Light on Masonry (David Bernard, 1829)
==========================================================
Bernard's 1829 documentary collection on Freemasonry; the Anti-Masonic movement's source-book. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/lightonmasonrya00berngoog).

This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.

We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web


atjhttp  :  //books  .  qooqle  .  com/


<£?


\


.


THE
COLLEGE  LIBRARY


Purchased  from  the  income  of
a  fu  ndforJ\.  m  erica  n  fiistory

bequeathed  by

-Annielouise  Bliss  WWen_

in  memory  of  her  husband

CHARLES  VC^RREJM"  '8$


HARVARD  UNIVERSITY


m


yGoQoIe


d  by  Google


Digitized  by  ■


le


W**    MtoMUAK.


l


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


\


y  Google


-r$


\yv


^  -


Digitized  by  G00gk  V


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


i


y  Google


IilGHT  OM  MASONRY:

A  COLLECTIOH  OF  ALL  TBI

MOST  IMPORTANT  DOCUMENTS

ON  THE  SUBJECT  OF
EMBRACING

THE  REPORTS  OF  THE  WESTERN  COMMITTEES

IN  RELATION  TO  THE

ABDTJOTIOH  OF  WTT.T«IAiy  MOBOAH,
PROCEEDINGS  OF  CONVENTIONS,  ORATIONS,  ESSAYS,  &c.&c.

WITH

ALL  THE  BEGREES  OF  THE  ORDER  CONFERRED  IK  A  MASTER'S  LODGE,

At  written  fry  Ceetoi*  William  Morgan;

ALL  THE  DEGREES  CONFERRED  IN    THE  ROTAL  ARCH  CHAPTER

AMD  GRAND  ENCAMPMENT  «F  KNIGHTS  TEMPLARS,

WITH  THE   APPENDANT  ORDERS,

As  yvWiafted  Dy  the  Convention  0/  Seceding  Xoeona,  field  *t  Le  ioy,  Jtttn  4mJ5,  ISA.

ALSO,

A  REVELATION

OF

W  tfie  ©tgreeg  conferred  in  ttje  Codge  of  perfection

AND

FIFTEEN  DEGREES  OF  A  STILL  HIGHER  ORDER,

WITH

SEVEN  FRENCH  DEGREES:

MAKING

FORTY-EIGHT  DEGREES  OF  FREE  MASONRY

Witt  Jfotea  an*  Critical  MemtrKt.


BY  ELDER  DAVID  BERNARD,

OF  WARSAW,  SENSSEE  CO.  *>  T.

•nee  am  Intimate  Secretary  In  the  Lodge  of  Perfection;  and  Secretary  of  the  CobtcuUub

of  Seceding  Xaaona,  held  at  Le  Eoy,  July  4  and  5,  IMS.


"  m  then  la  «ofM*g  covered  that  aftea  net  oe  revealed,  an/l  aid  tact  altotlnof  eelmticrt.'
"And»Ut  ye  near  in  flu  ear  tnotvreacaye  upon  the  fton*  fey«.»


UTXOA,

WI1LIAM  WI1LIAM9,  PBUTTBB,  •1N19EE  STREET.
1829.


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


,'■  .u


s


NORTHERN  DISTRICT  OF  NEW  YORK,  TO  WIT :

Be  it  RIMEMbered,  that  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  April,  in  the  fifty-third  year  of
'  die  Independence  of  the  United  States  of  America,  A.  D.  1829,  David  Bernard,  of
the  said  District,  hath  deposited  in  this  office  the  title  of  a  book,  the  right  whereof  he
claims  as  Aathor,  in  the  words  following,  to  wit :

"  Light  on  Masonry :  a  collection  of  all  the  most  important  documents  on  the
"subject  of  Speculative  Free  Masonry:  embracing  the  Reports  of  the  Western
""Committees  in  relation  to  the  abduction  of  William  Morgan,  Proceedings  of  Con-
u  ventions,  Orations,  Essays,  &c.  &c  With  all  the  degrees  of  the  order  conferred
41  in  a  Master's  Lodge,  as  written  by  Captain  William  Morgan ;  all  the  degrees
<(  conferred  in  the  Royal  Arch  Chapter  and  Grand  Encampment  of  Knights  Templars
<l  with  the  appendant  erders,  an  published  by  the  Convention  of  Seceding  Masons,
""  held  at  Le  Roy,  July  4  and  5,  1828.  Also,  a  revelation  of  all  the  degrees  conferred
"  ia  the  Lodge  of  Perfection,  and  fifteen  degrees  of  a  still  higher  order,  with  seven
"  French  degrees  :  making  forty-eight  degrees  of  Free  Masonry.  With  notes  and
<c  critical  remarks.  By  Elder  David  Bernard,  of  Warsaw,  Genesee  Co.  N.  Y.
"  once  an  Intimate  Secretary  in  the  Lodge  of  Perfection ;  and  Secretary  of  the
*'  Convention  of  Seceding  Masons,  held  at  Le  Roy,  July  4  and  5,  1828

" *  For  there  is  nothing  corered  that  shall  not  be  reyeal**,  and  hid  that  shaU  not  be  fcnowa.'
<  Aad  what  ye  bear  in  the  ear  that  preach  ye  upon  the  house  top*.'    Jetua  Christ."

Im  conformity  to  the  Act  of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  entitled  "  An  Ac*
for  the  encouragement  of  Learning,  by  securing  the  copies  of  Maps,  Charts  and
Books,  to  the  Authors  and  Proprietors  of  such  copies,  during  the  times  therein  men-
tioned ;"  and  also  to  the  Act  entitled  "  An  Act  supplementary  to  an  Act  entitled
*  An  Act  for  the  encouragement  t>f  Learning,  by  securing  the  copies  ef  Maps,  Charts
and  Books,  to  the  Authors  and  Proprietors  of  such  copies,  during  the  times  therein
mentioned,1  and  extending  the  benefits  thereof  to  the  arts  of  Designing,  Engraving
and  Etching,  historical  and  other  prints."  s

R.  R.  LANSING,
Clerk  #/  f  he  District  Cttrt  of  the  United  State*,  for  the
Northern  District  •fNeiv  Tork\


HARVARD  -,
lUNIVERSITY
LIBRARY
FEB  9     1970   j


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


PREFACE.


The  following  documents  are  compiled  with  the  design  of  se-
curing them  from  the  grasp  of  Masonic  power;  advancing  the
cause  of  truth,  and  justice;  preserving  the  rights  and  liberties  of
our  country;  promoting  the  glory  of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom;
and  saving  souls  from  destruction.

During  several  years  the  compiler  was  a  member  of  the  Ma-
sonic fraternity.  While  he  regarded  the  ceremonies  of  the  order
with  disgust,  and  its  oaths  with  abhorrence,  he  supposed  that
there  existed  principles  in  the  institution  which  were  pure  and
and  holy.  In  the  peculiar  providence  of  God,  he  was  led  to  in-
vestigate the  subject;  he  found  it  wholly  corrupt;  its  morality,  a
shadow;  its  benevolence,  selfishness;  its  religion,  infidelity;  and
that  as  a  system  it  was  an  engine  of  Satan,  calculated  to  enslave
the  children  of  men,  and  pour  contempt  on  the  Most  High.

In  the  immolation  of  Morgan,  he  saw  the  rate  of  Masonry —

*****  'Its  fall

Determined,  and  its  hapless  crew— involved
In'  that  dark  deed  of  death  'contagion  spread
Both  of  its  crime  and  punishment:'

He  saw  the  hand  of  God  inscribing  on  its  mystic  pillars,  #Mene
Tekel,  Upharsin;'  and

'From  amidst  them  forth  he  pass'd
Long  way  through  hostile  scorn,  which  he  sustaln'd
Superior,  nor  of  violence  fear'd  ought;
And  with  retorted  scorn  his  back  he  turn'd
On'  that  proud  temple  Ho  destruction  doom'd !'

Since  that  event  he  has  been  impelled  by  duty  to  bjg  tf^ntry
and  ]us  €*o4,  to  hazard  his  property,  character,  and  Mfe,  my  exer-
tions to  overthrow  an  institution  which  has  arisen 'among  the
nations  in  power  and  glory,  and  like  mystic  Babylon  made  them
-'drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  fornication!'

Here  will  he  stand  and  breast  him  to  the  shock,
1H1  he  or  Denmark  falls.'


y  Google


IV  PREFACE.

From  the  unwearied  exertions  of  the  brotherhood  to  suppress;
the  light  and  impede  the  progress  of  truth,  in  relation  to  their  out-
rages of  September,  1826,  and  the  revelations  of  Free  Masonry
made  by  Capt.  Morgan  and  a  Convention  of  Seceding  Masons,
he  has  thought  of  no  way  in  which  he  could  do  so  much  for  the
advancement  of  the  cause  of  liberty  and  truth,  as  to  embody  in
one  volume  all  the  documents  pertaining  to  the  secrets  of  the  in-
stitution; the  recent  violation  of  our  laws  and  liberties  by  the
Masonic  fraternity;  the  proceedings  of  Anti-Masonic  conventions ;_
essays;  orations;  and  remarks  on  the  principles  of  the  order — all
of  which  are  eminently  calculated  to  give  light  on  Masonry.  He
believes  that  such  a  work  is  important,  not  only  for  the  present
crisis,  but  or  the  benefit  of  posterity.  He  hopes  it  will  receive,
that  patronage  to  which  it  may  fate  entitled.  Should  he,  however,
after  'biding  the  pelting  of  the  pitiless  storm,'  hear  only  murmurs
of  disapprobation  from  the  world,  even  then  he  will  be  cheered
in  the  fulfillment  of  duty,  by  the  'still  small  voice'  which  whisper*
'peace*.'

'As  when  a  wretch  from  thick  polluted  air.
Darkness,  and  stench,  and  suffocating  damps,
And  dungeon  horrors,  by  kind  fate  discharged,
CUrabs  some  fair  eminence,  where  ether  pore
Surfbuads  him*  and  Elysian  prospects  rise,
His  heart  exults,  his  spirits  cast  their  load;
As  if  new  bora,  he  triumphs  in  the  change.
So  joys  the  son),  when  from  inglorious  aims7
And  sordid  sweets  from  feculence  and  forth.
Of  ties  terrestrial,  set  at  large,  she  mounts
To  reason's  region,  her  own  element,
Breathes  hopes  immortal,  and  affects  the  skip?/


f     .


y  Google


INTRODUCTION.


In  justice  to  myself,  I  cannot  present  this  work  to  tbe  public,
'without  a  brief  exhibition  of  the  facts  which  have  led  to  its  publi-
cation.

Soon  after  I  commenced  the  service  of  Christ,  Free  Masonry
was  commended  to  my  attention  as  an  institution  from  heaven;
moral,  benevolent,  of  great  antiquity,  the  twin  sister  of  Chris-
tianity, possessing  the  patronage  of  the  wise,  the  great,  and  good,
and  highly  important  to  the  ministers  of  the  Lord  Jesus.     Wish-
ing to  avail  myself  of  every  auxiliary  in  promoting  the  glory  of
God  and  the  happiness  of  my  fellow  men,  I  readily  received  the
three  first  degrees.    My  disappointment  none  can  know,  but  those
who  have,  in  similar  circumstances,  been  led  in  the  same  path  of
folly  and  sin.     I  silently  retired  from  the  institution,  and  for  three
years  was  hardly  known  as  a  Mason.     I  was  not,  however,  with-
out my  reflections  on  the  subject.     I  considered  what  I  had  taken
as  frivolous  and  wicked;  but  was  unwilling  to  believe  that  there
existed  no   substantial   good  in  the  order;   and  this  idea  was
strengthened  from  the  fact  that  many  of  my  friends  of  a  higher
grade  in  Masonry  taught  me,  that  what  I  had  received  was  not  the
'magnum  bonum'  of  the  institution,  but  that  this  was  yet  to  be
attained.     Not  being  able  to  advocate  its  cause  from  the  know-
ledge I  had  derived  of  its  principles,  and  supposing  that  the  obli-
gations I  had  received  were  morally  binding,  I  could  not  say  'pro
nor  con'  concerning  it,  without  a  violation  of  my  conscience.
With  these  views  I  embraced  an  offer  to  advance  into  the  higher
orders  of  mysticism,  and  reached  forward  to  attain  the  desired  end.
In  the  reception  of  the  Chaptoral  degrees,  my  embarrassment  in-
creased.   When  I  came  to  the  oath  of  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  which
obligates  to  deliver  a  companion,  'right  or  wrong,1  I  made  a  full
atop  and  objected  to  proceeding.     I  was  then  assured  in  the  most
positive  terms,  that  all  would  in  the  end  be  explained  to  my  full
satisfaction.    But  no  such  explanation  took  place.     I  bought  I —
Is  this  Free  Masonry?    Is  this  the  ancient  add  honorable  institu-
tion patronized  by  thousands  of  the  great  and  good?      Upon
my  suggesting  some  queries  to  a  Masonic  friend,  he  gravely  id-
formed  me  that  the  first  seven  degrees  were  founded  on  the  Old
Testament,  and  were  but  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come;  th**
A2

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


VI  INTRODUCTION.

if  I  wished  to  arrive  at  perfection,  I  must  proceed  to  the  sublime
and  ineffable  degrees.  These  assurances,  the  awful  oaths  I  had
taken,  with  their  penalties,  and  the  vengeance  of  this  most  power-
ful institution,  combined  to  deter  me  from  renouncing  it  us  evil.
After  much  deliberation,  hoping  to  find  something  in  the  higher
orders  to  redeem  the  character  of  the  institution  in  my  estimation,
I  entered  the  lodge  of  Perfection  and  took  the  ineffable  degrees.
About  this  time  I  learned  that  William  Morgan  was  writing
Masonry  for  publication.  My  reformer  was  then  a  Baptist  minis-
ter in  high  standing,  and  a  Royal  Arch  Mason.  He  remarked
that  Morgan's  writing  Masonry  was  the  greatest  piece  of  depra-
vity he  ever  knew;  that  some  measures  must  be  taken  to  stop  it;,
that  he  would  be  one  of  a  number  to  put  him  out  of  the  way;  that
God  looked  upon  the  institution  with  so  much  complacency,  he
would  never  bring  the  perpetrators  to  light;  that  there  had  already
been  two  meetings  on  the  subject;  and  that  he  expected  there
would  be  another  on  that  day;  and  finally  attempted  to  justify  his
murder  from  Masonry  and  the  word  of  God!

This  conversation  took  place  in  Covington,  (where  I  then  liv-
ed,) five  weeks  before  Morgan  was  murdered;  and  I  should  at
this  early  period  have  informed  him  of  his  danger,  had  I  not  un-
derstood that  he  was  on  his  guard  and  prepared  for  a  defence.

The  next  week  I  left  home  for  my  health,  and  was  absent  some
weeks.  I  returned  on  the  16th  of  September,  and  soon  learned
that  Morgan  was  kidnapped  and  probably  murdered!  I  conversed
with  the  Masons  on  the  subject,  and  they  justified  both  hit  ab-
duction and  murder!  I  now  read  the  first  production  of  Elder
Stearns  on  Masonry  with  peculiar  interest.  I  also  examined  the
Monitor  and  other  Masonic  writings,  and  reflected  deeply  on  the
nature  and  tendency  of  the  institution.  I  compared  the  murder
of  Morgan  and  the  conduct  of  the  fraternity  in  relation  to  his  ab-
duction, with  the  oaths  and  principles  of  the  order,  and  became
fully  satisfied  that  to  continue  longer  with  the  institution  was  not
my  duty.  I  expressed  my  opposition  to  its  principles  and  the
reeeht  conduct  of  the  fraternity  in  a  free  and  open  manner,  which
causeo^much  excitement  among  the  brotherhood,  A  meeting  ef
the  lodge  in  Covington  was  soon  called,  the  object  of  which  was
to  concert  measures  for  an  agreement  among  the.  fraternity,  in
what  they  should  say  in  relation  to  their  outrages,  and  to  attend
to  members  who  were  disaffected  with  their  proceedings.  I  atr
tended  for-  tke^  purpose  of  freeing,my  mind. ,  When  the  lodge  was
duly  opened  and  the  subject  introduced,,  t  arose  and  in  the  most
decisive  manner  disapproved  the  conduct  of  the  fraternity,  in  their
violation  of  civil  and  moral  law,    Tie  wetingwae.  lojjg  andJ5#r*


y  Google


INTRODUCTION.  Ul

liMy  interesting!  The  true  spiot  of  the  institution  was  peculiarly
manifest,  especially  towards  me.  For  the  introduction  of  Elder
Steams'  book,  and  the  honest  expression  of  my  sentiments,  I  was
most  shamefully  abused.  The  murder  of  Morgan  was  justified,
and  every  thing  said  that  was  calculated  to  harrow  up  the  feelings
of  a  patriot  or  Christian.  Elder  A****,  a  Knight  Templar,  be-
ing present,  boldly  asserted  'that  if  he  should  see  any  man  writing
Masonry,  he  should  consider  it  his  duty  to  take  measures  to  stop
fairn;  that  as  cities  and  churches  had  their  laws,  wkh  a  right
to  inflict  their  penalties,  so  Masons  had  their  laws,  with  the
right  to  inflict  the  penalties  to  them;  and  that  the  lodge  was  the
place  to  try  a  Mason — that  if  Morgan  had  been  writing  Masonry,
and  his  threat  was  cut  from  ear  to  ear,  his  tongue  torn  out  by
the  roots,  and  his  body  buried,  beneath  the  rough  sands  of  the
sea,  at  low  water  mark,  where  the  tide  ebbs  and  flows  twice
in.  twenty-four  hours,  he  could  not  complain  in  not  haying  jus-
tice done  himf  Amen,  Amen,  Amen,  was  the  audible  response
around  the  room.

At  the  next  meeting  of  the  lodge,  by  request  of  the  Master.
I  attended.  Here  a  scene  passed  which  language  cannot  de-
scribe! Several  hours  were  occupied  in  abusing  and  making
charges  against  me,  the  principal  of  which  were,  I  had  spo-
ken against  the  institution.  Many  questions  were  asked  and
insults  offered  me.  I  told  them  frankly  1  had  spoken  against
the  principles  of  the  order;  that  the  right  of  opinion,  the  free-
dom of  speech,  and  the  liberty  of  the  press,  were  privileges
given  to  me  by  God;  purchased  by  the  blood  of  my  fathers;
that  I  had  inhaled  them  with  my  first  breath,  and  I  would  only
lose  them  with  my  last;  that  if  they  could  remove  ray  objec-
tions to  the  institution,  which  I  then  exhibited,  well — i{  not,
they  could  expel  me;  but  if  they  proceeded  to  farther  abuses,
they  must  suffer  the  consequences.  My  objections  wgrokiiol  re-
moved; and  I  requested  permission  to  withdraw.  *  >e*  aft  r  I  left
them  they  expelled  and  immediately  commenced  a  t&tft*  wicked
persecution  against  me.  The  professed  ministers  o£  Christ,  infi-
dels, and  drunkards,  from  Buflklo  to  Albany,  were  united  to
destroy  my  character!  I  was  admonished  by  oral  and  episto-
lary communications  to  be  on  my  guard,  to  carry  arms;:  |ind
se  great  was  my  personal  danger,  that  my  friends  woukjnpt
suffer  me  to  ride  alone  from  one  town  to  another.*  In  §teSt
',    '^0f •'"

*  Let  the  reader  remember  that  the  compiler  of  this  work  tbhomeei
Sfittonryin  October,  1826— was  the-  first  Mason  who  declared  open  'lips-
tility  to  the  institution  subsequent  to  the  abduction  of  Morgan;  ao^;*1*
will  not  be  awpriued  in  learning  that  ait  life  was  in  jeopardy*

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


viii  INTRODUCTION.

they  'opposed  my  interest,  deranged  my  business,  pointed  me
out  as  an  unworthy  and  vicious  vagabond,  an  object  of  con-
tempt/ and  'transferred  this  character  after  me;'  and  it  would
seem  that  they  intended  to  do  it  'during  my  natural  life!'  The
united  efforts  of  the  fraternity  to  injure  me,  have,  however,
proved  unavailing.

I  soon  became  convinced  that  the  peace  of  society,  the  sal-
vation of  my  country,  the  present  and  eternal  happiness  of  my
fellow  men,  and  the  glory  of  God,  required  the  destruction  of
(he  institution.  To  accomplish  this,  I  was  confident  but  one
effectual  method  could  be  adopted,  and  this  was  to  make  a
full  disclosure  of  its  secrets.  To  this  end  I  then  exerted  my*
self.  After  an  interchange  of  minds  with  some  of  the  patriots
of  Batavia  and  Le  Roy,  a  convention  of  Masons  opposed  to
the  institution  was  called,  to  meet  on  the  19th  of  February,
1827.  This  convention  was  composed  of  about  forty,  who
after  having  deliberated  upon  the  principles  of  the  order,  and
,  binding  nature  of  its  obligations,  resolved  to  make  a  revelation
of  its  mysteries.  They  confirmed  the  'Illustrations'  of  William
Morgan;  published  the  oaths  of  twelve  degrees  of  a  higher  order;
appointed  a  committee  to  prepare  all  the  degrees  which  could
be  obtained  for  the  press;  and  adjourned  to  meet  on  the  4th
of  July  following.

The  committee,  with  much  labor  and  expense,  had  all  the
degrees  conferred  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  Incanpment  of
Knights  Templars,  and  orders  of  the  HoryCroi-s,  ready,  and
presented  them  to  the  convention  on  the  4th  and  6th  of  July,
which  declared  them  correct,  and  ordered  them  to  be  published
to  the  world.

The  degrees  of  Mark,  Past,  and  Most  Excellent  Master,
were  obtained  from  Mrs.  Morgan,  as  written  bj  her  husband;
the  Royal  Arch,  from  an  agent  of  the  comnittee,  (a  Royal
Arch  Mason,)  as  given  by  Jeremy  L.  Cross,  the  Grand  Lecturer
of  the  United  States;  and  those  of  the  Epcampment  and  Holy
Cross,  from  a  Knight  of  the  Thrice  Illustrious  Order,  as  tran-
scribed from  a  copy  as  given  the  Encampment  at  Le  Roy,  by
the  Grand  Commander  at  Utica.

In  consequence  of  the  zeal  manifested  4>y  the  fraternity  to
stifle  the  excitement,  I  conceived  that  much  good  might  be
done  by  a  compilation  of  the  most  important  documents  in
relation  ^*o  the  subject  By  the  advice  of  many  friends,  and
under  the  patronage  of  a  county  and  state  convention,  I  under-
took the  work.
While  preparing  it  for  the  press,  I  obtained  from  the  fttgtarf


T


i


INTRODUCTION.  ix

authority  thirty-three  of  the  sublime  and  ineffable  degrees,  all
of  which,  I  know  to  be  correct,  and  I  give  them  to  the
world  ^verbatim  et  literatum.'

But  am  I  justifiable  in  pursuing  this  course?  WH1  the  law  of
God  approve  the  violation  of  such  solemn  oaths?  Passing  by  the
arguments  which  might  be  adduced  from  the  fact  that  the  obli-
gations were  taken  without  a  previous  knowledge  of  their  cha-
racter— the  assurances  that  they  were  not  to  interfere  with  mv
political  or  religious  sentiments,  when  they  are  diametrically  op-
posite to  both— that  I  swore  fealty  to  a  professedly  ancient,  moral,
benevolent,  and  righteous  institution,  when  it  proves  to  be  'mo-
dern, corrupt,  selfish,  and  unholy.' — I  rest  the  question  upon  the
principles?  of  moral  obligation  by  which  I  expect  to  be  judged,  and
by  which  I  must  stand  or  fall  Are  the  oaths  of  Free  Masonry,
then,  congenial  with  the  duties  which  I  owe  to  God  and  my  fellow
men?.  If  they  are,  I  most  certainly  am  bound  to  keep  diem;  ii
not,  to  break  them.  By  the  principles  of  moral  obligation  I  am
required  to  promote  God's  glory,  and  the  best,  good  of  the  uni-
verse. My  swearing  to  love  God  and  my  neighbor  does  not
enhance  the  obligation  at  all;  for  it  says,  'Thou  shalt  love  the
Lord  thy  God  with  aU  thy  heart  and  with  all  thy  soul  and  with  all
thy  strength  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  thy  neighbor  a^thyselD
It  says  mis  to  the  sinner  and  the  .saint — to  the  man  who  has  sworn
and  to  him  who  has  not  sworn,  it  is  alike  infinitely  binding  on
all.  It  cannot  be  increased  nor  diminished — it  can  require  no
more — it  can  receive  no  less.  If  I  swear  to  love  God  and  keep
his  commandments,  the  oath  is  binding,  because  moral  obliga-
tion made  these  requisitions  before  I  took  the  oath,  'anil  the  oath
and  moral  obligation  are  in  perfect  harmony.  If  I  swear  to  vio-
late the  command  of  God;  for  instance,  to  kill  my  neighbor,  I  am
bound  to  break  my  oath;  for  the  Divine  law  says,  'Thou  shalt  not
kill,'  and  my  swearing  to  violate  the  command  does  not,  cannot,
render  the  obligation  void.  Moral  obligation  requires  me  to  keep
such  secrets  and  such  only  as  are  calculated  to  promote  God's
glory  and  the  best  good  of  community;  and  my  swearing  does  not
effect  the  obligation  at  alL  It  also  requires  me  to  reveal  those
secrets*  the  keeping  of  which  have  a  tendency  to  mar  or  prevent
His  glory  and  the  best  good  of  xny  neighbor;  and  my  swearing  to
keep  diem  does  not,  cannot*  render  the  obligation  void:  for  in-
tance,  if  I  had  sworn  to  keep  secret  die  intention  of  a  highway-
man to  rob  my  neighbor's  house  and  murder  his  family;  to  keep
secret  a  plot  against  my  country,  the  government  of  which  is
founded  upon  the  principles  of  truth  and  justice;  to  keep  secret  a
grand  conspiracy  formed  by  a  powerful  society,  the  object

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


X  INTRODUCTION.

which  was,  like  that  of  the  Illuminati,  to  abolish  government  and
social  order  and  extinguish  Christianity— as  the  keeping  of  these
secrets  would  be  prejudicial  to  the  interests  of  my  neighbor,  to
the  safety  of  my  country,  and  the  glory  of  God,  the  principles  of
moral  obligation  would  require  me  to  reveal  them.  If  1  had  sworn
to  assist  the  robber,  to  unite  in  the  plot,  or  conspiracy,  my  refus-
ing to  act  in  either  case,  simply,  would  not  fulfil  the  duties  which  I
should  owe  to  my  neighbor,  my  country,  or  my  God.  So  I  did
not  make  known  the  intention  of  the  robber,  expose  the  plot,  or
reveal  the  conspiracy,  I  should  be  guilty  of  a  violation  of  moral
obligation.

It  will  not  be  necessary  here  to  inquire  whether  the  oaths  to
keep  the  secrets  of  a  brother,  with  or  without  exception,  to  deli-
ver a  companion  'right  or  wrong,'  to  'take  vengeace  on  the  trai-
tors of  Masonry,'  'to  sacrifice  all  those  who  reveal  the  secrets  of
the  order,'  are  in  harmony  with  the  Pivine  law — but  whether  the
principles  of  moral  obligation  require  the  keeping  or  revealing
of  Masonic  secrets?

It  will  readily  be  admitted  that  the  existence  of  the  institution
depends  upon  the  keeping  of  its  secrets  inviolate.  It  will  follow,
then,  that  if  the  existence  of  the  institution  is  necessary,  or  has  a
tendency  to  promote  God's  glory  and  the  well  being  of  society,
the  principles  of  moral  obligation  require  me  to  keep  its  secrets,
and  by  revealing  them  I  am  < guilty  of  moral  perjury!  And  on  the
other  hand,  if  the  institution  is  corrupt,  has  an  evil  tendency,  is
opposed  to  the  order  and  well  being  of  society  and  the  glory  of
God,  I  am  under  moral  obligation  to  break  my  oaths,  and  reveal
its  secrets  to  the  world,  that  it  may  come  to  an  end.  My  refus-
ing to  meet  with  or  support  the  institution,  is  not  sufficient;  I
must  renounce  fealty  to  the  order,  reveal  its  secrets,  oppose  its
influence,  and  use  my  exertions  to  destroy  it,  or  I  am  guilty  of
a  violation  of  moral  obligation.

Let  the  reader  carefully  and  thoroughly  examine  the  following
documents  and  he  will  discover  that  Free  Masonry,  as  a  system,
is  dark,  unfruitful,  selfish,  demoralizing,  blasphemous,  murderous,
anti-republican,  and  anti-Christian — opposed  to  the  glory  of  God
and  the  good  of  mankind;  and  hence  that  the  compiler  in  burst-
ing asunder  the  bands  of  the  fraternity  and  publishing  their
secrets  to  the  world,  is  doing  no  more  than  is  required  by  the
principles  of  moral  obligation — is  but  fulfilling  the  duties  which
he  owes  to  God  and. his  fellow  men*

David  Bbbnari>.

Warsaw,  April  1,  1829.


y  Google


DATZON8.

'The  Baptist  Church  of  Christ  in  Warsaw  9  Genesee  County,  JV.

Co  tip  C&rtftian  public*

As  Elder  David  Bernard  i»  ib  >ut  publishing  a  book  entitled  'Light  on  Masonry.'
which  we  deem  highly  important  for  the  purity  and  advancement  of  the  Redeemers
kingdom;  and  as  we  are  sensible,  from  the  persecution  he  has  already  received,  as
well  as  from  the  nature  of  the  subject,  that  many  aspersions  will  be  thrown  upon  his
character,  to  impede  the  righteou*  influence  which  the  truth  should  hare  upon  the
public  mind;  we  deem  it  our  duty  to  state,  that  from  the  most  W  ly  accredited  docu-
ments, we  can  vouch  for  the  purity  of  his  moral  character  from  his  infancy  to  the
time  he  professed  Christianity—- of  his  moral  and  Christian  conversation  from  this
period,  until  he  became  a  member  of  this  church;  and  that  during  nearly  two  years
he  has  been  the  regular  and  approved  pastor  among  us;  that  he  is  a  minister  of  the
Genesee  Baptist  Association,  in  good  standing;  and  we  cheerfully  and  unanimously
recommend  him  as  a  man  of  strict  integrity,  unblemished  moral  character,  and  faith-
ful servant  of  the  Lord  Jesus.

Executed  by  order  and  in  presence  of  the  church,
this  fourteenth  day  of  March,  A.  D.  1829.

JOHN  TRUESDELL,  Church  Clerk,  pro  tern.

!onathanAfSSard,  }  »-»-  «**•  Ch°reh-


Resolution  of  an  Anti-Masonic  Convention  of  Genesee  county,  held  at  Bethany,
July  23,  1828,  in  favor  of  this  work.  'Whereas  the  title  and  prospectus  of  a  book
entitled  'Light  on  Masonry,'  &c.  &c.  has  been  read  to  this  convention — There-
fore, Resolved,  That  for  the  advancement  of  light  and  truth  in  the  great  and  holy
cause  of  Anti- Masonry,  and  for  the  good  of  future  generations,  we  deem  it  of  the
highest  importance  that  such  a  work  be  published;  and  from  our  knowledge  of  the
talents,  character,  intelligence,  and  zeal,  of  Elder  David  Bernard,  we  believe  him
to  be  eminently  qualified  for  such  an  undertaking;  we  therefore  solicit  him  to  perse-
vere in  the  work  without  delay,  as  such  a  work  is  worthy  of  the  patronage  of  the
friends  of  liberty  and  religion  throughout  the  whole  civilized  world.  >

'ROBERT  EARLL,  jun.  President.

'CEPHAS  A.  SMITH,  Secretary.,

Resolution  of  the  Anti-Masonic  New  York  State  Convention,  held  at  Utica,
August  4,  1828,  in  favor  of  this  work  'Whireas  the  title  and  prospectus  of  a
book  entitled  'Light  on  Masonry,'  &c.  &c.  by  Elder  David  Bernard,  has  been  read
to  the  convention,  and  entertaining  the  fullest  confidence  in  the  integrity,  zeal,  and
ability,  of  the  compiler,  and  being  deeply  imoressed  with  the  importance  of  the  pro-
posed publication,  to  the  cause  of  truth  and  justice— Therefore,  Resolved,  That
we  recommend  the  compiler  to  proceed  without  delay  in  the  publication  of  his  book;
and  we  recommend  it  to  the  attention  and  patronage  of  all  the  friends  of  truth  and
.the  cause  of  civil  liberty  throughout  the  world.

'JAMES  HAWKS,  President.


'THOS.  C    GREEN,  )  G       ,    .     ,
SETH  A.  ABBEY,   )  SecreteneB.


d  by  Google


y  Google


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


LIGHT  on  MASONRY.  ****

DESCRIPTION   OF  CEREMONIES
USED  IN  CONFERRING  DEGREE  OF

Entered  Apprentice 13

Fellow  Craft 42

Master  Mason 58

Mark  Master 87

Past  Master 107

Most  Excellent  Master  .    .    .    .  114

Royal  Arch.    ...*...  124

Knight  of  the  Red  Cross     ...  144

Knight  Templar  and  Kt.  of  Malta  155
Knight  of  the  Christian  Mark,  and

Guard  of  the  Conclave    ...  166

Knight  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  .    .  170
The  Holy  and  Thrice  Illustrious

Order  of  the  Cross     ....  173

Secret  Master 183, 210

Perfect  Master 186,210

Intimate  Secretary     .    .    .    .189,211

Provost  and  Judge     .     .    .    ..    .  191

Intend  ant  of  the  Buildings,  or  Mas-
ter in  Israel  194

Elected  Knight  of  Nine  .    .    .    .196
Elected  Grand  Master,  or  Illus-
trious Elected  of  Fifteen  ...  199
Illustrious  Knight  or  Sublime  Knight

Elected 201

Grand  Master  Architect      .    *    .  201

Knight  of  the  Ninth  Arch    .    .    .  202
Grand  Elect  Perfect  and  Sublime

Mason *   .    .    .  205

Knight  of  the  East  and  West  .    .  212
Knight  of  the  Eagle,  a  nth' Sovereign

Prince  of  Rose  Croix  de  Heroden  220

Grand  Pontiff 233

Venerable  Grand  Master  of  all
Symbolic  Lodges,  Sov.  Prince
of  Masonry,  Master  Advitiain,

or  Grand  Pontiff 235

Knight  of  the  Royal  Axe,  or  Hache,

(hatchet) 242

Chief  of  the  Tabernacle      ...  244
Prince  of  the  Tabernacle    .    ,    .  246
Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent  .    .  248
Prince  of  Mercy,  or  Scotch  Trini-
tarian   .........  250

Sovereign  Commander  of  the  Tem-
ple at  Jerusalem     251

Knight  Adept  of  the  Eagle,  or  Sun  253

Knight  of  Kadosh 273


Prince  of  Jerusalem  .....  535
Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret  .  ...  538
Sovereign  Grand  Inspector  G  cneral    543

French  degrees.

EIu  de  Perignan 290

Le  Petit  Architect 293

Grand  Architect,  or  Compagnon

Ecossois 298

Le  Maitre  Ecossois 302

Chevalier  de  l'Orient  .....  307

Le  Chevalier  Rose  Croix    ...  317

Chevalier  Prussien 322

COMMITTEE  REPORTS,  CONVEN-
TION PROCEEDINGS,  ORATIONS
ESSAYS,  ETC.  ETC.

Narrative   of  facts  relating  to  ab-
duction of  William  Morgan,  &c.     337
Saratoga  Baptist  Convention  Pro-
ceedings     328

Address  to  honest  Masons  ...  373
Le  Roy  Seceding  Masons'  Conven.    413

Anti-Masonic  Convention    418

Adjourned  Seced.  Masons1


Convention — with  Declaration
New  York  Legislature  Proceedings
Hon.  J.  Crary's  Speech  in  Senate
Herbert  A.  Read's,  Esq.  Oration  at

Le  Roy

Utica  Anti-Masonic  N.  York  State

Convention  Proceedings  .     .
T.  P.  Talbot's,  Esq.    Speech  at

Utica

Eli  Bruce's  (and  others)  Trial  for

Conspiracy

B.  B.  Hotchlrin's  Candid  Appeal
Answer  to  Two


452
431

443

460

478

490

502
514


Great  Questions 527

APPENDIX.

Depositions  of  sundry  persons —
and  other  documents-— disclos-
ing many  important  particulars  -'
relative  to  the  kidnapping  of  the
unfortunate  Morgan:  with  Go-,
vernment  Proclamations,  &c.  &c.
(In30Nos.) l-*xxvl


y  Google


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.


*A  Description  of  the  ceremonies  used  in  opening  a  Lodge  of
Entered  Apprentice  Masons;  which  is  the  same  in  all  the  up-
per degrees,  with  the  exception  of  the  difference  in  the  signs,
due-guards,  grips,  pass-grips,  words  and  their  several  names;
all  of  which  will  be  given  and  explained  in  their  proper  places
as  the  work  progresses.

One  rap  calls  the  lodge  to  order;  one  calls  up  the  Junior  and
Senior  Deacons;  two  raps  call  up  the  subordinate  officers;  and
three,  all  the  members  of  the  lodge.

The  Master  having  called  the  lodge  to  order,  and  the  officers
all  seated,  the  Master  says  to  the  Junior  Warden,  'Brother  Jun-
ior, are  they  all  Entered  Apprentice  Masons  in  the  souths  Ans.
*  They  are,  Worshipful.'  Master  to  the  Senior  Warden,  'Bro-
ther Senior,  are  they  all  Entered  Apprentice  Masons  in  tho
west?'  Am.  '  They  are,  Worshipful.'  The  Master  then  says,
'  They  are  in  the  east;'  at  the  same  time  he  gives  a  rap  with  the
common  gavel  or  mallet,  which  calls  up  both  Deacons.  Master
to  Junior  Deacon,  '  Attend  to  that  part  of  your  duty,  and  inform
the  Tyler  that  we  are  about  to  open  a  lodge  of  Entered  Appren-
tice Masons;  and  direct  him  to  tyle  accordingly*'  The  Tyler
then  steps  to  the  door  and  gives  three  raps,  which  are  answered
by  three  from  without :  the  Junior  Deacon  then  gives  one,  which
is  also  answered  by  the  Tyler  with  one;  the  door  is  then  partly
opened,  and  the  Junior  Deacon  delivers  his  message,  and  re-
sumes his  situation, land  says,  'the  doorj?  tyled,  Worshipful,*
(at  the  same  time  giving  the  due-guard,  which  is  never  omitted
•  when  the  Master  is  addressed.)  The  Master  to  the  Junior  Dea-
con, '  By  whom?'  Am.  '  By  a  Master  Mason  without  the  door,
armed  with  the  proper  implements  of  his  office.'  Master  to  the?
Junior  Deacon,  'His  duty  there  V  Am.  '  To  keep  off  all  cow-
ans and  eave-droppers,  see  that  none  pass  or  repass  without  per-


*  The  first  three  Degrees  in  Masonry  here  published,  are  as  written  1$:
Capt.  William  Morgan :  and  as  conferred  in  the  Lodges  in  the  western  part.

***

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


«f!NewYorkc

B


14  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

mission  from  the  Master.'  [Some  say  without  permission  from
the  chair.  ]r  Master  to  Junior  Deacon,  'Brother  Junior,  your
place  in  the  lodge?'  Ans.  'At  the  right  hand  of  the  Senior
Warden  in  the  west.'  Master  to  Junior  Deacon,  'Your  business
there,  Brother  Junior?'  Ans.  *  'To  wait  on  the  Worshipful  Mas- ,
ter  and  Wardens,  act  as  their  proxy  in  the  active  duties  of  the
Lodge,  and  take  charge  of  the  door.'  Master  to  Junior  Deacon,
'The  Senior  Deacon's  place  in  the  Lodge?'  Ans.  'At  the  right
hand  of  the  Worshipful  Master  in  the  east.'  [The  Master,  while
asking  the  last  question,  giyes  two  raps,  which  calls  up  all  the
subordinate  officers.]  Master  to  Senior  Deacon,  'Your  duty
there,  Brother  Senior?'  Ans.  'To  wait  on  the  Worshipful  Mas-
ter and  Wardens,  act  as  their  proxy  in  the  active  duties  of  the
Lodge,  attend  to  the  preparation  and  introduction  of  candidates
— and  Welcome  and  clothe  all  visiting  Brethren,'  [i.  e.  furnish
them  with  an  apron.]  Master  to  Senior  Deacon,  'The  Secreta-
ry's place  in  the  Lodge,  Brother  Senior?'  Ans.  'At  the  left
hand  of  the  Worshipful  Master  in  the  east'  Master  to  Secre-
tary, 'Your  duty  there,  Brother  Secretary?'  Ans.  'The  better
to  observe  the  Worshipful  Master's  will  and  pleasure,  record  the
proceedings  of  the  Lodge;  transmit  a  copy  of  the  same  to  the
Grand  Lodge,  if  required;  receive  all  monies  and  money  bills
from  the  hand  of  the  Brethren,  pay  them  over  to  the  Treasurer,
and  take  his  receipt  for  the  same.'  The  Master  to  the  Secreta-
ry, 'The  Treasurer's  place  in  the  Lodge?'  Ans.  'At  the  right
hand  of  the  Worshipful  Master.'  Master  to  Treasurer,  'Your
duty  there,  Brother  Treasurer?'  Ans.  'Duly  to  observe  the
Worshipful  Master's  will  and  pleasure;  receive  all  monies  and
money  bills  from  the  hands  of  the  Secretary;  keep  a  just  and  true
accoun^of  the  same;  pay  them  out  by  order  of  the  Worshipful
Master  and  consent  of  the  Brethren.'  The  Master  to  the  Trea-
surer, *The  Junior  Warden's  place  in  the  lodge,  Brother  Trea-
surer?' Ans.  'In  the  south,  Worshipful.'  Master  to  Junior
Warden,  'Your  business  there,  Brother  Junior?'  Ans.  'As  the
sun  in  the  south  at  high  meridian,  is  the  beauty  and  glory  of  the
day,  so  stands  the  Junior  Warden  in  the  south,  the  better  to  ob-
serve the  time;  call  the  crafts  from  labour  to  refreshment;  super-
intend them  during  the  hours  thereof;  see/ that  none  convert  the
hours  of  refreshment  into  that  of  intemperance  or  excess;  and
call  them  on  again  in  due  season,  that  tfte:  Worshipful  Master
may  have  honor,  and  they  pleasure  and  profitf  thereby.'  Master
to  die  Junior  Warden,  'The  Senior  Wrarden'S  place  in  the  lodge?'
Ana,  'In  the  west,  Worshipful.'  Master  to  the  Senior  War-
den, 'Your  duty  there,  Brother  Senior?'     Ans.     'As  the  sun  sets  ,


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  15

in  the  west,  to  close  the  day,  so  stands  the  Senior  Warden  in  the
west,  to  assist  the  Worshipful  Master  in  opening  his  Lodge;  take
care  of  the  jewels  and  implements;  see  that  none  be  lost;  pay  the
craft  their  wages,  if  any  be  due;  and  see  that  none  go  away  dis-
satisfied.' Master  to  the  Senior  Warden,  'The  Master's  place
in  the  Lodge?  Jhis.  'In  the  east,  Worshipful.'  Master  to  the
Senior  Warden,  'His  duty  there?'  Jlns.  'As  the  sun  rises  in  the
east  to  open  and  adorn  the  day,  so  presides  the  Worshipful  Mas-
ter in  the  east  to  open  and  adorn  his  lodge;  set  his  crafts  to  work
with  good  and  wholesome  laws;  or  cause  the  same  to  be  done.'
The  Master  now  gives  three  raps,  when  all  the  brethren  rise,  and
the  Master,  taking  off  his  hat,  proceeds  as  follows:  'In  like  man-
ner so  do  I,  strictly  forbidding  all  profane  language,  private  com-
mittees, or  any  other  disorderly  conduct  whereby  the  peace  and
harmony  of  this  Lodge  may  be  interrupted  while  engaged  in  its
lawful  pursuits,  under  no  less  penalty  than  the  bye-laws,  or  such
penalty  as  a  majority  of  the  brethren  present  may  see  fit  to  in-
flict. Brethren,  attend  to  giving  the  signs.'  [Here  lodges  dif-
fer very  much.  In  some  they  declare  the  lodge  open  as  follows,
before  they  give  the  signs:]  The  Master  (all  the  Brethren  imi-
tating him)  extends  his  left  arm  from  his  body  m  as  to  form  an
angle  of  about  forty-five  degrees,  and  holds  his  right  hand  tra-
versely  across  his  left,  the  palnis  thereof  one  inch  apart.  This
is  called  the  first  sign  of  a  Mason — is  the  sign  of  distress  in  this
degree,  and  alludes  to  the  position  a  candidate's  hands  are  plac-
ed in  when  he  takes  the  obligation  of  an  Entered  Apprentice  Ma-
son. The  Master  then  draws  his  right  hand  across  his  throaty
the  hand  open,  with  the  thumb  next  to  the  throat,  and  drops  it
down  by  his  side.  This  is  called  the  due-guard  of  an  Entered
Apprentice  Mason,  (many  call  it  the  sign,)  and  alludes  to  the
penalty  of  an  obligation.  (See  obligation.)  The  Master  then
declares  the  Lodge  opened,  in  the  following  manner:  'I  now  de-
clare this  Lodge  of  Entered  Apprentice  Masons  duly  .opened  for
the  despatch  of.  business.'  The  Jenior  Wanfen  declares  it  to  the
Junior  Warden,  and  he  to  the  Brethren.  'Come,  Brethren,  let
us  pray.'     One  of  the  following  prayers  is  used:

Most  holy  and  glorious  God!  the  great  Architect  of  the  Uni-
verse; the  giver  of  all  good  gifts  and  graces:  Thou  hast  promis-
ed that  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  thy  name,
thou  wilt  be  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  bless  them."  In  thy  name
we  assemble,  most  numbly  beseeching  thee  to  bless  us  in  all  our
undertakings;  that  we  may  know  and  serve  thee  aright,  and  that
all  our  actions  may  tend  toothy  glory,  and  our  advancement  in
knowledge  and  virtue.     And  we  beseech  thee,  O  Lord  God,  tc

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


i
16  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

bless  our  present  assembling;  and  to  illumine  our  minds  through
the  influence  of  the  Son  of  Righteousness,  that  we  may  walk  in
the  light  of  thy  countenance ;  and  when  the  trials  of  our  proba-
tionary state  are  oter,  be  admitted  into  the  temple  not  made
with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.     Amen.     So  mote  it  be.

Another  prayer,  as  often  used  at  opening  as  closing.

Behold  how  good  and  how  pleasant  it  is  for  brethren  to  dwell
together  in  unity;  it  is  like  the  precious  ointment  upon  the  head
that  run  down  upon  the  beard,  even  Aaron's  beard,  that  went
down  iff  the  skirts  of  his  garment:  as  the  dew  of  Hermon,  and  as
the  dew  that  descended  upon  the  mountains  of  Zion,  for  there  the
Lord  commanded  the  blessing,  evermore.  Amen.  So  mote  it
be.

The  lodge  being  now  open  and  ready  to  proceed  to  business,
the  Master  directs  the  Secretary  to  read  the  minutes  of  the  last
meeting,  which  naturally  brings  to  view  the  business  of  the  pres-
ent.

If  there  are  any  candidates  to  be  brought  forward,  that  will  be
the  first  business  attended  to.  I  will,  therefore,  proceed  with  a
description  of  the  ceremonies  used  in  the  admission  and  initiation
of  a  candidate  in  the  first  degree  of  Masonry.

A  person  wishing  to  become  a  Mason  must  get  some  one  who
is  a  Mason  to  present  his  petition  to  a  lodge,  when,  if  there  are
no  Serious  objections,  it  will  be  entered  on  the  minutes,  and  a
^ommijtee  of  two  or  three  appointed  to  inquire  into  his  charac-
ter, and  report  to  the  next  regular  communication.  The  follow-
ing is  the  form  of  a  petition  used  by  a  candidate ;  but  a  worthy
candidate  will  not  be  rejected  for  the  want  of  formality  in  his  pe-
tition^  \  \

To  the  Worshipful  Master  "Wardens  and  Brethren  of  Lodge  No.
— ,  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons.

The  subscriber,  residing  in ,  of  lawful  age,  and  by  oc-
cupation a ; ,  begs  leave  to  state  that,  unbiassed  by  friends,

and  uninfluenced  bji  mercenary  motives,  he  freely  and  voluntari-
ly offers  himself  a  candidate  for  the  mysteries  of  Masonry,  and
that  he  is  prompt  to  solicit  this  privilege  by  a  favorable  opinion
conceived  of  the  institution,  a  desire  of  knowledge  and  a  sincere
wish  of  being  serviceable  to  his  fellow  creatures.  Should  his  pe-
tition be  granted,  he  will  cheerfully  conform  to  all  the  ancient  es-
tablished usages  and  customs  of  the  fraternity.

(Signed)  A.  B.

At  the  next  regular  communication,  (if  no  very  serious  objec-
tion appears  against  the  candidate,)  the  ballot-boxes  will  be  pass-

,      Digitized  by  VjC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  17

fcd;  one  black  ball  will  reject  a  candidate.     The  boxes  may  be
passed  three  times.     The  Deacons  are  the  proper  persons  to  pass
them;   one  of  the  boxes  has  black  and  white  beans,  or  balls  in  it,
the  other  empty;  the  one  with  the  balls  in  it  goes  before,  and  fur-
nishes each  member  with  a  black  and  white  ball;  the  empty  box
follows  and  receives  them.     There  are  two  holes  in  the  top  of  his
box  with  a  small  tube  (generally)  in  each,  one  of  which  is  black,
and  the  other  white,  with  a  partition  in  the  box.     The  members
put  both  their  balls  into  this  box  as  their  feelings  dictate;  when
the  balls  are  received,  the  box  is  presented  to  the  Master,  Senkj,
and  Junior  Wardens,  who  pronounce  clear  or  not  clear,  as  tHfc
case  may  be.     The  ballot  proving  clear,  the  candidate  (if  pres-
ent) is  conducted  into  a  small  preparation  room  adjoining  the
lodge,  he  is  asked  the  following  questions,  and  gives  the  follow-
ing answers.     Senior  1  »eacon  to  Candidate/ 4>o  yotf  sincerely
declare,  upon  your  honor  before  these  gentleman,  that,  unbiassed
by  friends,  uninfluenced  by  unworthy  motives,  ybii  freely  and  vo-
luntarily offer  yourself  a  candidate  for  the  mysteries  of  Masonry?'
Jins.     'I  do.'     Senior  Deacon  to  candidate,  'iJo  you  sincerely
declare,  upon  your  honor  before  these  gentlemen,  that  you  are
prompt  to  solicit  the  privileges  of  Masonry,  by  a  favorable  opinion
conceived  of  the  institution,  a  desire  of  knowledge,  and  a  sincere
wish  of  being  lerviceable  to  your  fellow  creatures*'    Ans.    'I  do.'
Senior  Deacon  to  candidate,*  'Do  you  sincerely  declare,  upon
your  honor  before  these  gentlemen,  that  you  will  cheerfully  con-
form to  all  the  ancient  established  usages  and  customs  of  the  fra-
ternity?'    Aiis.    *I  do.'    After  the  above  questions  are  proposed
and  answered,  and  the  result  reported  to  the  Master,  he  says,
'Brethren,  at  the  request  of  Mr.  A.  B.  he  has  been  proposed  and
accepted  in  regular  form.     I  therefore  recommend  him  as  a  pro-
per candidate  for  the  mysteries  of  Masonry,  and  worthy  to  par-
take of  the  privileges  of  the  fraternity;  and  in  consequence  of  a
declaration  of  his  intentions,  voluntarily  made,  I  believe  he  will
cheerfully  conform  to  the  rules  of  the  order.'     The  candidate,
during  the  time,  is  divested  of  all  his  apparel  (shirt  excepted)  and
furnished  with  a  pair  of  drawers,  kept  in  the  lodge  for  the  use  of
candidates;  the  candidate  is  then  blindfolded,  his  left  foot  bare,

*  The  reader  will  here  learn  one  reason  why  those  wh«i  enter  a  lodgo,
never  come  out,  until  they  have  taken  a  degree.  The  Candidate  is  made  t©
promise  upon  his  honor  that  he  will  "conform  to  all  the  ancient  established
usages  and  customs  of  the  fraternity;"  hence  let  him  be  ever  so  much  op-
posed to  the  ceremonies  of  initiation,  or  the  oath  of  the  degree,  he  cannot  go
back,  for  he  feels  bound  by  his  promise.  Should  he,  however,  feel  constrain-
ed to  violate  his  word,  the  persuasion^  and,  if  necessary,  tha  threats  «f  th
.  master  and  brethren  compel  him  to  go  forward.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


19  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY*

his  right  in  a  slipper,  his  left  bjeast  and  arm  naked,  and  a  rope
called  a  cable-tow  round  his  neck  and  left  arm,  (the  rope  is  not
put  round  the  arm  in  all  lodges)  in  which  posture  the  Candidate
is  conducted  to  the  door  where  he  is  caused  to  give,  or  the  con-
ductor gives  three  distinct  knocks,  which  are  answered  by  three
from  within,  the  conductor  gives  one  more,  which  is  also  answer-
ed by  one  from  within.  The  door  is  then  partly  opened  and  the
Junior  Deacon  generally  asks,  'who  comes  there?  who  comes
there?  who  comes  there?'  The  conductor,  alias  the  Senior  Dea-
con, answers,  'A  poor  blind  candidate  who  has  long  been  desir-
es of  having  and  receiving  a  part  of  the  rights  and  benefits  of
this  worshipful  lodge  dedicated  (some  say  erected)  to  God  and
held  forth  to  the  holy  order  of  St.  John,  as  all  true  fellows  and
brothers  have  done,  who  have  gone  this  way  before  him.' — The
Junior  Deacon  then  asks,  'Is  it  of  his  own  free  will  and  accord
he  makes  this  request?  is  he  duly  and  truly  prepared?  worthy  and
well  qualified?  and  properly  avouched  for?'  All  of  which  being
answered  in  the  affirmative,  the  Junior  Deacon  to  Senior  Dea-
con; 'By  what  farther  rights  does  he  expect  to  obtain  this  bene-
fit?' Ana,  'By.being  a  man,  free  born,  of  lawful  age,  and  under
the  tongue  of  good  report'  The  Junior  Deacon  then  says,  'since
this  is  the  case  you  will  wait  till  the  worshipful  Master  in  the  east
is  made  acquainted  with  his  request,  and  his  answer  returned;'
the  Junior  Deacon  repairs  to  the  Master,  when  the  same  ques-
tions are  asked  and  answers  returned  as  at  the  door;  after  which,
the  Master  says,  'since  he  comes  endowed  with  all  these'  neces-
sary qualifications,  let  him  enter  this  worshipful  lodge  in  the  name
of  the  Lord  and  take  heed  on  what  he  enters.'  The  candidate
then  enters,  the  Junior  Deacon  at  the  same  time  pressing  his
naked  left  breast  with  the  point  of  the  compass,  and  asks  the
candidate,  'Did  you  feel  any  thing?'  Am.  'I  did;'  Junior  Dea-
con to  candidate,  'what  was  it?'  Aru.  'A  torture.'  The  Jun-
ior Deacon  then  says,  'as  this  is  a  torture  to  your  flesh,  so  may
it  ever  be  to  your  mind  and  conscience,  if  ever  you  should  attempt
to  reveal  the  secrets  of  Masonry  unlawfully.'  The  candidate  is
then. conducted  to  the  centre  of  the  lodge,  where  he  and  the  Sen-
ior Deacon  kneels,  and  the  Deacon  says  the  following  prayer.

"Vouchsafe  thine  aid,  Almighty  Father  of  the  universe,  to  this
eur  present  convention;  and  grant  that  this  candidate  for  Mason-
ry may  dedicate  and  devote  his  life  to  thy  service,  and  become  a
true  and  faithful  brother  among  us!  Endue  him  with  a  compe-
tency of  thy  divine  wisdom,  that  by  the  secrets  of  our  art,  he  may
be  the  better  enabled  to  display  the  beauties  of  holiness,  to  the
honor  o$  thy  holy  name.     So  mote  it  be.     Amen!"

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON    MASONRY.  19

The  Master  then  asks  the  candidate,  'In  whom  do  you  put  your
trust]'  Jlns.  'In  God.'  The  Master  then  takes  him  by  the  right
hand  and  says,  'Since  in  God  you  put  your  trust,  arise  follow  your
leader  and  fear  no  danger.'  The  Senior  Deacon  then  conducts
the  candidate  three  times  regularly  round  the  lodge,  and  halts  at
the  Junior  Warden  in  the  south,  where  the  same  questions  are
asked  and  answers  returned  as  at  the  door.

As  the  candidate  and  the  conductor  are  passing  round  the  room
the  Master  reads  the  following  passage  of  scripture,  tnd  takes
the  same  time  to  read  it  that  they  do  to  go  round  the*  lodge  three
times.

"Behold  how  good  and  how  pleasant  it  is  for  brethren  to  dwell
together  in  unity!  It  is  like  the  precious  ointment  upon  the  head,
that  ran  down  upon  the  beard,  even  Aaron's  beard,  that  went
down  to  the  skirts  of  his  garment:  as  the  dew  of  Hermon,  and  as
the  dew  that  descended  upon  the  mountains  of  Zion;  for  there
the  Lord  commanded  the  blessing,  even  life  for  ever  more."

The  candidate  is  then  conducted  to  the  Senior  Warden  in  the
west,  where  the  same  questions  are  asked  and  answers*  returned
as  before,  from  thence  he  is  conducted  to  the  Worshipful  Master
in  the  east,  where  the  same  questions  are  asked  and  answers  re-
turned as  before.  The  Master  likewise  demands  of  him,  from
whence  he  came  and  whither  he  is  travelling.  The  candidate  an-
swers, 'from  the  west  and  travelling  to  the  east.'  Master  in-
quires: 'Why  do  you  leave  the  west  and  travel  to  the  east?'  Jkus.
'In  search  of  ligjit.'  Master  then  says,  'Since  the  candidate  is
travelling  in  search  of  light,  you  will  please  conduct  him  back  to
the  west  from  whence  he  came,  and  put  him  in  the  care  of  the
Senior  Warden,  who  will  teach  him  how  to  approach  the  east,
the  place  of  light,  by  advancing  upon  one  upright  regular  step,  to
the  first  step,  his  feet  forming  the  right  angle  of  an  oblong  square,
his  body  erect  at  the  altar  before  the  Master,  and  place  him  in  a
proper  position  to  take  upon  him  the  solemn  oath  or  obligation  of
an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason.'  The  Senior  Warden  receives  the
candidate,  and  instructs  him  as  directed.  He  first  steps  off  with
the  left  foot  and  brings  up  the  heel  of  the  right  into  the  hollow
thereof,  the  heel  of  the  right  foot  against  the  ancle  of^the  left,  will
of  course  form  the  right  angle  of  an  oblong  square;  the  candidate
then  kneels  on  his  left  knee,  and  places  his  right  foot  as  to  form
a  square  with  the  left,  he  turns  his  foot  round  until  the  ancle  bone
is  as  much  in  front  of  him  as  the  toes  on  the  left;  the  candidate's
left  hand  is  then  put  under  the  Holy  Bible,  square  and  compass,
and  the  right  hand  on  them.  This  is  the  position  in  which  a  can-
didate is  placed  when  he  takes  uf  on  him  the  otrth  or  oblig**10^  ~

,  Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


20  LIGHT    ON    MASONRY.

an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason.  As  soon  as  the  candidate  is  plac-  .
ed  in  this  position,  the  Worshipful  Master  approaches  Kim,  and
says,  'Mr.  A.  B.  you  are  now  placed  in  a  proper  position  to  take
upon  you  the  solemn  oath  or  obligation  of  an  Entered  Apprentice
Mason,*  which  I  assure  you  is  neither  to  effect  your  religion  nor
politics,  if  you  are  willing  to  take  it  repeat  your  name  and  say  af-
ter me;'  [and  although  many  have  refused  to  take  any  kind  of  an
obligation,  and  begged  for  the  privilege  of  retiring,  yet  pone  have
made  their  escape;  they  have  been  either  coerced,  or  persuaded
to  submit.  There  are  thousands  who  never  return  to  the  lodge
after  they  are  initiated.]  The  following  obligation  is  then  admin-
istered.

"I,  A.  B.  of  my  own  free  will  and  accord,  in  presence  of  Al-
mighty God  and  this  worshipful  lodge  of  Free  and  Accepted  Ma-
sons, dedicated  to  God  and  held  forth  to  the  holy  order  of  St.
John,  do  hereby  and  hereon  most  solemnly  and  sincerely  promise
and  swear,  that  I  will  always  hail,  ever  conceal,  and  never  reveal
any  part,#or  parts,  art,  or  arts,  point,  or  points  of  the  secrets,  arts
and  mysteries  of  ancient  Free  Masonry,  which  I  have  received,  am
about  to  receive,  or  may  hereafter  be  instructed  in,  to  any  person
or  persons  in  the  known  world,  except  it  be  a  true  and  lawful  bro-
ther Mason,  or  within  the  body  of  a  just  and  lawfully  constituted
lodge  of  such,  and  not  unto  him,  nor  unto  them  whom  I  shall  hear
so  to  be,  but  unto  him  and  them  only  whom  I  shall  find  so  to  be,
after  strict  trial  and  due  examination  or  lawful  information.  Fur-
thermore, do  I  promise  and  swear  that  I  will  not  write,  print,
stamp,  stain,  hugh,  cut,  carve,  indent,  paint,  or  engrave  it  on  any
thing  moveable  or  immoveable,  under  the  whole  canopy  of  heav-
en, whereby,  or  whereon  the  least  letter,  figure,  character,  mark,
stain,  shadow;  or  resemblance  of  the  same  may  become  legible  or
intelligible  to  myself  or  any  other  person  in  the  known  world,
whereby  the  secrets  of  Masonry  may  be  unlawfully  obtained
through  my  unworthiness.  T#  all  which  I  do  most  solemnly  and
sincerely  promise  and  swear,  without  the  leasi  equivocation,  men-
tal reservation,  or  self  evasion  of  mind  in  me  whatever;  binding
myself  under  no  less  penalty,  than  to  have  my  throat  cut  across,
my  tongue  torn  out  by  the  roots,  and  my  body  buried  in  the  rough

*  In  many  lodges  this  is  put  in  the  form  of  a  question,  thus:  "Are  you ,
willing  to  take  an  obligation  upon  you  that  does  not  effect  your  politics  or
religion VJ  The  promise  "to  conform,"  made  before  entering  the  lodge,  the  f
"assurance  that  the  oath  js  not  to  interfere  with  their  political  or  religious
principles,"  and  the  manner  the  obligation  is  administered, — only  two  or
three  words  being  repeated  at  a  time,  consequently  not  fully  understood ;
aTe  among  the  reasons  which  have  led  many  great  and  good  men  to  take
•aths  incompatible  with  the  laws  oi  God  and  #ur  country.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  21

sands  of  tlie  sea  at  low  water  mark,  where  the  tide  ebbs  and  flows
twice  in  twenty-four  hours;  so  help  me  God,  and  keep  me  stead*
fast  in  the  due  performance  of  the  same."*

After  the  obligation  the  master  addresses  the  candidate  in  the
following  manner:  '  Brother,  to  you  the  secrets  of  masonry  are
about  to  be  unveiled,  and  a  brighter  sun  never  shone,  lustre  on
your  eyes;  while  prostrate  before  this  sacred  altar,  do  you  not
shudder  at  every  crime?  have  you  not  confidence  in  every  virtue?
May  these  thoughts  ever  inspire  you  with  the  most  noble  senti-
ments; may  you  ever  feel  that  elevation  of  soul,  that  shall  scorn  a
dishonest  act.  Brother,  what  do  you  most  desire?'  Jim.  'Light.'
Master  to  brethren,  'Brethren,  stretch  forth  your  hands  and  assist
in  bringing  this  new  made  brother  from  darkness  to  light'  The
members  having  formed  a  circle  round  the  candidate,  the  Master
says,  'And  God  said,  let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light'  At
the  same  time,  all  the  brethren  clap  their  hands,  and  stamp  on
the  floor  with  their  right  foot  as  heavy  as  possible,  the  bandage
dropping  from  the  candidate's  eyes  at  the  same  instant,  which,
after  having  been  so  long  blind,  and  full  of  fearful  apprehensions
all  the  time,  this  great  and  sudden  transition  from  perfect  dark-
ness to  a  light  brighter  (if  possible)  than  the^meridian  sun  in  a  mid
summer  day,  sometimes  produces  an  alarming  effect.  I  once
knew  a  man  to  faint  on  being  brought  to  light;  and  his  recovery
was  quite  doubtful  for  some  time:  however,  he  did  come  too,  but
he  never  returned  to  the  lodge  again.  I  have  often  conversed
with  him  on  the  subject,  he  is  yet  living,  and  will  give  a  certificate
in  support  of  the  above  statement  at  any  time  if  requested.

After  the  candidate  is  brought  to  light,  the  Master  addresses
him  as  follows:  'Brother,  on  being  brought  to  light,  you  first  dis-
cover three  great  lights  in  masonry  by  the  assistance  of  three  less-
er, they  are  thus  explained;  the  three  great  lights  in  masonry  are
the  Holy  Bible,  Square  and  Compass.  |     The  Holy  Bible  is  giv-

+  It  is  frequently  said  by  Masons  that  the  "penalties  of  masonic  oaths  are
nothing;  that  no  one  is*  bound  to  inflict  them,  and  that  if  Morgan  was  put
to  death  by  Masons  it  was  not  done  in  conformity  to  masonic  law."  But  it"
one  part  of  the  oath  is  nothing  another  part  is  nothing  by  the  same  rule.  Any
Mason,  therefore,  is  at  liberty  to  reveal  masonry  without  exposing  himself
any  more  than  he  would  if  the  oath  was  never  administered.  But  if  the  pen-
alties are  not  to  be  inflicted,  why  did  they  kill  Morgan — and  why  is  a  Ma-
eon  sworn  that  he  will  "use  his  most  decided  endeavors,  by  the  blessing  of
God,  to  bring  such  person  (the  person  who  violates  masonic  law)  to  the  most
strict  and  condign  punishment  agreeable  to  the  ancient  rules, And  usages  of
the  fraternity?

t  The  Holy  Bible  is  here  said  to  be  given  to  Masons  as  a  rule  and  guide  for
their  faith  and  practice.  But  I  would  ask,  if  Free  Masonry  is  the  same  among
all  nations  (as  is  declared  by  masonic  writers)  how  this  is  possible,  when  it

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


22  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

en  to  us  as  a  rule  and  guide  for  our  faith  and  practice;  the  Square,
to  square  our  actions,  and  the  Compass  to  keep  us  in  due  bounds
with  all  mankind,  but  more  especially  with  the  brethren.  The
three  lesser  lights  are  three  burning  tapers,  or  candles  placed  on
candlesticks,  (some  say,  or  candles  on  pedestals,)  they  represent
the  Sun,  Moon,  and  Master  of  the  lodge,  and  are  thus  explained.
As  the  sun  rules  the  day  and  the  moon  governs  the  night,  so  ought
the  Worshipful  Master  with  equal  regularity  to  rule  and  govern
his  lodge,  or  cause  the  §ame  to  be  done;  you  next  discover  me
as  Ma3ter'of  this  lodge,  approaching  you  from  the  east  upon  the
first  step  of  masonry,  under  the  sign  and  due-guard  of  an  Entered
Apprentice  Mason.  (The  sign  and  due-guard  has  been  explain-
ed.) This  is  the  manner  of  giving  them,  imitate  me  as  near  as
you  can,  keeping  your  position.  First,  step  off  with  your  left
foot  and  bring  the  heel  of  the  right  into  the  hollow  the/eof  so  as
to  form  a  square.'  [This  is  the  first  step  in  masonry.]  The  fol-
lowing is  the  sign  of  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason,  and  is  the
sign  of  distress  in  this  degree;  you  are  not  to  give  it  unless  in
distress.  *  [It  is  given  by  holding  your  two  hands  traversely  across
each  other,  the  right-hand  upwards  and  one  inch  from  the  left.]
The  following  is  the  due-guard  of  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason.
[This  is  given  by  drawing  your  right  hand  across  your  throat,
the  thumb  next  to  your  throat,  your  arm  as  high  as  the  elbow  in
a  horizontal  position.]  'Brother,  I  now  present  you  my  right
hand  in  token  of  brotherly  love  and  esteem,  and  with  it  lie  grip
and  name  of  the  grip  of  an  Entered  Apprentice  Ma3on.'  The
right  hands  are  joined  together,  as  in  shaking  hands,  and  each
sticks  his  thumb  nail  into  the  third  joint  or  upper  end  of  the  fore
finger;  the  name  of  the  grip  is  Boaz,  and  is  to  be  given  in  the  fol-
lowing manner  and  no  other;  the  Master  first  gives  the  grip  and
word,  and  divides  it  for  the  instruction  of  the  candidate;  the  ques-

is  a  well  known  fact,  that  but  a  small  part  of  the  human  family  are  in  pos-
sesion of,  or  know  any  thing  about,  the  Bible?  And  if  the  Bible  is  receiv-
ed by  Masons  as  a  rule  of  faith  and  practice,  why  do  they  use  a  square  and
compass?    Is  not  the  Bible  sufficient?

The  truth  is,  masonry  is  not  the  same  among  all  nations,  only  in  some  re-
spects, and  these  are,  the  fundamental  principles  ot  the  order.  The  appen-
dages of  the  Institution  differ  according  to  the  peculiar  feelings  and  senti-
ments of  the  people  among  whom  it  exists.  Hence  in  America,  in  a  reli-
gious point  of  view,  it  has  existed  with  difficulty:  masonic  writers  have  been
at  a  loss  what  to  say  on  the  subject,  and  in  their  extremity,  one  has  called  it
'religion,'  another  the  'hand-maid  of  religion,'  a  third  the  'twin-sister  of  Chris-
tianity,' and  a  fourth  that  it  was  simply  an  Institution  of  'morality  and  be-
nevolence.* To  please  the  christian  the  Bible  is  introduced, — to  satisfy  tht*
infidel,  the  square  and  compass  are  added;  the  name  of  Christ  is  expunged
from  passages  quoted,  and  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  rejected,  and  all  dona
in  «ach  a  manner,  that  but  few  see  the  foul  and  monstrous  imposition.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY*  23

thns  are  as  follows:  The  Master  and  candidate  holding  each  oth-
er by  the  grip  as  before  described,  the  Master  says,  'what  is  this?'
Ans.  'A  grip.'  Q.  'A  grip  of  what?  Jlns.  'The  grip  of  an
Entered  Apprentice  Mason.'  Q.  'Has  it  a  name?  Ans.  'It
has.'  Q.  'Will  you  give  it  to  me?'  Jlns.  'I  did  not  so  receive
it,  neither  can  I  s^>  impart  it.'  Q.  'What  will  you  do  with  it?
Am.  'Letter  it  or  halve  it.'  Q.  'Halve  it  and  begin.'  Jlnt.
'You  begin.'  Q.  'Begin  you.'  Ms.  'BO.'  Q.  'AZ.'  Ans.
'BOAZ.'  Master  says,  'Right,  brother  Boaz,  I  greet  you.  It
is  the  name  of  the  left  hand  pillar  of  the  porch  of  king  Solomon's
Temple— arise,  brother  Boaz,  snd  salute  the  Junior  and  Senior
Wardens  as  such,  and  convince  them  that  you  have  been  regular-
ly initiated  as  an* Entered  Apprentice  Mason,  and  have  £ot  the
sign,  grip,  and  word.'  The  Master  returns  to  his  seat  while  the
Wardens  are  examining  the  candidate,  and  gets  a  lamb-skin  or
white  apron,  presents  it  to  the  candidate  and  observes,  'Brother,
I  now  present  you  with  a  Lamb-skin  or  white  apron;  it  is  an
emblem  of  innocence,  and  the  badge  of  a  Mason;  it  has  been
worn  by  kings,  princes,  and  potentates  of  the  earth,  who  have  nev-
er been  ashamed  to  wear  it;  it  is  more  honorable  than  the  dia-
dems of  kings,  or  pearls  of  princesses,  when  worthily  worn:  it  is
more  ancient  than  the  Golden  Fleece  or  Roman  Eagle;  more
honorable  than  the  Star  ard  Garter;  or  any  other  order  that  can
be  conferred  upon  you  at  this,  or  any  other  time,  except  it  be  in
the  body  of  a  just  and  fully  constituted  lodge;  you  will  carry  it  to
the  Senior  Warden  in  the  west,  who  will  teach  you  how  to  wear
it  as  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason.'  The  Senior  Warden  ties
the  apron  on  and  turns  up  the  flap  instead  of  letting  it  fall  down
in  front  of*the  top  of  the  apron.  This  is  the  way  Entered  Ap-
prentice Masons  wear,  or  ought  to  wear,  their  aprons  until  they
are  advanced.  The  candidate  is  now  conducted  to  the  Master
in  the  east,  who  says,  'Brother,  as  you  are  dressed,  it  is  neces-
sary you  should  have  tools  to  work  with;  I  will  now  present  you
with  the  working  tools  of  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason,  which
are  the  twenty-iour  inch  gauge  and  common  gavel;  they  arp  thus
explained: — The  twenty-four  inch  gauge  is  an  instrument  made
use  of  by  operative  Masons  to  measure  and  lay  out  their  work,
but  we  as  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  make  use  of  it  for  the  more
noble  and  glorious  purpose  of  dividing  our  time.  The  twenty-
four  inches  on  the  guage,  are  emblematical  of  the  twenty-four
hours  in  the  day,  which  we  are  taught  to  divide  into  three  equal
parts,  whereby  we  find  eight  hours  for  the  service  of  God,  and  a
worthy  distressed  brother;  eight  hours  for  our  usual  vocations;
and  eight  for  refreshment  and  sleep;  the  common  gavel  is  an  in-


y  Google


24  LIGHT    ON    MASONRY.

strument  made  use  of  by  operative  Mason  to  break  off  the  cor-
ners of  rough  stones;  the  better  to  fit  them  for  the  builders  use,  but
we  as  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  use  it  for  the  more  noble  and
glorious  purpose  of  divesting  our  hearts  and  consciences  of  all  the
vices  and  superfluities  of  life,  thereby  fitting  our  minds  as  living
and  lively  stones,  for  that  spiritual  building,  tnVt  h6use  not  made
with  hands,  eternal  in  the  Heavens.*  I  also  present  you  with  a
new  name;  it  is  CAUTION,  it  teaches  you  as  you  are  barely  in-
structed in  the  rudiments  of  Masonry,  that  you  should  be  cautious
over  all  your  words  and  actions,  particularly  when  before  the  ene-
mies of  Masonry.  I  shall  next  present  you  with  three  precious  jew-
els, which  are  a  listening  ear,  a  silent  tongue,  and  a  faith-

FUL  HEART.

4  A  listening  ear  teaches  you  to  listen  to  the  instructions  of  the
Worshipful  Master;  but  more  especially  that  you  should  listen  to
the  cries  of  a  worthy  distressed  brother.  A  silent  tongue  teaches
you  to  be  silent  while  in  the  lodge,  that  the  peace  and  harmony
thereof  may  not  be  disturbed,  but  more  especially,  that  you  should
be  silent  before  the  enemies  of  Masonry,  that  the  craft  may  not  be
brought  into  disrepute  by  your  imprudence.  A  faithful  heart  teach-
es you  to  be  faithful  to  the  instructions  of  the  worshipful  Master  at
all  times,  but  more  especially,  that  you  should  be  faithful  and  keep
and  conceal  the  secrets  of  Masonry,  and  those  of  a  brother  when
given  to  you  in  charge  as  such,  that  they  may  remain  as  secure  and
inviolable  in  your  breast  as  in  his  own,  before  communicated  to
you.  I  further  present  you  with  check  words  two;  their  names  are
truth  and  union,  and  are  thus  explained.  Truth  is  a  divine  at-
tribute, and  the  foundation  of  every  virtue;  to  be  good  and  true,  is
the  first  lesson  we  are  taught  in  Masonry;  on  this  theme  we  con-
template, and  by  its  dictates  endeavor  to  regulate  our  conduct;
hence,  while  influenced  by  this  principle,  hypocrisy  and  deceit  are
unknown  among  us,  sincerity  and  plain  dealing  distinguish  us,  and
the  heart  and  tongue  join  in  promoting  each  other's  welfare,  and
rejoicing  in  each  other's  prosperity.

Union,  is  that  kind  of  friendship,  which  ought  to  appear  conspic-
uous in  every  Mason's  conduct.  It  is  so  closely  allied  to  the  di-
vine attribute,  truth,  that  he  who  enjoys  the  one,  is  seldom  desti-

*  Let  it  no  longer  be  said,  that  "Masonry  is  not  a  religious  Institution."
But  while  we  assert  that  it  inculcates  a  system  of  religion,  we  affirm  that  it
is  not  the  religion  of  Jesus.  There  are  in  the  world  many  religions,  but  all
are  false  save  one,  and  that  is,  of  the  Bible.  Any  system  which  professedly
teaches  a  way  to  Heaven,  is  a  system  of  religion:  but  that  which  points  out  a
path,  without  a  crucified  Saviour  and  the  sanctifying  influences  of  the  Holy
Comforter,  is  not  only  false,  but  in  direct  hostility,  to  the  true  God,  and  the
*ouls  of  men!    Such  a  religious  system  is  that  or  Masonry.

Digitized  by  G00gle  *


1.1GHT   ON   MASONRY.  25

tute  of  the  other.  Should  interest,  honor,  prejudice,  or  human  de-
pravity, ever  induce  you  to  violate  any  part  of  the  sacred  trust  we
now  repose  in  you,  let  these  two  important  words,  at  the  earliest  in-
sinuation, teach  you  to  put  on  the  check-line  of  truth,  which  will  in-
fallibly direct  you  to  pursue  that  straight  and  narrow  path  which
ends  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  grand  lodge  above;  where  we
shall  all  meet  as  Masons  and  members  in  the  same  family,  in  peace,
harmony,  and  love;  where  all  discord  on  account  of  politics,  reli-
gion, or  private  opinion  shall  be  unknown,  and  banished  from  with-
in our  walls.

'Brother,  it  has  been  a  custom  from  time  immemorial' to  demand,
or  ask  from  a  newly  made  brother  something  of  a  metalic  kind,  not
so  much  on  account  of  its  intrinsic  value,  but  that  it  may  be  depos-
ited in  the  archives  of  the  lodge,  as  a  memorial  that  you  was  here-
in made  a  Mason; — a*  small  trifle  will  be  sufficient; — any  thing  of
a  metalic  kind  will  do;  if  you  have  no  money,  any  thing  of  a  me-
talic nature  will  be  sufficient;  even  a  button  will  do.'  [The  can-
didate says  he  has  nothing  about  him;  it  is  known  he  has  nothing.]
1  Search  yourself,'  the  Master  replies.  He  is  assisted  in  search-
ing, nothing  is  found;  'perhaps  you  can  borrow  a  trifle,'  says  the
Master.  [He  tries  to  borrow,  none  will  lend  him — he  proposes
to  go  into  the  other  room  where  his  clothes  are;  he  is  not  permit-
ted.— If  a  stranger,  he  is  very  much  embarrassed;  Master  to  can-
didate, 'Brother,  let  this  ever  be  a  striking  lesson  to  you,  and  teach
you,  if  you  should  ever  see  a  friend,  but  more  especially  a  brother
in  a  like  pennyless  situation,  to  contribute  as  liberally  to  his  relief
as  his  situation  may  require,  and  your  abilities  will  admit  without
material  injury  to  yourself  or  family.'  Master  to  Senior  Deacon.
'You  wiM  conduct  the  candidate  back  from  whence  he  came,  and
invest  him  of  what  he  has  been  divested,  and  let  him  return  for  for-
mer instruction.  A  zealous  attachment  to  these  principles  will
ensure  public  and  private  esteem.  In  the  state,  you  are  to  be  a
quiet  and  peaceable  subject,  true  to  your  government  and  just  to
your  country;  you  are  not  to  countenance  disloyalty,  but  faithfully
submit  to  legal  authority,  and  conform  with  cheerfulness  to  the
government  of  the  country  in  which  you  live.  In  your  outward  de-
meanor be  particularly  careful  to  avoid  censure  or  reproach.  Al-
though your  frequent  appearance  at  our  regular  meetings  is  ear-
nestly solicited,  yet  it  is  not  meant  that  Masonry  should  interfere
with  your  necessary  vocations;  for  these  are  on  no  account  to  be
neglected:  neither  are  you  to  suffer  your  zeal  for  the  institution  to
lead  you  into  argument  with  those,  who,  through  ignorance,  may
ridicule  it.  At  your  leisure  hours,  that  you  may  improve  in  Ma-
sonic knowledge,  you  are  to  converse  with  well  informed  brethren;

C
•


26  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY,

who  will  be  always  as  ready  to  give,  as  you  will  be  to  receive  in-
formation. Finally,  keep  sacred  and  inviolable  the  mysteries  of
the  order,  as  these  are  to  distinguish  you  from  the  rest  of  the  com-
munity, and  mark  your  consequence  among  Masons.  If,  in  the
circle  of  your  acquaintance,  you  find  a  person  desirous  of  being
initiated  into  Masonry,  be  particularly  attentive  not  to  commend
him,  unless  you  are  convinced  he  will  conform  to  our  rules;  that
the  honor,  glory,  and  reputation  of  the  institution  may  be  firmly
established,  and  the  world  at  large  convinced  of  its  good  effects.

The  work  of  the  evening  being  over,  I  will  proceed  to  give  a  de-
scription of  'the  manner  of  closing  the  lodge.  It  is  a  very  common
practice  in  lodges  to  close  a  lodge  of  Entered  Apprentices,  and
open  a  lodge  of  Fellow  Crafts,  and  close  that,  and  open  a  Master
Mason's  lodge,  all  in  the  same  evening.

Some  brother  generally  makes  a  motion  that  the  lodge  be  clos-
ed; it  being  seconded  and  carried: —

The  Master  to  the  Junior  Deacon — 'Brother  Junior,'  [giving
one  rap  which  calls  up  both  Deacons,]  'the  first  as  weH  as  the  last
care  of  a  Mason?'  Am.  'To  see  the  lodge  tyled,  Worshipful.'
Master  to  the  Junior  Deacon,"  'Attend  to  that  part  of  your  duty,
and  inform  the  Tyler  that  we  are  about  to  close  this  lodge  of  En-
tered Apprentice  Masons,  and  direct  him  tyle  accordingly.'  The
Junior  Deacon  steps  to  the  door  and  gives  three  raps,  which  are
answered  by  the  Tyler  with  three  more;  the  Junior  Deacon  then
gives  one,  which  is  also  answered  by  the  Tyler  by  one.  The,  Jun-
ior Deacon  then  opens  the  door,  delivers  his  message,  and  resumes
his  place  in  the  lodge,  and  says,  'the  door  is  tyled,  Worshipful.'
Master  to  Junior  Deacon,  'By  whom?'  Am.  'By  a  Master  ma-
son without  the  door,  armed  with  the  proper  implements  «f  his  of-
fice/ Master  to  Junior  Deacon,  'His  business  there?'  Am.  'To
keep  off  all  cowans  and  eaves-droppers,  and  see  that  none  pass  or
repass  without  permission  from  the  chair. '  Master  to  Junior  Dea-
con, 'Your  place  in  the  lodge,  Junior?'  Am.  'At  the  right  hand
of  the  Senior  Warden  in  the  west.'  Master  to  Junior  Deacon,
'Your  duty  there?'  Am.  'To  wait  on  the  Worshipful  Master  and
Wardens,  act  as  their  proxy  in  the  active  duties  of  the  lodge,  and
take  charge  of  the  door.'  Master  to  the  junior  Deacon,  'The
Senior  Deacon's  place  in  the  lodge?'  Am.  'At  the  right  hand  of
the  Worshipful  Master  in  the  east.'  Master  to  Senior  Deacon,
4  Your  duty  there,  brother  Senior?  Am.  'To  wait  on  the  Worship-
ful Master  and  Wardens;  act  as  their  proxy  in  the  active  duties  of
the;  lodge;  attend  to  the  preparation  and  introduction  of  candi-
dates; receive  and  clothe  ahWisiting  brethren.'  Master  to  the  Sen-
ior Deacon,  'The  Secretary's  place  in  the  lodge?'     Ans.    'At

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY-  Sft

your  left  hand,  W>rsbipfiil.'  Master  to  Secretary,  'Your  dut\
there,  brother  Secretary?'  Ans*  *I>iily  to  observe  the  Master's
will  and  pleasure;  record  the  proceedings  of  the  lodge;  transmit
a  copy  of  the  same  to  the  grand  lodge,  if  required;  receive  all
monies  and  money  bills  from  the  hands  of  the  brethren;  pay  them
over  to  the  Treasurer,  and  take  his  receipt  for  the  same. '  Master
to  the  Secretary,  'The  Treasurer's  place  in  the  lodge?'  ixi.  'At
the  right  hand  of  the  Worshipful  Master.'  Master  to  Treasurer,
'Your  business  there,  brother  Treasurer?'  Am.  'Duly  to  observe
the  Worshipful  Master's  will  and  pleasure;  receive  aH  monies  and
money  bibs  from  the  hands  of  the  Secretary;  keep  a  jnst  and  ac-
curate account  of  the  same;  pay  them  out  by  order  of  the  Wor-
shipful Master  and  consent  of  the  brethren.'  Master  to  the
Treasurer,  'The  Junior  Warden's  place  in  the  lodge?'  Ana.  'In
the  south,  Worshipful.'  Master  to  the  Junior  Warden,  'Your
business  there,  brother  Junior?'  Ans.  'As  the  sun  in  the  south,
at  high  meridian,  is  the  beauty  and  glory  of  the  day;  so  stands  the
Junior  Warden  in  the  south  at  high  twelve,  the  better  to  observe
the  time;  call  the  crafts  from  labor  to  refreshment;  superintend
them  during  the  hours  thereof;  see  that  none  convert  the  purposes
of  refreshment  into  that  of  excess  or  intemperance;  call  them  on  a-
gain  in  due  season;  that  the  Worshipful  Master  may  have  honor,
and  they  pleasure  and  profit  thereby.'  The  Master  to  the  Junior
Warden,  [I  wish  the  reader  to  take  particular  notice,  that  in  clos-
ing the  lodge,  the  Master  asks  the  Junior  Warden  as  follows: —
'The  Master's  place  in  the  lodge?'  and  in  opening  he  asks  the
Senior  Warden  the  same  question,]  'The  Master's  place  in  the
lodge?'  Ans.  'In  the  east,  Worshipful.'  Master  to  Junior
Warden,  'His  duty  there?'  Ans.  'As  the  sun  rises  in  the  east  to
open  and  adorn  the  day;  so  presides  the  Worshipful  Master  in  the
east,  to  open  and  adorn  his  lodge;  set  his  crafts  to  work  with  good
and  wholesome  laws,  or  cause  the  same  to  be  done.'  Master  to
the  Junior  Warden,  'The  Senior  Warden's  place  in  the  lodge?'
Ans.  'In  the  west,  WoTsmpful.'  Master  to  Senior  Warden,
'Your  business  there,  Brother  Senior?'  Ans.  'As  the  sun  sets  in
the  west  to  close  the  day,  so  stands  the  Senior  Warden  in  the  west
to  assist  the  Worshipful  Master  in  opening  and  closing  the  lodge;
take  care  of  the  jewels  and  implements;  see  that  none  be  lost;  pay
the  craft  their  wages',  if  any  be  due;  and  see  that  none  go  away  dis-
satisfied.' The  Master  now  gives  three  raps,  when  all  the  breth-
ren rise,  and  the  Master  asks,  'Are  you  ail  satisfied?'  They  an-
swer in  the  affirmative,  by  giving  the  due-guard.

Should  the  Master  discover  that  any  declined  giving  it,  inquiry
is  immediately  made  why  it  is  so;  and  if  any  member  is  dissatisfied

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


28  •  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

with  any  part  of  the  proceedings,  or  with  any  brpther,  the  subject  is
immediately  investigated*  Master  to  the  Brethren,  'Attend  to  giv-
ing the  signs;  as  I  do,  so  do  you  give  them  downwards;'  [which  is
by  giving  the  last  in  opening,  first  in  closing.  In  closing,  on  this
degree,  you  first  draw  your  right  hand  across  your  throat,  as  here-
in before  described,  and  then  hold  your  two  hands  over  each  other
as  before  described.  This  is  the  method  pursued  through  all  the
degrees;  and  when  opening  on  any  of  the  upper  degrees,  all  the
signs,  of  all  the  proceeding  degrees,  are  given  before  you  give  the
signs  of  the  degree  on  which  you  are  opening.  ]  This  being  done,
the  Master  proceeds,  'I  now  declare  this  lodge  of  Entered  Ap-
prentice Masons  regularly  closed  in  due  and  ancient  form.  Brother
Junior  Warden,  please  inform  brother  Senior  Warden,  and  request
him  to  inform  the  brethren  that  it  is  my  will  and  pleasure  that  this
lodge  of  Entered  Apprentice  Masons  be  now  closed,  and  stand  clos-
ed until  our  next  regular  communication,  unless  a  case  or  cases
of  emergency  shall  require  earlier  convention,  of  which  every  mem-
ber shall  be  notified;  during  which  time  it  is  seriously  hoped  and
expected  that  every  brother  will  demean  himself  as  becomes  a
Free  and  Accepted  Mason.'  Junior  Warden  to  Senior  Warden,
'Brother  Senior,  it  is  the  Worshipful  Master's  will  and  pleasure
that  this  lodge  of  Entered  Apprentice  Masons  be  closed,  and  stand
closed  until  our  next  regular  communication,  unless  a  case  or  cas-
es of  emergency  shall  require  earlier  convention,  of  which  every
brother  shall  be  notified;  during  which  time  it  is  seriously  hoped
and  expected  that  every  brother  will  demean  himself  as  becomes
a  Free  and  Accepted  Mason.'  Senior  Warden  to  the  brethren,
'Brethren,  you  have  heard  the  Worshipful  Master's  will  and  plea-
sure as  communicated  to  me  by  Brother  Junior;  so  let  it  be  done.'
Master  to  the  Junior  Warden,  'Brother  Junior,  how  do*  Masons
meet?'  Ans.  'On  the  level.'  Master  to  Senior  Warden,  'How
do  Mason's  partf  Ans.  'On  the  square.'  Master  to  the  Junior
and  Senior  Wardens,  'Since  we  meet  on  the  level,  Brother  Junior,
and  part  on  the  square,  Brother  Senior,  so  let  us  ever  meet  and
$>art  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.'  Here  follows  a  prayer,  sometimes
used.     Master  to  the  Brethren,  'Brethren,  let  us  pray.'

'Supreme  Architect  of  the  universe!  accept  our  humble  praises
for  the  many  mercies  and  blessings  which  thy  bounty  has  conferred
upon  us,  and  especially  for  this  friendly  and  social  intercourse. —
Pardon,  we  beseech  thee,  whatever  thou  hast  seen  amiss  in  us
since  we  have  been  together;  and  continue  to  us  thy  presence,  pro-
tection, and  blessing.  Make  us  sensible  of  the  renewed  obliga-
tions we  are  under  to  love  thee  supremely,  and  to  be  friendly  to  each
other.     May  all  our  irregular  passions  be  subdued,  and  may  we

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


tIGHf   ON   MASOffftV.  2&

fla%  increase  in  faith,  hope,  and  charity;  but  more  especially  in
that  charity  which  i9  the  bond  of  peace,  and  perfection  of  every  vir-
tue. May  we  so  practice  thy  precepts,  that,  through  the  merits  of
the  Redeemer,  we  may  finally  obtain  thy  promises,  and  find  an  ac-
ceptance through  the  gates,  and  into  the  temple  and  city  of  our
God.     So  mote  it  be.     Amen.9

A  Benediction,  oftener  used  at  dosing,  than  ike  preceding  Prayer.

'May  the  blessings  of  Heaven  rest  upon  us,  and  all  regular  Ma-
sons! May  brotherly  love  prevail,  and  every  moral  and  social  vir-
tue cement  us.     So  mote  it  be.     Amen.

After  the  prayer  the  following  charge  ought  to  be  delivered;  but
it  is  seldom  attended  to;  in  a  majority  of  lodges  it  is  never  at-
tended to.

Master  to  Brethren,  'Brethren,  we  are  now  about  to  quit  this
sacred  retreat  of  friendship  and  virtue,  to  mix  again  with  the  world.
Amidst  its  concerns  and  employments,  forget  not  the  duties  which
you  have  heard  so  frequently  inculcated,  and  so  forcibly  recom-
mended in  this  lodge. — Remember  that  around  this  altar  you  have
promised  to  befriend  and  relieve  every  brother  who  shall  need  your
assistance.  You  have  promised,  in  the  most  friendly  manner,  to
remind  him  of  his  errors,  and  aid  a  reformation.  These  generous
principles  are  to  extend  further:  Every  human  being  has  a  claim
upon  your  kind  offices.  Do  good  unto  all.  Recommend  it  more
"especially  to  the  household  of  the  faithful."  Finally,  brethren,
be  ye  all  of  one  mind,  live  in  peace,  and  may  the  God  of  love  and
peace,  delight  to  dwell  with  and  bless  you.'

In  some  lodges,  after  the  charge  is  delivered,  the  Master  says,
'Brethren,  form  on  the  square.'  When  all  the  brethren  form  a
circle,  and  the  Master,  followed  by^  every  brother,  [except  in  us-
ing the  words,]  says,  'And  God  saicl,  let  there  be  light,  and  there
was  light. '  At  the  same  moment  that  the  last  of  these  words  drops
from  the  Master's  lips,  every  member  stamps  with  -his  right  foot  on
the  floor,  and  at  the  same  instant  bring  their  hands  together  with
equal  force,  and  in  such  perfect  unison  with  each  other,  that  per-
sons situated  so  as  to  hear  it,  would  suppose  it  the  precursor  of
some  dreadful  catastrophe.     This  is  called  Hhe  shocks

Having  described  all  the  ceremonies  and  forms  appertaining  to
the  opening  of  a  lodge  of  Entered  Apprentice  Masons;  setting
them  to  work;  initiating  a  candidate,  and  closing  3  ledge;  I  will
now  proceed  to  give  the  Lecture  on  this  degree.  It  is  divided
into  three  sections.  The  lecture  is  nothing  more  or  less  than  a
recapitulation  of  the  preceding  ceremonies  and  forms  by  way  of
question  and  answer,  and  fully  explains  the  same.    In  fact,  the

C2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


30  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

ceremonies  and  forms  (generally  masonically  called  the  work)
and  lecture  are  so  much  the  same  that  he  who  possesses  a
knowledge  of  the  lectures  cannot  be  destitute  of  a  knowledge
of  what  the  ceremonies  and  forms  are.  As  the  ceremonies  used
in  opening  and  closing  are  the  same  in  all  the  degrees,  it  is
thought  best  to  give  the  whole  one  insertion;  it  being  the  sin-
cere wish  of  the  writer,  that  every  reader  should  perfectly  under-
stand all  the  formulas  of  the  whole  masonic  fabric,  as  he  then
will  thereby  be  able  to  form  correct  opinions  of  the  propriety  or
impropriety,  advantages  or  disadvantages  of  the  same.

First  Section  of  the  Lecture  on  the  First  Degree  of  Masonry.

Q.  From  whence  came  you  as  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason?

A.  From  Che  hdly  lodge  of  St.  John  at  Jerusalem.

Q.  What  recommendations  do  you  bring?

A.  Recommendations  from  the  Worshipful  Master,  Wardens
and  Brethren  of  that  Right  Worshipful  lodge,  whom  greet  you.

Q.  What  comest  thou  hither  to  do?

A.  To  learn  to  subdue  my  passions,  and  improve  myself  in
the  secret  arts  and  mysteries  of  ancient  Free  Masonry.

Q.  You  are  a  Mason,  then,  I  presume?

A.  I  am.

Q.  How  do  you  know  that  you  are  a  Mason?

A.  By  being  often  tried,  never  denied  and  willing  to  be  tried
again.

Q.  How  shall  I  know  you  to  be  a  Mason?

A.  By  certain  signs,  and  a  token.

Q.  W  hat  are  signs?

A.  All  right  angles,  horizontals,  and  perpendiculars.

Q.  What  is  a  token?  „

A.  A  certain  friendly  and  brotherly  grip  whereby  one  Mason
may  know  another  in  the  dark  as  well  as  in  the  light

Q.  Where  was  you  first  prepared  to  be  a  Mason?

A.  In  my  heart.

Q.  Where  secondly?

A.  In  a  room  adjacent  to  the  body  of  a  just  and  lawfully  con-
stituted lodge  of  such.

Q.  How  was  you  prepared?

A.  By  being  divested  of  all  metals,  neither  naked  nor  clothed,
barefoot  nor  shod,  hood-winked  with  a  Cable  Tow*  about  my
neck,  in  which  situation  I  was  conducted  to  the  door  of  the
lodge.

Q.  You  being  hood- winked  how  did  you  know  it  to  be  a  door?
♦Three  miles  long,

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  31

A.  By  first  meeting  with  resistance  and  afterwards  gaining
admission.

Q.  How  did  you  gain  admission?

A*  By  three  distinct  knocks  from  without,  answered  by  the
same  from  within.

Q.  What  was  said  to  you  from  within?

A.  Who  comes  there,  who  comes  there,  who  comes  there.

Q»  Your  answer?

A.  A  poor  blind  candidate  who  has  long  been  desirous  of  hav-
ing and  receiving  a  part  of  the  rights  and  benefits  of  this  Wor-
shipful lodge  dedicated  to  God,  and  held  forth  to  the  holy  order
of  St.  John  as  all  true  fellows  and  brothers  have  done,  who  have
gone  this  way  before  me.

Q.  What  further  was  said  to  you  from  within?

A.  I  was  asked  if  it  was  of  my  own  free  will  and  accord  I
made  this  request;  if  I  was  duly  and  truly  prepared  worthy  and
well  qualified;  all  of  which  being  answered  in  the  affirmative,  1
was  asked  by  what  further  rights  I  expected  to  obtain  so  great  a
favor  or  benefit.

Q.  Your  answer?

A.  By  being  a  man,  free  born,  of  lawful  age  and  well  recom-
mended.

Q.  What  was  men  said  to  you?

A.  I  was  bid  to  wait  till  the  Worshipful  Master  in  the  east  was
made  acquainted  with  my  request  and  his  answer  returned.

Q.  After  his  answer  returned  what  followed?

A.  I  was  caused  to  enter  the  lodge.

Q.  How?

A.  On  the  point  of  some  sharp  instrument  pressing  my  naked
left  breast  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.

Q.  How  was  you  then  disposed  of?

A.  I  was  conducted  to  the  centre  of  the  lodge  and  there  caus-
ed to  kneel  for  the  benefit  of  a  prayer.     [See  page  18.]

Q.  After  prayer  what  was  said  to  you?

A.  I  was  asked  in  whom  I  put  my  trust.

Q.  Your  answer?

A.  In  God.

Q.  What  followed?

A.  The  Worshipful  Master  took  me  by  the  right  hand  and  said,
since  in  God  you  put  your  trust,  arise,  follow  your  leader  and  fear
no  danger.

Q.  How  was  you  then  disposed  of?

A.  I  was  conducted  three  times  regularly  around  the  lodgo


y  Google


U2  LIGHT   Otf  MASONRt.

and  halted  at  the  Junior  Warden  in  the  south,  where  the  same
questions  were  asked  and  answers  returned  as  at  the  door.

Q.  How  did  the  Junior  Warden  dispose  of  you?

A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  to  the  Senior  Warden  in
the  west,  where  the  same  questions  were  asked  and  answers  re-
turned as  before.

Q.  How  did  the  Senior  Warden  dispose  of  you?

A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  tp  the  Worshipful  Master
in  the  east,  where  the  same  questions  were  asked  and  answer?
returned  as  before,  who  likewise  demanded  of  me  from  whence  I
came  and  whither  I  was  travelling.

Q.  Your  answer?

A.  From  the  west  and  travelling  to  the  east.

Q.  Why  do  you  leave  the  west  and  travel  to  the  east?

A.  In  search  of  light.

Q.  How  did  the  Worshipful  Master  then  dispose  of  you?

A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  back  to  the  west  from
whence  I  came,  and  put  in  care  of  the  Senior  Warden,  who  taught
me  how  to  approach  the  east,  the  place  of  light  by  advancing
upon  one  upright  regular  step  to  the  first  step,  my  feet  forming
the  right  angle  of  an  oblong  square,  my  body  erect  at  the  altar
before  the  Worshipful  Master.

Q.  What  did  the  Worshipful  Master  do  with  you?

A.  He  made  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason  of  me.

Q,  How?

A.  In  due  form.

Q.  What  was  that  due  form?

A.  My  left  knee  bare  bent,  my  right  forming  a  square;  my
left  hand  supporting  the  Holy  Bible,  Square  and  Compass;  I  took
"*  >n  me  the  solemn  oath  or  obligation  of  an  Entered  Appren-

e  Mason.  [See  page  20.]

Q."  After  you  had  taken  your  obligation  what  was  said  to  you?
I  was  asked  what  I  most  desired.
Your  answer?     A.  Light.
Was  you  immediately  brought  to  light?
I  was.     Q.  How?

By  the  direction  of  the  Master  and  assistance  of  the
brethren.

Q.  What  did  you  first  discover  after  being  brought  to  light?

A.  Three  great  lights  in  Masonry,  by  the  assistance  of  three
lesser.

Q.  What  were  those  three  great  lights  in  Masonry?

A.  The  Holy  Bible,  Square,  and  Compass.

Q.  How  are  they  explained?

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  33

A.  The  Holy  Bible  is  given  to  us  as  a  guide  for  our  faith  and
practice;  the  Square  to  square  our  actions;  and  the  Compass  to
keep  us  in  due  bounds  with  all  mankind,  but  more  especially
with  the  brethren.

Q.  What  were  those  three  lesser  lights?

A.  Three  burning  tapers,  or  candles  on  candle-sticks.

Q.  What  do  they  represent?

A.  The  Sun,  Moon,  and  Master  of  the  lodge.

Q.  How  are  they  explained?

A.  As  the  Sun  rules  the  day  and  the  Moon  governs  the  night «
so  ought  the  Worshipful  Master  to  use  his  endeavors  to  rule  and
govern  his  lodge  with  equal  regularity,  or  cause  the  same  to  be
done.

Q.  What  did  you  next  discover?

A.  The  Worshipful  Master  approaching  me  from  the  east,  un-
der the  sign  and  due-guard  of  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason,
who  presented  me  with  his  right  hand  in  token  of  brotherly  love
and  esteem,  and  proceeded  to  give  me  the  grip  and  word  of  an
Entered  Apprentice  Mason,  and  bid  me  arise  and  salute  the
Junior  and  Senior  Wardens,  and  convince  them  that  I  had  been
regularly  initiated  as  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason,  and  was  in
possession  of  the  sign,  grip,  and  word.

Q.  What  did  you  next  discover?

A.  The  Worshipful  Master  a  second  time  approaching  me  from
the  east,  who  presented  me  with  a  lambskin  or  white  apron,  which
he  said  was  an  emblem  of  innocence,  and  the  badge  of  a  Ma-
son; that  it  had  been  worn  by  kings,  princes,  and  potentates,  of
the  earth,  who  had  never  been  ashamed  to  wear  it;  that  it  was
more  honorable  than  the  diadems  of  kings,  or  pearls  of  princess-
es, when  worthily  worn;  and  more  ancient  than  the  Golden
Fleece,  or  Roman  Eagle;  more  honorable  than  the  star  or
garter,  or  any  other  order  that  could  be  conferred  upon  me  at;
that  time,  or  any  time  thereafter,  except  it  be  in  the  body  of  a.
just  and  lawfully  constituted  lodge  of  Masons;  and  bid  me  carry
it  to  the  Senior  Warden  in  the  west,  who  taught  me  how  to  wear
it  as  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason.

Q.  What  was  you  next  presented  with?

A.  The  working  tools  of  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason.

Q.  What  were  they?

A.  The  twenty-four  inch  guage  and  common  gavel.

Q.  How  were  they  explained?

A.  The  twenty-four  inch  guage  is  an  .instrument  made  use  oi'
by  operative  Masons  to  measure  and  lay  out  their  work;  but  we
as  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  are  taught  to  make  use  of  it  ft>1'

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


34  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

the  more  noble  and  glorious  purpose  of  dividing  our  time;  the
twenty-four  inches  on  the  guusje  are  are  emblematical  of  the
twenty-four  hours  in  the  day,  which  we  are  taught  to  divide  into
three  equal  parts,  whereby  we  find  eight  hours  for  the  service  of
God,  and  a  worthy  distressed  brother;  eight  hours  for  our  usual
vocation,  and  eight  hours  for  refreshment  and  sleep.  The  com-
mon gavel  is  an  instrument  made  use  of  by  operative  Masons  to
break  off  the  corners  of  rough  stones,  the  better  to  fit  them  for
the  builder's  use;  but  we  as  free  and  Accepted  Masons  are  taught
to  make  use  of  it  for  the  more  noble  and  glorious  purpose  of
divesting  our  hearts  and  consciences  of  all  the  vices  and  super-
fluities of  life,  thereby  fitting*  our  minds  as  lively  and  Irving
stones  for  that  spiritual  building,  that  house  not  made  with  hands,
eternal  in  the  heavens.  •

Q.  What  was  you  next  presented  with!

A.  New  name.

Q.  What  was  that?    A.  Caution.

Q.  What  does  it  teach?

A.  It  teaches  me  as  I  was  barely  instructed  in  the  rudiments
of  Masonry,  that  I  should  be  cautious  over  all  my  words  and
actions,  especially  when  before  its  enemies.

Q.  What  was  you  next  presented  with?

A.  Three  precious  jewels.

Q.  What  were  they?

A.  A  listening  ear,  a  silent  tongue  and  a  faithful  heart

Q.  What  do  they  teach?

A.  A  listening  ear,  teaches  me  to  listen  to  the  instruction  of
the  Worshipful  Master,  but  more  especially  that  I  should  listen
to  (he  calls  and  cries  of  a  worthy  distressed  brother.  A  silent
|tongue  teaches  me  to  be  silent  in  the  lodge,  that  the  peace  and
ony  thereof  may  not  be  disturbed;  but  more  especially  that
(should be  silent  when  before  the  enemies  of  Masonry.  A  faith-
ful heart,  that  I  should  be  faithful  to  the  instructions  of  the  Wor-
shipful Master  at  all  times;  but  more  especially  that  I  should  be
faithful  and  keep  and  conceal  the  secrets  of  Masonry,  and  those
of  a  brother,  when  delivered  to  me  in  charge  as  such,  that  they
may  remain  as  secure  and  inviolable  in  my  breast,  as  in  his  own
before  communicated  to  me.

Q.  What  was  you  next  presented  with?

A.  Check-words  two.

Q.  What  were  they?

A.  Truth  and  Union.

Q.  How  explained?

i .  Truth  is  a  divine  attribute,  and  the  foundation  of  every  vir-

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  35

tue.  To  be  good  and  true  are  the  first  lessons  we  are  taught  in
Masonry.  On  this  theme  we  contemplate,  and  by  its  dictates
endeavor  to  regulate  our  conduct:  hence,  while  influenced  by  this
principle,  hypocrisy  and  deceit  are  unknown  amongst  us;  sincer-
ity and  plain  dealing  distinguishes  us;  and  the  heart  and  tongue
join  in  promoting  each  others  welfare,  and  rejoicing  in  each  oth-
ers prosperity.

Union  is  that  kind  of  friendship  that  ought  to  appear  conspicu-
ous in  the  conduct  of  every  Mason.  It  is  so  closely  allied  to
the  divine  attribute  truth,  that  he  who  enjoys  the  one,  is  seldom
destitute  6f  the  other.  Should  interest,  honor,  prejudice,  or  hu-
man depravity  ever  influence  you  to  violate  any  part  of  the  sacred
trust  we  now  repose  in  you,  let  these  two  important  words,  at  tho
earliest  insinuation,  teach  you  to  put  on  the  check-line  of  truth,
which  will  infallibly  jdirect  you  to  pursue  that  strait  and  narrow
path,  which  ends  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  grand  lodge  above,
where  we  shall  all  meet  as  Masons  and  members  of  one  family;
where  all  discord  on  account  of  religion,  politics,  or  private  opin-
ion, shall  be  unknown  and  banished  from  within  our  walls.

Q.  What  followed?

A.  The  Worshipful  Master  in  the  east  made  a  demand  of  mo
of  something  of  a  metalic  kind,  which,  he  said,  was  not  so  much
on  account  of  its  intrinsic  value,  as  that  it  might  be  deposited  in
the  archives  of  the  lodge,  as  a  memorial  that  I  had  therein  been
made  a  Mason.

Q.  How  did  the  Worshipful  Master  then  dispose  of  you  ?

A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  out  of  the  lodge  and  in-
vested of  what  I  had  been  divested,  and  returned  for  further  in-
structions.

Q.  After  you  returned  how  was  you  disposed  of?

A.  I  was  conducted  to  the  north  east  comer  of  the  lodge,
and  there  caused  to  stand  upright  like  a  man,  my  feet  forming  a
square,  and  received  a  solemn  injunction,  ever  to  walk  and  act
uprightly  before  God  and  man,  and  in  addition  thereto  received
the  following  charge.  (For  this  charge  see  page  25.)
SECOND  SECTION.

Q.  Why  was  you  divested  of  all  metals  when  you  was  made  a
Mason?

A.  Because  Masonry  regards  no  man  on  account  of  his  worldr
ly  wealth  or  honors ;  it  is  therefore  the  internal,  and  not  the  ex-
ternal qualifications  that  recommends  a  man  to  Masons.

Q.  A  second  reason?

A.  There  was  neither  the  sound  of  an  axe,  hammer,  or  any
other  metal  tool  heard  at  the  building  of  king  Solomon's  temple-
Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


36  LIGHT  ON  MASONRT.

Q.  How  could  so  stupendous  a  fabric  be  erected  without  the
sound  of  axe,  hammer,  or  any  other  metal  tool?

A.  All  the  stones  were  hewed,  squared  and  numbered  in  the
quarries  where  they  were  raised,  all  the  timbers  felled  and  pre-
pared in  the  forests  of  Lebanon,  and  carried  down  to  Joppa  on
floats,  and  taken  from  thence  up  to  Jerusalem  and  set  up  with  wood-
en malls,  prepared  for  that  purpose;  which,  when  completed,  every
part  thereof  fitted  with  that  exact  nicety,  mat  it  had  more  the  resem-
blance of  the  handy  workmanship  of  the  Supreme  Architect  of
the  universe,  than  of  human  hands.

Q.  Why  was  you  neither  naked  nor  clothed  ?

A.  As  I  was  an  object  of  distress  at  that  time,  it  was  to  remind
me,  if  ever  I  saw  a  friend,  more  especially  a  brother,  in  a  like
distressed  situation,  that  I  should  contribute  as  liberally  to  his  re-
lief as  his  situation  required,  and  my  abilities  would  admit,  with-
out material  injury  to  myself  or  family.

Q.  Why  was  you  neither  barefoot  nor  shod  ?
•  A.  It  was  an  ancient  Israelitish  custom,  adopted  among  Ma-
sons ;  and  we  read  in  the  book  of  Ruth  concerning  their  mode
and  manner  of  changing  and  redeeming,  and  to  confirm  all  things,
a  brother  plucked  of  his  shoe  and  gave  it  to  his  neighbor,  and  that
was  testimony  in  Israel.  This  then,  therefore,  we  do  in  confir-
mation of  a  token,  and  as  a  pledge  of  our  fidelity ;  thereby  signi-
iying  that  we  will  renounce  our  own  will  in  all  things,  and  be-
come obedient  to  the  laws  of  our  ancient  institutions.

Q.  Why  was  you  hood-winked  ?

A.  That  my  heart  might  conceive  before  my  eyes  beheld  the
beauties  of  Masonry.

Q.  A  second  reason.

A.  As  I  was  in  darkness  at  that  time,  it  was  to  remind  me  that
I  should  keep  the  whole  world  so  respecting  Masonry.

Q.  Why  had  you  a  Cable-Tow  about  your  neck  ?
-   A.  In  case  I  had  not  submitted  to  the  manner  and  mode  of
my  initiation  that  I  might  have  been  led  out  of  the  lodge  without
seeing  the  form  and  beauties  thereof.

Q.  Why  did  you  give  three  distinct  knocks  at  the  door?

A.  To  alarm  the  lodge,  and  let  the  worshipful  master,  war-
dens and  brethren  know  that  a  poor  blind  candidate  prayed  ad-
mission.

Q«  What  do  those  three  distinct  knocks  allude  to?

A.  A  certain  passage  in  Scripture  wherein  it  says,  *  ask  and  it
shall  be  given,  seek  and  ye  shall  find,  knock  and  it  shall  be  open-
ed unto  you.'

Q.  How  did  you  apply  this  to  your  then  case  in  Masonry  I

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.  37

A.  I  asked  the  recommendations  of  a  friend  to  become  a  Ma-
son; I  sought  admission  through  his  recommendations  and  knock-
ed, and  the  door  of  Masonry  opened  unto  me.

Q.  Why  was  you  caused  to  enter  on  the  point  of  some  sharp
instrument  pressing  your  naked  left  breast  in  the  name  of  the
Lord?

A.  As  this  was  a  torture  to  my  flesh,  so  might  the  recollection
of  it  ever  be  to  my  flesh  and  conscience  if  ever  I  attempted  to
reveal  the  secrets  of  Masonry  unlawfully.

Q.  Why  was  you  conducted  to  the  centre  of  the  lodge  and
there  caused  to  kneel  for  the  benefit  of  a  prayer?

A.  Before  entering  on  this,  or  any  other  great  and  important
undertaking,  it  is  highly  necessary  to  implore  a  blessing  from
Deity.

Q.  Why  was  you  asked  in  whom  you  put  your  trust?

A.  Agreeable  to  the  laws  of  our  ancient  institution,  no  Atheist
could  be  made  a  Mason;  it  was  therefore  necessary  that  I  should
believe  in  Deity;  otherwise,  no  oath  or  obligation  could  bind  me.

Q.  Why  did  the  Worshipful  Master  take  you  by  the  right
hand,  and  bid  you  rise,  follow  your  leader,  and  fear  no  danger?

A.  As  I  was  in  darkness  at  that  time  and  could  neither  foresee
nor  avoid  danger,  it  was  to  remind  me  that  I  was  in  the  hands  of
an  affectionate  friend,  in  whose  fidelity  f  might  with  safety  con-
fide.

Q.  Why  was  you  conducted  three  times  regularly  round  the
lodge?

A.  That  the  Worshipful  Master,  Wardens,  and  brethren  might
see  that  I  was  duly  and  truly  prepared.

Q.  Why  did  you  meet  with  those  several  obstructions  on  the
way?

A.  This,  and  every  other  lodge,  is,  or  ought  to  be,  a  true  rep-
resentation of  king  Solomon's  temple,  which,  when  completed,
had  guards  stationed  at  the  east,  west  and  south  gates.

Q.  Why  had  they  guards  stationed  at  those  several  gates?

A.  To  prevent  any  one  from  passing  or  repassing  that  was  not
duly  qualified.

Q.  Why  did  you  kneel  on  your  left  knee  and  not  on  your  right,
or  both?

A.  The  left  side  has  ever  been  considered  the  weakest  part  of
the  body;  it  was,  therefore,  to  remind  me  that  that  part,  I  was
then  taking  upon  me,  was  the  weakest  part  of  Masonry,  it  being
that  only  of  an  Entered  Apprentice.

Q.  Why  was  ypur  right  hand  placed  on  the  Holy  Bible,  Square,
and  Compass,  and  not  your  left,  or  both?

D

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


38  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

A.  The  right  hand  has  ever  been  considered  the  seat  of  fideli-
ty, and  our  ancient  brethren  worshipped  Deity  under  the  names
of  Fides;  which  has  sometimes  been  represented  by  two  right
hands  joined  together;  at  others,  by  two  human  figures  holding
each  other  by  the  right  hand;  the  right  hand,  therefore,  we  use  in
this  great  and  important  undertaking,  to  signify,  in  the  strongest
manner  possible,  the  sincerity  of  our  intentions  in  the  business
we  are  engaged.

Q.  Why  did  the  Worshipful  Master  present  you  with  a  lamb-
skin, or  a  white  apron?

A.  The  lamb-skin  has,  in  all  ages,  been  deemed  an  emblem  of
innocence;  he,  therefore,  who  wears  the  lamb-skin,  as  a  badge  of
a  Mason,  is  thereby  continually  reminded  of  that  purity  of  life  and
rectitude  of  conduct,  which  is  so  essentially  necessary  to  our  gain-
ing admission  into  the  celestial  lodge  above,  where  the  Supreme
Architect  of  the  universe  presides.

Q.  Why  did  the  Master  make  a  demand  of  you  of  something
of  a  metalic  nature?

A.  As  I  was  in  a  poor  and  pennyless  situation  at  the  time,  it
was  to  remind  me  if  ever  I  saw  a  friend,  but  more  especially  a
brother,  in  the  like  poor  and  pennyless  situation,  that  I  should  con-
tribute as  liberally  to  his  relief  as  my  abilities  would  admit  and  his
situation  required,  without  injuring  myself  or  family.

Q.  Why  was  you  conducted  to  the  northeast  corner  of  the  lodge,
and  there  caused  to  stand  upright,  like  a  man,  your  feet  forming
a  square,  receiving,  at  the  same  time,  a  solemn  charge  to  walk
and  act  uprightly  before  God  and  man?

A.  The  first  stone,  in  every  masonic  edifice,  is,  or  ought  to  be,
placed  at  the  northeast  corner;  that  being  the  place  where  an  En-
tered Apprentice  Mason  receives  his  first  instructions  to  build  his
future  masonic  edifice  upon.

THIRD  SECTION.

Q.  We  have  been  saying  a  good  deal  about  a  lodge,  I  want  to
know  what  constitutes  a  lodge?

A.  A  certain  number  of  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  duly  as-
sembled in  a  room,  or  place,  with  the  Holy  Bible,  Square,  and
Compass,  and  other  masonic  implements,  with  a  charter  from  the
grand  lodge  empowering  them  to  work.

Q.  Where  did  our  ancient  brethren  meet  before  lodges  were
erected?

A.  On  the  highest  hills,  and  in  the  lowest  vales.

Q.  Why  on  the  highest  hills,  and  in  the  lowest  vales?

A.  The  better  to  guard  against  cowans  and  enemies,  either  as-


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  39

lending  or  descending,  that  the  brethren  might  have  timely  notice
of  their  approach  to-  prevent  being  surprised.

Q.  What  is  the  form  of  your  lodge?

A.  An  oblong  square.

Q.  How  long?     A.  From  east  to  west.     Q.  How  wide?

A.  Between  north  and  south.

Q.  How  high?

A.  From  the  surface  of  the  earth  to  the  highest  heavens.

Q.  How  deep?

A.  From  the  surface  to  the  centre.

Q.  What  supports  your  lodge?

A.  Three  large  columns  or  pillars.

Q.  What  are  their  names?

A.  Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty.

Q.  Why  so?  A.  It  is  necessary  there  should  be  wisdom  to
contrive,  strength  to  support,  and  beauty  to  adorn,  all  great  and
important  undertakings;  but  more  especially  this  of  ours.

Q.  Has  your  lodge  any  covering?

A.  It  has;  a  clouded  canopy,  or  starry-decked  heaven,  where
all  good  Masons  hope  to  arrive.

Q.  How  do  you  hope  to  arrive  there?

A.  By  the  assistance  of  Jacob's  ladder.*

Q.  How  many  principal  rounds  has  it  got?    A.  Three.

Q.  What  are  their  names?

A.  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity.

Q.  What  do  they  teach?

A.  Faith  in  God,  hope  in  immortality,  and  charity  to  all  maa-
.   kind.

Q.  Has  your  lodge  any  furniture?

A.  It  has;  the  Holy  Bible,  Square,  and  Compass.

Q.  To  whom  do  they  belong?

A.  The  Bible  to  God;  the  Square  to  the  Master;  and  tho
Compass  to  the  Craft.

Q.  How  explained?

A.  The  Bible  to  God;  it  being  the  inestimable  gift  of  God  to
man,  for  his  instruction  to  guide  him  through  the  rugged  paths  of
life:  the  Square  to  the  Master;  it  being  the  proper  emblem  of  his
office:    the  Compass  to  the  Craft;  by  a  due  attention  to  which,

*  The  ladder  which  Jacob  saw,  undoubtedly  represented  the  way  of  life
and  salvation  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  rounds  in  that  ladder;
the  several  stops  He  took  in  the  great  work  of  redemption.  The  angels  of
God  are  sent  forth,  through  this  medium,  to  minister  unto  them  who  shall  be
the  heirs  of  salvation;  and  not  upon  the  principles  of  faith,  hope,  and  chari-
ly, which  are  graces  wrougat  in  the  hearts  of  christians  by  the  Holy  Spin  -

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


40  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

we  are  taught  to  limit  our  desires;  curb  our  ambition;  subdue  our
irregular  appetites;  and  keep  our  passions  and  prejudices  in  due
bounds  with  all  mankind:  but  more  especially  with  the  brethren.
Q.  Has  your  lodge  any  ornaments?

A.  It  has;  the  Mosaic,  or  chequered  pavement;  the  indented
tessel;  that  beautiful  tesselated  border  which  surrounds  it,  with
the  blazing  star  in  the  centre.
Q.  What  do  they  represent?

A.  The  Mosaic,  or  chequered  pavement,  represents  this  world;
which,  though  chequered  over  with  good  and  evil,  yet  brethren
may  walk  together  thereon  and  not  stumble:— the  indented  tessel,
with  the  blazing  star  in  the  centre,  the  manifold  blessings  and
comforts  with  which  we  are  surrounded  in  this  life;  but  more  es-
pecially, those  which  we  hope  to  enjoy  hereafter: — the  blazing
star,  that  prudence  which  ought  to  appear  conspicuous  in  the  con-
duct of  every  Mason;  but  more  especially,  commemorative  of
the  star  which  appeared  in  the  east,  to  guide  the  wise  men  to
Bethlehem,  to  proclaim  the  birth  and  the  presence  of  the  Son  of
God.
Q.  Has  your  lodge  any  lights?    A.  It  has;  three.
Q.  How  are  they  situated?
A.  East,  West,  and  South.

Q.  Has  it  none  in  the  Norm?  A.  It  has  not  Q.  Why  so?
A.  Because  this,  and  every  other  lodge,  is,  or  ought  to  be,  a
true  representation  of  king  Solomon's  temple,  which  was  situat-
ed1 north  of  the  ecliptic;  the  sun  and  meon,  therefore,  darting  their
rays  from  the  south,  no  light  was  to  be  expected  from  the  north;
we,  therefore,  masonically,  term  the  norm  a  place  of  darkness.
Q.  Has  your  lodge  any  jewels?

A#  It  has;-— six:  three  moveable  and  three  immoveable.
Q.  What  are  the  three  moveable  jewels?
A.  The  Square,  Level,  and  Plumb.
Q.  What  do  they  teach?

A.  The  square,  morality;  the  level,  equality;  and  the  plumb,
rectitude  of  life  and  conduct

Q.  What  are  the  three  immoveable  jewels?
A.  The  rough  Ashlar,  the  perfect  Ashlar,  and  the  Tressle-
Board.
Q.  What  are  they?

A.  The  rough  ashlar  is  a  stone  in  its  rough  and  natural  state;
the  perfect  ashlar  is  also  a  stone  made  ready  by  the  working  tools
of  the  Fellow  Craft,  to  be  adjusted  in  the  building;  and  the  tres-
sle-board  is  for  the  master  workman  to  draw  his  plans  and  designs
npon.  r

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  41

Q.  What  do  they  represent?

A.  The  rough  ashlar  represents  man  in  his  rude  and  imperfect
state  by  nature;  the  perfect  ashlar  also  represents  man  in  that
state  of  perfection  to  which  we  all  hope  to  arrive,  by  means  of  a
virtuous  life  and  education,  our  own  endeavors  and  the  blessing
of  God.  In  erecting  our  temporal  building,  we  pursue  the  plans
and  designs  laid  down  by  the  master  workman  on  his  tressle-board;
but,  in  erecting  our  spiritual  building,  we  pursue  the  plans  and  de-
signs laid  down  by  the  Supreme  Geometrician  of  the  universe  in
the  book  of  life;  which  we,  masonicaUy,  term  our  spiritual  tres-
sle-board.

Q.  Who  did  you  serve?     A.  My  Master.
Q.  How  long?  A.v  Six  days.

Q.  What  did  you  serve  him  with?
A.  Freedom,  Fervency,  and  Zeal.
Q.  What  do  they  represent?
A.  Chalk,  Charcoal,  and  Earth.

Q.  Why  so?  A.  There  is  nothing  freer  than  chalk;  the  slight-
est touch  of  which  leaves  a  trace  behind:  nothing  more  fervent
than  heated  charcoal;  it  will  melt  the  most  obdurate  metals:  no-
thing more  zealous  than  the  earth  to  bring  forth.

Q.  How  is  your  lodge  situated?     A.  Due  east  and  west.
Q.  Why  so?

A.  Because  the  sun  rises  in  the  east  and  sets  in  the  west.
Q.  A  second  reason?

A.  The  gospel  was  first  preached  in  the  east,  and  is  spreading
to  the  west.
'       Q.  A  third  reason?

A.  The  liberal  arts  and  sciences  began  in  the  east,  and  are  ex-
tending to  the  west
Q,  A  fourth  reason?

A.  Because  all  the  churches  and  chapels  are,  or  ought  to  be,
so  Situated.

Q.  Why  are  all  churches  and  chapels  so  situated?
A.  Because  king  Solomon's  temple  was  so  situated.
Q.  Why  was  king  Solomon's  temple  so  situated?
A.  Because  Moses,  after  conducting  the  children  of  Israel
through  the  Red  Sea,  by  divine  command,  erected  a  tabernacle  to
God,  and  placed  it  due  east  and  west;  which  was  to  commemo-
rate, to  the  latest  posterity,  that  miraculous  east  wind  that  wrought
their  mighty  deliverance;  and  this  was  an  exact  model  of  Solo-
mon's temple:  since  which  time,  every  well  regulated  and  gov-
erned lodge  is,  or  ought  to  be,  so  situated.

Q.  To  whom  did  our  ancient  brethren  dedicate  their  lodges?

D2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


42  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

A.  To  king  Solomon.  Q.  Why  so?

A.  Because  king  Solomon  was  our  most  ancient  Grand  Master.

Q.  To  whom  do  modern  Masons  dedicate  their  lodges?

A.  To  St.  John  the  Baptist,  and  St.  John  the  Evangelist.

Q.  Why  so?

A.  Because  they  were  the  two  most  ancient  christian  patrons
of  Masonry;  and,  since  their  time,  in  every  well  regulated  and
governed  lodge,  mere  has  been  a  certain  point  within  a  circle,
which  circle  js  bounded  on  the  east  and  the  west  by  two  perpen-
dicular parallel  lines,  representing  the  anniversary  of  St.  John  the
Baptist,  and  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  who  were  two  perfect  par-
allels,*^ well  in  Masonry  as  Christianity;  on  the  vertex  of  which
rests  the  book  of  the  holy  scriptures,  supporting  Jacob's  ladder,
which  is  said  to  reach  to  the  watery  clouds;  and,  in  passing  round
this  circle,  we  naturally  touch  on  both  these  perpendicular  paral-
lel lines,  as  wej!  as  the  book  of  the  holy  scriptures;  and  while  a
Mason  keeps  himself  thus  circumscribed,  he  cannot  materially
err.

Thus  ends  the  first  degree  of  Masonry;  and  the  reader,  who
has  read  and  paid  attention  to  it,  knows  more  of  Masonry  than
any  Entered  Apprentice  in  Christendom,  and  more  of  this  degree
than  one  hundredth  part  of  the  Master  Masons,  or  even  Royal
Arch  Masons;  for  very  few  ever  attempt  to  learn  the  lectures,  or
even  the  obligations:  They  merely  receive  the  degrees,  and  there
stop,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  who  are  fascinated  with  the  idea
of  holding  an  office:  they  sometimes  endeavor  to  qualify  them-
selves to  discharge  the  duties  which  devolve  on  them  in  their  re-
spective offices.  The  offices  of  Secretary  and  Treasurer,  are,
by  some,  considered  the  most  important  in  the  lodge,  particular-
ly where  there  is  much  business  done.

I  will  now  introduce  the  reader  to  the  second  degree  of  Mason-
ry. It  is  generally  called  passing,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  lecture.
I  shall  omit  the  ceremonies  of  opening  and  closing,  as  they  are
precisely  the  same  as  in  the  first  degree;  except  two  knocks  are
used  in  this  degree,  and  the  door  is  entered  by  the  benefit  of  a
pass- word:  it  is  Shiboleth.     It  will  be  explained  in  the  lecture.

The  candidate,  as  before,  is  taken  into  the  preparation  room,
and  prepared  in  the  manner  following:  All  his  clothing  taken  off,
except  his  shirt;  furnished  with  a  pair  of  drawers;  his  right  breast
bare;  his  left  foot  in  a  slipper;  the  right  bare;  a  cable-tow  twice
round  his  neck;  semi-hood- winked;  in  which  situation  he  is  con-
ducted to  the  door  of  the  lodge,  where  he  gives  two  knocks,  when
the  Senior  Warden  rises  and  says,  'Worshipful,  while  we  are
peaceably  at  work  on  the  second  degree  of  Masonry,  under  the

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


_  LIOHT   ON   MASONRY.  43

influence  of  faith,  hope,  and  charity,  the  door  of  our  lodge  in
alarmed.'  Master  to  Junior  Deacon,  'Brother  Junior,  inquire
the  cause  of  that  alarm.'  (In  many  lodges  they  come  to  the
door,  knock,  are  answered  by  the  Junior  Deacon,  and  come  in
without  being  noticed  by  the  Senior  Warden  or  Master.)  The
Junior  Deacon  gives  two  raps  on  the  inside  of  the  door.  The
candidate  gives  one  without,  it  is  answered  by  the  Junior  Dea-
con with  one;  when  the  door  is  partly  opened  by  the  Junior  Dea-
con, who  inquires,  'who  comes  here?  who  comes  here?'  Tho
Senior  Deacon,  who  is,  or  ought  to  be,  the  conductor,  answers,
'A  worthy  brother,  who  has  been  regularly  initiated  as  an  Enter-
ed Apprentice  Mason,  served  a  proper  time  as  such,  and  now
wishes  for  further  light  in  Masonry,  by  being  passed  to  the  degree
of  Fellow  Crail.'  Junior  Deacon  to  Senior  Deacon,  'Is  it  of  his
own  free  will  and  accord  he  makes  this  request?'.  Jtns.  'It  is.'
Junior  Deacon  to  Senior  Deacon,  'Is  he  duly  ami  truly  prepar-
ed?' Am.  'He  is.'  Junior  Deacon  to  Senior  Deacon,  'Is  he
worthy  and  well  qualified?'  Am  'He  is.'  Junior  Deacon  to
Senior  Deacon,  'Has  he  made  suitable  proficiency  in  the  preced-
ing degree?'  Am.  4He  has.'  {Very  few  know  any  more  than
they  did  the  night  they  were  initiated;  have  not  heard  their  obli-
gation repeated,  nor  one  section  of  the  lecture;  and,  in  fact,  a
very  small  portion  of  Masons  ever  learn  either.)  Junior  Deacon
to  Senior  Deacon,  6By  what  further  rights  does  he  expect  to  ob-
tain this  benefit?'  Am.  'By  me  benefit  of  a  pass-word.'  Jun-
ior Deacon  to  Senior  Deacon,  'Has  he  a  pass-word?1  Am.  'Ho
has  not,  but  I  have  it  for  him.'  Junior  Deacon  to  Senior  Dea-
con, Ixive  it  to  me?'  The  Senior  Deacon  whispers  in  the  Junior
Deacon's  ear,  'ShibolethS  The  Junior  Deacon  says,  'The  pass
is  right;  since  this  is  the  case,  you  will  wait  until  the  Worship-
ful Master  in  the  east  is  made  acquainted  with  his  request,  and
his  answer  returned.'  The  Junior  Deacon  then  repairs  to  the
Master,  and  gives  two  knocks,  as  at  the  door,  which  are  answer-
ed by  two  by  the  Master;  when  the  same  questions  are  asked,
and  answers  returned,  as  at  the  door.  After  which,  the  Master
says,  'Since  he  conies  endued  with  all  these  necessary  qualifica-
tions, let  him  enter  this  worshipful  lodge  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,
and  take  heed  on  what  he  enters.'  He  enters;  the  angle  of  the
square  is  pressed  hard  against  his  naked  right  breast;  at  which
Jane,  the  Junior  Deacon  says,  'Brother,  when  you  entered  this
lodge  the  first  time,  you  entered  on  the  point  of  the  compass
pressing  your  naked  left  breast,  which  was  then  explained  to  you.
You  now  enter  it  on  the  angle  of  the  square,  pressing  your  naked
right  breast;  which  is  to  teach  you  to  act  upon  the  square  with  all

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


44  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

mankind,  but  more  especially  with  the  brethren.'  The  candidate
is  then  conducted  twice  regularly  round  the  lodge,  and  halted  at
the  Junior  Warden  in  the  south,  where  he  gives  two  raps,  and  is
answered  by  two,  when  the  same  questions  are  asked,  and  an-
swers returned  as  at  the  door;  from  thence  he  is  conducted  to  the
Senior  Warden,  where  the  same  questions  are  asked  and  answers
returned,  as  before;  he  is  then  conducted  to  the  Master  in  the
east,  where  the  same  questions  are  asked  and  answers  returned,
as  before;  the  Master  likewise  demands  of  him,  from  whence  he
came,  and  whither  he  was  travelling;  he  answers,  'From  the  west,
and  travelling  to  the  east.'  The  Master  says,  'Why  do  you  leave
the  west,  aud  travel  to  the  east?'  Jlns  'In  search  of  more  light.'
The  Master  then  says  to  the  Senior  Deacon, ' Since  this  is  the  case,
you  will  please  conduct  the  candidate  back  to  the  west,  from
whence  he  came,  and  put  him  in  the  care  of  the  Senior  Warden,
who  will  teach  <him  how  to  approach  the  east,  'the  place  of  light/
by  advancing  upon  two  upright  regular  steps  to  the  second  step,
(his  heel  is  in  the  hollow  of  the  right  foot,  on  this  degree;)  his  feet
forming  the  right  angle  of  an  oblong  square,  and  his  body  erect  at
the  altar  before  the  Worshipful  faster,  and  place  him  in  a  proper
position  to  take  the  solemn  oath,  or  obligation  of  a  Fellow  Craft
Mason.'  The  Master  then  leaves  his  seat,  and  approaches  the
kneeling  candidate,  (the  candidate  kneels  on  the  .right  knee;  the
left  forming  a  square;  his  left  arm,  as  far  as  the  elbow,  in  a  hori-
zontal position,  and  the  rest  of  the  arm  in  a  vertical  position,  so
as  to  form  a  square;  his  arm  supported  by  the  square  held  under
His  elbow:)  and  says,  'Brother,  you  are  now  placed  in  a  proper
position  to  take  on  you  the  solemn  oath,  or  obligation,  of  a  Fellow
Craft  Mason,  which  I  assure  you,  as  before,  is  neither  to  affect
your  religion  nor  politics;  if  you  are  willing  to  take  it,  repeat  your
name,  and  say  after  me:' —

'I,  A  B,  of  my  own  free  will  and  accord,  in  the  presence  of
Almighty  God,  and  this  Worshipful  Lodge  of  Fellow  Craft  Ma-
sons, dedicated  to  God,  and  held  forth  to  the  holy  order  of  St.
John,  do  hereby  and  hereon,  most  solemnly  and  sincerely  promise
and  swear,  in  addition  to  my  former  obligation,  that  I  will  not  give
the  degree  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason  to  any  one  of  an  inferior  de-
gree, nor  to  any  other  being  in  the  known  world,  except  it  be  to  a
true  and  lawful  brother,  or  brethren  Fellow  Craft  Masons,  or  with-
in the  body  of  a  just  and  lawfully  constituted  lodge  of  such;  and
not  unto  him  nor  unto  them  whom  I  shall  hear  so  to  be,  but  unto-
him  and  them  only  whom  I  shall  find  so  to  be,  after  strict  trial  and
due  examination,  or  lawful  information.  Furthermore,  do  I  pro-
mise and  swear,  that  I  will  not  wrong  this  lodge,  nor  a  brother  of

Digitized  by  VjOOQL


LIGHT  ON  M1SONRF.  45

this  degree,  to  the  value  of  two  cents,  knowingly,  myself,  nor  suf-
fer it  to  be  done  by  others,  if  in  my  power  to  prevent  it     Fur-
thermore, do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  win  support  the  consti-
tution of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  and  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  this  state,  under  which  mis  lodge  is  held,  and  confom
to  all  the  bye-laws,  rules,  and  regulations  of  this,  or  any  other
lodge,  of  which  I  may,  at  any  time  hereafter,  become  a  member,
as  far  as  in  my  power.     Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,
that  I  will  obey  all  regular  signs  and  summons,  given,  handed,
sent,  or  thrown  to  me  by  the  hand  of  a  brother  Fellow  Craft  Ma-
son, or  from  the  body  of  a  just  and  lawfully  constituted  lodge  of
such;  provided  it  be  within  the  length  of  my  cable-tow,  or  square
and  angle  of  my  work.     Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,
that  I  will  be  aiding  and  assisting  all  poor  and  pennyless  brethren
Fellow  Crafts,  their  widows  and  orphans,  wheresoever  disposed
round  die  globe,  they  applying  to  me  as  such,  as  far  as  in  my  pow-
er, without  injuring  myself  or  family.     To  all  'which  1  do  most
solemnly  and  sincerely  promise  and  swear,  without  the  least  hesi-
tation, mental  reservation,  or  self-evasion  of  mind  in  me  whatev-
er; binding  myself  under  no  less  penalty  than  to  have  my  left
breast  torn  open,  and  my  heart  and  vitals  taken  from  thence,  and
thrown  over  ray  left  shoulder,  and  carried  into  the  valley  of  Jeho-
saphat,  mere  to  become  a  prey  to  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field,  and
vultures  of  the  air,  if  ever  I  should  prove  wilfully  guilty  of  violat-
ing any  part  of  this  my  solemn  oath  or  obligation  of  a  Fellow
Craft  Mason;  so  keep  me  God,  and  keep  me  steadfast  in  the  due
performance  of  the  same.'  'Detach  your  hands,  and  kiss  the  book,
which  is  the  Holy  Bible,  twice.'     The  bandage  is  now  (by  one  of
the  brethren)  dropped  over  the  other  eye,  and  the  Master  says,
'Brother,  (at  the  same  time  laying  his  hand  on  the  top  of  the  can-
didate's head,)  what  do  you  most  desire?*    The  candidate  answers
after  his  prompter,  'more  light.'     The  Master  says,  'Brethren,
form  on  the  square,  and  assist  in  bringing  our  new  made  brother
from  darkness  to  light;  and  God  said,  let  there  be  light,  and  there
was  light.'     At  this  instant  all  the  brethren  clap  their  hands,  and
stamp  on  the  floor,  as  in  the  preceding  degree.     The  Master  says
to  the  candidate,  'Brother,  what  do  you  discover  different  from
before?'     The  Master  says,  after  a  short  pause,  'You  now  dis-
cover one  point  of  the  compass  elevated  above  the  square,1  which
denotes  light  in  mis  degree;  but  as  one  is  yet  in  obscurity,  it  is  to
remind  you  mat  you  are  yet  one  material  point  in  the  dark,  re-
specting Masonry.'     The  Master  steps  off  from  the  candidate
three  or  four  steps,  and  says,  'Brother,  you  now  discover  me  as  a
Master  of  this  lodge,  approaching  you  from  the  east,  under  the  sign

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


46  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

and  due-guard  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason;  do  as  I  do,  as  near  as
you  can,  keeping  your  position.'     The  sign  is  given  by  drawing
your  right  hand  flat,  with  the  palm  of  it  next  to  your  breast,  across
your  breast,  from  the  left  to  the  right  side,  with  some  quickness,
and  dropping  it  down  by  your  side;  the  due-guard  is  given  by  rais-
ing the  left  arm  until  that  part  of  it  between  the  elbow  and  shoul-
der is  perfectly  horizontal,  and  raising  the  rest  of  the  arm  in  a  ver-
tical position,  so  that  that  part  of  the  arm  below  the  elbow,  and  that
part  above  it,  forms  a  square:  this  is  called  the  due-guard  of  a
Fellow  Craft  Mason.     The  two  given  together,  are  called  the  sign
and  due-guard  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason,  and  they  are  never  given
separately;  they  would  not  be  reeognised  by  a  Mason,  if  given
separately.     The  Master,  by  the  time  he  gives  his  steps,  sign,  and
due-guard,  arrives  at  the  candidate  and  says,  'Brother,  I  now  pre-
sent you  with  my  right  hand  in  token  of  brotherly-love  and  confi-
dence, and  with  it  the  pass-grip  and  word  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Ma-
son.'    The  pass,  br  more  properly  the  pass-grip,  is  given  by  tak-
ing each  other  by  the  right  hand,  as  though  going  to  shake  hands,
and  each  putting  his  thumb  between  the  fore  and  second  finger,
where  they  join  the  hand,  and  pressing  the  thumb  between  the
joints.     This  is  the  pass-grip  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason;  the  name
of  it  is  Shiboleth.     Its  origin  will  be  explained  in  the  lecture— the
pass-grip  some  give  without  lettering  or  syllabling,  and  others  give
it  in  the  same  way  they  do  the  real  grip.     The  real  grip  of  a  Fel-
low Craft  Mason  is  given,  by  putting  the  thumb  on  the  joint  of  the
second  finger,  where  it  joins  the  hand,  and  crooking  your  thumb
so  that  each  can  stick  Ihe  nail  of  his  thumb  into  the  joint  of  the
other.  This  is  the  real  grip  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason;  the  name  of
it  is  Jachin;  it  is  given  in  the  following  manner:    If  you  wish  to
examine  a  person,  after  having  taken  each  other  by  the  grip,  ask
him,  'What  is  this?'     A.  'A  grip.'     Q.  «A  grip  of  what?'    A.
'The  grip  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason.'     Q.  'Has  it  a  name?'    A.
'It  has.'     Q.  'Will  you  give  it  to  me?'     A.  'I  did  not  so  receive
it,  neither  can  I  so  impart  it.'      Q.    'What  will  you  do  with  it?'
A.  Til  letter  it  or  halve  it.'     Q.  'Halve  it,  and  you  begin?'    A.
'No;  begin  you.'     Q.  'You  begin?'     A.  'J  A.'     Q.  'CHIN?'
A.  'JACHIN.'     Q.  'Right,  brother  Jachin,  I  greet  you.'

After  the  Master  gives  the  candidate  the  pass-grip  and  grip,  and
their  names,  he  says,  'Brother,  you  will  rise  and  salute  the  Junior
and  Senior  Wardens  as  such,  and  convince  them  that  you  have
been  regularly  passed  to  the  degree  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason,  and
have  got  the  sign  and  pass-grip,  real  grip,  and  their  names.'  [I
do  not  here  express  it  as  expressed  in  lodges  generally;  the  Mas-
ter generally  says,  'you  will  arise  and  salute  the  Wardens,  &c.


U6HT   ON   MASONRY.  47

and  convince  them,  &c.  that  you  have  got  the  sign,  pass-grip,  and
word.'     It  is  obviously  wrong;  because  the  first  thing  lie  gives  is
the  sign,  then  the  due-guard,  then  the  pass-grip,  and  their  names.]
While  the  Wardens  are  examining  the  candidate,  the  Master  gets
an  apron  and  returns  to  the  candidate,  and  says,  'Brother,  I  now
have  the  honor  of  presenting  you  with  a  lamb-skin,  or  white  apron,
as  before,  which  I  hope  you  will  continue  to  wear  with  honor  to
yourself,  and  satisfaction  to  the  brethren;  you  wiH  please  carry  it
to  the  Senior  Warden  in  the  west,  who  will  teach  you  how  to  wear
it  as  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason.'     The  Senior  Warden  ties  on  his
apron,  and  turns  up  one  corner  of  the  lower  end  of  the  apron,  and
tucks  it  under  the  apron  string.     The  Senior  Deacon  then  con-
ducts his  pupil  to  the  Master,  who  has,  by  this  time,  resumed  his
seat  in  the  east,  where  he  has,  or  ought  to  have,  the  floor  carpet
to  assist  him  in  his  explanations.     Master  to  the  candidate,  'Bro-
ther, as  you  are  dressed,  it  is  necessary  you  should  have  tools  to
work  with;  I  will,  therefore,  present  you  with  the  tools  of  a  Fellow
Craft  Mason.     They  are  the  plumb,  square,  and  level.     The
plumb  is  an  instrument  made  use  of  by  operative  Masons  to  raise
perpendiculars;  the  square,  to  square  their  work;  and  the  level,
to  lay  horizontals:  but  we,  as  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  are
taught  to  use  them  for  more  noble  and  glorious  purposes;  the
plumb  teaches  us  to  walk  uprightly,  in  our  several  stations,  before
God  and  man;  squaring  our  actions  by  the  square  of  virtue;  and
remembering  that  we  are  travelling  on  the  level  of  time  to  that  un-
discovered country,  'from  whose  bourne  no  traveller  has  returned.'
I  further  present  you  with  throe  precious  jewels;  their  names  are
faith,  hope,  and  charity;  they  teach  us  to  have  faith  in  God,  hope
in  immortality,  and  charity  to  all  mankind.'     The  Master  to  the
Senior  Deacon,  'You  will  now  conduct  the  candidate  out  of  this
lodge,  and  invest  him  with  what  he  has  been  divested.'     After  he
is  clothed,  and  the  necessary  arrangements  made  for  his  recep-
tion, such  as  placing  the  columns  and  floor  carpet,  if  they  have
any,  and  the  candidate  is  reconducted  back  to  the  lodge,  as  he  en-
ters the  door,  the  Senior  Deacon  observes,  'we  are  now  about  to
return  to  the  middle  chamber  of  king  Solomon's  temple.'     When
within  the  door,  the  Senior  Deacon  proceeds;  'Brother,  we  have
worked  in  speculative  Masonry,  but  our  forefathers  wrought  both
in  speculative  and  operative  Masonry.  They  worked  at  the  build-
ing of  king  Solomon's  temple,  and  many  other  masonic  edifices;
they  wrought  six  days;  they  did  not  work  on  the  seventh,  because
in  six  days  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  rested  on
the  seventh  day.     The  seventh,  therefore,  our  ancient  brethren
consecrated  as  a  day  of  rest;,  thereby  enjoying  more  frequent  op-

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


48  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY*.

portunities  to  contemplate  the  glorious  works  of  creation,  and  to
adore  their  great  Creator.'    Moving  a  step  or  two,  the  Senior
Deacon  proceeds:  'Brother,  the  first  tiling  that  attracts  our  atten-
tion, are  two  large  colums,  or  pillars,  one  on  the  left  hand,  and
the  other  on  the  right;  the  name  of  the  one  on  the  left  hand  is  Bo~
azy  and  denotes  strength;  the  name  of  the  one  on  the  right  hand
is  Jachin,  and  denotes  establishment;  they  collectively  allude  to
a  passage  in  scripture,  wherein  God  has  declared  in  his  word,  'In
strength  shall  this  house  be  established.'     These  columns  are
eighteen  cubits  high,  twelve  in  circumference,  and  four  in  diame-
ter; they  are  adorned  with  two  large  chapiters,  one  on  each,  and
these  chapiters  are  ornamented  with  net  work,  lily  work,  and
pomegranates;  they  denote  unity,  peace,  and  plenty.     The  net
work,  from  its  connexion,  denotes  union;  the  lily  work,  from  its
whiteness,  purity  and  peace;   and  the  pomegranates,  from  the
exuberance  of  its  seed,  denotes  plenty.     They  also  have  two
large  globes,  or  balls,  one  on  each;  these  globes,  or  balls,  con-
tain, on  their  convex  surfaces,  all  the  maps  and  charts  of  the  ce-
lestial and  terrestrial  bodies:  they  are  said  to  be  thus  extensive,
to  denote  the  universality  of  Masonry,  and  that  a  Mason's  chari-
ty ought  to  be  equally  extensive.     Their  composition  is  molten,
or  cast  brass;  they  were  cast  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Jordan,  in
the  clay-ground  between  Succoth  and  Zaradatha,  where  king  So-
lomon ordered  these  and  all  other  holy  vessels  to  be  cast;  they
were  cast  hollow;  and  were  four  inches,  or  a  hand's  breadth  thick;
they  were  cast  hollow,  the  better  to  withstand  inundations  and
conflagrations;  they  were  the  archives  of  Masonry,  and  contained
tiie  constitution,  rolls,  and  records.'     The  Senior  Deacon  having
explained  the  columns,  he  passes  between  them,  advances  a  step
or  two,  observing  as  he  advances,  'Brother,  we  will  pursue  our
travels;  the  next  thing  that  we  come  to  is,  a  long,  winding  stair
case,  with  three,  five,  seven  steps,  or  more.     The  three  first  al-
lude to  the  three  principal  supports  in  Masonry,  viz:  wisdom,
strength,  and  beauty;  the  five  steps  allude  to  the  five  orders  in
architecture,  and  the  five  human  senses;  the  five  orders  in  archi-    .
tecture  are,  the  Tuscan,  Doric,  Ionic,  Corinthian,  and  Compo-
site; the  five  human  senses  are,  hearing,  seeing,  feeling,  smelling,
and  tasting;  the  three  first  of  which,  have  ever  been  highly  essen-
tial among  Masons:  hearing,  to  hear  the  word,  seeing,  to  see  the
sign,  and  feeling,  to  feel  the  grip,  whereby  one  Mason  may  know
another  in  the  dark  as  well  as  in  the  light.     The  seven  steps  al-
lude to  the  seven  sabbatical  years;  seven  years  of  famine;  seven
years  in  building  the  temple;  seven  golden  candlesticks;  seven
wonders  of  the  world;  seven  planets;  but,  more  especially,  the

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  49

several  liberal  arts  and  sciences,  which  are  grammar,  rhetoric
logic,  arithmetic,  geometry,  music,  and  astronomy;  for  this,  and
many  other  reasons,  the  number  seven  has  ever  been  held  in  hiirh
estimation  among  Masons.'     Advancing  a  few  steps,  the  Senior
Deacon  proceeds;  'Brother,  the  next  thing  we  cqme  to,  is  the
outer  door  of  the  middle  chamber  of  king  Solomon's  temple
which  is  partly  open,  but  closely  tyled  by  the  Junior  Warden.'
[It  is  the  Junior  Warden  in  the  south  who  represents  the  Tvler
at  the  outer  door  of  the  middle  chamber  of  king  Solomon's  tem-
pie;]  who,  on  the  approach  of  the  Senior  Deacon  and  candidate
inquires,  'who  comes  here?  who  comes  here?'     The  Senior  Dea
con  answers,  'A  Fellow  Craft  Mason.'    Junior  Warden  to  Sen-
lor  Deacon,  'How  do  you  expect  to  gam  admission?'     Arts    'By
a  pass,  and  token  of  a  pass.'    Junior  Warden  to  Senior  Dea-
con   'Will  you  give  them  to  me?'     [The  Senior  Deacon,  or  the
candidate,  (prompted  by  him,)  gives  them;  this  and  many  other
tokens,  or  grips,  are  frequently  given  by  strangers,  when  first  in-
troduced to  each  other.  If  given  to  a  Mason,  he  will  immediate-
ly return  it;  they  can  be  given  in  any  company  unobserved,  even
by  Masons,  when  shaking  hands.     A  pass,  and  token  of  a  pass-
me  pass  is  the  word  Shibboleth;  the  token,  alias,  the  pass-grip  is
given,  as  before  described,  by  taking  each  other  by  the  right
hand,  as  if  shaking  hands,  and  placing  the  thumb  between  the
fore  finger  and  second  finger,  at  the  third  joint,  or  where  they
join  the  hand,  and  pressing  it  hard  enough  to  attract  attention
In  the  lecture  it  is  called  a  token,  but  generally  called  the  pass-
grip.     It  is  an  undeniable  fact  that  Masons  express  themselves
so  differently,  when  they  mean  the  same  thing,  that  they  frequent
ly  wholly  misunderstand  each  other.]

After  theJunipr  Warden  has  received  the  pass  Shibboleth,  he
inquires,  'What  does  it  denote?'  Ana.  'Plenty.'  Junior  War-
den to  Senior  Deacon,  'Why  sot'  Ans.  'From  an  ear  of  corn
being ;  placed  at  the  water-ford.'  Junior  Warden  to  Senior  Dea-
con,'Why  was  this  pass  instituted?'  Ans.  'In  consequence  of
a  quarrel  which  had  long  existed  between  Jephthah,  Judge  of  Is-
rael, and  the  Ephraimites^  the  latter  of  whom  had  longbeen  «
stubborn,  rebellious  people,  whom  Jephthah  had  endeavored  td
subdue  by  lenient  measures,  but  to  no  effect.  The  Epbraimites
being  highly  incensed  against  Jephthah,  for  not  being  called  to
briA  and  share  in  the  rich  spoils  of  the  Ammonitish  war,  assem-
bled a  mighty  army,  and  passed  over  the  river  Jordan  to  give
Jephthah  battle;  but  he,  being  apprised  of  their  approach,  called
together  the  men  of  Israel,  and  gave  them  battle,  and  put  them
to  flight;  and  to  make  his  victory  more  complete,  he  ordered

E


5()  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

guards  to  be  placed  at  the  different  passes  on  the  banks  of  the
river  Jordan,  and  commanded,  if  the  Ephraimites  passed  that
way,  that  they  should  pronounce  the  word  Shibboleth;  but  they,
being  of  a  different  tribe,  pronounced  it  Sibboleth;  which  trifling
defect  proved  them  spies,  and  cost  them  their  lives:  and  there
fell  that  day,  at  the  different  passes  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Jor-
dan, forty  and  two  thousand.     This  word  was  also  used  by  our
ancient  brethren  to  distinguish  a  friend  from  a  foe,  and  has  since
been  adopted  as  a  proper  pass-word,  to  be  given  before  entering
any  well  regulated  and  governed  lodge  of  Fellow  Craft  Masons.
Since  this  is  the  case,  you  will  pass  on  to  the  Senior  Warden  m
the  west  for  further  examination.'     As  they  approach  the  Senior
Warden  in  the  west,  the  Senior  Deacon  says  to  the  candidate,
'Brother,  the  next  thing  we  come  to,  is  the  inner  door  of  the  mid-
dle chamber  of  king  Solomon's  temple,  which  we  find  partly  open,
but  more  closely  tyled  by  the  Senior  Warden;'  when  the  Senior
Warden  inquires,  'Who  comes  here?  who  comes  here?'     The
Senior  Deacon  answers, '  A  Fellow  Craft  Mason.'     Senior  War-
den to  Senior  Deacon,  'How  do  you  expect  to  gam  admission?
Ms     'By  the  grip  and  word.'     The  Senior  Warden  to  the  Sen-
ior Deacon,  'Will  you  give  them  to  me?'    They  are  then  given
as  herein  before  described.     The  word  is  Jachin.     After  they
are  given,  the  Senior  Warden  says,  'They  are  right;  you  can
pass  on  to  the  Worshipful  Master  in  the  east.'     As  they  approach
the  Master,  he  inquires,  'Who  comes  here?  who  comes  here?'
Senior  Deacon  answers,  'A  Fellow  Craft  Mason.'    The  Master
then  says  to  the  candidate,  'Brother,  you  have  been  admitted  in-
to the  middle  chamber  of  king  Solomon's  temple,  for  the  sake  of
the  letter  G.     It  denotes  Deity;  before  whom  we  all  ought  to
bow  with  reverence,  worship,  and  adoration.  It  also  denotes  ge-
ometry, the  fifth  science;  it  being  that  on  which  this  degree  was
principally  founded.     By  geometry,  we  may  curiously  trace  na-
ture through  her  various  windings  to  her  most  concealed  recess-
es: by  it,  we  may  discover  the  power,  the  wisdom,  and  the  good-
ness of  the  grand  Artificer  of  the  universe,  and  view  with  delight
the  proportions  which  connect  this  vast  machine:  by  it,  we  may
discover  how  the  planets  move  in  their  different  orbits,  and  de-
monstrate their  various  revolutions:  by  it,  we  account  for  the  re-
turn of  a  season,  and  the  variety  of  scenes  which  each  season  dis-
plays to  the  discerning  eye.     Numberless  worlds  surround  us,
all  formed  by  the  same  Divine  Architect,  which  roll  through  this
vast  expanse,  and  all  conducted  by  the  same  unerring  law  of  na-
ture.    A  survey  of  nature,  and  the  observations  of  her  beautiful
proportions,  first  determined  man  to  imitate  the  divine  plan,  and

•


LIGHT   ON  MASONRV.  5^

study  symmetry  and  order.     The  architect  began  to  design;  and
the  plans  which  he  laid  down,  being  improved  by  experience  and
time,  have  produced  works  which  are  the  admiration  of  eyery  age.
The  lapse  of  time,  the  ruthless  hand  of  ignorance,  and  the  devas-
tations of  war,  have  laid  waste  and  destroyed  many  valuable  mon-
uments of  antiquity,  on  which  the  utmost  exertions  of  human  gen-
ius have  been  employed.     Even  the  temple  of  Solomon,  so  spa-
cious and  magnificent,  and  constructed  by  so  many  celebrated
artists^  escaped  not  the  unsparing  ravages  of  barbarous  force.
The  attentive  ear  received  the  sound  from  the  instructive  tongue;
and  the  mysteries  of  Free  Masonry  are  safely  lodged  in  the  re-
pository ofjaithful  breasts.     Tools  and  implements  of  architec-
ture, and  symbolic  emblems,  most  expressive,  are  selected  by
the  fraternity,  to  imprint  on  the  mind  wise  and  serious  truths;  ancF
thus,  through  a  succession  of  ages,  are  transmitted,  unimpaired,
the  most  excellent  tenets  of  our  institution.'  Here  ends  the  work
part  of  the  Fellow  Craft's  degree.     It  will  be  observed  that,  the
candidate  has  received,  in  this  place,  the  second  section  of  the
lecture  on  this  degree.     This  course  is  not  generally  pursued,
but  it  &  much  the  most  instructive  method;  and  when  it  is  omit-
ted, I  generally  conclude  that  it  is  for  want  of  a  knowledge  of  the
lecture.     Monitorial  writers,  (who  are  by  no  means  coeval  with
Masonry,)  all  write,  or  copy,  very  much  after  each  other;  and
they  have  all  inserted,  in  their  books,  all  those  clauses  of  the
several  lectures  which  are  not  considered  by  the  wise  ones  as
tending  to  develope  the  secrets  of  Masonry.   In  some  instances,
they  change  the  phraseology  a  little;  in  others,  they  are  literal
extracts  from,  the  lectures.     This,  it  is  said,  is  done  to  facilitate
the  progress  of  learners,  or  young  Masons;   when,  in  fact,  it  has
the  contrary  effect.     All  lecture  teachers,  (and  there  are  many
travelling  about  the  country,  with  recommendations  from  some
of  their  distinguished  brethren;)  when  they  come  to  any  of  those
clauses,  will  say  to  their  pupils,  'I  have  not  committed  that;  it  is
in  the  Monitor;  you  can  learn  it  at  your  leisure.'  This  course  of
procedure  subjects  the  learner  to  the  necessity  of  making  bis  own
questions,  and,  of  course,  answering  monitorially,  whether  the
extracts  from  the  lectures  are  literal  or  not.     Again,  there  is  not.
a  perfect  sameness  in  all  the  Monitors,  or  they  could  not  all  get
copy  rights;  hence  the  great  diversity  in  the  lectures  as  well  as
the  work.     The  following  charge  is,  or  ought  to  be,  delivered  to
the  candidate  after  he  has  got  through  the  ceremonies;  but  he  is
generally  told,  'It  i3  in  the  Monitor,  and  you  can  learn  it  at  your
leisure.'     'Brother,  being  advanced  to  the  second  degree  .of  Ma-
sonry, we  congratulate  you  on  your  preferment.     The  internal*


►gk


52  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.

and  not  the  external,  qualifications  of  a  man,  are  what  Masonry
regards.  As  you  increase  in  knowledge,  you  will  improve  in  so-
cial intercourse.  It  is  unnecessary  to  recapitulate  the  duties
which,  as  a  Mason,  you  are  bound  to  discharge;  or  enlarge  on
the  necessity  of  a  strict,  adherence  to  them,  as  your  own  experi-
ence must  have  established  their  value.  Our  laws  and  regula-
tions you  are  strenuously  to  support;  and  be  always  ready  to  as-
sist in  seeing  them  duly  executed.  You  are  not  to  palMate  or
aggravate  the  offences  of  your  brethren;  but  in  the  decision  of
every  trespass  against  our  rules,  you  are  to  judge  with  candor,
admonish  with  friendship,  and  reprehend  with  justice.  The  stu-
dy of  the  liberal  arts,  that  valuable  branch  of  education,  which
tends  so  effectually  to  polish  and  adorn  the  mind,  is  earnestly
recommended  to  your  consideration;  especially,  the  science  of
geometry,  which  is  established  as  the  basis  of  our  art  Geome-
try, or  Masonry,  originally  synonymous  terms,  being  of  a  divine
moral  nature,  is  enriched  with  the  most  useful  knowledge;  while
it  proves  the  wonderful  properties  of  nature,  it  demonstrates  the
more  important  truths  of  morality.  Your  past  behaviour  and
regular  deportment,  have  merited  the  honor  which  we  have  now
conferred;  and,  in  your  new  character,  it  is  expected  that  you
will  conform  to  the  principles  of  the  order,  by  steadily  persever-
ing in  the  practice  of  every  commendable  virtue.  Such  is  the
nature  of  your  engagements  as  a  Fellow  Craft,  and  to  these  du-
ties you  are  bound  by  the  most  sacred  ties.'

I  will  now  proceed  with  the  lecture  on  this  degree;  it  is  divid-
ed into  two  sections.

SECTION  FIRST.

Q.  Are  you  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason?

A.  I  am — try  me.

Q.  By  what  will  you  be  tried?     A.  By  the  Square.

Q.  Why  by  the  Square?

A.  Because  it  is  an  emblem  of  virtue.

Q.  What  is  a  Square?

A.  An  angle  extending  to  ninety  degrees,  or  the  fourth  part  of
a  circle.

Q.  Where  were  you  prepared  to  be  made  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason?

A.  In  a  room  adjacent  to  the  body  of  a  just  and  lawfully  con-
stituted lodge  of  such,  duly  assembled  in  a  room,  or  place,  repre-
senting the  middle  chamber  of  king  Solomon's  temple.

Q.  How  were  you  prepared?

A.  By  being  divested  of  all  metals:  neither  naked  nor  clothed  -
barefooted  nor  shod;  hood-winked;  with  a  cable-tow  twice  round


y  Google


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.  53

my  neck;  in  which  situation  I  was  conducted  to  the  door  of  the
lodge,  where  I  gave  two  distinct  knocks.

Q.  What  did  those  two  distinct  knocks  allude  to?

A.  The  second  degree  in  Masonry;  it  being  that  on  which  1
was  about  to  enter.

Q>  What  was  said  to  you  from  within?  ;

A.  Who  comes  there,  who  comes  there.

Q.  Your  answer?

A.  A  worthy  brother,  who  has  been  regularly  initiated  as  an
Entered  Apprentice  Mason;  served  a  proper  time  as  such;  and
now  wishes  for  further  light  in  Masonry,  by  being  passed  to  the
degree  of  a  Fellow  Craft.

Q.  What  was  then  said  to  you  from  within?

A.  I  was  asked  if  it  was  of  my  own  free  will  and  accord  1
made  this  request;  i£  I  was  duly  and  truly  prepared;  worthy  and
well  qualified;  and  had  made  suitable  proficiency  in  the  preced-
ing degree:  all  of  which  being  answered  in  the  affirmative,  I
was  asked,  by  what  further  rights  I  expected  to  obtain  so  great
a  benefit.

Q.  Your  answer?

A.  By  the  benefit  of  a  pass- word.

Q.  What  is  that  pass-word?     A.  Shibboleth.

Q.  What  further  was  said  to  you  from  within?

A.  I  was  bid  to  wait  till  the  Worshipful  Master  in  the  east  wa.<
made  acquainted  with  my  request,  and  his  answer  returned.

Q.  After  his  answer  was  returned,  what  followed?

A.  I  was  caused  to  enter  the  lodge.

Q.  How  did  you  enter?

A.  On  the  angle  of  the  square  presented  to  my  naked  right
breast,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.

Q.  How  were  you  then  disposed  of?

A.  I  was  conducted  twice  regularly  round  the  lodge  and  halt-
ed at  the  Junior  Warden  in  the  south,  where  the  same  questions
were  asked  and  answers  returned,  as  at  the  door.

Q.  How  did  the  Junior  Warden  dispose  of  you?

A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  to  the  Senior  Warden  in
the  west,  where  the  same  questions  were  asked  and  answers  re»
turned,  as  before.

Q.  How  did  the  Senior  Warden  dispose  of  you?

A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  to  the  Worshipful  Master
m  the  east,  where  the  same  questions  were  asked  and  answers
returned,  as  before;  who  likewise  demanded  of  me  from  whence
x  came,  and  whither  I  was  travelling.

Q*  Tour  answer?

£2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


54  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

A.  From  the  west,  and  travelling  to  the  east.

Q.  Why  do  you  leave  the  west,  and  travel  to  the  east?

A.  In  search  of  more  light.

Q.  How  did  the  Worshipful  Master  then  dispose  of  you?

A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  back  to  the  west,  from
whence  I  came,  and  put  in  care  of  the  Senior  Warden,  who  taught
me  how  to  approach  the  east,  by  advancing  upon  two  upright
regular  steps  to  the  second  step,  my  feet  forming  the  right  angle
of  an  oblong  square,  and  my  body  erect  at  the  altar  before  the
Worshipful  Master.

Q.  What  did  the  Worshipful  Master  do  with  you?

A.  He  made  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason  of  me.

Q.  How?     A.  In  due  form.

Q.  What  was  that  due  form?

A.  My  right  knee  bare  bent;  my  left  knee  forming  a  square;
my  right  hand  on  the  Holy  Bible,  Square,  and  Compass;  my  left
arm  forming  an  angle,  supported  *by  the  square,  and  my  hand  in
a  vertical  position:  in  which  posture  I  took  upon  me  the  solemn
oath,  or  obligation,  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason.  [See  page  44  for
obligation.]

Q.  After  your  oath,  or  obligation,  what  was  said  to  you?

A.  I  was  asked  what  I  most  desired.

Q.  Your  answer?     A.  More  light*

Q.  On  being  brought  to  light,  what  did  you  discover  different
from  before?

A.  One  point  of  the  compass  elevated  above  the  square,  which
denoted  light  in  this  degree;  .but  as  one  point  was  yet  in  obscuri-
ty, it  was  to  remind  me  that  I  was  yet  one  material  point  in  the
dark,  respecting  Masonry.

Q.  What  did  you  next  discover?  *

A..  The  Worshipful  Master  approaching  me  from  the  east,  un-
der the  sign  and  due-guard  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason,  who  pre-
sented me  with  his  right  hand  in  token  of  brotherly  love  and  con-
fidence; and  proceeded  to  give  me  the  pass-grip  and  word  of  a
Fellow  Craft  Mason,  and  bid  me  rise  and  salute  the  Junior  and
Senior  Wardens,  and  convince  them  that  I  had  been  regularly
passed  to  the  degree  of  a  Fellow  Craft,  and  had  the  sign,  grip,  and
word,  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason.

Q.  What  next  did  you  discover?

A.  The  Worshipful  Master  approaching  me  a  second  time  from
the  east,  who  presented  me  a  lamb-skin,  or  white  apron;  which,
lie  said,  he  hoped  I  would  continue  to  wear  with  honor  to  myself
and  satisfaction  and  advantage  to  my  brethren.

Q.  What  was  you  next  presented  with?

Digitized  by  VjO(


LIGHT   OH   MASOKRT.  55

A*  The  working  tools  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason.

Q.  What  are  they?

A.  The  Plumb,  Square,  and  Level.

Q.  What  do  they  teach?  [I  think  this  question  ought  to  bc7
'How  explained?']

A.  The  plumb  is  an  instrument  made  use  of  by  operative  Ma-
sons to  raise  perpendiculars;  the  square,  to  square  the  work;  and
the  level,  to  lay  horizontals:  but  we,  as  Free  and  Accepted  Ma-
sons, are  taught  to  make  use  of  them  for  more  noble  and  glorious
purposes.  The  plumb  admonishes  us  to  waft  uprightly,  in  our
several  stations,  before  God  and  man;  squaring  our  actions  by
the  square  of  virtue;  and  remembering  mat  we  are  all  travelling,
upon  the  level  of  time,  to  mat  undiscovered  country,  from  whose
bourne  no  traveller  returns.

Q.  What  was  you  next  presented  with?

A.  Three  precious  jewels.

Q.  What  were  they?

A.  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity.

Q.  What  do  they  teach?

A.  Faith  in  God,  hope  in  immortality,  and  charity  to  all  man-
kind.

Q.  How  was  you  then  disposed  of?

A.  I  was  conducted  out  of  the  lodge,  and  invested  of  what  1
had  been  divested.

SECTION  SECOND.

Q.  Have  you  ever  worked  as  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason?

A.  I  have,  in  speculative;  but  our  forefathers  wrought  bom  in
speculative  and  operative  Masonry.

Q.  Where  did  they  work?

A.  At  the  building  of  king  Solomon's  temple,  and  many  other
masonic  edifices.

Q.  How  long  did  they  work?     A.  Six  days.

Q.  Did  they  not  work  on  the  seventh?

A.  They  did  not.

Q.  Why  so?  A.  Because,  in  six  days  God  created  the  heav-.
ens  and  the  earth,  and  rested  on  the  seventh  day;  the  seventh  day,
therefore,  our  ancient  brethren  consecrated  as  a  day  of  rest  from
their  labors;  thereby  enjoying  more  frequent  opportunities  to  con-
template the  glorious  works  of  creation,  and  adore  flieir  great
Creator.

Q.  Did  you  ever  return  to  the  sanctum  sanctorum,  or  holy  of
holies,  of  king  Solomon's  temple?

A.  I  did.
t

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


50  UGHT  ON   MASONRY.

Q.  By  what  way?
A.  Through  a  long  porch,  or  alley.

Q.  Did  any  thing  particular  strike  your  attention  on  your  re-
turn?

A.  There  did;  viz: — two  large  columns,  or  pillars,  one  on  the
left  hand,  and  the  other  on  the  right

Q.  What  was  the  name  of  the  one  on  the  left  hand?
A.  Boaz,  to  denote  strength.
Q.  What  was  the  name  of  the  one  on  the  right  hand?
A.  Jachin*  denoting  establishment.
Q.  What  do  they  collectively  allude  to?
A.  A  passage  in  scripture,  wherein  God  has  declared  in  his
word,  'In  strength  shall  this  house  be  established.'
Q.  What  were  their  dimensions?

A.  Eighteen  cubits  in  height,  twelve  in  circumference,  and
four  in  diameter.

Q.  Were  they  adorned  with  any  thing?
A.  They  were;   with  two  large  chapiters,  one  on  each.
Q.  Were  they  ornamented  with  any  thing?
A.  They  were;  with  wreaths  of  net  work,  lily  work,  and  pome-
granates.

Q.  What  do  they  denote?
A.  Unity,  Peace,  and  Plenty.

Q.  Why  so?      A.  Net  work,  from  its  connexion,  denotes  un-
ion; lily  work,  from  its  whiteness  and  purity,  denotes  peace;  and
pomegranates,  from  the  exuberance  of  its  seed,  denotes  plenty.
Q.  Were  those  columns  adorned  with  any  thing  farther?
A.  They  were;  viz: — two  large  globes,  or  balls,  one  on  each.
Q.  Did  they  contain  any  thing?

A.  They  did;  viz: — all  the  maps  and  charts  of  the  celestial
and  terrestrial  bodies.

Q.  Why  are  they  said  to  be  so  extensive?
A.  To  denote  the  universality  of  Masonry,  and  that  a  Mason's
charity  ought  to  be  equally  extensive.
Q.  What  was  their  composition?
A.  Molten,  or  cast  brass.
Q.  Who  cast  them?
A.  Our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff.
Q.  Where  were  they  cast?

A.  On  the  banks  of  the  river  Jordan,  in  the  clay  ground  between
Succoth  and  Zaradatha,  where  king  Solomon  ordered  these,  and
-all  other  holy  vessels  to  be  cast

Q.  Were  they  cast  solid  or  hollow?      A.  HoHw.
Q.  What  was  their  thickness?

i

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   Otf  HASOJNRT,  57

A.  Four  inches,  or  a  hand's  breadth.

Q.  Why  were  they  cast  hollow?

A.  The  better  to  withstand  inundations  &  conflagrations;  were
the  archives  of  Masonry,  and  contained  the  constitution,  rolls,
and  records.

Q.  What  did  you  next  come  to?

A.  A  long,  winding  stair  case,  with  three,  fife,  seven  steps,  or
more.

Q.  What  do  the  three  steps  allude  to?

A.  The  three  principal  supports  in  Masonry;  viz:— wisdom,
strength,  and  beauty.

Q.  What  do  the  five  steps  allude  to?

A.  The  five  orders  in  architecture,  and  the  five  human  senses.

Q.  What  are  the  five  orders  in  architecture?

A.  The  Tuscan,  Doric,  Ionic,  Corinthian,  and  Composite.

Q.  What  are  the  five  human  senses?

A.  Hearing,  seeing,  feeling,  smelling,  and  tasting;  the  first
three  of  which  have  ever  been  deemed  highly  essential  among
Masons;  hearing,  to  hear  the  word,  seeing,  to  see  the  sign,  and
feeling,  to  feel  the  grip,  whereby  one  Mason  may  know  another
in  the  dark  as  well  as  in  the  light.

Q.  What  do  the  seven  steps  allude  to?

A.  The  seven  sabbatical  years;  seven  years  of  famine;  seven
years  in  building  the  temple;  seven  golden  candlesticks;  seven
wonders  of  the  world;  seven  planets;  but  more  especially,  the
seven  liberal  arts  and  sciences;  which  are,  grammar,  rhetoric,
logic,  arithmetic,  geometry,  music,  and  astronomy.  For  these,
and  many  other  reasons,  the  number  seven  has  ever  been  held  in
high  estimation  among  Masons.

Q.  What  did  you  next  come  to?

A.  The  outer  door  of  the  middle  chamber  of  lung  Solomon's
tejnple,  which  I  found  partly  open,  but  closely  tyled  by  the  Jun-
ior Warden.

Q.  How  did  you  gain  admission?

A.  By  a  pass,  and  token  of  a  pass.

Q.  What  was  the  name  of  the  pass?    A.  Shibboleth.

Q.  What  does  it  denote?    A.  Plenty.

Q.  Why  so?

A.  From  an  ear  of  corn  being  placed  at  the  water-ford.

Q.  Why  was  this  pass  instituted?

A.  In  consequence  of  a  quarrel  which  had  long  existed  be-
tween Jephthah,  Judge  of  Israel,  and  the  Ephraimites;  the  latter
of  whom  had  long  been  a  stubborn,  rebellious  people,  whom  Jeph-
thah had  endeavored  to  subdue  by  lenient  measures,  but  to  p^

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


5S  LIGHT  ON  MASONBV.

effect.  The  Ephraimites,  being  highly  incensed  against  Jeph-
thah  for  not  being  called  to  fight  and  share  in  the  rich  spoils  of  the
Ammonitish  war,  assembled  a  mighty  army,  and  passed  over  ihe
river  Jordan  to  give  Jephthah  battle;  but  he,  being  apprised  of
their  approach,  called  together  the  men  of  Israel,  and  gave  them
battle,  and  put  them  to  flight;  and,  to  make  has  victory  more  com-
plete, he  ordered  guards  to  be  placed  at  the  different  passes  on
the  banks  of  the  river  Jordan,  and  commanded,  if  the  Ephraim-
ites passed  that  way,  that  they  should  pronounce  the  word  Shibbo-
leth; but  they,  being  of  a  different  tribe,  pronounced  it  SibboUih;
which  trifling  defect  proved  them  spies,  and  cost  them  their  lives:
and  there  fell  that  day,  at  the  different  passes  on  the  banks  of4ke
river  Jordan,  forty  and  two  thousand.  This  word  was  also  used
by  our  ancient  brethren  to  distinguish  a  friend  from  a  foe,  and
has  since  been  adopted  as  a  proper  pass-word,  to  be  given  be-
fore entering  any  well  regulated  and  governed  lodge  of  Fellow
Craft  Masons.

Q.  What  did  you  next  discover?

A.  The  inner  door  of  the  middle  chamber  of  king  Solomon's
temple,  which  I  found  partly  open,  but  closely  tyled  by  the  Sen-
ior Warden.

Q.  How  did  you  gain  admission?

A.  By  the  grip  and  word.

Q.  How  did  the  Senior  Warden  dispose  of  you?

A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  to  the  Worshipful  Master
in  the  east,  who  informed  me  that  I  had  been  admitted  into  the
middle  chamber  of  king  Solomon's  temple  for  the  sake  of  the  let-
ter G.

Q.  Does  it  denote  any  thing?

A.  It  does;  Deity:— -before  whom  we  should  all  bear  with  rev-
erence, worship,  and  adoration.  It  also  denotes  geometry,  the
fifth  science;  it  being  that  on  which  this  degree  was  principal!)
founded.

Thus  ends  the  second  degree  -of  Masonry.

THE  THIRD,  OR  MASTER  MASON'S  DEGREE.

The  traditional  account  of  the  death,  several  burials,  and  re-
surrection of  Hiram  AbifF,  the  widow's  son,  (as  hereafter  narrat-
ed,) admitted  as  facts,  mis  degree  is  certainly  very  interesting.
The  Bible  informs  us,  that  there  was  a  person  of  that  name  em-
ployed at  the  building  of  king  Solomon's  temple;  but  neither  the
Bible,  the  writings  of  Josephus,  nor  any  other  writings,  however
ancient,  of  which  I  have  any  knowledge,  furnish  any  information,
respecting  his  death.     It  is  very  singular,  that  a  man,  so  celebrate

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  59

ed  as  Hiram  AbifFwas,  an  arbiter  between  Solomon,  king  of  Is-
rael, and  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  universally  acknowledged  as  the
.third  most  distinguished  man  then  living,  and,  in  many  respects,
the  greatest  man  in  the  world,  should  pass  off  the  stage  of  action,
in  the  presence  of  king  Solomon,  three  thousand  three  hundred
grand  overseers,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  workmen,
with  whom  he  had  spent  a  number  of  years  j  and  neither  king  So-
lomon, his  bosom  friend,  nor  any  other  among  his  numerous
friends,  even  recorded  his  death  or  any  thing  about  him.

A  person,  who  has  received  the  two  preceding  degrees,  and
wishes  to  be  raised  to  the  subHme  degree  of  a  Master  Mason,  is
(the  lodge  being  opened  as  in  the  preceding  degrees,)  conducted
from  the  preparation  room  to  the  door,  (the  manner  of  preparing
him  is  particularly  explained  in  the  lecture,)  where  he  gives  three
distinct  knocks,  when  the  Senior  Warden  rises  and  says,  'Wor-
shipful, while  we  are  peaceably  at  work  on  the  third  degree  oi*
Masonry,  under  the  influence  of  humanity,  brotherly  love,  and
affection,  the  door  of  our  lodge  appears  to  be  alarmed.'  The
Master  to  the  Junior  I>eacon,  'Brother  Junior,  inquire  the  cause
of  that  alarm.'  The  Junior  Deacon  then  steps  to  the  door  and
answers  the  three  knocks  that  have  been  given,  by  three  more;
(the  knocks  are  much  louder  than  those  given  on  any  occasion,
other  than  that  of  the  admission  of  candidates  in  the  several  de-
grees:) one  knock  is  then  given  without,  and  answered  by  one
from  within,  when  the  door  is  partly  opened,  and  the  Junior  Dea-
con asks,  'Who  comes  there?  who  comes  there?  who  comes
there?'  The  Senior  Deacon  answers,  'A  worthy  brother  who  has
been  regularly  initiated  as  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason,  passed
to  the  degree  of  a  Fellow  Craft,  and  now  wishes  for  further  light
in  Masonry,  by  being  raised  to  the  sublime  degree  of  a  Master
Mason.*  Junior  Deacon  to  Senior  Deacon,  'Is  it  of  his  own  free
will  and  accord  he  makes  mis  request?'  Ans.  'It  is.'  Junior
Deacon  to  Senior  Deacon,  'Is  he  worthy  and  well  qualified?'
Ans.  'He  is,'  Junior  Deacon  to  Senior  Deacon,  'Has  he  made
suitable  proficiency  in  the  preceding  degrees?'  Ans.  'He  has.'
Junior  Deacon  to  Senior  Deacon,  'By  what  further  right  does  he
expect  to  obtain  this  benefit?*  Ans.  'By  the  benefit  of  a  pass-
word.' Junior  Deacon  to  Senior  Deacon,  'Has  he  afass-wordV
Ans.  'IJe  has  not,  but  I  have  got  it  for  him.'  The  Junior  Dea-
con to  Senior  Deacon,  'Will  you  give  it  to  me?'  The  Senior
Deacon  men  whispers  in  the  ear  of  the  Junior  Deacon,  'Tubal
Cam '  Junior  Deacon  says',  the  pass  is  right.  Since  this  is  the
case,  you  will  wait  till  the  Worshipful  Master  be  made  acquaint-
ed with  his  request,  and  his  answer  returned.'    The  Junier  Dea-

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


60  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.

con  then  repairs  to  the  Master,  and  gives  three  knocks,  as  at  tike
door;  after  answering  which,  the  same  questions  are  asked  and
answers  returned,  as  at  the  door;  when  the  Master  says,  'Since
he  pomes  endued  with  all  these  necessary  qualifications,  let  him
enter  this  worshipful  lodge  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  take
heed  on  what  he  enters.'  The  Junior  Deacon  returns  to  the
door  and  says,  'Let  him  enter  this  worshipful  lodge  in  the  name
of  the  Lord,  and  take  heed  on  what  he  enters.'  In  entering,  both
points  of  the  compass  are  pressed  against  his  naked  right  and  left
breasts,  when  the  Junior  Deacon  stops  the  candidate,  and  says,
'Brother,  when  you  first  entered  this  lodge,  you  was  received  on
the  point  of  the  cpmpass  pressing  your  naked  left  breast,  which
was  then  explained  to  you;  when  you  entered  it  the  second  time,
you  was  received  on  the  angle  of  the  square,  which  was  also  ex-
plained to  you;  on  entering  it  now,  you  are  received  on  the  two
extreme  points  of  the  compass  pressing  your  naked  right  and
left  breasts,  which  are  thus  explained:  'As  the  most  vital  parts  of
man  are  contained  between  the  two  breasts,  so  are  the  most  val-
uable tenets  o^  Masonry  contained  between  the  two  extreme
points  of  the  compass,  which  are,  virtue,  morality,  and  brotherly
love.'  The  Senior  Deacon  then  conducts  the  candidate  three
times  regularly  round  the  lodge.  (I  wish  the  reader  to  observe,
that  on  this,  as  well  as  every  other  degree,  the  Junior  Warden  is
the  first  of  the  three  principal  officers  that  the  candidate  passes,
travelling  with  the  sun,  when  he  starts  round  the  lodge;  and  as
he  passes  the  Junior  Warden,  Senior  Warden,  and  Master,  the
first  time  going  round  they  each  give  one  rap;  the  second  time,
two  raps;  and  the  third  time,  three  raps.  The  number  of  raps
given,  oh  those  occasions,  are  the  same  as  the  number  of  the  de-
gree, except  the  first  degree,  on  which  three  are  given,  I  always
thought  improperly.)  During  the  time  the  candidate  is  travelling
round  the  room,  the  Master  reads  the  following  passage  of  scrip-
ture, the  conductor  and  candidate  travelling,  and  the  Master
reading,  so  that  the  travelling  and  reading  terminates  at  the  same
time:  'Remember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  while
the  evil  days  come  not,  nor  the  years  draw  nigh,  when  thou  shah
say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  them;  while  the  sun,  or  the  moon,  or
the  stars  be  not  darkened,  nor  the  clouds  return  after  the  rain;  in
the  day  when  the  keepers  of  the  house  shall  tremble,  and  the
strong  men  shall  bow  themselves,  and  the  grinders  cease  because
they  are  few,  and  those  that  look  out  of  the  windows  be  darkened,
and  the  doors  shall  be  shut  in  the  streets;  when  the  sound  of  the
grinding  is  low,  and  he  shall  rise  up  at  the  voice  of  the  bird,  and
all  the  daughters  of  music  shall  be  brought  low.    Also,  when  they

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  Off   MASONRY*  61

stall  be  afraid  of  that  which  is  high,  and  fears  shall  be  in  the  way,
and  the  almond  tree  shall  flourish,  and  the  grasshopper  shall  be  a
burthen,  and  desire  shall  fail :  because  man  goeth  to  his  long
home,  and  the  mourners  go  about  the  streets:  Or  ever  the  silver
cord  be  loosed,  or  the  golden  bowl  be  broken,  or  the  pitcher  be
broken  at  the  fountain,  or  the  wheel  at  the  cistorn.  Then  shall
the  dust  return  to  the  earth,  as  it  was;  and  the  spirit  return  unto
God  who  gave  it.'  The  conductor  and  candidate  halt  at  the  Jun-
ior Warden  in  the  south,  where  the  same  questions  are  asked  and
answers  returned,  as  at  the  door;  he  is  then  conducted  to  the
Senior  Warden  in  the  west,  where  the  same  questions  are  asked
and  answers  returned,  as  before;  from  thence  he  is  conducted  to
the  Worshipful  Master  in  the  east,  who  asks  the  same  questions
and  receives  the  same  answers,  as  before;  and  who  likewise  asks
the  candidate,  from  whence  he  came,  and  whither  he  is  travelling?
Jl.  'From  the  west;  and  travelling  to  the  east.'  Q.  'Why  do  you
leave  the  west,  and  travel  to  the  east?'  A.  'In  search  of  more
light.'  The  Master  then  says  to  the  Senior  Deacon,  'You  will
please  conduct  the  candidate  back  to  the  west,  from  whence  he
came,  and  put  him  in  care  of  the  Senior  Warden,  and  request
him  to  teach  the  candidate  how  to  approach  the  east,  by  advanc-
ing upon  three  upright  regular  steps  to  the  third  step,  his  feet
forming  a  square,  his  body  erect  at  the  altar  before  the  Worship-
ful Master,  and  place  him  in  a  proper  position  to  take  upon  him
the  solemn  oath,  or  obligation,  of  a  Master  Mason.'  The  Mas-
ter then  comes  to  the  candidate  and  says,  'Brother,  you  are  now
placed  in  a  proper  position,  (the  lecture  explains  it,)  to  take  upon
you  the  solemn  oath,  or  obligation,  of  a  Master  Mason;  which  1
assure  you,  as  before,  is  neither  to  affect  your  religion  nor  poli-
tics. If  you  are  willing  to  take  it,  repeat  your  name,  and  say  af-
ter me: —

'I,  A  B,  of  my  own  free  will  and  accord,  in  presence  of  Al-
mighty God,  and  this  Worshipful  Lodge  of  Master  Masons,  erect-
ed to  God,  and  dedicated  to  the  holy  order  of  St  John,  do  hereby
and  hereon,  most  solemnly  and  sincerely  promise  and  swear,  ia
addition  to  my  former  obligations,  that  I  will  not  give  the  degree
of  a  Master  Mason  to  any  one  of  an  inferior  degree,  nor  to  any
other  being  in  the  known  world,  except  it  be  to  a  true  and  lawful
brother,*  or  brethren,  Master  Mason,  or  within  the  body  of  a  just
and  lawfully  constituted  lodge  of  such;  and  not  unto  him,  nor  un-
to them,  whom  I  shall  hear  so  to  be,  but  unto  him  and  them  only
whom  I  shall  find  so  to  be  after  strict  trial  and  due  examination,  or
lawful  information  received.— Furthermore,  do  I  promise  aad
swear  that  I  will  not  give  the  Master's  word,  which  I  shall  herc-

F

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


62  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

after  receive,  neither  in  the  lodge,  nor  out  of  it,  except  it  be  oil
the  five  points  of  fellowship,  and  then  not  above  my  breath.
Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  not  give  the
grand  hailing  sign  of  distress,  except  I  am  in  real  distress,  or  for
the  benefit  of  the  craft  when  at  work;  and  should  I  ever  see  that
sign  given,  or  the  word  accompanying  it,  and  the  person  who
gave  it  appearing  to  be  in  distress,  I  will  fly  to  his  relief  at  die
risk  of  my  life,  should  there  be  a  greater  probability  of  saving  his
life  than  of  losing  my  own.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and
swear  that  I  will  not  wrong  this  lodge,  nor  a  brother  of  this  degree,
to  the  value  of  one  cent,  knowingly,  myself,  nor  suffer  it  to  be
done  by  others,  if.  in  my  power  to  prevent  it  Furthermore,  do  I
promise  and  swear  that  I  will  not  be  at  the  initiating,  passing,  and
raising  a  candidate  at  one  communication,  without  a  regular  dis-
pensation from  the  grand  lodge  for  the  same.  Furthermore,  do  I
promise  and  swear  that  I  will  not  be  at  the  initiating,  passing,  or
raising,  a  candidate  in  a  clandestine  lodge,  I  knowing  it  to  be
such.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear  that  I  will  not  be  at
the  initiating  of  an  old  man  in  dotage,  a  young  man  in  non-age,
an  Atheist,  irreligious  libertine,  idiot,  madman,  hermaphrodite,
nor  woman.*  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  .and  swear  that  I  will
not  speak  evil  of  a  brother  Master  Mason,  neither  behind  his  back,
nor  before  his  face,  but  will  apprize  him  of  all  approaching  dan-
ger if  in  my  power.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear  that
I  will  not  violate  the  chastity  of  a  Master  Mason's  wife,  mother,
sister,  or  daughter,  I  knowing  them  to  be  such,  nor  suffer  it  to  be
done  by  others,  if  in  my  power  to  prevent  iff  Furthermore,  do
I  promise  and  swear  that  I  wiH  support  the  constitution  of  the

grand  lodge  of*  the  state  of ,  under  which  this  lodge  is  held,

and  conform  to  all  the  by-laws,  rules,  and  regulations  of  this  or
any  other  lodge  of  which  I  may  at  any  time  hereafter  become
a  member.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear  that  I  will
obey  all  regular  signs,  summons,  or  tokens,  given,  handed,  sent,

♦Masonry  professes  to  bring  men  to  heaven,  and  yet  it  denies  its  blessings


;  the

high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  bond  and  free,  male  and  female,  are  all  one  in
Christ  Jesus.

fl  ask  the  candid  reader  if  this  is  morality  or  benevolence?  If  a  Mason
was  sworn  not  to  violate  the  chastity  of  any  woman,  it  would  have  more  the
appearance  of  virtuous  principle.  But  would  a  Mason's  oath  restrain  a  man,
who  would  be  guilty  of  such  crimes?  If  masonry  inculcated  the  true  princi-
ples of  morality  the  fruit  would  be  manifest,  I  have  heen  acquainted  with
many  Masons,  but  never  knew  one  made  better  by  masonry;  but  on  the  con-
trary, numbers,  who,  through  its  demoralising  influence  have  been  rendered  .
worthless.


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  63

or  thrown,  to  me  from  the  hand  of  a  brother  Master  Mason,  or
from  the  body  of  a  just  and  lawfully  constituted  lodge  of  such,
provided  it  be  within  the  length  of  my  cable-tow.  Furthermore,
do  I  promise  and  swear  that  a  Master  Mason's  secrets,  given  to
me  in  charge  as  such,  and  I  knowing  them  to  be  such,  shall  re-
main as  secure  and  inviolable  in  my  breast  as  in  his  own,  when
communicated  to  me,  murder  and  treason  excepted;  and  they  left
to  my  own  election.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear  that
I  will  go  on  a  Master  Mason's  errand,  whenever  required,  even
should  I  have  to  go  barefoot,  and  bareheaded,  if  within  the  length  of
my  cable- tow.*  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear  that  I  will
always  remember  a  brother  Master  Mason,  when  on  my  knees,
offering  up  my  devotions  to  Almighty  God.  Furthermore,  do  1
promise  and  swear  that  I  will  be  aiding  and  assisting  all  poor,  in-
digent Master  Masons,  their  wives  and  orphans,  wheresoever
disposed  round  the  globe,  as  far  as  in  my  power,  without  injuring
myself  or  family  materially.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and
swear  thai  if  any  part  .of  this  my  solemn  oath  or  obligation  be
omitted  at  this  time,  that  I  will  hold  myself  amenable  thereto,
whenever  informed.  To  all  which  I  do  most  solemnly  and  sin-
cerely promise  and  swear,  with  a  fixed  and  steady  purpose  of  mind
in  me,  to  keep  and  perform  the  same,  binding  myself  under  no  less
penalty,  than  to  have  my  body  severed  in  two  in  the  midst,  and  di-
vided to  the  north  and  south,  my  bowels  burnt  to  ashes  in  the  centre*
and  the  ashes  scattered  before  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  that  there
might  not  the  least  track  or  trace  of  remembrance  remain  among
men  or  Masons  of  so  vile  and  perjured  a  wretch  as  I  should  be,
were  I  ever  to  prove  wilfully  guilty  of  violating  any  part  of  this
my  solemn  oath  or  obligation  of  a  Master  Mason.  So  help  me
Ctod,  and  keep  me  steadfast  in  the  due  performance  of  the  same.'
The  Master  then  asks  the  candidate.  'TV  hat  do  you  most  de-
sire?'  The  candidate  answers  after  his  prompter,  'more  light.'
The  bandage  which  was  tied  round  his  head  in  the  preparation
x  room*  is,  by  one  of  the  brethren  who  stands  behind  him  for  that
purpose,  loosened  and  put  over  both  eyes,  and  he  is  immediately
Drought  to  light  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  preceding  degree,
except  three  stamps  on  the  floor,  and  three  claps  of  the  hands  are
given  in  this  degree. — On  being  brought  to  light,  the  Master  says
to  the  candidate,  'You  first  discover,  as  before,  three  great  lights
in  Masonry,  by  the  assistance  of  three  lesser,  with  this  difference,

♦Literally  a  rope  several  yards  in  length,  but  mystically  three  miles:  so
that  a  Master  Mason  must  go  on  a  brother  Master  Mason's  errand  whenev-
er required,  the  distance  of  three  miles;  should  he  have  to  go  barefoot  and
bareheaded.    In  the  degrees  of  knighthood  the  distance  is  forty  miles.

*  Digitized  by  G00gk


64  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

both  points  of  the  compass  are  elevated  above  the  square,  which
denotes  to  you  that  you  are  about  to  receive  all  the  light  that  can
be  conferred  on  you  in  a  Master's  lodge/  The  Master  steps  back
from  the  candidate  and  says,  'Brother,  you  now  discover  me  as
Master  of  this  lodge,  approaching  you  from  the  east,  under  the
sign  and  due-guard  of  a  Master  Mason/  The  sign  is  given  by
raising  both  hands  and  arms  to  the  elbows  perpendicularly,  oae  on
either  side  of  the  head,  the  elbows  forming  a  square.  The  words
accompanying  this  sign  in  case  of  distress,  are,  '0  Lord  my  God,
is  there  no  help  for  the  widow's  son.'  As  the  last  words  drop  from
your  lips  you  let  your  hands  fall  in  that  manner,  best  calculated  to
indicate  solemnity.  Ring  Solomon  is  said  to  have  made  this  ex-
clamation on  the  receipt  of  the  information  of  the  death  of  Hiram
Abiff.  Masons  are  all  charged  never  to  give  the  words  except  in
the  dark  when  the  sign  cannot  be  seen.  Here  Masons  differ  very
much;  some  contend  that  Solomon  gave  this  sign,  and  made  this
exclamation,  when  informed  of  Hiram's  death,  and  work  accord-
ingly in  their  lodges.  Others  say  the  sign  was  given;  and  the  ex-
clamation made  at  the  grave  when  Solomon  went  there  to  raise
Hiram,  and  of  course  they  work  accordingly;  that  is  to  say,  the
Master,  who  governs  a  lodge,  holding  die  latter  opinion,  gives  the
sign,  &c.  at  the  grave, 'when  he  goes  to  raise  the  body,  and  vice
versa.  The  due^guard  is  given  by  putting  the  right  hand  to  the
left  side  of  the  bowels,  the  hand  open,  with  the  thumb  next  to  the
belly,  and  drawing  it  across  the  belly,  and  let  it  fall;  this  is  done
tolerably  quick.  After  the  Master  has  given  the  sign  and  due-
guard,  which  does  not  take  more  than  a  minute,  he  says,  'brother,
I  now  present  you  with  my  right  hand  in  token  of  brotherly  love
and  affection,  and  with  it  the  pass  grip  and  word.'  The  pass-grip
is  given  by  pressing  the  thumb  between  the  joints  of  the  second
and  third  fingers,  where  they  join  the  hand,  and  the  word  or  name
is  Tubal  Cain.  It  is  the  pass  word  to  the  Master's  degree.  The
Master  after  giving  the  candidate  the  pass-grip  and  word,  bids  him
rise  and  salute  the  Junior  and  Senior  Wardens,  and  convince  them
that  he  is  an  obligated  Master  Mason,  and  is  in  possession  of  the
pass-grip  and  word.  While  the  Wardens  are  examining  the  can-
didate, die  Master  returns  to  the  east  and  gets  an  apron,  and  as  he
returns  to  the  candidate,  one  of  the  Wardens,  [sometimes  both,]

says  to  the  Master,  ' Worshipful,  we  are  satisfied  that  br.

is  an  obligated  Master  Mason.'  The  Master  then  says  to  the
candidate,  'Brother,  I  now  have  the  honor  to  present  you  with  a
lamb-skin,  or  white  apron,  as  before,  which,  I  hope,  you  will  con-
tinue to  wear  with  credit  to  yourself,  and  satisfaction  and  advan-
tage to  the  brethren;  you  will  please  carry  it  to  the  Senior  War-


y  Google"


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  65

lien  in  the  west,  who  will  teach  you  how  to  wear  it  as  a  Master
Mason."

The  Senior  Warden  ties  on  his  apron,  and  lets  the  flap  fall  down
before  in  its  natural  and  common  situation.

The  Master  returns  to  his  seat,  and  the  candidate  is  conducted
to  him.     Master  to  candidate,  *  Brother,  I  perceive  you  are  dress-
ed, it  is,  of  course,  necessary  you  should  have  tools  to  work  with;
I  will  now  present  you  with  the  working  tools  of  a  Master  Mason,
and  explain  their  uses  to  you.    .The  working  tools  of  a  Master
Mason  are  all  the  implements  of  Masonry  indiscriminately,  but
more  especially  the  trowel.     The  trowel  is  an  instrument  made
use  of  by  operative  Masons  to  spread  the  cement  which  unites  a
building  into  one  common  mass;  but  we,  as  Free  and  Accepted
Masons,  are  taught  to  make  use  of  it  for  the  more  noble  and  glo-
rious purpose  of  spreading  the  cement  of  brotherly  love  and  affec-
tion; that  cement  which  unites  us  into  one  sacred  band  or  society
of  friends  and  brothers,  #  among  whom  no  contention  should  ever
exist,  but  that  noble  contention,  or  rather  emulation,  of  who  can
best  work,  or  best  agree.     I  also  present  you  with  three  precious
jewels;  their  names  are  Humanity,   Friendship,  and  Brotherly
L«ove.     Brother,  you  are  not  yet  invested  with  all  the  secrets  of
this  degree,  nor  do  I  know  whether  you  ever  will,   until  I  know
how  you  withstand  the  amazing  trials  and  dangers  that  await  you.'
'You  are  now  about  to  travel  to  give  us  a  specimen  of  your
fortitude,  perseverance,  and  fidelity,  in  the  preservation  of  what
you  have  already  received — Fare  you  well  and  may  the  Lord  be
with  you,  and  support  you  through  your  trials  and  difficulties. 'r-~
[In  some  lodges  they  make  him  pray  before  he  starts.]     I'he
candidate  is  then  conducted  out  of  the  lodge,  clothed,  and  re-
turns; as  he  enters  the  door,  his  conductor  says  to  him,  'Brother,
we  are  now  in  a  place  representing  the  sanctum  sanctorum,  or  ho-
ly of  holies,  of  king  Solomon's  temple.     It  was  the  custom  of  our
Grand  Master,  Hiram  \biff,  every  day  at  high  twelve,  when  the
crafts  were  from  labour  to  refreshment,  to  enter  into  the  sanctum
sanctorum,  and  offer  up  his  devotions  to  the  ever  living  God.— r
Let.us,  in  imitation  of  him,  kneel  and  pray.'     They  then  kneel
and  the  conductor  says  the  following  prayer.     'Thou,  0   God,
knowest  our  down  sitting  and  up  rising,  and  understandest  our
thoughts  afar  off;  shield  and  defend  us  from  the  evil  intentions  of
our  enemies,  and  support  us  under  the  trials  and  afflictions  we
are  destined  to  endure,  while  travelling  through  this  vale  of  tears.
Man  that  is  born  of  a  woman  is  of  few  days,  and  full  of  trouble.
He  cometh  forth  as  a  flower,  and  is  cut  down;  he  fleeth  also  as  a
shadow,  and  continueth  not.     Seeing  his.  days  are  determine

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


66  LIGHT  ON   BtASOftRT*

the  number  of  his  months  are  with  thee,  Aon  hast  appointed  hi*
bounds  that  he  cannot  pass;  turn  from  him  that  he  may  jest,  till
he  shall  accomplish  his  day.     For  giere  is  hope  of  a  tree  if  it  be
cut  down,  that  it  will  sprout  again,  and  that  the  tender  branch
thereof  will  not  cease.     But  man  dieth  and  wasteth  away;  yea,
man  giveth  up  the  ghost,  and  where  is  he?    As  the  waters  fail
from  the  sea,  and  flood  decayeth  and  drieth  up,  so  man  lieth
down,  and  riseth  not  up  till  the  heavens  shall  be  no  more.    Yet,
O  Lord!  have  compassion  on  the  children  of  thy  creation;  ad-
minister unto  them  comfort  in  time  of  trouble,  and  save  them
with  an  everlasting  salvation.     Amen — so  mote  it  be*'     They
then  rise  and  the  conductor  says  to  the  candidate,  'Brother,  in
further  imitation  of  our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff,  let  us  retire  at
the  south  gate.'     They  then  advance  to  the  Junior  Warden
(who  represent  Jubeta,  one  of  the  ruffians,)  who  exclaims,  'Who
comes  here'?'  [The  room  is  dark,  or  the  candidate  hood-winked.]
The  conductor  answers,  'Our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff.'  'Oui
Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff!'  exclaims  tile  ruffian,  'he  is  the  very
man  I  wanted  to  see;  (seizing  the  candidate  by  the  throat  at  the
same  time,  and  jerking  him  about  with  violence;)  give  me  the
Master  Mason's  word,  or  111  take  your  hfe.'     The  conductor  re-
plies, 'I  cannot  give  it  now,  but  if  you  will  wait  till  the  grand
lodge  assembles  at  Jerusalem,  if  you  are  worthy,  you  shall  men
receive  it,  otherwise  you  cannot.'     The  ruffian  then  gives  the
candidate  a  blow  with  the  twenty-four  inch  guage  across  die
throat,  on  which  he  fled  to  the  west  gate,  where  he  was  accosted
by  the  second  ruffian,  Jubelo,  with  more  violence,  and  on  his  refu-
sal to  comply  with  his  request,  he  gave  him  a  severe  blow  with
the  square  across  his  breast;  on  which  he  attempted  to  make  his
escape  at  the  east  gate,  where  he  was  accosted  by  the  third  ruf-
fian, Jubelum,  with  still  more  violence,  and  refusing  to  comply  with
his  request,  the  ruffian  gave  him  a  violent  blow  withthe  common
gavel  on  die  forehead,  which  brought  him  to  the  floor,  on  which
one  of  them  exclaimed,  'What  shall  we  do,  we  have  kitted  our
Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff?'     Another  answers,  'Let  us  carry
him  out  at  the  east  gate,  and  bury  him  in  the  rubbish  till  low
twelve,  and  then  meet  and  carry  him  a  westerly  course  and  bury
him.'     The  candidate  is  then  taken  up  in  a  blanket,  on  which  he
fell,  and  carried  to  the  west  end  of  the  Lodge,  and  covered  up
and  left;  by  mis  time  the  Master  has  resumed  his  seat,  (king
Solomon  is  supposed  to  arrive  at  the  temple  at  this  juncture,)  and
calls  to  order,  and  asks  the  Senior  Warden  the  cause  of  all  that
confusion;  the  Senior  Warden  answers,  'Our  Grand  Master,  Hi-
ram Abiff,  is  missing,  and  there  are  no  plans  or  designs  laid  down

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  67

on  the  teessle-board  for  the  crafts  to  pursue  their  labor.'     The
Master,  alias  king  Solomon,  replies,  'OurGrand  Master  missing!
our  Grand  Master  has  always  been  very  punctual  in  his  atten-
dance; I  (ear  he  is  indisposed;  assemble  the  crafts,  and  search
in  and  about  the  temple,  and  see  if  he  can  be  found.'     They  all
shuffle  about  the  floor  a  while,  when  the  Master  calls  .them  to  or-
der, and  asks  the  Senior  Warden,  'What  success.'     He  answers,
'We  cannot  find  our  Grand  Master,  my  Lord.'  The  Master  then
orders  the  Secretary  to  call  the  roll  of  workmen,  and  see  whether
any  of  them  are  missing.     The  Secretary  calls  the  roll,  and  says,
'I  have  called  the  roll,  my  Lord,  and  find  that  there  are  three  mis-
sing, viz:    Jtibela,  Jubelo  and  JubelumS     His  Lordship  then
observes,  'This  brulgs  to  my  mind  a  circumstance  that  took  place
this  morning — twelve  Fellow-Crafts,  clothed  in  white  gloves  and
aprons,  in  token  of  their  innocence,  came  to  me,  and  confessed
that  they  twelve,  with  three  others,*  had  conspired  to  extort  the
Master  Mason's  word  from  their  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff,  and
in  case  of  refusal  to  take  his  life — they  twelve  had  recanted,  but
feared  the  other  thye  had  been  base  enough  to  carry  their  atro-
cious designs  into  execution.     Solomon  then  ordered  twelve  Fel-
low-Crafts  to  be  drawn  from  the  bands  of  the  workmen,  clothed
in  white  gloves  and  aprons,  in  token  of  their  innocence,  and  sent
three  east,  three  west,  three  north,  and  three  south,  in  search  of
the  ruffians,  and  if  found,  to  bring  them  forward.     Here  the  mem-
bers all  shuffle  about  the  floor  a  while,  and  fall  in  with  a  reputed
traveller,  and  inquire  of  him  if  he  had  seen  any  travelling  men
that  way ;  he  tells  them  that  he  had  seen  three  that  morning  near
the  coast  of  Joppa,  who  from  their  dress  and  appearance  were
Jews,  and  were  workmen  from  the  temple,  inquiring  for  a  passage
to  Ethiopia,  but  were  unable  to  obtain  one,  in  consequence  of  an
embargo  which  had  recently  been  laid  on  all  the  shipping,  and  had
tamed  back  into  the  country.

The  Master  now  calls  them  to  order  again,  and  as!fc*  the  Sen-
ior Warden,  'What  success.'  He  answers  by  relating  what  had
taken  place — Solomon  observes,  '1  had  this  embargo  laid  to  pre-
vent the  ruffians  from  making  their  escape;'  and  adds,  'you  will
go  and  search  again,  and  search  till  you  find  them,  if  possible;  and
if  they  are  not  found,  the  twelve,  who  confessed,  shall  be  consid-
ered as  the  reputed  murderers,  and  •  suffer  accordingly.'  The
members  all  start  again,  and  shuffle  about  a  while,  until  one  of
them,  as  if  by  accident,  finds  the  body  of  Hiram  Abiff,  alias  the
candidate,  and  hails  his  travelling  companions  who  join  him,  and
white  they  are  humming  out  something  over  the  candidate,  the
three  reputed  nutans,  who  are  seated  in  a  private  corner  near  the

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC


63  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

candidate,  are  heard  to  exclaim  in  the  following  manner— first,
Jubela,  '0,  that  my  throat  had  been  cut  across,  my  tongue  torn
out,  and  my  body  buried  in  the  rough  sands  of  the  sea  at  low
water-mark,  where  the  tide  ebbs  and  flows  twice  in  twenty-four
hours,  ere  I  had  been  accessary  to  the  death  of  so  good  a  man  as
our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  A  biff.'

The  second,  Jubelo,  'O  that  my  left  breast  had  been  torn  open,
and  my  heart  and  vitals  taken  from  thence,  and  thrown  over  my
left  shoulder,  carried  into  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  and  there  to
become  a  prey  to  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field,  and  vultures  of  the
air,  ere  I  had  conspired  the  death  of  so  good  a  man  as  our  Grand
Master,  Hiram  Abiff.'

The  third,  Jubelum,  'O  that  my  body  had  been  severed  in  two
in  the  midst,  and  divided  to  the  north  and  south,  my  bowels  burnt
to  ashes  in  the  centre,  and  the  ashes  scattered  by  the  four  winds
of  heaven,  that  there  might  not  the  least  track  or  trace' of  remem-
brance remain  among  men,  or  Masons,  of  so  vile  and  perjured  a
wretch  as  I  am — Ah,  Jubtla  and  Jubelo,  it  was  I  that  struck  him
harder  than  you  both — it  was  J  that  gave  hip  the  fatal  blow — it
was  I  that  killed  him  outright.'     The  three  Fellow-Crafts  who
had  stood  by  the  candidate  all  this  time  listening  to  the  ruffians,
whose  voices  they  recognized,  says  one  to  the  other,  *1\  hat  shall
we  do,  there  are  three  of  theni,  and  only  three  of  us?'  'It  is,'  said
one,  in  reply,  'our  cause  is  good,  let  us  seize  them;'  on  which
they  rush  forward,  and  carry  them  to  the  Master,  to  whom  they
relate  what  bad  passed;  the  Master  then  addresses  them  in  the
following  manner:  (They  in  many  lodges  kneel,  or  lie  down  in
token  of  their  guilt  and  penitence.)     'Well,  Jubela,  what  have
you  got  to  say  {'or  yourself — guilty  or  not  guilty  V     Jlns.  'Guilty,
my   Lord.'     'Jubelo,  guilty  or  not  guilty?'     Ans.  'Guilty,  ray
Lord.'  'Jubelum,  guilty  or  not  guilty?'    Jins.  'Guilty,  my  Lord.'
The  Master  of  the  three  Fellow-Crafts,  who  took  them,  'Take
them  wi#At  the  west  gate  of  the  Temple,  and  have  them  execu-
ted according  to  the  several  imprecations  of  their  own  mouths.'
They  are  then  hurried  off  to  the  west  end  of  the  room.     Here
this  part  of  the  farce  ends.     The  Master  then  orders  fifteen  Fel-
low-Crafts to  be  elected  from  the  bands  of  the  workmen,  and
sent  three  east,  three  west,  three  north,  three  south;  and  three  in
and  about  the  temple  in  search  of  their  Grand  Master,  Hiram
Abiff,  [In  some  lodges  they  pnly  send  twelve,  when  their  own
lectures  say  fifteen  were  sent,]   and  charges  them  if  they  find
the  body  to  examine  carefully  on  and  about  it  for  the  Master's
word  or  a  key  to  it.     The  three  that  travelled  a  westerly  course,
come  to  the  candidate  and  finger  about  him  a  little  and  are  called


LIOBT  ON  UABONRT.  69

to  order  by  the  Master,  when  they  report  that  they  have  found
the  grave%f  their  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff,  and  on  moving  the
earth  till  they  came  to  the  body,  they  involuntarily  found  their
hands  raised  in  this  position,  [showing  it  at  the  same  time;  it  is
the  due-guard  of  this  degree;]  to  guard  their  nostrils  against  the
offensive  effluvia  which  arose  from  the  grave,  and  that  they  had
searched  carefully  on  and  about  the  body  for  the  Master's  word,
but  had  not  discovered  any  thing  but  a  faint  resemblance  of  the
letter  G  on  the  left  breast.  The  Master  on  the  receipt  of  this
information,  (raising  himself,)  raises  his  hands  three  several
times  above  his  head  (as  herein  before  described)  and  exclaims
twice,  'Nothing  but  faint  resemblance  of  the  letter  G !  that  is  not
the  Master's  word,  nor  a  key  to  it.  I  fear  the  Master's  word  is  '
forever  lost!  ( The  third  exclamation  is  different  from  the  others —
attend  to  it,  it  has  been  described  in  page  64.)  'Nothing  but  a  faint
resemblance  of  the  letter  G !  that  is  not  the  Master's  word  nor  a
key  to  it  '0  Lord  my  God,  is  there  no  help  for  the  widow's
son!'  The  Master  then  orders  the  Junior  Warden  to  summon  a
lodge  of  Entered  Apprentice  Masons,  and  repair  to  the  grave  to
raise  the  body  of  their  Grand  Master,  by  the  Entered  Apprenti-
ce's grip.'  They  go  to  the  candidate  and  take  hold  of  his  fore
finger  and  pull  it,  return  and  tell  the  Master  that  they  could  not
raise  him  by  the  Entered  Apprentice's  grip;  that  the  skin  cleaved
from  the  bone.  A  lodge  of  Fellow-Crafts  aift  then  sent,  who  act
as  before,  except  they  pull  the  candidate's  second  finger.  The
IVtaster  then  directs  the  Senior  Warden  [generally]  to  summon  a
lodge  of  Master  Masons,  and  says,  'I  will  go  with  them  myself  in
person,  and  try  to  raise  the  body  by  the  Master's  grip,  or  lion'6
paw.'  [Some  say  by  the  strong  grip,  or  the  lion's  paw.]  They
then  all  assemble  round  the  candidate,  the  Master  having  declar-
ed the  first  word  spoken  after  the  body  was  raised,  should  be
adopted  as  a  substitute  for  the  Master's  word,  for  the  government
of  Master  Mason's  lodges  in  all  future  generations;  he  proceeds
to  raise  the  candidate,  alias,  the  representative  of  the  dead  body
of  Hiram  Abiff.  He  [the  candidate]  is  raised  on  what  is  called
the  five  points  of  fellowship,  which  are  foot  to*  foot,  knee  to  knee,
breast  to  breast,  hand  to  back,  and  mouth  to  ear.  This  is  done
by  putting  the  inside  of  your  right  foot  to  the  inside  of  the  right
foot  of  the  person  to  whom  you  are  going  to  give  the  word,  the
inside  of  your  knee  to  his,  laying  your  right  breast  against  his,
your  left  hands  on  the  back  of  each  other,  and  your  mouths  to
each  other's  right  ear,  [in  which  position  you  are  alone  permitted
to  give  the  word,]  and  whisper  the  word  Mah-hah-bqne.  The
Master's  grip  is  given  by  taking  hpld  of  each  ether's  right  hand>

Digitized  by  VjOCK


70  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

as  though  you  were  going  to  shake  hands,  and  sticking  the  nails
of  each  of  your  fingers  into  the  joint  of  the  other's  wrisr  where  it
unites  with  the  hand.  In  this  position  the  candidate  is  raised,  he
keeping  his  whole  body  stiff,  as  though  dead.  The  Master  in
raising  him  is  assisted  by  some  of  the  brethren,  who  take  hold  of
the  candidate  by  the  arms  and  shoulders;  as  soon  as  he  is  raised
to  his  feet  they  step  back,  and  the  Master  whispers  the  word
Mah-hah-bone  in  his  ear,  and  causes  the  candidate  to  repeat  it,
telling  him  at  the  same  time  that  he  must  never  give  it  in  any
manner  other  than  that  which  he  receives  it — He  is  also  told  that
J\lah-hah~bone,  signifies  marrow  in  the  bone.  They  then  separ-
ate, and  the  Master  makes  the  following  explanation,  respecting
the  five  points  of  fellowship.  Master  to  candidate,  'Brother,  foot
to  foot,  teaches  you  that  you  should,  whenever  tusked,  go  on  a
brother's  errand  if  within  the  length  of  your  cable-tow,  even  if
you  should  have  to  go  barefoot  and  bareheaded.  Knee  to  knee,
that  you  shouid  always  remember  a  Master  Mason  in  your  devo-
.tion  of  Almighty  God.  Breast  to  breast,  that  you  should  keep
the  Master  Mason's  secrets,  when  given  to  you  in  charge  as
such,  as  secure  and  inviolable  in  your  breast,  as  they  were  in  his
own,  before  communicated  to  you.  Hand  to  back,  that  you
should  support  a  Master  Mason  behind  his  back,  as  well  as  be-
fore his  face.  Mouth  to  ear,  that  you  should  support  his  good
name,  as  well  behind  his  back  as  before  his  face.'

After  the  candidate  is  through  with  what  is  called  the  woifc
|>art,  the  Master  addresses  him  in  the  following  manner:  'Broth-
er you  may  suppose  from  the  manner  you  have  been  dealt  with
to  jiight,  that  we  have  been  fooling  with  you,  or  that  we  have
treated  you  different  from  others,  but  I  assure  you  that  is  not  the
case.  You  have,  this  night,  represented  one  of  the  greatest  men
that  ever  lived,  in  the  tragical  catastrophe  of  his  death,  burial,  and
resurrection;  I  mean  Hiram  Abiff,  the  widow's  son,  who  was  slain
by  three  ruffians,  at  the  building  of  king  Solomon's  temple,  and
who,  in  his  inflexibility,  integrity,  and  fortitude,  never  was  sur-
passed by  man.  The  history  of  that  momentous  event  is  thus
related.  Masonic  tradition  inform  us,  that  at  the  building  of
king  Solomon's  temple,  fifteen  fellow-crafts  discovering  that  the
temple  was  almost  finished,  and  not  having  the  Master  Mason's
word,  became  very  impatient,  and  entered  into  a  horrid  conspira-
cy to  extort  the  Master  Mason's  word  from  their  Grand  Master,
Hiram  Abiff,  the  first  time  they  met  him  alone,  or  take  his  life,
that  they  might  pass  as  Masters  in  other  countries,  and  receive
wages  as  such;  but  before  they  could  accomplish  their  designs,
twelve  of  them  recanted,  but  the  other  three  were  base  enough  to


LIGHT   OK   MA80NRT.  71

carry  their  atrocious  designs  into  execution.     Their  names  were
Jubtla,  Jubeloy  and  Jubelum.7

'It  was  the  custom  of  our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff,  every
day  at  high  twelve,  when  the  crafts  were  from  labour  to  refresh-
ment, to  enter  into  the  Sanctum  Sanctorum,  and  offer  his  devo-
tions to  the  ever  living  God,  and  draw  out  his  plans  and  designs
on  the  tressle-board  for  the  crafts  to  pursue  their  labor.  On  a
certain  day,  [not  named  in  any  of  our  traditional  accounts,]  Ju-
bela,  Jubelo,  and  Jubelum,  placed  themselves  at  the  south,  west,
and  east  gates  of  the  temple,  and  Hiram  having  finished  his  devo-
tions and  labor,  attempted  (as  was  his  usual  custom,)  to  retire  at
the  south  gate,  where  he  wTas  met  by  Jubela,  who  demanded  of
him  the  Master  Mason's  word,  (some  say  the  secrets  of  a  Mas-
ter Mason,)  and  on  his  refusal  to  give  it,  Jubela  gave  htm  a  vio-
lent blow  with  a  twenty-four  inch  guage  across  the  throat;  on
which  Hiram  fled  to  the  west  gate,  where  he  was  accosted  in  the
same  manner  by  Jubelo,  but  with  more  violence.  Hiram  told
him  that  he  could  not  give  the  word  then,  because  Solomon,  king
of  Israel,  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  and  himself,  had  entered  into  a
solemn  league,  that  the  word  never  should  be  given,  unless  they
three  were  present;  but  if  he  would  have  patience,  till  the  grand
lodge  assembled  at  Jerusalem,  if  he  was  then  found  worthy  he
should  then  receive  it,  otherwise  he  could  not;  Jubcio  replied  in
a  very  peremptory  manner:  4If  you  do  not  give  me  the  Master's
word,  I'll  take  your  life;'  and  on  Hiram's  refusing  to  giro  it,  /«-
belo  gave  him  a  severe  blow  with  the  square  across  the  left  breast;
on  which  he  fled  to  the  east  gate  where  he  was  accosted  by  J«6e-
lum,  in  the  same  manner,  but  with  still  more  violence*  Here  Hi-
ram reasoned  as  before ;  Jubelum  told  him  that  he  had  heard  his
cavelling  with  Jubcla  and  Jubelo  long  enough,  and  that  the  Mas-
ter's word  had  been  promised  to  him  from  time  to  time  for  a  long
time;  that  he  was  still  put  off,  and  that  the  temple  was  almost  fin-
ished, and  he  was  determined  to  have  the  word  or  take  his  life;
'I  want  it  (so  that  I  may  be  able  to  get  wages  as  a  Master  Ma-
son, in  any  country  to  which  I  may  go  for  employ,  after  the  tem-
ple is  finished,  and  that  I  may  be  able  to  support  my  wife  and
children.'  Hiram  persisting  in  his  refusal;  he  gave  Hiram  a  vio-
lent blow  with  the  gavel,  on  the  forehead,  winch  felled  him  to  the
floor  and  killed  him — they  took  the  body  and  carried  it  out  of  the
west  gate,  and  buried  it  in  the  rubbish,  till  low  twelve  at  night,
(which  is  twelve  o'clock,)  when  they  three  met  agreeable  tp  ap-
pointment, and  carried  the  body  a  westerly  course,  and  buried  it
at  the  brow  of  a  hill,  in  a  grave,  dug  due  east  and  west  six  feet
perpendicular,  and  made  their  escape.     King  Solomon  coming

igitized*jj3©Og


72  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

up  to  the  temple  at  low  six  in  the  morning,  (as  was  his  usual
custom,)  found  the  crafts  all  in  confusion;  and  on  inquiring  the
cause,  was  informed  that  their  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff,  was
missing,  and  there  was  no  plans  and  designs  laid  down  on  the
tressleboard,  for  the  crafts  to  pursue  their  labor.  Solomon  or-
dered search  to  be  made  in  and  about  the  temple  for  him;  no  dis-
covery being  made,  he  then  ordered  the.  secretary  to  call  the  roll
of  workmen  to  see  if  any  were  missing;  it  appearing  that  there
were  three,  viz:  Jubela,  Jubtlo,  and  Jubelum:  Solomon  observed,
'This  brings  to  my  mind  a  circumstance  that  took  place  this  morn-
ing. Twelve  Fellow-Crafts  came  to  me  dressed  in  white  gloves
and  aprons,  in  token  of  their  innocence,  and  confessed  that  they
twelve  with  three  others,  had  conspired  to  extort  the  Master  Ma-
son's word  from  their  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff,  and  in  case  of
his  refusal,  to  take  his  life;  they  twelve  had  recanted,  but  feared
the  other  three  had  been  base  enough  to  carry  their  atrocious  de-
signs into  execution.'  Solomon  immediately  ordered  twelve
Fellow-Crafts  to  be  selected  from  the  bands  of  the  workmen,
clothed  in  white  gloves  and  aprons  in  token  of  their  innocence,
and  sent  three  east,  three  west,  three  north,  and  three  south,  hi
search  of  the  ruffians,  and  if  found,  to  bring  them  up  before  him.
The  three  that  travelled  a  westerly  course,  coming  near  the  coast
of  Joppa,  fell  in  with  a  way-taring  man  who  informed  them  that
he  had  seen  three  men  pass  that  way  that  morning,  who,  from
their  appearance  and  dress,  were  workmen  from  the  temple,  in-
quiring for  a  passage  to  Ethiopia,  but  were  unable  to  obtain  ono
in  consequence  of  an  embargo  which  had  recently  been  laid  on  all
the  shipping,  and  had  turned  back  into  the  country.  After  mak-
ing further  and  more  diligent  search,  and  making  no  further  dis-
covery, they  returned  to  the  temple  and  reported  to  Solomon  the
result  of  their  pursuit  and  inquiries.  On  which  Solomon  directed
them  to  go  again  and  search  until  they  found  their  Grand  Master,
Hiram  Abiff,  if  possible,  and  if  he  was  not  found,  the  twelve  who
had  confessed,  should  be  considered  as  the  murderers,'  and  suffer
accordingly.

They  returned  again  in  pursuit  of  the  ruffians,  and  one  of  the
three  that  traveBed  a  westerly  course,  being  more  weary  than  the
the  rest,  sat  down  at  the  brow  of  a  hill  to  rest  and  refresh  himself;
and  in  attempting  to  rise,  caught  hold  of  a  sprig  of  cassia,  which
easily  gave,  and  excited  his  curiosity,  and  made  him  suspicious  of
a  deception;  on  which  he  hailed  his  companions,  who  immediate-
ly assembled,  and  on  examination,  found  that  the  earth  had  been
recently  moved;  and  on  moving  the  rubbish,  discovered  the  ap-
pearance of  the  grave;  and  while  they  were  confabulating  about


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY*  73

what  measures  to  take,  they  heard  voices  issuing  from  a  cavern
in  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  on  which,  they  immediately  repaired  te
the  place,  where  they  heard  the  voice  ofJubela  exclaim,  <0!  that
my  throat  had  been  cut  across,  my  tongue  torn  out,  and  my  body
buried  in  the  rough  sands  of  the  sea,  at  low  water  mark,  where
the  tide  ebbs  and  flows  twice  in  twenty-four  hours,  ere  I  had  been
accessary  to  the  death  of  so  good  a  man  as  our  Grand  Master,
Hiram  Abiff: '— -on  which,  they  distinctly  heard  die  voice  of  Jube-
lo  exclaim,    '0!  that  my  left  breast  had  been  torn  open,  and  my
heart  and  vitals  taken  from  thence  and  thrown  over  my  left  shoul-
der -,  carried  into  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  there  to  become  a
prey  to  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  and  vultures  of  the  air,  ere  I
had  conspired  to  take  the  life  of  so  good  a  man  as  our  Grand  Mas-
ter, Hiram  Abiff: ' — when  they  more  distinctly  heard  the  voice  of
Jubelum  exclaim,    'O!  that  my  body  had  been  severed  in  two  in
the  midst,  and  divided  to  the  north  and  the  south,  my  bowels
burnt  to  ashes  in  the  centre,  and  the  ashes  scattered  by  the  four
winds  of  heaven,  that  there  might  not  remain  the  least  trace  of  re-
membrance among  men,  or  Masons,  of  so  vile  and  perjured  a
wretch  as  I  am,  who  wilfully  took  the  life  of  so  good  a  man  as  our
Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff.     Ah!  Jubda  and  Jubeloy  it  was  I
that  struck  him  harder  than  you  J^oth !  it  was  I  that  gave  him  the
fatal  blow !  it  was  I  that  killed  him  outright !'— on  which,  they
rushed  forward,  seized,  bound,  and  carried  mem  before  king  Solo-
mon, who,  after  hearing  the  testimony  of  the  three  Fellow  Crafts,
and  the  three  ruffians  having  plead  guilty,  ordered  them  to  be  tak-
en out  at  the  west  gate  of  the  temple,  and  executed  agreeably  to
the  several  imprecations  of  their  own  mouths.     King  Solomon
then  ordered  fifteen  Fellow  Crafts  to  be  selected  from  the  bands
of  the  workmen,  clothed  with  white  gloves  and  aprons,  in  token
of  their  innocence,  and  sent  three  east,  tlpee  west,  three  north,
three  south,  and  three  in  and  about  the  temple,  in  search  of  the .
body  of  our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff;  and  the  three  that  trav-
elled a  westerly  course  found  it  under  a  sprig  of  cassia,  where  a
worthy  brother  sat  down  to  rest  and  refresh  himself;  and  on  re- :
moving  the  earth  till  they  came  to  die  coffin,  they  involuntarily
found  their  hands  raised,  as  herein  before  described,  to  guard
their  nostrils  against  the  offensive  effluvia  that  rose  from  the
grave.    It  is  also  said,  that  die  body  had  lain  there  fourteen  days;  .-
some  say,  fifteen.

The  body  was  raised  in  the  manner  herein  before  described,
curried  up  to  the  temple,  and  buried  as  explained  in  the  olostiy^
clauses  of  the  lecture.    Not  one  third  part  of  the  preceding  bis-

G

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


74  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

toiy  of  this  degree  in  ever  given  to  a  candidate.  A  few  general,
desultory,  unconnected  remarks  are  made  to  him,  and  he  is  gen-
erally referred  to  the  manner  of  raising,  and  to  the  lecture,  for  in-
formation as  to  the  particulars.  Here  follows  a  charge  which
ought  to  be,  and  sometimes  is,  delivered  to  the  candidate  after
hearing  the  history  of  the  degree.

Jin  address  to  be  delivered  to  the  candidate  after  the  history  has
been  given.

'Brother,  your  zeal  for  the  institution  of  Masonry,  the  progress
you  have  made  in  the  mystery,  and  your  conformity  to  our  regu-
lations, have  pointed  you  out  as  a  proper  object  of  our  favor  and
esteem.

'You  are  bound,  by  duty,  honor,  and  gratitude,  to  be  faithful  to
your  trust;  to  support  the  dignity  of  your  character  on  every  oc-
casion; and  to  enforce,  by  precept  and  example,  obedience  to  the
tenets  of  the  order.

'In  the  character  of  a  Master  Mason,  you  are  authorized  to
correct  the  errors  and  irregularities  of  your  uninformed  brethren,
and  to  guard  them  against  a  breach  of  fidelity.

'To  preserve  the  reputation  of  the  fraternity  unsullied,  must  be
your  constant  care;  and,  for  this  purpose,  it  is  your  province  to
recommend  to  your  inferiors,  obedience  and  submission;  to  your
equals,  courtesy  and  affability;  to  your  superiors,  kindness  and
condescension.  Universal  benevolence  you  are  always  to  incul-
cate; and,  by  the  regularity  of  your  own  behaviour,  afford  the
best  example  for  the  conduct  of  others  less  informed.  The  an-
cient landmarks  of  the  order,  entrusted  to  your  care,  you  are
carefully  to  preserve;  and  never  suffer  them  to  be  infringed,  or
countenance  a  deviation  from  the  established  usages  and  customs
of  the  fraternity.

".  'Your  virtue,  honor,  and  reputation  are  concerned  m  support-
ing, with  dignity,  the  character  you  now  bear.  Let  no  motive,
therefore,  make  you  swerve  from  your  duty,  violate  your  vow,  or
betray  your  trust;  but  be  true  and  faithful,  and  imitate  the  exam-
ple of  that  celebrated  artist  whom  you  mis  evening  represent;  thus
you  will -render  yourself  deserving  the  honor  which  we  have  con-
ferred, and  merit  the  confidence  mat  we  have  reposed.'

Here  Mows  the  lecture  on  this  degree,  which  is  divided  into
three  sections.


^


d  by  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  75

SECTION  FIRST.

Q.  Are  you  a  Master  Mason?
A.  I  am; — try  me,  prove  me;  disprove  me  if  you  can.
Q.  Where  were  you  prepared  to  be  made  a  Master  Mason?
A.  In  a  room  adjacent  to  the  body  of  a  just  and  lawfully  consti-
tuted lodge  of  such,  duly  assembled  in  a  room,  representing  the
>  sanctum  sanctorum,  or  holy  of  holies,  of  king  Solomon's  temple.

Q.  How  were  you  prepared?

A.  By  being  divested  of  all  metals;  neither  naked  nor  clothed;
barefooted  nor  shod;  with  a  cable-tow  three  times  about  my  na-
ked body;  in  which  posture  I  was  conducted  to  the  door  of  the
lodge,  where  I  gave  three  distinct  knocks.

Q.  What  did  those  three  distinct  knocks  allude  to?

A.  To  the  third  degree  of  Masonry;  it  being  that  on  which  I
was  about  to  enter.

Q.  What  was  said  to  you  from  within?

A.  Who  comes  there,  who  comes  there,  who  comes  there.

Q.  Your  answer?      *

A.  A  worthy  brother,  who  has  been  regularly  initiated  as  an
Entered  Apprentice  Mason,  passed  to  the  degree  of  Fellow  Craft,
and  now  wishes  for  further  light  in  Masonry,  by  being  raised  to
the  sublime  degree  of  a  Master  Mason.

Q.  What  further  was  said  to  you  from  within?

A.  I  was  asked  if  it  was  of  my  own  free  will  and  accord  I
made  this  request;  if  I  was  duly  and  truly  prepared;  worthy  and
well  qualified;  and  had  made  suitable  proficiency  in  the  preced-
ing degrees:  all  of  which  being  answered  in  the  affirmative,  I  was
asked,  by  what  further  rights  I  expected  to  obtain  that  benefit.

Q.  Your  answer?

A.  By  the  benefit  of  a  pass- word.

Q.  What  was  that  pass-word?     A.  Tubal  Cain.

Q.  What  next  was  said  to  you?

A.  I  was  bid  to  wait  till  the  Worshipful  Master  in  the  east  was
made  acquainted  with  my  request,  and  his  answer  returned.

Q.  After  his  answer  was  returned,  what  followed?

A.  I  was  caused  to  enter  the  lodge  on  the  two  extreme  points
of  the  compass,  pressing  my  naked  right  and  left  breasts,  in  the
name  of  the  Lord.

Q.  How  were  you  then  disposed  of?

A.  I  was  conducted  three  times  regularly  round  the  lodge,  and
halted  at  the  Junior  Warden  in  the  south,  where  the  same  ques-
tions were  asked  and  answers  returned,  as  at  the  door.

Q.  How  did  the  Junior  Warden  dispose  of  you?

A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  to  the  Senior  Warden  in

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


76  LIGBT   ON   SEASON RY.

the  west,  where  the  same  questions  were  asked  and  answers  re-
turned, as  before.

Q.  How  did  the  Senior  Warden  dispose  of  you?

A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  to  the  Worshipful  Master
in  the.  east,  where  the  same  questions  were  asked  and  answers  re-
turned, as  before;  who  likewise  demanded  of  me  from  whence  I
came,  and  whither  I  was  travelling.

Q.  Your  answer?

A.  From  the  west,  and  travelling  to  the  east.

Q.  Why  do  you  leave  the  west,  and  travel  to  the  east?

A.  In  search  of  light.

Q.  How  did  the  Worshipful  Master  dispose  of  you?

A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  hack  to  the  west,  from
whence  I  came,  and  put  in  care  of  the  Senior  Warden,  who  taught
ine  how  to  approach  the  east,  by  advancing  upon  three  upright
regular  steps  to  fhe  third  step,  my  feet  forming  a  square,  and  my
body  erect  at  the  altar  before  the  Worshipful  Master.

Q.  What  did  the  Worshipful  Master  ^>  with  you?

A.  He  made  an  obligated  Master  Mason  of  me.

Q.  How?  A.  In  due  form.

Q.  What  was  that  due  form?

A.  Both  my  knees  bare  bent,  they  forming  a  square;  both
hands  on  the  Holy  Bible,  square,  and  compass;  in  which  posture
I  took  upon  me  the  solemn  oath,  or  obligation,  of  a  Master  Ma-
son.

Q.  After  your  obligation,  what  was  said  to  you?

A.  What  do  you  most  desire.

Q.  Your  answer?

A.  More  light.  [The  bandage  round  the  head,  is  now  drop-
ped over  the  eyes.]

Q.  Did  you  receive  light?  A.  I  did.

Q.  On  being  brought  to  light,  on  this  degree,  what  did  you  first
discover?

A.  Three  great  lights  in  Masonry,  by  the  assistance  of  three
less,  and  both  points  of  the  compass  elevated  above  the  square;
which  denoted  to  me  that  I  had  received,  or  was  about  to  receive,  .
all  the  light  that  could  be  conferred  on  me  in  a  Master's  lodge.,

Q.  What  did  you  next  discover?

A.  The  Worshipful  Master  approaching  me  from  the  east,  un-
der the  sign  and  due-guard  of  a  Master  Mason,  who  presented
me  with  his  right  hand  in  token  of  brotherly  love  and  confidence,
and  proceeded  to  give  me  the  pass-grip  and  word  of  a  Master
Mason,  [the  word  is  the  name  of  the  pass-grip;]  and  bid  me  rise
and  salute  the  Junior  and  Senior  Wardens,  and  convince  them


y  Google


LIGHT  Off   MASONRY.  77

that  I  was  an  obligated  Master  Mason,  and  had  die  sign,  pass*
grip,  and  word.     (Tubed  Cain.)

Q.  What  did  you  next  discover!

A.  The  Worshipful  Master  approaching  me,  a  second  time,
from  the  east,  who  presented  me  with  a  lamb-skin,  or  white  apron;
which,  he  said,  he  hoped  I  would  continue  to  wear  with  honor  to
myself,  and  satisfaction  and  advantage  to  the  brethren.

Q.  What  were  you  next  presented  with?

A.  The  working  tools  of  a  Master  Mason.

Q.  What  are  they]

A.  All  the  implements  of  Masonry  indiscriminately,  but  more
especially  the  trowel.

Q.  How  explained?

A.  The*  trowel  is  an  instrument  made  use  of  by  operative  Ma-
sons to  spread  the  cement  which  unites  a  building  into  one  com-
mon mass;  but  we,  as  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  are  taught  t#
make  use  of  it  for  the  more  noble  and  glorious  purpose  of  spread-
ing the  cement  of  brotherly  love  and  affection;  that  cement,
which  unites  us  into  one  sacred  band,,  or  society,  of  brothers,
among  whom  no  contention  should  ever  exist,  but  that  noble  emu-
lation of  who  can  best  work,  or  best  agree.

Q.  What  were  you  next  presented  with?

A.  Three  precious  jewels.

Q.  What  are  they?

A.  Humanity,  Friendship,  and  Brotherly  Love.

Q.  How  were  you  then  disposed  of?

A.  I  was  conducted  out  of  the  lodge,  and  invested  of  what  I
had  been  divested,  and  returned  again  in  due  season.

SECTION  SECOND.

Q.  Did  you  ever  return  to  $fe  sanctum  sanctorum,  or  holy  4>f
^lolies,  of  king  Solomon's  temple?

A.  I  did.

Q.  Was  there  any  thing  particular  took  place  on  your  return?

A.  There  was;  viz: — I  was  accosted  by  three  ruffians,  who  de-
manded of  me  the  Master  Mason's  word.

Q.  Did  you  ever  give  it  to  them?

A.  I  did  not,  but  bid  them  wait,  with  time  and  patience,  till  the
grand  lodge  assembled  at  Jerusalem;  and  then,  if  they  were  found
.  worthy,  they  should  receive  it;  otherwise,  they  could  not.

Q.  In  what  manner  was  you  accosted?

A.  In  attempting  to  retire  at  the  south  gate,  I  was  accosted
by  one  of  them,  who  demanded  of  me  the  Master  Mason's  word,
and,  on  my  refusing  to  comply  with  his  request,  be  gave  me  a  blow

G2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


78  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY,

with  the  twenty-four  inch  gauge,  across  my  breast;  on  which  I
fled  to  the  west  gate,  where  I  was  accosted  by  the  second  with
more  violence,  and,  on  my  refusing  to  comply  with  his  request,
he  gave  me  a  severe  blow,  with  the  square,  across  my  breast;  on
which  I  attempted  to  make  my  escape  at  the  east  gate,  where  I
was  accosted  by  the  third  with  still  more  violence,  and,  on  my
refusing  to  comply  with  his  request,  he  gave  me  a  violent  blowy
with  the  common  gavel,  on  the  forehead,  and  brought  me  to  the
floor.

Q.  Whom  did  you  represent  at  that  time?
A.  Our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  AbifF,  who  was  slain  at  the
building  of  king  Solomon's  temple.
Q.  Was  his  death  premeditated?

A.  It  was;— -by  fifteen  Fellow  Crafts,  who  conspire^  to  extort
from  him  the  Master  Mason's  word;  twelve  of  whom  recanted;,
but  the  other  three  were  base  enough  to  carry  their  atrocious  de-
signs into  execution.

Q.  What  did  they  do  with  the  body?

A.  They  carried  it  out  at  the  west  gate  of  the  temple,  and  bu-
ried it  till  low  twelve  at  night,  when  they  tbT.ee  met  agreeably  to
appointment,  and  carried  it  a  westerly  course  from  the  temple,
and  buried  it  under  the  brow  of  a  hill,  in  a  grave  six  feet  due  east
and  west,  six  feet  perpendicular,  and  made  their  escape.
Q.  What  time  was  he  slain?

A.  \t  high  twelve  at  noon,  when  the  crafts  were  from  labor  t#
refreshment.

Q.  How  came  he  to  be  alone  at  that  time?
A.  Because  it  was  the  usual  custom  of  our  Grand  Master,
Hiram  AbifF,  every  day,  at  high  twelve,  when  the  crafts  were
tfrom  labor  to  refreshment,  to  enter  into  the  sanctum  sanctorum,
or  holy  of  holies,  and  offer  up  his  adorations  to  the  ever  living
God,  and  draw  out  his  plans  and  designs  on  his  tressle-board  for
the  crafts  to  pursue  their  labor.
Q.  At  what  time  was  he  missing?  .

A.  Allow  six  in  the  morning,  when  king  Solomon  came  upt»
the  temple,  as  usual,  to  view  the  work,  and  found  the  crafts  all
in  confusion;  and,  on  inquiring  the  cause,  he  was  informed  that
their  Grand  Master,  Hiram  AbifF,  was  missing,  and  no  plans  or
designs  were  laid  down  on  the  tressle-board  for  the  crafts  to  pur-
sue -their  labor.

Q.  What  observations  did  king  Solomon  make  at  that  time?
A.  He  observed  that  our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  AbifF,  had  al-
ways been  very  punctual  in  attending,  and  feared  that  he  was  in-


y  Google


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  ?9

•

disposed,  and  ordered  search  to  be  made  in  and  about  the  tem-
ple, to  see  if  he  could  be  found.

Q.  Search  being  made,  and  he  not  found,  what  further  remarks
did  king  Solomon  make?

A.  He  observed  he  feared  some  fatal  accident  had  befallen  our
Grand  Master,  Hiram  AbhT — that  morning  twelve  Fellow  Crafts,
clothed  in  white  gloves  and  aprons  in  token  of  their  innocence,
had  confessed  that  they  twelve,  with  three  others,  had  conspired
to  extort  the  Master  Mason's  word  from  their  Grand  Master,  Hi-
ram Abiff,  or  take  his  life;  that  they  twelve  had  recanted,  but  fear-
ed the  other  three  had  been  base  enough  to  carry  their  atrocious
designs  into  execution.

Q.  What  followed?

A.  King  Solomon  ordered  the  roll  of  workmen  to  be  called,  to
see  if  there  were  any  missing.

Q.  The  roll  being  called,  were  there  any  missing?

A.  There  were  three;  viz: — Jub'ela,  Jubelo,  and  Jubelum.

Q.  Were  the  ruffians  ever  found?

A.  They  were.

Q.  How?  A.  By  the  wisdom  of  king  Solomon,  who  ordered
twelve  Fellow  Crafts  to  be  selected  from  the  bands  of  the  work-
men, clothed  in  white  gloves  and  aprons,  in  token  of  their  inno-
cence, and  sent  three  east,  three  west,  three  north,  and  three
south,  in  search  of  the  ruffians,  and  if  found,  to  bring  them  for-
ward.

Q.  What  success?
.  A.  The  three  that  travelled  a  westerly  course  from  the  tem-
ple, coming  near  the  coast  of  Joppa,  were  informed,  by  a  way-
faring man,  that  three  men  had  been  seen  that  way  that  morning,
who,  from  their  appearance  and  dress,  were  workmen  from  the
temple,  inquiring  for  a  passage  to  k  thiopia;  but  were  unable  to
obtain  one,  in  consequence  of  an  embargo  which  had  recently
been  laid  on  all  the  shipping,  and  had  turned  back  into  the
country.

Q.  What  folio  wed?.

A.  King  Solomon  ordered  them  to  go  and  search  again,  and

search  till  they  were  found,  if  possible;  and  if  they  were  not  found,

that  the  twelve,  who  had  confessed,  should  be.  considered  as  the

reputed  murderers,  and  suffer  accordingly.  -  *

Q.  What  success?

A.  One  of  the  three  that  travelled  a  westerly  course  from  the
temple,  being  more  weary  than  the  rest,  sat  down  under  the  brow
of  a  hill,  to  rest  and  refresh  himself;  and,  in  attempting  to  rise,
caught  hold  of  a  sprig  of  cassia,  which  easily  gave  way,  and  ex

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


10  LIGHT  ON  MASONEY.

died  his  curiosity,  and  made  bim  suspicious  of  a  deception,  on
which  he  hailed  his  companions,  who  immediately  assembled; —
and,  on  examination,  found  that  the  earth  had  recently  been  mov-
ed, and,  on  moving  the  rubbish,  discovered  the  appearance  of  a
grave;  and  while  they  were  confabulating  about  what  measures
to  take,  they  heard  voices  issuing  from  a  cavern  in  the  clefts  "of
the  rocks,  on  which  they  immediately  repaired  to  the  place,  where
they  heard  the  voice  of  Jubela  exclaim,  '0 !  that  my  throat  had
been  cut  across,  my  tongue  torn  out,  and  my  body  buried  in  the
rough  sands  of  the  sea,  at  low  water-mark,  where  the  tide  ebbs
and  flows  twice  in  twenty-four  hours,  ere  I  had  been  accessary  to
the  death  of  so  good  a  man  as  our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  AbiffV
—on  which  they  distinctly  heard  the  voice  of  Jubelo  exclaim,  *0!
that  my  left  breast  had  been  torn  open,  and  my  heart  and  vitals
taken  from  thence,  and  thrown  over  my  left,  shoulder,  carried  to
the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  there  to  become  a  prey  to  the  wild
beasts  of  the  field,  and  vultures  of  the  air,  ere  T  had  conspired  to
take  the  life  of  so  good  a  man  as  our  Grand  Master,  Hiram
Abiff:' — when  they  more  distinctly  heard  the  voice  of  Jubekm
exclaim,  'O !  that  my  body  had  been  severjed  in  two  in  the  midst,
and  divided  to  the  north  and  the  south,  my  bowels  burnt  to  ashes
in  the  centre,  and  the  ashes  scattered  by  the  four  winds  of  heav-
en, that  there  might  not  remain  the  least  track  or  trace  of  remem-
brance among  men  or  Masons,  of  ao  vile  and  perjured  a  wretch
as  I  am,  who  wilfully  took  the  life  of  so  good  a  man  as  our  Grand
Master,  Hiram  Abiff.  Ah!  Jubela  and  Jubelo,  it  was  I  that  struck
him  harder  than  you  both!  it  was  I  that  gave  him  the  fatal  blow !
it  was  I  that  killed  him  outright !'— on  which  they  rushed  forward,
seized,  bound,  and  carried  them  up  before  king  Solomon.

Q.  What  did  king  Solomon  do  with  them?

A.  He  ordered  them  to  be  executed  agreeably  to  the  several
imprecations  of  their  own  mouths.

Q.  Was  the  body  of  our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff,  ever  found?

A.  It  was.

Q.  How?  A.  By  the  wisdom  of  king  Solomon,  who  ordered
fifteen  (in  some  lodges  they  say  twelve)  Fellow  Crafts  to  be  se-
lected from  the  bands  of  the  workmen,  and  sent  three  east,  three
west,  three  north,  three  sduth,  and  three  in  and  about  the  temple,
ill  search  of  the  body.

Q.  Where  was  it  found?

A.  Under  that  sprig  of  cassia  where  a  worthy  brother  sat  down
to  rest  and  refresh  .himself.

Q.  Was  there  any  thing  particular  took  place  on  the  discovery
of  the  body?

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC   ■


light  on  KAooirar.  •  ai

A.  There  was;  viz: — on  removing  the  earth  tiH  they  came  to
the  coffin,  they  involuntarily  found  their  hands  raised  in  this  posi-
tion, to  guard  their  nostrils  against  the  offensive  effluvia  that  rose,
from  the  grave.

Q.  How  long  had  the  body  lain  there?

A.  Fourteen  days.

Q.  What  did  they  do  with  the  body?

A.  Raised  it  in  a  masonic  form,  and  carried  it  up  to  the  ten>
pie  for  more  decent  interment.

Q.  Where  was  it  buried?

A.  Under  the  sanctum  sanctorum,  or  holy  of  holies,  of  king  So*
lomon's  temple,  over  which  they  erected  a  marble  monument  with
this  inscription  delineated  thereon: — A  virgin  weeping  over  a
broken  column,  with  a  book  open  before  her;  in  her  right  hand  a
sprig  of  cassia;  in  her  left,  an  urn: — Time  standing  behind  her,
-with  his  hands  infolded  in  the  ringlets  of  her  hair.

Q.  What  do  they  denote?

A.  The  weeping  virgin  denotes  the  unfinished  state  of  the  tem-
ple; the  broken  column,  that  one  of  the  principal  supporters  of
Masonry  had  fallen;  the  book  open  before  her,  that  his  memory
was  on  perpetual  recoty  the  sprig  of  cassia,  the  timely  discove-
ry of  his  grave;  the  urn  in  her  left  hand,  thajt  his  ashes  were  safe-
ly deposited  under  the  sanctum  sanctorum,  or  holy  of  holies,  of
king  Solomon's  temple;  and  Time,  standing  behind  her  with  his
hands  infolded  in  the  ringlets  of  her  hair,  that  time,  patience,  and
perseverance  will  accomplish  all  things.  -

SECTION  THIRD.

Q.     What  does  a  Master's  lodge  Represent?

A.  The  sanctum  sanctorum,  or  holy  of  holies,  of  king  Solo-
mon's temple.

Q.  How  long  was  the  temple  building?

A.  Seven  years;  during  which,  it  rained  not  in  the  day  time,
that  the  workmen  might  not  be  obstructed  in  their  labor.  4*

Q.  What  supported  the  temple?

A.  Fourteen  hundred  and  fifty-three  columns,  and  two  thou-
sand, nine  hundred  and  six  pilasters;  all  hewn  from  the  finest
Parian  marble.

Q.  What  further  supported  it?

A.  Three  grand  columns,  or  pillars.

Q.  What  were  they  called?

A.  Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty.  V

Q.  What  did  they  represent?  r

A.  The  pillar  of  wisdom  represented  Solomon,  king  of  Israel

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


$2  MOHT  ON  MASONRY.

whose  wisdom  contrived  the  mighty  fabric;  the  pillar  of  strength,
Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  who  strengthened  Solomon  in  his  glorious
undertaking;  the  pillar  of  beauty,  Hiram  Abiff,  the  widow's  son,
whose  cunning  craft  and  curious  workmanship  beautified  and
adorned  the  temple.

Q.  How  many  were  there  employed  in  the  building  of  lung
Solomon's  temple?

A.  Three  Grand  Masters;  three  thousand,  three  hundred  Mas*
ters,  or  overseers  of  the  work;  eighty  thousand  Fellow  Crafts;
and  seventy  thousand  Entered  Apprentices:  all  those  were  class-
ed and  arranged  iri  such  a  manner,  1>y  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,
that  neither  envy,  discord,  nor  confusion  were  suffered  to  inter-
rupt that  universal  peace  and  tranquillity  that  pervaded  the  work
at  that  important  period.

Q.  How  many  constitutes  an  Entered  Apprentice's  lodg$?t

A.  Seven;  one  Master  and  six  Entered  Apprentices.

Q.  Where  did  they  usually  meet?

A.  On  the  ground  floor  of  king  Solomon's  temple.

Q.  How  many  constitutes  a  Fellow  Craft's  lodge?

A.  Five;  two  Masters  and  three  Fellow  Crafts.

Q.  Where  did  they  usually  meet?

A.  In  the  middle  chamber  of  king  Solomon's  temple.

<J.  How  many  constitutes  a  Master's  lodge?

A.  Three  Master  Masons.

Q.  Where  did  they  usually  meet?

A.  In  the  sanctum  sanctorum,  or  holy  of  holies,  of  king  Solo-
mon's temple.

Q.  Have  you  any  emblems  on  this  degree?

A.  We  have  several,  which  are  divided  into  two  classes.

Q.  What  are  the  first  class?

A.  The  pot  of  incense;  the  bee-hive;  the  book  of  constitutions,
guarded  by  the  Tyler's  sword;  the  sword,  pointing  to  a  naked
heart;  the  all-seeing  eye;  the  anchor  and  ark;  the  forty-seventh
problem  of  Euclid;  the  hour-glass;  the  scythe;  and  the  three
steps  usually  delineated  on  the  Master's  carpet,  which  are  thus
explained: — The  pot  of  incense  is  an  emblem  of  a  pure  heart,
which  is  always  an  acceptable  sacrifice  to  the  Deity;  and  as  this
glows  with  fervent  heat,  so  should  our  hearts  continually  glow
with  gratitude  to  the  great  and  beneficent  Author  of  our  existence,
for  the  manifold  blessings  and  comforts  we  enjoy.  The  bee-hive
is  an  emblem  of  industry,  and  recommends  file  practice  of  that
virtue  to  all  created  beings,  from  the  tyghest  seraph  in  heaven  to
the  lowest  reptile  of  the  dust  It  teaches  us,  that,  as  we.  came
into  the  world  rational  and  intelligent  beings,  so  we  should  ever

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  OK  KASONRT.  S3

be  industrious  ones;  never  sitting  down  contented,  while  our  fel-
low creatures  around  us  are  in  want,  when  it  is  in  our  power  to
relieve  them,  without  inconvenience  to  ourselves.  When  we  take
a  survey  of  nature,  we  behold  man,  in  his  infancy,  more  helpless
and  indigent  than  the  brute  creation;  he  lies  languishing  for  day?,
weeks,  months,  and  years,  totally  incapable  of  providing  suste-
nance for  himself;  of  guarding  against  the  attacks  of  the  field,  or
sheltering  himself  from  the  inclemencies  of  the  weather.  It  might
have  pleased  the  great  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  to  have  made
man  independent  of  all  other  beings;  but,  as  dependence  is  one  of
the  strongest  bonds  of  society,  mankind  were  made  dependent  on
each  other  for  protection  and  security,  as  they  thereby  enjoy  bet-
ter opportunities  of  fulfilling  the  duties  of  reciprocal  love  and
friendship.  Thus  was  man  formed  for  social  and  active  life,  the
noblest  part  of  the  work  oft  God;  and  he,,  who  will  so  demean
himself  as  not  to  be  endeavoring  to  add  to  the  common  stock  of
knowledge  and  understanding,  may  be  deemed  a  drone  in  the
hive  of  nature,  a  useless  member  of  society,  and  unworthy  of  our
protection  as  Masons.  The  book  of  constitutions,  guarded  by
the  Tyler's  sword,  reminds  us  that  we  should  be  ever  watchful  and
guarded,  in  our  thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  particularly  when
before  the  enemies  of  Masonry;  ever  bearing  in  remembrance
those  truly  masonic  virtues,  silence  and  circumspection.  The
sword,  pointing  to  a  naked  heart,  demonstrates  that  justice  will
sooner  or  later  overtake  us;  and,  although  our  thoughts,  words,
and  actions  may  be  hidden  from  the  eyes  of  men;  yet,  that  all*
seeing  eye,  whom  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  obey,  and  under  whose
watchful  care  even  comets  perform  their  stupendous  revolutions,
pervades  the  inmost  recesses  of  the  human  heart,  and  will  reward
us  according  to  our  merits.  The  anchor  and  ark,  are  emblems
©f  a  well  grounded  hope  and  well  spent  life.  They  are  emblem-
atical of  that  divine  ark  which  safely  wafts  us  over  this  tempestu-
ous sea  of  troubles,  and  that  anchor  which  shall  safely  moor  us  in
a  peaceful  harbor,  where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and
the  weary  shall  find  rest.  T\u&  forty-seventh  problem  of  l&uclid:
— this  was  an  invention  of  our  ancient  friend  and  brother,  the
great  Pythagoras,  who,  in  his  travels  through  Asia,  Africa,  and
Europe,  was  initiated  into  several  orders  of  priesthood,  and  rais-
ed to  the  sublime  degree  of  a  Master  Mason.  ,
This  wise  philosopher  enriched  his  mind  abundantly  in  a  gene-  ,
ral  knowledge  of  things,  and  more  especially  in  geometry,  or  Ma*
sonry;  on  this  subject  he  drew  out  many  problems  and  theorems:
and,  among  the  most  distinguished,  he  erected  this,  which,  in  the
joy  of  his  heart,  he  called  Eureca,  in  the  Grecian  language  sign?

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


&4  LIGHT   05  MASONRY.

fying,  1  have  found  it;  and  upon  the  discovery  of  which  he  is  said
to  have  sacrificed  a  hecatomb.  It  teaches  Masons  to  be  general
lovers  of  the  arts  and  sciences.  The  hour-glass  is  an  emblem  of
human  life.  Behold! !  how  swiftly  the  sands  run,  and  how  rapidly
our  lives  are  drawing  to  a  close.  We  cannot  without  astonish-
ment behold  the  little  particles  which  are  contained  in  this  ma-
chine;  how  they  pass  away  almost  imperceptibly,  and  yet  to  our
surprise,  in  the  short  space  of  an  hour  they  are  all  exhausted.

Thus  wastes  man!  to  day,  he  puts  forth  the  tender  leaves  of
hope;  to-morrow,  blossoms,  and  bears  his  blushing  honors  thick
upon  him;  the  next  day  comes  a  frost,  which  nips  the  shoot,  and
when  he  thinks  his  greatness  is  still  ripening,  he  falls,  like  autumn
leaves,  to  enrich  our  mother  earth.  The  scythe  is  an  emblem  of
time,  which  cuts  the  brittle  thread  of  life,  and  launches  us  into
eternity.  Behold!  what  havoc  the  scythe  of  time  makes  among
the  human  race:  if,  by  chance,  we  should  escape  the  numerous
evils  incident  to  childhood  and  youth,  and,  with  health  and  vigor,
arrive  to  the  years  of  manhood,  yet  withal  we  must  soon  be  cut
down  by  the  all  devouring  scythe  of  time,  and  be  gathered  into  the
land  where  our  fathers  had  gone  before  us.  The  three  steps,  usu-
ally delineated  upon  the  Master's  carpet,  are  emblematical  of  the
three  principal  stages  of  human  life;  viz: — youth,  manhood,  and
age.  In  youth,  as  Entered  Apprentices,  we  ought  industriously
to  occupy  our  minds  in  the  attainment  of  useful  knowledge;  in
manhood,  as  Fellow  Crafts,  we  should  apply  our  knowledge  to  the
discharge  of  our  respective  duties  to  God,  our  neighbors,  and  our-
selves; so  that,  in  age,  as  Master  Masons,  we  may  enjoy  the  hap-
py reflections  consequent  on  a  well  spent  life,  and  die  in  the  hope
*f  a  glorious  immortality.

Q.  What  are  the  second  class  of  emblems?
'  A.  The  spade,  coffin,  death-head,  marrow  bones,  and  sprig  of
cassia,  which  are  thus  explained: — The ^spade  opens  the  vault  to
receive  our  bodies,  where  our  active  limbs  will  soon  moulder  to
dust.  The  coffin,  death-head,  and  marrow  bones,  are  emblemati-
cal of  the  death  and  burial  of  our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  A  biff,  and
are  worthy  our  serious  attention.  The  sprig  of  cassia  is  emble-
matical of  that  immortal  part  of  man  which  never  dies;  and  when,
the  cold  winter  of  death  shall  have  passed,  and  the  bright  sum-
mer's morn  of  the  resurrection  appears,  the  Son  of  Righteousness
shall  descend,  and  send  forth  his  angels  to  collect  our  ransomed
dust;  then,  if  we  are  found  worthy,  by  his  pass- word,  we  shall  en*
ter  into  the  celestial  lodge  above,  wWe  the  Supreme  Architect
of  the  universe  presides,  where  we  shall  see  the  King  in  the  .beau-
ty of  holiness,  and  with  him,  enter  into  an  endless  eternity.   *.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON    MASONRY.  85

Here  ends  the  three  first  degrees  of  Masonry,  which  constitute
a  Master  Mason's  lodge.  A  Master  Mason's  lodge  and  a  chap-
ter of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  are  two  distinct  hodies,  wholly  inde-
pendent of  each  other.  The  members  of  a  chapter  are  privileged
to  visit  all  Master  Masons'  lodges  when  they  please;  and  may  be,
and  often  are,  members  of  both  at  the  same  time:  and  all  th<?
members  of  a  Master  Mason's  lodge  who  are  Royal  Arch  Masons,
though  not  members  of  any  chapter,  may  visit  any  chapter.  I  wish
the  reader  to  understand  that  neither  all  Koyal  Arch  Masons  nor
Master  Masons  are  members  of  either  lodge  or  chapter;  there  an*
tens  of  thousands  who  are  not  members,  and  scarcely  ever  attend.
although  privileged  to  do  so.

A  very  small  proportion  of  Masons,  comparatively  speaking,
ever  advance  any  further  than  the  third  degree,  and  consequently
never  get  the  great  word  which  was  lost -by  Hiram's  untimely
death.     Solomon,  king  of  Israel,  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  and  Hi-
ram Abiff,  the  widow's  son,  having  sworn  that  they,  nor  neither  qf
them,  wouli  ever  give  the  word,  except  they  three  were  present;
(arid  it  is  generally  believed  that  there  was  not  another  person  in
the  world,  at.  that  time,  that  had  it;)  consequently  the  word  wa^
lost,  and  supposed  to  be  for  ever;  but  the  sequel  will  show  it  wa>
found  after  a  lapse  of  four  hundred  and  seventy  years;  not  with-. -
standing,  the  word  Mah-hah-bone,  which  was  substituted  by  Sol-
omon, still  continues  to  be  used  by  Master  Masons,  and  no  doubJ
will,  as  long  as  Masonry  attracts  the  attention  of  men;  and:tl:<\
word  which  was  lost,  is  used  in  the  Royal  Arch  degree.     What
was  the  word  of  the  Royal  A.rch  degree,  before  they  found  th<
Master's  word,  which  was  lost  at  the  death  of  Hiram  Abiff,  aim
'  was  not  found  for  four  hundred  and  seventy  years?     Were  then
any  Royal  Arch  Masons  before  the  Master's  word  was  found?    1 '
wish  some  masonic  gentleman  would  solve  these  two  question^

The  ceremonies,  history,  and  the  lecture,  in  the  preceding  de-
gree, are  so  similar,  that,  perhaps,  some  one  of  the  three  migh
have  been  dispensed  with,  and  the  subject  well  understood  In  .
most  readers,  notwithstanding  there  is  a  small  difference,  between
the  work  and  history,  and  between  the  history  and  the  lecture*

I  shall  now  proceed  with  the  Mark  Master's  degree,  which
the  first  degree  in  the  chapter.  The  Mark  Master's  degree,  &£
Past  Master's,  and  the  Most  Excellent  Master's,  are  lodges  of
Mark  Master  Masons,  Past  Master,  and  Most  Excellent  Master;
yet,  although  called  lodges,  they  are  called  component  parts  of
the  chapter.  Ask  a  Mark  Master  Mason  if  he  belongs  to  the
chapter;  he^will  tell  you  he  does,  but  that  he  has  only  been  mark-
ed. .  It  is  not  an  uncommon  thing,  by  any  means,  for  a  chapter '

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


86  LIGHT    ON   MASONRY.

confer  all  four  of  the  degrees  in  one  night,  viz:  the  Mark  Mas—
ter,  Past  Master,  Most  Excellent  Master,  and  Royal  Arch  de-
grees.


\


TEST-OATH    AND   WORD.

The  following  "Test-Oath  and  Word?  were  invented' and  adop-
ted try  the  "Grand  Lodge"  of  the  state  of  New-Yorkr  at  their
session*in  June,  1827,  for  the  purpose  of  guarding  against  Book
Masons.  They  are  given  in  a  Master's  lodge. — They  were  ob-
tained from  a  gentleman  in  high  standing  in  society,  and  among
Masons,  but  a  friend  to  Anti-Masonry.  He  was  a  member  of  the
'*Grand  Lodge,"  aad  present  when  they  were  adopted.

A  person,  wishing  to  be  admitted  into  the  lodge,  presents  him-
self at  the  door;  the  Tyler,  (or  some  brother  from  within,)  de-
mands, or  asks,  'Do  you  wish  to  visit  this  lodge?'  The  candidate
for  admission,  says,  'If  thought  worthy.'  Tyler.  'By  what  are
you  recommended?'  Jins.  'By  fidelity.'  Tyler  says,  'Prove
that;7  at  the  same  time  advances  and  throws  out  bis  hand,  or  arm,
to  an  angle  of  about  forty-five  degrees  obliquely  forward,  the  hand
open,  and  thumb  upward.  The  candidate  then  advances,  and  pla-
ces the  back  of  his  left  hand  against  the  palm  of  the  Tyler's  right
hand — still  extended — puts  his  mouth  to  the  Tyler's  ear,  and
whispers,  LOS,  and  pronounces,  LOS.*

TEST-OATH.

'I,  A  B,  of  my  own  free  will  and  accord,  in  the  presence  of
Almighty  God,  solemnly  and  sincerely  promise  and  swear,  that  I
will  not  communicate,  the  secret  test- word,  annexed  to  this  obliga-
tion, to  any  tyut  a  true  and  lawful  Master  Mason,  and  that  in  the
body  of  a  lawful  lodge  of  such,  in  actual  session,  or  at  the  door  of
a  lodge  for  the  purpose  of  gaining  admission;—- under  the  penalty
of  being  for  ever  disgraced  and  dishonored  as  a  man,  and  despis-
ed, degraded,  and  expelled  as  a  Mason.1

*  This  word  is  an  inversion  of  SOL,  the  Sun,  and  is  very  applicable  as  a
masonic  test;  the  light  of  Masonry  being  fast  retrograding  towards  its  na-
tive darkness  \


■■     .  •    ♦.*'  r';'  -  >":  \*'

Digitized  V  V-iOO  V  l£  'V '"%'     *


(87)


A  HETVELATION

op

*      FUEE  MASONRY,

As  published  to  the  world  by  a  C  onveation  of  Seceding  Masons,. held  at  Le

,  Roy,  Genesee  county,  New- York,  on  the  4th  and  5th  of  JuVr,  1828:  con^

taming  a  true  and  genuine  deveFioprnent  of  the  mode  of  initiation,  and  also

of  the  several  lectures  of  the  following  degrees;  to  wit: — in  the  Chapter,

Mark  Master,  Past  Master,  Most  Excellent  Master,  and  Royal  Arch.

In  the  Encampment,  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross,  Knight  Templar,  Knight  of
Malta,  Knight  of  the  Christian  Mark,  and  Guards  of  the  Conclave,  and
Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre.

In  the  Ancient  Council  of  the  Trinrty,  denominated  the  Holy  and  Thrice  Il-
lustrious Order  of  the  Cress,  the  Illustrious,  Most  Illustrious,  and  Thri«;«
Illustrious  degrees. ,

FOURTH,  OR  MARK  MASTER'S  DEGREE.

'Ceremonies  used  in  opening  a  lod%e  of  Mark  Miiter  Masons.
— One  rap  calls  the  lodge  to  order;  one  calls  up  the  Junior  and
Senior  Deacons;  two  raps  call  up  the  subordinate  officers;  and
three,  all  the  members  of  the  lodge.  The  Right  Worshipful  Mas-
ter having  called  the  lodge  to  order,  and  all  being  seated,  the  Right
Worshipful  Master  says  to  the  Junior  Warden,  '  Brother  Junior,.
are  tlra  all  Mark  Master  Masons  in  the  south?'  Junior  Warden
answ|§,  'They  are,  Right  Worshipful.'  R.  W.  M.  M  thank  you,
brother.'  R.  W.  M.  'Brother  Senior,  are  they  all  Mark  Master
Masons  in  tty  west?  Senior  Warden,  'They  are,  Right  Wor-
shipful.' rf»'W*  M.  'They  are  in  the  east.'  At  the  same  time
gives  a  rap  with  the  mallet,  which  calls  up  both  Deacons.  R.  W>
M.  'Brother  Junior,  the  first  care  of  a  Mason f  '  To  see  the
lodge  tyled,  Right  Worshipful.'  R.  W.  M.  <  Ittend  to  that  pari
of  your  duty,  and  inform  the  Tyler  that  we  are  about  to  open  a
lodge  of  Mark  Master  Masons,  and  direct  him  to  tyle  according-
ly.' Junior  Deacon  steps  to  the  door  and  gives  four  raps,  which
are  answered  by  four  without  by  the  Tyler — the  Junior  Deacon
then  gives  one,  which  is  answered  by  the  Tyler  with  one — the
door  is  then  partly  opened,  and  the  Junior  Deacon  then  delivers
his  message,  and  resumes  his  station,  gives  the  due-guard  of  p
Mirk  Master  Ma6onvand  says,  'The  door  is  tyled,  Right  Wf


38  '   LlGttT   ON  MASONRT;

*

shipftuV  R.  W.  M.  'By  whom?*  Junior  Deacon,  'By  a  Mark
Master  Mason  without  the  door,  arrned  with  the jw-oper  implements
of  his  office.'  R.  W*  M.  'His  duty  there?'  *  D*  'To  keep  oft
all  cowans  and  eaves-droppers,  see  that  none  pass  or  repass  with-
out permission  from  the  R.  W.  M.'  R.  W.  M,  'Brother  Junior,
your  place  in  the  lodge?'  J.  D.  'At  the  right  hand  of  the  Senior
Warden  in  the  west.'  R.  W  M.  'Your  business  there,  br^her
Junior?'  J.  D.  'To  wait  on  the  R.  W.  M.  and  Wardens,  &t  as
their  proxy  in  the  active  duties  of  the  lodge,  and  take  care  of  the
door.'  R.  W.  M.  'The  Senior  Deacon's  place  in  the  lodge?'  S^
0.  'At  the  right  hand  of  the  Right  Worshipful  Master  in  the  east.'
R.  W.  M.  'I  thank  you,  brother.'  He  then  gives  two  raps  with
the  mallet,  and  the  subordinate  officers  rise.  R.  W*  M.  'Your
duty  there,  brother  Senior?'  S.  D.  'To  wait  on  the  R.  W.  M.
arid  Wardens,  act  as  their  proxy  in  the  active  duties  of  the  lodge,
attend  to  the  preparation  and  introduction  of  candidates,  and  wel-
come and  clothe  all  visiting  brethren.'  R.  W.  M.  'The  Secre-
tary's place  in  the  lodge,  Brother  Junior?'  J.  D.  'At  the  left  hand
of  the  Right  Worshipful  Master  in  the  east.'  R.  W.  M.  'I  thank
you,  brother.  Your  duty  there,  brother  Secretary?'  Secretary,,
'The  better  to  observe  the  R.  W.  Master's  will  and  pleasure;  re-
cord the  proceedings  of  the  lodge;  transmit  the  same  to  the  grand
lodge,  if  required;  receive  all  monies  and  money  bills  from  the
bands  of  the  brethren,  pay»them  over  to  the  Treasurer,  and  take
ins  receipt  for  the  same  '  R.  W.  M.  'J  he  Treasurer's  place  in
the  lodge?'  Sec.  '  \t  the  right  hand  of  the  R.  W.  M.'  R.  W.
M.  'I  thank  you,  brother.  Your  duty  there,  brother  Treasurer?'
Treasurer.  'Duly  to  observe  the  R.  W.  Master's  will  and  plea-
sure; receive  all  monies  and  money  bills  from  the  hands  of  the
Secretary;  give  a  receipt  for  the  same;  keep  a  just  and  trjA ac-
count of  the  same;  pay  them  out  by  the  order  of  the  R.  mM.
and  consent  of  the  brethren.'*     R.  W.  M.    'The  Junior  Over-


mo,  10,001


*  Supposing  that,  in  the  United  States,  there  are  500,(^pB!eied  Appren-
:ice,  400,000  Master,  and  200,000  Royal  Arch  Masoj^alSo,  10,000  Knights;
and  that  they  all  paid  the  usual  fees,  for  the  degr^S;  the  amount  would  be
ih  enormous  sum  of  11,250,000  dollars;  the  yearly  interest  of  which,  at  7
per  ct.  is  ?87,500  dollars;  which  sum,  (atyowing  100  dollars  to  each  individ-
»al,)  would  support  7,875  persons.         w  •

.  Now,  I  ask,  do  Masons,  by  their  charities,  support  this  number  of  poor  in
lhe  United  States?  Do  they  support  one  tenth  part  of  that  number?  Sup-
posing they  do;  is  it  necessary  to  give  10  or  50  dollars,  for  the  privilege  o£
contributing  1,  5,  or  50  dollars  masonicafly?  Must  the  privilege  of  being  a
charitable  man  be  bought  with  gold?  How  many  there  are  who  fcavfe  ren-
dered themselves  incompetent  to  bestow  charities,  by  their  payifc£ifc*?ator
attendance  on,  masonic  secrets  and  ceremonies!  If  all,  th©  mpftS  Jf&|or
J  he  degrees  of  Masonry,  was  applied  to  charitable  purpieees,^^;)?*^^

,  _     Digitized  by  VLjOO$L,C      [      ,

_^       .\'*..v'_.    Jm&^>L!        ,*!.;*&_. ...£■:.    .


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.  89

seer's  place  in  the  lodge,  brother  Treasurerr  Treas.  'At  tht.
right  hand  of  the  Junior  Warden  in  the  south,  Right  Worshipful.'
R.  W.  M.  'I  thank  you,  brother.  Your  business  there  brother
Junior  Overseer?'  J.  Overseer.  'To  inspect  all  materials  brought
up  for  the  building  of  the  temple;  approve  or  disapprove  of  the
same;  and,  if  approved,  pass  it  on  to  the  Senior  Overseer  for  fur-
ther inspection. '  R.  W.  M.  'The  -enior  Overseer's  place  in
the  lodge?  J.  Overseer.  'At  the  right  hand  of  the  Senior  W  ar-
den  in  the  west,  R.  Worshipful.'  R.  W.  M.  'I  thank  you,  bro-
ther. Your  business  there,  brother  enior  Overseer*'  Senior
Overseer.  'To  inspect  all  materials  brought  up  for  the  building  of
the  temple;  and,  if  approved,  pass  it  on  to  the  Master  .Overseer
at  the  east  gate  for  further  inspection.'  R.  VV .  M.  ''1  he  Master
Overseer's  place  in  the  lodge,  brother  »:  enior  Overseer?'  .  ;  enior
Overseer.  'At  the  right  hand  of  the  Right  Worshipful  Master  in
the  east.'  R.  W.  M.  4i  thank  you,  brother,  kour  business
there,  brother  Master  Overseer?  Master  Overseer.  'To  assist
in  the  inspection  of  all  materials  brought  up  for  the  building  of  the
temple;  and,  if  disapproved,  to  call  a  council  of  my  brother  Over?'
seers.'  R.  W.  M.  kihe  Junior  Warden's  place  in  the  lodge,,
brother  Master  Overseer?'  ai.  Overseer.  4In  the  south,  Jt.  W.'
R.  W.  M.  'I  thank  you,  brother.  *  i  our  business  there,  brother*
Junior?'  .  Warden,  'as  the  sun  in  the  south,  at  high  meridian,
is  the  beauty  and  glory  of  the  day;  so  stands  the  junior  V>  arden
in  the  south,  the  better  to  observe  the  time;  call  the  craft  %>)nb  la-
bor to  refreshment;  superintend  them  during  the  hoiu»  thereof;
see  that  none  convert  the  hours  of  refreshment  into  that  of  in7
temperance,  or  excels;  and  call  them  on  agaiii  in  due  season.
that  the  R.  JV.  M.  may  have  honor,  and  they  pleasure  and  pr&&\
thereby.'  R.  W.  M.  'The  Senior  Warden's  place  m  the  lutigcr
J.  W.  'In  the  west,  Right  Worshipful.'  ii.  W.  M.  '1  thank
you,  brother.  Yotir  duty  there,  brother  t  enior?-  ben.  \\  aiden.
'As  tfce  sun  sets  in  the  west  to  close  the  day;  so  stands  the  <l  en-  .
ior  Warden  in  the  west,  to  assist  the  uight  Worshipful  A* aster  in
opening  and  closing  the  lodge;  take  caie  of  the  jewels  and  im-

would  appear  differently;  but,  it  is  principally  devoted  to  the  erection,  of  iiia-
sonic  temples, — support  of  the  grand  lodges,  and  for  rtfreshment  for  t$e(
crafts;  and,  I  think  I  may  add,  for  their  support  in  'kidnapping  and  ttjuffaqp?
(If  I  had  not  been  informed,  from  what  I  believe  to  be  good  authority,  that,
the  grand  lodge  of  this  state  had.  recently,  since  the  abduction  of  Morgan^*
appropriated  5000  dollars  to  the  wantsof  toe  crafts,  and  had  put  that  sum
into  the  hands  tf a  'committee,'  to  be  disposed  of  by  them  as  their  judgment
should  dictate,  having  a  reference  to  the.l|jdnappers  and  murderers  of  Capt.
Morgan,  I  should  not  have  added  the  last  remark.)

*H2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


90  LIGHT   OK   MASONRY.

plemq|to;  see  that  nose  be  lost;  pay  the  craft  their  wages,  if  any
be  du^  and  see  that  none  go  away  dissatisfied.'     R.  W.  M.
'The  Master's  place  in  the  lodge]'     S.  W.  'In  fhe  east,  R.  Wor-
shipful,'    R.  W.  M.   <H*s  duty  there?     S.  W.   'As  the  sun  ris-
es in  the  east,  to  open  and  adorn  the  day;  so  presides  the  R.  W.
M.  in  the  east,  to  open  and  adorn  his  lodge;  set  his  craft  to  work,
and  govern  them  with  good  and  wholesome  laws,  or  cause  the
same  to  be  done.'     R.  W.  M.    'I  thank  j^u,  brother.'     Gives
three*  raps  with  the  mallet,  which  calls  up  all  the  brethren,  takes
off  his  hat,  and  says,  'In  like  manner,  so  do  I,  strictly  prohibiting
all  profane  language,  private  committees,  or  any  other  disorderly
conduct,  whereby  the  peace  and  harmony  of  this  lodge  may  be  in-
terrupted, while  engaged  in  its  lawful  pursuits;  under  no  less  pen-
alty Ulan  the  by-laws  enjoin,  or  a  majority  of  the  brethren  present
may  see  cause  to  inflict.     Brethren,  attend  to  giving  the  signs.'
The  R.  W.  M.  (all  the  brethren  imitating  him,)  extends  his  left
arm  from  his  body,  so  as  to  form  an  angle  of  about  forty-five  de-
grees, and  holds  his  right  hand  transversely  across  his  left,  the
palms  thereof  about  an  inch  apart.     This  is  called  the  first  sign
of  a  Mason — is  the  sign  of  distress  in  the  first  cregree,  and  alludes
to  the  position  a  candidate's  hands  are  placed,  when  he  takes  the
obligation  of  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason;  he  then  draws  his
right  hand  across  his  throat,  the  hand  open,  with  his  thumb  next
his  throat,  drops  it  down  by  his  side.     This  is  called  the  due-
guard  of  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason,  and  alludes  to  the  penal
(*art  of  the  obligation.     Next  he  places  the  palm  of  his  open  right
hand  upon  his  left  breast,  and,  at  the  same  time,  throws  up  his
.  left  hand,  and  so  extends  his  left  arm  as  te  form  a  right  angle:
Irom  the  shoulder  to  the  elbow  it  is  horizontal;  from  the  elbow
U  the  tip  of  the  ringer  it  is  perpendicular.     This  is  the  sign  and
dtie-guard  of  a  Fellow  Craft  Mason,  and  also  alludes  to  the  penal
part  of  the  obligations,  whicfc  is  administered  in  this  degree.    Af-
ter' this,  the  R.  W.  M.  draws  his  right  hand  across  his  bowels,
wife  his  hand  open,  and  the  thumb  next  his  body,  and  drops  it
down  by  his  side.     This  is  the  sign,  or  due-guard,  of  a  Master
Mas  >n,  and,  like  the  others,  allude  to  the  penalty  of  this  degree.
lie  then  throws  up  the  grand  hailing  sign  of  distress:  mis  is  giv-
en by  raising  both  hands  and  arms,  to  the  elbow,  perpendicularly,
one  on  each  side  of  the  head?  the  elbows  forming  a  square,  his
arms  then  drop  by  his  side;  he  then  clutches  the  third  and  little
fingers  of  his  righ\  hand,  with  his  thumb  extends,  at  the  same
lime,  his  middle  ana\  f<fte*|bfiers,  brings  up  his  hand,  in  stjcn  n
manner  as  to  have  the?  Sweoi  the  middle  finger  touch  tbg  WBputof
tfye  right  ear,  then  lets  it  drop,  and,  as  it  falls,  brings  the  onward

'  Digitized  by  VjC  IC  '  ^ ,  **


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  91

side  of  the  little  finger  of  the  left  hand,  across  the  wri^Lof  the
right,  then  lets  them  fall  by  his  sides.  This  is  the  sign,  or  due-
guard,  of  a  Mark  Master  Mason,  and  also  alludes  to  the  penal
part  of  the  obligation  in  this  degree.  Here  it  is  proper  to  remark,
that,  in  the  opening  of  any  lodge  of  Masons,  they  commence  giv-
ing the  signs  of  an  Entered  Apprentice,  and  go  through  all  the
signs  of  the  different  degrees,  in  regular  gradation,  until  they  ar-
rive to  the  one  which  they  are  opening,  and  commence  at  the  sign
of  the  degree  in  which  they  are  at  work,  and  descend  to  the  last
when  closing.  After  going  through  all  the  signs,  as  above  de-
scribed, the  R.  W.  M.jj^tiares  the  lodge  opened,  in  the  follow-
ing manner: — 'i  now'  declare  this  lodge  of  Mark  Master  Masons
duly  opened  for  the  despatch  of  business;'  the  Senior  Warden  de-
clares it  to  the  Junior  Warden,  and  he  to  the  brethren.  The  R.
W.  M.  tlten  repeats  a  charge:  'Wherefore,  brethren,  lay  aside  all
malice  and  guile,'  &c.  &c.  (Monitor,  page  76.)    .

The  lodge  being  opened  and  ready  for  business,  the  R.  W.  M.
directs  the  Secretary  to  read  the  minutes  of  the  last  meeting,  which
generally  brings  to  view  the  business  of  the  present  If  there  are
any  candidates  tc>be  brought  forward,  that  is  generally  the  first
business-  A  Master  Mason,  wishing  for  further  light  in  M  ason-
ry,  sends  a  petition  to  the  chapter;  nd  requests  to  be  advanced  to
the  honorary  degree  of  Mark  Master  Mason;  ii  there  is  no  seri-
ous objection  to  the  petition,  it  is  entered  on  the  minutes,  and  a
committee  of  several  appointed  to  inquire  into  his  character  and.
report  to  the  next  regular  communication;  at  that  time,  tf  the  com-,
mittee  report  in  his  favor,  and  no  serious  objection  is  made  against
him  otherwise,  a  morion  is  made  that  the  ballot  pass;  if  carried^
the  Deacons  pass  the  ballot  boxes:  these  boxes  are  the  same  as
in  the  preceding  degrees.  When  the  balls  are  received,  the  boi
is  presented  to  the  Right  Worshipful  Master,  Senior  >and  Junior,
Wardens.  R.  W.  M.  'Clear  in  the  west,  brother  feeQfari'  "S*
W.  'Clear,  R.  W.'  R.  W.  M.  'Clear  in  the  south,  brother  Jun^
iorf  J.  W.  'JLlear,  Right  Worshipful'  R.  W  M.  says,  'Clear
in  the  east'  This  being  the  case,  the  candidate  is  accepted;  out;
if  there  is  one  black  ball  in  that  ^end  of  the  box  which  has  tip
white  tube,  and  the  Senior  J^alflen  pronouncing  'not  clear/  ,afl
stop,  and  inquiry  is  made,  and  the  ballot  passes  again;  and,  jf
blacked  a  third  time,  the  candidate  is  rejected.  It  being  other-
wise, the  Senior  Deacon,  who  is  the  candidate's  conductor,  pars-
es out  of  the  lodge  into  the  adjoining  rpom,<#here  the  candidate
is  in  waitings  and  there  the  conductor 'ig  furnished  with  aVtball  ob-
long square,  six  inches  long — the^andidate  is  presented  with  a
large  white  marWe  key  stone,  weighing,  probably,  twenty  pounds,


92  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.

Bud  is  jgflered,  by  his  conductor,  to  take  it  by  the  little  end,  be-
tween his  first  and  second  fingers  and  thumb  of  his  right  hand. —
The  door  is  then  opened  without  ceremony,  and  they  pass  direct-
ly to  the  Junior  Overseer's  station  at  the  south  gate,  which  is  no-
thing more  than  the  Junior  Warden's  seat,  and  the  conductor  gives
four  raps,  with  his  block  of  timber,  on  a  pedestal  in  front  of  the
Junior  Overseer's  station.  J.  O.  'Who  comes  here?'  Con-
ductor. 'Two  brother  Fellow  Crafts,  with  materials  for  the  tem-
ple.' J.  0  'Have  you  a  specimen  of  your  labor?'  Conductor.
'I  have.'  J.  O.  'Present  it.'  The  conductor  then  presents  the
piece  of  timber  before  described;  the  JnnW  Overseer  receives  it,
and  applies  a  small,  trying  square  to  its  different  angles,  and -they
agreeing  with  "the  angles  of  the  square,  he  says,  This  is  good
work,  square  work,  such  work  as  we  are  authorized  to  received
Returns  the  block  of  timber,  and  turning  his  eye  upon  the  candi-
date, asks,  'Who  is  this  you  have  with  you?'  Conductor  'A  bro-
ther Fellow  Craft.'  J.  0.  'Have  you  a  specimen  of  your  labor?'
Can.  'I  have'  J.  O.  'Present  it.'  The  candidate  then  presents
the  key  stone;  the  Junior  Overseer  receives  it  and  applies  his
square  to  all  its  angles,  and  they  not  agreeing  with  the  angles  of
the  square,  he  says,  'What  have  you  here,  brother?  this  is  neither
an  oblong  nor  a  square,  neither  has  it  the  regular  mark  of  the  ©raft-
upon  it,  but  from  its  singular  form  and  beauty  1  am  unwilling  to
reject  it;  pass  on  to  the  Senior  Overseer  at  the  west  gate,  for  fur-
ther inspection.'  ihey  then  pass  on  to  the  *  enior  Overseer's
station  at  the  west  gate,  which  is  the  Senior  Warden's  seat,  and
gives  four  raps,  as  before,  on  the  pedestal  which  stands  in  front
of  the  Senior  Overseer.  8.0.  'Who  come  sphere?'  Con.  'Two
brother  Fellow  Crafts,  with  materials  for  the  temple.'  S.  0.
'Have  you  a  specimen  of  your  labor?'  Con  'I  have.'  S.  O.
'Present  it.'  The  conductor,  as  before,  presents  the  block  of
timber;  the  Senior  Overseer  applies  his  square  to  it,  and  finding
it  agrees,  with  the  angles  of  his  square,  says,  'This  is  good  work,
square  work,  such  work  as  we  are  authorized  to  receive:  who  is
this  you  have  with  you?'  Con.  'A  brother  Fellow  Craft '  b.  O.
'Have  you  a  specimen  of  your  labor?'  Can.  'I  have.'  S.  O.
'Present  it.'  The  candidate  theh  presents  the  key  stone,  and  he
applies  it,  but  not  fitting,  he  says,  'This  is  neither  an  oblong  nor  a
square,  neither  has  it  the  regular  mark  of  the  craft  upon  it;  it  is  a
curious  wrought  stone,  and  on  account  of  its  singular  form  and
beauty,  I  am  unwilling  to  reject  it:  pass  on  to  the  Master  Over-
seer at  the  east  gate,  for  further  inspection.'  Thejt  pass  to  his
station  at  the  east  gate,  and  ^ve  four  raps.  Master  Overseer*
'Who  comes  here?'  Conductor.  'Two  brethren  Fellow  Crafts*
,vith  their  materials  for  the  temple.'     M.  Overseer.  'Have  you

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC     .
I


tlGHT  ON  MASONRV.  9a

specimen  of  your  labor?     Con.   'I  have.'    M.  Overseen    'Pre-
sent it.'     The  conductor  presents  his  billet  of  wood  to  him,  and
he  applies  nis  square  to  h,  and,  like  the  other  Overseers,  says,
'This  is  good  work,  square  work,  such  work  as  we  are  authorized
to  receive:  who  is  this  you  have  with  youC     Conductor.  'A  bro-
ther Fellow  Craft'     M.  Overseer.  'Have  you  a  specimen  of  your
labor?'     Can    'I  have.'     MO    ^Present  it.'     (It  ought  here  to
be  remarked,  that,  when  the  candidate  is  presented  with  the  key
stone,  and  takes  it  between  his  thumb  and  two  fingers,  it  hangs
suspended  by  his  side,  and  he  is  requested  to  carry  his  work
plumb;  and  the  conductor  taking  good  care  to  see  that  he  does
it,  by  the  time  he  arrives  at  the  Master  Overseer's  station  at  the
east  gate,  and  when  the  Master  Overseer  says,  'present  it,'  the
candidate  is  extremely  willing  to  hand  over  the  key  stone  to  him
for  inspection;  for,  by  this  time,  it  becomes  very  painful  to  hold
any  longer  the  stone  which  he  has  in  < barge.)  Ihe  Master  Over-
seer having  received  the  key  stone,  he  applies  his  square  to  the
different  angles  of  ft,  and  being  found  not  to  be  square,  he,  like
the  other  Overseers,  says,  '1  his  is  neither  an  oblong  nor  a  square,
neither  has  it  the  regular  mark  of  the  craft  upon  it'     He  then
looks  sternly  upon  the  candidate,  and  demands,    'Is  this  your
work?'      Can     'It  is  not.'      M.  Overseer.    'Is  this  your  roaik?'
Cam  'It  is  not'    M.  0>  Where  did  you  get  it?'     Can.  'I  pick-
ed it  up  in  the  quarry.'     M  0.  Ticked  it  up  in  the  quarry?  this
explains  the  matter:  what !  been  loitering  away  your  time  iliiS
whole  week,  and  now  brought  up  another  man's  work  to  impose
upon  the  Grand  Overseers!  this  deserves  the  severest  punish-
ment    (Motions  the  candidate  to  stand  aside.)     Brothers  Jun-
ior and  Senior  Overseers,  here  is  work  brought  up  for  inspection
which  demands  a  council.'     Ihe  Junior,  Senior,  and  toaster
Overseers  then  assemble  in  council.     M.  Overseer,  presenting
the  stone,  'Did  a  Fellow  (raft  present  this  to  you  for  inspection,
brother  Junior?'     J.  Overseer.    'A  Fellow  c  raft  came  to  my.  of-
fice and  presented  this  stone  for  inspection:  t  examined  it,  and
found  it  was  neither  an  oblong  nor  a  square,  nor  neither  bad  it  the
regular  mark  of  the  craft  upon  it;  but,  on  account  of  its  singular
form  and  beauty,  I  was  unwilling  to  reject  it,  and  ordered  it  to
the  Senior  Overseer  at  the  west  gate,  for  further  inspection.'     M.
Overseer.    'Brother  Senior,  was.  this  stone  presented  to  you  for
inspection?'      Senior  Overseer,    'It  was:  I  know  of  no  use  for  if
in  the  temple:  I  tried  it  with  the  square,  and  observed  it  was  nei-
ther an  oblong  nor  a  square,  neither  had  it  the  regular  mark  of  the
craft  upon  it;  but,  on  account  of  its  singular  form  and  beauty,  I
was  unwilling  to  reject  it,  and,  therefore,  directed  it  to»the  Master


94  LIGHT   OK  MASONBT.

Overseer  at  the  east  gate,  for  further  inspection.'     M.  Overseer*
<It  was  also  presented  to  me  for  inspection;  but  I  do  not  know  of
any  use  which  it  can  be  in  the  building. '     Sen.  Overseer.  'I  know
of  no  use  for  it'     Jun.  Overseer.   *I  know  of  no  use  for  it.'     M.
Overseer.  'Brother  Senior,  what  shaM  we  do  with  it?     S.  Over-
seer.   'Heave  it  over  among  the  rubbish.'     The  Master  and  Sen-
ior Overseers  then  take  the  stone  between  them,  and,  after  wav-
ing it  backward  and  forward  four  times,  they  heave  it  over  in  such
a  manner  that  the  one  letting  go  while  the  stone  is  arriving  at  the
highest  point,  it  brings  the  stone  in  a  quarterly  direction  over  the
other's  left  shoulder:  the  Junior  Overseer,  being  stationed  in  a
suitable  position,  at  this  moment  receives  the  stone,  and  carries
it  away  into  the  preparation  room.      R.  W  M.    'Brother  Senior
Warden,  assemble  the  craft  to  receive  wages. '     At  this  command
the  brethren  all  arise,  and  form  a  procession  single  file;  the  can-
didate is  placed  at  the  head  of  the  procession,  and  when  station-
ed, is  told,  that  'the  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first,  last.'     The
procession  being  formed,  they  commence  singing  the  following
song:  'Mark  Masters  all  appear,'  &c.  (see  Monitor,  page  82;)
and,  at  the  same  time,  commence  a  circular  march  (against  the
course  of  the  sun,)  around  the  room,  giving  all  the  signs  during
their  march,  beginning  with  that  of  Entered  Apprentice,  and  end-
ing at  that  of  Mark  Master.      They  are  given  in  the  following
manner:  the  first  revolt tion  each  brother,  when  opposite  the  R.
W.  21.  gives  the  first  sign  in  Masonry.     The  second  revolution,
when  opposite  the  Master,  die  second;  and  so  on,  until  they  give
all  the  signs  to  that  of  Mark  Master.     While  the  ceremony  is  go-
ing on  in  the  lodge,  the  Senior  Grand  Warden  procures  a  suffi-
cient number  of  cents  and  passes  into  the  preparation  room,  and
opens  a  lattice  window  in  the  door  which  communicates  to  the
lodge  room,  and  when  the  craftsmen  arrive  to  the  Mark  Master
Mason's  sign,  each  one  of  them,  in  their  last  revolution,  puts  his
hand  through  the  window  in  the  door  and  gives  a  token,  (this  is
given  by  shutting  the  third  and  little  fingers,  extending  the  fore
and  middle  fingers,  and  placing  the  thumb  over  them  in  a  suita-
ble manner  to  receive  the  penny,  or  cent;)  and  receives  a  penny,
or  cent,  from  the  S.  G.  W.     Matters  are  so  timed  in  the  march,
that  when  they  come  to  that  part  of  the  song  which  says,  'cau-
tion them  to  beware  of  the  right  hand,'  it  comes  the  turn  of  the
candidate  to  put  his  hand  through  the  aperture  of  the  door,  and
receive  his  penny;  but  not  being  able  to  give  the  token,  he  is  de-
.    tected  as  an  impostor,  and  the  S.  G.  W.  instead  of  giving  him
his  penny,  seizes  him  by  the  hand  and  draws  his  arm  full  length
through  the  door,  and  holds  him  securely,  exclaiming,  at  the  same

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  95

time,  'an  impostor!  an  impostor!*    Others  who  are  in  the  room
with  the  S.  G.  W.  cry  out,  'Chop  qff  his  hand!  chop  off  his  hand!'
At  this  moment,  the  conductor  steps  to  the  candidate  and  inter-
cedes warmly  in  his  behalf.     Con.  'Spare  him!  spare  him!'     S.
G.  Warden.    'He  is  an  impostor.     He  has  attempted  to  receive
wages  without  being  able  to  give  the  tokc  n.     1  he  penalty  must
be  inflicted.'     Con.  'He  is  a  brother  Fellow  i  raft,  and  on  con-,
dition  that  you  will  release  him,  I  will  be  responsible  that  he  shall
be  taken  before  the  Right  Worshipful  Master,  where  all  the  cir-
cumstances shall  be  made  known;  and,  if  he  condemns  him,  I
will  see  that  the  penalty  is  inflicted.'     k.  G.  Warden.  'On  these
conditions,  I  release  him.'     The  candidate  is  released,  and  tak-
en before  the  R  W.  Master.     Con.  'This  young  Fellow  Craft
has  brought  up  work  for  inspection,  which  was  not  his  own,  and
has  attempted  to  receive  wages  for  it;  he  was  detected  at  the
Senior  Grand  Warden's  apartment  as  an  impostor,  and  I  became
responsible,  on  condition  of  his  release,  that  he  should  appear
before  the  R.  W.  and  if,  after  a  fair  trial,  you  should  pronounce
him  guilty,  that  I  should  see  the  penalty  of  an  impostor  inflicted
upon  him.'     R  W.  M.  'Brother  Junior  Overseer,  did  this  man
bring  up  work  to  your  station  for  inspection?'     J.  Overseer.  'He
did.     I  inspected  it,  and  observed  that  it  was  neither  an  oblong
nor  a  square,  n§ ither  had  it  the  regular  mark  of  the  craft  upon
it;  but,  on  account  of  its  singular  form  and  beauty,  I  was  unwil-
ling to  reject  it;  therefore,  I  ordered  it  passed  to  the  Senior  Over-
seer's station  at  the  west  gate,  for  further  inspection.'     R.  W.
M.  'Brother  Senior  Overseer,  did  this  young  man  bring  up  work,
to  you  for  inspection?      S.  0.    'He  did;  and  I,  for  similar  rea-
sons offered  by  brother  Junior  Overseer,  was  unwilling  to  reject
it,  and  ordered  it  passed  on  to  the  Master  Overseer  at  the  east
gate,  for  further  inspection.'     R.  W.  M.  'Brother  Master  Over*
seer,  did  this  young  man  bring  up  work  to  you  for  inspection?'
'He  did.    I  inspected  the  work,  and  observed  that  it  was  neither  *■
an  oblong  nor  a  square,  neither  had  it  the  regular  mark  of  the
craft  upon  it:  I  then  asked  him  if  it  was  his  work.     He  admitted
that  it  was  not.     I  asked  him  where  he  got  it;  he  said  he  pick'
■ed  it  up  in  the  quarry.     I  rebuked  him  severely  for  his  attempt
to  impose  upon  the  Grand  Overseers,  and  for  loitering  away  his
time  and  then  bringing  up  another  man's  work  for  inspection.  I
then  called  a  council  of  my  brother  Overseers,  and  we,  knowing
no  use  for  the  work,  hove  it  over  among  the  rubbish.'     Ri  W.  M.
'Senior  Grand  Warden,  did  the  young  man  attempt  to  receive
wages  at  your  apartment?'      S-  G.  W.    'He  did,  and  I  detected
bim  as  an  impostor,  and  was  about  to  inflict  the  penalty,  but  the


d  by  Google


96  LIGHT   Oft  MASONRY.

(conductor  becoming  responsible,  tha%  if  I  would  release  him,  he
would  see  the  impostor  taken  before  the  R.  W.  and,  if  found
guilty,  that  the  penalty  should  be  inflicted.  I  released  him.'    R.
W.  M.  'Young  man,  it  appears  that  you  have  been  loitering  away
your  time  this  whole  week,  and  have  now  brought  up  another
man's  work  for  inspection,  to  impose  upon  the  Grand  Overseers,
and  what  is  more,  you  have  attempted  to  receive  wages  for  labor
which  you  never  performed:  conduct  like  this  deserves  prompt
punishment*     The  penalty  of  an  impostor  is  that  of  having  his
right  hand  chopped  off.     This  young  man  appears  as  though  he
deserved  a  better  fate,  and  as  though  he  might  be  serviceable  in
the  building  of  the  temple.     Are  you  a  Fellow  Craft?'     Can.  'I
am  '     R.  W.  M.  'Can  you  give  us  any  proof  of  it?'     Candidate
gives  the  sign  of  a  Fellow  Craft.      R.  W.  M.    'He  is  a  Fellow
Craft.     Have  you  ever  been  taught  how  to  icceive  wages]'
Candidate.  'I  have  not'    R.  W.  M.  'This  serves,  in  a  measure,
to  mitigate  his  crime.     If  you  are  instructed  how  to  receive  wa-
ges, will  you  do  better  in  future,  and  never  again  attempt  to  im-
pose on  the  Grand  Overseers,  and,  above  all,  never  attempt  to
receive  wages  for  labor  which  you  never  performed?'     Candi-
date. 'I  will.'     R.  W.  M.  'The  penalty  is  remitted  '     The  can-
didate is  then  taken  into  the  preparation  room,  and  divested  of
his  outward  apparel,  and  all  money  and  valualAes;   his  breast
bare,  and  a  cable-tow  four  times  round  his  body:  in  which  con-
dition he  is  conducted  to  the  door,  when  the  conductor  gives
four  distinct  knocks,  upon  the  hearing  of  which,  the  Senior
Warden  says  to  the  R.  W.  'While  we  are  peaceably  at  work  on
the  fourth  degree  of  Masonry,  the  door  of  our  lodge  appears  to
be  alarmed.'     R  W  M.  ^Brother  Junior,  see  the  cause  of  that
alaan.'    The  J.  W.  then  steps  to  the  door  and  answers  the  alarm
by  four  knocks,  the  conductor  and  himself  each  giving  another;
the  door  is  then  partly  opened,  and  the  Junior  Warden  then  asks,
'Who  comes  there?'      Conductor.    'A  worthy  brother,  who  has
been  regularly  initiated  as  an  Entered  Apprentice,  served  a  pro-
per time  as  such;  passed  to  the  degree  of  Fellow  Craft;  raised
to  the  sublime  degree  of  a  Master  Mason;  and  now  wishes  fur-
ther light  in  Masonry,  by  being  advanced  to  the  more  honorable
degree  of  Mark  Master  Mason.'     J.  W.  'Is  it  of  his  own  free
will  and  accord  he  makes  this  request?'     Conductor.  'It  is.'    J.
W.  'Is  he  duly  and  truly  prepared?'      Conductor.    'He  is.'      J.
W.  'Has  he  wrought  in  the  quarry,  and  exhibited  specimens  of
his  skill  in  the  preceding  degrees?'      Conductor.    'He  has.'     J.
W.  'By  what  further  right,  or  benefit,  does  he  expect  to  obtain
this  favor?'      Con.    'By  the  benefit  of  a  pass  word.'      J.  W.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


*^e


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  97

'Has  he  a  pass  word?    Con.  'He  has  not,  but  I  have  it  for  him.9
J.  W.  'Give  it  me.'     Conductor  whispers  in  his  ear,  *JOPPA.r
J.  W.  'The  pass  word  is  right.     Tou  will  let  him  wait  until  R.
W.  M.  is  made  acquainted  with  his  request,  and  his  answer  re-
turned.'    The  Junior  Warden  returns  him  to  the  R.  W.  M.
where  the  same  questions  are  asked  and  answers  returned,  as  at
the  door.     The  R.  W.  M.  then  says,  'Since  he  comes  endowed
with  the  necessary  qualifications,  let  him  enter  in  the  name  of  the
Lord,  and  take  heed  on  what  he  enters.     (Previous  to  the  can-
didate's entering,  one  of  the  brethren  who  is  best  qualified  for
the  station,  is  selected  and  furnished  with  an  engraving  chisel
and  mallet,  and  placed  near  the  door,  so  that  when  the  candidate
enters,  it  is  on  the  edge  of  an  engraving  chisel,  under  the  pres-
sure of  the  mallet.     As  this  is  the  business  of  no  particular  offi-
cer, we  have,  for  convenience,  styled  him  executioner.)     Bro-
ther, it  becomes  my  duty  to  put  a  mark  on  you,  and  such  a  one,
too,  as  you  will  probably  carry  to  your  grave.'     Places  the  edge
of  the  chisel  near  his  left  breast,  and  makes  several  motions  with
the  mallet,  as  though  he  was  about  to  strike  upon  the  head  of  the
chisel.     Executioner.  'This  is  a  painful  undertaking;  ldo>nqt
feel  able  to  perform  it,  R   W;  (turning  to  the  R.  W.  M.)  this
task  is  too  painful;  I  feel  that  I  cannot  perform  it:  I  wish  the  R.
W.  would  selcA  some  other  brother  to  perform  it  in  my  stead/
R.  W.  M.    'I  know  the  task  is  unpleasant,  and  a  painful  one;
but  as  you  have  undertaken  to  perform  it,  unless  some  other  bro-
ther will  volunteer  his  service  and  take  your  place,  you  must  pro-
ceed.'    Executioner.  'Brother,  (calling  the  name,)  will  you  vol-
unteer your  service,  and  take  my  place?'     Brother.    'I  cannot
consent  to  do  it;'   (after  several  solicitations  and  refusals.)     Ex*
ecutioner.  'R.  W.  no  brother  feels  willing  to  volunteer  his  ser-
vices4; and  I  declare  I  feel  unwilling  and  unable  to  perform  it.'
~~    W.  M.  'As  no  brother  feels  disposed  to  take  your  station,  it
ecomes  your  duty  to  perform  it  yourself.'     Executioner,  (tak-
ing his  station,)  'Brethren,  support  the  candidate;  (several  take
hold  of  the  candidate:)  brother,  (naming  some  physician,  or  sur-
geon,) will  you  assist]'    Doctor,  (stepping  up,)  'Brethren,  it
becomes  necessary  that  we  have  a  bowl,  or  some  other  vessel,
to  receive  the  blood.'     A  bowl  is  presented,  having  the  appear-
ance of  blood  upon  it,  and  is  held  in  a  suitable  position  to  receive
the  blood;  the  surgeon  places  his  fingers  on  the  left  breast  of  the
candidate,  and  gives  counsel  where  it  would  be  adviseable  to  in-
flict the  wound.    The  executioner  then  places  the  edge  of  the
chisel  near  the  spot,  and  draws  back  the  mallet,  and  while  mak-
ing several  false  motions,  says,  'Operative  Masons  make  use  ot

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


98  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

the  engraving  chisel  and  mallet  to  cut,  hew,  carve,  and  indent
their  work;  but  we,  as  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  make  use  of
them  for  a  more  noble  anch  glorious  purpose; — we  use  them  to
cat.  hew,  carve,  and  indent  the  mind;'  giving,  at  the  instant  the
last  word  is  pronounced,  a  severe  blow  with  the  mallet  upon  the
bead  of  the  chisel,  without  the  least  injury  to  the  candidate.*  The
candidate  is  then  conducted  four  times  round  the  lodge,  and  each
time,  as  he  passes  the  station  of  the  Master,  Senior,  and  Junior
Wardens,  they  each  give  one  loud  Tap  with  their  mallet;  the
Master,  in  the  meantime,  reads  the  following  passages  of  crip-
ture — Psalm  cxviii.  22.  'The  stone  which  the  builders  refused  is
become  the  head  stone  of  the  corner.'  Matt.  xxi.  42.  'Did  ye
never  read  in  the  scriptures,  the  stone  which  the  builders  reject-
ed, the  same  is  become  the  head  of  the  corner?'  Luke  xx.  17.
'  'What  is  this,  then,  that  is  written:  The  stone  which  the  builders,
rejected,  the  same  is  become  the  head  of  the  cornter?'  Acts  iv.
11.  'This  is  the  stone  which  was  set  at  nought  of  you  builders,
which  is  become  the  head  of  the  corner.'  The  reading  of  them
is  so  timed,  as  to  be  completed  just  as  the  candidate  arrives  at
the  Junior  Warden's  post;  here  he  stops,  and  the  same  questions
are  asked  and  answers  returned,  as  at  the  door;  the  same  pass-
es at  the  Senior  Warden  and  Master,  who  orders  the  candidate
to  be  conducted  back  to  the  Senior  Warden  in  %e  west,  by  him
to  be  taught  to  approach  the  east,  by  four  upright  regular  steps,
his  feet  forming  a  square,  and  body  erect  at  the  altar;  the  candi-  •
date  then  kneels  and  receives  the  obligation,  as  follows: —

"I,  A  B,  of  my  own  free  will  and  accord,  in  presence  of  Al-
mighty God,  and  this  Right  Worshipful  Lodge  of  Mark  Master
Masons,  do  hereby  and  hereon,  in  addition  to  my  former  obliga-
tions, most  solemnly  and  sincerely  promise  and  swear,  that  I
will  not  give  the  degree  of  a  Mark  Master  Mason  to  any  one  of
an  inferior  degree,  nor  to  any  other  person  in  the  kuown  worfl^^^
except  it  be  to  a  true  and  lawful  brother,  or  brethren,  of  this  de^^
gree;  and  not  unto  him  nor  unto  them,  whom  I  shall  hear  so  to
be,  but  unto  him  and  them  only,  whom  I  shall  find  so  to  be,  after
strict  trial  and  due  examination,  or  lawful  information  given:
Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  support  the
constitution  of  the  General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the


*  This  is  supposed  to  be  the  most  interesting  part  of  the  degree;  and  is
made  so,  by  the  pains  taken  to  frighten  the  candidate.  If  the  floor,  bowl,
chisel,  and  mallet  are  bespattered  with  blood,  or  something  which  resembles
It,  and  the  'executioner'  acts  his  part  well,  ^the  candidate  must  necessarily
Ifeel  Y&ry  uneasy  during  the  ceremony:— This  generally  gives  great  satisfac-
tion to  the  brotherhood,  and  is  often  the  subject  of  their  secret  discourse  fot
weeks  afterwards.


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  99

United  States  of  America,  also  the  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter
of  this  State,  under  which  this  lodge  is  held,  and  conform  to  all
the  by-laws,  rules,  and  regulations  of  this  or  any  other  lodge  of
Mark  Master  Masons,  of  which  I  may  at  any  time  hereafter  be-
come a  member:  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I
will  obey  all  regular  signs  and  summons  given,  handed,  sent,  ox
thrown  to  me  from  the  hand  of  a  brother  Mark  Master  Mason,
or  from  the  body  of  a  just  and  legally  constituted  lodge  of  s«ob,
provided  it  be  within  the  length  of  my  cable  tow:  Furthermore,
do  1  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  not  wrong  this  lodge,  or  a
brother  of  this  degree,  to  the  value  of  his  wages,  (or  one  penny)
myself,  knowingly,  nor  suffer  it  to  be  done  by  others  if  in  my
power  to  prevent  it:*  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that
I  will  not  sell,  swap,  barter,  or  exchange  my  mark,  which  I  shall
•  hereafter  choose,  nor  send  it  a  second  time  to  pledge  until  it  is

m  lawfully  redeemed  from  the  first:  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and
swear,  that  I  will  receive  a  brother's  mark  when  offered  to  me
requesting  a  favor,  and  grant  him  his  request  if  in  my  power;
and  if  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  grant  his  request,  I  will  return  him
his  mark  with  die  value  thereof,  which  is  half  a  shekel  of  silver,
or  quarter  of  a  dollar.  To  all  of  which  I  do  most  solemnly
and  sincerely  promise  and  swear,  with  a  fixed  and  steady  pur-
pose of  mind  in  me,  to  keep  and  perform  the  same,  binding  my-
self under  no  less  penalty,  than  to  have  my  right  ear  smote  oft
that  f  may  forever  be  unable  to  hear  the  word,  and  my  rftfht  hanb!
chopped  off,  as  the  penalty  as  an  impostor,  if  I  should  ever  prove
wilfully  guilty  of  violating  any  part  of  this  my  solemn  oath,  or
obligation,  of  a  Mark  Master  Mason.  So  help  me  God,  and
make  me  steadfast  to  keep  and  perform  the  same."     "Detach

r   your  hand  and  kiss  the  book."

-  <:,  The  Master  then  produces  the  same  key  stone,  concerning
;  'which,  so  much  has  already  been  said;  and  says  to  the  candidate;
<we  read  in  a  passage  of  scripture,'  Rev.  ii.  17*  'to  him  that
.overcometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna,  tind  will  give
him  a  white  stone,  and  in  the  stone  a  new  name  written,  which
no  man  knoweth  save  him  that  receiveth  it.'  kHe  then  presents
the  stone  to  the  candidate  and  says,  *I  now  present  >o**  with*
white  stone,  on  which  is  written  a  new  name;  we  give  the  words'
that  form  this  circle;  (the  letters  are  so  engraved  on  the  stone  as
to  form  a  circle:)  the  initials  are  H.  T.  W.  S.  S.  T.  K.  Su  Hi-
ram Tyran,  Widow's  Son,  sent  to  King  Solomon.  These  placed
in  this  form  were  the  mark  of  our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiffl
At  present  they  are  used  as  the  general  mark  of  this  degree,  and
m  the  centre  of  them  each  brother  places  his  own  individ"**

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


100  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

mark.9  The  stone  is  then  removed  and  the  candidate  still  re*
mains  on  his  knees  at  the  altar,  the  Master  then  *  takes  the  jewel
containing  his  mark  from  his  neck  and  presents  it  to  the  candid-
ate—requests of  him  some,  favor,  such  as  the  loan  of  five,  ten,  or
twenty  dollars.  The  candidate  having  left  all  his  money  and
Valuables  in  the  preparation  room,  answers,  'I  cannot  do  it;  I
liav£  no  money  about  me:'  and  offers  to  return  the  mark  to  the
M  Ater,  but  he  refuses  to  take  it,  and  says  to  the  candidate,  'have
you  not  just  sworn  that  you  will  receive  a  brother  Mark  Master's
mark  when  offered  to  you,  requesting  a  favor,  and  if  not  in  your
power  to  grant  the  favor,  you  would  return  him  his  mark  .with  the
"value  of  it?  Is  this  the  way  you  mind  your  obligations?  Here  I
presented  my  mark  with  a  request  for  a  small  favor;  you  say  you
cannot  grant  it,  and  offer  to  return  my  mark  alone?  Where  is  the
^quarter  of  a  dollar  you  "have  sworn  to  return  with  it?'  The  can*  *
■didate,  much  embarrassed,  answers,  'I  cannot  do  even  that  I
have  no  money  about  me.  It  was  all  taken  from  me  in  the  prep-
aration room.'  The  Master  asks,  'are  you  quite  sure  you  have
none?'  Candidate  answers,  'I  am;  it  is  all  in  the  other  room.'
Master,  'you  have  not  examined;  perhaps  some  friend  has,  in
pity  to  your  destitute  situation,  supplied  you  with  that  amount  un-
known to  yourself:  feel  in  all  your  pockets,  and  if  you  find,  after
a  thorough  search,  that  you  have  really  none,  we  shall  have  less
treason  to  think  that  you  meant  wilfully  to  violate  your  obligation.'
^Fhe  candidate  examines  his  pockets  and  finds  a  quarter  of  a  dol-
lar, which  some  brother  had  slily  placed  there;  this  adds  not  a
Sktle  to  his  embarrassment;  he  protests  he  had  no  intention  of
•concealing  it;  really  supposed  he  had  none  about  him,  and  hands
it  to  the  Master,  with  his  mark.  The  Master  receives  it  and  says
to  the  candidate,  'Brother,  fet  this  scene  he  a  striking  lesson  to
you;  should  you  ever  hereafter  have  a  mark  presented  you  by
a  worthy  brother,  asking  a  favor;  before  you  'deny  him,  make  dil-
igent search,  and  be  quite  sure  of  your  inability  to  serve  him;
perhaps  you  will  then  find,  as  in  the  present  instance,  that  some
unknown  person  has  befriended  you,  and  you  are  really  in  a  bet-
ter situation  than  Jrou  think  yourself.'  The  candidate  then  rises
and  is  made  acquainted  with  the  grips,  words,  and  signs  of  this
degree.  The  pass-grip  of  this  degree  is  made  by  extending  the
right  arms  and  clasping  the  fingers  of  the  right  hands,  as  one
-would  naturally  do  to  assist  another  up  a  steep  ascent;  the  pass-
word is  *  Joppa;'  the  real  grip  is  made  by  locking  the  little  fin-
gers*of  the  right  hand,  bringing  the  knuckles  together,  placing
the  ends  of  the  thumbs  against  each  other;  the  word  is,  'Mark
w*§£'    The  signs  have  been  described.     After  the  grips}  wowls,

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


UGfiT   ON   MASONRY,  101

and  signs  are  given  andexplained,(see  lectures,)  the  Master  says,
'Brother,  1  now  present  you  with  the  tools  of  a  Mark  Master,
(here  he  points  them  out  in  the  carpet,  or  in  the  chart,)  which  are
the  chisel  and  mallet;  they  are  thus  explained;  the  chisel  morally
demonstrates  the  advantages  of  discipline  and  education;  the
mind,  like  the  diamond  in  its  original  state,  is  rude  and  unpolish-
ed, but  as  the  effect  of  the  chisel  on  the  external  coat,  sooiy>re-
sents  to  view  the  latent  beauties  of  the  diamond,  so  education
discovers  the  latent  beauties  of  the  mind,  and  draws  them  forth
to  range  the  large  field  of  matter  and  spare,  to  display  the  sum-
mit,of  human  knowledge,  our  duty  to  God  and  man.  The  mal-
lei morally  teaches  to  correct  irregularities,  and  to  reduce  man  ta
a  proper  level;  so  that  by  quiet  deportment,  he  may,  in  the  school
of  discipline,  learn  to  be  content.  What  the  mallet  is  to  the
workmen,  enlightened  reason  is  to  ihe  passions;  it  curbs  ambition,
it  depresses  envy,  it  moderates  anger,  and  it  encourages  good
dispositions,  whence  arises  among  good  masons  that  comely  order,

*Which  nothing  earthly  gives,  or  can  destroy,  «

The  soul's  calm  sunshine,  and  the  heartfelt  joy.'

The  W.  Master  then  delivers  the  following  charge  to  the  caa-r
didate,  which  completes  the  ceremony  of  advancement  to  this
degree.     (For  the  charge,  see  Monitor.)

CEREMONY    OP    CLOSING    A    LODGE    OP    MARK    MASONS.

The  Worshipful  Master  says,  'Brother  Junior  Warden,  as-
semble the  brethren,  and  form  a  procession  for  the  purpose  of
closing  the  lodge.'  The  brethren  then  assemble  and  commence
a  circular  march,  singing  the  song.  'Mark  Masters  all  appear/
(see  Webb's  Monitor,  page  82,)  with  the  same  ceremony  as  des-
cribed in  another  part  of  this  degree.  After  the  song  is  .complet-
ed, the  brethren  compare  the  wages  they  have  received,  a  d  find-
ing that  all  have  received  alike,  (one  penny  or  cent,  the  begi*
to  murmur  among  themselves,  some  pretending  to  think  th^jr
•tight  to  have  more,  as  they  have  done  alt  the  labor— they  finally
throw  down*heir  wages  upon  the  altar,  declaring  if  they  cannot
be  dealt  justly  with,  they  will  have  none  The  Wors  ipful
Master  calls  to  order,  and  demands  the  cause  of  the  confusion.
Some  brother  answers,.  'Worshipful,  we  are  not  satisfied  with  the
manner  of  paying  the  workmen;  for  we  find  those  who  have
done  nothing,  and  even  the  candidate  just  received,  is  paid  just
as  much  as  we,  who  have  borne  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day.
Master  says,  'it  is  perfectly  right.?    Brother.  *It  oannot  fee  right

12

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


f v


102  LIGHT  Off  MASOKRt.

—it  id  very  unreasonable  '  Master.  'Hear  what  thd  law  says  on
this  subject.'  He  then  reads  the  following  parable,  Mat  xx.  1,
16:  'For  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  man  that  is  a
householder,  which  went  out  early  in  the  morning  to  hire  labor-
ers into  his  vineyard.  And  when  he  bad  agreed  with  the  labor-
ers for  a  penny  a  day,  he  sent  them  into  his  vineyard.  And  he
went  out  about  the  third  hour,  and  saw  others  standing  idle  in  the
martfet-place,  and  said  unto  them,  Go  ye  also  into  the  vineyard;
and  whatsoever  is  right,  I  will  give  you.  And  they  went  their
way.  Again  he  went  out  about  the  sixth  and  ninth  hour,  and  did
likewise.  And  about  the  eleventh  hour  he  went  out,  and  found
others  standing  idle,  and  saith  unto  them,  Why  stand  ye  here  all
the  day  idle?  they  say  unto  him;  Because  no  man  hath  hired  us.
He  saith  unto  them,  Go  ye  also  into  the  vineyard;  and  whatso-
ever is  right,  that  shall  ye  receive.  So  when  even  was  come,
the  lord  of  the  vineyard  said  unto  his  steward,  call  the  laborers,
and  give  them  their,  hire,  beginning  from  the  last  unto  the  first.
And  when  they  came  that  were  hired  about  the  eleventh  hour,
they  received  every  man  a  penny.  But  when  the  first  came,
they  supposed  that  they  should  have  received  more:  and  they
likewise  received  every  man  a  penny.  And  when  they  had  re-
ceived it,  they  murmured  against  the  good  man  of  the  house,
saying,  These  last  have  wrought  but  one  hour,  and  thou  hast
tnade  mem  equal  unto  us,  which  have  borne  the  burden  and  heat
of  the  day.  But  he  answered  one  of  them,  and  said,  Friend,  I
do  thee  no  wrong:  didst  thou  not  agree  *vith  me  for  a  penny?
fake  that  thine  is,  and  go  thy  way:  I  wift  give  unto  this  last
eVen  as  unto  thee.  Is  it  not  lawful  f4r  me  to  do  what  I  will  with
mine  own?  Is  thine  eye  evil  because  I  am  good?  So  the  last
shall  be  first,  and  the  first  last:  for  many  be  called,  but  few  chos-
en. '  (We  leave  it  for  the  public  to  judge,  with  what  consistency*
Irfng  Solomon  in  his  day,  could  introduce*  passage  of  the  New
Testament,  written  long  after,  to  settle  a  dispute  arising  among
his  workmen.  They  will  observe  that  many  passages  of  the>
Jf ew  Testament  are  introduced  in  this  and  the  following  degrees,
jwe tended  to  have  been  organized  at  the  building  of  the  temple.
We  make  no  comments.)  The  brethren  then  declare  them-
selves satisfied;  the  signs  are  given  from  Mark  Master  down  to
the  Entered  Apprentice,  and  the  Master  declares  the  lodge  clos-
ed.


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  103

Lectures  on  the  4th,  or  Mark  Master's  degree.

SECTION  FIRST.  ^

Q.  Are  .you  a  Mark  Master  Mason?  A.  I  am;  try  me:
Q.  By  what  will  you  be  tried?  A.  By  the  engraving  chisel  and
mallet,  Q.  Why  by  the  engraving  chisel  and  mallet?  A.  Be-
cause they  are. the  proper  masonic  implements  of  this  degree.
Q.  On  what  was  the  degree  founded?  A.  On  a  certain  key
stone  which  belonged  to  the  principal  arch  of  king  Solomon's
temple.  Q.  Who  formed  this  key  stone?  A.  Our  worthy
Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff.  Q.  What  were  the  preparatory
steps  relative  to  your  advancement  to  this  degree?  A  I  was
caused  to  represent  one  of  the  Fellow  Craft,  at  the  building  of
"king  Solomon's  temple,  whose  custom  it  was,  on  the  eve  of  ev-
ery sixth  day,  to  carry  up  their  work  for  inspection,  Q.  Why
was  you  caused  to  represent  these  Fellow  Craftsf  A.  Because,
our  worthy  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff,  had  completed  this  key
stone,  agreeable  to  the  original  plan,  and  before  he  gave  orders
to  have  it  carried  up  to  the  temple,  was  slain  by  thtee  ruffians,  as
already  represented  in  the  preceding  degrees;  and  it  so  happen-
ed that  on  the  eve  of  a  certain  sixth  day,  as  the  craft  were  carry-
ing up  work  for  inspection,  a  young  Fellow  Craft  discovered  thig
stone  in  the  quarry,  and  from  its  singular  form  and  beauty,  sup-
posed it  belonged  to  .some  part  of  the  temple,  carried  it  up  for
inspection.  Q  Who  inspected  it?  A.  The  Grand  Overseers,
placed  at  the  east,  west,  and  south  gates.  Q.  How  did  they  in?-
spect  it?  A.  On  its  being  presented  to  the  Junior  Overseer  at
the  south  gate,  he  observed  that  it  was  neither  an  oblong  or  a
squar-e,  neither  had  it  the  regular  mark  of  a  craft  upon  it;  but
from  its  singular  form  and  beauty  was  unwilling  to  reject  it,  there-
fore ordered  it  to  be  passed  to  the  Senior  Overseer  at  the  west,
gate,  for  further  inspection;  who,  for  similar  reasons,  suffered  it
to  pass  to  the  Master  Overseer  at  the  east  gate,  who  held  a  con-
sultation with  his  brother  Overseers,  and  they  observedj  as  be-
fore, that  it  was  neither  an  oblong  or  square,  neither  haflri
regular  mark  «of  the  craft  upon  it;  and  neither  of  them  beii
Mark  Master  Masons,  supposed  it  of  bo  use  in  the  building,  am
hove  it  over  among  the  rubbish.  Q.  How  many  Fellow  Craf
were  there  engaged  at  the  building  of  the  temple?  A.  Eighty
thousand.  Q.  Were  not  the  Master  Overseers  liable  to  be  im-
posed upon  by  receiving  bad  work  from  the  hands  of  suck  a  vast
number  of  workmen?  A.  They  were  not.  Q.  How  was  this
imposition  prevented?    A.  By  the  wisdom,  of  king  Solomon,

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


104  LIGHT   ON  MASONRV.

Who  wisely  ordered,  that  the  craftsmen  who  worked,  should
choose  him  a  particular  mark  and  place  it  upon  all  his  work;  by
which  it  was  known  and  distinguished  when  carried  up  to  the
building,  and  if  approved,  to  receive  wages.  Q.  What  was  the
wages  of  a  Fellow  Craft?  A.  A  penny  a  day.  Q.  Who  paid
the  craftsmen?  A.  The  Senior  G^and  Warden.  Q.  Was  not
the  Senior  Grand  Warden  liable  to  be  imposed  upon  by  impos-
tors, in  paying  off  such  a  vast  number  of  workmen?  A.  He
was  not.  Q.  How  was  tttis  imposition  prevented?  A.  By  the
wisdom  of  king  Solomon,  who  also  ordered  that  every  craftsman
applying  to  receive  wages,  should  present  his  right  hand  through
a  lattice  window  of  the  door  of  the  Junior  Grand  Warden's
apartment,  with  a  copy  of  his  mark  in  the  palm  thereof,  at  the
same  time  giving  a  token.  Q.  What  was-  that  token?  (This*
was  before  explained.)  Q.  What  did  it  allude  to?  A.  To  the
manner  of  receiving  wages;  it  was  also  to  distinguish  a  true
craftsman,  from  an  impostor.  Q.  What  is  the  penalty  on  an  im-
postor/    A.  To  have  his  right  hand  chopp  d  off.

SECTION    SECOND.

Q.  Where  was  you  prepared  to  be  made  a  Mark  Master  Ma*
Wn?  A.  In  the  room  adjoiniug  the  body  of  a  just  and  lawfully
constituted  lodge  of  such,  duly  assembled  in  a  room,  or  place,
representing  a  work  shop  that  was  erected  near  the  ruins  of  king
Solomon's  temple.  Q.  How  was  you  prepared?  A.  By  being
divested  of  my  outward  apparel  and  all  money;  my  breast  bare,
with  a  cable  tow  four  times  about  my  body;  in  which  situation  I
Was  conducted  to  the  door  of  a  lodge,  where  I  gave  four  distinct
knocks.  Q  What  do  these  four  distinct  knocks  allude  to?  A.
To  the  fourth  degree  of  Masonry;  it  being  that  on  which  I  was
about  to  enter.  Q.  What  was  said  to  you  from  without?  A.
Who  comes  there?  Q.  Your  answer?  A.  A  worthy  brother,
whb  has  been  regularly  initiated  as  an  Entered  Apprentice,  serv-
ed a  proper  lime  as  such;  passed  to  the  Fellow  Craft;  raised  to
the  sublime  degree  of  a  Master  Mason;  and  now  wishes  further
light  in  Masonry,  by  being  advanced  t«»  the  more  honorable -de-
.  gree  of  a  Mark  Master  Mason.  Q.  What  further  was  said  to
'  jfou  from  within?  A  1  was  asked  if  it  was  of  my  own  free  will
and  accord,  I  made  this  request;  if  1  was  duly  ancf  truly  pre-
pared; worthy  and  well  qualified;  had  wrought  in  tikk  Quarries,
and  exhibited  specimens  of  my  skill  and  proficiency  )a  '
Ceding  degrees;  all  of  which,  being  answered  in  {the  i
$  was  asked  by  what  further  right,  or  benefit,  Yei^M
$ws  fcvor.    Q.   Your  answer?   A.   By  &*.*  "    '  *


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  105

word.  Q.  What  was  that  pass  word?  A.  Joppa.  Q.  What
did  it  allude  to?  -  A.  The  city  of  Joppa,  the  place  where  the
materials  were  landed,  for  building  king  Solomon's  temple,  after
being  prepared  in  the  forost  of  Lebanon,  and  carried  there  on
floats,  (by  sea.)  (Masonic  tradition  informs  us,  that  the  banks
of  this  place  are  so  perpendicular,  that  it  was  impossible  to  as-
cend them  without  assistance  from  above,  which  was  effected  by
brethren  stationed  there,  with  this  strong  grip;  [this  has  been  ex-
plained,] which,  together  with  the  word  Joppa,  has  since  been
adopted  as  a  proper  pass  to  be  given  before  entering  any  well
regulated  lodge  of  Mark  Master  Masons.)  Q.  What  further
was  said  to  you  from  within.7  A.  I  was  bid  to  wait  till  the  Right
Worshipful  Master  in  the  east,  was  made  acquainted  with  my
request,  and  his  answer  returned.  Q.  When  his  answer  was  re-
turned, what  followed?  A.  I  was  caused  to  enter  the  lodge.
Q.  On  what  did  you  enter?  A.  On  the  edge  of  the  engraving
chisel,  under  the  pressure  of  the  mallet,  which  was  to  demon-
strate the  moral  precepts  of  this  degree,  and  make  a  deep  and
lasting  impression  on  my  mind  and  conscience.  Q.  How  was
you  then  disposed  of?  A.  I  was  conducted  four  times  regularly
round  the  lodge,  and  halted  at  the  Junior  Warden's  in  the  south,
where  the  same  questions  were  asked,  and  answers  returned  as!
at  the  door.  Q.  How  did  the  Junior  Warden  dispose  of  yvul
A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  to  the  Senior  Warden  in  the
west,  where  the  same  questions  were  asked  and  the  saim>  •an-
swers returned,  as  before.  Q.  How  did  the  Senior  Warden  dis*  .
pose  of  you?  A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  to  the  Right
Worshipful  Master  in  the  east,  where  the  same  questions  were
asked  and  answers  returned,  as  before;  who  likewise  demanded
of  me,  from  whence  I  came,  and  whither  1  was  travelling.  Q
Your  answer?  A.  From  the  west,  and  travelling  to  the  east.
Q.  Why  do  you  leave  the  west,  and  travel  to  the  east?  A.  In
search  of  light.  Q.  How  did  the  Right  Worshipful  Master*dk-
pose  of  you?  A.  He  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  back  to  the
west,  from  whence  I  came,  and  put  in  the  care  of  the  Senior
Warden,  who  taught  me  how  to  approach  the  east,  the  place  oi*
light;  by  advancing  upon  four  upright  regular  steps,  to  the  fourth
step,  my  feet  forming  a  square,  and  nty  body  erect  at  the  altaiV
before  the  Right  Worshipful  Master.  Q.  What  did  the  lfigfafc
Worshipful  Master  do  with  you?  A.  He  made  a  Mark  Master
Mason  of  me.  Q.  How?  A.  In  due  form.  Q.  What  was
that  due  form?  A.  Both  knees  bent,  they  forming  a  square,  both
roy  hands  oji  to  holy  bible,  square,  and  compass,  my  body  being
arectf'  rawhijf  posture  I  took  upon  rne  the  solemn  oath,  or  obh-

.     ,'  .  '  Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


10$  LIGHT   OX   MASONRY.

gation  of  a  Marjt  Master  Mason.  Q.  Have  you  that  oath,  or
obligation?  A.  I  have.  Q.  Will  you  give  it  me?  A.  I  will,
with  your  assistance.  (Here,,  as  in  the  preceding  degree,  you
repeat,  after  the  Right  Worshipful  Master,  I,  A  B.  &c.  See
obligation,  page  98.)  Q.  After  your  oath,  or  obligation,  what
follows?  A.  Information  was  brought  that  the  temple  was  al-
most completed,  but  the  craft  was  all  in  confusion  for  want  of  a
certain  key  stone,  which  none  of  them  bad  been  instrumental  to
make.  Q.  What  followed?  A.  King  Solomon  believing  in
confidence,  that  our  worthy  Grand  Master,  Hiram  AbifF,  had
completed  this  key  stone  agreeable  to  the  original  plan,  ordered
inquiry  to  be  made  among  the  Master  Overseers,  if  a  stone  bear-
ing a  particular  mark  had  been  presented  to  them  for  inspection;
and  on  inquiry  being  made,  it  was  found  that  there  had.  Q.
What  followed?  A.  King  Solomon  ordered  search  to  be  made
for  the  stone,  when  it  was  found,  and  afterwards  applied  to  its  in*
tended  use  .  Q.  What  color  was  the  stone?  A.  White*
Q.  What  did  it  allude  to?  A.  To  a  passage  in  scripture,  where
it  says;  'To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden
manna,  and  I  wiil  give  him  a  white  stone,  and  in  the  atone  a  new
name  written,  which  no  man  knoweth  saving  him  that  reeeiveth.'
Q  What  was  that  new  name?  A.  The  letters  on  the  stone  and  the
initials  of  the  words  for  which  they  stand,  viz — H.#  T  W.  S.  S.
T.  K.  S.  Q.  Of  what  use  is  this  new  name  to  you  in  Masonry?
■*fL  It  was  the  original  mark  of  xrar  worthy  Grand  Master,  Hiram
AbifF,  and  is  the  general  mark  of  this  degree,  and  the  letters
form  the  circle,  in  the  centre  of  which,  every  brother  of  this  de-
gree places  his  particular  mark,  to  which  his  obligation  alludes.
Q.  What  followed?  A.  I  was  more  fully  instructed  with  the  se-
crets of  this  degree.  Q.  Of  what  do  they  consist?  -J.  Of  signs
and  tokens.  Q.  Have  you  a  sign?  A.  I  have.  Q.  ,What  is  it
called?  A.  Heave  over.  Q.  What  does  it  allude  to?  JL  To
the  manner  of  heaving  over  work  that  the  Overseers  said  was  un-
fit for  the  temple;  also,  the  manner  the  key  stone  was  hove  over.
Q  Have  you  any  other  sign?  A.  I  have,  (at  the  same  time
giving  it. )  Q.  \JThat  is  that?  A.  The  due-guard  of  a  Mark
Master  Mason.  Q  What  does  it  allude  to?  A.  To  the  penal-.
ty  of  my  obligation;  whiclf  is,  that  my  right  ear  should  be  smote
}  off,  that  I  might  forever  be  unable  to  hear  .the  word,  and  my  right '
hand  be  chopped  off,  as  the  penalty  of  an  impostor;  If.  I  should
ever  prove  wilfully  guilty  of  revealing  any  part  of  ray  Obligation.
Q.  Have  you  any  further  sign?  A.  I  have.  Q>  Wk^^MMS
A. .  The  grand  sign,  or  sign  of  distress.  J&  Wb#  d<Wl
fo?    A*  To  the  manner*  the  Fellow  Crafts, carry  1


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  107

to  the  temple  for  inspection;  also  the  manner  I  was  taught  to
cany  my  work,  on  my  advancement  to  this  degree.  Q.  Have
you  any  other  sign?  A.  I  have  not;  but  I  have  a  token,  (gives
it  to  him.)  Q.  What  is  this?  A.  The  pass-grip  of  a  Mark
Master  Mason.  Q.  What  is  the  name  of  it.  A.  'Joppa.'  Q.
What  does  it  allude  to?  A.  The  city  of  Joppa.  Q.  Have  you
any  other  token?  A.  I  have.  Q.  What  is  this?  A.  The  real,
grip  of  a  Mark  Master  Mason.  Q.  What  is  the  name  of  it?
A.  Mark  well.  Q.  What  does  it  allude  to?  A.  To  a  passage
of  scripture,  where  it  says,  'Then  he  brought  me  back  the  way
of  the  gate  of  the  outward  sanctuary,  which  looketh  toward  the
east,  and  it  was  shut;  and  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  son  of  man,
mark  well,  and  behold  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear  with  thine  ears,
all  that  I  say  un4o  thee  concerning  all  the  ordinances  of  the  house
of  the  Lord,  and  the  laws  thereof,  and  mark  well  the  entering  in
of  the  house,  with  every  going  forth  of  the  sanctuary.'  Q.  Who
founded  this  degree?  A.  Our  three  ancient  Grand  Masters ,.v&
— Solomon,  king^  of  Israel,  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre',  and  Hiram
Abiff.  Q.  Why  was  it  founded?  A.  Not  only  as  an  honorary
reward,  to  be  conferred  on  all  who  have  proved  themselves  mer-
itorious in  the  preceding  degrees;  but  to  render  it  impossible  for
a  brother  to  suffer  for  the  immediate  necessities  of  life,  when  the
price  of  his  mark  will  procure  them.  Q.  A  brother,  pledging  his
mark,  and  asking  a  favor,  who  does  he  represent?  A*  Our  wor-
thy Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff,  who  was  a  poor  man^  but' on
account  of  his  great  skill  and  mysterious  conduct  at  the  building
of  king  Solomon's  temple,  was  most  eminently  distin^uishfedi'
Q%  A  brother  receiving  a  pledge,  and  granting  a  favor,  wh
does  he  represent?  A.  King  Solomon,  who  was  a  rich  mad,
renowned  for  his  benevolence.


THE  PAST  MASTER'S  DEGREE.

This  degree  is  very  simple,  although  Monitor  writers  say  rfBt
about  it.  It  is  necessary  that  a  Master  Mason  should  take  tbi:
degree,  before  he  can,  constitutionally,  preside  over  a  lodge  6t~
.  Master  Masons,  as  Master  of  it;  and  when  a  Master  Mason  is
elected  Master  of  a  lodge,  who  has  not  previously  received  the
Fast  Master's  degree,  it  is  then  conferred  upon  him,  often  with-
out any  other  ceremonies  than  that  of  administering  the  obliga-
tion. ,  *bc

This-Jodge  is  opened  and  closed,  in  the  same  manner  that  tfee

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


108  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

lodges  of  the  first  three  degrees  are;  the  candidate  petitions,  and
is  ballotted  for  in  the  same  manner,  but  he  is  received  into  the
lodge  in  a  very  different  manner.  He  is  conducted  into  the  lodge
without  any  previous  preparation,  when  the  presiding  officer  ris-
es and  says,  'brethren,  it  is  inconvenient  for  me  to  serve  you  any
longer,  as  Master  of  this  lodge.  I  wish  you  would  select  some
other  brother  for  that  purpose. '  The  candidate  is  nominated,  the
usual  forms  of  ballotting  for  officers  are  then  dispensed  with,  and
a  vote  of  the  lodge  is  taken,  by  yeas  and  nays.  The  candidate
is  elected,  and  generally  refuses  to  serve,  but  ha  is,  eventually,
prevailed  on  to  accept;  whereupon,  the  presiding  officer  ad-
dresses the  Master  elect  in  the  words  following,  viz:  'Brother,
previous  to  your  investiture,  it  is  necessary  that%you  assent  to
those  ancient  charges  and  regulations,  which  point  out  the  duty
of  a  Master  of  a  lodge.

1.  You  agree  to  be  a  good  man,  and  true,  and  strictly  to  obey
the  moral  law.

2.  You  agree  to  be  a  peaceable  subject,  and  cheerfully  to  con-
form to  the  laws  of  the  country  in  whi'h  you  reside.

3.  You  promise  not  to  be  concerned  in  any  plots  or  conspira-
cies against  government;  but  patiently  to  submit  (p  the  decisions
of  the  supreme  legislature.

4.  You  agree  to  pay  a  proper  respect  to  the  civil  magistrate,
to  work  diligently,  live  creditably,  and  act  honorably  by  all  men.

5.  You  agree  to  hold  in  veneration  the  original  rules  and  pat-
rons of  Masonry,  and  their  regular  successors,  supreme  and  sub-
ordinate, according  to  their  stations,  and  to  submit  to  the  awards
and  resolutions  of  your  brethren,  when  convened,  in  every  case
consistent  with  the  constitution  of  the  order.

6.  You  agree  to  avoid  private  piques  and  quarrels,  and  to  guard
against  intemperance  and  excess.

7.  You  agree  to  be  cautious  in  carriage  and  behavior,  cautious
to  your  brethren,  and  faithful  to  your  lodge.

8.  You  promise  to  respect  genuine  brethren,  and  discounte-
nance impostors,  and  all  dissenters  from  the  original  plan  of  Ma-
sonry.

9.  You  agree  to  promote  the  general  good  of  society,  to  cul-
tivate the  social  virtues,  and  to  propagate  the  knowledge  of  the
arts.

10.  You  promise  to  pay  homage  to  the  Grand  Master,  for  the"

\t\me  being,  and  to  his  officer  wh?n  duly  installed;  strictly  to  con-

jjitm  to  every  edict  of  the  Grand  Lodge  or  general  assembly  of

Stasons,  that  is  not  subversive  of  the*  principles  and  ground  worli;

,of  Masonry.  *#


y  Google


LIGHT   ON    MASONRY.  109

11.  You  admit  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  any  man,  or  body
of  men,  to  make  innovations  in  the  body  of  Masonry.

12.  You  promise  a  regular  attendance  on  the  committees  and
communications  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  on  receiving  proper  notice,
and  to  pay  attention  to  all  the  duties  of  Masonry  on  convenient
occasions.

13.  You  admit  that  no  new  lodge  can  be  formed  without  per-
mission of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  that  no  countenance  be  given
to  any  irregular  lodge,  or  to  any  person  clandestinely  initiated
therein,  being  contrary  to  the  ancient  charges  of  the  order.

14.  You  admit  that  no  person  can  be  regularly  made  a  Mason
in,  or  admitted  a  member  of,  any  regular  lodge,  without  previous
notice,  and  due  inquiry  into  his  character.

15.  You  agree  that  no  visitors  shall  be  received  in  your  lodge
without  due  examination,  and  producing  proper  vouchers  of  their
having  been  initiated  into  a  regular  lodge.'

The  presiding  officer  then  asks  the  Master  elect  (candidate)
the  following  question;  which  he  must  answer  in  the  affirmative.
Q.  'Do  you  submit  to  these  charges  and  promise  to  support
these  regulations,  as  Masters  have  done,  in  all  ages,  before  you?
Jl.  'I  do.'  The  presiding  officer  then  addresses  him.  'Brother
A  B,  in  consequence  of  your  cheerful  conformity  to  the  charges
and  regulations  of  the  order,  you  are  now  to  be  instated  Mas-
ter of  this  degree;  in  full  confidence  of  youi  care,  skill  and  ca-
pacity, to  govern  the  same.  But  previous  to  your  investiture,  it
is  necessary  you  should  take  upon  yourself  the  solemn  oath,  or
obligation,  appertaining  to  this  degree;  if  you  are  willing  to  take
it  upon  you,  you  will  please  to  kneel  before  the  altar,  when  you;
shall  receive  the  same.'  (Here  lodges  differ  very  materially,*
but  this  is  the  most  prevalent  mode  of  proceeding.)-  The  can-
didate then  kneels  on  both  knees,  lays  both  hands  on  the  Holy
Bible,  square,  and  compass,  and  takes  the  following  oath,  or  ob-
ligation:— 'I,  A  B,  of  my  own  free  will  and  accord,  in  presence
of  Almighty  God,  and  this  Worshipful  lodge  of  Past  Master-
Masons,  do  hereby  and  hereon,  most  solemnly  and  sincerely
promise  and  swear,  in  addition  to  my  former  obligations,  that  I
will  not  give  the  degree  of  Past  Master  Mason,  or  any  of  the  se-
crets pertaining  thereto,  to  any  one  of  an  inferior  degree,  nor  to
any  person  in  the  known  world;  except  it  be  to  a  true  and  lawful
brother,  or  brethren,  Past  Master  Masons,  or  within  the  body  of »
•  a  just  and  lawfully  constituted  lodge  of  such;  and  not  unto  him
or  unto  them  whom  I  shall  hear  so  to  be,  but  unto  him  and  therit
only,  whom  I  shall  find  so  (o  be,  after  strict  trial  and  examination*
or  lawful  information.     Furthermore,  do  1  promise  and  sweaif

K

f

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC


jjq  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.

♦hat  I  will  obey  all  regular  signs  and  summons,  sent,  thrown,
handed,  or  given,  from  the  hand  of  a  brother  of  this  degree,  or
X  the-  body  of  a  just  and  lawfully  oonstttuted  lodge  of  Past
Masters,  provided  it  be  within  the  length  of  ray  cable-tow.  Further-
more, do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  support  the  constitution
ofthe  General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  United  States  of

America,  also,  that  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  State  of-

under  which  this  lodge  is  held,  and  conforni .to  all  the  by-laws,
rules,  and  regulations  of  this,  or  any  other  lodge,  of  which  I  may
at  any  time  hereafter  become  a  member,  so  far  as  m  my  power.
Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  not  assist,  or  be
wesent  at  toe  conferring  of  this  degree  upon  any  person,  who
has  not,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  and  be.ie  regularly  receiv-
ed the  degrees  of  Entered  Apprentice,  Kllow  Oral.,  Master
Mason,  and  Mark  Master,  or  been  elected  Master  of  a  regular
lodge  of  Master  Masons.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,
that  I  will  aid  and  assist  all  poor  and  indigent  Past  Master  Ma-
sons, their  widows  and  orphans,  wherever  dispersed  rW  the
glob^,  they  applying  to  me  as  such  and  I  finding  them  worthy,
L  far  as  in  my  power,  without  material  injury  to  myself  or  fami-
ly. Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  the  secrets  of  a
brother  of  this  degree,  delivered  to  me  in  charge  as  such,  shall
remain  as  secure  and  inviolable  in  my  breast,  as  they  were  in  h»
own,  before  communicated  to  me;  murder  and  treason  excepted,
and  those  left  to  my  own  election.  Furthermore,  do  1  promise
and  swear,  that  I  will  not  wrong  this  lodge,  not  a  brother  of  this
degree,  to  the  value  of  one  cent,  knowingly  myself,  noi •sutler  it
to  be  done  by  others,  if  in  my  power  to  prevent  it.  Furthermore,
do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  not  govern  this  lodge,  nor
any  other  over  which  I  may  be  called  to  preside,  ma  haughty,
arbitrary,  or  impious  manner;  but  will  at  all  times,  use  my  utmost
endeavors  to  preserve  peace  and  harmony  among  the  brethren.
Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  1  will  never  open  a
lodge  of  Master  Masons,  unless  there  be  present  three  regular
Master  Masons,  besides  the  Tyler,  nor  close  the  same,  without
riving  a  lecture,  or  some  section,  or  part  of  a  lecture,  for  the  in-
struction of  the  lodge.  Furthermore,  that  I  will  not,  knowingly,
set  in  any  lodge  where  any  one  presides,  who  has  not  received
the  dearee  of  Past  Master.  (This  last  point  is,  in  many  lodges,
entirely  omitted.  In  some,  the  two  last.)  All  which,  I  do  most
solemnly  and  sincerely  promise  and  swear,  with  a  fixed  and
steady  purpose  of  mind,  to  keep  and  perform  the  same;  bmdmg
myself  under  no  less  penalty,  than  to  have  my  tongue  split  from
tip  to  root;  that  I  might  for  ever  thereafter,  be  unable  to  pro-

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  Ill

nounce  the  word,  if  ever  I  should  prove  wilfully  guilty  of  viola-
ting any  part  of  this,  my  solemn  oath,  or  obligation,  of  a  Past
Master  Mason  So  help  me  God,  and  make  me  steadfast  to
keep  and  perform  the  same.'

The  obligation  being  administered,  the  candidate  rises,*  and
the  Master  proceeds  to  give  the  sign,  word,  and  grip  of  this  .de-
gree, as  follows.     The  sign  (sometimes  called  the  due- guard,}
is  given  by  laying  the  edge  of  the  thumb  of  the  right  hand  in  a
vertical  position,  on  the  centre  of  the  mouth,  high  enough  to  touch
the  upper  lip.     The  word  is  given  by  taking  each  other  by  the
Master's  grip,  and  pulling  the  insides  of  their  feet  together,  when
the  Master  whispers  the  word,  Giblem^  in  the  ear  of  the  candi-
date.    Then  they  clap  their  left  hand  on  each  other's  right  arm,
between  the  wrist  and  elbow,  disengaging,  (at  the  same  moment,)
their  right  hand  from  the  Master's  grip;  they  each  seize  the  left
arm  of  the  other  with  their  right  hands,  between  the  wrist  and  el*
bow,  and,  (almost  at  the  same  instant,)  yielding  their  left  hand
hold  on  each  other's  right  arm,  and  moving  their  left  hands  with
a  brisk  motion,  they  clasp  each  other's  right  arm  with  their  left
hands  above  the  elbow,  pressing  their  finger  nails  hard  against  the
arms:  as  they  shift  their  hands  from  place  to  place,  the  Master
says,  (in  union  with  these  movements,)  'From  grips  to  spans,  and
from  spans  to  grips,  a  twofold  cord  is  strong,  but  a  threefold  cord
is  not  easily  broken.'     The  Master  then  conducts  the  candidate
to  the  chair,  and,  as  he  ascends  the  steps,  the  Master  says,  'Bro-
ther, I  now  have  the  pleasure  of  conducting  you  into  the  oriental
chair  of  king  Solomon;'  places  a  large  cocked  hat  on  his  head,
and  comes  down  to  the  front  of  the  newly  installed  Master,  and
addresses  him  as  follows: — 'Worshipful  brother,  I  now  present
you  with  the  furniture  and  various  implements  of  our  profession;
they  are  emblematical  of  our  conduct  in  life,  and  will  now  be
enume  ated  and  explained  as  presented.'

The  Holy  Writings,  that  great  light  in  Masonry,  will  guide
you  to  all  truth;  it  will  direct  your  path  to  the  temple  of  happi*
ness,  and  point  out  to  you  the  whole  duty  of  man.  The  Square
teaches  to  regulate  our  actions  by  rule  and  line,  and  to  harmon-
ize our  conduct  by  the  principles  of  morality  and  virtue.  The
Compass  teaches  to  limit  our  desires  in  every  station;  thus  rising

*  In  some  lodges,  the  Master  takes  the  candidate  by  the  Master's  grip,
and  says,  'Brother,  you  will  please  rise,'  assisting  him.

f  There  is  much  diversity  of  opinion,  among  Masons,  respecting  this  word;
some  insist  that  Giblem  is  the  right  word;  others,  that  Gibelwn  is  the  ri#it
word: — the  latter  word  was  rejected  because  it  was  used  by  'Jaehm  ond
Boaz.'


y  Google


112  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

to  eminence  bymerit,  we  may  live  respected,  and  die  regretted.  The
Rul*  directs,  that^e  should  punctually  observe  our  duty;  press
forward  in  the  padi  of  virtue,  and,  neither  inclining  to  the  right  or
to  the  left,  in  all  our  actions  have  eternity  in  view.  The  Line
teaches  the  criterion  of  moral  rectitude;  to  avoid  dissimulation  in
conversation  and  action,  and  to  direct  our  steps  to  the  path  that
leads  to  immortality.  The  hook  of  constitutions  you  are  to  search
at  all  times;  cause  it  to  be  read  in  your  lodge,  that  none  may  pre-
tend ignorance  of  the  excellent  precepts  it  enjoins.  Lastly,  you
receive  in  charge  the  by-law  of  your  lodge  which  you  are  to  see
carefully  and  punctually  executed.

*I  will  also  present  you  with  the  mallet:  it  is  an  emblem  of
power.  One  stroke  of  the  mallet  calls  to  order,  and  calls  up  the
Junior  and  Senior  Deacons;  two  strokes  calls  up  all  the  subor-
dinate officers;  and  three,  the  whole  lodge.'  The  following  charge
is  then  delivered  to  the  newly  installed  Master,  (alias,  candidate,)
by  the  former  Master.

'Worshipful  Master,  being  appointed  Master  of  mis  lodge,  you
cannot  be  insensible  of  the  obligations  which  devolve  on  you,  as
their  head;  nor  of  your  responsibility  for  the  faithful  discharge  of
the  important  duties  annexed  to  your  appointment.  The  honor,
usefulness,  and  reputation  of  your  lodge,  will  materially  depend
on  the  skill  and  assiduity  with  which  you  manage  its  concerns;
while  the  happiness  of  its  members  will  be  generally  promoted,
in  proportion  to  the  zeal  and  ability  with  which  you  propagate  the
genuine  principles  of  our  institution.  For  a  pattern  of  informa-
tion, consider  the  luminary  of  nature;  which,  rising  in  the  east,
regularly  diffuses  light  and  lustre  to  all  within  its  circle.  In  like
manner,  it  is  your  province  to  spread  and  communicate  light  and
instruction  to  the  brethren  of  your  lodge.  Forcibly  impress  upon
them  the  dignity  and  high  importance  of  Masonry,  and  seriously
admonish  them  never  to  disgrace  it.  Charge  them  to  practice
out  of  the  lodge,  those  duties  which  they  have  been  taught  in  it;
and,  by  amiable,  discreet,  and  virtuous  conduct,  to  convince  man-
kind of  the  goodness  of  the  institution;  so  that,  when  any  one  is
said  to  be  a  member  of  it,  the  world  may  know  that  he  is  one  to
whom  the  burdened  heart  may  pour  out  its  sorrows — to  whom  dis-
tress may  prefer  its  suit — whose  hand  is  guided  by  justice,  and
his  heart  expanded  by  benevolence.  In  short,  by  a  diligent  ob-
servance of  the  by-laws  of  your  lodge,  the  constitution  of  Ma-
sonry, and,  above  all,  the  holy  scriptures,  which  are  given  as  a
rule  and  guide  of  your  faith,  you  will  be  enabled  to  acquit  your-
self with  honor  and  reputation,  and  lay  up  a  crown  of  rejoicing)


3g.Ie


LIGHT   ON   UASONRV.  113

which  shall  continue  when  time  shall  be  no  moj^^  The  Mas-
ter then  says  to  the  newly  installed  Master,  'Jfr&if'|^iFe  you*  to
the  government  of  your  lodge.'  He  then  retire*  to  &rseat,  and,
after  a  moment  or  two,  rises  and  addresses,  the  candidate,  (now
in  the  chair  as  Master;)  ' Worshipful  Master,  in  consequence  of
my  resignation,  and  the  election  of  a  new  Master,  the  seats  of
the  Wardens  have  become  vacant  It  is  necessary  you  should
have  Wardens  to  assist  you  in  the  government  of  your  lodge. —
The  constitution  requires  us  to  elect  our  officers  by  ballot,  but  it
is  common,  on  occasions  of  this  kind,  to  dispense  with  those  for-
malities, and  elect  by  ayes  and  noes;  I  move  we  do  so  on  the
present  occasion.?  The  question  is  tried  and  carried  in  the  af-
firmative.

The  Master  has  a  right  to  nominate  one  candidate  for  office,
and  the  brethren  one.  Here  a  scene  of  confusion  takes  place,
which  is  not  easily  described.  The  newly  installed  Worahipjtd
is  made  the  butt  for  every  worthy  brother  to  exercise  his  wit  up-
on. Half  a  dozen  are  up  at  a  time,  soliciting  the  Master  to
nominate  them  for  Wardens,  urging  their  several  claims,  and  de-
crying the  merits  of  others  with  much  zeal;  others  crying  out, —
'Order,  Worshipful!  keep  order!'  Others  propose  to  dance,  and
request  the  Master  to  sing  for  them:  others  whistle,  or  sing,  or
jump  about  the  room;  or  scuffle,  and  knock  down  chairs  or  bench-
es. One  proposes  to  call  from  labor  to  refreshment;  another
compliments  the  Worshipful  Master  on  his  dignified  appearance,
and  knocks  off  his  hat,  or  pulls  it  down  over  his  face;  another  in-
forms him  that  a  lady  wishes  to  enter.  If  the  Master  calls  to  or-
der, every  one  obeys  the  signal  with  the  utmost  promptness,  and
drops  upon  the  nearest  seat;  the  next  instant,  before  the  Master
can  utter  a  word,  all  are  on  their  feet  again,  and  as  noisy  as  ever:
finally,  a  nominal  election  is  effected,  and  some  prudent  member,
tired  of  such  a  ridiculous  confusion,  moves  that  the  lodge  be
closed;  which  being  done,  the  poor,  (aod,  if  a  stranger,)  much
embarrassed  candidate,  has  his  big  hat  taken  from  him,  and  is  re-
duced to  the  ranks;  but,  for  his  consolation,  the  Worshipful  Mas-
ter informs  him  that  the  preceding  scene,  notwithstanding  its  ap-
parent confusion,  is  designed  to  convey  to  him,  in  a  striking  man-
ner, the  important  lesson,  never  to  solicit,  or  accept  any  office,  or  .
station,  for  which  he  does  not  know  himself  amply  qualified.  ,

The  LECTURE  on  the  fifth,  or  Past  Master's  degree,  is  di-
vided into  five  sections.    The  first  section  treats  of  the  manner

*  This  charge  is  frequently  omitted,  when  conferring  the  degree  on  a  can-
didate; but  never,  when  really  installing  a  Master  of  a  lodge.    -
K2

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


114  LlGHf  ON   MASONRY.

of  constituting  a  lodge  of  Master  Masons.  The  second,  treats
of  the  ceremony  of  installation,  including  the  manner  of  receiv-
ing candidates  to  this  degree,  as  given  above.  The  third,  treats
of  the  ceremonies  observed  at  laying  the  foundation  stones  of
public  structures.  The  fourth  section,  of  the  ceremony  observ-
ed at  the  dedications  of  Masonic  Halls.  The  fifth,  of  the  cer-
emony observed  at  funerals,  according  to  ancient  custom,  with  the
service  used  on  the  occasion.  All  the  sections  of  this  lecture,
are  printed  in  full  in  Webb's  Monitor,  from  the  83d  to  the  125th
page;  except  such  part  of  the  second  as  relates  to  the  induction
of  candidates,  and  the  ceremony  of  opening  and  closing.  .

It  ought  to  be  here  remarked,  that  the  statement  above  is  strict-
ly correct  It  includes  all  the  ceremonies  ever  used  in  confer-
ring the  degree  of  Past  Master;  but  the  ceremonies  are  more
frequently  shortened  by  the  omission  of  some  part  of  them;  the
presenting  of  the  'various  implements  of  the  profession,'  and
their  explanations,  are  often  dispensed  with;  and  still  more  often,
the  charge.  By  comparing  this  with  the  2d  section  as  described
by  Webb,  the  reader  can  see  the  whole  ceremony  of  installing
officers,  on  all  occasions.

MOST  EXCELLENT  MASTER'S  DECREE.

A  description  of  the  ceremonies  used  in  opening  a  lodge  of
Most  Excellent  Masters,

The  lodge  being  called  to  order,  the  Most  Excellent  Master
says,  'Brother  Junior,  are  they  all  Most  Excellent  Masters  in  the
south?  J.  Warden.  'They  are,  Most  Excellent.'  Most  Excel-
lent Master.  'Brother  Senior,  are  they  all  Most  Excellent  Mas-
ters in  the  west?  S.  W.  'They  are,  Most  Excellent.'  Most
Excellent  Master.  'They  are  in  the  east;  (gives  one  rap,  which
calls  up  both  Deacons.)  Brother  Junior  Deacon,  the  first  care
of  a  Mason?  J.  D.  'To  see  the  door  tyled,  Most  Excellent.'
M.  E.  M.  'Attend  to  that  part  of  your  duty,  and  inform  the  Ty-
ler that  we  are  about  to  open  this  lodge  of  Most  Excellent  Mas-
ters, and  direct  him  to  tyle  accordingly.'  J.  D.  steps  to  the  door
and  gives  six  knocks,  which  the  Tyler  answers  with  six  more: —

*  'Be  ye  not  called  Rabbi;  (which  is  Master:)  for  one  is  your  Master,
even  Christ,  and  all  ye  are  brethren.'  Matt,  xxiii.  8.  Do  ministers  of  the
gospel,  who  are  'Most  Worshtpfid,'  and  'Most  Excellent  Masters,'  obey  this
command?


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  115

J.  D.  gives  one  more,  which  the  Tyler  answers  with  one; — the
door  is  then  partly  opened,  when  the  Junior  Deacon  informs  the
Tyler  that  a  lodge  of  Most  Excellent  Masters  is  about  *to  be
opened,  and  tells  him  to  tyle  accordingly;  and  then  returns  to  his
place  in  the  lodge,  and  says,  'Most  Excellent  Master,  the  lodge
istyled.'     M.  E.  M.  'By  whom?     J.  D.  'By  a  Most  Excellent
Master  Mason  without  the  door,  armed  with  the  proper  imple-
ments of  his  office.'     M.  E.  M.    'His  duty  there?     J.  D.    'To
keep  off  all  cowans  and  eavesdroppers;  and  see  that  none  pass
and  repass,  without  permission  from  the  chair.'      M.  E.   M.
<Ybur  place  in  the  lodge,  brother  Junior?'     J.  D.    'At  the  right
hand  of  the  Senior  Warden  ki  the  west,  Most  Excellent.'     M.
E.  M.  'Your  duty  there,  brother  Junior?'     J.  D.  'To  wait  on  the
Most  Excellent  Master  and  Wardens,  act  as  their  proxy  in  the  ac-
tive duties  of  the  lodge,  and  take  charge  of  the  door.'     M.  E.  M.
'The  Senior  Deacon's  place  in  the  lodge?'      J.  D.    'At  the  right
hand  of  the  Most  Excellent  Master  in  the  east.'      M.  E.  M.    'I
thank  you,  brother.     Your  duty  in  the  east,  brother  Senior?'     S.
Deacon.  'To  wait  on  the  Most  Excellent  Master  and  Wardens;
act  as  their  proxy  in  the  active  duties  of  the  lodge;  attend  to  the
preparation  and  introduction  of  candidates;  and  receive  and  wel-
come all  visiting  brethren.'     M.  E.  M.   'The  Secretary's  place
in  the  lodge,  brother  Senior?'      S.  D.    'At  the  left  hand  of  the
Most  Excellent  Master  in  the  east.'     M.  E.  M.     'I  thank  you,
brother.      Your  business  there,  brother  Secretary?'      Sec.    'The
better  to  observe  the  Most  Excellent  Master's  will  and  pleasure;
record  the  proceedings  of  the  lodge,  and  transmit  a  copy  of  the
same  to  the  grand  chapter,  if  required;  receive  all  monies  and
money  bills  from  the  hands  of  the  brethren;  pay  them  over  to  the
Treasurer,  and  take  his  receipt  for  the  same.'     M.  L.  M.  'The
Treasurer's  place  in  the  lodge?'     Sec.  'At  your  right  hand,  Most
Excellent'     M.  E.  M.  'I  thank  you,  brother.     Your  duty  there,
brother  Treasurer?'     Treas.  fcThe  better  to  observe  the  Most  Ex-
cellent Master's  will  and  pleasure;  receive  all  monies  and  mon-
ey bills  from  the  hands  of  the  Secretary;  keep  a  just  and  true  ac-
count of  the  same;  pay  them  out  by  the  order  of  the  Most  Ex-
cellent Master,  and  consent  of  the  brethren.'      M.  E.  M.    'The
Juniof  Warden's  place  in  the  lodge?'     Treas.  'In  the  south,  M.
Excellent.'      M.  E.  M.    'I  thank  you,  brother.     Your  business
in  the  south,  brother  Junior?'     J.  W.  'As  the  sun  in  the  south,  at
high  meridian,  is  the  beauty  and  glory  of  the  day;  so  stands  the
Junior  Warden  in  the  south,  the  better  to  observe  the  time  of  high
twelve;  call  the  craft  from  labor  to  refreshment;  superintend  them
during  the  hours  thereof;  see  that  none  convert  the  hours  of  re*

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC


116  LI6kT   ON   MASONRY.

freshment  into  that  of  intemperance,  or  excess;  call  them  again
in  due  season;  that  the  Most  Excellent  Master  may  have  honor,
and  they  profit  thereby.'      M.  E.  M.    'The  Senior  Warden's
place  in  the  lodge?'    J.  W.  'In  the  west,  Most  Excellent.'     M.
E.  M.    'I  thank  you,  brother.     Your  duty  in  the  west,  brother
Senior?'      S.  W.    'As  the  sun  sets  in  the  west,  to  close  the  day;
so  stands  the  Senior  Warden  in  the  west,  to  assist  the  Most  Ex-
cellent Master  in  the  opening  of  his  lodge;  take  care  of  the  jew-
els and  implements;  see  that  none  be  lost;  pay  the  craft  their  wa-
ges, if  any  be  due;  and  see  that  none  go  away  dissatisfied.'    M.
E.  M.  'The  Most  Excellent  Master's  place  in  the  lodge?'  S.  W.
'In  the  east,  Most  Excellent'    M.  E.  M.   'His  duty  in  the  east,
brother  Senior?'      S.  W.    'As  the  sun  rises  in  the  east,  to  open
and  adorn  the  day;  so  presides  the  Most  Excellent  Master  in  the
east,  to  open  and  adorn  his  lodge;  to  set  his  craft  to  work;  gov-
ern them  with  good  and  wholesome  laws,  or  cause  the  same  to  be
done.'     (In  some  lodges  the  foregoing  ceremonies  are  omitted.)
M.  E.  M.    'Brother  Senior  Warden,  assemble  the  brethren  round
the  altar  for  the  purpose  of  opening  this  lodge  of  Most  Excel-
lent Master  Masons.'       S.  W.    'Brethren,  please  to  assemble
round  the  altar  for  the  purpose  of  opening  this  lodge  of  Most
Excellent  Master  Masons.'     In  pursuance  of  this  request,  the
brethren  assemble  round  the  altar,  and  form  a  circle,  and  stand  in
such  a  position  as  to  touch  each  other,  leaving  a  space  for  the
Most  Excellent*  Master;  they  then  all  kneel  on  their  left  knee,
and  join  hands,  each  giving  his  right  hand  brother  his  left  hand,
and  his  left  hand  brother  his  right  hand;  their  left  arms  upper-
most, and  their  heads  inclining  downward:  all  being  thus  situat-
ed, the  Most  Excellent  Master  reads  the  following  portion  of
scripture:  Psalm  xxiv. — 'The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness
thereof;  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein.     For  he  hath
founded  it  upon  the  seas,  and  established  it  upon  the  floods.  Who
shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord?  and  who  shall  stand  in  his
holy  place?    He  that  hath  clean  hands,  and  a  pure  heart;  who
hath  not  lifted  up  his  soul  unto  vanity,  nor  sworn  deceitfully.  He
shall  receive  the  blessing  from  the  Lord,  and  righteousness  from
the  God  of  his  salvation.     This  is  the  generation  of  them  that
seek  him,  that  seek  thy  face,  O  Jacob.    Selah.      Lift  up  your
heads,  0  ye  gates;  and  be  ye  lifted  up,  ye  everlasting  doors;  and
the  King  of  glory  shall  come  in.    Who  is  this  King  of  glory?
Hie  Lord,  strong  and  mighty;  the  Lord,  mighty  in  battle.     Lift
up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates;  even  lift  them  up,  ye  everlasting  doors;
and  the  King  of  glory  shall  come  in.    Who  is  this  King  of  glo-
iv?    The  Loud  of  hosts;  he  is  die  King  of  glory.    Selah.'    Tbe

•


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  117

reading  being  ended,  the  Most  Excellent  Master  then  kneels,
joins  hands  with  the  others,  which  closes  the  circle;  they  all  lift
their  hands,  as  joined  together,  up  and  down  six  times,  keeping
time  with  the  words  as  the  Most  Excellent  Master  repeats  them,
one,  two,  three;  one,  two,  three  This  is  masonically  called  bal-
ancing. They  then  rise,  disengage  their  hands,  and  lift  them  up
above  their  heads  with  a  moderate,  and  somewhat  graceful,  mo-
tion; cast  up  their  eyes,  turning,  at  the  same  time,  to  the  ri^ht,
they  extend  their  arms  and  then  suffer  them  to  fall  loose  and
nerveless  against  their  sides.  This  sign  is  said,  by  Masons,  to
represent  the  sign  of  astonishment,  made  by  tbe  queen  of  Sheba,
on  first  viewing  Solomon's  temple.  The  Most  Excellent  Mas-
ter now  resumes  his  seat,  and  says,  'Brethren,  attend  to  giving
the  signs,'  The  Most  Excellent  Master  then  gives  all  the  signs
from  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason,  up  to  the  degree  of  Most
Excellent  Master;  in  which  they  all  join  and  imitate  him.  M.
E.  M.  'Brother  Senior  Warden,  you  will  please  to  inform  brother
Junior,  and  request  him  to  inform  the  brethren,  that  it  is  my  will
and  pleasure  that  this  lodge  of  Most  Excellent  Master  Masons
be  now  opened  for  despatch  of  business,  strictly  forbidding  all  pri-
vate committees,  or  profane  language,  whereby  the  harmony  of
the  same  may  be  interrupted,  while  engaged  in  their  lawful  pur-
suits, under  no  less  penalty  than  the  by-laws  enjoin,  or  a  majori-
ty of  the  brethren  may  see  cause  to  inflict.'  Senior  Warden.
'Brother  Junior,  it  is  the  will  and  pleasure  of  the  Most  Excellent
Master,  that  this  lodge  of  Most  Excellent  Master  Masons  be
now  opened  for  despatch  of  business,  strictly  prohibiting  all  pri-
vate committees,  or  profane  language,  whereby  the  harmony  of
the  same  may  be  interrupted,  while  engaged  in  their  lawful  pur-
suits, under  no  less. penalty  than  the  by-laws  enjoin,  or  a  majority
of  the  brethren  may  see  cause  to  inflict.'  J.  W.  'Brethren,  you
have  heard  the  Most  Excellent  Master's  will  and  pleasure,  as
communicated  to  me  by  brother  Senior — so  let  it  be  done.'

CEREMONIES    OP    INITIATION.

The  lodge  being  now  opened,  and  ready  for  the  reception  of
candidates,  the  Senior  Deacon  repairs  to  the  preparation  room,
where  the  candidate  is  in  waiting,  takes  off  his  coat,  puts  a  ca-
ble-tow six  times  round  his  body,  and,  in  this  situation,  conducts
him  to  the  door  of  the  lodge;  against  which  he  gives  six  distinct
knocks,  which  are  answered,  by  the  same  number,  by  the  Junior
Deacon  from  within:  the  Senior  Deacon  then  gives  one  knock,
and  the  Junior  Deacon  answers  by  giving  one  more:  the  door  is
then  partly  opened  by  the  Junior  Deacon,  who  says,  'Who  comes


y  Google


118  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

there?  Senior  Deacon  'A  worthy  brother,  who  has  been  regu-
larly initiated  as  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason;  passed  to  the
degree  of  Fellow  Craft;  raised  to  the*  sublime  degree  of  Master
Mason;  advanced  to  the  honorary  degree  of  a  Mark  Master
Mason;  presided  in  the  chair  as  Past  Master;  and  now  wishes
for  further  light  in  Masonry,  by  being  received  and  acknowledged
as  a  Most  Excellent  Master.'  Junior  Deacon.  'Is  it  of  his  own
free  will  and  accord  he  makes  tins  request?'  Senior  Deacon.  'It
is.'  J.  Deacon.  'Is  he  duly  and  truly  prepared?'  S.  Deacon.
'He  is.'  J.  Deacon.  'Is  he  worthy  and  well  qualified?'  S.  D.
'He  is.'  J.  D.  'Has  he  made  suitable  proficiency  in  the  preced-
ing degrees?'  S.  D.  'He  has.'  J.  D.  'By  what  further  right,
or  bonefit,  does  he  expect  to  obtain  this  favor?'  S.  D.  'By  the
benefit  of  a  pass  word.'  J.  D.  'Has  he  a  pass  word?'  S.  D.
'He  has  not,  but  I  have  it  for  him.'  J.  D.  'Will  you  give  it  to
me?'  S.  D.  whispers  in  the  ear  of  the  Junior  Deacon  the  word,
<R  ABBONL'  (In  many  lodges,  the  Past  Master's  word,  'GIB-
LEM,'  is  used  as  a  pass  word  for  this  degree,  and  the  word,
'Jtoooora,'  as  the  real  word.)  J.  D.  'The  word  is  right;  since
this  is  the  case,  you  will  wait  until  the  Most  Excellent  Master  in
the  east,  is  made  acquainted  with  your  request,  and  his  answer
returned.'  J.  Deacon  repairs  to  the  Most  Excellent  Master  in
the  east,  and  gives  six  raps,  as  at  the  door.  M.  E.  M.  'Who
comes  here?'  J.  D.  'A  worthy  brother,  who  has  been  regularly
initiated  as  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason;  passed  to  the  degree
of  Fellow  Craft;  raised  to  the  sublime  degree  of  a  Master  Ma-
son; advanced  to  the  honorary  degree  of  Mark  Master  Mason;
presided  in  the  chair  as  Past  Master;  and  now  wishes  for  further
light  in  Masonry,  by  being  received  and  acknowledged  as  a  Most  *
Excellent  Master.'  M.  E.  M.  'Is  it  of  his  own  free  will  and
choice  he  makes  this  request?'  J.  D.  'It  is.'  M.  E.  M.  'Is  he
duly  and  truly  prepared?'  J.  D.  4He  is.'  M.  E.  M.  'Is  he
worthy  and  well  qualified?'  J.  D.  'He  is.'  M.  E.  M.  'Has
he  made  suitable  proficiency  in  the  preceding  degrees?'  J.  D.
'He  has.'  M.  E.  M.  'By  what  further  right,  or  benefit,  does  he
expect  to  obtain  this  favor?'  J.  D.  'By  the  benefit  of  a  pass
word.'  M.  E.  M.  'Has  he  a  pass  word?'  .  J.  D.  'He  has  not,
but  I  have  it  for  him.'  M.  E.  M.  'Will  you  give  it  to  me?'  J.
Deacon  whispers,  in  the  ear  of  the  Most  Excellent  Master,  the
word,  'RABBONI.'  M.  E.  M.  'The  pass  is  right;  since  he
comes  endowed  with  all  these  necessary  qualifications,  let  him
enter  this  lodge  of  Most  Excellent  Masters,  in  the  name  of  the
Lord.'  The  candidate  is  then  conducted  six  times  round  the
lodge,  by  the  Senior  Deacon,  moving  with  the  sun.     The  first


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  »  119

time  they  pass  round  the  lodge,  when  opposite  the  Junior  War-
den, he  gives  one  blow  with  the  gavel;  when  opposite  the  Senior
Warden  he  does  the  same;  and  likewise  when  opposite  the  Most
Excellent  Master.     The  second  time  round  each  gives  two  blows,
the  third,  three;  and  so  on,  until  they  arrive  to  six.     During  this
time,  the  Most  Excellent  Master  reads  the  following  passage  of
scripture: — Psalm  cxxii.     'I  was  glad  when  they  said  unto  me,
Let  us  go  into  the*house  of  the  Lord.    Our  feet  shall  stand  with-
in thy  gates,  0  Jerusalem.     Jerusalem  is  builded  as  a  city  that
is  compact  together:  \\  hither  the  tribes  go  up,  the  tribes  of  the
Lord,  unto  the  testimony  of  Israel,  to  give  thanks  unto  the  name
of  the  Lord.     For  there  are  set  thrones  of  judgment,  tfce  thrones
of  the  house  of  David.     Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem:  they
shall  prosper  that  love  thee.   Peac^e  be  witffin  thy  walls,  and  pros-
perky  within  thy  palaces.      For  my  brethren  and  companions7
sakes,  I  will  now  say,  Peace  be  within  thee.      Because  of  the
house  of  the  Lord,  our  God,  I  will  seek  thy  good.'     i  he  reading
of  the  foregoing  is  so  timed,  as  not  to  be  fully  ended  until  the
Senior  Deacon  and  candidate  have  performed  the  sixth  revolution.
Immediately  after  this,  the  Senior  Deacon  and  candidate  arrive
at  the  Junior  Warden's  station  in  the  south,  when  the  same  ques-
tions are  asked  and  the  same  answers  returned,  as  at  the  door;
(who  comes  here (  &c.)     The  Junior  Warden  then  directs  the
candidate  to  pass  on  to  the    enior  Warden  in  the  west,  for  fur-
ther examination;  where  the  saaie  questions  are  asked  and  an-
swers returned,  as  before.     *i  he  k  enior  W  arden  directs  him  to
be  conducted  to  the  Right  Wor:  hipf'ul  Master  in  the  east,  for  fur-
ther examination.  *  1  he  h.  V  .  Maste*-  asks  the  same  questions
and  receives  the  same»answir.s.  as  before.  He  then  says,  'Please
to  conduct  the  candidate  back  to  the  west,  fron;  whence  he  came,
and  put  him  in  the  care  of  the    enior  Vs  arden,  and  request  him ,
to  teach  the  candidate  how  to  appi  oachthe  east,  by  advancing  up-  *
on  six  upright  regular  steps  to  the  sixth  step,  and  place  him  in  a
proper  position  to  take  upon  him  the  solemn  oath,  or  obligation*
of  a  Most  Excellent  Master  Mason.'  The  candidate  is* conduct-
ed back  to  the  west,  and  put  in  care  of  the  Senior  Warden,  who
informs  him  how  to  approach  the  east,  as  directed  by  the  Most
Excellent  Master:  The  candidate  kneels  on  both  knees,  and  pla-
ces both  hands  on  the .  leaves  of  an  opened  Kible,  square,  and
compass.     The  Most  Excellent  Master  now  comes  forward,  and
says,  'Brother,  you  are  now  placed  in  a  proper  position  to  take
upon  you  the  solemn  oath,  or  obligation,  of  a  Most  Excellent
Master  Mason;  which  I  assure  you,  as  before,  is  neither  to  aftect
your  religion,  or  politics.     If  you  are  willing  to  take  it,  repeat


y  Google


120  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

your  name,  and  say  after  me/  The  following  obligation  is  then
administered.

'I,  A  B,  of  my  own  free  will  and  accord,  in  presence  of  Al-
mighty God  and  this  lodge  of  Most  Excellent  Master  Masons,
*  do  hereby  and  hereon,  in  addition  to  my  former  obligations,  most
solemnly  and  sincerely  promise  and  swear,  that  1  will  not  give  the
degree  of  a  Most  Excellent  Master  to  any  of  an  inferior  degree,
nor  to  any  other  person,  or  persons,  in  (he  known  world,  except
it  be  to  a  true  and  lawful  brother,  or  brethren,  of  this  degree,  and
wimin  the  body  of  a  just  and  lawfully  constituted  lodge  of  such;
and  not  unto  him  nor  them  whom  I  shall  hear  so  to  be,  but  unto
him  and  them  only  whom  I  shall  find  so  to  be,  after  strict  trial
and  due  examination,  or  lawful  information.  Furthermore,  do  I
promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  obey  all  regular  signs  and  sum-
mons, given,  handed,  sent,  or  thrown  to  me  from  a  brother  of  this
degree,  or  from  the  body  of  a  just  and  lawfully  constituted  lodge
of  such,  provided  it  be  within  the  length  of  my  cable-tow,  if  in
my  power.  Furthermore,  do  1  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will
support  the  constitution  of  the  General  Grand  Royal  Arch  C Chap-
ter of  the  United  States  of  America;  also  the  Grand  Royal  Arch
Chapter  of  the  state  of  ,  under  which  this  lodge  is

held,  and  conform  to  all  the  by-laws,  rules,  and  regulations  of
this,  or  any  other  lodge,  of  which  I  may,  at  any  time  hereafter,
become  a  member.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that
I  will  aid  and  assist  all  poor  and  indigent  brethren  of  this  degree,
their  widows  and  orphans,  wheresoever  dispersed  around  the  globe,
as  far  as  in  my  power,  without  injuring  myself,  or  family.  Fur-
thermore, do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  the  secrets  of  a  brother  of
this  degree,  given  to  me  in  charge  as  such*  and  I  knowing  them
to  be  such,  shall  remain  as  secret  and  inviolable  in  my  breast  as
in  his  own,  murder  and  treason  excepted,  and  the  same  left  to  my
own  free  will  and  choice.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,
that  I  will  not  wrong  this  lodge  of  Most  Excellent  Master  Ma-
sons, nor  a  brother  of  this  degree,  to  the  value  of  any  thing,
knowingly,  myself,  nor  suffer  it  to  be  done  by  others-,  if  in  my
power  to  prevent  it;  but  will  give  due  and  timely  notice  of  all  ap-
proaches of  danger,  if  in  my  power.  Furthermore,  do  I  prom-
ise and  swear,  that  I  will  dispense  light  and  knowledge  to  all  ig-
norant and  uninformed  brethren,  at  all  times,  as  far  as  in  my  pow-
er, without  material  injury  to  myself,  or  family.  To  all  which,  I
do  most  solemnly  swear,  with  a  fixed  and  steady  purpose  of  mind
in  me,  to  keep  and  perform  the  same;  binding  myself  under  no
less  penalty  than  to  have  my  breast  torn  open,  and  my  heart  and


d  by  Google


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  121

vitals  taken  from  thence,  and  exposed  to  rot  on  the  dunghil,  if
ever  I  violate  any  part  of  this  my  solemn  oath,  or  obligation,  of  a
Most  Excellent  Master  Mason:  so  help  me  God,  and  keep  me
steadfast  in  the  due  performance  of  the  same.'  'Detach  your
hands  and  kiss  the  book.'

•  The  candidate  is  now  requested  to  rise,  and  the  Most  Excel-
lent Master  gives  him  the  sign,  grip,  and  word  appertaining  to
this  degree.  The  sign  is  given  by  placing  your  hands  one  on
each  breasfc,  the  fingers  meeting  in  the  centre  of  the  body,  and
jerking  them  apart  as  though  you  were  trying  to  tear  open  your
breast:  it  alludes  to  the  penalty  of  the  obligation.  The  grip  is
given  by  taking  each  other  by  the  right  hand,  and  clasping  them
so  that  each  cOmpress  the  third  finger  of  the  other  with  his  thumb.
(If  one  hand  is  large  and  the  other  small,  they  cannot  both  give
the  grip  at  the  same  time.)  It  is  called  the  grip  of  all  grips,  be-
cause it  is  said  to  cover  all  the  preceding  grips.  The  Most  Ex-
cellent holds  the  candidate  by  the  hand,  and  puts  the  inside  of  his
right  foot  to  the  inside  of  the  candidate's  right  foot,  and  whispers
in  his  ear,  'RABBONL'  In  some  lodges,  the  word  is  not  giv-
en in  a  whisper,  but  in  a  low  voice.  After  these  ceremonies  are
over,  and  the  members  seated,  some  noise  is  intentionally  made,
by  snuffling  the  feet.

M.  E.  M.  'Brother  Senior,  what  is  the  cause  of  this  confu-
sion? S.  W.  'Is  not  this  the  day  set  apart  for  the  celebration  of
the  cape-stone,  Most  Excellent?'  M.  E,  M.  'I  will  ask  brother
Secretary.  Brother  Secretary,  is  mis  the  day  set  apart  for  the
celebration  of  the  cape-stone?'  Secretary,  (looking  in  his  book,)
'It  is,  Most  Excellent.'  M.  E.  M*  'Brother  Senior  W  arden,  as-
semble the  brethren,  and  form  a  procession,  for  the  purpose  of
celebrating  the  cape-stone.'  The  brethren  then  assemble,  (the
candidate  stands  aside,  not  joining  in  the  procession;)  form  a  pro-
cession double  file,  and  march  six  times  round  the  lodge,  against
the  course  of  the  sun,  singing  the  following  song,  and  giving  all
the  signs  from  an  Entered  Apprentice  to  that  of  Most  Excellent
Master.  When  opposite  the  Most  Excellent  Master,  the  first
time  they  march  round  the  lodge,  each  member  gives  the  first
sign  of  an  Entered  Apprentice,  and  preserves  it  until  he  nearly
arrives  opposite  the  Most  Excellent  a  second  time,  then  gives  the
second  sign,  and  continues  it  in  the  same  manner,  and  so  of  all
others,  up  to  that  of  this  degree,  saying,

L


d  by  Google


I2i  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY*

'All  hail  to  the  morning,  that  bids  us  rejoice:
The  temple's  completed,  exalt  high  each  voice.
The  cape-stone  is  finished — our  labor  is  o'er,
The  sound  of  the  gavel  shall  hail  us  no  more.

'To  the  power  Almighty,  who  ever  has  guided

The  tribes  of  old  Israel,  exalting  their  fame;
To  Him,  who  hath  governed  our  hearts  undivided,

Let's  send  forth  our  vows  to  praise  bis  great  name^

'Companions,  assemble  on  this  ioyful  day,
(The  occasion  is  glorious,)  the  key-stone  to  lay;
Fulfilled  is  the  promise,  by  the  Ancient  of  Dats,
To  bring  forth  the  cape-stone  with  shouting  and  praise.

(The  key-stone  is  now  produced  and  laid  on  the  altar. ;

'There  is  no  more  occasion  for  level  or  plumb-line,

For  trowel  or  gavel,  for  compass  or  square:*
"Our  works  are  completed,  the  ark  safely  seated,!

And  we  shall  be  greeted  as  workmen  most  rare.

'Names,  those  that  are  worthy  our  tribes,  who  have  shared
And  proved  themselves  faithful,  shall  meet  their  reward:
Their  virtue  and  knowledge,  industry  and  skill,
Have  our  approbation — have  gained  our  good  will.

'We  accept  and  receive  them,!  Most  Excellent  Masters;

Trusted  with  honor  and  power  to  preside
Among  worthy  craftsmen,  where'er  assemble,

The  knowledge  of  Masons  to  spread  far  and  wide.

'ALMIGHTY  JEHOVAH,||  descend  now  and  fill
This  lodge  with  thy  glory,  oar  hearts  with  good  will:
Preside  at  our  meeting,  assist  us  to  find
True  pleasure  in  teaching  good  will  to  mankind.

'Thy  wisdom  inspired  the  great  institution;

*thy  strength  shall  support  it  till  nature  expire:-^
And  when  the  creation  shall  fall  into  ruin,

Its  beauty  shall  rise  through  the  mist  of  the  fire.'§

*  Here  the  brethren  divest  themselves  of  their  jewels,  sashes,  aprons,  kc.

f  The  ark,  which  had  been  carried  by  two  brethren  in  the  procession,  is
here  placed  on  the  altar.

I  At  these  words  the  candidate  is  received  into  the  procession.

i||  Here  all  kneel  in  a  circle  round  the  altar,

§  At  the  time  the  ark  is  placed  on  the  altar,  there  is  also  placed  on  it  a  pot
of  incense,  to  which  fire  is  communicated  by  the  Most  Excellent  Master,
just  as  tile  last  line  of  the  song  is  sung:  this  pot  to  contain  incense,  is  some-
times an  elegant  silver  urn;  but  if  the  lodge  is  too  poor  to  afford  that,  a
common  tea-pot,  with  spout  and  handle  bro&en  oft  answers  every  purpose:
—for  incense  some  pieces  of  paper  are  dipped  in  spirits  of  turpentine.


y  Google


LIGHT   ON  MAS0NBT.  183

The  members  now  all  join  hands,  as  in  opening;  and  whale  in
this  attitude,  the  Most  Excellent  reads  the  following  passage  of
scripture: — 2  Chron.  vii.  1 — 4.  'Now  when  Solomon  had  made
an  end  of  praying,  the  fire  came  down  from  heaven,  and  consum-
ed the  burnt-offering  and  the  sacrifices;  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord
filled  the  house.  And  the  priests  could  not  enter  into  the  house
of  the  Lord,  because  the  glory  of  the  Lord  had  filled  the  Lord's
house.  And  when  all  the  children  of  Israel  saw  how  the  fire
came  down,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  upon  the  house,  they  bow-
ed themselves  with  their  faces  to  the  ground  upon  the  pavement,
and  worshipped,  and  praised  the  Lord,  saying,  FOR  HE  IS
GOOD*  FOR  HIS  MERCY  ENDURETH  FOR  EVER.'
The  members  now  balance  six  times,  as  before;  in  opening,  rise
and  balance  six  times  more,  disengaging  themselves  from  each
other,  and  take  their  seats;  the  Most  Excellent  Master  then  de-
livers the  following  charge  to  the  candidate: —

'Brother,  your  admittance  to  this  degree  of  Masonry,  is  a
proof  of  the  good  opinion  the  brethren  of  this  lodge  entertain  of
your  masonic  abilities.  Let  this  consideration  induce  you  to  be
careful  of  forfeiting,  by  misconduct  and  inattention  to  our  rules,
that  esteem  which  has  raised  you  to  the  rank  you  now  possess.

'It  is  one  of  your  great  duties,  as  a  Most  Excellent  Master,  to
dispense  light  and  truth  to  the  uninformed  Mason;  and  I  need
not  remind  you  of  the  impossibility  of  complying  with  this  obli-
gation without  possessing  an  accurate  acquaintance  with  the  lee^
tures  of  each  degree.

'If  you  are  not  already  completely  conversant  in  all  the  de-
grees heretofore  conferred  on  you,  remember,  that  an  indulgence
prompted  by  a  belief  that  you  will  apply  yourself  with  double
diligence  to  make  yourself  ao,  has  induced  the  brethren  to  accent
you.  ,  F

'Let  it,  therefore,  be  your  unremitting  study  to  acquire  such  a
degree  of  knowledge  and  information  as  shall  enable  you  to  dis-
charge with  propriety  the  various  duties  incumbent  on  you,  and  to
preserve  unsullied  the  title  now  conferred  upon  you  of  a  Most
Excellent  Master.'

After  this  a  motion  is  made,  by  some  of  the  members,  to  close
the  lodge.  This  motion  being  accepted  and  received,  the  Most
Excellent  says,  'Brother  Junior  Warden,  you  will  please  assem-

*  At  the  words  "for  He  is  good,"  the  Most  Excellent  Master,  who  is  high
pnest  of  the  chapter,  kneels  and  joins  hands  with  the  rest;  they  all  tfaenjre-
peat  in  concert  the  words,  "For  He  is  good,  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever,"
si*  times,  each  time  bowing  their  heads  low  towards  the  floor.


d  by  Google


124  LIGHT   ON   MASONRT.

ble  the  brethren  round  the  altar,  for  the  purpose  of  closing  this
lodge  of  Most  Excellent  Masters.'  The  brethren  Immediately
assemble  round  the  altar  in  a  circle,  and  kneel  on  the  right  knee,
put  their  left  arms  over  and  join  hands,  as  before;  while  kneeling
in  this  position,  the  Most  Excellent  reads  the  following  Psalm:—
Psalm  cxxxiv.  'Behold,  bless  ye  the  Lord,  all  ye  servants  of  the
Lord,  which  by  night  stand  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  Lift  up
your  hands  in  the  sanctuary,  and  bless  the  Lord.  The  Lord  that
•made  heaven  and  earth  bless  thee  out  of  Zion.'  The  Most  Ex-
cellent then  closes  the  circle  as  in  opening,  when  they  balance
six  times,  rise  and  balance  six  times  more,  disengage  their  hands,
and  give  all  the  signs  downwards,  and  declares  the  lodge  closed-


ROYAL  ARCH  DEGREE.

All  legally  constituted  bodies  of  Royal  Arch  Masons  are  call-
ed Chapters,  as  regular  bodies  of  Masons  of  the  preceding  de-
grees are  called  lodges.     All  the  degrees  from  Mark  Master  to
Royal  Arch,  are  given  under  the  sanction  of  Royal  irch  Chap-
ters.    A  person  making  application  to  a  Chapter  for  admission,
is  understood  as  applying  for  all  the  degrees,  unless  he  states  in
his  application  the  particular  degree  or  degrees  he  wishes  to  re-
ceive.    If  you  ask  a  Mark  Master  if  he  belongs  to  a  Chapter,
he  will  answer  yes,  but  has  only  been  marked.      If  a  person
make  application  for  all  the  degrees,  and  wishes  to  receive  them
all  at  one  time,  he  is  frequently  balloted  for  only  on  the  mark  de-
gree, it  being  understood,  that  if  accepted  on  that,  he  is  to  re-
ceive the  whole.     The  members  of  'Chapters  who  have  received
all  the  degrees*  style  each  other  companions;  if  they  have  not  re-
ceived the  Royal  Arch  degree,  brothers.     It  is  a  point  of  the
Royal  Arch  degree  'not  to  assist,  or  be  present,  at  the  conferring
of  this  degree  upon  more  or  less  than  three  candidates  at  one
time.'     If  there  are  not  three  candidates  present,  one  or  two
companions,  as  the  case  may  be,  volunteer  to  represent  candid-
ates so  as  to  make  the  requisite  number,  or  a  team  as  it  is  tech-
nically styled,  and  accompany  the  candidate  or  candidates  through
all  the  stages  of  exaltation.     Every  Chapter  must  consist  of  a
High  Priest,  King,  Scribe,  Captain  of  the  Host,  Principal  Sojour-
ner, Royal  Arch  Captain,  three  Grand  Masters  of  the  Veils,
Treasurer,  Secretary,  and  as  many  members  as  maybe  found
convenient  for  working  to  advantage.     In  the  lodges  for  confer-
ring the  preparatory  degrees,  the  High  Priest  presides  as  Master*

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


LIGHT  OR  M1BONRF.  lfcfc

the  King  as  Senior  Warden,  the  Scribe  as  Junior  Warden,  Hie
Captain  of  the  Host,  as  Marshal,  or  Master  of  ceremonies,  the
principal  Sojourner,  as  Senior  Deacon;  the  Royal  Arch  Captain,
as  Junior  Deacon;  the  Master  of  the  first,  second  and  third  Veils,
as  Junior,  Senior  and  Master  Overseers;  the  Treasurer,  Secretary,
and  Tyler,  as  officers  of  corresponding  rank.  The  chapter  is
authorised  to  confer  the  degrees  by  a  charter,  or  warrant  from
some  Grand  Chapter.  *  *

The  members  being  assembled,  the  High  Priest  calls  to  cyder
and  demands  of  the  Royal  Arch  Captain  if  all  present  are  R.  A.
Masons.  The  Royal  Arch  Captain  ascertains  and  answers  in  the
affirmative.  The  High  Priest  then  directs  him  to  cause  die  Ty-
ler to  be  stationed,  which*  being  done,  the  High  Priest  says,
'Companions  Royal  Arch  Masons,  you  will  please  to  clothe,  and
arrange  yourself  for  the  purpose  of  opening  the  chapter.9  The
furniture  of  the  chapter  is  then  arranged,  the  companions  clothed
with  scarlot  sashes  and  aprons,  and  the  officers  invested  with  the
proper  insignia  of  their  respective  offices,  and  repair  to  their  prop-
er stations.  The  High  Priest  then  demands  whether  the  chapter
is  tyied,  and  is  answered  the  same  as  in  a  lodge.  The  stations
and  duties  of  the  offices  are  then  recited,  (see  lecture,  sec.  1st.)
Alter  the  duties  of  the  officers  are  recited,  the  High  Priest  directs
the  captain  of  the  host  to  assemble  the  companions  at  the  altar.
The  companions  form  a  circle  about  the  altar,  all  kneeling  on  the
right  knee,  with  their  arms  crossed,  right  arm  uppermost  and  hands
joined,  leaving  a  space  for  the  High  Priest,  who  reads  the. follow-
ing passages  of  scripture,  2d  Thess.  tii.  6 — 18. ''.  Now  we  com-
mand you,  brethren,  that  ye  withdraw  yourselves  from  every
brother  that  walketh  disorderly,  and  not  after  the  tradition  that  ye
have  received  of  us,  for  yourselves  know,  how  ye  might  to  follow
us,  for  we  behaved  not  ourselves  disorderly  among  you,  neither
did  we  eat  any  man's  bread  for  nought,  but  wrought  with  labpr
and  travail  night  and  day,  that  we  might  not  be  chargeable  to  any
of  you;  not  because  we  have  not  power,  but  to  make  oursdmxs
an  ensample  unto  you  to  follow  us.  For  even  when  we  were
with  you,  this  we  commanded  you,  that  if  any  man  would  not
work,  neither  should  he  eat  For  we  hear  that  there  are  some,
which  walk  among  you  disorderly,  working  not  at  all,  but  are  bu-
sy-bodies. Now  them  that  are  such,  we  command' and  exhort,
that  with  quietness  they  work  and  eat  their  own  bread.  But  ye,
brethren,  be  not  weary  in  well  doing.  And  if  any  man  obey  not
our  word,  note  that  man  and  have  no  company  with  him,  that  he
may  be  ashamed.  Yet  count  him  not  as  an  enemy  but  admonish
him  as  a  brother.    Now  the  Lord  of  peace  himself,  give  you

L2

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC


126  LIGHT  OH  MA80Nfcr.

peace  always.  The  salutation  of  Paul,  with  mine  own  hand,
which  is  the  token,  so  I  write/  (The  reader  is  requested  to  com-
pare this  with  the  scripture— -he  will  observe  that  the  name  of  the
Saviour  is  intentionally  left  out)  The  High  Priest  then  takes  his
place  in  the  circle.  The  whole  circle  men  balance  with  their  arms
three  times  three,  mat  is,  they  raise  their  arms  and  let  them  fall
upon  their  knees  three  times  in  concert,  after  a  short  pauie  three
times  more,  and  after  another  pause  three  times  more.  Then  all
break  into  squads  of  three,  and  raise  the  living  arch.  '  This  is
done  by  each  companion's  taking  his  left  wrist  in  his  right  hand,
and  with  their  left  hands,  the  three  grasp  each  other's  right  wrists,
and  raise  them  above  their  heads.  This  constitutes  the  living
arch,  under  which  the  Grand  Omniflc  Royal  Arch  word  must  be
given,  but  it  must  also  be  given  by  three  times  three.  In  opening
the  chapter  this  is  done  in  the  following  manner.  After  the  three
have  joined  hands  they  repeat  these  lines  in  concert,  and  at  the
close  of  each  line  raise  them  above  their  heads,  and  say,  'As
we  three  did  agree,  the  sacred  word  to  keep,'  'And  as  we  three
did  agree,  the  sacred  word  to  search,'  'So  we  three  do  agree,  to
raise  this  Royal  Arch.'  At  the  close  of  the  last  line  they  keep
their  hands  raised,  while  they  incline  their  heads  under  them,  aw!
the  first  whispers  in  the  ear  of  the  second  the  syllable  J  A  H,  (he
second  to  the  third,  B  U  H,  and  the  third  to  the  1st,  L  U  N.
The  second  then  commences,  and  it  goes  round  again  in  the  same
manner,  then  the  third;  so  that  each  companion  pronounces  each
syllable  of  the  word.*  They  then  separate,  each  repairing  to  his
station,  and  the  High  Priest  ^declares  the  chapter  opened.

The  LECTUHE  of  the  ROYAL  ARCH  degree  is  dividedin-
to  two  sections.  The  first  section  designates  the  appellation,
♦number  and  stttion,  of  the  several  officers,  and  points  out  the  pur-
pose and  duty  of  their  respective  stations.

Question.  Are  you  a  Royal  Arch  Mason?  Answer.  I  am  that
t  am.f     Q.  How  shall  I  know  you  to  be  a  R.  A.  Mason?  A.  By

*There  is  a. great  difference  in  the  manner  of  giving  the  R.  A.  word  m  the-
different  chapters.  Sometimes  it  is  given  at  the  opening,  as  above  stated,
sometimes  they  commence  with  the  word  GOD,  eacn  one  pronouncing  a  let-
ter of  it  in  succession,  until  they  have  each  pronounced  every  letter  of  the
Word,  then  the  word  JEHOVAH,  a  syllable  at  a  time,  and  men  the  word
JAHBUHLUN,  as  described.  There  are  also  chapters  in- which  the  latter
word  is  not  known*  and  there  are  others  in  which  the  word  is  not  given  at
all  at  opening.

t(I  am  that  I  am,'  is  one  of  the  peculiar  names  of  fteity,  and  to  use  it,
as  above,  is,  to  say  the  least,  taking  the  name  of  God  in  vain!  How  must  the
humble  disciple  of  Jesus  feel  when  constrained  thus  to  answer  the  question:
Are  you  a  Royal  Arch  Mason  ?

Digitized  by  VjC


light  on  auiosar.  127

three  times  three.  Q.  Where  was  you,made  a  R.  A.  Mason?
JL  In  a  just  and  legally  constituted  chapter  of  R.  A.  Masons,
consisting  of  Most  Excellent,  High  Priest,  King,  and  Scribe,
Capt.  of  the  Host,  Principal  Sojourner,  Royal  Arch  Captain,  and
the  three  Grand  Masters  of  the  Vefla,  assembled  in  a  room  or
place  representing  the  tabernacle  erected  by  our  ancient  brethren,
near  the  ruins  of  king  Solomon's  temple.  Q.  Where  is  the  High
Priest  stationed,  and  what  are  his  duties?  A.  He  is  stationed  in
the  sanctum  sanctorum.  His  duty  with  the  King  and  Scribe,  to
sit  in  the  Grand  Council,  to  form  plans  and  give  directions  to  the
workmen.  Q.  The  King's  station  and  duty?  4.  At  the  right
hand  of  the  High  Priest,  to  aid  him  by  his  advice  and  counsel,
and  in  his  absence  to  preside.  Q.  The  Scribe's  station  and  duty?
A.  At  the  left  hand  of  the  High  Priest,  to  assist  him  and  the
King  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties,  and  to  preside  in  their  ab-
sence. Q.  The  Captain  of  the  Host's  station  and  duty?  A.  At
the  right  hand  of  the  Grand  Council,  and  to  receive  their  orders,
and  see  them  duly  executed.  Q.  The  Principal  Sojourner's  sta-
tion and  duty?  A.  At  the  left  hand  of  the  Grand  Council,  to  bring
the  blind,  by  a  way  that  they  know  not,  to  lead  them  in  paths  they
have  not  known,  to  make  darkness  light  before  them,  and  crooked
tnmgs  strait.  Q.  The  Royal  Arch  Captain's  station  and  duty?
J*  At  the  inner  Veil,  or  entrance  of  the  sanctum  sanctorum;  to
guard  the  same,  and  see  that  none  pass  but  such  as  are  duly  qual-
ified, and  have  the  proper  pass  words  and  signets  of  truth.  Q.
What  is  the  color  of  his  banner?  A.  White,  and  is  emblematical
of  that  purity  of  heart  and  rectitude  of  conduct,  which  is  es-
sential to  obtain  admission  into  the  divine  sanctum  sanctorum
aboye.  Q.  The  stations  and  duties  of  the  three  Grand  Masters
of  the  Veils?  A.  At  the  entrance  of  their  respective  Veils;  to
guard  the  same  and  see  that  none  pass  but  such  as  are  duly  quali-
fied and  in  possession  of  the  proper  pass  words  and  tokens,  Q.
What  are  the  colors  of  their  banners?  A.  That  of  the  third,
scarlet,  which  is  emblematical  of  fervency  and  zeal,  and  the  ap-
propriate color  of  the  Royal  Arch  Degree.  It  admonishes  us  to
be  fervent  in  the  exercise  of  our  devotions  to  God,  and  zealous  in
our  endeavors  to  promote  the  happiness  of  men.  Of  the  second,
purple,  which  being  produced  by  a  due  mixture  of  blue  and  scar-
let, the  former  of  which,  is  the  characteristic  color  of  the  sym-
bolic, or  three  first  degrees,  and  the  latter,  that  of  the  Royal  Arch
degree,  is  an  emblem  of  union,  and  is  the  characteristic  color  of
the  intermediate  degrees.  It  teaches  us  to  cultivate  and  improve
that  spirit  of  harmony  between  the  brethren  of  the  symbolic  de-
grees, and  the  companions  of  the  sublime  degrees,  which  shoul'1


128  LIGBV  ON  JUSONBY.

ever  distinguish  the  members  of  a  society  founded  upon  &M***1-
ciples  ^  everlasting  truth  and  universal  philanthropy.  Of  the
first,  blue,  the  peculiar  color  of  th*three  ancient  or  symbolical  de-
grees. It  is  an  emblem  of  universal  friendship  and  benevolence,
and  instructs  us  mat  in  th^mind  of  a  Mason,  those  virtues  should
be  as  expansive  as  th*blue  arch  of  heaven  itself*  Q.  The  treas-
urer's station  and  duty?  A.  At  the  right  hand  of  the  Captain  of
the  Host;  his  duty  to  keep  a  just  and  regular  account  of  all  the
property  and  funds  of  the  chapter  placed  in  his  hands,  and  ex-
hibit them  to  the  chapter  when  called  upon  for  that  purpose.
Q.  The  Secretary's  place  in  the  chapter?  A.  At  the  left  of  the
principal  Sojourner,  his  duty  to  issue  the  orders  and  notificaaonB
of  his  superior  officers,  record  the  proceedings  of  the  chapter  prop-
er to  be  written,  to  receive  all  monies  due  to  the  chapter,  and  pay
them  over  to  the  Treasurer.  Q.  Tyler's  place  and  duty?  A.  His
station  is  at  the  outer  avenue  of  the  chapter,  his  duty  to  guard
against  the  approach  of  cowans  and  eaves-droppers,  and  suffer
none  to  pass  or  repass  but  such  as  are  duly  qualified.  The  sec-
ond section  describes  the  method  of  exaltation  to  this  subtime  de-
gree, as  follows:  'companion,  you  informe4  me,  at  the  commence-
ment of  this  lecture,  that  you  was  made  a  R.  A.  Mason  in  a  just
and  legally  constituted  chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons.'

Q.  Where  was  you  prepared  to  be  made  a  R.  A.  Mason?  A.
In  a  room  adjacent  to  the  chapter  Q.  How  was  you  prepared?
A.  In  a  company  of  three,  I  was  hoodwinked,  with  a  cable-tow
seven  times  around  our  bodies;  in  which  condition  we  were  con-
ducted to  the  door  of  the  chapter,  and  caused  to  give  seven  dis-
tinct knocks,  which  were  answered  by  a  like  number  from  within  j
and  we  were  asked  'Who  comes  there?'  Q.  Your  answer?  Three
brethren,  who  have  been  regularly  initiated  as  Entered  Appren-
tices, passed  to  the  degree  of  Fellow  Craft,  raised  to  the  sublime
degree  of  Master  Mason,  advanced  to  the  more  honorable  degree
ef  Mark  Master,  presided  as  Masters  in  the  chair,  accepted  and
received,  as  M.  Excellent  Masters,  and  now  wish  for  further  light
in  Masonry,  by  being  exalted  to  the  more  sublime  degree  of  Roy-
al Arch  Masons.  Q.  What  was  then  said  to  you?  A  We  were
asked  if  we  were  duly  and  truly  prepared,  worthy  and  well  quali-
fied, had  made  suitable  proficiency  in  the  preceding  degrees,  and
were  properly  avouched  for.  All  which,  being  answered  in  th©
affirmative,  we  were  asked  by  what  further  right  or  benefit  we  ex-
pected to  obtain  this  favor?  Q.  Your  answer?  A.  By  the  ben-
efit of  a  pass  word.  Q.  Had  you  that  pass  word?  A.  We  had
not,  but  our  conductor  gave  it  for  us.  Q.  What  was  then  said  to
you?    A.  We  were  directed  to  wait  with  patience,  till  the  Grand

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRV.  129

Council  could  be  informed  of  oar  request  and  their  pleasure
known.  Q.  What  answer  was  returned?  A.  Let  them  enter
under  a  living  arch,  and  remember  to  stoop  low,  for  he  that  hum-
bleth  himself  shall  be  exalted.  Q.  Did  you  pass  under  a  living
arch?  A.  We  did.  Q.  How  were  you  then  disposed  of?  A.
We  were  conducted  to  the  altar,  caused  to  kneel,  and  take  upon
ourselves  the  solemn  oath,  or  obligation,  of  a  Royal  Arch  Mason.
Q.  Have  you  that  obligation?  A.  I  have.  Q.  Will  you  give  it
me?

A.  I,  A  B,  of  my  own  free  will  and  accord,  in  the  presence  of
Almighty  God,  and  this  chapter  of  R.  A.  Masons,  erected  to  God,
and  dedicated  to  the  holy  order  of  St.  John,*  do  hereby  and  here-
on, most  solemnly  and  sincerely  promise  and  swear,  in  addition  to  '
my  former  obligations,  that  I  will  not  give  the  degree  of  Royal
Arch  Mason  to  any  one  of  an  inferior  degree,  nor  to  any  other  be-
ing in  the  known  world,  except  it  be  to  a  true  and  lawful  compan-
ion Royal  Arch  Mason,  or  within  the  body  of  a  just  and  legally
constituted  chapter  of  such,  and  not  unto  him  or  unto  them  whom
I  shall  hear  so  to  be,  but  unto  him  or  them  whom  1  shall  find  so
to  be,  after  strict  trial,  due  examination  or  legal  information  receiv-
ed.    Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  not  give
the  Grand  Omnific  Royal  Arch  word,  which  I  shall  hereafter  re-
ceive, neither  in  the  chapter  nor  out  of  it,  except  there  be  present
two  companions  Royal  Arch  Masons,  who,  with  myself,  make
three,  and  then  by  three  times  three,  under  a  living  arch  not  above
my  breath.     Furthermore,  that  I  will  not  reveal  the  ineffable
characters  belonging  to  this  degree,  or  retain  the  key  to  them  in
my  possession,  but  destroy  it,  whenever  it  comes  to  my  sight.
Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  not  wrong  this
chapter,  nor  a  companion  of  this  degree,  to  the  value  of  any  thing,
knowingly  myself,  or  suffer  it  to  be  done  by  others,  if  in  my  pow-
er to  prevent  it.     Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will
not  be  at  the  exaltation  of  a  candidate  to  this  degree,  at  a  clan-
destine chapter,  I  knowing  it  to  be  such.     Furthermore,  do  1
promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  not  assist  or  be  present  at  the  ex-
altation of  a  candidate  to  this  degree,  who  has  not  regularly  re-
ceived the  degrees  of  Entered  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,  Master
Mason,  Mark  Master,  Past  Master,  Most  Excellent  Master,  to
the  best  of  my  knowledge  and  belief.     Furthermore,  that  I  will
not  assist  or  see  more  or  less  than  three  candidates  exalted  at
one  and  the  same  time.     Furthermore,  that  I  will  not  assist  or  be


♦Or  as  it  is  at  this  time  given  ift  some  chapters,  'to  the  honor  of  oor  an-
ient patron  Zeni^he!.'    «


y  Google


130  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

present  at  the  forming  or  opening  of  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  un-
less there  be  present  nine  regular  Royal  Arch  Masons.  Further-
more, do  I  promise,  and  swear,  that  I  will  not  speak  evil  of  a
companion  Royal  Arch  Mason,  neither  behind  his  back  nor  before
hjs  face,  but  will  apprise  him  of  approaching  danger  if  in  mv
power.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  not
strike  a  companion  R.  A.  Mastfn  in  anger,  so  as  to  draw  his  blood.
Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  support  the  con-
stitution of  the  General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  United
States  of  America,  also  the  constitution  of  Grand  Royal  Arch
Chapter  of  the  state  under  which  this  chapter  is  held,  and  con-
form to  all  the  by-laws,  rules  and  regulations  of  this,  or  any  other
chapter  of  which  I  may  hereafter  become  a  member.  Further-
more, do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  obey  all  regular  signs,
summons,  or  tokens  given,  handed,  sent  or  thrown  to  me,  from  the
hand  of  a  companion  Royal  Arch  Mason,  or  from  the  body  of  a
just  and  lawfully  constituted  chapter  of  such,  provided  it  be  with-
in the  length  of  my  cable-tow.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and
swear,  that  I  will  aid  and  assist  a  companion  R  A.  Mason,  when
engaged  in  any  difficulty;  and  espouse  his  cause,  so  far  as  to  ex-
tricate him  from  the  same,  if  in  my  power,  whether  he  be  right  or
wrong.  Also,  that  I  will  promote  a  companion  R.  A.  Mason's
political  preferment  in  preference  to  another  of  equal. qualifica-
tions.* Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  a  companion
R.  A.  Mason's  secrets,  given  me  in  charge  as  such,  and  I  know-
ing them  to  be  such,  shall  remain  as  secure  and  inviolable  in  my
breast  as  in  his  own,  murder  and  treason  not  excepted.^  Further-
more, do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  be  aiding  and  assisting
all  poor  and  indigent  R.  A.  Masons,  their  widows  and  orphans,
wherever  dispersed  around  the  globe,  so  far  as  in  my  power,  with-
out material  injury  to  myself  or  family.  All  which  I  most  sol-
emnly and  sincerely  promise  and  swear,  with  a  firm  and  steadfast
resolution,  to  perform  the  same,  without  any  equivocation,  mental
reservation,  or  self-evasion  of  mind  in  me  whatever;  binding  my-
self under  no  less  penalty,  than  that  of  having  my  skull  smote
off,  and  my  brains  exposed  to  the  scorching  rays  of  the  sun,
should  I  ever  knowingly,  or  wilfully,  violate  or  transgress  any
part  of  this  my  solemn  oath,  or  obligation,  of  a  Royal  Arch  Ma-

*This  clause  is  sometimes  made  a  distinct  point  in  the  obligation  in  the
following  form,  viz:  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  vote
for  a  companion  R.  A.  Mason,  before  any  other  of  equal  qualifications;  and
in  some  chapters,  both  are  left  out  of  the  obligation.

fin  some  chapters  this  is  administered.  All  the  secret*  df  a  ?eoi!iBanlpn
without  exception.  «


y  Google


LIGHT    ON  MASONRY.  131

son.    So  help  me  God,  and  keep  me  steadfast  in  the  performance
of  the  same.

Q.  After  receiving  the  obligation,  what  was  said  to  you?  A.
We  were  told,  that  we  were  now  obligated  and  received  as  R.
A.  Masons,  but  as  this  degree  was  infinitely  more  important  than
any  of  the  preceding,  it  was  necessary  for  us  to  pass  through
many  trials,  and  to  travel  in  tough  and  rugged  ways  to  prove  our
fidelity,  before  we  could  be  entrusted  with  the  more  important
secrets  of  this  degree.  We  were  further  told,  that,  though  we
could  not  discover  the  path  we  were  to  travel,  we  were  under  the
direction  of  a  faithful  guide,  who  would  'bring  the  blind  by  a  way
they  know  not,  and  lead  them  in  paths  they  had  not  known;  who
would  make  darkness  light  before  them,  and  crooked  things
straight;  who  would  do  these  things,  and  not  forsake  them.'  (see
Isa.  xlii.  16,)  Q.  What  followed?  A.  We  were  caused  to  trav-
el three  times  round  the  room,  when  we  were  again  conducted
to  the  altar,  caused  to  kneel  and  attend  to  the  following  prayer.
(See  this  prayer,  Monitor,  p.  134.)  Supreme  Architect  of  uni-
versal nature,  who,  by  thine  Almight)  Word,  didst  speak  into
being  the  stupendous  arch  of  heaven!  And  for  the  instruction
and  pleasure  of  thy  rational  creatures,  didst  adorn  us  with  great-
er and  lesser  lights,  thereby  magnifying  thy  power,  and  endear-
ing thy  goodness  unto  the  sons  of  men:  We  humbly  adore  and
worship  thine  unspeakable  perfection!  We  bless  thee,  that,  when
man  had  fallen  from  his  innocence  and  his  happiness,  thou  didst
leave  him  the  powers  of  reasoning,  and  capacity  of  improve-
ment and  of  pleasure.*  We  thank  thee,  that,  amidst  the  pains
and  calamities  of  our  present  state,  so  many  means  of  refresh-
ment and  satisfaction  are  reserved  to  us,  while  travelling  the
rugged  path  of  life;  especially  would  we,  at  this  time,  render
thee  our  thanksgiving  and  praise  for  the  institution,  as  members  i
•f  which  we  are,  at  this  time,  assembled,  and  for  all  the  plea-
sures we  have  derived  from  it.  We  thank  thee,  that  the  ijew
here  assembled  before  thee,  have  been  favored  with  new  induce-
ments, and  been  laid  under  new  and  stronger  obligations  of  vir-
tue and  holiness.  |  May  these  obligations,  O  blessed  Father!
have  their  full  effect  upon  us.    Teach  us,  we  pray  thee,  the  true

*  If  Masonry  was  congenial  to  Christianity,  this  prayer  would  read  very '
differently;  it  would  read  thus; — 'We  bless  thee,  that,  when  man  had  fallen
from  his  innocence  and  happiness,'  thou  didst  send  thine  only  Son,  the  Lorti
Jesus  Christ;  to  make  a  propitiation  for  our  sins; — to  renovate  our  hearts
and  save  us  from  the  wrath  to  come.

f  How  stupid  must  be  tfct  man,  who  supposes  that  his  moral  obligations
caa  J*e  increased  by  thettking  of  •oasonic  oaths?


d  by  Google


132  LIGHT    ON   MASONRY.

reverence  of  thy  great,  mighty,  and  terrible  name.  Inspire  us
with  a  firm  and  unshaken  resolution  in  our  virtuous  pursuits.
Give  us  grace  diligently  to  search  thy  word  in  the  book  of  na-
ture, wherein  the  duties  of  our  high  vocation  are  inculcated  with
divine  authority.*  May  the  solemnity  of  the  ceremonies  of  our
'  institution  be  duly  impressed  on  our  minds,  and  have  a  happy
and  lasting  effect  on  our  lives!  O  thou,  who  didstaforetime  ap-
pear unto  thy  servant  Moses  in  a  flame  of  fire  out  of  the  midst  of
a  bush,  enkindle,  we  beseech  thee,  in  each  of  our  hearts,  a  flame
of  devotion  to  thee,  of  love  to  each  other,  and  of  charity  to  all
mankind!  May  all  thy  miracles  and  mighty  works,  fill  us  with
thy  dread,  and  thy  goodness  impress  us  with  a  love  of  thy  holy
name!  May  Holiness  to  the  Lord,  be  engraven  upon  all  our
thoughts,  words,  and  actions!  May  the  incense  of  piety  ascend
continually  unto  thee,  from  the  altar  of  our  hearts,  and  burn  day
and  night,  as  a  sacrifice  of  a  sweet  smelling  savor,  well  pleasing
unto  thee!  And  since  sin  has  destroyed  within  us  the  first  tem-
ple of  purity  and  innocence,  may  thy  heavenly  grace  guide  and
assist  us  in  rebuilding  a  second  temple  of  reformation,  and  may
the  glory  of  this  latter  house  be  greater  than  the  glory  of  the  for-
mer!    Amen,  so  mote  it  be.

Q.  After  the  prayer  what  folfbwed?  A.  We  were  again  caus-
ed to  travel  three  times  round  the  room,  during  which  the  follow-
ing passage  of  scripture  was  read,  and  we  were  shown  a  repre-
sentation of  the  bush  that  burned  and  u$.s  not  consumed.  Exo-
dus iii.  1 — 6.  Now  Moses  kept  the  flock  of  Jethro  his  father-
in-law,  the  priest  of  Midian;  and  he  led  the  flock  to  the  back
side  of  the  desert,  and  came  to  the  mountain  of  God,  even  to
Horeb.  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  a  flame
of  fire  out  of  the  midst  of  a  bush;  and  he  looked,  and,  behold,
the  bush  burned  with  fire,  and  the  bush  was  not  consumed.  And
Moses  said,  I  will  now  turn  aside,  and  see  this  great  sight,  why
the  bush  is  not  burned.  And  when  the  Lord  saw  that  he  turned
aside  to  see,  God  called  unto  him  out  of  the  midst  of  the  bush,
and  said,  Moses,  Moses.  And  he  said,  Here  am  I.  And  he
said,  Draw  not  nigh  hither:  put  off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet;  '
for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground.  Moreover
he  said,  I  am  the  God  of  thy  father,  the  God  of  Abraham,  the
God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob.  And  Moses  hid  his  face;
for  he  was  afraid  to  look  upon  God.  Q.  What  followed1!  A.
We  again  travelled  while  the  following  passage  was.  read.    2

*  Here,  again,  we  see  the  cloven  foot  of  the  institution!    The  Bible  is  re-
jected, and  the  'booh  of  nature''  is  reccive^as  the  rule  of  faith  and  practice.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRT.  133

Chron.  xxxvi.  1 1 — 20.  Zedekiah  was  one  and  twenty  years  old
when  he  began  to  reign,  and  reigned  eleven  years  in  Jerusalem.
And  he  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  his  God,
and  humbled  not  himself  before  Jeremiah  the  prophet  speaking;
from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.  And  he  also  rebelled  against  king
Nebuchadnezzar,  and  he  stiffened  his  neck,  and  hardened  his
heart  from  turning  unto  the  Lord  God  oflsraeL  Moreover,  all  the
chief  of  the  priests  and  the  people,  transgressed  very  much  after  all
the  abominations  of  the  heathen;  and  polluted  the  house  of  the
Lord  which  he  had  hallowed  in  Jerusalem.  And  the  Lord  God  of
their  fathers  sent  to  them  by  his  messengers,  rising  up  betimes
and  sending;  because  he  had  compassion  on  his  people,  and  on
his  dwelling  place.  But  they  mocked  the  messengers  of  God*
and  despised  his  words,  and  misused  his  prophets,  until  the  wrath
of  the  Lord  arose  against  his  people,  till  there  was  no  remedy.
Therefore  he  brought  upon  him  the  king  of  the  Chaldees,  who
slew  their  young  men  with  the  sword  in  the  house  of  their  sanc-
tuary, and  had  no  compassion  on  young  men  or  maidens,  old
men,  or  him  that  stooped  for  age;  he  gave  them  all  into  his  hand.
And  all  the  vessels  of  the  housp  of  God,  great  and  small,  and
the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  treasures  of  the
king,  and  of  his  princes;  all  these  he  brought  to  Babylon.  And
they  burnt  the  house  of  God,  and  brake  down  the  wall  of  Jeru-

'  salem,  and  burnt  all  the  palaces  thereof  with  fire,  and  destroyed
all  the  goodly  vessels  thereof.  And  them  that  had  escaped  from
the  sword  carried  he  away  to  Babylon;  where  they  were  servant*
to  him  and  his  sons,  until  the  reign  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia.
At  the  close  of  this  there  was  a  representation  of  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  the  carrying  cap-
tive of  the  children  of  Israel  to  Babylon.  We  were  seized,
bound  in  chains,  and  confined  in  a  dungeon.

Q.  What  followed?  A.  We  heard  rejoicing,  as  of  good  news;
the  proclamation  of  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia,  was  read  in  our  hear-
ing. [Ezra,  i.  1 — 3.]  'Now  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus,  king
of  Persia,  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus,  king  of  Per-

m  sia,  that  he  made  a  proclamation  throughout  all  his  kingdom,  and
put  it  also  in  writing,  saying:  Thus  saith  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia*
the  Lord  God  of  heaven  hath  given  me  all  the  kingdoms  of  the
earth,  and  he  hath  charged  me  to  build  him  an  house  at  Jerusa-
lem, which  is  in  Judah.  Who  is  there  among  you  of  all  his  peo-
ple? His  God  be  with  him.  and  let  him  go  up  to  Jerusalem,
which  is  in  Judah,  and  builirme  house  of  the  Lord  God  of  Is-
rael, which  is  in  Jerusalem.'  Q.  What  was  then  said  to  you?
A.  We  were  unbound  and  requested  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem  to

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC  "


134  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY*

assist  in  rebuilding  the  temple,  but  objected,  as  we  bad  no  pass
by  which  to  make  ourselves  known  to  our  brethren.  Q.  What
followed?  A.  The  third  chapter  of  Exodus,  13  and  14  verses,
were  read  to  us:  'And  Moses  said  unto  God,  Behold !  when  I
come  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and  shall  say  unto  them,  the
God  of  your  fathers  hath  sent  me  unto  you,  and  they  shall  say
to  me,  what  is  his  name?  what  shall  I  say  to  them?  And  God
said  unto  Moses,  I  AM  THAT  I  AM :  And  thus  thou  shalt  say
unto  the  children  of  Israel,  I  AM  hath  sent  me  unto  you.'  We
were  directed  to  use  the  words,  *I  am  that  I  am ,'  as  a  pass  word.
Q.  What  followed?  A.  We  arose  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  and
travelled  over  hills  and  valleys,  rough  and  rugged  ways,  for  ma-
ny days;  during  which  time,  as  we  stopped  occasionally  to  rest
and  refresh  ourselves,  the  following  passages  from  the  Psalms,
were  read  in  our  hearing  for  our  consolation  and  encouragement.
[Psalms  cxli.  cxlii.  cxliii.]

Psalm  cxli. — 'Lord,  I  cry  unto  thee:  make  haste  unto  me;
give  ear  unto  my  voice.  Let  my  prayer  be  set  forth  before  thee,
as  incense:  and  the  lifting  up  of  hands  as  the  evening  sacrifice.
Set  a  watch,  O  Lord,  before  m%  mouth;  keep  the  door  of  my
lips.  Incline  not  my  heart  to  any  evil  thing,  to  practise  wicked
works  with  men  that  work  iniquity.  Let  the  righteous  smite
me;  it  shall  be  a  kindness:  and  let  him  reprove  me;  it  shall  be
an  excellent  oil.  Mine  eyes  are  unto  thee,  O  God  the  Lord;  in
thee  is  my  trust;  leave  not  my  soul  destitute.  Keep  me  from
the  snare  which  they  have  laid  for  me,  and  the  gins  of  the  work-
ers of  iniquity.  Let  the  wicked  fall  into  their  own  nets,  whilst
that  I  withal  escape.

Psalm  cxlii. — I  cried  unto  the  Lord  with  my  voice;  with  my
voice  unto  the  Lord  did  I  make  my  supplication.  I  poured  out
my  complaint  before  him;  I  showed  before  him  my  trouble. —
When  my  spirit  was  overwhelmed  within  me,  then  thou  knewest
ray  path.  In  the  way  wherein  I  walked,  have  they  privily  laid  a
snare  for  me.  I  looked  on  my  right  hand,  and  beheld,  but  there
was  no  man  that  would  know  me;  refuge  failed  me:  no  man
cared  for  my  soul*  I  cried  unto  thee,  O  Lord;  I  said;  Thou
art  my  refuge  and  my  portion  in  the  land  of  the  living.  Attend
unto  my  cry,  for  I  am  brought  very  low;  deliver  me  from  my
persecutors;  for  they  are  stronger  than  I.  Bring  my  soul  out  of
prison,  that  I  may  praise  thy  name.  ■

Psalm  cxliii. — Hear  my  prayer,  O  Lord,  give  e*r  to  my  sup-
plications: in  thy  faithfulness  answff  me,  and  in  thy  righteous-
ness. And  enter  not  into  judgment  with  thy  servant:  for  in  thy
sight  shall  no  man  living  be  justified. '   For  the  enemy  hath  per-


d  by  Google


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.      #  135

secuted  my  soul;  he  hath  made  me  to  dwell  in  darkness.  There-
fore is  my  spirit  overwhelmed  within  me;  my  heart  within  me  is
-desolate.  Hear  me  speedily,  0  Lord:  my  spirit  faileth:  hide
not  thy  face  from  me,  lest  I  be  like  unto  them  mat  go  down  into
the  pit.  Cause  me  to  hear  thy  loving  kindness  in  the  morning;
for  in  thee  do  I  trust:  cause  me  to  know  the  way  wherein  I
should  walk,  for  I  lift  up  my  soul  unto  thee.  Bring  my  soul  out
of  trouble,  and  of  thy  mercy  cut  off  mine  enemies:  for  I  am  thy
servant.'

At  length  we  arrived  at  Jerusalem,  and  presented  ourselves  at
the  first  Veil  of  the  Tabernacle.

Q.  What  was  there  said  to  you?  A.  The  Master  of  the  First
Veil  demanded  of  us,  'who  comes  there?  who  dares  approach
this  outer  Veil  of  our  sacred  Tabernacle?  who  comes  here?'  Q.
Your  answer?  A.  JThreo  weary  travellers  from  Babylon.  They
then  demanded  of  us  who  we  were,  and  what  were  our  intentions.
Q.  Your  answer?  A.  We  are  your  own  brethren  and  kindred,
of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin;  we  are  the  descendants  of  those  no-
ble families  of  Giblimites,  who  wrought  so  hard  at  the  building
•of  the  first,  temple,  were  present  at  its  destruction  by  Nebuchad-
nezzar, by  him  carried  away  captive  to  Babylon,  where  we  re-
mained servants  to  him  and  his  sons,  till  the  first  year  of  Cyrus,
king  of  Persia,  by  whose  order  we  were  liberated,  and  are  now
returned  to  assist  in  rebuilding  the  house  of  the  Lord,  without
expectation  of  fee  or  reward.  Q.  What  further  was  demanded
of  you?  A.  The  pass  word,  'I  am  that  I  am.'  After  giving
which,  the  Master  of  the  Veil,  assured  of  his  full  confidence  in
us  as  wormy  brethren,  commended  us  for  our  zeal,  and  gave  us
the  token  and  words  to  enable  us  to  pass  the  second  Veil.  Q.
What  are  they?  A.  The  token  is  an  imitation  of  that  which  Mo-
ses was  commanded  to  exhibit  to  the  children  of  Israel,  casting
his  rod  upon  the  ground  it  became  a  serpent,  and  putting  forth
his  hand  and  taking  it  again  by  the  tail,  it  became  a  rod  in  his
hand.  The  words  are  these,  'Shem,  Ham,  and  JapheV  Q.  What
followed?  A.  We  were  conducted  to  the  second  Veil,  where
the  same  questions  were  asked  and  answers  returned,  as  before,
with  the  addition  of  the  pass  words  and  token  given  at  the  First
Yeil.  Q.  What  followed?  A.  The  Master  of  the  Second  Veil
told  us  that  we  must  be  true  and  lawful  brethren  to  pass  thus  far,
but  further  we  could  not  go  without  his  pass  and  token,  which  he
accordingly  gave  to  us.  #%What  are  they?  A.  The  words  are
Shem,  Japheth,  and  Adoniram;  the  token  is  putting  the  hand  in
the  bosom,  plucking  it  out  again,  in  imitation  of  the  second  sign
Vhich  Moses  was  directed  to  make  to  the  Israelites,  when  putting

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


136  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

his  hand  into  his  bosom  and  taking  it  out  again,  it  became  lep-
rous as  snow.  Q.  How  were  you  then  disposed  of?  A.  We
were  conducted  onwards  to  the  Third  Veil,  when  the  same  ques-
tions were  asked  and  answers  returned,  as  before,  with  the  addi-
tion of  the  token  and  words  last  received.  Q.  What  followed?
A.  The  Master  of  the  Third  Veil  then  gave  us  the  sign,  words,
and  signet,  to  enable  us  to  pass  the  Fourth  Veil,  to  the  presence
of  the  Grand  Council.  Q.  What  are  the  words,  sign,  and  sig-
net? A.  The  words  are  Japheth,  Shem,  Noah;  the  sign,  pour-
ing water  upon  the  ground,  in  imitation  of  Moses,  who  poured
water  upon  the  ground  and  it  became  blood;  the  signet  is  called
the  signet  of  truth,  and  is  Zerubbabel.  It  alludes  to  this  pas-
sage, 'In  that  day,  I  will  take  thee,  O  Zerubbabel,  my  servant,
the  son  of  Shealtiel,  and  will  make  thee  as  a  signet;  for  I  have
chosen  thee.'  [See  Haggai,  chap.  ii.  ver.  2J.]

Q.  What  followed?  A.  We  then  passed  to  the  Fourth  Veil,
where,  after  answering  the  same  questions,  and  giving  the  sign,
words,  and  signet,  last  received,  we  were  admitted  to  the  pres-
ence of  the  Grand  Council,  where  the  High  Priest  made  the
same  demands  as  were  made  at  the  Veils,  and  received  die  same
answers.  Q.  What  did  the  High  Priest  further  demand  of  you?
A.  The  signs  from  Entered  Apprentice  to  Most  Excellent  Mas-
ter in  succession.  Q.  What  did  he  then  say  to  you?  A.  He
said  we  were  truly  three  worthy  Most  Excellent  Masters,  com-
mended us  for  our  zeal  and  disinterestedness,  and  asked  what
part  of  the  work  we  were  willing  to  undertake.  Q.  Your  an-
swer? A.  That  we  were  willing  to  undertake  any  service,  how-
ever servile  or  dangerous,  for  the  sake  of  forwarding  so  great  and
noble  an  undertaking.  Q.  What  followed?  A.  We  were  then
furnished  with  a  pickaxe,  spade,  and  crow,  and  were  directed  to
repair  to  the  N.  W.  corner  of  the  ruins  of  the  old  temple,  and
commence  removing  the  rubbish,  to  lay  the  foundation  of  the
new,  and  to  observe  and  preserve  every  thing  of  importance  and
report  to  the  Grand  Council.  We  accordingly  repaired  to  the
place,  and  after  laboring  several  days,  we  discovered  what  seem-
ed a  rock,  but  on  striking  it  with  the  crow,  it  gave  a  hollow  sound,
and  upon  closer  examination,  we  discovered  in  it  an  iron  ring,
by  help  of  which  we  succeeded  in  removing  it  from  its  place,
when  we  found  it  to  be  the  key-stone  of  an  arch,  and  through
the  aperture  there  appeared  to  be  an  immense  vault  curiously
arched.  We  then  took  the  stone,jflB  repaired  to  the  Grand
Council,  and  presented  it  for  their  inspection.  Q.  What  did  the
Grand  Council  then  say  to  you?  A.  They  told  us  that  the  stone
contained  the  mark  of  our  ancient  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff;


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.'  137

that  it  was  truly  a  fortunate  discovery,  and  that  without  doubt  tho
Tault  contained  things  of  the  utmost  consequence  to  the  craft.
They  then  directed  us  to  repair  again  to  the  place,  and  continue
our  researches.     Q.  What  followed?     A.  We  returned  again
to  the  place,  and  agreed  that  one  of  our  number  should  descend
by  means  of  a  rope,  the  middle  of  which  was  fixed  firmly  around
his  body,  and  if  he  wished  to  descend,  he  was  to  pull  the  rope  in
his  right  hand,  if  to  ascend,  that  in  his  left     He  accordingly
descended,  and  in  groping  about,  he  found  what  appeared  to  be
some  ancient  jewels,  but  the  air  becoming  offensive,  he  pulled
the  rope  in  his  left  hand,  and  was  immediately  drawn  out.     We
then  repaired  to  the  Grand  Council,  made  our  report,  and  pre-
sented the  articles  found,  which  they  pronounced  the  jewels  of
our  three  ancient  Grand  Masters,  Solomon,  Hiram,  and  Hiram
Abiff     They  commended  us  highly  for  our  zeal  and  fidelity,  as-
sured us  that  it  was  a  fortunate  discovery,  that  it  would  probably
lead  to  still  more  important  ones,  aod  that  our  disinterested  per-
severance should  not  go  unrewarded.     They  directed  us  to  re-
pair again  to  the  place,  and  make  what  further  discoveries  lay  in
our  power.     Q-   What  followed?     A.  We  again  returned  to  the
place,  and  let  down  one  of  our  companions,  as  before.  The  sun
having  now  reached  its  meridian  height,  darted  its  rays  to  the  in-
most recesses  of  the  vault,  and  enabled  him  to  discover  a  small
chest,  or  box,  curiously  wrought;  but  the  air  becoming  exceed-
ingly offensive,  he  gave  the  sign  and  was  immediately  drawn  out.
We  immediately  repaired  to  the   Grand  Council,  and  presented
our  discovery.      On  examination,  the  Grand  Council  pronounc-
ed it  to  be  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  which  was  deposited  in  the
vault  by  our  ancient  Grand  Master,  for  safe  keeping.      On  in-
specting it  more  closely,  they  found  a  key  with  which  they  open-
ed it.     The  High  Priest  then  took  from  it  a  book,  which  he  open-
ed, and  read  as  follows:  (Gen.  i.  1 — 3.)  'In  the  beginning  God
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth.    And  the  earth  was  without
form,  and  void;  and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep:
and  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters.   And
God  said,  Let  there  be  light:  and  there  was  light'      [Deut.
xxxi.  24 — 26.]     'And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Moses  bad  made
an  end  of  writing  the  words  of  this  law  in  a  book,  until  they
were  finished,  that  Moses  commanded  the  Levites  which  bare  the
ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  saying,  Take  this  book  of  the
law,  and  put  it  in  the  side  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord
your  God,  that  it  may  be  there  for  a  witness  against  thee.'  [Ex.
xxv.  21.]    'And  thou  shalt  put  the  mercy-seat  above,  upon  the
ark;  and  in  the  ark  thou  shalt  put  the  testimony  that  I  shall  give

m

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


136  LIGHT  OK  MASOffftfV

thee.'  He  then  declared  it  to  be  the  book  of  the  law;  upon
which  the  Grand  Council,  in  an  ecstasy  of  joy,  exclaimed  three
times,  "Long  lost,  now  found,  Holiness  to  the  Lord;"  at  the
same  time  drawing  their  hand  across  their  foreheads.  Q.  What
further  was  found  in  the  ark?  A.  A  small  vessel  containing  a
substance,  which,  after  the  Council  had  examined,  and  the  High
Priest  again  read  from  the  book  of  the  law,  [Ex.  xvi.  32 — 34,]
he  pronounced  to  be  manna.  'And  Moses  said,  this  is  the  thing
which  the  Lord  commandeth:  fill  an  omer  of  the  manna  to  be
kept  for  your  generations,  that  they  may  see  the  bread  where-
with I  have  fed  you  in  the  wilderness,  when  I  brought  you  forth
from  theland  of  Egypt.  And  Moses  said  unto  Aaron,  take  a
pot  and  put  an  omer  full  of  manna  therein,  and  lay  it  up  before
the  Lord,  to  be  kept  for  your  generations.  As  the  Lord  com-
manded Moses,  so  Aaron  laid  it  up  before  the  testimony,  to  be
kept  for  a  token.'  The  High  Priest  then  took  a  rod  from  the
ark,  which  after  he  had  read  the  following  passage,  [Numb.  xvii.
10,]  'And  the  Lord  said  unto  Mosea,  bring  Aaron's  rod  again
before  the  testimony  to  be  kept  for  a  token,'  he  pronounced  to
be  Aaron's  rod,  whifch  budded  and  blossomed  as  the  rose.  Q.
Was  there  any  thing  further  found  in  the  ark?  A.  There  was  a
Hey  to  the  ineffable  characters  belonging  to  this  degree,  as  follows:
dftz  X  beginning  at  top  of  this  diagram  at  the  left  hand  angle;
A   B    CDEFGH   I   J   KLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ

JJUJUi33DQCElinnrFVV«AA»

The  upper  left  hand  angle  Without  a  dot  is  A;  the  same  with  a
dot  is  B,  &c.

Q,  What  further  was  said  io  you?  A.  The  High  Priest  read
the  following  passage:  (Exodus  vi.  2,  3,)  'And  God  spake  un-
to Moses,  and  said  unto  him,  I  am  the  Lord,  and  I  appeared  un-
to Abraham,  unto  Isaac,  and  unto  Jacob,  by  the  name  of  God
Almighty,  but  by  my  name  Jehovah  was  I  not  known  to  them.9
He  then  informed  us  that  the  name  of  Deity  the  divine  Logos,
or  word,  to  which  reference  is  had  in  John  i.  1,5.  'In  the  be-
ginning was  the  word,  and  the  word  was  with  God,  and  the  word
was  God;  the  same  was  in  the  beginning  with.  God:  all  things
were  made  by  him,  and  without  him  was  not  any  thing  made  that
was  made:  In  him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men:
And  the  light  shineth  in  darkness,  and  the  darkness  comprehend-
eth  it  not'  That  this  Logos,  or  word,  was  ancientry  writt^  Ob-
\y  in  these  sacred  characters,  and  thus  pre seired  from  OM^jfae
-ration  to  another.     That  this  was  the  true  masonic  wordfwjfch


y  Google


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  139

was  lost  in  the  death  of  Hiram  Abiff,  and  was  restored  at  the
rebuilding  of  the  temple,  in  the  manner  we  had  at  that  time  as-
sisted to  represent.     Q.  What  followed?     A.  We  were  remind-
ed of  the  manner  in  which  we  had  sworn  to  give  the  R.  A.  word;
were  instructed  in  the  manner  and  finally  invested  with  the  all-
important  word  in  due  form.     Q.  What  is  the  Grand  Royal  Arch
word?    A.  JAH-BUH-LUN.*     Q.  How  is  it  to  be  given?     A.
Under  a  living  arch  by  three  times  three,  in  low  breath,  (see  des-
cription of  opening  a  chapter*)     Q.  What  followed?     A.  We
were  presented  with  the  signs  belonging  to  this  degree.     Q.  Will
you  give  me  those  signs?     Answered  by  giving  the  signs,  thus:
raise  the  right  hand  to  the  forehead,  the  hand  and  arm  horizontal;
thumb  towards  the  forehead,  draw  it  briskly  across  the  forehead
and  drop  it  perpendicularly  by  the  side.  This  constitutes  the  due
guard  of  this  degree,  and  refers  to  the  penalty  of  the  obligation.
The  grand  sign  is  made  by  locking  the  ringers  of  both  hands  to-
gether, and  carrying  them  to  the  top  of  the  head,  the  palms  up-
ward, alluding  to  the  manner  in  which  the  brother  who  descended
into  the  vault,  and  found  the  ark,  found,  his  hands  involuntarily
placed  to  protect  his  head  from*  the  potent  rays  of  the  meridian
sun.     Q.  What  followed?     A.     The  High  Priest  then  placed
crowns  upon  our  heads,  and  told  us  that  we  were  now  invested
with  all  the  important  secrets  of  this  degree,  and  crowned  and  re-
ceived as  worthy  companions  Royal  Arch  Masons.  He  then  gives
the  charge,  (see  Masonic  Chart,  pa.  113,  or  Webb's  Monitor,  149.)

The  second  section  of  the  lecture  on  this  degree  states  mi-  a
nutely  the  ceremonies  and  forms  of  exaltation,  (as  the  confer-
ring  of  this  degree  is  styled,)  but  there  seems  to  be  some  parts
which  require  explanation.  The  principal  sojourner  conducts
the  candidate,  and  is  considered  as  representing  Moses  con-
ducting the  children  of  Israel  through  the  wilderness.  He  is
usually  dressed  to  represent  an  old  man,  bowed  with  age,  with  a
mask  on  his  face,  and  long  beard  hanging  down  upon  his  breast;
is  introduced  to  the  candidate  in  the  preparation  room  by  the
name  of  Moses.  On  entering  the  chapter,  the  candidates  are
received  under  a  'living  arch;'  that  is,  the  companions  arrange
themselves  in  a  line  on  each  .side  of  the  door,  and  each  joins
hands  with  the  one  opposite  to  himself.  The  candidates  enter-
ing, the  conductor  says;  'stoop  low,  brothers!  we  are  about  to
enter  the  arches;  remember  that  he  that  humbleth  himself,  shall
be  exalted:  stoop  low,  brothers,  stoop  low!'     The  candidates

♦This  question  and  answer  do  not  belong  to  the  lecture,  but  are  inserted
to  show  the  word  plainly  and  unencumbered  with  ceremonies.

■      Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


140  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.

seldom  pass  the  first  pair  of  bands,  or,  in  other  words,  the  first
arch,  without  being  so  far  humbled  as  to  be  very  glad  to  support
themselves  on  all  fours.     Their  progress  may  well  be  imagined
to  be  very  slow;  for,  in  addition  to  their  humble  posture,  they
are  obliged  to  support  on  their  backs,  the  whole  weight  of  the
living  arches  above.     (Who  would  not  go  slow?)     The  conduct-
or to  encourage  them,  calls  out  occasionally,  'stoop  low,  bro-
thers, stoop  low!'     If  they  go  too  slow  to  suit  the  companions,
it  is  not  unusual  for  some  one  to  apply  a  sharp  point  to  their  bo-
dies, to  urge  them  on;  the  points  of  the  pasteboard  crown  an-
swers quite  well  for  this  purpose.     After  they  have  endured  this
humiliating  exercise  as  long  as  suits  the  convenience  of  the  com-
panions, (and  if  they  are  not  reduced  to  a  more  humble  posture
than  all  fours,  they  come  off  well,)  they  pass  from  under  the  liv-
ing arches.     Surely,  after  this,  they  must  stay  humbled  for  lift.
The  candidates  next  receive  the  obligation,  travel  the  room,  at-
tend the  prayer,  travel  again,  and  are  shown  a  representation  of
the  Lord  appearing  to  Moses  from  the  burning  bush.     This  last
is  done  in  various  ways.      Sometimes  an  earthen  pot  is  filled
with  earth,  and  green  bushes  set  round  the  edge  of  it,  and  a
candle  in  the  centre;  and  sometimes  a  stool  is  provided  with  holes
about  the  edge,  in  which  bushes  are  placed,  and  a  bundle  of  rags,
or  tow,  saturated  with  oil  of  turpentine,  placed  in  the  centre,  to
which  fire  is  communicated.     Sometimes  a  large  bush  is  sus-
pended from  the  ceiling,  around  the  stem  of  which  tow  is  wound
wet  with  oil  of  turpentine.     In  whatever  way  the  bush  is  prepar-
ed, when  the  words  are  read,  'he  looked,  and  behold,  the  bush
burned  with  fire,'  &c.  the  bandage  is  removed  from  the  eyes  of
the  candidates,  and  they  see  the  fire  in  the  bush,*  and,  at  the
words,  'Draw  not  nigh  hither;  put  off  thy  shoes,'  &c.  the  shoes
of  the  candidates  are  taken  off,  and  they  remain  in  the  same  sit-
uation while  the  rest  of  the  passage  is  read  to  the  words,   *  And
Moses  hid  his  face;  for  he  was  afraid  to  look  upon  God.'     The
bandage  is  then  replaced,  and  the  candidates  again  travel  about
the  room,  while  the  next  passage  of  scripture  is  read.      [See

*  This  is  frequently  represented  in  this  manner:  When  the  person  read-
ing comes  to  that  part  where  it  says,  'God  called  to  him  out  of  the  midst  of
the  bush,  and  said/  &c.  he  stops  reading,  and  a  person  behind  the  bushes
calls  out,  'Moses,  Moses;'  the  conductor  answers,  'Here  am  I :'  the  person
behind  the  bush  then  says,  'Drew  not  nigh  hither;  put  off  thy  shoes  from  off

'  i  holy


thy  feet;  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground:  (his  shoes  are
then  slipped  off.)  Moreover,  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  the<J6dof  Isaac,
and  the  God  of  Jacob.'  The  person  first  reading,  then  says,  *And  Moses  hid
his  face;  for  he  was  afraid  to  look  upon  GedV  At  these  wards  the  bandage
is  placed  over  the  candidates' eyes.


y  Google


-  LIGHT   Off  MASONRY.  141

Lecture.]    At  the  words,  'and  brake  down  the  walls  of  Jerusa-
lem,' the  companions  make  a  tremendous  crashing  and  note*,  by
firing  pistols,  overturning  chairs,  benches,  and  whatever  is  at
hand;  rolling  cannon  balls  across  the  floor,  stamping,  &c.  &c.
and  in  the  midst  of  the  uproar,  the  candidates  are  seized,  a  chain
thrown  about  them,  and  they  are  hurried  away  to  the  preparation
room.     This  is  the  representation  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusa-
lem, and  carrying  captive  the  children  of  Israel  to  Babylon. —
After  a  short  time  the  proclamation  of  Cyrus  is  read,  the  candi-
dates are  unbound,  and  start  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  to  assist  in
rebuilding  the  temple.     The  candidates,  still  hood-winked,  are
brought  into  the  chapter,  and  commence  their  journey  over  the
rugged  and  rough  paths.     They  are  literally  rough  paths,  sticks
of  timber  framed  across  the  path  the  candidate  must  travel,  some
inches  from  the  floor,  make  no  comfortable  travelling  for  a  per*
son  blindfolded.     But  this  is  not  always  the  way  it  is  prepared;
billets  of  wood  singly,  or  in  heaps,  ladders,  nets  of  cords,  &c.
&c.  are  all  put  in  requisition  to  form  the  rough  and  rugged  paths,
which  are  intended  as  a  trial  of  the  fidelity  of  the  candidates.
If  they  escape  with  nothing  more  than  bruised  shins  they  do
well.     They  have  been  known  to  faint  away  under  the  severity
of  the  discipline,  and  occasion  the  worthy*  companions  much
alarm.     After  travelling  the  rugged  paths  till  all  are  satisfied,
they  arrive  at  the  first  Veil  of  the  Tabernacle,  giv«  the  pass
word,  and  pass  on  to  the  second,  give  the  pass  words,  and  pre-
sent the  sign.     This,  it  will  be  recollected,  is  in  imitation  of  the
sign  which  Moses  was  directed  to  make  to  the  children  of  Israel.
He  threw  his  rod  upon  the  ground  and  it  became  a  serpent;  he
put  forth  his  hand  and  took  it  by  the  tail,  and  it  became  a  rod  in
his  hand.      The  conductor  is  provided  with  a  rod,  made  in  the
form  of  a  snake,  and  painted  to  resemble  one.    This  he  drops
upon  the  floor,  and  takes  up  again.     They  then  pass  on  to  the
next  Veil,  give  the  pass  word,  and  make  the  sign,  (put  the  right
hand  in  the  bosom  and  pluck  it  out  again;)  pass  on  to  the  next
— gives  the  pass  words,  and  .make  the  sign,  (pour  water  upon  the
ground;)  and  are  ushered  into  the*  presence  of  the  Grand  Coun-
cil.    The  Veils  are  four  in  number,  and  of  the  same  color  as  the
banners  of  the  three  Grand  Masters  of  the  Veils,  and  that  of
the  Royal  Arch  Captain,  blue,  purple,  scarlet,  and  white,  and
have  the  same  references  and  explanations.     (See  Lecture.)
The  Grand  Council  consists  of  the  M.  E.  High  Priest,  King,
and  Scribe.     The  H.  Priest  is  dressed  in  a  white  robe,;  with  a
breastplate  of  cut  glass,  consisting  of  twelve  pieces  to  represent
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  an  apron,  and  a  mitre.    The  King

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


142  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.

wears  a  scarlet  robe,  apron,  and  crown.     The  mitre  and  crown
are  generally  made  of  pasteboard;  sometimes  thejr  have  them  of
the  most  splendid  materials,  gold  and  silk  velvet;  but  these  are
kept  for  public  occasions.     The  mitre  has  the  words,  '  Holiness
to  the  Lord9  in  gold  letters  across  the  forehead.     The  Scribe
wears  a  purple  robe,  apron,  and  turban.     After  having  satisfied
the  Grand  Council  that  they  are  true  brethren,  and  stated  their
object  in  coming  to  Jerusalem,  the  candidates  are  directed  to
commence  the  labor  of  removing  the  rubbish  of  the  old  temple
preparatory  to  laying  the  foundation  of  the  new.     For  the  pur-
pose of  performing  this  part  of  the  ceremony,  there  is  in  or  rfear
the  chapter  a  narrow  kind  of  closet,  the  only  entrance  to  which
is  through  a  scuttle  at  the  top;  there  is  placed  over  this  scuttle
whatever  rubbish  is  at  hand,  bits  of  boards,  brick  bats,  &c.  and
among  them  the  key  stone.    After  the  candidates  are  furnished
with  the  tools,  (pickaxe,  spade,  and  crow,)  they  are  directed  to
this  place,  and  remove  the  rubbish  till  they  discover  the  key  stone.
This  they  convey  to  the  Grand  Council  as  stated  in  the  lecture.
After  the  Grand  Council  have  examined  it,  they  pronounce  it  to
be  the  work  of  the  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff,  and  direct  them
to  return  and  prosecute  their  researches,  not  doubting  they  will
make  many  important  discoveries.     The  candidates  return  and
let  down  one  of  their  number  by  a  rope — he  finds  three  squares,
is  drawn  out,  and  all  proceed  with  them  to  the  Grand  Council. —
The  G.  Council  inspect  them  and  pronounce  them  to  be  the  three
ancient  jewels  that  belonged  to  the  three  ancient  Grand  Masters,
Solomon,  Hiram,  and  Hiram  Abiff.     The  candidates  then  return
to  the  vault  and  let  down  another  of  their  number.     Here,  let  it
be  remarked,  some  chapters,  for  the  purpose  of  lightening  the  la-
bors of  the  candidates,  call  in  the  aid  of  machinery.     A  pulley
is  suspended  over  the  vault,  and  the  candidate  is  exalted  from
the  bottom  at  the  tail  of  a  snatch  block,  the  one  last  let  down
finds  at  the  bottom  a  small  chest,  or  box;  upon  which  he  gives
the  signal  to  be  drawn  out:  he  no  sooner  discovers  the  box,  than
the  air  in  the  vault,  in  the  language  jzf  the  lecture,  'becomes  ex-
ceedingly offensive.'     This  is  strictly  true;  for  at  the  moment  he
takes  up  the  box  and  is  preparing  to  ascend,  fire  is  communica-
ted to  a  quantity  of  gun-powder  at  his  feet,  so  that  by  the  time
he  arrives  at  the  top,  he  is  so  completely  suffocated  with  the  fumes
of  the  powder,  that  he  is  almost  deprived  of  the  power  of.  respi-
ration or  motion.  The  box  is  carried  to  the  G.  Council,  and  pro-
nounced to  be  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  It  is  opened,  and  a  Bible
taken  out,  and  some  passages  read  from  it.  (See  Lecture.)  One
word  respecting  the  representation  of  the  ark.    It  ought  to  be  a

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MA^RY.  143

splendid  box  covered  with  gold,  andvsome  of  them  are  really
elegant;  but  the  chapter  must  have  such  as-  it  can  afford:  if  it  is
too  poor  to  procure  splendid  furniture,  cheap  articles  are  made
to  answer;  for  an  ark,  if  the  funds  are  low,  a  plain  cherry  or  pine
box  will  answer,  and  sometimes  a  cigar  box  is  made  the  humble
representation  or  the  splendid  ark,  made  by  divine  command,  of
shittim  wood,  and  overlaid  with  pure  gold.     The  H.  Priest  takes
then  from  the  ark  a  vessel  containing  something  to  represent  man-
na. This  vessel  is  of  various  forms  and  materials,  from  an  elegant
silver  urn  to  a  broken  earthen  mug;  and  the  substance  contain-
ed js  as  various  as  the  vessels  in  which  it  is  deposited;  such  as
a  bit  of  sugar,  a  piece  of  cracker,  or  a  few  kennels  of  wheat.
Which  ever  is  used,  the  11.  Priest  takes  it  »»ut  and  gravely  asks
the  King  and  Scribe  their  opinion  of  it;  they  say  they  think  it  is
manna.     The  High  Priest  then  looks  at  it  intently  and  says,  'it
looks  like  manna;'  smells  it,  and  says,  'it  smells  like  manna;'  and
then  tastes  it,  and  says,  'it  is  manna.'    The  H.  Priest  then  takes
from  the  ark  a  bit  of  an  apple  tree  sprout,  a  few  inches  long,
with  some  withered  buds  upon  it,  Or  a  stick  of  a  similar  length
with  some  artificial  buds  upon  it,  which,  after  consulting  with .
the  King  and  Scribe,  he  pronounces  Aaron's  rod.  He  then  takes
out  the  key  to  the  ineffable  characters  and  explains  it.    This  key
is  kept  in  the  ark  on  four  distinct  pieces  of  paper.     The  key  is
marked  on  a  square  piece  of  paper,  and  the  paper,  is  then  divided
into  four  equal  parts;  thus: — tie  outside  lines  rep-         .     .
resent  the  dimensions  of  the  paper,  the  inside  ones    ,'"  '  ", '
are  the  key,  and  the  dotted  ones,  the  section  that  is      ;  I  •  1  •
made  of  the  whole  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  it  se-      •  |  '  I  "
cret,  should  say  graceless  cowan  ever  get  possession
of  the  sacred*  ark,  and  attempt  to  runiage  its  contents.  The  oth-
part  of  the  key  X  is  made  on  the  back  of  the  same  piece  bf  pa-
per, so  that  on  putting  them  together,  it  shows  equally  plain.    It
is  said  that  these  characters  were  used  by  Aaron  Burr,  in  carry-
ing on  his  treasonable  practices,  and  by  that  means  made  public;
since  which  time  they  have  been  written  and  iead  from  left  to
right.    After  the  ceremonies  are  ended,  the  High  Priest  informs
the  candidates,  in  many  or  few  words,  according  to  his  ability,
that  this  degree  owes  its  origin  to  Zerubbabel  and  his  associates,
who  rebuilt  the  temple  by  order  of  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia.     He
informs  them  that  the  discovery  of  the  secret  vault  and  the  ines-
timable treasures,  with  the  long  lost  word,  actually  took  place  in
the  manner  represented  in  conferring  this  degree,  and  that  it  is
the  circumstance  upon  which  the  degree  is  principally  founded.
The  ceremony  of  closing  a  chapter  is  precisely  the  same  as  afc


d  by  Google


144  LIGHtf  *N  MASONEY.

opening*  to  the  raising  of  t&  living  arch.  The  companions  jots
hands  by  threes,  in  the  game  manner,  and  say  in  concert,  with
the  same  ceremony,  'As  we  three  did  agree,  the  sacred  word  to
keep,'  'As  we  three  did  agree,  the  sacred  word  to  search,'  'So
we  three  do  agree,  to  close  this  royal  arch/  They  then  break
without  giving  the  word,  as  the  H.  Priest  reads  the  following
prayer:  By  the  wisdom  of  the  Supreme  High  Priest  may  we  be
directed,  by  his  strength  may  we  be  enabled,  and  by  the  beauty
of  .virtue  may  we  be  incited,  to  perform  the  obligations  here  en-
joined upon  us,  to  keep  inviolable  the  mysteries  here  unfolded  to
us,  and  invariably  to  practice  all  those  duties  out  of  the  chapter,
which  are  inculcated  in  it.  (Response.)  So  mote  it  be.  Amen.
The  High  Priest  then  declares  the  chapter  closed  in  due  form.


K9IGHTS  OF  THE  RED  CROSS.

At  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  the  line  is  formed.  Master  of
Cavalry  to  the  Sir  Knight  Warden,  'when  a  council  of  Knights
of  the  Red  Cross  is  about  to  be  formed  and  opened,  what  is  the
first  care?'  Warden,  'to  see  the  council  chamber  duly  guarded.'
M.  C.  'please  to  attend  that  part  of  your  duty,  see  that  the  sen-
tinels are  at  their  respective  posts,  and  inform  the  captain  of  the
Guards  that  we  are  about  to  open  a  council  of  Knights  of  the
Red  Cross  for  the  despatch  of  business.'  Warden,  'the  senti-
nals  are  at  their  respective  posts,  and  the  council  chamber  duly
guarded.'  M.  C.  'are  all  present  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross?'
Warden,  Hhey  are.'  M.  C.  'attention,  Sir  Knights,  count  your-
selves from  right  to  left — right  files  handle  sword — draw  sword- —
carry  sword — right  files  to  the  left  double — second  division  for-
ward, marqji,  halt — right  about  face.'  Sir  Kt.  Master  of  infant-
ry, accompanied  by  the  sword  bearer  and  Warden,  'please  inform
the  Sovereign  Master  that  the  lines  are  formed  waiting  his  pleas-
ure.' At  the  approach  of  the  council  the  trumpet  sounds.  M.
C.  'form  avenue:  (the  council  pass:)  the  Sovereign  Master  pas-
ses uncovered :  recover  arms,  poise  arms.'  Sovereign  Master,
'attention,  Sir  Knights;  give  your  attention  to  the  several  signs  of
Masonry:  as  I  do,  so  do  you.'  [The  Sir  Knights  give  the  sign
from  the  first  to  the  seventh  degree.]  Sov.  M.  'draw  swords —
take  care  to  advance  and  give  the  Jewish  countersign — recover
arms:  take  care  to  advance  and  give  the  Persian  countersign —
recover  arms.'  Sov.  M.  to  Sir  Knight  Master  of  the  Palace,
'advance,  and  give  me  the  word  of  a  Kt  of  the  R^d  Cross:  the


y  Google


LIGHT  ON  HA305BY.  145

word  is  right—receive  it  on  your  left.9  The  word  is  then  passed
around:  When  it  arrives  at  the  Chancellor  he  says,  'Sov.  M.  of
the  Red  Cross,  word  has  arrived.'  Sov.  M.  'pass  it  on  to  me:
[he  gives  it  to  the  Sov.  M.]  Sir  Kt  the  word  is  right*  Sov.  M.,
to  Sir  Kt.  Chancellor  'advance,  and  give  me  the  grand  sign,  grip
and  word  of  a  Kt.  of  the  Red  Cross:  it  is  right-— receive  it  on
your  left/  [The  word  passes  around  as  before,  as  will  hereafter
be  explained,  and  when  arrived  at  the  Master  of  the  Palace,  he
says]  'Sov.  M.  the  grand  sign,  grip  and  word  have  arrived/
'Pass  them  on  to  me:  Sir  Kt  they  are  right.  Left  face — depos-
it helmets — centre  face-^-reverse  arms— to  your  devotions,  [the

Sir  Kts.  all  kneel  and  repeat  the  Lord's  prayer:]  recover  arms

left  face — recover  helmets— centre  face — right  about  face to

your  posts — march.'

FIRST   SECTION   OF   LECTURES.

1st.  Are  you  a  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross?  That  is  my  pro-
fession. 2d»  By  what  test  will  you  be  tried?  By  the  test  of
truth.  3d.  Why  by  the  test  of  truth?  Because  none  but  the  good
and  true  are  entitled  to  the  honors  and  privileges  of  this  illustrious
order.  4th.  Where  did  you  receive  the  honors  of  this  illustri-
ous order?  In  a  just  and  regular  council  of  Knights  of  the  Red
Cross. .  5th.  What  number  compose  a  council?  There  is  an
indispensable  number  and  a  constitutional  number.  6th.  What
is  the  indispensable  number?  Three.  7th.  Under  what  circum-
stances are  they  authorized  to  form  and  open  a  council  of  Knights
of  the  Red  Cross?  Three  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,  being  al-
so Knight  Templars,  and  hailing  from  three  different  command-
eries,  may,  under  the  sanction  of  a  legal  warrant  from  some  re-
gular Grand  Encampment,  form  and  open  a  council  of  Knights
of  the  Red  Cross  for  the  despatch  of  business.  8th.  What  is  a
constitutional  number?  A.  5,  7,  9,  11,  or  more.  9th.  When
composed  of  5,  7,  9,  11,  of  whom  does  it  consist?  A.  Sover-
eign Master*  Chancellor,  Master  of  the  Palace,  Prelate,  Master .
of  Cavalry,  Master  of  Infantry,  Master  of  Finance,  Master  of
Despatches,  Standard  bearer,  Sword  bearer,  and  Warder.  1  Oth..
Warder's  station  in  the  council?  A.  On  the  left  of  the  Stand-
ard bearer  in  the  west.  11th.  His  duty?  A.  To  announce
the  approach  of  the  Sov.  Master;  to  see  that  the  sentinels  are  at
their  respective  posts,  and  the  council  chamber  duly  guardedV
12th.  Sword  bearer's  station  in  the  council?  A.  On  the  right
of  the  Standard  bearer  in  the  west.  13th.  His  duty?  A.  To  as-
sist in  the  protection  of  the  banners  of  our  order:  to  watch  all
signals  from  the  Sov.  Master,  and  see  his  orders  duly  executed.

N

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


146  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.

14th.  Standard  bearer's  station?  A*  In  the  west.  15th.  His*
duty?  A.  To  display,  support  and  protect  the  banners  of  our
order.  16th.  Why  is  the  Standard  bearer's  station  in  the  west?
A.  That  the  brilliant  rays  of  the  rising  sun,  shedding  their  lus-
tre upon  the  banners  of  our  order,  may  encourage  and  animate  all
true  and  courteous  Knights,  and  dismay  and  confound  their  ene-
mies. 17th.  Station  of  Master  of  Despatches?  A.  In  front
of  the  Master  of  the.  Palace.  18th.  His  duty?  A.  To  ob-
serve with  attention  the  transactions  of  the  council;  to  keep  a  just
and  regular  record  thereof,  collect  the  revenue,  and  pay  the  same
over  to  the  Master  of  Finance.  19th-  Station  of  the  Master
of  Finance?  A.  In  front  of  the  Chancellor.  20th.  His  duty?
A.  To  receive  in  charge  the  funds  and  property  of  the  council,
pay  all  orders  drawn  upon  the  treasurer,  and  render  a  just  and  re-
gular account  when  called  for.  21st.  Station  of  the  Master  of
infantry?  A.  On  the  right  of  the  second  division,  when  separ-
ately formed;  on  the  left  of  the  whole  when  formed  in  line.  22d.
His  duty?  A.  To  command  the  second  division  or  line  of  in-
fantry, teach  them  their  duty  and  exercise;  also  to  prepare  all  can-
didates, attend  them  on  their  journey,  answer  all  questions  for
them,  and  finally  to  introduce  them  into  the  council  chamber.  23d.
Station  of  the  Master  of  Cavalry?  A.  On  the  right  of  the  first
division  when  separately  formed,  and  on  the  right  of  the  whole
when  formed  in  line.  24th.  His  duty?  A.  To  command  the
first  division  or  line  of  Cavalry,  teach  them  their  duty  and  exer-
cise; to  form  the  avenue  at  the  approach  of  the  sovereign  Mas-
ter, and  prepare  the  lines  for  inspection  and  review.  25th.  Pre-
late's station?  A.  On  the  right  of  the  Chancellor.  26th.  His
duty?  A.  To  preside  in  the  Royal  Arch  council;  administer
at  the  altar;  to  offer  up  prayers  and  adoration  to  Deity.  27th.
Station  of  Master  of  the  Palace?  A.  On  the  left  of  the  Sov.
Master  in  the  East.  28th.  His  duty?  A.  To  see  that  the
proper  officers  make  all  due  preparations  for  the  several  meet-
ings of  the  council;  to  take  special  care  that  the  council  cham-
ber is  in  suitable  array  for  the  reception  of  candidates,  and  the
despatch  of  business;  to  receive  and  communicate  all  orders  is-
sued by  the  Sov.'  Master,  through  the  officers  of  the  line.
29th.  Chancellor's  station?  A.  On  the  right  of  the  Sovereign
Master,  30th.  His  duty?  A.  To  receive  and  communicate
all  orders -and  petitions;  to  assist  the  Sov.  Master  in  the  discharge
of  his  various  duties,  and  in  his  absence  to  preside  in  the  council*
31st  Sovereign  Master's  station?  A.  In  the  east.  32d.  His
duty.  To  preside  in  the  council;  confer  this  order  of  Knight-
hood upon  those  whom  his  council  may  approve;  to  preserve  in


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  147

violate  the  laws  and  constitution  of  our  order;  to  dispense  justice,
reward  merit,  encourage  truth,  and  diffuse  the  sublime  principles
of  universal  benevolence.     Sov.  Master.    'Sir  Knight  Chancel-
lor, it  is  my  will  and  pleasure  that  a  council  of  Knights  of  the
Red  Cross  be  now  opened,*  and  to  stand  open  for  the  despatch  of
such  business  as  may  regularly  come  before  it  at  this  time,  re-
quiring all  Sir  Knights  now  assembled,  or  who  may  come  at  this
time,  to  govern  themselves  according  to  the  sublime  principles  of
our  order.    Tou  will  communicate  this  to  the  Sir  Kt  Master  of
the  Palace,  that  the  Sir  Knights  present  may  have  due  notice
thereof,  and  govern  themselves  accordingly.'    [The  Sir  Knight
Chancellor  communicates  it  to  the  Sir  Knight  Master  of  the  Pal-
ace, and  he  to  the  Knights.]     Sov.  Master:  Return  arms;  right
about  face;  to  your  posts;  march;  centre  face;  Sir  Knights,  this
Council  is  now  open  for  the  despatch  of  business.'

SECOND   SECTION    OF   LECTURES.

1st.     What  were  the  preparatory  circumstances  attending  your
reception  to  this  illustrious  order?    A  counc i)  of  Royal  Arch  Ma-
sons being  assembled  in  a  room  adjacent  to  the  council  chamber,
I  was  conducted  to  the  door,  where  a  regular  demand  was  made
by  2,  3,  and  2.     2d.  What  was  said  to  you  from  within?    Who
comes  mere.     3d.    Your  answer?     Companion  A.  B.  who  has
regularly  received  the  several  degrees  of  Entered  Apprentice,
Fellow  Craft,  Master  Mason,  Mark  Master,  Past  Master,  Most
Excellent  Master,  and  Royal  Arch  degree,  and  now  solicits  the
honor  of  being  regularly  constituted  a  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross.
4th.     What  was  then  said  to  you?     T  was  asked  if  it  was  of  my
own  free  will  and  accord  that  I  made  this  request;  if  I  was  wor-
thy and  well  qualified;  if  I  had  made  suitable  proficiency  in  the
foregoing  degrees,  and  was  properly  vouched  for:  all  of  which  be-
ing answered  in  the  affirmative,  I  was  asked  by  what  further  right
or  benefit  I  expected  to  gain  admittance.     5th.     Your  answer?
By  the  benefit  of  a  pass  word.     6th.     Did  you  give  that  pass
word?    I  did  with  the  assistance  of  my  companions.     [Here  the
Royal  Arch  Word  is  given  as  described  in  the  Royal  Arch  de-
gree.]    7th,     What  was  then  said  to  you?     I  was  then  directed
to  wait  with  patience  till  the  Most  Excellent  Prelate  should  be  in-
formed of  my  request  and  his  answer  returned.     8th.  What  was
his  answer?     Let  him  be  admitted.     9th.  What  was  you  then  in-
formed?    The  Most  Excellent  Prelate  observed,  that  the  coun-
cil there  assembled,  represented  the  grand  council  convened  at
Jerusalem,  in  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of  Darius,  King  of
Persia,  to  deliberate  on  the  unhappy  state  of  the  fraternity  <*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


148  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

ing  tfae  reigns  of  Artaxerxes  and  Ahasuerus,  and  to  devise  some
means  to  obtain  favor  of  the  new  Sovereign,  and  to  gain  his  con-
sent to  pioceed  in  rebuilding  their  new  city  and  temple.  10th.
What  followed?  The  Most  Excellent  Prelate  then  informed  me,
that  if  I  was  desirous  of  attending  the  deliberations  of  the  coun-
cil at  this  time,  it  was  necessary  that  I  should  assume  the  name
and  character  of  Zerubbabel,  a  prince  of  the  house  of  Judah,
whose  hands  laid  the  foundation  of  the  second  temple,  and  whose
hands  the  Lord  had  promised  should  complete  it.  11th.  What
followed?  The  Most  Excellent  Prelate  then  read  a  lesson  from
the  records  of  the  Fathers,  stating  the  impediments  with  which
they  were  troubled  by  their  adversaries,  on  the  other  side  of  the
river,  and  the  grevious  accusations  which  were  brought  against
them  before  the  King.  12th.  What  followed/  My  conductor
then  addressed  the  Most  Excellent  Prelate,  thus:  Most  excellent
Prelate,  our  Sovereign  Lord,  Darius  the  King,  having  now  as-
cended the  throne  of  Persia,  new  hopes  are  inspired  of  protec-
tion and  support  in  the  noble  and  glorious  undertaking,  which  has
been  so  long  and  so  often  interrupted  by  our  adversaries  on  the
other  side  of  the  river;  for  while  yet  a  private  man,  he  made  a  vow
to  God,  that  should  he  ever  ascend  the  throne  of  Persia,  he  would
Send  all  the  Holy  vessels  remaining  at  Babylon  back  to  Jerusa-
lem.* Our  Most  Excellent  and  faithful  companion  Zerubbabel,
who  was  formerly  honored  with  the  favorable  notice  and  friend-
ship of  the  Sovereign,  now  offers  his  services  to  encounter  the
hazardous  enterprise  of  traversing*  the  Persian  dominions,  and
seeking  admission  to  the  presence  of  the  Sovereign,  where  the
first  favorable  moment  will  be  seized  to  remind  the  King  of  his
vow,  and  impress  on  his  mind  the  almighty  force  and  importance
of  truth;  and  from  his  known  piety,  no  doubt  can  be  entertained
of  gaining  his  consent,  that  our  enemies  be  removed  far  hence,
and  that  we  be  no  longer  hindered  or  impeded  in  our  noble  and
glorious  undertaking.  13th.  What  was  the  Most  Excellent
Prelate's  reply?  Excellent  Zerubbabel,  the  council  accept  with
gratification  and  joy  your  noble  and  generous  offer,  and  will  in-
vest you  with  the  necessary  passports,  by  means  of  which  you
will  be  enabled  to  make  yourself  known  to  the  favor  of  one  coun-
cil wherever  you  may  meet  them;  but  in  an  undertaking  of  so
much  importance,  it  is  necessary  that  you  enter  into  a  solemn  ob-
ligation, to  be  faithful  to  the  trust  reposed  in  you.  14th.  What
followed!    The  Most  Excellent  Prelate  then  invested  me  with

*  This  is  not  found  in  the  scrtptures,*itd  it  contrary  to  all  probability.—
"Add  thou  not  onto  his  words  lest  he  reprove  thee  ana  thou  be  found  a  6u**
Frov.  30,6.

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  149

a  sword,  to  enable  me  to  defend  myself  against  my  enemies,  and
said  he  was  ready  to  administer  the  obligation. — 15th.  Did  you
consent  to  that  obligation?  I  did  in  due  form.  16th.  What  was
that  due  form?  Kneeling  on  my  left  knee,  my  right  foot  forming
a  square,  my  body  erect,  my  right  hand  grasping  the  hih  of  my
sword,  my  left  hand  covering  the  Holy  Bible,  square  and  Com-
.  pass,  with  two  cross-swords  thereon,  in  which  due  form  I  took
upon  me  the  solemn  oath  and  obligation  of  Knight  of  the  Red
Cross.     17th.     Repeat  the  obligation.

'I,  A  B,  of  ray  own  free  will  and  accord,  in  the  presence  of  the
Supreme  Architect  of  the  Universe,  and  these  witnesses,  do  here-
by and  hereon,  most  solemnly  and  sincerely  promise  and  swear,
that  I  will  always  hail,  forever  conceal,  and  never  reveal,  any  of
the  secret  arts,  parts  or  point*  of  the  mysteries  appertaining  to
this  order  of  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross,  unless  it  be  to  a  true  and
lawful  companion  Sir  Knight  of  the  Order,  or  within  the  body  of  a
just  &  lawful  council  of  such;  &  not  unto  him  or  them,  until  by  due
trial,  strict  examination  or  lawful  information,  f  find  him  or  them
lawfully  entitled  to  receive  the  same. — I  furthermore  promise
and  swear,  that  I  will  answer  and  obey  all  due  signs  and  regular
summons,  which  shall  be  sent  to  me  from  a  regular  council  of
Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,  or  given  to  me  from  the  hands  of  a
companion,  Sir  Knight  of  the  Rtfd  Cross,  if  within  the  distance  of
forty  miles;  natural  infirmities  and  unavoidable  accidents  only  ex-
cusing me. — I  furthermore  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  not  be
present  at  the  conferring  of  this  order  of  Knighthood  upon  any
person,  unless  he  shall  have  previously  regularly  received  the
several  degrees  of  Entered  Apprentice,  Fellow  Craft,  Master
Mason,  Mark  Master,  Past  Master,  Most  Excellent  Master,  and
Royal  Arch  degree,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  and  belief.—-
I  furthermore  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  not  assist  or  be  pres-
ent at  the  forming  and  opening  of  a  council  of  Knights  of  the
Red  Cross,  unless  there  be  present  at  least  five  regular  Knights
of  the  order,  or  the  representatives  of  three  different  Encamp-
ments, acting  under  the  sanction  of  a  legal  warrant. — I  further-
more promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  vindicate  the  character  of  a
courteous  Sir  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross,  when  wrongfully  traduc-
ed: that  I  will  help  him  on  a  lawful  occasion  in  preference  to  any
brother  of  an  inferior  degree,  and  so  far  as  truth,  honor  and  jus-
tice may  warrant. — I  furthermore  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will
support  and  maintain  the  by-laws  of  the  council  of  which  I  may
hereafter  become  a  member,  the  laws  and  regulations  of  the
Grand  Encampment  under  which  the  same  may  be  holder*,  to-
gether with  the  constitution  and  ordinances  of  the  General  Grantf

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


150  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

Encampment  of  the  United  States  of  America,  so  far  as  the  same
shall  come  to  my  knowledge — to  all  which  I  do  most  solemnly
promise  and  swear,  binding  myself  under  no  less  penalty  than
of  having  my  house  torn  down,  the  timbers  thereof  set  up,  and
I  hanged  thereon;  and  when  the  last  trump  shall  blow,  that  I  be
forever  excluded  from  the  society  of  all  true  and  courteous  Kts.
should  I  ever  wilfully  or  knowingly  violate  any  part  of  this  sol-  .
emn  obligation  of  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross;  so  help  me  God,  and
keep  me  steadfast  to  keep  and  perform  the  same.*

18th.    What  followed?    The  Most  Excellent  Prelate  then  di-
rected me  to  rise  and  be  invested  with  a  countersign,  which  he
informed  me  would  enable  me  to  make  myself  known  to  the
friends  of  our  cause  wherever  I  should  meet  them,  and  would  en-
sure me  from  them,  succor,  aid  and  protection.     [Here  the  Mas-
ter of  Infantry,  who  is  the  conductor,  gives  the  candidate  the
Jewish  countersign:  it*is  given  under  the  Arch  of  steel,  that  is,
their  swords  elevated  above  their  heads,  forming  a  cross,  each
placing  his  left  hand  upon  the  other's  right  shoulder,  and  whis-
pering alternately  in  each  other's  ear,  tile  names  of  Judah  and
Benjamin.]     19th.    What  followed?     The  Most  Excellent  Pre-
late then  invested  me  with  a  green  sash,  as  a  mark  of  our  parti-
cular friendship  and  esteem:  you  will  wear  it  as  a  constant  memo-
rial to  stimulate  you  to  the  faithful  performance  of  every  duty,
being  assured  that  the  memory  of  him  who  falls  in  a  just  and  vir-
tuous cause,  shall  forever  flourish  like  the  green  bay  tree.  20th.
What  followed?    I  then  commenced  my  journey,  and  was  fre-
quently accosted  by  guards,  all  of  which,  by  means  of  the  coun-
tersign I  had  received,  I  was  enabled  to  pass  in  friendship,  until
I  arrived  at  the  bridge,  which  was  represented  to  be  in  the  Per-
sian dominions:  on  attempting*  to  pass  this  bridge,  which  I  found
strongly  guarded,  the  Persian  countersign  was  demanded,  and  be-
ing unable  to  give  it,  i»was  attacked,  overpowered,  and  made
^prisoner.     21st.     What  followed?     After  remonstrating  in  vain
>  against  their  violations,  I  told  them  I  was  a  prince  of  the  house
of  Judah,  and  demanded  an  audience  with  their  sovereign.  22d.
What  was  the  answer9    Tou  are  a  prisoner,  and  can  obtain  an
audience  with  the  sovereign  only  in  the  garb  of  a  captive  and
slave.     23d.     Did  you  consent  to  this?    I  did;  being  firmly  per-
suaded, that  could  I  by  any  means  gain  access  to  the  presence  of
the  sovereign,  I  should  be  able  to  accomplish  the  object  of  my


♦By  this  tremendous  imprecation — the  candidate  of  his  "own  free  will  and
accord"  volunteers  (in  case  of  a  violation,)  to  come  forth  to  the  resurrection
©f  damnation,  and  receive  the  sentence,  "depart  thou  accursed  into  everlast-
ing fire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.'


y  Google


LIGHT  ON   MASON&T.  151

mission.    24th.    What  followed?    They  then  deprived  me  of
roy  outward  apparel,  sash  and  sword,  and  hating  confined  my
hands  and  feet  in  chains,  the  links  thereof  were  of  a  triangular
form,  they  put  sackcloth  and  ashes  on  my  head.     25th.     Why
were  the  links  of  the  captives  chain  of  a  triangular  form?     The
Assyrians  having  learned  that  among  the  Jews  the  triangle  was  an
emblem  of  the  Eternal,  caused  the  links  of  their  chains  to  be
made  of  a  triangular  form,  thinking  thereby  to  add  to  the  mise-
ries of  their  captives.     26th.    What  followed?     I  was  conducted
to  the  door  of  the  council  chamber,  where  the  alarm  being  giv-
en by  4X2,  the  warder  appeared  and  demanded,  'Who  comes
there?'     27th.     What  answer  was  returned?     A  detachment  of
his  majesty's  guards  having  made  prisoner  of  one,  who  reports
himself  to  be  prince  of  the  house  of  .Judah.     28th.     What  was
then  said  to  you?     I  was  asked  from  whence  I  came.    29th.
Your  answer?     From  Jerusalem.     30th.     What  was  then  de-
manded of  you?    Who  are  you.     3  lsj.     Your  answer?     The
first  among  my  equals,  a  Mason,  and  free  by  rank,  but  a  captive
and  slave  by  misfortune.     32d.  What  was  you  then  asked?  My
name.  33d.     Your   answer?     Zerubbabel.     34th.    What  were
youthen  asked?     What  are  your  demands.     35th.  Your  answer?
To  see  the  sovereign  if  possible.     36th.     What  was  then  said
to  you?    I  was  then  directed  to  wait  with  patience  until  the  sov-
ereign Master  should  be  informed  of  my  request,  and  his  answer
returned.     37th.     What  was  that  answer?     That  the  necessary
caution  should  be  taken  that  I  was  not  armed  with  any  hostile
weapons,  and  that  I  should  then  be  admitted.     38th.  How  were
you  then  received?     The  guard  being  drawn  up  on  the  right  and
left  of  the  throne,  swords  drawn,  two  of  them  placed  at  the  door
with  swords  crossed,  under  which  I  was  permitted  to  enter,  my
face  covered  with  my  hands.     39th.     How  were  you  then  dis-
posed of?    I  was  conducted  in  front  of  the  sovereign  Master,
who  received  me  with  kindness  and  attention,  and  listened  with
patience  to  my  request.     40th.     What  did  the  sovereign  *Master
then  observe  to  the  council?  That  this  Zerubbabel  was  the  friend
of  his  youth,  that  he  could  neither  be  an  enemy  nor  a  spy.  41st.
What  followed?      The  sovereign  Master   thus  addressed  me,
'Zerubbabel,  having  now  gained  admittance  into  our  presence,  we
demand  that  you   immediately   declare  the  particular  motives
which  induced  you,  without  our  permission,  and  with  force  and
arms,  to  pass  the  lines  of  our  dominions?'  42d.  Your  answer?  Sov.
Master,  the  tears  and  complaints  of  my  companions  at  Jerusalem,
who  have  been  so  long  and  so  often  impeded  in  the  noble  and
glorious  undertaking  in  which  they  were  permitted  to  engage  by

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


152  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.

our  late  sovereign  Lord  Cyrus  the  King;  but  our  enemies  having
made  that  great  work  to  cease  by  force  and  power,  I  have  now
come  up  to  implore  your  majesty's  clemency,  that  you  would  be
pleaded  to  restore  me  to  favor,  and  grant  me  employment  among
the  servants  of  your  household.  43d.  What  was  the  sovereign's
reply?     Zerubbabel,  I  have  often  reflected  with  much  pleasure
upon  our  early  intimacy  and  friendship,  and  I  have  frequently
heard,  with  great  satisfaction,  of  your  fame  as  a  wise  and  accom-
plished Mason,  and  having  myself  a  profound  veneration  for  that
ancient  and  honorable  institution,  and  having  a  sincere  desire  to
become  a  member  of  the  same,  I  will  this  moment  grant  your  re-
quest, on  condition  that  you  will  reveal  to  me  the  secrets  of  Free
Masonry.     44th.     Did  you  consent  to  that?     I  did  not.     45th.
What  was  your  reply?     Sovereign  Master,  when  our  Grand  Mas-
ter Solomon,  King  of  Israel,  first  instituted  the  Fraternity  of  Free
and  Accepted  Masons,  he  taught  us  that  truth  was  a  divine  attri-
bute, and  the  foundation  of  every  virtue:  to  be  good  and  true  is
the  first  lesson  we  are  taught  in  Masonry.     My  engagements  are
sacred  and  inviolable;  I  cannot  reveal  our  secrets.     If  I  can  ob-
tain your  Majesty's  favor  only  at  the  expense  of  my  integrity,  I
humbly  beg  leave  to  decline  your  royal  protection,  and  will  cheer-
fully submit  to  an  honorable  exile.     What  was  the  sovereign's
reply?  Zerubbabel,  your  virtue  and  integrity  are  truely  commen-
dable, and  your  fidelity  to  your  engagements,  is  worthy  of  imita-
tion: from  this  moment  you  are  free — my  guards  will  divest  you
of  those  chains  and  that  garb  of  slavery,  and  clothe  you  in  suit-
able habilments  to  attend  me  at  the  banquet  hall.  Zerubbabel,  you
are  free:  guards,  strike  off  those  chains;  and  may  those  emblems
of  slavery  never  again  disgrace  the  hands  of  a  Mason,  more
particularly  a  prince  of  the  house  of  Judah,  Zerubbabel,  we  as-
sign you  a  seat  of  rank  and  honor  among  the  princes  and  rulers  of
our  assembly.     47th.     What  followed?  The  guards  being  drawn
up  in  the  court  yard,  the  warder  informed  the  sovereign  Master
that  the  guards  were  in  readiness,  waiting  his  pleasure.     48th.
What  followed?     He  then  ordered  the  guards  to  attend  him  to
the  banquet  hall.     49th.     What  occurred  there?     *  After  having
participated  in  a  liberal  entertainment,  the  sovereign  Master  not
being  inclined  to  sleep,  and  many  of  the  guard  having  retired,  he
amused  himself  by  entering  into  conversation  with  some  of  his
principal  officers  and  friends,  proposing  certain  questions  to  them,
and  offering  a  princely  reward  to  such  as  should  give  the  most
reasonable  and  satisfactory  answer.    50th.  What  questions  were

*  See  the  Ajocrypbal  books,  1,  Esdns,  cte*t*»  3  *4.


LIGHT   ON  MA8DNRT.  153

proposed?    Among  others,  'which  was  the  strongest,  wine,  the
king,  or  woman?9    51st.    What  answers  were  returned?    The
Chancellor  said  wine  was  the  strongest;  the  Master  of  the  Pal-
ace said  the  king  was  the  strongest;  but  I,  being  firmly  persuad-
ed that  the  time  had  arrived  in  which  I  could  remind  the  king  of
his  vow,  and  request  the  fulfilment  of  it,  replied  that  women
were  stronger  than  either  of  the  former,  but  above  aH  things  truth
beareth  the  victory.     52d.     What  followed?     The  king  being
deeply  struck  with  the  addition  I  made  to  the  question,  ordered  us
to  be  prepared  with  proper  arguments  m  support  of  our  respect-
ive propositions  on  the  day  following.     53d.     What  followed?
On  the  day  following  the  council  being  convened  at  the  sound  of
the  trumpet,  the  Chancellor  was  called  upon  for  his  answer,  and
thus  replied,  (see  templar's  chart.)     54th.     What  followed?  The
Master  of  the  Palace  thus  replied,  (see  templar's  chart.)  55th.
What  followed?     I  then  being  called  upon  for  my  defence,  an-
swered as  follows,  (see  templar's  chart)  56th.     What  followed?
The  king  being  deeply  struck  with  the  force  of  the  arguments  I
had  used,  involuntarily  exclaimed,  'Great  is  truth,  and  mighty
above  all  things:  Ask  what  thou  wilt,  Zerubbabel,  and  it  shall  be
granted  thee,  for  thou  art  found  wisest  among  thy  companions,'
57th.     Your  answer?    (see  templar's  chart.)     58th.     What  fol-
lowed? The  sovereign  Master  thus  addressed  me,  *  Zerubbabel,
I  will  punctually  fulfil  my  vow:  letters  and  passports  shall  be  im-
mediately issued  to  my  officers  throughout  the  realm,  and  they
shall  give  you,  and  those  who  accompany  you,  safe  conveyance
to  Jerusalem,  and  you  shall  be  no  longer  hindered  or  impeded  in
rebuilding  your  city  and  temple,  until  they  shall  be  completed.'
59th.  What  followed?  The  Sov.  M.  then  invested  me  with  a  green
sash,  and  thus  addressed  me,  'This  green  sash,  of  which  you  were
deprived  by  my  guards,  I  now  with  pleasure  restore  to  you,  and
will  make  it  one  of  the  insignia  of  a  new  order,  calculated  to
perpetuate  the  remembrance  of  the'  event  which  caused  the  re-
newal of  our  friendship;  its  color  will  remind  you  that  truth  is  a
divine  attribute,  and  shall  prevail,  and  shall  forever  flourish  in  im-
mortal green.     I  will  now  confer  on  you  the  highest  honor,  in  our
power  at  this  time  to  bestow,  and  will  create  you  the  first  Knight
of  an  order,  instituted  for  the  express  purpose  of  inculcating  the
almighty  force  and  importance  of  truth?    60th.     What  followed?
The   sovereign  Master  then  directed  me  to  kneel,  and  said,  by
virtue  of  the  high  power  in  me  vested,  as  the  successor  and  rep-
resentative of  Darius,  king  of  Persia,  I  now  constitute  you  a  Kt.
of  the  illustrious  order  of  the  Red  Cross— (at  the  same  time  lay-
ing the  blade  of  his  sword,  first  upon  the  right  shoulder,  then  up-

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


154  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY

on  the  bead,  and  then  upon  the  left  shoulder  of  the  candidate.)
61st.  What  followed?  The  sovereign  Master  then  directed  me
to  arise,  and  presenting  me  with  a  sword  thus  addressed  me,  'this
sword,  of  which  you  were  deprived  by  my  guards,  I  now  restore
in  your  hand,  as  a  true  and  courteous  Knight:  it  will  be  endowed
with  three  most  excellent  properties — its  hilt  be  faith,  its  blade  be
hope,  its  point  be  charity:  it  should  teach  us  this  important  les-
son, that  when  we  draw  our  swords  in  a  just  and  virtuous  cause,
having  faith  in  God,  we  may  reasonably  hope  for  victory,  ever  re-
membering to  extend  the  hand  of  charity  to  the  fallen  foe:  sheathe
it,  and  sooner  may  it  rust  in  its'  scabbard,  than  be  drawn  in  the
cause  of  injustice  or  oppression.'  62d.  What  followed?  The
sovereign  Master  then  invested  me  with  the  Persian  countersign.
63d.  Give  it?  This  countersign  is  given  like  the  Jewish,  ex-
cepting this  variation,  it  is  given  over  instead  of  under  the  arch
of  steel.  The  words  are  Tatnai  Shethar-boznai,  Ezra,  v,  3.
64th.  Who  were  they?  They  were  governors  of  Persian  prov-
inces, and  enemies  of  the  Jews.  65th.  What  followed?  The
sovereign  Master  then  invested  me  with  the  Red  Cross  word.
66th.  Give  it?  (Each  placing  his  left  hand  upon  the  other's
right  shoulder,  at  the  same  time  bringing  the  point  of  the  swords
to  each  other's  left  side,  in  which  position  the  word  libertas  is  giv-
en.) 67th.  What  followed?  The  sovereign  Master  then  in-
vested me  with  the  grand  sign,  grip  and  word  of  Knight  of  the
Red  Cross.  68th.  Give  them? — The  grand  sign  is  given  by
bringing  the  thumb  and  finger  of  the  left  hand  to  the  mouth,  and
carrying  it  off  in  an  oblique  direction — the  grip  is  given  by  inter-
lacing the  fingers  of  the  left  hands — the  word  is  Veritas.  The
sign,  grip  and  word  is  given  under  the  arch  of  steel.  69th.  How
do  you  translate  the  word?  Truth.  70th.  To  what  does  the
sign  allude?  To  the  blowing  of  the  Trumpet  upon  the  walls  and
watch  towers  of  the  council;  but  more  particularly  to  the  obliga-
tion, 'that  when  the  last  trump  shall  sound,  I  shall  be  forever  ex*
eluded  from  the  society  of  all  true  and  faithful  Sir  Knights.'  71st.
What  is  the  motto  of  our  order?  'Magna  est  tveritas  it  prevail
bit.*


*  Great  is  truth  and  it  vfll  prevail.


dbyGodgte'"'


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY*  155

KNIGHT  TEMPLAR   AND  KNIGHT  OF  MALTA.

1st     Q.  Are  you  a  Knight  Templar?     A.  that  is  my  title*
Q.     2d.    Where  were  you  created  a  Knight  Templar?     A.    In
a  just  and  lawful  encampment  of  Knight  Templars.    3d.  What
number  composes  a  just  and  lawful  encampment  of  Knight  Tem-
plars?     There  is  an  indispensable  number  and  a  constitutional
number.    4th.     What  is  an  indispensable  number.     Three.  6th.
Under  what  circumstances  are  they  authorised  to  form  and  open
an  Encampment  of  Knight  Templars'!     Three  Knight  Templars
hailing  from  three  different  commanderies,  may,  under  the  sanc-
tion of  a  charter,  or  warrant,  from  some  regular  Grand  Encamp-
ment, form  and  open  an  Encampment  for  the  despatch  of  busi-
ness.    6th.  What  is  a  constitutional  number?     Seven,  nine,  elev-
en, or  more.     7th.  When  composed  of  eleven,  of  whom  does  it
consist?  .   Warder,  Sword  bearer,   Standard  bearer,  Recorder,
Treasurer,  Junior  Warden,   Senior  Warden,  Prelate,  Captain
General,  Generalissimo,  and  Grand  Commander.  8th.  Warder's
station?     On  the  left  of  the  Standard  bearer  in  the  west,  and  on
the  left  of  the  third  division.     9th.  His  duty?    To  observe  the
orders  and  directions  of  the  Grand  Commander:  to  see  that  the
sentinels  are  at  their  respective  posts;  and  that  the  Encampment
is  duly  guarded.     10th.  Sword  bearer's  station?    On  the  right  of
the  Standard  bearer  in  the  west,  and  on  the  right  of  the  third  divi-
sion.    11th.  His  duty?     To  assist  in  the  protection  of  the  ban-
ners of  our  order;  to  watch  all  signals  from  the  Grand  Command-
er, and  see  his  orders  duly  executed.     12th.  Standard  bearer's
station  in  the  Encampment?  In  the  west,  and  in  the  centre  of  the
third  division.     13th.  His  duty?  To  display,  support,  and  protect
the  banners  of  our  order.      14th.    Why  is  the  Standard  bearer's
station  in  the  west?      That  the  brilliant  rays  of  the  rising  sun,
shedding  their  lustre  upon  the  banners  of  our  order,  may  encour-
age and  animate  all  true  and  courteous  Knights,  and  dismay  and
confound  th&r  enemies.  15th.  Recorder's  station  in  the  Encamp-
ment?    In  front  of  the  Captain  General.     16th.  His  duty?     To
observe  with  attention  the  order  of  the  Encampment;  keep  a  just
and  regular  record  of  the  same;  collect  the  revenue,  and  pay  the
same  over  to  the  Treasurer.     17th.  Treasurer's  station  in  the
Encampment?     In  front  of  the  Generalissimo.     18th.  His  duty?
To  receive  in  charge  all  funds  and  property  of  the  Encampment;
pay  all  orders  drawn  upon  him,  and  render  a  just  and  faithful  ac-
count when  required.     19th.     Station  of  the  Junior  Warden  in
ihe  Encampment?    At  the  south  west  angle  of  the  triangle,  and


d  by  Google


156  tIGBT  OK  BCASONBV.

on  the  left  of  the  first  division.  20th.  His  duty?  To  attend  to
all  poor  and  weary  pilgrims  travelling  from  afar;  to  accompany
them  on  their  journey;  answer  all  questions  for  them,  and  finally
introduce  them  into  the  asylum.  21st  Senior  Warden's  station
in  the  Encampment?  At  the  north  west  angle  of  the  triangle,  and
on  the  right  of  the  second  division.  22d.  His  duty  there?  To
attend  on  pilgrim  warriors,  travelling  from  afar;  to  comfort*  and
support  pilgrims  penitent,  and,  after  due  trial,  to  recommend  them
to  the  hospitality  of  the  Generalissimo.  23d.  Prelate's  station
in  the  Encampment?  On  the  right  of  the  Generalissimo.  24th.
His  duty  there?  To  administer  at  the  altar,  and  offer  up  prayers
and  adorations  to  the  Deity.  26th.  Captain  General's  station?
On  the  left  of  the  Grand  Commander.  26th.  His  duty?  To
see  that  the  proper  officers  make  all  suitable  preparations  for  the
several  meetings  of  the  Encampment,  and  take  special  care  that
the  asylum  is  in  a  suitable  array  for  the  introduction  of  candidates
and  despatch  of!  business;  also,  to  receive  and  communicate  all
orders  from  tho  Grand  Commander  to  the  officers  of  the  line.
27th.  Generalissimo's  station?  On  the  right  of  the  Grand  Com-
mander. 28th#  His  duty?  To  receive  and  communicate  all
orders,  signals,  and  petitions,  and  assist  the  Grand  Commander
in  the  discharge  of  his  various  duties,  and  in  his  absence  to  gov-
ern the  Encampment.  29th.  Grand  Commander's  station?  In
the  east.  30th.  His  duty?  To  distribute  /alms,  and  protect
weary  pilgrims,  travelling  from  afar;  to  encourage  pilgrim  warrir
©rs;  to  sustain  pilgrims  penitent;  feed  the  hungry,  clothe  the
naked,  bind  up  the  wounds  of  the  afflicted;  to  inculcate  hospitali-
ty, and  govern  his  Encampment  with  justice  and  moderation.

SECOND  SECTION  OP  LECTURES.

1st.  What  were  the  preparatory  circumstances  attending  your
reception  into  this  Illustrious  Order?  I  was  conducted  to  the
chamber  of  reflection,  where  I  was  left  in  silence  and  solitude,  to
reflect  upon  three  questions  which  were  left  with  me  in  writing.
2d.  What  were  your  answers?  They  were  satisfactory  to  the
Grand  Commander;  but,  as  a  trial  of  my  patience  and  persever-
ance, he  enjoined  upon  me  the  performance  of  seven  years'  pil-
grimage, clothed  in  pilgrim's  weeds.  3d.  What  followed?  I  was
then  invested  with  sandals,  staff,  and  scrip,  and  commenced  my
tour  of  pilgrimage,  but  was  soon  accosted  by  a  guard,  who  de-
manded of  me,  'who  comes  there?'  4th.  Your  answer?  A  poor
and  weary  pilgrim,  travelling  from  afar,  to  join  with  those  who  oft
have  gone  before,  and  offer  his  devotions  at  the  holy  shrine.  5th.
What  said  the  guard?    Pilgrim,  I  greet  thee;  gold  and  silver  hare

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   OS  MASONRY.  157

I  none,  but  such  as  I  have  give  I  unto  thee.  6th.  What  followed?
After  having  participated  in  the  refreshments,  (which  is  a  glass  of
\vater  and  a  cracker,)  the  guard  took  ipe  by  the  hand,  and  thus
addressed  me:  'Pilgrim,  hearken  to  a  lesson  to  cheer  thee  on  thy
way,  and  insure  thee  of  success.'  7th.  What  followed?  Lesson
read*  (See  Templar's  chart.)  The  guard  then  took  me  by  the
hand,  and  said,  'Fare  thee  well!  God  speed  thee  on  thy  way.'
8th.  What  followed?  I  still  pursued  my  pilgrimage,  but  was  often
accosted  by  guards,  from  whom  I  received  the  same  friendly
treatment,  as  from  the  first.  9th.  Where  did  your  term  of  pil-
grimage end?  At  the  door  of  the  asylum,  where  after  giving  the
alarm  by  3X3,  the  Warder  appeared  and  demanded,  'who  comes
there?'  10th.  Your  answer?  A  poor  and  weary  pilgrim,  travel-
ling from  afar,  who,  having  passed  full  three  long  years  of  pilgrim-
age, now  craves  permission,  if  it  shall  please  the  Grand  Com-
.  mander,  forthwith  to  dedicate  the  remaining  four  years  to  deeds
of  more  exalted  usefulness,  and  if  found  worthy,  his  strong  de-
sire is  now  to  be  admitted  to  those  valiant  Knights,  whose  well-
earned  fame  has  spread  both  far  and  near  for  deeds  of  charity
and  pure  beneficence.  1 1th.  What  were  you  then  asked?  What
surety  can  you  offer  that  you  are  no  impostor.  12th.  Your  an-
swer? The  commendations  of  a  true  and  courteous  Knight,  the
Junior  Warden,  who  recommends  to  the  Grand  Commander  the
remission  of  the  four  remaining  years  of  pilgrimage.  13th.  What
followed?  The  Grand  Commander  then  addressed  the  Most  Ex-
cellent Prelate:-^-This  being  true,  Sir  Knight,  our  Prelate,  you
will  conduct  this  weary  pilgrim  to  the  altar,  where  having  taken
an  obligation  always  to  be  faithful  to  his  vow,  cause  him  forth-
with to  be  invested  with  a  sword  and  buckler,  that  as  a  pilgrim
warrior,  he  may  perform  seven  years'  warfare,  as  a  trial  of  his
courage  and  constancy.  14th.  What  followed?.  The  Senior
Warden  then  detached  a  party  of  Knights  to  escort  me  to  the  al-
tar, where,  in  due  form,  I  took  upon  me  the  obligation  of  a  Knight
Templar.  15th.  What  was  mat  due  form?  Kneeling  on  both
knees  upon  two  cross  swords,  my  body  erect,  my  naked  hands
covering  the  Holy  Bible,  square,  and  compass,  with  two  cross
swords  lying  thereon;  in  which  due  form  I  received  the  solemn
obligation  of  Knight  Templar,     l&h.  Repeat  the  obligation.

'I,  A  B,  of  my  own  free  wiH  and  accord,  in  the  presence  of
Almighty  God,  and  this  Encampment  of  Knight  Templars,  6o
hereby  and  hereon,  most  solemnly  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will
always  hail,  forever  conceal,  and  never  reveal  any  of  the  secret
arts,  parts,  or  points  appertaining  to  the  mysteries  of  this  order
of  Knight  Templars,  unless  it  be  to  a  true  and  lawful  companion
0

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


158  LIGHT  ON  BMAON&Y.

Knight  Templar,  of  within  the  body  of  a  just  and  lawful  Encamps
merit  of  such;  and  not  unto  him  or  them,  until  by  due  trial,  strict
examination,  or  lawful  information,  I  find  him  or  them  lawfully
entitled  to  receive  the  same.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and
swear,  that  I  will  answer  and  obey  all  due  signs  and  regular  sum-
mons, w^ich  shall  be  given  or  sent  to  me  from  regular  Encamp-
ments of  Knight  Templars,  if  within  the  distance  of  forty  miles —
natural  infirmities  and  unavoidable  accidents  only  excusing  me*
Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  help,  aid,  and
assist  with  my  counsel,  my  purse,  and  my  sword,  all  poor  and  in-
digent Knight  Templars,  their  widows  and  orphans,  they  making
application  to  me  as  such,  and  I  finding  them  worthy,  so  far  as  I
can  do  it  without  material  injury  to  myself,  and  so  far  as  truth,
honor,  and  justice  may  warrant  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and
swear,  that  I  will  not  assist,  or  be  present,  at  the  forming  and
opening  of  an  Encampment  of  Knight  Templars,  unless  there  be
present  seven  Knights  of  the  order,  or  the  representatives  of  three
different  Encampments,  acting  under  the  sanction  of  a  legal  war-
rant. Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  go  the
distance  of  forty  miles,  even  barefoot  and  on  frosty  ground,  to
save  the  life  and  relieve  the  distresses  of  a  worthy  Knight,  should
I  know  that  his  distresses  required  it,  and  my  abilities  permit.
Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  wield  my  sword
in  defence  of  innocent  virgins,  destitute  widows,  helpless  orphans,
and  the  Christian  religion.  Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear*
that  I  will  support  and  maintain  the  by-laws  of  the  Encampment
of  which  I  may  hereafter  become  a  member,  the  edicts  and  regu-
lations of  the  Grand  Encampment  under  which  the  same  may  be
holden,  together  with  the  laws  and  constitution  of  the  General
Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States  of  America,  so  far  as
the  same  shall  come  to  my  knowledge. — To  all  this  I  most  sol-
emnly and  sincerely  promise  and  swear,  with  a  firm  and  steady
resolution  to  perform  and  keep  the  same,  without  any  hesitation,
equivocation,  mental  reservation,  or  self-evasion  of  mind  in  me
whatever,  binding  myself  under  no  less  penalty  than  to  have  my
Tiead  struck  off  and  fjaced  on  the  highest  spire  in  Christendom,
should  I  knowingly  or  wilfully  violate  any  part  of  this  my  solemn
obligation  of  a  Knight  Templar.  So  help  me  God,  and  keep  me
steadfast  to  perform  and  keep  the  same.'

17th.  What  followed?  The  Most  Excellent  Prelate  directed
me  to  arise,  and  thus  addressed  me: — 'Pilgrim,  thou  hast  craved
permission  to  pass  through  our  solemn  ceremonies,  and  enter  the
asylum  of  our  encampment:  by  thy  sandals,  scrip,  and  staff,  I
judge  thee  to  be  a  child  of  humility:  charity  and  hospitality  are

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  TSIASOffBY.  139

&e  grand  characteristics  of  this  magnanimous  order:  in  die  char-
acters of  Knight  Templars,  you  are  hound  to  give  alms  to  poor
and  weary  pilgrims  travelling  from  afar;  to  succor  the  needy,  feed
the  hungry,  clothe  the  naked,  and  bind  up  the  wounds  of  the  af-
flicted.    We  here  wage  war  against  the  enemies  of  innocent  vir-
gins, destitute  widows,  helpless  orphans,  and  the  Christian  reli-
gion.*    If  thou  art  desirous  of  enlisting  in  this  noble  and  glori-
ous warfare,  lay  aside  thy  staff  and  take  up  the  sword,  fighting
manfully  thy  way,  and  with  valor  running  thy  course;  and  may
the  Almighty,  who  is  a  strong  tower  and  defence  to  all  those  who
put  their  trust  and  confidence  in  him,  he  now  and  ever  thy  de-
fence and  thy  salvation.'      18th.    What  followed?     Having  laid
aside  my  staff  and  taken  up  the  sword,  the  Most  Excellent  Pre*
late  continued: — 'Having  now  taken  up  the  sword,  we  expect  you
will  make  a  public  declaration  of  the  cause  in  which  you  will
wield  it.'     19th.  Tour  answer?     I  wield  my  sword  in  defence  of
innocent  virgins,  destitute  widows,  helpless  orphans,  and  the
Christian  religion.     20th.    What  was  the  Prelate's  reply?     With
confidence  in  this  profession,  our  Senior  Warden  will  invest  you .
with  the  warrior's  pass,  and  under  his  direction,  as  a  trial  of  your
courage  and  constancy,  we  must  now  assign  you  seven  years  of
warfare— success  and  victory  attend  you.      (This  pass  word  is
Maher-shalal-hashbaz,  and*  is  given  under  the  arch  of  steel,  as
has  been  described.     21st  What  followed?     I  men  commenced
my  tour  of  warfare,  and  made  professions  of  the  cause  in  which
I  would  wield  my  sword.     22d.  Where  did  your  tour  of  w$pftr&
end?     At  the  door  of  the  asylum,  where,  on  giving  the  alarm  by
8X4,  the  Warder  appeared  and  demanded,  'who  comes  there?'
23d.  Your  reply?     A  pilgrim  warrior,  travelling  from  afar,  who,
having  passed  full  three  long  years  of  warfare,  is  most  desirous
now,  if  it  should  please  the  Grand  Commander,  to  be  admitted  to
the  honors  and  rewards  that  await  a  valiant  Templar.      24th.
What  was  men  demanded  of  you?    What  surety  can  you  give
that  you  are  no  impostor.     25th.   Your  answer?     The  commen-
dation of  a  true  and  courteous  Knight,  the  Senior  Warden,  who
recommends  to  the  Grand  Commander  nWfemission  of  the  four
remaining  years  of  warfare.     26th.  What  was  then  demanded?
By  what  further  right  or  benefit  do  you  expect  to  gain  admittance
to  the  asylum.     27th.    Your  answer?      By  the  benefit  of  a  pass
word.     28th.  Give  it    (Here  the  warrior's  pass  is  given,  as  be-

*  Says  God,  'They  that  take  the  sword,  shall  perish  with  the  swonk3
'The  wrath  of  man  workbth  not  the  righteousness  of  God.'
'The  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal'


y  Google


160  LIGHT  ON  JfclSOKRY.

fore  described.)  ftftb.  What  was  then  said  to  you?  I  \fms  di-
rected to  wait  with  courage  and  constancy,  and  soon  an  answer
should  be  returned  to  my  request.  30th.  What  answer  was  re-
turned? Let  biro  be  admitted.  31st  Wbat  did  &e  Grand  Com-
mander then  observe?  Pilgrim,  (having  gained  admittance  to  o«r
asylum,  what  profession  have  you  now  to  make  in  testimony  of
your  fitness  to  be  received  a  Knight  among  eur  number.  3&d.
Tour  answer?  Most  Eminent,  I  now  declare  in  truth  and  sober-
ness, that  I  bold  no  enmity  or  hatred  against  a  being  on  earth,
that  I  would  not  freely  reconcile,  should  I  find  in  him  a  corres-
ponding disposition.  33d.  What  was  the  Grand  Commander's
reply?  Pilgrim,  the  sentiments  you  utter  are  worthy  of  the  cause
in  which  you  are  engaged;  but  still  we  must  require  some  steong*
er  proofs  of  your  faithfulness:  the  proofs  we  demand  are,  that
you  participate  with  us  in  five  Kbations;  this  being  accomplished,
we  will  receive  you  a  Knight  among  our  number.  34th.  What
were  the  ingredients  of  the  libations?  Four  of  them  were  taken
in  wine  and  watery  and  the  fifth  in  pure  wine.  3&4h.  What  was
the  first  libation?  To  the  memory  of  Solomon,  king  of  Israel.
36th.  What  was  the  second  libation?  To  the  memory  ef  Hiram,
king  of  Tyre.  37th.  What  was  the  third?  To  the  memory  of
Hiram,  the  widow's  son,  who  lost  his  We  in  defence  of  his  integ-
rity. 38th.  What  followed?  The  Grand  Commander  then  ad-
dressed me:  Pilgrim,  the  order  to  which  you  seek  to  unite  your-
self,  is  founded  on  the  Christian  religion-,  let  us,  then,  attend  to
a  lesson  from  the  holy  evangelist.  39th.  What  followed!  The
Host  Excellent  Prelate  then  read  a  lesson,  relative  to  the  apos-
tasy of  Judas  Isoariot.  (S«e  Templar's  chart.)  40th.  What
followed?  The  Grand  Commander  then  addressed  roe: f  «Pilgnm,
the  twelve  tapers  you  see  around  the  triangle,  correspond  in  num*
her  with  the  disciples  of  our  Saviour  while  on  eatfh,  one  of  «A
fell  by  transgression,  and  betrayed  bis  Lord  and  fibster;  and  as
a  constant  admonition  to  you  always  to  persevere  in  the  f»ths  of
honor,  integrity,  and  truth,  and  as  a  perpetual  memorial  of  the
apostaey  of  Judas  Iscerfot,  you  are  required,  by  the  rules  of  our
order,  to  extinguish  one  of  those  tapers;  and  let  it  ever  remind
you,  that  he,  who  can  basely  violate  his  vow  and  betray  his  trust,
is  worthy  of  no  better  fate  than  Judas  Iscnriot.'  < The  candidate
extinguishes  one  of  the  tapem;  the  triangle  is  placed  in  the  cen-
tre of  the  veom,  on  which  are  twelve  binning  candles;  between
each  candlestick,  a  glass  of  wine;  in  the  centre  of  the  triangle  is
placed  a  coffin,  on  which  are  the  Bible,  scull,  and  cross-bones.)
41st  What  followed?  The  relics  were  then  uncovered,  and  the
Grand  Commander  thus  addressed  me:  'Pilgrim,  yon  here  behold


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  161

sua  emblem  of  mortality  resting  on  divinity,— a  human  scull  rest-
ing on  the  holy  scriptures;  it  is  to  teach  us  that,  among  all  the
trials  and  vicissitudes  which  we  are  destined  to  endure  while  pass-
ing through  the  pilgrimage  of  this  life,  a  firm  reliance  on  divine
protection,  can  alone  afford  us  the  consolation  and  satisfaction
which  the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away.'  42d.  What
followed?    The  Most  Excellent  Prelate  then  read  a  lesson  to  me

«  with  respect  to  the  bitter  cup.  43d.  What  followed?  The  Grand
Commander  took  the  scull  in  his  hand,  and  pronounced  the  fol-
lowing soliloquy:  'How  striking  is  this  emblem  of  mortality,  once
animated  like  us,  but  now  it-  ceases  to  act  or  think;  its  vital  en-
ergies are  extinct,  and  all  the  powers  of  life  have  ceased  their  op-
erations; and  such,  my  brethren,  is  the  state  to  which  we  are  all

,  hastening:  let  us,  therefore,  gratefully  improve  the  remaining
space  of  life,  that,  when  our  weak  and  frail  bodies,  like  this  me-
mento, shall  become  cold  and  inanimate,  and  mouldering  in  se-

.  pulchral  dust  and  ruins,  our  disembodied  spirits  may  soar  aloft  to
the  blessed  regions  where  dwells  light  and  life  -eternal.'      44(Ji.

-What  followed?  The  Most  Excellent  Prelate  then  read  a  lesson
relative  to  the  crucifixion.  (See  Templar's  chart.)  45th.  What
was  the  fourth  libation?  To  me  memory  of  Simon,  of  Cyrene,
the  early  friend  and  disciple  of  our  Saviour,  who  was  compelled
to  bear  his  cross,  and  fell  a  martyr  to  his  fate.*  46th.  What  fol-
lowed?     The  Grand  Commander  then  addressed  me:  'Pilgrim,

,  before  you  can  be  permitted  to  participate  in  the  fifth  libation,  we
must  enjoin  on  you  one  year's  penance  as  a  trial  of  your  faith
and  humility,  which  you  will  perform  under  the  direction  of  thp
Junior  and  Senior  Wardens,  with  the  scull  in  one  hand  and  a  light-
ed taper  m  the  other;  which  is  to  teach  you*  that  with  faith  and
humility  you  should  cause  your  light  so  to  shine  before  men,  that
w^r  seeing  your  good  works,  may  glorify  our  Father  which  is, in
heaven.'  47th.  What  followed?  1  then  commenced  my  tour  of
penance,  and  passed  in  a  humble  posture  through  the  sepulchre,
where  the  fifth  lesson  was  read  by  the  Senior  Warden,  relative  to
the  resurrection.  (Here  the  ascension  of  the  Saviour  is  repre-
sented on  canvass,  which  the  candidate  is  directed  to  look  at;  at
the  same  tune  the  Sir  Knights  sing  a  hymn.)  After  the  hymn  the
Prelate  speaks  as  follows; —

'I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life,  saith  the  Lord;  he  that  be-
lieveth  on  me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  be  made  alive;

*  There  is  no  evidence  in  existence  that  'Simon,  the  Cyrenean,'  was  a
friend  or  disciple  of  Jesus,  or  that  he  fell  a  martyr  to  his  fate,  This  45&  an-
swer, then,  is  absolutely  false !

02

^  Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


162  tlGfif  Off  MASONRf.

and  who^elref  Uv^^%e$e¥edi  on  me*  sbttt  never  die.  f&-
grim,  the  scene  before  fop  represents  the  splendid  conclusion  of
the  hallowed  sacrifice,  ofifatf  by  tile  Redeemer  of  the  world,  to
propitiate  the  anger  of  an  offended  Deity.  Ttei  sacred  volume
informs  us  that  our  Saviour,  after  baring  suffered  the  pains  of
death,  descended  into  the  place  of  departed  spirits,  and  that  en
the  third  day,  he  bunt  the  bands  of  death,  triumphed  over  the
grave,  and,  in  due  time,  ascended  with  transcendent  majesty  to
heaven,  where  he  now  site  on*  the  right  hand  of  our  Heavenly  Fa-
ther, a  mediator;  and  intercessor  for  aM  those  whv  have  faith  in
hrm.  I  now  invest  you  wife  an'  emblem  of  tfeat  frith:  (at  the
same  time  suspends  from  Ms  neetra  biaek  cross:)  it  is  afeo  an
emblem  of  our  order,  which  you  wffi  wear  as  a  constant  ffcemori-
ai,  for  you  to  imitate  the  virtues  of  the  immaculate  Jesus,  who
died  that  you  might  live.  Pi^rim,  the  ceremonies  in  which  you
are  how  engaged,  are  calculated  deeply  to  impress  your  mind,  and
I  trust  wul  have  a  happy  and  lasting  effect  upon  your  oharaeter .
Tou  were  first,  as  a  trial  of  your  faith  and  humftky,  enjoined  to
perform  seven  years  of  pilgrimage;  k  represents  tile  great  pil-
grimage of  life,  through  winch  we  are  aft  passing:  we  are  all  wea-
ry pilgrims,  anxiously  lookmg  toward  to  that  asylum,  where  we
shall  rest  from  our  labors,  and  be  at  rest  for  ever.  You  were  then
directed,  as  a  trial  of  your  courage  and  constancy,  to  perform
seven  years9  warfare;  R  represents  to  you  the  constant  warfare
with  the  lying  vanities  and  deceits  of  this  world,  in  which  it  is
necessary  for  us  always  to  be  engaged.  You  are  now  perform-
ing a  penance  as  a  trial  of  your  humility.  Of  this  our  Lord  and
Saviour  has  left  us  a  bright  example.  For  though  he  was  the
Eternal  Son  of  God,  he  humbled  himself  to  be  bora  of  a  wo-
man, tp  endure  the  paifis  and  afflictions  incident  to  human  nature,
and  finally  to  suffer  a  cruel  and  ignominious  death  upon  the  cress:
it  is  also  a  trial  of  that  faith  which  will  conduct' you  safely  over
die  dark  gulf  of  everlasting  death,  and  land  your  enfranchised
spirit  in  the  peaceful  abodes  of  the  blessed.  Pilgrim,  keep  ever
in  your  memory  this  awful  truth;  you  know  not  how*  soon  you
may  be  called  upon  to  render  an  account  to  that  Supreme  Judge,
from  whom  not  even  the  most  minute  afct  of  your^life  is  hiddem
for  although  you  now  stand  erect  ranall  the  strength  of  manhood
*and  pride  of  beauty,  in  a  few  short  moments  you  may  become  a
4iaie  and  lifeless  corpse.  This  moment,  even  vwhile  'I  yet  speak,
the  angel  of  death  may  receive  the  fatal  mandate  to  strike  yon
■ftorn  the  roll  of  existence;  and  the  friends  who  now  surround  you,
may  be  called  upon  to  perform  the  last  sad  duty:  of  .laj^  you  in
fa  earth  a  banquet  for  wttms,  and  this  fair  l>odf  oe^SoW  th^

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LMMJT   ON  MASOWtY.  168

refe  you  now  hold  in  your  hand.  Mm  that  is  born  of  a  woman,
is  of  few  days  and  full  of  sorrow;  he  comcth  up  and  is  cut  down
as  a  flower;  he  fleeth  as  a  shadow,  and  cootinueth  not  In  the
midst  of  life,  we  are  in  death;  of  whom  may  we  seek  for  succor
but  of  thee,  O  Lord,  who  for  our  sins  art  justly  displeased.  Yet,
O  God  most  holy,  thou  God  most  mighty,  0  holy  and  most  mer-
ciful Saviour,  deliver  us  from  the  pains  of  eternal  death: — I  heard
a  voice  from  heaven,  saying  unto  me,  write  from  henceforth,
blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord;  even  so,  saith  the  spir-
it, for  they  rest  from  their  labors:  be  ye  also  ready,  and  rest  as-
sured that  a  firm  faith  in  the  truths  here  revealed,  will  afford  you
consolajtion  in  the  gloomy  hour  of.  dissolution,  and  ensure  you
iaefiable  and  eternal  happiness  in  the  world  to  come— Amen  and
amen.

48th.  Where  did  your  tow  of  penance  end?  It  has  not  yet
ended;  neither  can  it  end  until  this  mortal  shall  put  on  immortali-
ty: for  all  men  err,  and  aH  error  needs  repentance,  49th.  Were
you  men  permitted  to  participate  in  the  fifth  libation?  I  was.
,50th.  Where?  Within  the  asylum.  51st  How  gained  you  ad-
mittance there?  After  having  passed  my  year  of  penance,  I  re-
turned to  the  door  of  the  asylum,  where,  on  giving  the  alarm,  the
Warden  appeared  and  demanded,  'who  comes  there?'  52d.  Your
answer?  Pilgrim  penitent,  travelling  from  afar,  who  begs  your
permission  here  to  rest,  and  at  the  shrme  of  our  departed  Lord,
to  offer  up  his  prayers  and  meditations.  53d.  What  was  then
demanded  of  you?  What  surety  can  he  offer  mat  he  is  no  im-
postor. 54th.  Your  answer?  The  commendation  of  two  <r#e
and  courteous  Knights,  the  Junior  and  Senior  Wardens*  5.6th.
What  was  then  demanded  of  you?  By  what  further  right  or  bene-
.  fit  I  expected  to  gain  admittance.  56th.  Your  answer?  '  By  the
benefit  of  a  pass  word.  57th.  Did  you  give  mat  pass  word?.  I
did  not;  my  conductor  gave  it  for  me.  58th.  Give  it.  Golgo-
tha: (it  is  given  as  before  described.)  59th.  What  was  then  said
to  you?  Wait  with  faith  and  humility,  and  soon  an  answer  shall
be  returned  to  your  request  60th.  What  was  the  answer  of  the
Grand  Commanderi  i  That  I  should  he  admitted.  61st.  What
did  the  Grand  Commander  then  demand?  Who  have  you-there
in  charge,  Sir  Knight.  62d.  What  answer  was  returned?  A  pil-
grim penitent,  travelling  from  afar,  who,  having  passed  his  term
of  penance,  seeks  new  to  participate  in  the  fifth  libation*  ;thet£by
to  seal  ins  fate.  63d.  What  did  the  Grand  Commander  then  ob-
serve? Pilgrim,  in  granting  your  request,  and  receiving  you  a
Knight  among  our  number,  I  can  only  offer  you  a  rough  habit,
coarse  diet,  and  severe  duties:  if,  on  these  condition*,  yen  am


y  Google


}$4  LIOTT  ON  MASOHBT.

still  desirous  of  enlisting  under  our  banners,  you*  will  advance  and
kneel  at  the  base  of  the  triangle.      64th*    What  did  the  Grand
Commander  then  observe?     Pilgrim,  the  fifth  libation  is  taken,  in
the  most  solemn  and  impressive  manner;  we  cannot  be  too  often
reminded  that  we  are  born  to  die:  and  the  fifth  libation  is  an  em-
blem of  that  bitter  cup  of  death,  of  which  we  must  all  sooner  or
later  partake,  and  from  which  even  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  not-
withstanding his  ardent  prayers  and  solicitations,  was  not  ex-,
empt.  «  65th.  The  Grand  Commander  asked  me  if  I  had  any  re-
pugnance to  participate  in  the  fifth  libation.    66th.  Your  answer?
I  am  willing  to  conform  to  the  requirements  of  the  order.    67th.
What  followed?     I  then  took  the  cup  (the  upper  part  of  the  hu-
man scull,)  m  my  hand,  and  repeated  after  the  Grand  Command-
er, the  following  obligation:  'This  pure  wine  I  now  take  in  testi-
mony of  my  belief  in  the  mortality  of  the  body  and  the  immor-'
tality  of  the  soul, — and  may  this  libation  appear  as  a  witness
against  me,  both  here  and  hereafter, — and  as  the  sins  of  the  world
were  laid  upon  the  head  of  the  Saviour,  so  may  all  the  sins  com-
mitted* by  the  person  whose  scull  this  was,  be  heaped  upon  my
nead,  in  addition  to  my  own,  should  I  ever-  knowingly  or  wilfully
violate  or  transgress  any  obligation  that  I  have  heretofore  taken,
take  at  this  time,  or  shall,  at  any  future  period,  take  in  relation  to
any  degree  of  Masonry,  or  order  of  Knighthood.*     So  help  me
.  God.'     68th.  What  was  this  obligation  called?      The  sealed  ob-
ligation.    69th.  Why  so?     Because  any  obligation  entered  into,
or  promise  made  in  reference  to  this  obligation,  is  considered  by
Knight  Templars,  as  more  binding  and  serious  than  any  other
special  obligation  could  be.     70th.  What  followed?     The  Most
Excellent  Prelate  then  read  the  sixth  lesson,  relative  to  the  elec-
tion of  Matthias.      (See  chart.)      71st    What  followed?      The
Generalissimo  thus  addressed  the  Grand  Commander: — 'Most
Eminent,  by  the  extinguished  taper  on  the  triangle,  I  perceive
:  there  is  a  vacancy  in  our  Encampment,  which  I  propose  should
..  be  filled  by  a  choice  from  among  those  valiant  Knights,  who  have
c  sustained  the  trials  and  performed  the  ceremonies  required  by  our
»  order,  f     72d.  What  followed?     The  Grand  Commander  then  or-


•  *  The  candidate  here  not  only  imprecates  the  damnation  of  his  own  soul,
for  his  own  sins,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  another,  which  is  a  double  danvw-

tion- and  all  this  in  case,  of  a  violation  of  any  oath  in  Masonry.     Aa   *«•

instance    if  he  'speaks  evil  of  a  brother  Master  Mason,  behind  hi


As,  for
is  back  or


before  his  face;'
•there,  if  in  "


He    SUCWWB  cvu,  in    a    uivrvuci   *»aatci   UHwuii)  ireuusu    *mo  u«wn    VI

ce;'  or  'wrongs  him  out  of  cne  cent;',  or  'suffers  it  to  be  done  by
•tners,  h  i»  his  power  to  prevent  it:' — he  is  to  be  doubly  damned! ! !

-f  This  lesson  is  to  be  found  in  Acts,  chap.  i.  21 — 26.  This  part  of  the  cere-
mony there  consists  in  the  mockery  of  electing  by  lot  the  candidate,  who  may

y  Google


Digitized  by  V


WGBT  ON  VAB09BX.  165

dered  the  lots  to  be  given  forth,  which  being  done,  I  was  elected,
and  the  Grand  Commander  thus  addressed  me:  'In  'testimony  of
jour  election  as  a  companion  among  us,  and  of  your  acceptance
of  that  honor,  you  will  re-light  that  extinguished  taper;  and  may
the  Almighty  lift  upon  you  the  light  of  his  countenance,  and  pre-
serve you  from  fidting.'  73d.  What  Mowed?  The  Grand  Com-
mander then  directed  me  to  kneel,  and  said,  by  virtue  of  the  high,
power  in  me  vested,  as  the  successor  and  representative  of  Hugh
De  Paganis,  and  Geoffrey,  of  SU  Qmers,  1  now  dub  and.  create
you  Knight  Templar,  Knight  of  Malta,  of  the  holy  order  of  St.
John,  of  Jerusalem.  [Tin*  is  repeated  three  times,  at  the  same
tirfie  laying  the  blade  of  his  sword  first  upon  the  right  shoulder,
then  upon  the  head,  and  then  upon  the  left  shoulder  of  the  candi-
date.] 74*.  What  followed?  The  Grand  Commander  then  pre-
sented me  a  swocd,  and  thus  addressed  me:  'This  sword  in  your
hand,  as  a  true  and  courteous  Knight,  will  be  endowed  with  three
most  excellent  qualities;  its  hilt  be  justice  impartial,  its  blade  be
fortitude  undaunted,  and  its  point  be  mercy:  and  let  it  teach  us
this  important  lesson,  that  we  should  ever  be  assured  of  the  jus-
lice  of  the  cause  in  which  we  draw  our  swords,  and  being  thus
assured,  we  should  persevere  with  the  most  undaunted  fortitude,
and  finaBy,  having  subdued  our  enemies,  we  should  consider  them
no  longer  such,  but  extend  to  them  the  most  glorious  attribute  of
God's 'mercy.'  75th.  What  followed?  The  Grand  Commander
then  eontmnieated  to  me  the  due-guard,  the  penitent's  pass,  and
.As  grand  sign,  grip,  and  word  of  Knight  Templars.  76th.  Civo
Ate  due-guard.  [The  sign  is  given  by  placing  the  end  of  the  right
thumb  under  the  chin.]  77th.  To  what  does  it  allude?  T<*
the  penally  of  my  obligation;  to  have  my  head  struck  off  and
placed  upon  the  highest  spire  in  Christendom.  78th.  Give  the
penitent's  pass.  It  is  given  as  before  described;  the  word  is
Golgotha.    79th.  What  does  this  word  aiude  to?  ;v*  ,\

BOth.  Gwre  die  grand  sign.  This  sign  is  given  by  placing  your-
self in  a  situation*  representing  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  £ttiA*;./
To  what  does  tins  sign  allude?  To  the  manner  in  whicfy$k
Saviour  expired  upon  the  cross,  and  expatiated  the  sins  oS  &b  '
world.  88d.  Give  the  grip  and  word.  The  grip  is  given  by  in-
.tariackig  the  fingers  of  the  right  and  left  hand,  with  the  fingers  of
the  right  and  left  hands  of  die  candidate,  which  forms  a  cross.-*-

be  a  swearer,  druakpid,  er  Oast,  as  *a  apostle  ef  tfce  LORD  sad  Saviour,
,  Jesus  Christ !

Diplomas  of  this  degree  may  be  seen,  which,  'in  the  name  of  the  &o"
end  UsrorriDSB  Tittim?  recommend  (be  bearer  as  a  true  andtWthfirf  "»-
dferof  lasasChdat!  »   "


y  Google


166  MGHT  ON   HEASOJfllV.

83d.  What  is  the  word?  Immanttel.  [This  word  is  given  at  tbe
time  of  giving  the  grip,  and  is  the  name  of  the  grip.]  84tht  What
does  the  grip  teach  us?  That  as  our  fingers  are  thus  strongly  in-
terlaced,  so  should  the  hearts  of  Knight  Templars  be  firmly  in*
terlaced  in  friendship  and  brotherly  love.  85th.  What  is  the
motto  of  our  order?  Rex  regum,  et  Dominus  donunorum.  86th.
How  do  you  translate  it?    King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.


K9IGHTS  OF  THE!  CHRISTIAN  MARK,

JUW>  GTJAMW  OF  THE  CONCLAVE.

This  conclave  is  governed  by  an  Invincible  Knight  of  the  Or-
der of  St  John  of  Jerusalem,  a  Senior  end  Junior  Knight,  six
Grand  Ministers,  Recorder,  Treasurer,  Conductor,  and  Guard.

Opening.— 'Sir  Junior  Knight,  are  all  convened  in  a  secret
place,  and  secured  from  the  prying  eye  of  the  profane?

'We  are,  Invincible.'

'Sir  Senior  Knight,  instruct  the  Sir  Knights  to  assemble  in  form
for  the  purpose  of  opening  this  Invincible  order.'

The  members  kneel  on  both  knees  in  a  circle,  each  With  life
right  hand  on  his  heart,  his  left  on  his  forehead.

Prayer. — 'Eternal  source  of  life,  of  light,  and  perfection,  Sfc»
preme  God  and  Governor  of  all  things,  liberal  dispenser  of  every
blessing!  We  adore  and  magnify  thy  holy  name  for  the  many
blessings  we  have  received  from  thy  hands,  and  acknowledge  our
^worthiness  to  appear  before  thee;  but  for  the  sake  and  in  the
name  of  thy  atoning  Son,  we  approach  thee  as  lost  and  undone
children  of  wrath;  but  through  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  and  the
sanctification  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  come  imploring  a  continua-
tion of  thy  favors,  for  thou  hast  said,  that  he  who  cometh  to  thee
through  faith  in  the  Son  of  thy  love,  thou  wilt  in  no  wise  cast  out;
therefore,  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  we  come,  supplicating  pardon
for  our  past  offences,  that  they  may  be  blotted  out  from  the  book
of  thy  remembrance,  and  be  seen  no  more,  and  that  the  remain-
der of  our  days  may  be  spent  as  becometh  the  followers  of  the
Holy  One  of  Israel;  and  graciously  grant  that  love,  harmony,
peace,  and  unity  may  reign  in  this  council;  mat  one  spirit  may
animate  us— one  God  reign  over  us— and  one  heaven  receive
us,  mere  to  dwell  in  thine  adorable  presence,  for  ever  and  ever.
Amen.'

The  Invincible  Knight  takes  the  Bible  and  waves  it  four  times
over  bis  head,  saying,    'BEX  REGNANTIUM,  WE  DOMI-


d  by  Google


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  167

NU8  DOMINANTITJM^*  kisses  it  and  passes  it  on  his  right:
it  goes  around  until  it  come  again  to  the  Invincible  Knight,  who
opens  and  reads,  Matthew,  y.  3 — >12,  16.

Always  interlace  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  draw  you  sword
and  present  it  to  <he  heart,  and  say,  'Tammuz  Touliumeth:  I
pronounce  this  convention  opened  in  ample"  form.  Let  us  repair
to  our  several  stations,  and  strictly  observe  silence.*  Prepara-
tion.— The  candidate  is  shown  into  the  antichamber  by  the  con-
ductor, who  clothes  him  in  a  gown  of  brown  stuff,  and  leads  him
to  the  door  of  the  council  chamber  where  he  knocks  twice,  six,
and  two;~2,  6,  and  2.  Jmmor  Knight  'Some  one  knocks  for
admission,  Invincible  Knight.'  Invincible,  'See  who  it  is,  and
make  report.'  J.  K.  (goes  to  the  door,  and  reports,)  'One  that  is
faithful  in  good  works,  wishes  admission  here.'  Inv.  'What  good
works  hath  he  performed?'  J.  K.  'He  hath  given  food  to  the
hungry,  drink  to  the  thirsty,  and  clothed  the  naked  with  a  gar-
ment' Inn.  'Thus  far  he  hath  done  well;  but  mere  is  still  much
for  him  to  do.  To  be  faithful  in  my  house,  saith  the  Lord  of
hosts,  filled  with  love  for  my  people.  If  so,  let  him  enter  under
the  penalties  of  his  symbolic  obligation.'  He  enters,  makes  signs
until  he  arrives  at  the  altar,  there  kneels.  Vow. — 'I,  A  B,  do
promise  and  vow,  with  this  same  volume  clasped  in  my  hands,  that
I  will  keep  secret  the  words,  signs,  tokens,  and  grips  of  this  or-
der of  Knighthood,  from  all  but  those  Knights  of  St.  John,  of
Jerusalem,  who  have  shown  a  Christian  disposition!  to  their  fel-
low men,  are  professors  of  the  Christian  faith,  and  have  passed
through  the  degrees  of  symbolic  Masonry;  and  that  I  will  protect
and  support,  as  far  as  in  me  lies,  the  followers  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ:  feed  them,  if  hungry;  give  them  drink,  if  thirsty;  if  na-
ked, clothe  them  with  garments;  teach  them,  if  ignorant,  and  ad-
vise them  for  their  good  and  their  advantage: — All  this  I  promise
in  the  name  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost;
and,   if  I  perform  it  not,  let  roe  be  anathema  maranatha!

ANATHEMA   MARANATHA !!' J

*  This  phrase  is  probably  intended  to  be  translated  'King  of  kings,  and
Lord  of  lords.'  We  infer  this  from  its  being  subsequently  thus  written  in
plain  English,  although  we  know  of  no  rules  that  would  authorize  a  trans-
lation. —Ed.  Le  Roy  Gaz.

t  'Shown  a  Christian  disposition/  Now,  reader,  remember  that  this  de-
claration is  made  under  oath,  often  by  men,  Who,  so  far  from  being  'profess-
ors of  the  Christian  faith,'  are  Deists,  and  hesitate  not  to  avow  the  fact
publicly.

\  Anathema  Maranatha  is  a  phrase  used  once  in  the  scriptures;  it  signified
'accursed  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord.'— Ed.  Le  Roy  Gaz.


y  Google


168  LIGHT  C-S  9USOK&T.

The  Invincible  Knight  interlaces  (he  fingers  of  his  left  band
with  those  of  the  candidate,  who  lays  his  right  hand  on  his  heart
The  Invincible  Knight  draws  his  sword;  the  Senior  Knight  does  <
the  same;  they  cross  them  on  the  back  of  die  candidate's  neck,
and  die  Invincible  Knight  says,  'by  virtue  of  me  high  power  in
me  vested,  by  a  ball  of  Hit  Holiness,  Pope  SykesUr,*  I  dub  yoa
a  Knight  of  the  Christian  Mark,  member  of  the  Grand  Council,
and  Guard  of  the  Grand  Conclave.'  The  Invincible  Knight  then
whispers  in  his  ear,  'Tammuz  Toumimeth.'  The  Knights  come
to  order;  the  Senior  Knight  takes  his  seat;  the  candidate  continues
standing:  the  conductor  brings  a  white  robe;  the  Senior  Knight
says,  'thus  saith  the  Lord,  he  that  beMeveth  and  endureth  to  the
end  shall  overcome,'  and  I  will  cause  his  iniquities  to  pass  from
him,  and  he  shall  dwell  in  my  presence  fbr  ever  and  ever.f  Take
away  his  filthy  garments  from  him,  and  clothe  him  with  a  change
of  raiment.  For  he  that  overcometh,  the  same  shall  be  clothed
in  white  raiment,  and  his  name  shall  be  written  in  the  book  of  life,
and  I  will  confess  his  name  before  my  father  and  his  holy  angels.
He  that  hath  an  ear  to  hear,  lethifjrfiear  what  the  Spirit  saith  un-
to the  true  believer.  Set  ye  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head,  place  a
palm  in  his  hand,  for  he  shall  go  in  and  out  and  minister  before
roe,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts;  and  he  shall  be  a  disciple  of  that  rod
taken  from  the  branch  of  the  stem  of  Jesse.  For  a  branch  has
grown  out  of  his  root,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  hath  rested  upon
it;  the  spirit  of  his  wisdom,  and  might,  and  righteousness  is  the
girdle  of  his  loins,  and  faithfulness  the  girdle  of  his  vine;  and  he
stands  as  an  Insignia  to  the  people,  and  him  shall  the  Gentiles
seek,  and  his  rest  shall  be  glorious.  Cause  them  that  have  charge
over  the  city  to  draw  near,  every  one  with  the  destroying  weapon
in  his  hand.'  The  six  Grand  Ministers  come  forward  from  the
north  with  swords  and  shields.  The  first  is  clothed  in  whke,  and
has  an  inkhom  by  his  side,  and  stands  before  the  Invincible
Knight,  who  says,  'Go  through  the  city;  run  in  the  midst  thereof
and  smite;  let  not  thine  eye  spare,  neither  have  pity:  for  they
have  not  executed  my  judgments  with  clean  hands,  saith  the  Lord

*  'His  Holiness,  Pope  Sylvester.'  Must  not  a  Protestant  have  some
qualms  of  conscience  in  this  recognition  of  the  authority  of 'the  man  of  sin.9
2  Thess.  hi.  4.

f  Let  the  reader  imagine  this  scene  passing  before  his  eyes.  The  candi-
date continues  standing;'— he  may  regard  the  LORD  Jesus  as  an  impostor,
and  his  religion  as  a  cunningly  devised  fable; — his  face  may  be  marked  with
intemperance;— yet  the  Senior  Knight  puts  on  him  the  *white  robe,'  and
gravely  says,  in  the  language  of  the  word  of  GOD,  (Rev.  iii.  5;  Zech.  hi.
1—8;  Isa.  ».  1—5;  Ezek.  ix.:)  'Thus  saith  the  LORD,  he  that  belicoeth  and
cnduretktQJhcmdSka  '

Digitized  by  LiOOQ IC


LIGHT   OK  MASOKKT.  169

of  Hosts.'  The  candidate  is  instructed  to  exclaim,  <Wo  is  me,
for  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and  my  dwelling  has  been  in  the
tents  of  Kedar  and  among  the  children  of  Meshec.  Then  he
that  has  the  inkhorn  by  his  side,  takes  a  live  coal  with  the  tongs
from  the  altar,  and  touches  the  lips  ef  the  candidate,  and  says,
'If  ye  believe,  thine  iniquities  shall  be  taken  away,  thy  sins  shall
be  purged:  I  will  that  these  be  clean  with  the  branch  that  shall  be
given  up  before  me.  All  thy  sins  are  removed  and  thine  iniqui-
ties blotted  out  For  I  have  trodden  the  wine  press  alone,  and
with  me  was  none  of  my  people:  For  behold,  I  come  with  dyed
garments  from  Bozrahr  mighty  to  save.  Refuse  not,  therefore,
to  hearken;  draw  not  away  thy  shoulders;  shut  not  thine  ear  that
thou  shouldst  not  hear.'  The  six  ministers  now  proceed  as  if
they  were  about  to  commence  the  slaughter,  when  the  Senior
Knight  says  to  him  with  the  inkhorn,  'Stay  thine  hand;  proceed
no  further  until  thou  hast  set  a  mark  on  those  that  are  faithful  in
the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  trust  in  the  power  of  his  might.  Take
ye  the  signet  and  set  a  mark  on  the  forehead  of  my  people  that
have  passed  through  great  tribulation,  and  have  washed  their
robes,  and  have  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,
which  was  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.'  The  Minis-
ter  takes  the  signet  and  presses  it  on  the  candidate's  forehead.
He  leaves  the  mark  in  red  letters,  'King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of
lords.'*  The  Minister  opens  the  scroll,  and  says,  'Sir  Invincible
Knight,  the  number  of  the  sealed  are  one  hundred  and  forty  and
four  thousand.'  The  Invincible  Knight  strikes  four,  and  all  the
Knights  stand  before  Kim.  He  says,  'Salvation  belongeth  to  our
God,  which  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb.'  All  the
members  fall  on  their  faces,  and  say,  'Amen.  Blessing,  honor,  ,
glory,  wisdom,  thanksgiving,  and  power,  might,  majesty,  and  do-
minion, be  unto  our  God,  for  ever  and  ever,  Amen.'  They  all
cast  down  crowns  and  palm  branches,  and  rise  up  and  say,  'Great
and  numberless  are  thy  works,  thou  King  of  saints.  Behold,  the
star  which  I  laid  before  Joshua,  on  which  is  engraved  seven  eyes,,
as  the  engraving  of  a  signet,  shall  be  set  as  a  seal  on  thine  arm.
— as  a  seal  on  thine  heart;  for  love  is  stronger  than  death;  many
waters  cannot  quench  it:  If  a  man  would  give  all  the  treasures  of
his  house  for  love,  he  cannot  obtain  it:  It  is  the  gift  of  God
through  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord.'

Charge. — 'Invincible  Knight,  I  congratulate  you  on  yoiu\h&y-

*  The  reader  is  requested  to  turn  to  the  following  passages:  <>Isa.  vi.  "b^7',-
Ps.  cxx.  5;  Isa.  xliii.  15,  and  Ixiii.  1—3;  Rev.  \m.  2—14;  xbufte*,  v.  I3r
xv.  3;  Zech.  iii.  9;  Songs  of  Solomon,  viu.  6,  7.  The  impious [prime*0*  °r
those  passages  is  incapable  of  defence  or  excuse.  *

P

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


iTfO  LIGHT   ON  MASOHRT*

ing  been  found  worthy  to  be  promoted  to  this  honorable  Order  of
Knighthood.  It  is  highly  honorable  to  all  those  worthy  Knights,
who,  with  good  faith  and  diligence,  perform  its  many  important
duties.  The  honorable  situation  to  which  you  are  now  advanced,
and  the  illustrious  office  which  you  now  fill,  is  one  that  was  much
desired  by  the  first  nobleman  of  Italy,  but  ambition  and  jealousy
caused  his  Highness,  Pope  Alexander,  to  call  on  his  ancient  friend,
the  Grand  Master  of  the  Knight  of  St.  John,  of  Jerusalem,  to
guard  his  person  and  the  Holy  See,  as  those  Knights  were  known
to  be  well  grounded  in  the  faith,  and  zealous  followers  of  the  Lord.
The  members  of  the  guard  were  chosen  by  their  countenances,
for  it  is  believed  that  a  plain  countenance  is  an  indication  of  the
heart;  and  that  no  stranger  should  gain  admission  and  discover
the  secrets  of  this  august  assembly,  this  Order  of  the  Christian
Mark  was  conferred  on  those  who  went  about  doing  good,  and
following  the  example  of  their  Illustrious  Master, ,  Jesus  Christ.
Go  thou  and  do  likewise.'

Motto. — 'Christus  regnat,  vincit,  triumphat.*  Rex.regnantium,
et  Dominus  dominantium.'

Israel  on  the  left  breast,  a  triangular  plate  of  gold,  seven  eyes
engraved  on  one  side,  on  the  other  the  letter  G  in  the  five  points.

*  Christ  rules,  conquers,  triumphs. — Ed.  Le  Roy  Gaz.


KNIGHTS  OF  THE  HOLY  SEPULCHRE.

History. — St.  Helena,  daughter  of  Caylus,  king  of  Britain,
consort  of  Constantine,  and  mother  of  Constantine  the  Great,  in
the  year  296,  made  a  journey  to  the  Holy  Land  in  search  of  the
cross  of  Jesus  Christ.  After  levelling  the  hillocks  and  destroy-
ing the  temple  of  Venus,  three  crosses  were  discovered.  It  was
now  difficult  to  discover  which  of  the  three  was  the  one  sought
for  by  her.  By  order  of  his  Holiness,  Pope  Marcellinus,  they
were  borne  to  the  bed  of  a  woman  who  had  long  been  visited  by
sickness,  and  lay  at  the  point  of  death;  she  placed  her  hands  up-
on the  second  cross  first,  which  rendered  her  no  service;  but  when
she  laid  her  hand  upon  the  third,  she  was  restored  to  her  former
health.  She  instantly  arose,  giving  glory  to  God,  saying,  He  was
wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities,
the  chastisement  of  sin  was  upon  him,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are
healed,  and  God  hath  laid  on  him  all  our  iniquities.  On  the  spot
where  the  crosses  were  found,  St.  Helena  erected  a  stately  churcb>

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   OK  MASONRY.  17l

one  hundred  paces  long  and  sixty  wide;  the  east  end  takes  in  the
place  where  the  crosses  stood,  and  the  west,  of  the  sepulchre:  by
levelling  the  hills,  the  sepulchre  is  above  the  floor  of  the  church,
like  a  grotto  which  is  twenty  feet  from  the  floor  to  the  top  of  the
rock:  there  is  a  superb  cupola  over  the  sepulchre,  and  in  the  aisle
are  the  tombs  of  Godfrey  and  Baldwin,  kings  of  Jerusalem.  In
302,  St.  Helena  instituted  the  Order  of  Knights  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ  This  Order
was  confirmed  in  304,  by  his  Holiness,  Pope  Marcellinus;  they
were  bound  by  a  sacred  vow  to  guard  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  pro-
tect pilgrims,  and  tight  infidels,  and  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ.
The  city  of  Jerusalem  was  rebuilt  and  ornamented  by  j&lius
Adrian,  emperor  of  Rome,  and  given  to  the  Christians  in  120.
The  Persians  took  it  from  them  in  637,  and  in  1008  it  fell  into
the  hands  of  the  TurkB,  under  whose  oppressions  it  long  groan-
ed, untff  Peter  the  Holy  steered  the  western  princes  to  release  the
distressed  church,  and  in  1096,  Godfrey  and  Baldwin  unfurled
the  banner  of  the  cros's,  and  expelled  the  Turks.  He  was  to
have  been  invested  with  the  royal  wreath  of  majesty,  but  he  thought
it  not  meet  to  wear  a  crown  of  laurel  when  his  blessed  Saviour
had  worn  a  crown  of  thorns.  Yet  for  the  common  good,  he  suf-
fered himself  to  be  called  the  king  of  Palestine.

Description,  $*.— The  Council  must  represent  a  Cathedral
Church,  die  altar  covered  with  black,  upon  which  must  be  placed
three  larger  candles;  a  cross,  and  in  the  centre  a  scull  and  cross
hones.  The  Principal  stands  on  the  right  side  of  the  altar,  with
a  Bible  in  one  hand,  and  a  staff  in  the  other;  soft  music  plays,
and  the  Veil  is  drawn  up,  and  discovers  the  altar;  me  choir  say:

'Hush,  hush,  the  heavenly  choir,
They  cleave  the  air  in  bright  attire:
See,  see,  the  tute  each  angel  brings,
And  hark  divinely  thus  they  sing:—- .


'To  the  power  divine,
AU  glory  be  given,

By  man  upon  earth,
And  angels  in  heaven.'


The  Priest  steps  before  the  altar,  and  says,  'Kyrie  Elieson;
Christe  Elieson;  Kyrie  Elieson;*  Amen:  Gloria  Sibi  Domino!t
I  declare  this  Grand  Council  opened,  and  ready  to  proceed  to
business.'  The  Priests  and  Ministers  take  their  several  stations
and  observe  order.     The  candidates  being  prepared,  h&  alarms

*  «0  Lord,  have  mercy:  O  Christ,  have  mercy;  O  Lord,  have  mercy.'
f  'Glory  to  the  Lord  himself.'


172  LIGHT  ON  MASONBY.

at  the  door  by  seven  raps,  and  the  Prelate  says  to  Verger,  'See
die  cause  of  that  alarm,  and  report.'    Verger  goes  to  the  doos,
and  reports,  'Right  Reverend  Prelate,  there  are  seven  brethren
who  solicit  admission  to  this  Grand  Council.'    Prelate  says,  'On
what  is  their  desire  founded?9 '   Verger.  'On  a  true  Christian  prin-
ciple, to  serve  the  church  and  its  members,  by  performing  the
seven  corporeal  works  of  mercy,  and  to  protect  and  guard  die
Holy  Sepulchre,  from  the  destroying  hands  of  our  enemies;9
Prelate.    'Admit  them  that  we  may  know  them,  if  you  please.7
They  are  then  admitted:  Prelate  says  to  them,  'Are  you  followers
of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation?'    Verger  says,  'We  are,  Right
Reverend  Prelate.'    P.  'Attend,  then,  to  the  sayings  of  our  Was-
ter, Jesus  Christ.'    Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord,  thy  God,  with  all
thy  heart,  with  all  Ay  mind,  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy
might     This  is  the  first  great  commandment,  and  the  second  is
like  unto  it;  thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself:  on  these  two
commandments  hang  all  the  law  and  die  prophets.    The  Verger
and  Beadle  hold  die  Bible  on  which  the  candidates  place  their
right  bands.     Vow* — 'I,  A  B,  in  the  name  of  the  high  and  undi-
vided Trinity,  do  promise  a?id  vow  to  keep  and  conceal  the  high
mysteries  of  tins  noble  and  invincible  Order  of  Knights  of  the
Holy  Sepulchre,  from  all  but  such  a*  ate  ready  and  willing  to  servo  *
the  church  of  Christ,  by  acts  of  valor  and  charity,  and  its  mem-
bers, by  performing  all  the  corporeal  works  of  mercy;  and  that,
as  far  as  in  me  lies,  I  wiU  defend  the  church  of  the  Hory  Sepul-
chre from  pillage  and  violence,  and  guard  and  protect  pilgrims  on
their  way  to  and  from  the  Holy  Land;  and  if  I  perform  not  this,
my  vow,  to  the  best  of  my  abilities,  let  me  become  inanimat**.'*
Interlace  your  fingers  with  the  candidate,  cross  your  arms,  and
say,  'De  mortuis,  nil  nisi  bonum.'f     Prelate  says,  'Take  the
sword,  and  travel  onward — guard  the  Holy  Sepulchre— defeat  our
enemies — unfurl  the  banner  of  our  cross — protect  the  *  Roman
Eagle — return  to  us  with  victory  and  safety.'     The  candidates
depart— go  to  the  south,  where  they  meet  a  band  of  Turks — a
desperate  conflict  ensues — the  Knights' are  victorious;  they  seize
the  crescent,  and  return  to  die  cathedral  in  triumph,  and  place  the
banner,  eagle,  and  crescent  before  the  altar,  and  take  their  seats*
(22d  chap.  St.  John,  read  by  Prelate.)    Then  the  choir  sing,—
'Creator  of  the  radiant  light,
Dividing  day  from  saMe  night;
Who,  with  the  light  bright  origin,  •

The  worlds  creation  cfitSt  begin.'

Prelate  then  says,  'Let  our  prayer  come  before  thee,  and  let
*  «Dead.7    t  'Concerning  the  dead,  eay  nothing  but  good,*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  173

our  exercises  be  acceptable  in  thy  sight9  The  seven  candidates
kneel  at  the  foot  of  die  altar.  The  Prelate  takes  the  bread,  and
says,  'Brethren,  eat  ye  all  of  this  bread  in  love,  that  ye  may  learn
to  support  each  other.'  He  then  takes  the  cup,  and  says,  'Drink
ye  all  of  this  cup  to  ratify  the  vow  that  ye  have  made,  and  learn  to
sustain  one  another .'  The  Prelate  then  raises  them  up  by  the
grip,  (interlace  the  fingers,)  and  says:  «lst,  Sir,  I  greet  thee  a
Knight  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre;  go  feed  the  hungry:  2d,  Give
,  ,drink  to  the  thirsty:  3d,  Clothe  the  naked  with  a  garment:  4th,
Visit  and  ransom^the  captives:  5th,  Harbor  the  harborless,  give
the  orphan  and  widow  where  to  lay  their  heads:  6th,  Visit  and
relieve  the  sick:  7th,  Go  and  bury  the  dead.'  All  make  crosses,
and  say,  'In  nomiiri  patriafiho  et  spiritus  sancto:  Amen.'  Prelate
says,  'Brethren,  let  us  recommend  to  each  ether  the  practice  of
the  four  cardinal  virtues;  prudence,  justice,  temperance,  fortitude.'
Closing.-* The  Knights  all  rise,  stand  in  circle,  interlace  their
fingers,  and  say,  'Sepulchrum.'  Prelate  then  says^  'Gloria  patri,
et  filio,  et  spiritui  sancto.'*  Brethren  answer,  'Sicut  erat  in  prin-
cipio,  et  nunc,  et  semper  et  in  secula  seculorum.f  Amen.'

Benediction. — 'Blessed  be  thou,  0  Lord,  our  God!  Great
first  cause  and  Governed  of  all  things!  thou  Greatest  the  world
with  thy  bountiful  hand,  and  sustained  it  by  thy  wisdom,  by  thy
goodness,  and  by  thy  mercy!  It  cometh  to  pass* thtfr  seed  time
and  harvest  never  fail !  It  is  thou  that  givest  every  good  and  per- '
feet  gift!  Blessed  be  thy  name  for  ever  and  every  To  exarn^
ine  a  Knight  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre;  he  holds  up  the  first  finger  •
of  the  right  hand,  Knight  holds  up  the  second;  you  then  hold  'tfp'
.  the  third,  and  he  shuts  up  his  ftrst:  this  signifies  three  persons  ift (
one  God.  .  *     •

*  'Glory  to  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit.'

f  «Asi  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  shall  be,  world  without  end.'


THE  HOLY  AND  THRICE  ILLUSTRIOUS  ORDER  OF  THE
CROSS,  G4LLED  A  COUNCIL*  '

Diploma  of  a  Comp.  of  the  Ancient  Council  of  the  Trinity.
Anno  Cr.  sen  Covt.  896.

C  F  The  Ancient  Council  of  the

M        C  Trinity,  by  their  success-

S  •  C  orb  in  the  United  States

4AOP  of  America.

St.  Albert,  To  every  Knight  Companion  of  the  Holy  and
Thrice  Illustrious  ORDER  OF  THE  CROSS:   Be  it  **>**


•

Digitized


by  Google


174  LIGHT  ON  MASON*?

unto  you,  thpt,  with  regard  to  unquestionable  vouchers,  we  have
confirmed  the  Induction  of  the  Knight  Templar  Mason  into  the
Councils  of  the  said  Order  of  Knighthood,  and  herein  do  war-
rant him  as  a  worthy  and  ILLUSTRIOUS  Companion  thereof:
and  hoping  and  confiding  that  he. will  ever  so  demean  himself  as
to  conduct  to  the  glory  of  I.  IJ.  5.*  the  Most  fcoly  and  Almighty
GOD,  and  to  the  honor  of  his  MARK,  we  do  recommend  and
submit  him  to  the  confidence  of  all  those  throughout  the  world,
who  can  truly  «and  deservedly  say,  'lama  Christian;'  and  that  no
unwarrantable  benefits  shall  arise  from  this  Diploma,  and  we
charge  all  concerned,  cautiously  and  prudently  to  mark  the  bear-
er on  {be  mystic  letters  therein  contained,  and  to  regard  only  the
result,  in  its  app^cation  and  privileges.

Done  out  of  Council,  at  Le  Roy,  in  the  coimty  of  Genesee,
and  state  of  New-York,  of  these  U.  S.  A.  August  1st  1827.

Sir ^

Commendations,  Sovereign  Prefect.

Sir  Knights  Comf'ns.  Sir  J.  H.  C.  MILLER,

Act'g.  Pref.
The  officer*  and  council  all  in  their  places.  *  The  Most  Illus-
trious Prefect  addresses  the  Most  Wortty  Provost  thus:  'Most
Worshipful  Provost,  what  u  the  o'clockf     Most  Worshipful  Pro-
vost says,  rifling"  and  facing  the  east,  at  the  same  time  raising  his
mark  in  his  right  hand,  'Most  Illustrious  Prefect,  it  is  now  the  first
hour  of  the  day,  the  time  when  our  Lord  suffered  and  the  veil  of
the  temple  was  rent  asunder,  when  darkness  and  consternation
'  was  spread  over  the  earth,  when  the  confusion  of  the  old  cove-
nant was  made  light  in  the  new,  in  ^he  temple  of  the  cross.  It  is,
Most  Illustrious  Prefect,  the  third  watch,  when  the  implements  of
Masonry,  were  broken— when  the  mime,  which  led  the  wise  men
of  the  east,  reappeared— when  the  cubick  stone  was  broken,  and
the  word  was  given.'     Most  Illustrious  Prefect  says  to  Worthy
Herald,  'It  is  my  will  that  thi*  house  of  God  be  closed,  and  the
remembrance  of  those  solemn  and  sacred  events,  be  here  com*
4nemorated:  make  this,  Worthy  Herald,  known  to  the  Most  Wor-
shipful Prdvost,  in 'due  and  ancient  form.'     The  Woifhy  Herald
pows  and  approaches  the  Most  .Worshipful  Provost,  where  he
|w)ws  thrice,  faces  about  and  gives  a  blast  with  his  hern,  an*  af-
ter the  Knights  have  filed  out  By  threes  without  the  door,  except
the  Worthy  Senior  Inductor,  he  does  his  errand,  viz:  'Most  Wor-
shipful Provost,  it  is  the  sovereign  will  of  Count  Albertus,  of  Per-

*  The  letters  I.  H.  6.  are  the  initials  of  the  Latin  words,  'Jesus  Htfminam
&*lyatpr.'    (Jesps,  Saviour  of  men.),     "•  •

•  Digitized  by  G00gk  ^


LIGHT  QN  MASONRY*  176

gasnus,  that  this  house  of  God  be  closed,  and  that  those  solemn
and  sacred  events  in  the  new  covenant  be  here  commemorated:
you  will  observe  this.'    The  Worthy  Herald  bows,  and  die  Most
Worshipful  Provos^  rises  and  addresses  die  Worthy  Sen.  Induc-
tor thusc  'It  is  the  will  of  the  Most  Illustrious  Prefect  that  here
now  be  opened  a  Council  of  Knights  of  the  Cross:  What  therein
becomes  your  duty?'     Worthy  Senior  Inductor  says,  'To  receive
the  commands  of  my  superiors  in  the  order,  and  pay  obedience
thereto— to  conduct  and  instruct  my  ignorant  pass-brethren;  and
to  revere,  and  inculcate  reverence  in  others,  for  the  Most  Holy
and  Almighty  God.9     The  Most  Worshipful  Provost  rises  fierce-
ly and  says,  'By  what  right  do  you  claim  this  duty?    Worthy  S.
Inductor  says,  'By  the  right  of  a  sign,  and  the  mark  of  a  sign.'
Most  Worshipful  Provost  says,  'Will  you  give  me  a  sign?'  Wor-
thy Sen.  'I  could  if  I  should.'     The  Most  Worshipful  Provost
then  partly  extends  both  arms,  pointing  downwards  to  an  angle  of
39°,  with  the  palms  open,  and  upwards,  to  show  they  are  not  sul-
'lied  with  iniquity  and  oppression,  and  says,  'Worthy  Sen.  Induct-
or, you  may  give  it.*     The  Worthy  S.  Inductor  men  looks  him
full  in  the  face,  and  with  his  fore  finger  touches  his  right  temple,
and  letS  fall  his  hand,  and  says,  'This  is  a  sum.'    Most  Worship-
ful ftrovost  savs,  'A  sign'  of  what?'    Worthy  S.  Inductor  says,
'Aye,  a  sign  of  what?'    Wor.  Pro/  says,.  'A  penal  sign*'    Wor.

S.  Inductor  says,  'Your  sign  is '    Most  Worthy  Pro.  says*

'The  last  sign  of  my  induction.'  Most  Worthy  Pro.  says,  'But
you^have  the  mark  of  a  sign.'  Worthy  S.  Inductor  says/  'The
sign  whereof  my  mark  is  a, mark,  I  hope  is  in  the  Council  above.'

Most  Worthy  Pro.  says,  'But  the  mark »    Worthy  S.  Induct-  .

or  says,  'Is  in  my  bosom.'  Thereupon  he  produces  his  mark  in
his  left  hand,  and  with  the  fore  fimpr  of  his  right  on  the  letter  S,
on  the  cross,  asks,  'What's  that?'  Most  Wor.  Pro.  says,  'Lisha.'
Wor.  Pro.  puts  his  finger  on  the  letter  H,  and  asks,  'What  is  this?'
Worthy  5L  Inductor  says,  '^Jia.'  Worthy  S.  Inductor  then  puts
his -finger  on  the  letter  I,  and  asks,  'What  is  this?'  Most  Wor.
Pro.  says,  'Baal.'  'What,  then,  is  your  mark?'  Wdrthy  S.  In-
ductor, says,  'Baal,  Sha-Lisha;*  I  am  the  Lord.'  The  Most
Worshipful  Provost  then  says,  'You  are  my  brother,  and  the  duty
is  yours  of  ancient  right;  please  announce  the  Council  open.'
.  The  Worthy  Senior  Inductor  steps  to  the  door  and  .gives  three
raps,  and  is  answered  by  some  Knight  from  without,  who  is  then
admitted,  and  the  Worthy  S.  Inductor  gives  the  conditional  sign,
(which  is  by  partly  extending  both  arms,  as  before  described;)  the
-"■""■ — — —  >,

* 'Lord  of  the  three.*  •

Digmzedf?  Google


17S  MGBT  ON  MA80NBY.

Knight  answering  by  putting  his  finger  to  his  right  temple,  as  be-
fore.    Hie  Worthy  S.  Inductor  then  addresses  the  chair,  thus:—
'Most  Illustrious  Prefect,  a  professing  brother  is  within  the  Coun-
cil by  virtue  of  a  sign.'     Most  Illustrious  Pjpfect  says  to  Wor-
thy Herald,  'Go  to  this  professing  brother,  and  see  him  marked
before  the  chair  of  the  Most  Worshipful  Provost;  conduct  him
thither,  Worthy  Herald.'   The  Worthy  Herald  says  to  the  Knight,
'Worthy  Sir,  know  you  the  sacred  cross  of  our  Council?'  Knight
says, 'lam  a  Christian.'     The  Worthy  Herald  then  says,  'Fok
low  me.'     When  arrived  before  the  Most  Wor.  1?ro.  the  Worthy
Herald  says,  'Most  Worthy  Provost,  by  order  of  the  Most  Illus-
trious Prefect,  I  here  bring  you  to  be  marked  a  professing  brother
of  the  cross.'    'The  Most  Wor.  Pro.  says,  'Worthy  Sir,  know
you  the  cross  of  our  Council?'     Knight  says,  'I  am  a  Christian/
The  Most  Wor.  Pro.  says,  'No  more.'

OBLIGATIONS  OF  THRICE  ILLUSTRIOUS  KNIGHTS  OF  THE
CROSS.

«     FIRST  OBLIGATION.

You,  Mr. ,  do  now,,  by  your  honor,  and  in  view*  of  the

power  and  union  of  the  Thrice  Illustrious  Order  of  the  Cross,
now  first  made  known  to  you,  and  m  the  dread  presence  of  tro
Most  Holy  and  Almighty  God,  solemnly  and  sincerely  swear  and
declare,  that,  to  the  end  of  your  life,  you  will  not,  either  in  con-
sideration of  gain,  interest,  or  honor,  nor  with  good  or  bad, de-
sign, ever  take  any,  the  least,  step  or  measure,  or  be  instrumen-
tal in  any  s^uch  object*  to  betray  or  communicate  to  any  person,
or  being,  or  number  of  the  sajpe,  in  the  known  world,  not  there-
to of  cross  and  craft  entitled,  any  secret  or  secrets,  or  ceremo-
ny or  ceremonies,  or  any  part  thereof  appertaining  to  the  order
and  degree  known  among  Masons  as  the  Thrice  Illustrious  Or-
der of  the  Cross.     That  you  will  not*  at  any  time  or  times  what-
ever, either  now  or  hereafter,  directly  f  or  indirectly,  by  letter,
figure,  or  character,  however  or  by  whoever  made,  ever  com-
municate any  of  the  information  and  secret  mysteries  heretofore
alluded  to.     That  you  will  never  speak  on  or  upon,  or  breathe
high  or  low,  any  ceremony  or  secret  appertaining  thereto,  out  of
council,  where  there  shall  not  be  two  or  more  KnigHts  compan-
ions of  the  order  present,  besides  yourself,  and  that  in  a  safe  and
sure  place,  whereby  any  opinion,  even  of  the  nature  and  genera!
principles  of  the  institution,  can  be  formed  by  any  other  person,
be  he  Mason  or  otherwise,  than  a  true  Knight  companion  of  the
cross;  nothing  herein  going'to  interfere  with  the  prudent  practice

•  Digitized  by  GoOgle


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  177

of  the  duties  enjoined  by  the  order,  or  arrangement  for  their  en-
forcement.

2.  *You  further  swear,  that,  should  you  know  another  to  vio-
late any  essential  point  of  this  obligation,  you  will  use  your  most
decided  endeavors,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  to  bring  such  person
to  the  strictest  and  most  condign  punishment,  agreeably  to  the
rules  and  usages  of  our  ancient  fraternity;  and  this  by  pointing
him  out  to  the  world  as  an  unworthy  vagabond;  by  opposing  his
interest,  by  deranging  his  business,  by  transferring  his  character
after  him  wherever  he  may  go,  and  by  exposing  mm  to  the  con*
tempt  of  the  whole  fraternity  and  the  world,  but  of  our  illustri-
ous order  more  especially,  during  his  whole  natural  life:  nothing
herein  going  to  prevent  yourself,  or  any  other,  when  elected  to
the  dignity  of  Thrice  Illustrious,  from  retaining  the  ritual  of  the
order,  if  prudence  and  caution  appear  to  be  the  governing  prin-
ciple in  so  retaining  it,  such  dignity  authorizing  the  elected  to  be
governed  by  no  rule  but  the  dictates  of  his  own  judgment,  in  re-
gard to  what  will  best  conduce  to  the  interest  of  the  order;  but
Siat  he  be  responsible  for  the  character  of  those  whom  he  may
induct,  and  for  the  concealment  of  the  said  ritual

3.  Should  any  Thrice  Illustrious  Knight  or  acting  officer  of
any  council  which  may  have  them  in  hand,  ever  require  your  aid
in  any  emergency  in  defence  of  the  recovery  of  his  said  charge,
you  swear  cheerfully  to  exercise  all  assistance  in  his  favor,  which
the  nature  of  the  time  and  place  will  admit,  even  to  the  sacrifice
of  life,  liberty,  and  property.  To  all,  and  every  part  thereof,  we
then  bind  you,  and  by  ancient  usage  you  bind  yourself,  under  the
no  less  infamous  penalty  than  dying  the  death  of  a  traitor,  by
having  a  spear,  or  other  sharp  instrument,  like  as  our  divine  Mas-
ter, thrust  in  your  left  side,  bearing  testimony,  even  in  death,  of
the  power  and  justice  of  the  mark  of  the  holy  cross.

SECOND   OBLIGATION.

"Mr.  — —,  before  you  can  be  admitted  to  the  light  and  benefit
of  this  Thrice  Illustrious  order,  it  becomes  my  duty,  by  ancient
usage,  to  propose  to  you  certain  questions,  not  a  thing  vainly
ceremonial;  but  the  companions  wiU  expect  true  answers:  they
will  concern  your  past  life,  and  resolutions  for  the  future.  Have
you  given  me  without  evasion  or  addition  your  baptismal  and
family  names,  and  those  of  your  parents,  your  true  age  as  far  as

*  Taking  this  obligation  in  connexion  with  the  penalty,  it  will  be  seen  that
the  candidate  swears  by  the  blessing  of  GOD,  to  bring  one,  who  shall  violate
the  obligation,  to  the  punishment  of  *having  a  spear,  or  other  sharp  instru*
went,  thrust  into  his  left  side,*  as  the  Saviour  at  his  orucifiaion!

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


178  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.

within  your  knowledge ;  where  you  were  educated,  where  you
were  born,  and  also  where  was  your  last  place  of  residence?  or
have  you  not?     'I  have.'    It  is  well.

2d.  Were  your  parents  free  and  not  slaves!  had  they  right
and  title  in  the  soil  of  the  earth?  were  they  devoted  to  the  religion
of  the  cross,  and  did  they  so  educate  their  family?  have  you
searched  the  spiritual  claims  of  that  religion  on  your  gratitude
and  your  affections?  and  have  you  continued  steadfast  in  that
faith  from  choice  and  a  conviction  of  your  duty  to  heaven,  or  from
education?     'From  duty  and  choice.*     This  also  is  right.

3d.  Have  you  ever  up  to  this  time  lived  according  to  the  prin-
ciples of  that  religion,  by  acting  upon  the  square  of  virtue  with  all
men,  nor  defrauding  any,  nor  defamed  the  good  name  of  any,
nor  indulged  sensual  appetites  unreasonably,  but  more  especially
to  the  dishonor  of  the  matrimonial  tie,  nor  extorted  on,  or  op-
pressed the  poor.  'I  have  not  been  guilty  of  these  things.*  You
have  then  entitled  yourself  to  our  highest  confidence,  by  obeying
the  injunctions  of  our  Thrice  Illustrious  Prefect  in  Heaven,  'of
doing  to  all  men  even  as  you  would  that  they  should  do  unto  you.'
Mr.  — ,  can  you  so  continue  to  act,  that  yearly  on  the  anniver-
sary of  St.  Albert,  you  can  solemnly  swear  for  the  past  season
you  have  not  been  guilty  of  the  crimes  enumerated  in  these  ques-
tions? 'By  the  help  of  God  I  can.*  Be  it  so,  then,  that  annual-
ly, on  the  anniversary  of  St  Albert,  you  swear  to  these  great
questions;  and  the  confidence  of  the  Knights  Companions  of  the
order  in  you,  rests  on  your  being  able  so  to  do.
4th;  For  the  future,  then,  you  promise  to  be  a  good  man,  and  to
be  governed  by  the  moral  laws  of  God  and  the  rules  of  the  order,
in  always  dealing  openly,  honorably,  and  above  deceit,  especial-
ly with  the  Knights  companions  of  the  order.     'I  do.'

5th  Tou  promise  so  to  act  WHh  all  mankind,  but  especially
with  the  fraternity,  as  that  you  shall  never  be  justly  called  a  bad
paymaster,  ungrateful,  a  liar,  a  rake,  or  a  libertine,  a  man  care-
less in  the  business  of  your  Vocation,  a  drunkard,  or  a  tyrant.
<Ido.'

6th.  Tou  promise  to  lead  a  life  as  upright  and  just  in  relation
to  mil  mankind  as  you  are  capable  of,  but  in  matters  of  difference
to  preserve  the  interest  of  a  companion  of  the  order;  of  a  com-
panion's friend  for  whom  he  pleads,  to  any  mere  man  of  the
world.     'I  do.'


*  The  word  of  GOD  says,  &  Chron.  vL  30,  "There  is  no  man  which  sin-
neth  not,"  but  each  Knight  swears  annually  on  the  anniversary  of  St  Albert,
that  during  the  past  year  he  has  acted  on  the  square  of  virtue  with  all  men;
that  he  'has  not  defrauded  any.  nor  defamed  the  good  name  of  any/  in  short
that  he  has  done  to  all  men  as  he  would  that  they  should  do  unto  him.'

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC     '


LIGUT  ON   MASONRY.  179

7th.  You  promise  never  to  engage  in  mean  party  strife,  nor
conspiracies  against  the  government  or  religion  of  your  country,
whereby  your  reputation  may  suffer,  nor  ever  to  associate  with
dishonorable  men  even  for  a  moment,  except  it  be  to  secure  the
interest  of  such  person,  his  family  or  friends,  to  a  companion,
whose  necessities  require  this  degradation  at  your  hands.  (I  do.'

8th.  You  promise  to  act  honorably  in  all  matters  of  office  or
vocation,  even  to  the  value  of  the  one  third  part  of  a  Roman  pen-
ny, and  never  to  take  any  advantage  therein  unworthy  the  best
countenance  of  your  companions,  and  this,  that  they  shall  not,  by
your  unworthiness,  be  brought  into. disrepute.     'I  do.'

THIRD  OBLIGATION.

I  do  now,  by  the  honor  and  power  of  the  mark  of  the  Holy  and
Illustrious  order  of  the  Cross,  which  I  do  now  hold  to  Heaven  in
ray  right  hand  as  the  earnest  of  my  faith,  and  in  the  dread  pre-
sence of  the  most  holy  and  Almighty  God,  solemnly  swear  and
declare,  that  1  do  hereby  accept  of,  and  for  ever  will  consider  the
cross  and  mark  of  this  order  as  my  only  hope:*  that  I  will  make  it
the  test  of  faith  and  fellowship;  and  that  I  will  effect  its  objects
and  defend  its  mysteries  to  the  end  of  my  days,  with  my  life  and
with  my  property — and  first,  that  in  the  state  of  collision  and  mis-
understanding impiously  existing  among  the  princes  and  pilgrims,
defenders  and  champions  of  the  Holy  Cross  of  Jesus  our  Lord,
now  assembled  in  the  land  and  city  of  their  peace,  and  consider-
ing that  the  glory  of  the  Most  High  requires  the  greatest  and
strictest  unanimity  of  measures  and  arms,  the  most  sacred  union
of  sentiment  and  brotherly  love  in  the  soldiers  who  there  thus
devote  themselves  to  his  cause  and  banner,  I  swear  strictly  to
dedicate  myself,  my  life  and  my  property  for  ever  hereafter  to  his
holy  name  and  the  purposes  of  our  mark,  and  to  the  best  interest  '
of  all  those  who  thus  with  me  become  Knights  of  the  Cross:  I
swear  for  ever  to  give  myself  to  this  holy  and  illustrious  order,
confiding  fully  and  unreservedly  -in  the  purity  of  their  morals  and
the  ardor  of  their  pious  enthusiasm,  for  the  recovery  of  the  land
of  their  fathers,  and  the  blessed  clime  of  our  Lord's  sufferings,
and  never  to  renounce  the  mark  of  the  order  nor  the  claims  and
welfare  of  my  brethren.

2d.  And  that  the  holy  and  pious  enthusiasm  of  my  brethren
may  not  have  slander  or  disgrace  at  my  hands,  or  the  order  be

*  'Consider  the  cross  and  mark  of  this  order  as  my  only  hope.'  The  can-
didate swears  then  to  trust  the  eternal  salvation  of  his  soul,  not  on  the  death
of  the  Saviour,  but  lto  the  cross  and  mark  of  this  order  V  .  .  f  *

He  dedicates  himself;  his  life  and  his  property  to  his  holy  name,  (OWisi>>
and  the  purposes  of  'our  mark!1    What  are  those  purposes?


d  by  Google


160  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.

injured  by  my  unwortHiness,  I  swear  for  ever  to  renounce  tyranny
and  oppression  in  my  own  person  and  place,  whatever  it  may
be,  and  to  stand  forth  against  it  in  others,  whether  public  or  pri-
vate; to  become  the  champion  of  the  cross,  to  observe  the  com-
mon good;  be  the  protector  of  the  poor  and  unfortunate;  and
ever  to  observe  the  common  rights  of  human  nature  without  en-
croachment, or  permitting  encroachment  thereon,  if  in  my  power
to  prevent  or  lessen  it.  I  will,  moreover,  act  in  subordination
to  the  laws  of  my  country,  and  never  countenance  any  change  in
the  government  under  which  I  live,  without  good  and  answerable
reasons  for  so  doing,  that  ancient  usages  and  immemorial  cus-
toms be  not  overturned.

3d.  I  swear  to  venerate  the  mark  as  the  wisdom  and  decree
of  Heaven,  to  unite  our  Lands  and  hearts  in  the  work  of  the  holy
crusade,  and  a  an  encouragement  to  act  with  zeal  and  efficacy,
and  I  swear  to  consider  its  testimonies  as  the  true  and  only  pro-
per test  of  an  illustrious  brother  of  the  cross.

4th.  I  swear  to  wear  the  mark  of  this  order,  without  any  the
least  addition,  except  what  I  shall  be  legally  entitled  to  by  induc-
tion, for  ever,  if  not  without  the  physical  means  of  doing  so,  or
it  being  contrary  to  propriety;  and  even  then,  if  possible,  to  wear
the  holy  cross;  and  I  swear  to  put  a  chief  dependence  for  the
said  worthy  and  pious  objects  therein.

5th.  [  swear  to  put  confidence  unlimited  in  every  illustrious
brother  of  the  cross,  as  a  true  and  worthy  follower  of  the  blessed
Jesus,  who  has  sought  this  land,  not  for  private  good,  but  pity,
and  the  glory  of  the  religion  of  the  Most  High  and  Holy  God.*

6th.  I  swear  never  to  permit  my  political  principles  nor  per-
sonal interest  to  come  counter  to  his,  if  forbearance  and  brother-
ly kindness  can  operate  to  prevent  it;  and  never  to  meet  him  if
I  know  it,  in  war  or  m  peace,  under  such  circumstances  that  I
may  not,  in  justice  to  myself,  my  cross,  and  my  country,  wish
him  unqualified  success;  and  if  perchance  it  should  happen  with-
out my  knowledge,  on  being  informed  thereof,  that  I  will  use  my
best  endeavors  to  satisfy  him,  even  to  the  relinquishing  my  arms
and  purpose.  I  will  never  shed  a  brother's  blood  nor  thwart  his
good  fortune,  knowing  him  to  be  such,  nor  see  it  done  by  others
if  in  my  power  to  prevent  it.

7th.  I  swear  to  advance  my  brother's  best  interest,  by  always

*  Here  is  a  stretch  of  charity  altogether  unprecedented.  It  would  cer-
tainly require  the  credulity  of  a  child  to  believe  that  every  man,  who  has
taken  this  degree,  «is  a  true  and  worthy  follower  of  the  blessed  Jesus;*— but
to  swear,  in  the  presence  of  the  great  Jehovah,  to  do  this,  is  an  act  of  mad-
ness!


LIGHT    ON  MASONRY.  j8l

supporting  his  military  fame  and  political  preferment  in  opposi-
tion  to  another;  and  hy  employing  his  arms  or  his  aid  in  his  vo-
cation, under  all  circumstances  where  I  shall  not  suffer  more  by
so  doing,  than  he,  by  my  neglecting  to  do  so,  but  this  never  to
the  sacrifice  of  any  vital  interest  in  our  holy  religion,  or  in  the
welfare  of  my  country.

8th.  I  swear  to  look  on  his  enemies  as  my  enemies,  his  friends
as  my  friends,  and  stand  forth  to  mete  out  tender  kindness  or
vengeance  accordingly;  but  never  to  intrude  on  his  social  or  do-
mestic relations  to  his  hurt  or  dishonor,  by  claiming  his  privileges
or  by  debauching  or  defaming  his  female  relations  or  friends.      ?

9th.  I  swear  never  to  see  calmly  nor  without  earnest  desires
and  decided  measures  to  prevent  the  ill  treatment,  slander,  or  de-
famation, of  any  brother  Knight,  nor  ever  to  view  danger  or  the
least  shadow  of  injury  about  to  fall  on  his  head,  without  well  and
truly  informing  him  thereof;  and,  if  in  my  power  to  prevent  it
never  to  fail,  by  my  sword  or  counsel,  to  defend  his  welfare  and
good  name.

10th.  I  do  swear  never  to  prosecute  a  brother  before  those
who  know  not  our  order,  till  the  remonstrances  of  a  council  shall
be  inadequate  to  do  me  justice.

11th.  I  swear  to  keep  sacred  my  brother's  secrets,  both  when
delivered  to  me  as  such,  and  when  the  nature  of  the  information
is  such  as  to  require  secrecy  for  his  welfare.

12th.  I  swear  to  hold  myself  bound  to  him,  especially  in  af-
fliction and  adversity,  to  contribute  to  his  necessities  my  prayers
my  influence,  and  my  purse.  f

13th.  I  swear  to  be  under  the  control  of  my  council,  or,  if  be-
longing to  none,  to  that  which  is  nearest  to  me,  and  never  to  de-
mur to,  or  complain  at,  any  decree  concerning  me,  which  my
brethren,  as  a  council,  shall  conceive  me  to  deserve>  and  enforce
on  my  head,  to  my  hurt  and  dishonor.

14th.  I  swear  to  obey' all  summons  sent  from  any  council  to
me,  or  from  any  Most  Illustrious  Knight,  whether  Illustrious
Counsellor  for  the  time  being,  or  by  induction,  and  to  be  govern-
ed by  the  constitution,  usages,  and  customs  of  the  order  iwthout
variation  or  change.

15th;  I  swear  never  to  see  nor  permit  more  than  two  candi-
dates, who,  with  the  Senior  Inductor,  will  make  three,  to  be  ad-
vanced, at  the  same  time,  in  any  council  where  I  shall  be;  nor
shall  any  candidate,  by  suffrage,  be  inducted  without  »  unani-
mous vote  of  the  illustrious  brethren  in  council;  nor  s^all  any
council  advance  any  member,  there  not  being  three  UluWtrious
Knights,  or  one  Most  Illustrious  and  four  Illustrious  Knights  of

Q

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


182  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.

the  Cross  present,  which  latter  may  be  substituted  by  Most  Il-
lustrious Induction;  nor  yet  where  there  shall  not  be  a  full  and
proper  mark  of  the  order,  such  as  usage  has  adopted  to  our  al-
tar, of  metal,  or  other  durable  and  worthy  material,  contained
within  the  apartment  of  council,  as  also  the  Holy  Bible;  nor  will
I  ever  see  a  council  opened  for  business,  without  the  ceremony
of  testing  the  mark,  exercised  on  the  character  of  every  brother,
prayers,  and  the  reading  of  the  35th  Psalm  of  David;  nor  will  I
ever  see,  consent  to,  or  countenance,  more  than  two  persons  of
the  same  business  or  calling  in  life,  to  belong  to,  or  be  inducted
and  advanced  in,  any  one  council  of  which  I  am  a  member,  at
the  same  time;  nothing  therein  going  to  exclude  members  from
other  parts  of  the  country,  or  from  foreign  parts,  frpm  joining
us,  if  they  consent  formally  and  truly  to  stand  in  deference  and
defence,  first,  of  their  special  bar-brethren  in  the  council,  nor  to
prevent  advancements  to  fill  vacancies,  occasioned  by  death  or
removal.     To  all  this,  and  every  part  thereof,  I  do  now,  as  be-
fore, by  the  honor  and  power  of  the  mark,  as  by  an  honorable
and  awful  oath,  which  confirmeth  all  things  in  the  dread  presence
of  the  Most  Holy  and  Almighty  God,  solemnly  and  in  truth,
bind  and  obligate  my  soul;  and  in  the  earthly  penalties,  to  wit,
that,  for  the  violation  of  the  least  matter  or  particle  of  any  of  the
here  taken  obligations,  I  become  the  silent  and  mute  subject  of
the  displeasure  of  the  Illustrious  Order,  and  have  their  power
and  wrath  turned  on  my  head,  to  my  destruction  and  dishonor,
which,  like  the  nail  of  Joel,  may  be  file  sure  end  of  an  unworthy
wretch,  by  piercing  my  temples  with  a  true  sense  of  my  ingrati-
tude— and  for  a  breach  of  silence  in  case  of  such  an  unhappy
event,  that  I  shall  die  the  infamous  death  of  a  traitor,  by  having
a  spear,  or  other  sharp  weapon,  like  as  my  Lord,  thrust  in  my
left  side — bearing  testimony,  even  in  death,  of  the  power  of  the
mark  of  the  Holy  and  Illustrious  Cross,  before  I.  H.  S.  our
Thrice  Illustrious  Counsellor  in  Heaven,  the  Grand  Council  of
the  good. — To  this  I  swear.


y  Google


(183)


THE  ELEVEN  INETFAfcLE  DECREES,

CON  PEERED  IN  THE

LODOE  OF  PERFECTION.


SECRET  MASTER.

Opening. — Master.  'Br.  Adoniram,  are  you  a  Secret  Master?7
Jlns.  'Most  Perfect,  I  have  passed  from  the  square  to  the  com-
pass; I  have  seen  the  tomb  of  our  Resp.  Master,  Hiram  Abiff,
and  have,  in  company  with  my  brethren,  shed  tears  at  the  same.7
M.  'What  is  the  hour?'  A.  'The  dawn  of  day  has  driven  away
darkness,  and  the  great  fight  begins  to  shine  in  this  lodge.'  M.
'If  the  great  light  is  the  token  of  the  dawn  of  day,  and  we  are
all  present  Secret  Masters,  it  is  high  time  to  begin  our  labors:
give  notice  that  I  am  about  to  open  a  lodge  of  Secret  Masters.'
Master  knocks  7  with  his  hands,  which  is  repeated  by  the  breth-
ren; and  then  makes  sign  of  admiration,  which  is  answered  by
the  brethren.

Reception. — The  candidate  is  led  to  the  door  of  the  lodge,
where  the  Mast,  of  Cer.  knocks  seven  times.  Adoniram  comes
and  repeats  the  alarm  on  the  inside,  and  opens  the  door,  and
says,  'Who  is  there?'  Jlns.  'A  br.  who  is  well  qualified,  wishes
to  receive  the  degree  of  Secret  Master.'  Adoniram  reports  to
the  Master,  and  requests  that  he  may  be  introduced.  Master
consents,  on  condition  he  vouches  for  his  integrity,  zeal,  and
good  conduct.  He  is  led  in,  and  advances  to  the  altar;  his  right
knee  on  the  floor;  head  bound,  as  if  blinded;  a  great  light  in  the
right  hand.

Obligation.— 'I.  Secrecy.  2.  Obey  orders  and  decrees  of
Council  of  Perfection,  of  Jerusalem,  under  penalty  of  all  the
former  degrees.'  (The  foregoing  is  the  oath  in  substance.)  Af-
ter the  obligation,  the  Master  takes  a  crown  of  laurel  and  olives,
and  says,  'My  br.  you  are  now  received  as  a  Secret  Master.'
[See  Monitor.]    Sign— that  of  silence.

After  giving  the  words  and  signs,  the  Master  says,  'Go,  my
brother,  pass  the  brethren  and  then  attend  to  our  ifljpuction.'


184  LIGHT   ON   MA80NBV.

LECTURE.

Q,  Are  you  a  Secret  Master?  A.  I  am,  and  glory  in  it  Q.
How  were  you  received  ?  A.  By  being  passed  from  the  square
to  the  compass.  Q.  Where  were  you  made?  A.  Under  the
laurel  and  olive  tree.  Q.  In  what  place  were  you  received?
A.  In  the  sanctum  sanctorum.  Q.  -Who  received  you?  A.
Solomon  and  Adoniram,  the  Inspector.  Q.  In  entering  the  S.
S.  what  did  you  perceive!  A.  The  character  of  the  divinity.
Q.  What  did  you  see  besides?  A.  The  great  circle,  in  the  midst
of  which  is  enclosed  the  blazing  star,  which  blinded  me  with  re-
spect and  admiration!  Q.  What  signify  the  Hebrew  characters
in  the  triangle?  A.  Something  above  the  knowledge  of  a  hu-
man being,  which  cannot  be  pronounced.  Q,  Why  not,  since
we  are  in*  the  lodge?  A.  Because  I  have  seen  the  great  light
darting  its  rays  without  knowing  it  myself.  Q.  What  enclosed
the  great  brightness?  A.  The  ineffable  name  of  the  Great
Architect  of  the  universe.  Q.  Who  was  the  first  that  saw  it?
A.  Moses — and  he  read  the  pronunciation  thereof,  from  the  Su-
preme Being  on  the  mount,  when  he  appeared  unto  him;  and,  by
a  law  of  Moses,  it  was  forbidden  even  to  be  spoken,  unless  in  a
particular  manner,  by  which  means  it  was  lost  Q.  What  did
you  perceive  more?  A.  Nine  other  words  in  Arabic  characters.
Q.  Where  were  they  placed?  A..  In  the  nine  beams  which  come
from  the  blazing  luminary.  Q.  What  did  they  signify?  A.  The
nine  names  which  God  gave  himself,  when  speaking  with  Mo-
ses on  Sinai — He  made  him  hope  that  hi3  future  issue  should
one  day  know  his  real  name.  Q.  Give  them  to  me  with  their
significations.     A.  *****

which  compose  888  letters,  and  enclose  72  names,  which  are  tak-
en as  names  of  the  Divinity  of  the  angels'  alphabet,  or  cabalis-
tic tree.  Q.  What  signines  the  circle  that  surrounds  the  trian-
gle? A.  It  represents  the  eternity  of  the  power  of  God,  which
hath  neither  beginning  nor  ending.  Q.  What  doth  the  blazing
star  denote?  A.  A  meteor  which  ought  to  guide  us  to  the  divine
Providence.  Q.  What  is  signified  by  the  letter  ' — /  in  the  cir-
cle of  the  blazing  star?  A.*  ******  by  *  *
is  meant  God;  by  *  *  *  is  meant  man,  who  may  become
great  by  perfection;  and  *  *  *  *  is  a  Hebrew  word  and
signifies  .thanks  to  God  for  his  supreme  power;  it  was  the  first
word  that  was  pronounced  by  our  common  parent  when,  at  his
rising,  he  saw  Eve.  Q.  What  is  signified  by  the  five  beams  of
the  blazing  star?  A.  The  five  orders  of  architecture,  which
were  used  in  the  construction  of  the  temple.  Q.  What  did  you
see  more  inJjte  sanctum  sanctorum?    A.  The  ark  of  alliance;

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON  MASOffBV.  185

the  golden  candlestick  of  seven  branches;  the  table  of  bread  of
proposition.  Q.  Where  was  the  ark  of  alliance  placed?  A.  In
the,  middle  of  the  S.  S.  under  the  blazipg  star.  Q.  What  did
the  ark  of  alliance,  with  the  blazing  star,  represent?  A.  As  the
ark  was  the  emblem  of  alliance  which  God  had  made  with  his
people,  and  was  put  under  the  shadow  of  the  cherubims'  wings,
so  is  the  circle  which  encloses  the  triangle  in  the  blazing  star,  an
emblem  of  the  alliance  of  br.  Masons.  Q.  What  form  was  the
arkl  A.  An  oblong  square.  Q.  Of  what  was  it  made?  A.
Of  shittim  wood,  covered  within  and  without  with  pure  gold,  and
covered  with  a  golden  crown,  and  borne  with  the  two  cherubims
of  gold.  Q.  What  was  the  name  of  the  crown?  A.  Propitia-
tory, or  the  place  that  served  to  appease  God's  anger.  Q.  What
did  it  contain?  A.  The  tables  of  laws  which  God  gave  to  Mo-
ses. Q.  Of  what  were  they,  and  what  did  they  contain?  A.
They  were  of  white  marble,  and  contained  the  ten  command-
ments in  Hebrew  characters.  Q.  What  are  those  command
ments?  A.  The  decalogue  engraved  by  the  finger  of  the  Al-
mighty. The  first  table  contained  the  four  divine  command-
ments; the  second,  the  six  human,  which  served  to  regulate  all
the  duties  of  man  to  man.  Q.  What  use  was  made  of  the  table
of  shew  bread?  A,  To  place  thereon  the  twelve  loaves  of
bread  of  proposition,  which  ought  always  to  be  in  the  presence
of  God  as  he  had  ordained  it  to  Moses.  Q.  Of  what  were  the
loaves?  A.  Of  pure  fine  flour.  Q.  How  were  they  placed?
A.  Six  on  the  right  hand  and  six  on  the  left,  forming  two  heaps.
Q.  What  was  placed  over  them?  A.  .  A  very  pure  and  bright
cover.  Q.  Why  so?  A.  In  order  that  they  should  remain  a
monument  of  the  obligations  made  to  God.  Q.  What  was  the
name  of  the  S.  S  in  Hebrew?  A.  Dabar.  Q.  .What  doth  that
word  signify?  A.  Speech.  Q.  Why  was  it  so  called?  A.  Be-
cause the  Divinity,  in  a  peculiar  manner,  resided  there  and  de-
livered his  oracles: —

A.  When  Moses  received  the  order  from  God  to  construct  the
ark,  he  made  choice  of  Bezaleel;  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  son
of  Aaron  and  Mary,  the  sister  of  Moses,  and  of  Aholiab,  the  son
of  Ahisamach,  of  the  tribe  of  Dan,  the  most  learned  of  the  peo-
ple; the  populace  testified  so  much  forwardness  in  the  work,
and  offered,  with  so  much  joy,  to  carry  it  on,  that  Moses  gave
notice,  by  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  that  he  did  not  want  any
more.  They  began  to  work  according  to  the  model  that  God
had  given  to  Moses,  which  also  served  for  the  number  to  be  pla-
ced in  the  Tabernacle  to  serve  for  sacrifices.  Q.  What  i9  meant
by  the  seven  branches  of  the  candlesticks?  A.  The  seven  plan-
Q2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


186  tiGfit  on  macmr.

ets.  Q.  What  was  on  the  top  of  the  branches?  A.  A  tamp
on  each,  looking  east  and  south.  Q.  Of  how  many  parts  was
the  candlesticks  of  seven  branches  composed?  A.  Of  seven
parts.  Q.  What  is  signified  by  the  Era  that  is  in  our  lodge?.  A.
An  only  eye  that  enlightens  us.  Q.  How  <fid  they  go  up  to  die
gallery  of  the  temple?  A.  By  a  staircase,  fixed  on  the  wall  on
die  north  side.  Q.  What  was' the  name  of  that  staircased  A.
Cochleus; — which  signifies  'tn  the  form  of  a  screw.9  Q.  How
many  doors  were  there  in  the  S.  S.f  A.  Only  one  on  the  east
side,  which  was  called  'iJtson,'  which  was  covered  with  ranging*
of  purple,  azure,  hyacinth,  and  gold,  supported  by  four  columns.
Q.  What  did  those  columns  represent?  A.  The  four  elements.
%  How  old  are  you?  A.  3  times  27,  and  accomplished  91.
Q.  Give  the  pass  word?    A.  *    *    *

Close. — Q.  'Br.  Inspector,  what's  the  o'clock?'  A.  *Theend
of  day.'  Q.  'What  doth  remain  to  do?'  A.  <To  practice  virtue,
to  fly  vice,  and  to  remain  in  silence.'  Q.  'Since  nothing  re-
mains to  do  but  to  practice  virtue  and  fry  vice,  let  us  enter  into
silence,  that  the  will  of  God  may  he  accomplished:  it  is  time  to
rest.  Br.  Inspector,  give  notice  that  I  am  about  to  close  this
lodge  by  the  mysterious  number.'  Insp.  says,  The  Most  Per-
fect is  about  to  close  this  lodge  by^he  mysterious  number.'  All
rfap  seven,  as  in  opening,  and  lodge  is  closed.


PERFECT  MASTER.

A  table  before  the  Master,  covered  with  black,  and  strewed
with  tears.— Adoniram  was  chosen  first  of  the  seven,  to  replace
Itiram  Abiff,  and  he  constructed  the  tomb  and  urn  of  H.  A.-*-
Stokin  first  found  the  body  of  H.  A.

Opening. — Q.  (Br.  Insp.  is  the  lodge  well  tyted,  and  are  we
all  Perfect  Masters?'  A.  'R.  W.  andR.,  we  are.'  Q.  'Give  no-
tice that  I  am  going  to  open  a  lodge  of  Perfect  Masters,'  (done.)
Ado.  knocks  4  with  an  iron;  Stokin  in  the  west,  4;  and  a  Br.  in
die  south,  4;  and  a  Br.  in  the  north,  4,  and  then  aU  make  the
sign  of 'admiration'  together!  Ado.  says,  'Br.  Stokin,  what  is
the  clock?'  Ans.  'Itis4.f  Ado. 'Then  it  is  high  time  to  sit  the
workmen  at  labor,  give  notice  that  a  lodge  of  Perfect  Matter  is
open.'    Stokin.  'The  lodge  is  open.'

Reception. — Candidate  is  ornamented  witfaihe  dress  and  jewel
of  a  Secret  Master.  Master  of  ceremony  knocks  four  on  the
shofeldet  of  Inspector  and  says,  <Thereis  in  the  antichaniber  a


y  Google


%


LIGHT  09  JUSOffHT.  187

Secret  Master  desirous  of  being  raised  to  this  degree.*    The
Insp.  reports  to  Master,  who  says,  'Is  he  worthy  and  well  quali-
fied to  receive  this  degreer     (Yes.)    Mast.  'Let  him  he  intro-
duced according  to  an  ancient  due  form.'    Insp.  orders  Master
of  Cer.  to  go  and  instruct  candidate;  he  goes  arid  examines  him
on  his  former  degrees,  pats  on  his  neck  a  green  cord,  and  holding
it  in  his  left  hand,  and  his  sword  in  his  right,  leads  him  to  the
door  and  knocks  4.     Insp.  repeats  tins  within,  and  says  to  the
Master,  'Some  one  knocks.'    Mast.  'See  who  it  is.'    Insp.  or-
ders Tyler  to  open  the  door,  and  see  who  knocks,  and  after  the
Tyler  has  repeated  to  the  Master  of  Cer.  he  acquaints  the  Mas-
ter, who  orders  him  to  be  introduced  and  led  to  the  sooth  side  of
the  tomb,  at  the  head  of  the  lodge,  where  he  stands  as  a  Secret
Master.    Master  says,  'My  Br.  what  do  yon  demand?'    Ans.
'To  be  received  to  die  degree  of  Perfect  Master.'    He  is  then
addressed  thus:  'It  is  my,'  &c  (see  Monitor.)    The  Insp.  then
takes  him  by  the  cord  and  leads  him  four  times  round  the  lodge,
then  makes  him  kneel,  after  which  he  passes  by  the  tomb  on  each
ante  of  the  two  columns;  (crossed:)  in  crossing,  he  steps  from
one  to  the  other,  still  with  the  sign  of  a  8.  M.  he  is  placed  oppo-
site the  altar,  his  right  knee  a  little  bent  and  takes  the  Obliga-
tion,     '1st.  Secrecy-    Penalty:— being  dishonored,  and  the
penalties  of  all  these  of  my  former  obligations,  Amen;  Amen;
Amen;  Amen."    Mast,  draws  the  cord  from  his  neck,  saying;
'I  now  draw,'  Jkc.  (see  Monitor,)  Signs.

Sutory.'^S<Aarmm  had  taen  informed  that  the  corpse  of  H.
A.  had  been  already  found  and  deposited  in  the  lower  end  of  the
temple  and  pleased  to  be  able  at  least,  to  gather  the  precious  re-
mains of  so  good  a  man;  he  ordered  the  noble  Adeukajn,  his  G.
Insp.  to  make  the  funeral  as  pompous  as  possible  and  the  breth-
ren to  attend  m  white  gloves  and  aprons,  forbidding  at  die  same
time,  that  the  marks  of  blood  spilled  in  the  temple  to  be  effaced
until  vengeance  should  be  taken, — Adoniram  being  Grand  Mas-
ter, Architect  and  chief  of  the  workmen,  presented  a  plan  of  a
superb  monument  to  be  raised  to  hi*  memory,  of  black  and  white
marble,  which  was  finished  in  nine  days.  The  heart  of  H.  A.
was  taken  enclosed  in  an  urn  on  the  top  of  an  obelisk  which  was
placed  near  the  west  end  of  the  temple  a  little  on  the  north  side
to  show  that  his  murderers  bad  first  pot  him  under  some  rubbish
in  a  ditch  before  they  carried  him  to  the  place  where  Stokin
found  him.  The  heart  in  the  urn  was  pierced  with  a  sword,  and
every  person  qualified  went  %o  testify  his  grief  until  vengeance
was  complete.    Hie  heart  was  enclosed  in  an  obelisk,  covered


y  Google


188  LIGHT  ON  uasos&y,

with  a  triangular  stone,  on  which  were  the  letters,  B.  SI*  L  en-
graved in  Hebrew  characters.

With  a  sprig  of  cassia  on  the  top,  bis  body  was  buried  in  the
middle  of  the  great  hall,  in  an  apartment  separated  from  the  tem-
ple, where  Solomon  used  to  keep  a  chapter  and  confer, with  Hi-
ram, king  of  Tyre,  and  Hiram  Abiff  on  the  craft.  Three  days
after  the  ceremony  of  burial,  SoL  went  with  his  court  to  the  tem-
ple, and  all  the  workmen  being  ranged  as  at  the  funeral,  he  di-
rected his  prayer  to  God,  examined  the  tomb  and  canopy,  repeat-
ed the  letters  on  the  triangle,  and  the  letters  engraved  in  the
centre,  then  lifting  his  eyes  and  his  hands  towards  heaven,  he
said,  with  joy  in  his  heart,  'It  is  accomplished  and  complete  by
the  sign  of  admiration!'  The  brethren  also  raising  their  eyes
and  hands  towards  heaven,  leaning  their  heads  on  their  shoul-
ders, &c.

LECTURE

Q.  Are  you  a  Perfect  Master?  A.  I  have  seen  the  circle  and
square  placed  on  the  top  of  the  two  columns. across.  Q.  Where
are  they  placed?  A.  In  the  place  where  was  deposited  the
body  of  our  resp.  H.  A.  Q.  What  did  they  represent?  A.  .The
two  pillars  which  I  came  to  when*!  was  made  a  Perfect  Master.
Q.  What  was  the  design  of  Solomon  in  instituting  this  degree?
A.  To  encourage  the  brethren  with  a  reverential  love,  and  to
excite  them  to  an  inquiry  who  were  the  bloody  assassins  of  H.
A.  A.  Suspicion  being  entertained  that  they  were  among  the
workmen,  Sol.  ordered  a  great  muster  of  them,  when  3  were
found  missing  and  supposed  to  be  the  persons.  Sol.  then  order-
ed a  Mason  to  erect  a  superb  obelisk  at  the  west  end  of  the  tem-
ple, and  to  enclose  in  an  urn  on  the  top  thereof,  the  heart  of  H.
Abiff,  well  embalmed, .  of  which  none  knew  except  the  P.  M.
This  was  accordingly  done,  and  was  to  remain  there  until  ven-
geance should  be  taken.  A  sword  appeared  to  be  driven  through
die  urn,  as  a  token  of  the  desire  of  the  brethren  to  take  ven-
geance on  the  assassins.  The  body  was  found  in  a  place  sepa-
rate from  the  temple,  where  Solomon  kept  his  chapter.  Q.  What
is  signified  by  the  square  stone  in  the  centre  of  the  circle,  and
also  what  is  signified  by  the  letters  on  the  square  stone?    A.  The

secret  word  of  a  Perfect  Master.    Q.  Pronounce  it     A.  * >•

Q.  What  does  it  signify?  A.  The  name  of  God,  as  known  by
us.  Q.  How  were  you  received  a  Perfect  Master?  A.  On  the
point  of  a  spear  to  my  heart,  and  a  halter  around  my  neck.  Q.
Why  so?  A.  To  make  me  remember,  they  should  be  instru-
mental Jin  m  death  if  I  revealed  any  of  the  secrets  !!!  I    Q»

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


MGHT  OH  JUSOBBY.  189

Haw  many  Bigns  have  you?  A.  One  by  five*  Q.  Why  so.  A.
In  remembrance  of  my  five  points  of  entrance*  Q.  Which  or
what  are  they?  A.  The  four  terms  of  entrance  into  the  temple,
and  the  fifth  of  admission?  Q.  What  is  represented  by  the  tomb
you  passed  over  at  your  admission?  A.  The  burial  of  H.  AbkT
in  the  valley.  Q.  Why  is  it  situated  northeast  from  the  sanctu-
ary? A.  To  teach  us  men  should  be  undented  before  they  en-
ter the  sanctum  sanctorum.  Q.  What  is  signified  by  the  rope
which  comes  from  the  tomb  to  the  temple?  A.  The  rope  of
green  with  which  the  brethren  raised  the  body  of  H.  A.  before
they  put  it  into  the  coffin.  Q.  There  is  a  further  reason.  A.
The  virtue  of  goodness  that  should  link  us  to  the  temple.  Q.
Why  were  you  examined  in  the  former  degrees  before  you  were
admitted?  A.  To  see  if  I  were  perfect  in  them  before  I  went
any  further?  Q.  What  is  your  color?  A.  Green.  Q.  Why  so?
A.  To  signify,  that  by  flourishing  in  virtue,  I  might  expect  to
make  progress  in  my  last  degrees.  Q.  What  is  signified  by  the
two  pyramids  in  the  lodge?  A.  Egypt,  from  whence  the  Syri-
ans sprung.  Q.  What  does  tile  jewel  represent?  A.  That  a
Perfect  Master  should  measure  his  conduct  by  the  exact  rule  of
equity.

Close  by  4  times  4.


INTIMATE  SECRETARY.

Opening- — Solomon  knocks  8  times  9,  which  is  repeated  by
Hiram  of  Tyre,  and  then  all  the  brethren  who  are  supposed  to
be  Perfect  Masters.  They  kneel,  make  signs,  repeat  the  'word'
thrice,  then  rise,  take  their  swords  and  go  out  of  the  lodge.

Solomon  having  first  appointed  acapt.  and  lieut.  of  the  guards,
with  directions  that  they  take  care  of  the  lodge,  and  see  that
none  approach  without  permission,  and  that  all  the  guards  ob-
serve their  duty.

Reception.— -Candidate  being  in  the  antichamber,  the  captain
of  the  guards  orders  two  or  three  of  them  to  take  from  him  his
hat,  sword,  and  the  decorations  of  a  Perfect  Master,  and  then  to
place  him  by  the  door,  (partly  open)  with  his  hands  across,  in
the  attitude  of  listening.  The  guards  make  a  little  noise,  on
which  Hiram  of  Tyre,  turning  his  head,  sees  the  cowans,  lifts  his
eyes  to  heaven  and  says,  'Oh  heavens,  there  is  a  listener!'  Sol.
says,  *it  is  impossible  as  there  are  guards  without.'  H.  T.  with-
out reply  makes  to  the  door  and  drags  the  can.  by  the  hands  w-


y  Google


190  LIGHT  Off   MASONBY.

to  the  lodge,  crying,  'Here  he  is.'  Sol.  'What  shall  we  do  with
him?'  H.  T.  (his  hand  on  his  sword,)  'We  must  kill  him!9

Solomon  quits  his  place  and  lays  hold  of  H.  T.  and  says,
'Stop,  my  brother.'  then  knocks  on  the  table,  the  guards  enter
and  salute  the  lodge.  Sol.  'Take  this  prisoner  and  secure  him,
and  let  him  be  forthcoming  when  called  for!'  on  which  they
go  out  with  the  prisoner,  leaving  Solomon  and  Hiram  of  Tyre
for  some  time  in  private  and  low  conversation.  Sol.  knocks  on  the
table  again,  and  the  guards  return  with  the  prisoner  in  the  midst.
By  a  signal  from  Solomon  they  advance  near  the  foot  of  the
throne  and  take  seats.  Sol  then  says  to  can.  'I  have  by  my
entreaties  prevailed  on  the  king  of  Tyre,  my  worthy  ally,  whom
your  vain  curiosity  has  offended,  to  remit  the  sentence  of  death
which  he  pronounced  upon  you.  I  have  not  only  obtained  your
pardon,  but  have  gained  his  consent,  to  receive  you  an  Intimate
Secretary  to  the  alliance  we  have  contracted.  Do  you  promise
to  keep  inviolate  the  secrets  entrusted  to  you  in  this  degree,  and
will  you  take  an  obligation  for  that  purpose,  in  the  most  solemn
manner?  (Tes.)    Solomon  causes  him  to  kneel.

Obligation. — '1st.  Secrecy.  2d.  Obey  mandates  and  decrees
of  the  G.  C.  of  P.  of  Jerusalem.  Penalty — body  dissected,
bowels  taken  out,  heart  cut  in  pieces,  and  the  whole  thrown  to
the  wild  beasts  of  the  field!'  Solomon  raises  the  can.  and  ex-
plains the  Carpet  'The  window  in  the  clouds  represent  the
vault  of  the  temple,  and  the  letter  I,  which  you  see  therein,  is  the
initial  of  the  name  of  the  G.  A.  of  the  Uni.  The  door  represents  the
great  gate,  by  which  they  entered  from  the  palace:  the  tears  are
emblematical  of  Solomon's  chamber  of  audience  for  Masons,in  the
palace  hung  with  black,  and  hither  he  used  to  retire  and  lament
the  unhappy  fate  of  Hiram  Abiff,  and  here  he  was  when  Hiram,
king  of  Tyre,  came  to  visit  him.'  'I  receive  you,  my  brother,  an
Intimate  Secretary,  on  your  promise  of  being  faithful  to  this  order
which  you  have  just  now  entered,  as  was  the  great  man  whose
place  you  are  now  to  supply.  The  color  of  your  ribbon  is  in-
tended to  remind  you  of  his  blood,  the  last  drop  of  which  he
chose  to  spill,  rather  than  betray  his  secrets;  we  hope,  therefore,
that  your  fidelity  will  be  proof  to  every  trial,  and  that  the  sword
with  which  we  arm  you  will  be  a  weapon  of  defence,  to  guard
you  from  the  attacks  that  might  be  made  on  you  to  extort  those
secrets,  which  we  are  now  going  to  confer  on  you,'  &c.  &c.

LECTURE.

Q*  Are  you  an  Intimate  Secretary*  A.  lam.  Q.  How  were
you  received?   A.  By  curiosity.    Q.  What  danger  did  you  risk?

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


LIGHT  OH   MASOHRT.  191

A.  The  loss  of  life.  Q.  What  was  done  to  you  after  you  were
apprehended?  A.  I  had  sentence  of  death  pronounced  on  me,
and  was  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  guard.  Q.  Were  they  In-
ornate Secretaries  or  Perfect  Masters?  A.  I  was  then  ignorant
thereof,  but  my  resolution  and  integrity  convinced  me  that  I  was
the  first  that  was  made  an  Intimate  Secretary.  Q.  What  are  the
passwords?  A.  *  *  *  *  Q.  What  is  the  grand
word?  A.  *  #  *  *  Q.,What  were  you  before
you  were  examined  and  received  an  I,  S.?  A.  A  favorite  of
Solomon.  Q.  Of  what  province?  A.,  Copentister.  Q.  How
many  governments  did  Solomon  give  to  Hiram  for  the  materials
he  supplied  him  with,  in  the  building  of  the  temple?  A.  Thirty.
Q.  Where  were  you  received?  A.  In  Solomon's  apartment,
lined  with  black  and  lighted  with  27  lights.  Q.  What  doth  the
letter  I.  signify,  which  you  saw  in  the  window?     A.     *        •

*  *  Q.  What  does  that  word  signify?  A.  It  is  the  third
name  of  Deity,  and  signifies,  give  thanks  to  Him,  the  work  is
done.  Q,  What  is  signified  by  A  and  two  P's,  in  the  angle?
A.  *  #  *  *  Q.  Why  is  this  lodge  lighted  with  27
lights?  A.  To  represent  2700  candlesticks  Sol.  made  for  his
temple.  Q.  What  doth  the  great  door  in  the  carpet  represent?
A.  The  door  of  Solomon's  palace.  Q.  What  is  signified  by  the
triple  triangle  you  wear?  A.  The  3  theological  virtues,  faith,
hope,  and  charity.  Q.  There  is  another  interpretation?  A.
Sol.  H.  and  H.  K.  of  Tyre.  Q.  What  is  the  hour?  A.  It  is  9.
Lodge  closed  by  3  times  9,  as  in  opening.


PROVOST  AOT>  JUDGE.

Opening. — Master.  'Br.  Wardens,  are  we  well  tyled?'  A.
'Thrice  Illustrious,  we  are.'  Master.  'Where  is  your  Master
placed?'  A.  'Every  where.'  M.  'Why  so?'  A.  'To  superin-
tend the  workmen,,  direct  the  work,  and  render  justice  to  every
man.'  Q.  'What  is  the  hour?'  A.  'Break  of  day,— 8  o'clock,—
2  and  7.'  Master  knocks  5  quick  and  slow — separate— which  is
repeated  by  the  Wardens.  Mast.  'It  is  break  of  day,— 8  o'clock,
— 2  and  7;  it  is  time  to  proceed  to  work.'  This  is  repeated  by
the  Wardens.  Brethren  clap  hands  4  and  1:  Master  says,  'The
lodge  is  open!'

Reception. — The  Master  of  Cer*  leads  the  candidate  to  the
4oor  and  knocks  4  and  1,  which  is  repeated  by  the  Wardens  and
Master  from  within.     Master  orders  a  brother  to  see  who  is

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


192  LIGHT  ON   VASOlfEY.

there;  after  the  brother  has  inquired,  he  says,  (A  brother  who
wishes  to  be  passed  to  the  degree  of  Provost  and  Judge.'  Mas-
ter sends  word  to  Master  of  Cer.  to  examine  him  well  and  then
introduce  him  in  ancient  form.  Master  of  Cer.  leads  him  and
places  him  between  the  Wardens.    .8.  Warden  orders  him  to

kneel  and  say  ' ,'  and  puts  a  naked  sword  in  his  hand  and  on

hie  left  shoulder,  Master  says,  * ,'  and  S.  W.  raising  candi-
date, leads  him  seven  times  round  the  lodge,  each  time  he  passes
the  Master  he  gives  a  sign,  (beginning  with  Entered  Apprentice;)
he  is  then  led  to  the  altar,  and  there  addressed  by  the  Master.
(See  Monitor.)  'I  now  intrust  you  with  the  key  of  the  place,
where  is  kept  the  body  and  heart  of  Hiram  AbhT,  as  also  the  box
in  which  is  kept  the  plans  of  the  temple;  and  you  are  now  to  give
us  assurance  that  you  will  never  discover  the  place  where  the
body  is  interred.'  (He  promises  and  takes  the  following  obli-
gation.'

Obligation. — <  1st  Secrecy.  2d.  I  will  justly  and  impartially
regulate  all  matters  of  difference  between  brethren;  I  will  be  just
and  equitable  to  all  the  world,  as  I  am  constituted  by  this  lodge
to  render  justice.  3d.  I  will  pay  due  obedience  to  the  mandate
of  the  Grand  Council  of  Perfection,  of  Jerusalem,  and  govern
myself  by  their  regulations.'  Penalty — that  of  all  the  former
degrees.  Candidate  rises,  and  the  Master  gives  him  a  blow  with
the  sceptre  on  each  shoulder,  saying,  'By  the  power  with  which  I
am  invested,  I  constitute  you  a  Provost  and  Judge  over  all  the
works  and  workmen  of  the  temple,  and  I  decorate  you,  in  this
character,  with  the  golden  key,  suspended  by  a  red  ribbon,  which
you  are  to  wear  in  the  form  of  a  collar;  this  apron  is  trimmed
with  the  same  color;  the  red  denotes  the  order  of  the  Mason,
and  the  pocket  in  the  centre  is  to  carry  your  plans  for  the  con-
struction of  the  temple.

LECTURE.

Q.  Are  you  a  Provost  and  Judge?  A.  I  am,  and  render  jus-
tice to  all  tiie  workmen  without  distinction.  Q.  How  were  you
introduced  into  this  lodge?  A.  By  4  and  1  distinct  knocks.  Q.
What  is  signified  by  4  and  1,  separate?  A.  The  4  represents  the
four  fronts  of  the  temple,  and  the  1  signifies  the  temple  of  Gon.
Q.  Whom  did  you  meet  with  in  your  road?  A.  A  Warden,  who
conducted  me  to  the  west.     Q.  What  was  done  with  you  there?

A.  The  S.  W.  made  me  kneel  on  my  right  knee,  and  say  * .'

Q.  What  answer  was  given  to  that?  A.  The  Thrice  Illustrious
*  *  *  Q.  What  is  the  signification  of  these  words?  A.  The
first  signifies  'kneel,'  and  the  second  'rise.'     Q.  What  was  next


d  by  Google


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  193

done?  A.  He  made  me  a  Provost  and  Judge.  Q*  What  did
he  deliver  to  you?  A.  A  golden  key  to  distinguish  this  degree.
Q,  For  what  purpose  is  this  key]  A.  To  open  a  small  ebony
box,  in  which  were  kept  the  plaijs  for  constructing  the  temple.
Q.  What  is  meant  thereby?  A,  That  *  Provost  and  Judge  only
knows  where  this  box  is,  as  well  aa  where  the  heart  of  Hiram
Abiff  lies.  Q.  What  is  the  pass  word?  A,  *  *  Q.  What
is  the  signification  of  that  word?  A.  It  is  the  name  of  the  first
Grand  Warden,  Prince  Harodim,  and  the  eldest  of  die  Provosts
and  Judges,  whose  care  it  was  to  .superintend  the  300  architects
of  the  temple.  Q.  What  did  you  perceive  in  the  lodge?  A.  A
curtain,  behind  which  was  suspended  a  small  ebony  box  enriched
with  jewels.  Q.  What  did  this  box  contain?  A.  All  the  de-
signs. Q.  Did  you  see  any  thing  else?  A.  I  saw  a  triangle  in
the  centre  of  the  Lodge  in  which  was  "G.  A."  Q.  What  is
meant  by  these  two  letters?  A.  "Grand  Architect."  Q.  ,What
more  did  you  see?  A.  A  balance  in  equilibrio.  Q.  What  is
meant  thereby?  A.  That  equity  of  judgment,  which  is  our  par-
ticular duty,  being  nominated  to  decide  all  differences  among  the
workmen.  Q.  Where  was  the  heart  of  Hiram  Abhf  deposited?
A.  In  an  urn  of  gold  upon  the  top  of  an  obelisk.  Q.  What  is
signifiedbythetwolettersXandl?  A.  *  *  *  the  seat  of
the  soul.  Q.  What  is  signified  by  the  letters  L  H.  S.,  with  the
sprig  of  cassia?  A.  *  *  *  *  Q.  In  what  place  were
you  received?  A.  In  the  middle  chamber.  Q.  What  was  your
duty?  A.  To  perfect  the  tomb  of  Hiram  AbhT.  Q.  What  did
die  Thrice  Illustrious  invest  you  with  upon  your  initiation?  A
With  a  white  apron,  lined  with  blood  red  color,  and  in  the  centre
of  which  was  a  pocket  with  a  red  and  white  rose.  Q.  What  was
its  use?  A.  To  carry  the  plans  in,  that  they  might  be  laid  out  on
the  tressle-board,  as  regular  designs  for  the  workmen.  Q  What
is  signified  by  the  red  and  white  rose?  A,  The  red  denotes  the
blood  of  Hiram  Abiff,  and  the  white,  the  innocency  and  truth  of
the    *    *    *    q    What  was  ^  mtention  of  Solomon  m  form

ing  this  degree?  A.  To  preserve  order  amongst  the  workmen.
Joabert,  being  honored  with  the  intimate  confidence  of  Solomon
receiveda  new  mark  of  distinction.  Solomon  first  created  Tito
Prince  Harodim,  Adomram,  and  Abda,  his  father,  Provosts  and
Judges,  and  gave  them  orders  to  initiate  Joabert,  his  favorite,  in-
to the  most  sacred  mysteries  and  to  give  him  the  keys  of  all  the
buildings,  which  were  enclosed  in  a  small  ivory  box,  suspended
in  the  sanctum  sanctorum,  under  a  rich  canopy.  When  Joabert
was  first  admitted  into  that  sacred  place,  he  was  struck  with  ad-
miration and  awe,  and  falling  on  his  knees  pronounced,  - — -

*  r  '    i     '

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


194  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.

Solomon,  seeing  him  prostrate,  said  to  him  — — ,  and  gave  to  him
the  balance  as  a  badge  of  his  6ffice.    ;

0&>#e.-*-Q.  What  is  jrour  age?  A.  41rme*  16.  Q*  From
whence  came  you?  A.  I  came  and  am  going  eVery  where.  Q.
What  is  the  o'clock!  *h;  fcrea*  of  day^-8  fl'ctocfc-ua  and  .7.
Q.  How  so?  A.  BectwSfe,  as  Fftvost  and  Judge,  t  must  be
ready  to  render  justice  at  all  times.  Ibe  todge  i»  closed  as  it  is
opened.  ..-..'  ...


iirTEirMrr  of  *bte  mnL»«ws,

-   T      .  OR

MAMTEH  IN  ISRAEL.

Solomon  is  in  the  east,  Tito  m(tha  west,  and  Adonirain  in  the
south*  '.■'■«'

,  Opening. — Solomon.  'Tito,' are  we,  tried?'  Tito.  'Most  Pu-
issant, we  are.'  Q.  ,'What  is  it  o*clock?'  4.  'ftreak  ot  day.'
Solomon  strikes  five  on  the  altar  with  his  scentre,  which  js  re-
peated by  Tito  and  Adoniram.  Solomon,  'As  it  is  break  of  day,
it  is  tyne  to  work.'  (The  lodge  is  open.)  AH  the  brethren
strike  five  together,  and  make  the  sign  of  surprise  and  admiration.

^eceptiont-r-Masltr.  'Brother  Tito,  how  shall  we  repair  the
.  loss  of  our  worflvy  Hiram  Abifft,  You  know  he  iad  the  orna-
ments of >  the  secret  chamber  in,  charge,  which  contained  the
holy  arli,  which  was  to  assure  the  Israelites  of  the  perfection  o£
the  most  Ijtoly  God.  He  is  now  taken  from  us  by  a  most  horrid
crime  pf  our  craft,  and  we  are  thereby  deprived^  of  bur  most  re-
spectable chief;  now,  my  Illustrious  Brother,  see  if  you  are  able
to  give  me  advice  in  this  important  matter.'

Jins*  'Most  Puissant,  the  method  I  would  propose  would  be  to
create  one  chief  from  the  iive  orders  of  architecture,  in  order  to
unite  all  abilities,  and  endeavor  to  finish  the  work  of  the  secret
chamber  of  the  third  story.'

Jttasttr.  'Tour  advice  is  good;  and  to  convince  you  of  my
readiness  to  follow  it,  I  appoint  you,  brethren,  to  inspect  the  con-
dition of  this  business. .  Excellent  brethren,  let  Adoniram  go  into-
me  middle  chamber,  and  see  if  he  can  find  a  chief  of  the  rive
orders  of  architecture.  *

Adoniram  goes,  arid  finding  Joabert,  says,  'Are  there  here  any
chiefs  of  the  fiye  orders  of  architecture?'  Joab.  *I  am  the  in-
troductor.'  Jldon,  'My  dear  brother,  have  you  zeal  to  apply
yourself  with  attention  to  that 'which  the  Most  Puissant  shall  re-
Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON  MA80NRT.  195

«uest  of  you?'  Joob.  'I  have,  ,and  wilj  with  all  pleasure  comply
with  the  request  of  the  Most  Puissant,  and  raise  this  edifice  to
his  honor  and  gloryf '  AdotL  'Give  me  the  signs,  words,  and
tokens  of  the  preceding  degrees.'  Adoniram  knocks  at  the  door
of  the  lodge,  three*  five,  and  seven.  One  of  the  brethren  with-
in  answers  the  alarm,  and  asks  what  is  wanted.  Jtou.  'There
is/ one  fyere  who  is  to  be  employed  in  the  works  of  t)ie  middle
chamber.'  The  door  is  opened,  and  Adoniram,  griping  the  can-
didate by  the  token  of  — : — »  brings  him  before  the  altar,  and
lays  him  down.  ,  Tito  stands,  behind,  puts  {he  sprig  of  cassia  in
his  han&  and  he  ta^es  the  obligation*  1.  Secrecy,  2,  Obedi-
ence to  the  orders  and  decrees  of  the  Grand  Council  of  Princes,
of  Jerusalem.  Pena%. — Body  severed  in  two,  and  bowels  tafc-
en  out,  when  the  candidate  says,  'Amen.'  Tito  covers  his  body
with  a  red  clem,  and  relieves  him  by  the  token,  and  with  his  hand
to  bis  elbow,  raises  and  places  hhn  on  a  stool,  when  he  is  thus  ad-
dressed by  the  Master:~'My  dear  brother,  Solomon,  willing  to
carry  to  the  highest  perfection  the  work  already  begun,  found  it
necessary  to  employ  five  chiefs  of  the  five  orders  of  architecture;
and  he  gave  command  pf  them  to  Tito,  Adoniram,  and  Abda,  his
father,  being  well  assured  that  their  a^al  would  be  exerted  to  the
utmost  in  bringing  to  perfection  the  works  of  me  middle  cham-
ber, We,  therefore,  flatter  ourselves,  my  hrotber,  tj*at  you  will
contribute  all  ni  your  power  Jo  die  same  end.  The  situation  you
have  just  been  in,  resembles  that  pf  3  dead  man,  and  you  being
reeved  from  it,  signifies  our  hope  that  you  will  repair  the  loss  of
our,  respected  Hiram  Ahjff;  living  so  bright  an  example  before
you,  that  you  wilj  endeavor  to  show  the*  same  firmness  and  con-
tempt of  dearth,  sooner  than  discover  any  of  the  secrets.  I  will
now  raise  you  in  the  same  manner  he  was  raised  under  the  sprig
of  cassia/  The  candidate  is  raisedjan.d  Tito  gives  him  the  s^gns,
jfokens,  and  words*

LECTURE.

Q.  Are  you.  an  Jntendaitt  of  the  Buil^ines?  A* .  I  have  made
the  five  steps  of  exactness;  I  have  penetrated  {he  inmost  part  of
the  temple;  and?  have  seen  the,  great  light,  m  the  middle  of  which
were  three  mysterious  letters,  or  characters,  in  Hebrew,  without
knowing  what  they  meant.  •*  %  $fow  camevou  to  be  received?
A.  By  aclq?io^Jedging.myi^oi»M^  fy  Why  were  yQu  receiv-
ed? A.  To  poiitt  out  to  nfe  the-  darkifess  hr  which  I  was,  and  to
procure  me  a  true,  Jjght  to  r^guj&te  my;  heart,  and  regulate  my  un-
derstand%.  #,  In  what  place  weft  you  introduced?  A-  to  a
place  full  pf  wonder  and  beauty,  fjuere  truth  and  wisdom  reside.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


196  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

Q.  What  was  your  duty?  •  A.  To  superintend  the  work.  Q.
Why  were  you  made  to  walk  backward  and  forward  in  the  lodget
A.  To  show  me,  that,  in  advancing  to  virtue,  I  should  set  humani-
ty in  opposition  to  the  pride  so  natural  to  us.  Q.  What  signify
the  letters  *  *  *  in  the  centre  of  the  triangle?  A.  *  *
*  #  *  *  which  are  expressive  of  the  wisdom  of  God.  Q-
What  is  meant  by  the  — ,  in 'the  middle  of  the  blazing  star  in  the
lodge?  A.  It  is  the  initial  of  that  ineffable  name.  Q.  What  is
signified  by  the  circle  in  the  triangle?  A.  It  teaches  the  immen-
sity of  God,  without  beginning  or  ending.  Q.  What  is  signified
by  the  four  letters  *  *  in  the  circlef  A.  1*he  divine  attri-
butes of  the  Deity.  Q.  What  are  the  principal  attributes?  A.
Beauty,  wisdom,  mercy,  omniscience, "eternity,  perfection,  jus-
tice, tenderness,  creation;'  which  together  make  the  square  of  9.
Q.  Why  were  you  barefoot  at  your  admission?  A.  Because
Moses  was  barefoot  when  he  saw  the  burning  bush.  Q.  What
did  the  five  knocks  represent?  A.  The  five  points  of  felicity.
Q.  What  did  they  produce?  A.  A  Warden,  who  conducted  me
five  times  round  the  temple,  and  supported  me.  Q.  What  did
you  see  there?  A.  The  holy  name  in  the  blazing  star.  Q.  Why
had  that  star  no  more  than  five  rays?  A.  To  denote  the  five  or-
ders of  architecture,  made  use  of  in  the  building  of  the  temple;
the  five  points  of  fellowship;  the  five  senses,  without  which  a
man  cannot  be  perfect;  the  five  lights  of  Masonry;  and  the  five
zones  of  the  world  inhabited  by  Masons.  Q.  What  is  the  name
in  the  centre  of  the  star?  A.  *  *  *  *  *  or  the  sacred
name.  Q  Why  is  blue  and  gold  so  peculiar  to  fhis  degree?
\9  #  *  *  *  Q,  Do  you  continue  stiH  in  darkness?  A.
The  morning  is  light,  and  the  blazing  star  is  my  guide.  Q.  What
is  your  age?  A.  27.  Q.  What  numbers  have  you  marked?
A.  5,  7,  and  15.  Q.  Explain  them?  A.  Five  points  of  felicity,
seven  golden  candlesticks,  and  fifteen  Fellow  Crafts,  who  joined
H.  A.  in  the  grave.

Owe,— Q.  'What's  the  hour?'   A.  .'Seven  alight'    Q.  <My^
brethren,  after  having  practised  the  five  points  of  felicity,  it  ishigb"
time  to  repose  and  refresh.'    The  Master  knocks  5,  which  is  re-
peated by  the  brethren,  5,  7,  and  15,  and  the  lodge  is  closed.


ELECTED  KNIQHTS  OF  NINE.

For  the  form  of  the  lodge,  see  Monitor,  and  in  addition,  the
brethren  have  their  knees  crossed,  and  their  heads  reclininff  on
their  right  hands.    Master.  'Brother  Stockin,  are  vbti  an  Erect-


y  Google


LIGHT   ON  MASONBT.  197

ed  Knight  of  Nine?'  Ans.  'One  cavern  received  me,  one  lamp
gave  me  light,  and  one  spring  refreshed  me.'  Q.  'What  is  the
hour?'  A.  'Break  of  day.'  Master  knocks  8  and  1,  Stockin  re-
peats it,  and  then  all  the  brethren,  with  their  poniards;  and  the
Master  declares  the  chapter  open.

.     Reception. — Master  of  Ceremonies  leads  the  candidate  to  the
door,  and  knocks  8  and  1.     The  Master  orders  the  candidate  to
be  admitted.     He  is  conducted  to  the  west,  and  placed  behind
Stockin.     Master.  'What  do  you  wish]'    A.  'To  be  admitted  an
Elected  Knight.'     Q»  'Have  you  courage  enough  to  revenge  the
death  of  your  Master,  Hiram  Abiff?'    A.  'I  have.'     Q.  'If  you
have,  you  shall  be  shown  where  one  of  his  murderers  is  conceal-
ed— a  stranger  has  shown  the  place  to  me,  and  if  you  have  forti-
tude, follow  the  stranger.'     The  candidate  is  blinded,  led  to  the
cavern,  and  seated  on  the  stone.      The  Master  of  Ceremonies
says,  'Be  of  good  courage,  I  am  going  to  leave  you,  but  shall  not
be  long  absent;  and  after  I  am  gone,  you  must  take  the  bandage
from  your  eyes,  and  drink  some  of  the  water  you  will  find  before
I  return.'      Candidate  is  left  alone,  and  the  doorislshut.      The
Master  of  Ceremonies  returns,  and  orders  him  to  take  the  poniard
in  his  right  hand,  and  the  head  in  his  left,  and  he  thus  goes  alone
to  the  door  of  the  lodge,  where  he  kicks  8  and  1.     Master  of
Cer.  within,  says,  'what  do  you  wish?'    A.  'An  Intendant  of  the
Buildings  demands  to  enter  Jhe  chapter.'     Q.  'Have  you  finished
your  time,  and  satisfied  your  Master?'    A.  'I  have  had  the  hon-
or of  performing  a  feat  for  the  honor  of  the  eraft,  which  will,  I
hope,  entitle  me  to  this  degree.'  Master  of  Cer.  repeats  to  Stock-
in,  who  repeats  to  the  Master,  and  he  orders  the  candidate  to  be
admitted.     He  advances  by  8  quick,  and  1  slow,  steps,  holding
the  poniard  elevated,  as  if  to  strike.     The  ninth  step  brings  him
to  the  altar,  where  he  falls  on  his  knees.      Master  observes  him,
and  says,  'Wretch,  what  have  you  done?     Do  you  not  know  that
by  this  rash  act,  you  have  deprived  me  of  die  pleasure  of  devot-
ing the  villain  to  condign  punishment?     Stockin,  let  him  be  put
immediately  to  death.'    At  this  word,  all  the  brethren,  falling  on
their  knees,  intercede  for  the  candidate,  observing  to  the  Master
that  his  offence  arose  from  zeal,  and  not  from  any  intention  of  de-
priving the  Master  of  the  pleasure  of  punishing  the  villain.  This
pacifies  him,  and  he  orders  Stockin  to  stop,  and  tell  the  candidate,
'that  he  shall  be  pardoned  this  second  time,  but  beware  of  the
third.'     Stockin  takes  the  head  and  poniard  from  the  candidate,
and  places  the  poniard  at  the  foot,  and  the  head  at  the  top,  of  the
altar.     The  candidate  is  still  on  his  knees,  and  all  the  brethren
standing  round,  as  if  to  strike: — betakes  the  obligation*— •'!•  I

R2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


Igg  hiem  ok  mAsouhy.

do  gotamnfy  sweat,  in  the  presence  of  Almighty  God,  that  ttwtf
4jjjglii^-e  Ike  assassination  of  our  wotthy  Master,  Hiram  Amff,  net
only  on  the  murderers,  but  also  en  o#,  wfo  may  otfray  fAe  4torefe
qftki*  degree;  and  furthermore,  that  I  will  keep  and  protect  this
order  with  all  my  might,  and  the  brethren,  in  general,  with  all  ray
power;  and  furthermore,  thai  I  will  obey  the  decrees  of  the  <2rand
Council  of  Princes,  of  Jerusalem;  and,  if  I  violate' this,  my  oh*
ligation,  J  cofmnt  fa  be  struck  with  tk*  dreadful  ponimrd  of  ten*
gtQMb,  now  presented  to  me,  and  to  have  my  head  cut  o8>  and
stuck  on  the  highest  pole,  or  pinnacle,  in  the  eastern  pari  of  the
world,  as  a  monument  of  my  vilknvl  Amenl  Amen!  Ameni
Amen!

Master  raises  candidate,  and  says,  'Some  time  after  the  death
of  Hiram  Abi$  -and  before  Solomon  had  been  able  to.  discover
the  traitors  who  had  murdered  him,  a  great  assembly  of  Mat*
tens,'  as  in  Monitor,  to  the  words,  'Who  had  only  time  to  pro-
nounce j.  ,  (vengeance  is  taken;)  immediatery  after  which,
Joabert,  being  thirsty,  and  perceiving  a  spring  of  water,  he  drank,
and  then  slept  until  the  rest  arrived  and  awoke  him.  On  behold-
ing the  bloody  scene,  they  all  exclaimed  »  i..  !  Joabert  men
acquainted  them  with  what  had  happened*  and  they,  emmd  him
for  having  alone  avenged  the  death  of  Hiram  AJbtfH  After  hav*
ing  refreshed  themselves  at  the  spring,  Joabert,  cutoff  the  headf
and  divided  the  body  into  four  quarters,  which,  were  burnt,  and
the  ashes  scattered  in  the  air,  so  as  that  they  might  be  dispersed
to  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  and  to  the*  corners  of  the  earth;

Then,  taking  the  poniard  and  head,  Joabert  said     i !  and

returned  to  Jerusalem.     (See  Monitor*)

Joabert  was  afterwards  highly  favored  of  Solomon,  whoeoa*.
ferred  on  him  and  the  others  this,  degree  ef  Elected  Knight,  and
then  gave  mem  the  following  signs:        *        *        *       *

LECTURE

Q.  Are  you  an. Erected  Knight?  A.  One  cavern. I  khewyajnt
entered.  Q.  What  did  you  see  there?  A.  A  light*  a  poniard*
and  the  traitor  Akirop.  Q.  What  did  you  do  wtm  thera?  A,
The  light  to  light  me,  the  poniard  to  revenge,  and  the  spring  tit
refresh  me!  Q.  Where  were  you  admitted!  A*  Ine  the:  audit
ence  chamber  of  Solomon.  %  How  many  werej  elected^  A.
Nine,  including  myself.  Q.  From  what  qumbe*  were  they
elected?*  A.  99.  Q.  For  what  purpose!?  A.  To  rev<enge  tbe
death  of  Hiram  Abifc  Q.  Where  did  you  find<him?  A.  Inithe
bottom  of  a  cavern,  near  a  burning  bush  in  a  ele%  near  the  const
of  Joppa,.    Q.  Who  conducted  you  there?    A.  jfc  strangers-  <§>


d  by  Google


LIGHT  OH  MAgOHRT.  199

What  way  did  you  travel  to  the  caveral  JL  By  dark,  intricate
roads.  Q.  In  what  manner  did  the  Elected  Knights  *mtb!  A.
Darkness  often  obliged  them  to  puttbeir  hand*  before  their  eyes,
to  prevent  their  being  put  out;  from  the  difficulty  of  the  roads
they  were  obliged  to  cross  their  legs,  and  this  is  the  reason  the
Elected  Knights  sit  in  that  manner  in  the  lodge.  Q.  What  is
meant  by  the  dog  yon  see  in  me  carpet  of  the  lodge?  A.  The
sagacity  of  the  stranger  who  conducted  them  to  the  cavern. »  Q.
What  does  the  color  of  black  denote  in  thk  degree?  A.  Grief.
Q.  What  remains  to  be  done?  A.  Nothing,  because  every  thing
is  accomplished?     Q.  Give  me  the  pass  word*     A    *  ■■  ,'

(all  the  signs  given.)  Q.  What  time  did  you  go  m  search  of
tile  assassins?  A.  At  break  of  day.  Q.  When  did  you  return?
A.  At  night.  Q.  What  is  your  age?  A.  Eight  and  one,  ac-
complished.

Cffo#e.— Q.  What  is  the  time?    A.  Evening.    The  Master
knocks  8  and  1,  which  is  repeated  by  all  the  brethren.    He  then

gives  the  sign,  which  is  answered  by  all.     Ho  then;  says, « ,*

and  the  rest,  'Vengeance,'  and  the  lodge  is  closed.  •


ELECTED  GRAND  MASTER,

OR

HAITSTRIOFS  EJECTED  OF  FIFTEEK.

Opening, — Master  knocks  three  times'  five.  The  Inspector
repeats  it,  and  the  Master  declares  the  lodge  is  open.

Hecepfton.— The  candidate  has  a  head  in  his  hand,  and  tried
to  the  4oor  of  the  lodge  by  the*  S.  W.  who  knocks  3  tones  5,  and
•the  Inspector  goes  to  the  door,  and  demands  who  is  mere?  Upon
which  the  S.  W.  says,  'An  E.  Knight,  who  is  desirous  of  joining
the  other  Knights  in  finding  the  other  two  assassins,  and  to  Be
admitted  among  the  elect  fifteen,  the*  Inspector  shuts  the  door
and  reports  to  the  Master,  who  gives  orders  for  mV  admission,
s  and  he  is  taught  to  make  15  steps  in  a  triangular  form,  which
brings  him  to  the  altar:  The  brethren  ail  stand  round  with  pon-
iards, and  interlacing*  their  hands  before  their  foreheads  with  the,
palms  presented  to  view,  awd  tHey  ask  pat donf  for  the  candidate,
Master.  <Why  do  you  ask  pardon?'  Ans.  'Because  they  are  not
guilty.'  Master.  i Why  do  you  ask  pardon  for  a  person  who  is
not  guilty?'  Ansi  In  order  to  qualify  him  to  become  a  Grand
Master  Elect.'    Master.  Is  he  well  qualified?'    Jhts.  <Heis.?


y  Google


200  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

Master.  'Kneel,  brother,  the  Grand  Master  Elect  here  present
desire  roe  to  admit  you  a  member  "of  this  degree;  will  you  take
the  soJenra  obligation  to  keep  the  secrets  inviolable?'  Ans.  <I
will.'

Obligation. — The  penalty  is,  to  have  the  body  opened  per-
pendicularly and  horizontally,  and  exposed  to  the  air  for  eight
hoars,  that  the  flies  may  prey  on  the  entrails,  also,  to  have  the
hea|  cut  off  and  placed  on  the  highest  pinnacle  in  the  world,  and
to  be  ready  to  inflict  the  same  penalty  on  all  who  disclose  the  se-
crets of  this  degree!!!  Master  raises  the  candidate  and  gives  the
signs,  &c.  (For  history,  see  Monitor.)  *  Solomon  determined
that  their  punishment  should  be  adequate  to  their  crimes,  and
when  the  day  of  their  execution  arrived,  they  were  brought  forth
at  10  o'clock,  A.  M.  and  were  executed,  and  were  bound,  neck
and  middle,  to  posts  in  the  most  public  place,  with  their  arms
extended;  and  their  bellies  were  cut  open  by  the  executioner,
lengthwise,  and  across,  and  in  this  position  they  remained  until
6  o'clock  in  the  evening,  so  that  the  flies  might  prey  on  their  en*
trails;  their  heads  were  then  cut  off  and  placed  on  spikes  with  mat
of ,  on  the  east,  west  and  south  pinnacles  of  the  tem-
ple, under  which  they  had  committed  their  crime.

LECTURE.  *

Q.  Are  you  a  Grand  Master  Elect?  A.  My  zeal  and  works
have  produced  me  that  honor!  Q.  How  were  you  received?  A.
By  Solomon  himself,  in  his  apartment*  Q.  When  and  for  what
purpose?  A.  At  the  time  he  sent  me,  together  with  my  compan-
ions, to  find  out  the  two  assassins!     Q.  How  came  they  to  be

discovered?    A.  By  the  diligence  of  Bengabee ,  Solomon's

intendant,  in  the  province  of  Cheth.  Q.  Who  carried  Solomon's
letter  to  the  king  Morihah?  A.  Tabeal.  Q.  How  many  did  he
send  on  this  occasion?  A.  15.  Q.  Give  me  the  sign,  token,
and  word?  f  Given.)  Q.  What  do  they  allude  to?  A.  That  I
shall  always  be  ready  to  inflict  the  same  punishment,  on  all  who
shall  betray  the  secrets  of  this  degree*

'  Close.—Q.  At  what  hour  did  the  assassins  expire.  A.  Their
execution  was  at  10  o'clock,  A.  M.  and  at  6  in  the  evening,  ven-
geance was  accomplished!     Q.  May  all  traitors  meet  the  same

fate!!!  Master  knocks  15,  which  is  repeated  first  by  the  Insp*
then  by  all  the  brethren,  and  the  lodge  is  closed.


y  Google   ,


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  201

ILLUSTRIOUS  KNIGHTS,

OR

SUBLIME  KNIGHTS  ELECTED.

Opening. — Master  knocks  12  times  at  equal  intervals,  which
isVepeated  by  the  Grand  Inspector  only.  .  Master.  'What  is  the
hour?  G.  I.  '12.'  Master.  *It  is  time  to  improve  our  labors
by  the  greatest  of  lights,  I  pronounce  the  Grand  Chapter  open.'

Reception. — Candidate  is  introduced  by  Master  of  Ceremonies,
who  knocks  12  at  the  door,  which  is  answered  by  Master  within,
then  by  the  Grand  Inspector,  who  goes  to  the  door  and  demands
«who  is  there]'  Master  of  Cer.  <A  Grand  Master  Elect  of  15,
who  is  desirous  of  being  admitted  to  this  Grand  Chapter  of  Illus-
trious Knights:' — This  is  repeated  to  the  Master  who  orders  him
to  be  introduced.  He  must  be  decorated  as  a  Grand  Master
Elect  of  15.  He  is  first  led  to  the  Grand  Inspector  who  exam-
ines him  in  all  his  former  degrees.  Master.  'Comp.  Gr.  Insp.
what  does  this  candidate  desire?  Gr*  Insp.  'To  be  admitted  to
the  degree  of  Illustrious  Knight.  Master.  'As  a  remembrance  of
bis  zeal  and  labor,  I  will  admit  him.'  Master  to  can.  '1  suppose,
my  brother,  you  only  wish  to  become  an  Illustrious  Knight,  from
interested  motives.'  A  Ans.  'My  first  view  is,  doing  my  duty,
which  I  have  doneat  my  own  expense,  to  punish  all  traitors;  and
now  I  request  this  honor  as  a  remembrance.'  Master.  'Advance
and  take  the  obligation.

Obligation. — '1st.  Secrecy.  2d.  To  be  charitable.'  Penal-
ty. — 'The  body  cut  in  quarters.'  The  Master  raises  the  candi-
date and  gives  the  signs,  &c.

Close.-— Master.  ( i  ou  have  this  day  received  pay  from  the
workmen,  who  have  performed  well,  and  you  are  worthy  of  the
name  you  bear,  from  the  strict  attendance  to  promote  peace  and
harmony,  and  to  animate  the  laborers  with  cheerfulness!  Mas-
ter knocks  12,  which  is  repeated  by  the  Grand  Inspector,  and  the
lodge  is  closed.


GRAND  MASTER  ARCHITECTS.

Opening. — Master  knocks  1  and  2,  which  is  repeated  by  the
Grand  Warden.  Q.  'Are  you  a  Grai»d  Master  Architectr^.
•I  know  the  use  of  every  mathematical  instrument.'    Q.  'What

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


202  LIGHT  ON  &U80NRF

are  they/  A  *  A  square,  a  single  compass,  a  compass  with  four
points,  a  rule,  a  line,  a  compass  of  perfection,  a  quadrant,  a  level,
and  a  plumb.'  Q.  *  Where  were  you  made  ana  received?'  •£.
'In  a  white  place  painted  with  flames.'  Q.  'What  do  these  sig-
nify?' A  'The  pwity  of  heart,  and  j&eel  that,  should  be  charac-
teristic of  every  good  Mason  Architect.'  Q.  'What  does  the
star  in  the  north  signify  in  this  degree?'  &,  'Virtue,  which  ought
to  be  a  guide  to  every  good  Mason,  as  the  north  star  is  to  mari-
ners.' (J.  'What  is  the  hour?'  A.  'A  star  appears  for  break  of
day.'    MtUr.  'Let  as  work,  I  declare  this  lodge  open.'

.Reception*— Candidate  being  igteodueed  by  1  and  2,  and  led
once  round  the  north  star,  is  made  to  ad  wee  3  square  steps  and
then  takes  the  same,  obligation  as  that  of  Illustrious  Knights;  be
then  rises  and  is  made  to  recede  3  steps  backward,  which  brings
him  between  the  Wardens,  aad  the.  Grand  Warden  gives  him
the  sign,  token,  and  word*     (For  history,  see  Monitor.)

C/oJe.— Master  knocks  1  aad  2,  which  ip  followed  first  by  the
Grand  Warden,  then  by  all  the  brethren;  after  this  they  all  wute
the  Master,  and  the  lodge  is  closed.


THE  DEGREE


KNIGHTS  OF  THE  tflNTH  ABCft

Solomon  knocks  9,  ( ! ! !  ! ! !  ! ! ! )  Hiram  of  Tyre  repeats,
the  Grand  Junior  Warden  calls  to  order,  and  then  he  and  the
rest  of  the  brethren  ^nock  the  same. '  The  two  kings  give  signs
of  admiration,  first  to  each  other  and  then  to  the  brethren,  by
whom  it  is  repeated.  The  two  kings  kneel  at  the  pedestal,  Sol-
omon rises,  thea  raises  H.  T.  after  which  brethren  kneel  at  the
pedestal,  by  order  of  SolomcuLr-r5plop>on  says,  4  declare  this
chapter  open.'

.Reckon*— Previous,  to  the  reception  the  vault  and  the  pedes-
tal are  darkened  and  the  trap  door  is  opened,  the  candidate  or
candidates,  (if  more  than  one,)  are  introduced  into  the  room
over  the  trap  door.  Two  brethren^  at  least,  being  with  candi-
dates as  guards,  one  of  which  demands,  'The  favor  of  being  ad-
mitted to,  the,  degree  of.  ^IfijighU  pf-the^Ajch^on  Recount  of  his
zeal,  and  Ms  Having  regularly  &Ken  atf  die  ibfe^pmg degrees.'
He  is  answered  from  below  that  pt  present  it  is  not  possible,  but
that  they  must  pray  to  God  for  permission.  The  gaaiti*  f&tire,
and  then  make  the  request,  to  whjck  the  safne  answer  is  rtrttrrn-


y  Google


LIGHT   ©tf  MA909&Y.  203

ed.  They  repeat  this  the  third  time.  Then  the  G.  J.  Warden
asks  if  they  are  willing  to  descend  into  the  lower  abyss  in  search
of  great  treasure?'  (Ans.  «¥es/)  A  rope  is  then  tied  rami
eife  of  the  candidates  to  let  him  down  into  the  vault.  He  is
fold  if  he  sees  any  thing  on  being  lowered  down,  be  ts  to  shake
the  rope  and  he  will  be  raised;  he  is  then  twice  lowered  and
raised,  the  third  time  they  give  him  a  homing  taper  -and  on  his
being  let  down  this  time,  one  who  is  concealed  below,  blows  out
the  taper  and  one  from  above  throws  down  some  pieces  of  stone
and  mortar,  and  the  candidate  beholds  the  pedestal,  (uncovered.)
He  is  to  fall  on  his  knees  with  all  below,  around  the  pedestal.
Candidate  continues  in  this  posture,  if  there  are  more  than  one
candidate,  until  all  are  let  down.  The  G.  J.  Warden  tells  him
or  them  that  in  this  posture  they  are  to  take  that  inviolable  and
secret  obligation.

€%ligaiibn.~-l  do  promise  and  vow,  in  the  most  solemn  man-
ner and  in  the  presence  of  the  most  holy  and  puissant  and  most
terrible,  jusf  and  merciful  God,  that  £  will  double  my  assiduity,
zeal  and  love  for  my  fellow  brethren  who  have  taken  this  degree
of  S.  A.     I  promise  further  never  to  assist  at  the  initiation  of
any  brother  into  this  degree,  nor  to  give  my  consent  that  he  be
initiated,  unless  he  shan  regularly  'have  received  all  the  forego-
ing degrees  in  a  just  and  regular  lodge,  and  unless  he  shows  a
charitable  disposition  for  Masonry,  and  also  obtains  a  permission
ftom  under1  thehdnds  and  seals  of  the  officers  of  a  just  and  regu-
lar lodge,  according  to  ancient  laws.     I  furthermore  promise
never  to  give  to  any  number  less  titan  3,  and  those  to  be  well
examined,  this  degree  unless- when  authorised  for  that  purpose
by  a  particular  patent,  and  with  a  view  of  constituting  a  lodge  of
XL  A.  Masons— which  I  will  never  consent  to  be  hofcten  within
25  leagues  of  one  already  regularly  constituted.    J  further  prom-
ise carefully  to  observe  and  payable  obedience  1o  all  the  laws,
rules  and  regulations,  established  and  appointed  by  this  K.  A.
Chapter  as  also  tokeep  inviolable  the  secrets  communicated  in  it.
I  rWthertnore  promise  that  I  will  not  debauch  my  female  related
to-ia  brother,  knowing  them  to  be  such.     All  this  I  promise  under
the  penalties  of  my  former  obligations,  and  in  case  of  failure,
that  my  body  may  be  exposed  to  the  beasts  of  the  forest  as  a
prey,  so  God  maintain  me  in  my  present  obligation.     (For  his-
tory 6f  this  degree  see  Webb's  Monitor,  2d  part,  chapter  10.)
4 When  the  treasure,  which  had  been  found  in  the  ground,  was
produced  (to  Solomon  and  H<  T.)  they  fell  on  their  knees,  gave
the  sign  of  admiration  and  exclajmed  *G — ,*  is  a  good  man!'  ^Af-
ter G—yJiaadS.  were  introduced  to  the  second  vaultandre-

m  Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


204  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

ceiving  alTthe  honors  of  this  degree,  Solomon  explained  to  them
the  sacred  word,  which  was  engraved  on  the  golden  plate  which
was  the  true  name  of  the  Most  High,  but  that  it  had  been  already
much  corrupted  as  had  already  been  observed.  The  principal
ages  of  Masonry  were  3,  5,  7,  and  9,  which  by  calculation  made
81,  or  the  cube  of  3.  I  shall  give  you  the  different  methods  of
pronouncing  the  words  precious  to  the  Arch  we  are  now  treating
of,  classed  according  to  the  above  numeral.

3  —  All  powerful.  5  —  It  is  what  it  will  be.

3  —  Divine  light  5  —  God  himself.

3  —  Striking  light  5  —  Eternal  God.

7  —  O  thou  who  art  eternal.  u9  —  God  of  mercy.

7  —  Sustain  us,  O  God.        9  —  My  trust  is  in  God.

7  —  God  of  lights.  9  —  The  grand  name.

This  last  is  the  application  known  only  to  those  who  have
been  admitted  to  the  sublime  degree  of  Perfection,  which  in  due
time,  will  also  bo  communicated  to  you.     From  the  corruption  of

of  the  grand  word  spring  the of  the  Moors,  the  Jupiter  of

the  Romans,  and  others  of  like  nature.  The  true  name  was  visi-
ble in  the  temple,  at  the  time  St  .Jerome  flourished,  written  in
the  ancient  Samaritan  characters,  and  is  still  preserved  in  the
heart  of  every  good  and  faithful  K.  A.  Mason.  This  mysterious
word  is  covered  by  3  signs,  3  tokens,  3  covered  words,  and  3
pass  words  which  will  all  be  particularly  explained  to  you  in  the
lodge  of  Perfection.  The  three  now  elected  took  an  oath  before
God,  never  to  pronounce  his  sacred  name,  nor  even  to  admit  to
this  sublime  degree,  any  Mason,  untd  he  gave  sufficient  proof  of
his  zeal  and  attachment,  and  promise  to  use  the  same  ceremonies
of  initiation,  in  order  to  commemorate  the  mysterious  history  of
the  divine  Delta,  and  the  B.g,  B.h,  and  where  the  Almighty  caused
the  ancient  patriarch  to  promise  that  be  would  never  fully  pro-
nounce his  sacred  and  true  name.'

The  number  of  the  grand  and  sublime  elect,  &c  (as  in  Mon-
itor, to  the  word  'Perfection,')  where  this  last  mentioned  lodge
was  holden,  9  Knights  of  the  N.  A.  styled  the  9  arches  which
led  to  the  sacred  vault.  The  most  ancient  stood  in  the  arch
next  to  the  vault,  and  so  on  in  regular  procession,  and  none  were
permitted  to  pass  but  those  who  were  qualified,  giving  the  pass
of  each,  viz.        *        *        •        *        *        .

And  at  the  sacred  vault  the  pass  word  of  the pronounced

three  times.  Appertaining  to  this  degree  are  two  signs  and  one
token,  besides  the  before  mentioned  passes.  For  charge,  see
Monitor,  and  it  concludes  thusj  'I  shall  now  conclude  with  ex-
horting you,  my  brothers,  who  have  been  made  acquainted  with

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


MGHT   ON  KASONRY.  205

the  mode  of  contemplating  often  on  the  grand  mysteries,  to  en-
deavor by  your  zeal  and  constancy,  to  receive  the  ultimate  de-
gree of  Moral  Knowledge.

LECTURE.

Q.  In  what  Mace  are  we?  A.  In  the  centre  of  the  most  holy  place
on  earth.  Q.  By  what  means  did  you  gain  admission?  A.  By  divine
providence.  Q.  Explain  that.  A.  I  wrought  in  the  ruins  of  the
ancient  temple  of  Enoch;  I  penetrated  through  9  arches  under
ground  and  finally  found  the  Delta,  containing  the  name  which
God  had  pronounced  to  the  patriarchs.  Q.  What  is  the  Delta?  A.
The  triangle  of  gold,  enriched  with  precious  stones  and  affording
great  light,  and  upon  which  was  engraved  by  Enoch  that  great  and
mysterious  name,  Jehovah.  Q.  Do  you  know  the  true  pronun-
ciation of  that  word?  A,  I  do  not,  and  it  is  only  known  to  the  G.
E.  P.  and  S.  Masons.     Q.  Who  are  you?     A.  I  am  what  I  am;

my  name  is  •.     Q.  What  is  your  quality?     A.  A  K.   of

It.  A.  Q.  How  are  you  received  La  this  quality?  A.  By  the
two  kings,  Solomon  and  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  in  company  with
my  brethren,  Joabert  and  Stokin,  as  a  reward  of  my  zeal  and
constancy.  Q.  Give  me  the  sign,  token  and  words,  (given.)
Q.  Have  you  any  thing  else  to  desire?  A.  I  have,  the  Ultimate
Degree  of  Masonry,  and  eternal  happiness.

Close.— Q.  What  is  the  time,  brother  J.  G.  Warden?  A.  It
is  evening.  Q.  Acquaint  the  brethren  that  I  am  going  to  close
this  R.  A.  L.  by  the  most  powerful  and  mysterious  number.
Solomon  strikes  9,  which  is  repeated  by  the  K.  T.  by  the  G.  J.
W.  and  officers,  and  the  rest  of  the  brethren.  J.  W.  calls  to
order,  on  which  the  two  kings  and  all  the  brethren  give  the  signs,
tokens,  and  words,  and  Solomon  says,  'This  R.  A.  L.  is  closed,
with  all  its  honors  V


THE  DEGREE  OF  PERFECTION

OR

GRAND  ELECT  PERFECT  AND  SUBLIME  MASON.

(For  description  of  ledge,  titles,  <£c.  see  Monitor.)  Delta  and
Appearance  of  the  burning  bush,  under  which  are  ruins,  and  be-
fore the  Master  a  broken  pedestal,  lights  are  arranged  according
to  the  several  stages  of  Masonry,  viz.  3  behind  J.  W.— 5  behind
S.  W.— 7  in  the  south,  and  9  behind  the  Master.  When  the
candidate  wishes  for  admission  to.  the  vault  he  gives  the  follow-

S

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


206  LSGffT  Off  aU0O»Tv

ing  pass  word,  via.— Fwrtty — — >  secondly  £■*»■—,  thirdly  — ^
pass  word  repeated  times*

Opening.— Matter.  'Most  Venerable  Wardens,  are  We  well

ryled!'    .flu*.  'R.  W.  and  Mosi  Perfect,  we  are.'   Jtfas/er. 'I<et
us  pray.'  (See  Monitor.)     Jaos/  Perfect.  'Venerable  brother,
S.  W.  what  brings  you  here?'    An*,  <R.  W.  and  M.  P.  the  love
of  Masonry,  my  obligation,  and  a  desire  for  perfection.'    Q.
'What  are  the  properties  and  qualities  for  acquiring  it!'    A.  'The
two  first  lead  to  the  third  and  are  three  to  happiness.'    Q.  'What
have  you  brought  here?'  A.  <A  heart  zealous  in  virtue  and  friend-
ship.'   Q.  ' What  is  the  disposition  of  an  El  P.  and  S.  M.?'    A.
'To  have  a  heart  divested  of  jealous  revenge  and  iniquity,  and
always  ready  to  do  good  and  keep  his  tongue  from  calumny,  and
detraction.'  Q.  #How  are  you  to  behave  in  this  place/'  A.  'With
the  most  profound  respect.'    Q.  'Whence  comes  it,  my  brother,
that  men  of  all  ranks  and  conditions  are  in  this  place,  and  are
termed  brethren  together,  and  are  all  equal?'    A.  Because  that
sacred  and  ineffable  name  puts  us  in  mind,  that  there  is  one  infin-
ity, that  is  superior  to  us  all.'    Q.  (Why  is  respect  paid  to  that
triangle!'    A.  'Because  it  contains  the  name  of  the  6.  H.  of
the  universe.'     Q.  'What  are  you!'    A.  'I  am  3  times  3,  the
perfect  number  of  81,  according  to  our  mysterious  number.'    Q.
'Explain  that.'    A.  'I  am  a  G.  E.  P.  and  S.  M.  my  trials  are
finished,  and  it  is  now  time  I  should  reap  the  fruit  of  my  labor.'
Q.  'What  is  the  hour?'    A.  'High  twelve.'     Q.  'What  do  you
understand  by  high  twelve?'    A.  'That  the  sun  has  gained  its
meridian  height,  and  darts  its  rays  with  the  greatest  force  on  this
lodge,  which  is  the  time  we  should  avail  ourselves  of,  to  profit
by  his  influence.'     Q-  'Venerable  Sen.  Warden  announce  that
I  am  about  to  open  this  lodge  of  P.  M.  by  the  mysterious  num-
ber of  3,  5,  7,  and  9.'     S.  W.  obe)s— J  W.  strikes  3,  S-.  W.
5,  and  Master  7 — silence  follows — Master  calls  to  order  and
gives  3  strokes,  on  which  the  brstbren  give  the  first  sign;  he  then
gives  3  other  strokes  and  the  second  sign  is  given,  and  so  on
until  the  third  sign  is  given.    Master.  'Ven.  br.  S.  W.  this  lodge
of  'Perfect  Masons'  is  open.'    J.  W.  announces  it  to  brethren.
Master  gives  sign  of  admiration,  whicja  is  firetrepeated  by  J.  W.
and  S.  W.  and  then  by  all  the  brethren.     Master  salutes  the
lodge  with  the  first  sign,  which  is  answered  by  brethren.     Breth-
ren cover  their  heads  and  seat  themselves.

Reception. — Candidate  is  in  preparation  room  separated  from
the  lodge  by  a  long  narrow  passage,  with  all  the  ornaments  of
his  former  degrees.  Master  of  Ceremowe*  directs  him  to  knock
3f,  5,  and  7,  at  the  first  door  of  the  passage,  and  to  give  the

•

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


HOMT  Of   KASOWtT*  207

first  pass  word  to  Ihe  first  guard,  who  say*  'pass?'  at  the  middle
door  he  gives  the  second  pass  word  to  |be  second  guard  who
says  'pass;'  at  the  door  of  die  sacred  vault  he  gives  the  third  pass
word,  and  knocks  3,  5,  7,  and  9,  which  are  answered  from
Within,  alternately,  by  the  J.  W.,  8.  W.  and  Master,  who  says,
'fir.  G.  J.  W.  who  knocks  there  in  the  manner  of  a  Grand  Elect,
Perfect  and  Sublime  Mason?'  J.  W.  goes  and  says,  'Who  is
there?'  Master  of  Cer.  answers,  'A  K.  of  the  R.  A.  who  is
•  desirous  of  arriving  at  Perfection,  and  being  admitted  to  the  se-
cond vault.'  J.  W.  reports,  and  Master  says,  'Admit  him  ac-
cording to  ancient  form.'  The  door  is  opened  and  the  Master
of  Cer.  and  all  the  brethren  presenting  swords  to  his  breast,  and
thus  place  him  between  the  two  Wardens,  when  he  gives  the
sign  of  admiration  to  the  Master.  Silence  follows  for  two  min-
utes. Master.  'What  do  you  want  here,  my  brother?'  Am.
'M.  R.  G.  P.  I  ask  the  perfection  of  Masonry.'  Matter.  'Resp.
br.  do  you  consent  that  he  shall  be  admitted/'  (Affirmative  by  up-
lifted hands.)  Master.  'My  brother,  before  you  are  initiated  into
our  sacred  mysteries,  you  must  answer  the  following  questions,
otherwise  you  must  be  sent  back  until  you  are  better  qualified.'
Q.  'Are  you  a  Mason?'  A,  'My  brethren  all  know  me  as  such.'
Q.  'Give  me  the  sign,  token,  and  word,'  (candidate  gives  those  of
an  Entered  Apprentice.)    ft.  'Are  you  a  F.  C.?'    A.  'I have  the

letter, and  know  the  pass,  ■   ■    .'     ft.  'Give  me  the  pass,

sign,  token,  and  word.'  (Given.)  ft.  'Are  you  a  Master  Ma-
son?' A.  'I  know  the  sprig  of  cassia,  and  what  it  means.'  ft.
'Give  ma  the  pass,  sign,  token  and  word.'  (Given,  *  *
*  •  *.)  ft.  'Are  you  a  S.  U.V  A.  'I  have  passed  from
the  square  to  the  compass,  and  have  seen  the  tomb  of  our  resp.
H.  A.  and  have  shed  tears  on  his  grave.'  Q.  Give  me  the  sign,
token,  and  word/  (Given.)  Q.  'Are  you  a  Perfect  Master?'
A.  'I  have  seen  the  two  circles  and  two  perfect  squares  placed
on  the  two  columns  across.'  Q.  'Give  me  the  sign,  token,  and
password.'  (Given.)  Q.  'Are  you  an  Intimate  Secretary?'  A.
'My  curiosity  is  satisfied,  but  it  nearly  cost  me  my  life.'  Q.
'Give  me  the  sign,  token,  and  word.'  (Given.)  ft.  'Are  you  a
Provost  and  Judge?''  A.  'I  render  justice  to  all  workmen  with-
out distinction.'  ft.  'Give  me  the  sign,  token,  and  word.'  (Giv-
en.) ft.  'Are  you  an  Intendant  of  the  Bandings?'  A*  'I  have
made  the  five  steps  of  exactness;  I  have  penetrated  the  inmost
part  of  the  temple;  I  have  seen  the  great  light  in  which  were  the
three  mysterious  letters,  in  Hebrew  characters, '— ,'  the  mean-
ing of  which  is  unknown  to  no*'  ft.  Myive  me  the  sign,  token,
and  word.'  (Given.)     ft.  'Aw  you  an  'Elected  Knight?'    A.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


208  LIGHT  09   ttASOff&Y.

'One  cavern  received  me,  one  lamp  gave  me  light,  and  one  foun-
tain refreshed  me.'  Q.  'Give  me  the  sign,  token,  and  word/
(Given.)  Q  i Are  you  a  Grand  Master  Elect?'  A.  'My  zeal
and  labor  have  procured  me  that  honor.'  Q.  'Give  me  the  sign,
token,  and  word.'  (Given.)  Q.  'Are  you  an  Illustrious  Knight?'
A.  'My  name  will  inform  you.'  Q.  'Give  me  the  sign,  token,
and  word.'  (Given.)  Q.  'Are  you  a  Grand  Master  Architect?*
A.  'I  am  skilled  in  mathematical  sciences  and  know  the  attri-
butes?' Q.  'Give  me  the  sign,  token,  and  word.'  (Given.)  Q.
'Are  you  a  K.  of  the  R.  A..V  A.  'I  have  penetrated  the  bowels .
of  the  earth,  through  9  arches,  and  have  seen  the  brilliant  trian-
gle.' Q.  'Give  me  the  sign,  token,  and  word.'  (Given.)  Q.
'What  do  you  desire  further,  my  brother?'  A,  'To  be  exalted  to
the  Degree  of  Perfection !'  Master  makes  a  sign  of  admiration,
and  says,  'Retire,  my  brother,  God  will  permit  that  you  receive
what  you  so  earnestly  desire!'  Master  orders  Master  of  Cer.  to
take  candidate  out  till  he  shall  be  wanted.  When  he  has  retired
the  Most  Perfect  says,  'Brethren,  you  are  still  of  the  opinion
that  this  Knight  of  the  R —  Arch  shall  be  admitted  to  the  Degree
of  Perfection?'  (The  brethren  signify  their  assent  by  uplifted
hands.)  The  candidate  is  ordered  to  be  admitted  by  the  myste-
rious number.  The  Master  of  Cer.  places  him  below  the  War*
dens,  and  the  Master  says,  'Does  your  conscience,  my  brother,
accuse  you  of  committing  any  offence-  against  your  brethren,
which  may  render  you  unworthy  of  this  degree?  Ans.  'It  does
not.'  Several  other  questions,  designed  to  ascertain  his  honor
and  fidelity,  are  proposed,  on  which  he  is  informed  of  the  utility
and  importance  of  this  degree,  which  will  prepare  him  for  futu-
rity, &c.  &c.  The  Master  requests  Master  of  Ceremonies  to
teach  the  candidate  to  walk  8  quick,  and  1  slow,  steps  to  the
Master,  with  the  sign  of  Elected  Master  on  him,  he  kneels  and
takes  the  obligation.  The  following  are  the  parts  of  the  obliga-
tion.

1st.  Secrecy.  2d.  To  conceal  the  laws  and  regulations  of
this  degree.  3d.  To  assist  brethren  in  sickness  with  his  counsel,
purse,  and  arms.  4th.  Not  to  assist  in  making  a  brother  of  this
degree,  unless  he  shall  be  of  good  moral  character,  and  who  has
been  an  officer  of  some  regular  lodge,  and  to  receive  him  by
virtue  of  a  power  granted  by  proper  authority.  5th.  To  endeavor
on  all  occasions  to  observe  strictly,  duties  to  God  and  commu-
nity. The  Penalty  is,  'To  have  the  body  cut  open,  and  the
bowels  torn  out  and  given  to  the  vultures  for  food  !  !'  The  can-
didate remains  on  his  knees,  while  the  Master  of  Cer.  brings
the  bod  and  trowel,  and  the  Master  anooints  his  head,  Hps,  and

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


left  breast,  with  die  holy  oil  which  aaointed  David  and  die  wise
Solomon.  The  Master  says,  'I  stamp  you,'  fcc.  (See  the  Mon-
itor to  the  charge.)  'The  matters  which  I  shall  now  confer  on
you  will  perfect  you  m  the  study  of  Masonry.  There  are  three
signs,  three  guard  words,  and  three  pass  words,  which  belong  to
this  degree,  besides  die  mysterious  word.9  (Master  here  gives
them  to  candidate.)  After  this  the  candidate  receives  die  charge
as  printed  in  the  Monitor.

LECTURE.

Q.  Who  afe  yout    A.  I  am  a  Grand,  Elect,  Perfect,  and  Sub-
lime Mason,  and  nothing  is  unknown  to  me.     Q.  Where  were
you  admitted  to  this  degree?     A.  In  a  place  where  the  light  of
the  sun  or  moon  was  not  necessary.     Q.  Where  is  that  place
situated?     A.  Under  the  holy  of  holies,  in  a  vault  called  the  sa-
cred vault.     Q.  Who  received  you  in  that  sacred  place?     A.
The  wisest  and  most  powerful  of  kings.     Q.  How  did  you  en-
ter?    A.  Through  nine  long  arches.     Q.  How  did  you  gain
admission?     A.  By  three  knocks.     Q.  What  did  they  signify?
A.  The  age  of  the  Entered  Apprentice,  and  the  number  of
Elected  Knights,  who  penetrated  the  bowels  of  the  earth  and
took  from  thence  the  inestimable  treasure.     Q.  What  was  pro-
duced by  the  three  knocks?    A.  Five  other  knocks.    Q.  What  is
their  signification?     A.  The  age  of  the  Fellow  Graft,  and  also
the  number  of  the  Grand  Elect  when  the  treasure  was  first
placed  in  die  arch.     Q.  What  were  their  names?     A.  Solomon, '
Hiram,  G.  J.  aud  S.     Q.  What  followed  these  five  knocks?    A.
Seven  other  knocks.     Q.  What  do  they  signify?     A.  The  age,
of  the  Master  Mason,  the  seven  expert  brethren  chosen  to  re-
place one,  and  the  seven  years  the  temple  was  building.     Q.
What  answer  was  given  to  these  seven  knocks?     A.  Nine  other
knocks.     Q.  What  is  signified  by  those  nine  knocks?     A.  The
age  of  the  Perfect  Master.     Q.  What  did  they  produce?     A.
The  opening  of  the  ninth  vault,  and  I  penetrated  into  the  most
holy  place  in  the  world,  where  I  heard  pronounced,  the  word
'plenty,'  in  Hebrew  dialect    *Q.  What  is  signified  by  the  three
lights  behind  the  Master?    A.  The  three  Fellow  Crafts,  who
slew  Hiram  Abiff.    Q.  Who  were  they?    A.  The  three  brothers
of  die  tribe  of  Dan.     Q.  How  do  you  enter  the  Lodge  of  Per-
fection?    A.  With  the  character  of  virtuous  firmness  and  con-
stancy,    Q.  How  do  you  stand  in  the  lodge  of  Perfect  Mason??
A.  In  an  attitude  of  surprise.     Q.  Why  sof    A.  Because  Mo-
ses stood  so  when  he  saw  God;  Solomon  and  Hiram  stood  so
.  when  the  precious  treasure  was  brought  Wore  them  from  dn?

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


810  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

vault  of  Enoch.  Q.  What  are  the  tools  of  Grand  Elect  Masons?
A.  The  shovel,  .crow,  and  pickaxe.  Q.  How  long  were  the
Israelites  in  bondage  in  Babylon?     A.  70  years.

Close. — Master.  'Acquaint  the  Wardens  that  I  am  about  to
close  this  lodge  by  3,  5,  7,  and  9.9  This  is  announced  by  the
S.  and  J.  Wardens,  who  knock  3,  5,  7,  and  9,  and  give  the
sign.  Master.  'Ven.  br.  Wardens,  resp.  officers  of  this  lodge
of  Grand,  Elect,  .Perfect  and  Sublime  Masons,  I  charge  you  to
retire  in  peace  to  practical  virtue,  and  live  always  impressed  with
a  just  sense  of  duty  that  the  G.  A.  of  the  universe,  may  always
be  present  with  us.     May  he  bless  us  and- all  our  works.'  *

Lodge  is  closed  by  3,  5,  7,  and  9.


SECRETS  OF  THE
LODGE  OP  PERFECTION.

The  following  are  the  Signs,  Tokens,  and  Words  of  the  three
first  ineffable  degrees,  conferred  in  the  Lodge  of  Perfection.

SECRET  MASTER.

The  Words  in  this  degree,  are  'Shaddai,'  'Adonai,'  and  'Ju-
ha.'    The  Pass  Word  is  'Zizon.'

The  Sign  is  given  by  placing  the  two  fore  fingers  of  the  right
hand  on  the  lips.  This  is  answered  by  placing  the  two  fore  fin-
gers of  the  left  hand  on  the  lips.

The  Token,  is  to  join  hands  as  in  the  Masters  Grip,  then
move  hands  to  the  elbows  and  give  a  grip,  at  the  same  tunecros*
the  legs.

PERFECT  MASTER.

The  Word  in  this  degree  is  'Jew.'

There  are  three  Signs.  The  first  is  given  by  placing  the
palm  of  the  right  hand  on  the  right  temple,  at  the  same  time
stepping  back  with  the  right  foot,  after  which  bring  the  right  foot
to  its  first  position.  The  second  is  that  of  admiration.  Raise
the  hands  and  eyes  to  heaven,  then  let  the  arms  fall  across  the
belly  and  look  downwards.  The  third  is  to  advance  the  toes  of
the  right  feet,  (that  is  of  both  persons,)  until  they  meet,  bring
the  right  knees  together,  place  the  hands  on  the  heart,  then  bring
the  hand  towards  the  right  side.


)y'Goog!e


LIGHT  OH  WASOHBT.  211

INTIMATE  SECRETARY.

*

The  Grip  in  this  degree  is  that  of  a  Mark  Master,  given  on
the  five  points.

The  Pas3  Words  are,  'Joabert'  and  'Zerbel.'

The  Mysterious  Word  is  'Jova.'

The  first  Sign  is  to  clinch  the  right  hand,  then  draw  it  from
the  left  shoulder  to  the  right  hip.  The  second  is  to  cross  the
arms,  then  let  them  fall  on  the  right  hip.

Grip. — Join  right  hands,  and  reverse  them  thrice,  repeating
at  each  time  one  of  these  words,  'Berith,'  'Neder,'  'Shelemoth.7

Not&.  Should  the  reader  wish  to  know  the  reasons  why  tU  the  Signs,
Grips,  and  Words  of  the  higher  orders  are  not  published,  he  may  be  informed
that  our  object  in  publishing  this  work,  is  not  to  learn  men  how  they  can
obtain  admittance  into  the  'Secret  Chambers;'  or  should  they  wish,  to  palm
themselves  upon  the  fraternity  as  members  of  the  'Mystic  tie,1  but  to  enlight-
en the  community  into  the  ceremonies,  oaths,  and  principles  of  the  institu-
tion. It  is  to  these,  he  would  direct  their  attention,  for  these  are  they  by
which  the  world  must  judge  of  its  merits;  and  by  which,  it  must  stand  or
fall.  They  are,  however,  all  in  possession,  and  should  it  be  deemed  nuts*
sary,  they  shall  be  given  to  the  public,  'without  money  and  without  price.'


y  Google


(213)


THE  DEGBEE

CALLED

KNIGHTS  OF  THE  EAST  AND  WEST.*

Form  of  the  Grand  Council* — The  Grand  Council  of  Knights
of  the  East  and  West,  must  be  hung  with  red  and  sprinkled  with
gold  stars.  In  the  east  of  the  Council  Chamber  must  be  a  can-
opy, elevated  by  seven  steps,  supported  by  four  lions  and  four
eagles,  and  between  them  an  angel,  or  seraphim,  with  six  wings.
On  one  side  of  the  throne  mere  must  be  a  transparent  painting  of
the  sun,  and  on  the  other  side,  one*  of  the  moon;  below  them  is
stretched  a  rainbow.  In  the  east  there  must  be  a  basin  with  per-
fume, and  a  basin  of  water,  and  a  human 'scull.  On  the  south
side  there  must  be  six  small  canopies,  and  on  the  north  side  five,
elevated  by  three  steps,  for  the  Venerable  Ancients,  and  opposite
the  throne,  in  the  west,  are  two  canopies,  elevated  by  five  steps,
for  the  two  Venerable  Wardens,  who  act  in  mis  Council  as  Grand
Officers,  or  Wardens.  A  full  Grand  Council  must  be  composed
of  twenty-four  Knights.  On  the  pedestal  there  must  be  a  large
Bible,  with  seven  seals  suspended  therefrom.

The  Venerable  Master  is  called  'All  Puissant;'  the  Wardens,
and  the  twenty-one  other  brethren,  are  called  'Respectable  An-
cients.' If  there  are  more  brethren  present,  they  are  styled  *  Re-
spectable Knights,'  and  are  placed  north  and  south,  behind  the
small  canopies.

The  first  canopy,  at  the  right  side  of  the  Puissant,  is  always
vacant  for  the  candidate.  All  the  brethren  are  clothed  in  white,
with  a  zone  of  gold  round  the  waist,  long  white  beards  and  gol-
den crowns  on  their  heads.  The  Knights,  in  their  ordinary  hab-
its, wear  a  broad  white  ribbon  from  the  right  shoulder  to  the  left
hip,  with  the  jewel  suspended  thereto.  They  also  wear  a  cross  of
the  order,  suspended  by  a  black  ribborl,  round  their  necks.  The
4  All  Puissant'  has  his  right  hand  on  the  large  Bible  on  the  pedes-


*  It  is  an  act  of  justice  due  to  those  who  have  received  the  higher  de*
grees  in  the.  United  States,  especially  those  of  'Knights  of  the  East  and
West,'  and  that  of  'Knight  of  the  Sun,'  to  observe,  that  a  general  obligation
was  administered,  applying  to  all  the  highest  degrees;  and  that  this,  of
course,  precluded  any  previous  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  tendency  0^
ithem.


^Google


LIGHT   OH  MASONRY.  213

tal  with  seven  seals.  The  draft  (or  carpet,)  of  the  Council,  is
an  heptagon  in  a  circle— over  the  angels  are  these  letters;  B.  D.
S.  P.  H.  F.  In  the  centre,  a  man  clothed  in  a  white  robe,  with
a  girdle  of  gold  round  his  waist— his  right  hand  extended,  and
surrounded  with  seven  stars — he  has  a  long  white  beard,  his  bead
surrounded  with  a  glory,  and  a  twoedged  sword  in  his  mouth —
with  seven  candlesticks  round  him,  and  over  them  the  following
letters;  H.  D.  P.  I.  P.  R.  C.

The  Jewel  is  an  heptagon  of  silver — at  each  angle,  a  star  of
gold  and  one  of  these  letters,  B.  D.  S.  P.  H.  G.  F.  in  the  cen-
tre. A  lamb  on  a  book  with  seven  seal*— on  the  reverse,  the
same  letters  in  the  angles,  and  in  the  centre,  a  twoedged  sword
between  a  balance.

The  Apron  is  white,  lined  with  red,  bordered  with  yellow,  or
gold;  on  the  flap  is  painted  a  twoedged  sword,  surrounded  with
the  seven  holy  letters— or  the  apron  may  have  the  plan  of  the  draft
painted  on  it.

To  open. — The  All  Puissant,  with  his  right  hand  on  the  Bible
sealed  with  seven  seals,  demands,  'Venerable  Knights  Princes,
what  is  your  duty?  Ans.  'To  know  if  we  are  secure.'  All
Puissant  'See  that  we  are  so/  Ans.  'All  Puissant,  we  are  in
perfect  security.'  The  All  Puissant  strikes  seven  times,  and  says,
'Respectable  Knights  Princes,  the  Grand  Council  of  Knights  of
the  East  and  West  is  open;  I  claim  your  attention  to  the  business
thereof.'  Ans.  'We  promise  obedience  to  the  All  Puissant's
commands.'  They  rise  and  salute  him,  when  he  returns  the  com-
pliment and  requests  them  to  be  seated.

Reception. — The  candidate  must  be  in  an  anticbamber,  which
must.be  hung  with  red  and  lighted  with  seven  lights,  where  he  is
clothed  with  a  white  robe,  as  an  emblem  of  the  purity  of  his  life
and  manners.  The  Master  of  Ceremonies  brings  him  barefooted
to  the  Council  Chamber  door,  on  which  he  knocks  seven  times,  j
which  is  answered  by  the  All  Powerful,  who  desires  the  youngest  /
Knight  to  go  to  the  door,  and  demand  who  knocks.  The  Mas-
ter of  Ceremonies  answers,  'It  is  a  valiant  brother  and  Most  Ex-
cellent Prince  of  Jerusalem,  who  requests  to  be  admitted  to  the
Venerable  and  All  Puissant.'  The  Knight  reports  the  same  an-
swer to  the  All  Puissant,  who  desires  the  candidate  to  be  intro-
duced. The  'Most  Ancient  Respectable  Senior  Grand  Warden'
then  goes  to  the  door,  and  takes  the  candidate  by  the  hand,  and
says,  'Come,  my  dear  brother,  I  will  show  you  mysteries  worthy
the  contemplation  of  a  sensible  man.  Give  me  the  sign,  token, ;
and  word  of  a  Prince  of  Jerusalem:'  after  which  the  candidate
kneels  on  both  knees,  about  six  feet  from  the  throne,  when  tho

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


214  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.

'Most  Ancient  Respectable  Senior  Grand  Warden'  says  to  him,
*  Brother,  you  no  doubt  have  always  borne  in  memory  the  oblige*
tions  of  your  former  degrees,  and  that  you  have,  as  far  as  in'  the
power  of  human  nature,  lived  agreeably  to  them?'  Candidate*
*l  have  ever  made  it  my  study,  and,  I  trust,  my  actions  and  life
will  prove  it'  Q.  4Jave  you  particularly  regarded  your  obliga-
tions as  a  'Sublime  Knight  of  Perfection,'  'Knight  of  the  East
and  Prince  of  Jerusalem?'  Do  you  recollect  having  injured  a
brother  in  any  respect  whatsoever?  Or  have  you  seen  or  known  of
his  being  injured  by  others,  without  giving  him  timely  notice,  as
far  as  was  in  your  power!  I  pray  you  answer  me  with  candor*'
Can.  (I  have  in  all  respects  done  my  duty,  and  acted  with  integ-
rity to  the  best  of  my  abilities.'  The  All  Puissant  says,  'You
will  be  pleased  to  recollect,  tny  brother,  that  the  questions  which
have  now  been  put  to  you,  are  absolutely  necessary  for  us  to  de-
mand, in  order  that  the  purity  of  our  Most  Respectable  Council
may  not  be  sullied;  and  it  behooves  you  to  be  particular  in  your
recollection,  as  the  indispensable  ties  which  we  are  going  to  lay
you  under,  will,  in  case  of  your  derauk,  only  increase  your  sins
and  serve  to  hurl  you  sooner  to  destruction,  should  you  have  de-
viated from  your  duty: — answer  me,  my  dear  brother.'  Con.  *I
never  have.'  The  All  Puissant  says,  'We  are  happy,  my  bro-
ther, that  your  declaration  coincides  with  our  opinion,  and  are  re-
joiced to  have  it  in  our  power  to  introduce  you  into  our  society.
Increase  our  joy  by  complying  with  our  rules,  and  declare  if  you
are  willing  to  be  united  to  us  by  taking  a  most  solemn  obligation.'
Can.  'I  ardently  wish  to  receive  it,  and  to  have  the  honor  of  be-
ing united  to  so  respectable  and  virtuous  a  society.'  The  All
Puissant  orders  one  of  the  Knights  to  bring  an  ewer  containing
some  perfume,  a  basin  of  water,  and  a  clean  white  napkin  to  the
candidate — who  washes  his  hands.  The  All  Puissant  repeats
the  six  first  verses  of  the  24th  Psalm.  Then  the  candidate  is
brought  close  to  the  foot  t)f  the  throne,  where  he  kneels  on  both
.  knees,  and  placing  his  right  hand  on  the  Bible,  his  left  hand  be-
tween the  hands  of  the  All  Puissant,  in  which  position  he  takes
the  following

0bHgaHm.-~I,  — ~>  do  promise  and  solemnly  swear  and  de-
clare, in  the  awful  presence  of  the  only  One  Most  Holy  Puissant
Almighty  and  Most  Merciful  Grand  Architect  of  heaven  and  earth,
who  created  the  universe  and  myself  through  his  infinite  good-
ness, and  conducts  it  with  wisdom  and  justice— and  in  the  pres-
ence of  the  Most  Excellent  and  Upright  Princes  and  Knights  of
■  die  Beet  and  West,  here  present  in  convocation  and  Grand  Gotm-
,:«3jk  oaJny  sacred  word  of  honor  and  ntoder  every  tie,  both  moral

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  Of  MANMIRT.  215

.and  religious,  that  I  never  wttl  meal  to  any  person  whomsoever
below  me,  or  to  whom  the  same  may  not  belong,  by  being  legally
and  lawfully  initiated,  the  secrets  of  this  degree  which  is  now
about  to  be  communicated  to  me,  under  the  penalty  of  not  only
being  dishonored,  but  to  consider  mytifcasthe  immediate  forfeit-
ure, and  that  to  be  taken  from  me  with  all  the  tortures  and  pains
to  be  infiicttd  trt  manner  at  I  have  consented  to  in  my  preceding  *
degrees.  I  further  promise  and  solemnly  swear,  that  I  never  will
tight  or  combat  with  my  brother  Knights,  but  will,  at  all  times,
when  he  has  justice  on  bus  side,  be  ready  to  draw  my  sword  in  his
defence,  or  against  such  of  his  enemies  who  seek  the  destruction
of  his  person,  his  honor,  peace,  or  prosperity;  that  I  never  will
revile  a  brother,  or  suffer  others  to  reflect  on  his  character  in  his
absence,  without  informing  him  thereof,  or  noticing  it  myself,  at
my  option;  that  I  will  remember,  on  all  occasions,  to  observe  my
former  obligations,  and  be  just,  upright,  and  benevolent  to  all  my
fellow  creatures,  as  far  as  is  in  my  power.  I  further  solemnly
promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  pay  due  obedience  and  submission
to  all  the  degrees  beyond  this,  but  particularly  to  the  Princes  of
the  Royal  Secret  and  the  Supreme  Council  of  Grand  Inspectors
General  of  the  33d,  and  regulate  myself  by  their  determinations,
and  that  I  will  do  all  in  my  power  to  support  them  in  all  justifiable
measures  for  the  good  of  the  craft,  and  advantage  of  Masonry,
agreeably  to  the  Grand  Constitutions. — All  this  I  solemnly  swear
and  sincerely  promise,  upon  my  sacred  word  of  honor,  under  the
penalty  of  the  severe  wrath  of  the  Almighty  Creator  of  heaven
and  earth,  and  may  He  have  mercy  on  my  soul,  on  the  great  and
awful  day  of  judgment,  agreeably  to  my  conformity  thereto.—1
Amen.  Amen.  Amen.

The  All  Puissant  then  takes  the  ewer  filled  with  perfumed  oiht*
ment,  and  anoints  his  head,  eyes,  mouth,  heart,  the  tip  of  his  right
ear,  hand,  and  foot,  and  says,  'You  are  now,  my  dear  brother,  re*
ceived  a  member  of  our  society;  you  will  recollect  to  h've  *ip  i&
the  precepts  of  it,  and  also  remember  that  those  parts  of  yovrbp*
dy,  which  home  the  greatest  power  of  assisting  you  in  good or  ^e#tfy
ham  this  day  been  made  holy  /'  The  Master  of  Ceremonies  ftferi
places  the  candidate  between  the  two  Wardens,  with  the  drafHie*
fore  him.  The  Senior  Warden  says  to  him,  'Examine  with  de»
liberation  and  attention  every  thing  which  the  All  PuissanI  is
going  to  show  you;'— after  a  short  pause,  he,  the  S.  W.,  aayai*
'Is  there  mortal  here  worthy  to  open  the  book  with  the  -seven
seals?  All  the  brethren  cast  their  eyes  down  and  sigh.  TJPhe
Senior  Warden,  hearing  their  sighs,  says  to  them,  'Yenerable  *uid
respectable  brethren,  be  not  afflicted;  here  is  a  victim  (P0^*1^

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


216  LIGHT  OH   MASONRY.

to  the  candidate,)  whose  courage  will  give  you  content/  S.  W>
to  the  candidate,  'Do  you  know  the  reason  why  the  ancients  have
a  long  white  beard?'  Can.  'I  do  not,  but  I  presume  you  do/
S.  W.  'They  are  those  who  came  here,  after  passing  through
great  tribulation,  and  having  Washed  their  robes  in  their  own  blood:
will  you  purchase  such  robes  at  so  great  a  price!'  Can.  'Yes;  I
am  willing.'  The  Wardens  then  conduct  him  to  the  basin,  and
bare  both  his  arms — they  place  a  ligature  on  each,  the  same  as  in
performing  the  operation  of  blood-letting.  Each  Warden  being
armed  with  a  lancet,  makes  an  incision  in  each  of  his  arms,  just
deep  enough  to  draw  a  drop  of  blood,  which  is  wiped  on  a  nap-
kin, and  shown  to  the  brethren.  The  Senior  Warden  then  says,
'See,  my  brethren,  a  man  who  has  spilled  his  blood  to  acquire  a
knowledge  of  our  mysteries,  and  shrunk  not  from  the  trial !'  Then
the  All  Puissant  opens  the  1st  Seal  of  the  great  book,  and  takes
from  thence  a  bone  quiver,  filled  with,  arrows,  and  a  crown,  and
gives  them  to  one  of  the  Ancients,  and  says  to  him,  'Depart  and
continue  the  conquest'  He  opens  the  2d  Seal,  and  takes  out  a
sword,  and  gives  it  to  the  next  aged,  and.  says,  'Go,  and  destroy
peace  among  the  profane  and  wicked  brethren,  that  they  may  nev-
er appear  in'our  Council.'  He  opens  the  3d  Seal,  and  takes  a
balance,  and  gives  it  to  the  next  aged,  and  says,  'Dispense  rigid
justice  to  the  profane  and  wicked  brethren.'  He  opens  the  4th
Seal,  and  takes  out  a  scuU,  and  gives  it  to  the  next  aged,  and
says,  'Go,  and  endeavor  to  convince  the  wicked  that  death  is  the
reward  of  their  guilt.'  He  opens  the  5th  Seal,  and  takes  out  a
cloth,  stained  with  blood,  and  gives  it  to  the  next  aged,  and  says,
'WThen  is  the  time  (or,  the  time  will  arrive,)  that  we  shall  revenge
and  'punish  the  profane  and  wicked,  who  have  destroyed  so  many
of  their  brethren  by  false  accusations.'  He  opens  the  6th  Seal,
and  that  moment  the  sun  is  darkened  and  the  moon  stained  with
blood !  He  opens  the  7th  Seal,  and  takes  out  incense,  which  he
gives  to  a  brother;  and  also  a  vase,  with  seven  trumpets,  and  gives
one  to  each  of  the  seven  aged  brethren.  After  this,  the  four  old
men,  in  the  four  corners,  show  their  inflated  bladders,  (beeves'
bladders,  filled  with  wind  under  their  arms,)  representing  the  four
winds;  when  the  All  Puissant  says,  'Here  is  seen  the  fulfilment
of  a  prophecy;  (Rev.  vii.  3:)  Strike  not,  nor  punish  the  profane
and  wicked  of  our  order,  until  I  have  selected  the  true  and  wor-
thy Masons!'*     Then  the  four  winds  raise  their  bladders,  and  one

*  Compare  the  foregoing  with  the  5th,  '6th,  and  7th  chapters  of  Revela-
tion, and  the  reader  will  discover  that  the  All  Puissant  represents  Jehovah
seated  on  the  throne  of  heaven—also,  the  Lamb  of  God,  opening  the  seven
seals.    The  Senior  Warden  represents  the  'Strong  Angel'  proclaiming,  'Who.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  217

of  the  trumpets  sound,  when  the  two  Wardens  cover  the  can-
didate's arms,  and  take  from  him  his  apron  and  jewel  of  the  last
degree.  The  2d  trumpet  sounds,  when  the  Junior  Warden  gives
the  candidate  the  apron  and  jewel  of  this  degree.  The  3d  trum-
pet sounds,  when  the  Senior  Warden  gives  him  a  long  white
beard.  The  4th  trumpet  sounds,  and  the  Junior  Warden  gives
him  a  crown  of  gold.  The  5th  trumpet  sounds,  and  the  Senior
Warden  gives  him  a  girdle  of  gold.  The  6th  trumpet  sounds,
and  the  Junior  Warden  gives  him  the  sign,  token,  and  words.
The  7th  trumpet  sounds,  on  which  they  all  sound  together,  when
the  Senior  Warden  conducts  the  candidate  to  the  vacant  canopy.
[This  canopy,  it  will  be  recollected,  is  at  the  right  side  of  the  All
Puissant,  who  represents  Jehovah.  The  sounding  of  the  seventh
trumpet,  and  the  conducting  of  the  candidate  to  file  canopy,  is  a
representation  of  the  end  Of  the  world,  and  the,  glorification  of
true  Masons  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  having  'passed  through
the  trials  of  Free  Masonry,'  and  'washed  their  robes  in  their  own
blood  /'—If  this  is  not  antichrist,  what  is?     Compiler.]

Origin  of  this  degree. — When  the  Knights  and  Princes  were
embodied  to  conquer  the  Holy  Land,  they  took  a  cross  to  distin-
guish them,  as  a  mark  of  being  under  its  banners;  they  also  took
an  oath  to  spend  the  last  drop  of  their  blood  to  establish  the  true
religion  of  the  Most  High  God.  Peace  being  made,  they  could
not  fulfil  their  vows,  and,  therefore,  returning  home  to  their  re-
spective countries,  they  resolved  to  do  in  theory  what  they  could
not  do  by  practice,  and  determined  never  to  admit,  or  initiate,  any
into  their  mystic  ceremonies,  but  those  who  had  given  proofs  of
friendship,  zeal,  and  discretion.  They  took  the  name  of  Knights
of  the  East  and  West,  in  memory  of  their  homes  and  the  place
where  the  order  began;  and  they  have  ever  since  strictly  adhered
to  their  ancient  customs  and  forms.  '  In  the  year  1118,  the  first
Knights,  to  the  number  of  eleven,  took  their  vows  between  the
hands  of  Garinus,  Patriarch  and  Prince  of  Jerusalem,  from
whence  the  custom  is  derived  of  taking  the  obligation  in  the  same
position.

LECTURE.

Q.  Are  you  a  Knight  of  the  East  and  West?  A.  I  am.  Q.
What  did  you  see  when  you  were  received  ?    A.  Things  that  were

is  worthy  to  open  the  book,'  &c.  The  aged  brethren,  and  the  four  old  men
with  bladders,  the  angels  of  God  with  power;  and  Masonry  claiming  its
faithful  adherents  as  the  servants  of  God,  the  144,000  who  were  sealed  in
their  foreheads,  and  of  whom  it  is  said,  'These  are  they  wmch  were  not  de-
filed with  women;  for  they  are  virgins,  These  are  they  which  follow  the
Lamb,'  &c.    See  Rev.  14th  chapter.

T

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


218  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.

marvellous.  Q.  How  were  you  received?  A.  By  water,  and
the  effusion  of  blood.  Q.  Explain  this  to  me?  A.  A  Mason
should  not  hesitate  to  spill  his  blood  for  the  support  of  Masonry*
Q.  What  are  the  ornaments  of  the  Grand  Council?  A.  Superb
thrones,  sun,  moon,  perfumed  ointment,  and  a  basin  of  water.
Q.  What  is  the  figure  of  the  draft?  A.  An  heptagon  within  a .
circle.  Q.  What  is  the  representation  of  it?  A.  A  man  vested
in  a  white  robe,  with  a  golden  girdle  round  his  waist — round  his
right  hand,  seven  stars — -his  head  surrounded  with  a  glory,  a  long
white  beard — a  twoedged  sword  across  his  mouth,  surrounded
by  seven  candlesticks,  with  these  letters;  H.  D.  P.  I.  P.  R.  C.
Q.  What  signifies  the  circle?  A.  As  the  circle  is  finished  by  a
point,  so  should  a  lodge  be  united  by  brotherly  love  an<J  affection*
Q.  What  signifies  the  heptagon?  A.  Our  mystic  number,  which
is  enclosed  in  seven  letters.  Q.  What  are  the  seven  letters?  A.
B.  D.  W.  P.  H.  G.  S.;  which  signifies  Beauty,  Divinity,  Wis-
dom, Power,  Honor,  Glory,  and  Strength.  Q.  Give  me  the  ex-
planation of  these  words?  A.  Beauty — to  adorn:  Divinity —
that  Masonry  is  of  divine  origin:  Wisdom — a  quality  to  invent:
Power — to  destroy  the  profane  and  unworthy  brethren:  Honor —
is  an  indispensable  quality  in  a  Mason,  that  he  may  support  him-
self in  his  engagements  with  respectability:  Glory — that  a  good
Mason  is  on  an  equality  with  the  greatest  prince:  and  Strength —
is  necessary  to  sustain  us.  Q.  What  signifies  the  seven  stars?
A.  The  seven  qualities  which  Masons  should  be  possessed  of;
Friendship,  Union,  Submission,  Discretion,  Fidelity,  Prudence,
and  Temperance.  Q.  Why  should  a  Mason  be  possessed  of
these  qualities?  A.  Friendship — is  a  virtue  that  should  reign
among  brothers:  Union — in  the  foundation  of  society:  Submis-
sion— to  the  laws,  regulations,  and  decrees  of  the  lodge,  without
murmuring;  Discretion — that  a  Mason  should  always  be  on  his
guard,  and  never  suffer  himself  to  be  surprised:  Fidelity — in  ob-
serving strictly  our  obligations:  Prudence — to  conduct  ourselves
in  such  a  manner  that  the  profane,  though  jealous,  may  never  be
able  to  censure  our  conduct:  and  femperance-^- to  avoid  all  ex-
cesses that  may  injure  either  body  or  soul.  Q.  What  signifies
the  seven  candlesticks,  with  their  seven  letters?  A.  Seven
crimes,  which  Masons  should  always  avoid;  viz:  Hatred,  Dis-
cord, Pride,  Indiscretion,  Perfidy,  Rashness,  and  Calumny.*  Q.
What  are  the  reasons  that  Masons  should  particularly  avoid  these
crimes?      A.    Because  they  are  incompatible  with  the  principles

*  Compare  the  explanation  of  the  seven  stars  and  seven  candlestick?,  as
given  above,  with  that  in  the  word  of  God.    See  Rev.  i.  30.

•    Digitized  by  CjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  219

tind  qualities  of  a  good  Mason,  who  should  avoid  doing  an  injury
to  a  brother,  even  should  he  be  ill  treated  by  him,  and  to  unite  in
himself  all  die  qualities  of  a  good  and  an  upright  man.  Discord
is  contrary  to  the  very  principles  of  society:  Pride  prevents  the
exercise  of  humanity:  Indiscretion  is  fatal  to  Masonry:  Perfidy
should  be  execrated  by  every  honest  man:  Rashness  may  lead  us
into  unpleasant  and  disagreeable  dilemmas:  and  Calumny,  the
worst  of  all,  should  be  shunned  as  a  vice  which  saps  the  very
foundation  of  friendship  and  society.  Q.  What  signifies  the
twoedged  sword?  A.  It  expresses  the  superiority  of  this  degree
over  all  others  that  precede  it.  Q.  Are  there  any  higher  degvees
than  this?  A.  Yes;  there  are  several.  Q.  What  signifies  the
book  with  seven  seals,  which  none  but  one  can  open?  A.  A
lodge,  or  council,  of  Masons,  which  the  All  Puissant  alone  has  a
right  to  convene  and  open.  Q.  What  is  enclosed  in  the  1st
seal?  A.  One  bow,  one  arrow,  and  one  crown.  Q.  What  in  the
second?  A.  A  twoedged  sword.  Q.  What  in  the  third?  A.  A
balance.  Q.  What  in  the  fourth?  A.  Death's  head.  Q.  What
in  the  fifth?  A.  A  cloth  stained  with  blood.  Q.  What  in  the
sixth?  A.  The  power  to  darken  the  sun,  and  tinge  the  moon
with  blood.  Q.  What  in  the  seventh?  A.  Seven  trumpets  and
perfumes.  Q.  Explain  these  things  to  me.  A.  The  bow,  ar-
row, and  crown,  signifies  that  the  orders  of  this  respectable  coun-
cil should  be  executed  with  as  much  quickness,  as  the  arrow  flies
from  the  bow,  and  be  received  with  as  much  submission  as  if  it
came  from  a  crowned  head,  or  the  chief  of  a  nation.  The  sword,
that  the  council  is  always  armed  to  punish  the  guilty.  The  bal-
ance is  a  symbol  of  justice.  The  skull  tY  the  image  of  a  bro*
ther  who  is  excluded  from  a  lodge,  or  council!!!  Thh  idea  must
make  all  tremble,  when  they  recollect  the  penalties  they  have  im-
posed on  themselves  under  the  most  solemn  obligations !  [Why
tremble,  if,  as  some  say,  the  penalties  are  not  to  be  inflicted? —
Compiler  J]  The  cloth  stained  with  blood,  that  we  should  not
hesitate  to  spill  ours  for  the  good  of  Masonry.  The  power  of
obscuring  the  sun  and  tinging  the  moon  with  blood,  is  the  repre-
sentation of  the  power  of  the  superior  councils — in  interdicting
their  works,  if  they  are  irregular,  until  they  have  acknowledged
their  error  and  submitted  to  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the  craft
established  by  the  Grand  Constitutions.  The  seven  trumpets,  sig-
nify that  Masonry  is  extended  over  the  surface  of  the  earth,  on
the  wings  of  fame,  and  supports  itself  with  honor.  The  perfumes
denote  that  the  life  of  a  good  Mason  should  be,  and  is,  free  from
all  reproach,  and  is  perfumed  by  means  of  good  report.  Q.
What  age  are  you?    A.  Very  ancient.    Q.  Who  are  you?    A.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


220  LIGHT   OH   MA80BRY

I  am  a  Patrician:  (i.  e.  of  Patmos.)      Q.   Whence  came  you?
A.  From  Patmos.     End  of  the  Lecture.

To  close. — Q.  What  is  the  o'clock?  A.  There  is  no  more
time.  The  All  Puissant  strikes  7,  and  says,  'Venerable  Knights
Princes,  the  council  is  closed.'  The  two  Wardens  repeat  the
same,  and  the  council  is  closed. — Finis.


THE  DEGREE  CALLED

KNIGHT  OF  THE  EAGLE,  AND  SOVEREIGN

PRINCE  OF  ROSE  CROIX  DE  HERODEN.*

Form  of  admission. — When  a  brother  wishes  to  receive  this
high  degree,  he  must  produce  his  certificate  of  Knight  of  the
East,  Prince  of  Jerusalem,  and  Knight  of  the  East  and  West
The  following  articles  must  be  read  to  him,  to  which  he  must
agree  before  he  can  be  received.  1st.  He  must  present  at  the
door  of  the  chapter  the  following  petition,  and  must  kneel  while

one  of  the  brethren  reads  it.     *  Brother ,  who  is  a  Knight  of

the  East,  Prince  of  Jerusalem,  and  Knight  of  the  East  and
West,  begs  leave  to  represent  to  the  Sovereign  Chapter  the  ear-
nest desire  he  has,  to  arrive  to  the  Sublime  Degree  of  Rose
Croix,  the  point  of  Perfection  of  Masonry,  and  that  you  will  be
pleased  (being  at  present  assembled,)  to  admit  him  among  the
number  of  Knights,  if  he  is  found  worthy.  And  your  petitioner
shall  never  cease  to  make  vows  to  Heaven,  for  the  prosperity  of
the  order  and  the  good  heajth  of  all  the  brethren.'  After  the  pe-
tition is  read  the  candidate  must  sign  it.  2d.  The  candidate
must  remain  on  his  knees,  at  the  door  of  the  chapter,  until  the
answer  is  thrown  to  him  on  the  floor  by  a  Knight,  when  he  rises
and  reads  it.  In  the  answer  he  will  find  the  day  appointed  for
his  reception,  and  the  name  of  the  Knight,  who  is  to  give  him  the,
necessary  instructions.  The  Knight  who  is  named  in  the  an-
swer, directs  the  candidate  to  procure  three  pair  of  gloves,  (one
pair  of  which  must  be  women's,)  and  two  sticks  of  fine  sealing
wax  for  the  seals.  He  also  directs  him  to  present  to  each  of  the
brethren,  one  pair  of  men's,  and  one  pair  of  women's  gloves,  and
two  sticks  of  sealing  wax.  3d.  He  must  make  a  donation  of  at
least  —  dollars  to  the  Superior  Lodge,  Chapter,  or  Council  of

*  In  this  work  there  are  two  degrees,  entitled  'Knight  of  the  Eagle  and
Sovereign  Prince  of  Rose  Croix.'  The  above  is  given  as  conferred  in  Eng-
land, Scotland,  and  America;  the  other  is  conferred  in  France.


y  Google


LIGHT   OK  HASOSRY.  221

the  SuUime  Degrees,  which  must  be  done  before  he  is  received,
and  may  be  appropriated  either  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the
order  or  be  given  to  the  poor.     He  must  also  present  to  the
lodge  three  white  wax  candles  for  the  Master,  and  two  to  each
of  the  Knights,  at  his  reception,  previous  to  his  entering  into  the
third  apartment.     4th.  He  must  solemnly  engage  on  his  honor,
never  to  reveal  the  place  where  he  was  received,  who  received  him,
nor  those  who  were  present  at  his  reception.     5th.  He  solemnly
promises  to  conform  to  all  the  ordinances  of  the  chapter,  and
keep  himself  uniformly  clothed  as  far  as  he  is  able.    6th.  He
must  promise  to  acknowledge  his  Master  at  all  times  and  in  all
places;  never  to  confer  this  degree  without  permission,  and  to
answer  for  the  probity  and  respectability  of  those  whom  he  pro-
poses.    7th.  That  he  will  be  extremely  cautious  in  granting  this
degree,  that  it  may  not  be  multiplied  unnecessarily.     If  the  can-
didate promises  to  perform  these  requisitions  he  may  be  admitted.
TUle  of  the  Order. — This  order,  which  is  the  ultimatum  of  Ma-
sonry, has  different  titles.     It  is  called  Rose  Croix  from  the  rose
on  the  cross  of  the  jewel,  being  emblematical  of  the  Son  of
God,  who  is  compared  to  a  rose  by  the  evangelist.     Knight  of
the  Eagle,  because  of  the  eagle  represented  in  the  jewel.    Knight
of  the  Pelican,  emblematical  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  shed  his
blood  for  the  great  family  of  mankind.     De  Heroden,  because
the  first  chapter  of  this  degree  wa   held  on  a  mountain  of  that
name,  situated  between  the  west  and  north  of  Scotland,  and
where  there  is  at  this  day  the  superior  lodge  and  residence  of  the
Sovereign  Grand  Chapter.     They  meet  in  an  old  castle  belong-
ing to  the  Knights  of  the  Rose  Croix.     It  is  from  this  circum-
stance that  three  fourths  of  the  lodges  of  England  took  the  name
of  the  Rose  Croix  de  Heroden,  and  the  other  fourth  the  name  of
Rose  Croix,  Knights  of  St.  Andrew,  because  the  first  Masons  of
Scotland  made  a  procession  every  year  on  the  festival  of  that
saint;  and  because  it  is  the  day  of  their  regular  constitution,
which  has  induced  many  to  call  it  St.  Andrews,  which  also  is  in
commemoration  of  the  troubles  of  that  country.     The  form  of
the  true  jewel  being  lost,  they  substituted  the  cross  of  St.  An-
drew, though  the  ceremonies  of  this  degree  have  no  connexion
with  that  jewel.    They  are  yet  worn  in  the  lodge  of  Cologne,  sus-
pended to  a  red  ribbon  in  the  form  of  a  collar.     In  Berlin  to  a
green  ribbon;  they  also  wear  it  to  a  button  hole.

Jewel. — The  jewel  of  this  degree  is  a  compass  of  gold  extend-
ed to  22  1-2  degrees.     The  head  of  the  compass  is  a  covered
rose,  the  stock  of  which  comes  to  a  point.     In  the  middle  of  the
compass  is  a  cross,  the  foot  of  which  rests  on  the  middle/
T2


222  LIGHT  ON  *A«OS&T.

ef  the  circle,  and  die  head  touches  the  head  of  the  com*
pads.  On  one  side  an  eagle,  touching  a  quarter  of  the  circles,
the  wings  and  the  head  reclining.  On  the  other  side  a  pelican
picking  its  breast  to  nourish  ha  young  which  must  be  in  a  nest
under  it  On  the  head  of  the  compass  roust  he  a  crown.  Onthe
circle  must  be  engraved  en  one  side,  the  Knight  in  hieroglyph-
ics, on  the  other  side  the  pass  word.  The  jewel  mist  be  of
gold;  die  eagle  and  pelican  of  silver.  It  is  worn  to  a  collar  of  a
bright  red  color,  of  at  least  three  inches  broad,  edged  with  black;
a  rose  at  the  lower  end  and  a  Mack  cross  on  each  side.  The
Knights  must  wear  this  jewel  in  every  lodge,  and  announce
themselves  at  the  door  as  Knights  of  Rose  Croix,  that  they  may
receive  the  honor  due  to  them.

Aprons. — For  the  first  chamber,  white  leather  lined,  and  bor-
dered with  black,  three  red  roses  placed  triangularly  on  the  flap;
a  human  scull  with  two  thigh  bones  placed  across  each  other,
also  on  the  flap.  At  the  bottom  of  the  apron  must  be  a  globe,
surrounded  by  a  serpent,  and  on  the  pocket  of  the  apron  a  large  I.

For  the  second  chamber,  red  lined  and  bordered  with  the
same.  '  Ob  the  middle  of  the  nap  must  be  embroidered,  a  triple
triangle,  with  three  squares  within  thsee  circles,  an  I  in  the  mid-
dle, which  forms  the  jewel  of  the  second  chamber.  On  each
aide  of  this  must  be  embroidered  two  compasses;  the  point  of
one  stands  in  one  square  of  the  circle,  and  the  other  stands  on
a  triangle,  with  the  point  down.

Jewel  and  Order. — For  the  first  chamber,  a  broad,  black  rib-
bon  from  the  left  shoulder  to  the  right  hip,  (three  inches  broad.)
On  the  breast  a  small  cross  of  red  ribbon;  below  this  must  be  a
red  rose,  and  a  small  rose  of  Wack  below  this,  to  which  must  be
suspended  a  gold  cross.

For  the  second  chamber,  the  order  and  jewel  of  thi*  degree.

Clothing  of  the  Knights,  Jewels,  and  Titles  of  the  Officers. —
All  the  brethren  must  be  dressed  in  black  clothes,  with  their
swords  on.  The  Master  roust  be  decorated  with  a  brilliant  star
of  seven  points,  which  he  wears  on  his  breast  over  his  heart*
In  the  middle  must  be  a  circle  and  in  its  centre  the  letter  €r.
The  following  three  words  must  also  be  engraved  within  the  cir-
cle around  the  C;  Faith,  Hope,  Charity.  The  Master  is
called,  'Evee  Most  Perfect  Sovereign.'  The  Senior  War-
den  wears  a  triangle,  and  is  called,  'Most  Exceltont  and -Perfect'
Hie  Junior  Warden  wears  the  square  and  compasses,  one  above
the  other,  and  is  called,  'Most  Excellent  and  Perfect.'  The
brethren  are  catted,  'Most  Respectable  Knights  Princes  of  Ma-
sons.'

1


LIGHT  03  MASONRY.  223

First  apartment.— The  first  apartment  is  a  representation  of
Mouht  Calvary.  It  must  be  hung  with  black  tapestry,  and
lighted  with  thirty-three  yellow  wax  candles,  in  three  candlesticks
of  eleven  branches  each.  There  must  be  three  columns  of  six
feet  high,  and  on  the  chapiter  of  each  must  be  wrote  one  of  the
following  words,  in  large  characters  of.  gold;  Faith,  Hope,
Charity.  These  columns  may  serve  as  candlesticks.  At  the
east  end  of  the  chapter  there  must  be  a  hill  or  bank  raised  to
represent  Mount  Calvary,  upon  which  must  be  placed  three
large  crosses,  and  upon  each  a  human  scull  and  two  thigh  bones
across.  In  the  front  of  this  must  be  the  altar  covered  with  black,
on  which  must  stand  a  cross  and  two  yellow  wax  candles,  light-
ed. Behind  the  altar  must  be  a  black  curtain  to  intercept  the
view  of  the  Mount  It  must  extend  to  the  top  of  the  chapter
and  be  made  to  open  in  the  middle,  and  be  drawn  to  each  side.
The  Master  must  be  seated  on  the  last  step  of  the  altar,  having
a  small  table  before  hint,  on  which  is  a  lighted  wax  candle,  a  Bi-
ble, square  and  compasses,  and  triangle.  There  must  be  no
chairs  or  benches  in  the  chapter,  but  all  the  brethren  must  be
seated  on  the  floor.  All  the  brethren  must  were  over  their  black
clothes,  a  white  satin  ehasuble>  bordered  with  black  ribbon,  two
inches  in  width.  A  red  cross,  two  inches  in  width,  must  reach
from  the  top  to  the  bottom  of  it.  It  must  be  made  as  the  chasu-
ble of  a  Catholic  priest  which  he  wears  over  the  alb,  when  cele-
brating mass.

Second  apartment. — The  east  end  of  the  second  apartment
must  represent,  in  transparent  painting,  the  resurrection  of  Jesus
Christ,  the  Saviour  of  mankind;  over  which  must  be  a  brilliant
triangle  surrounded  with  glory.  The  hanging  must  be  of  trans-
parent painting,  representing  the  light  blue  ether  of  the  sky,  in-
terspersed with  glory.  The  altar  must  be  splendidly  decorated
and  illuminated  with  transparent  lights.  There  must  be  no  can-
dles in  this  apartment,  as  all  the  light  must  be  received  through
the  transparences.  No  other  figure  must  be  painted  on  the  hang-
ings but  the  representation  of  our  Saviour  at  the  resurrection.
At  the  east,  and  behind  the  hangings,  at  some  little  distance,
must  be  an  organ  or  a  band  of  music.

Third  apartimnt.~Qn  the  hangings  of  the  third  apartment
must  be  represented,  in  transparent  paintings,  all  the  horrors
whack  we  attach  to  the  idea  of  Hell,  or  of  a  place  formed  for  the
puaiflhraeat  of.  the  worst  of  crimes;  such  as  human  figures  and
monsters  with  convulsed  muscles,  engulfed  in  flames,  &c.  &c.
Off  each  side  of-  the  door  a  human  skeleton,  with  an  arrow  in
their  hands.  Each  apartment  must  be  separate,  only  connecting
with  a  narrow  door.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


224  LIG0T   Off   HAgOKBY.

To  open. — M.  'My  Perfect  brothers,  Knights  Princes  of  Ma-
sons, assist  me  to  open  this  chapter.'  The  Wardens  repeat  the
same  one  after  another.  k  The  Master  then  knocks>3, 4,  which
is  repeated  by  the  Wardens.

M.  Most  Excellent  and  Perfect  Wardens,  what  is  our  care?

S.  W.  Most  Wise  Perfect  and  Sublime  Master,  it  is  to  ascer-
tain whether  the  chapter  is  well  covered,  and  all  the  brethren
present  are  Knights  of  the  Eagle  and  Rose  Croix.

M.  'Convince  yourselves,  my  Perfect  brethren,  one  from  the
south  and  one  from  the  north.'  This  the  Wardens  do  by  de-
manding from  each  brother,  in  rotation  the  sign,  token,  and  word,
after  which  they  give  an  account  to  the  Master,  who  says,  'Most
Perfect  Senior  Warden,  what  is  the  o'clock?'

S.  W.  The  moment  when  the  vail  of  the  temple  was  rent;  -
when  darkness  and  consternation  covered  the  earth;  when  the
stars  disappeared  and  the  lamp  of  day  was  darkened;  when  the
implements  of  Masonry  were  lost  and  the  cubic  stone  drew
blood  and  water;  that  was  the  moment  when  the  great  masonic
word  was  lost

M.  Since  Masonry,  my  brethren,  has  sustained  so  great  a
loss,  let  us  employ  ourselves  by  new  works,  to  recover  the  word
which  was  lost,  for  which  purpose  let  us  open  the  chapter  of
Rose  Croix.

S.  W.  My  brethren  let  us  do  our  duty;  the  Sovereign  Chapter
of  Rose  Croix  is  open.  J.  W.  repeats  the  same,  after  which  all
the  Knights  bend  their  right  knees  to  the  altar,  repeating  the
same  words  seven  times,  a  short  interval  between  the  6th  and7tb.

JVL  What  is  the  cause  of  our  assembling  here,  Most  Excellent
Senior  Warden?

S.  W.  Ever  Most  Perfect  and  Sovereign  Master,  the  propa-
gation of  the  order  and  the  perfection  of  the  Knight  of  the  East,
who  demands  to  be  received  among  us.  The  brethren  then
proceed  to  ballot  for  the  candidate.

Reception. — When  the  candidate  has  given  satisfactory  an-
swers to  all  the  conditions  proposed  to  him,  he  must  be  placed  in
the  chamber  of  reflection,  which  must  be  painted  black,  with
a  small  table  in  it  with  a  Bible  and  several  human  bones  on  it
The  only  light  is  received  from  a  candle  or  lamp  placed  in  the
scull  of  a  human  skeleton.  The  Master  of  Ceremonies  goes  to
the  candidate  and  decorates  him  in  the  attributes  of  the  last  de-
gree he  has  received,  and  also  with  his  sword  and  white  gloves
on.  He  then  says  to  him,  'All  the  temples  are  demolished;  our
tools  are  destroyed  with  our  columns;  the  sacred  word  is  lost,
notwithstanding  all  our  precaution;  and  we  are  in  ignorance  of

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  225

the  means  of  recovering  it,  or  of  knowing  each  other.  The  or-
der, in  general,  is  in  the  greatest  consternation !  Will  you  assist
us  in  recovering  the  word?'  The  candidate  replies,  'Most  cheer-
fully. '  The  Master  of  Ceremonies  says,  'Follow  me,  if  you
please;9  when  he  conducts  him  to  the  door  of  the  chapter,
whereon  he  knocks  as  a  Knight  of  Rose  Croix.  The  Senior
Warden  demands,  'What  do  you  want7'  Arw.  'It  is  a  brother
Knight  of  the  East  and  West,  who  is  wandering  in  the  woods
and  mountains,  and  who,  at  the  destruction  of  the  second  tem-
ple, lost  the  word  and  humbly  solicits  your  aid  and  assistance  to
recover  it'  The  door  is  opened  and  the  candidate  is  introduced.
All  the  brethren  are  seated  on  the  floor,  the  right  hand  on  their
necks,  their  left  covering  their  face,  their  heads  down,  their
elbows  on  their  knees,  and  their  jewels  covered  with  black  crape.
The  Master  is  in  the  same  position  at  the  table.  The  Senior
Warden  knocks  as  a  Rose  Croix,  and  announces  him  to  the
Master,  who  says,  'My  brother,  confusion  has  come  on  our
works,  and  it  is  no  longer  in  our  power  to  continue  them;  you
must  perceive  from  our  looks  and  the  consternation  which  pre-
vails among  us,  what  confusion  reigns  on  the  earth.  The  vail  of
the  temple  is  rent,  [at  this  moment  the  black  curtain  is  withdrawn;]
the  light  is  obscured  and  darkness  spreads  over  the  earth;  the
flaming  star  has  disappeared,  the  cubic  stone  sweats  blood  and
water,  and  the  sacred  word  is  lost;  therefore  it  is  impossible  we
can  give  it  to  you,  nevertheless  it  is  not  our  intention  to  remain
inactive:  we  will  endeavor  to  recover  it.  Are  you  disposed  to
follow  us/'  Jlns.  'Yes  I  am.'  Master  says,  'Brother  Wardens,
make  the  candidate  travel  for  33  years,  to  learn  the  beauties  of
the  new  law,'  [which  is  reduced  to  7  times  round  the  lodge.]
The  Wardens  lead  him  slowly  round  the  lodge,  and  when  he
passes  before  the  altar  he  must  kneelfand  when  passing  in  the
west  he  bends  his  right  knee,  they  make  him  observe  the  col-
umns and  repeat  the  name  of  each  as  he  passes  them.  After  he
has  performed  this  ceremony,  the  Wardens  knock  one  after  the
other  and  announce  him  to  the  Master,  who  says,  'My  brother
what  have  you  learned  on  your  journey?'  An$.  I  have  learned  three
virtues  by  which  to  conduct  myself  in  future,  Faith,  Hop$,  Char-
ity;  inform  ma  if  there  are  any  others?  Master.  'No,  my
brother,  they  are  the  principles  and  the  pillars  of  our  new  mys-
tery. Approach  near  to  us  and  make  an  engagement  never  to
depart  from  that  faith.  The  brethren  rise.  The  candidate
kneels  on  the  last  step  of  the  altar  and  places  bis  hands  on  tho
holy  Bible  and  takes  the  following  obligation.


y  Google


226         *  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

Obligation. — I  —  do  moat  solemnly  and  sincerely  promise  and
swear,  under  the  penalty  of  all  my  former  obligations,  which  I  have
taken  in  the  preceding  degrees,  never  to  reveal  either  directly  or
indirectly,  the  secrets  or  mysteries  of  Knight  of  the  Eagle,  Sove-
reign Prince  of  Rose  Croix,  to  any  brother  of  an  inferior  de-
gree, nor  to  any  in  the  world  besides,  who  is  not  justly  and  law-
fully entitled  to  the  same,  under  the  penalty  of  being  for  ever
deprived  of  the  true  word,  to  be  perpetually  in  darkness,  my
blood  continually  running  from  my  body,  to  suffer  without  inter-
mission, the  most  cruel  remorse  of  soul;  that  the  bitterest  gall,
mixed  with  vinegar,  be  my  constant  drink;  the  sharpest  thorns
for  my  pillow;  and  that  the  death  of  the  cross  may  complete  my
punishment,  should  I  ever  infringe  or  violate  in  any  manner,  or
form  the  laws,  and  rules  which  have  been,  are  now,  or  may  be
hereafter  made  known  or  prescribed  to  me;  and  I  do  furthermore
swear,  promise  and  engage  on  my  sacred  word  of  honor,  to  ob-
serve and  obey  all  the  decrees  which  maybe  transmitted  tome  by
the  Grand  Inspectors  General,  in  supreme  council  of  the  33d  de-
gree; that  I  never  will  reveal  the  place  where  I  have  been  receiv-
ed, nor*  by  whom  I  was  received,  nor  the  ceremony  used  at  my
reception,  to  any  person  on  earth,  but  to  a  lawful  Prince  of  Rose
Croix;  that  I  never  will  initiate  any  person  into  this  degree,  but
by  a  lawful  patent  obtained  for  that  purpose,  either  from  thus
chapter,  or  from  a  superior  council:  so  help  me  God,  and  keep
me  steadfast  in  this  my  solemn  obligation.  Amen.  He  kisses
the  Bible.  The  Master  says,  'My  brethren,  all  is  accomplished!'
The  brethren  all  place  themselves  on  the  floor  and  cover  their
faces  with  their  hands,  except  the  Wardens  who  continue  with
the  Master*  and  the  candidate  whom  they  deprive  of  his  apron
and  order.  The  Master  invests  him  with  the  chasuble  and  says,
'This  habit,  my  brother,  Caches  you  the  uniformity  of  our  man-
ners and  our  belief,  and  will  recall  to  your  recollection  the  prin-
cipal points  of  our  mysteries.  The  black  apron  with  which  I
invest  you,  is  to  mark  our  sincere  repentance  of  those  evils
which  was  the  cause  of  all  our  misfortunes,  and  it  will  also  serve
to  show  you  those  who  are  in  search  of  the  true  word;  the  ribbon
is  the  mark  of  our  constant  mourning,  till  we  have  found  it.
Pass  to  the  west  and  assist  us  to  search  for  it/*  The  Wardens
conduct  him  to  the  west.  The  Master  knocks  6  atffe  1,  as  a
Knight.  The  Wardens  repeat  it.  All  the  brethren  rise  and
place  themselves  in  the  sign  of  the  good  pasture.  The  Master
demands,  'Brother  Master  Wardens,  what  is  the  motive  of  our
assembling?'  Ans.  The  loss  of  the  word,  which,  with  your  assis-
tance, we  hope  to  recover.     Q.  What  must  we  do  to  obtain  ft?

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


LIGHT  OH   MAS0NR7.  .       227

Ant.  To  be  fully  convinced  of  the  three  virtues  which  are  the
basis  of  our*  columns  and  our  principles.  Q.  What  are  they?
A.  Faith,  Hope,  Charity.  Q.  How  shall  we  find  those  three
columns?  A.  By  travelling  three  days  in  the  most  profound
obscurity.  The  Master  says,  'Let  us  travel,  my  brethren,  from
east  to  north,  and  from  west  to  sooth.'  All  the  brethren  travel  in
silence,  bending  their  knees  as  they  pass  the  altar  in  the  east,
and  go  7  times  round.  At  the  third  time, of  going  round  the
Master  passes  to  the  second  apartment;  at  the  fourth  time,  the
Wardens;  at  the  fifth  time,  all  the  officers;  at  the  sixth  time,  all
the  brethren;  at  the  seventh  time,  the  Master  of  Ceremonies
stops  the  candidate  and  says,  'You  cannot  enter  unless  you
give  me  the  word.  The  candidate  answers,  'I  am  in  search  of
the  word,  by  the  help  of  the  new  law  and  the  three  columns  of
Masonry.'

During  this  time  the  brethren  in  the  second  apartment  take
off  their  black  decorations,  and  put  on  the  red,  and  also  uncover
their  jewels.  The  candidate  knocks  on  the  door,  and  the  War-
den for  answer,  shuts  the  door  in  his  face.  The  master  of
ceremonies  says,  'These  marks  of  indignity  are  not  sufficiently
humiliating,  you  must  pass  through  more  rigorous  proofs,  before
you  can  find  it.'  He  then  takes  off  the  candidate  the  chasuble  and
black  apron,  and  puts  over  him  a  black  cloth  covered  with  ashes
and  dust,  and  says  to  him,  'I  am  going  to  conduct  you  into  the
darkest  and  most  dismal  place,  from  whence  the  word  shall  tri-
umphantly come  to  the  glory  and  advantage  of  Masonry ;  place
your  confidence  in  me.'  He  then  takes  him  into  the  third  apart-
ment, and  takes  from  him  his  covering  and  makes  him  go  three
times  around,  (showing  him  the  representation  of  the  -torments
of  the  damned,)  when  he  is  led  to  the  door  of  the  chapter  and  the
Master  of  Ceremonies  says  to  him,  'The  horrors  which  you  have
'just  now  seen,  are  but  a  faint  representation  of  those  you  shall  suf-
fer* .*/ y01*  break  through  our  laws,  or  injpnge  the ,  obligation
you  have  taken.1*  The  Master  of  Ceremonies Upo&kjL  on  the  door
of  the  chapter,  and  the  Warden  reports  to  the  Master,  who  orders,
him  to  go  and  see  who  knocks.  The  Master  of  Ceremonies
answers,  'It  is  a  Knight,  who,  after  having  passed  through  the
mbst  profound  and*  difficult  places,  hopes  to  procure  the  real

*This  certainly  caps  the  climax,  and  renders  the  institution  of  Masonry
complete.  The  torments  <of  ^th»  damned,  the  awful  punishment  which  the
Almighty  inflicts  on  the  \iom<tkiibf  his  righteous  law,  is  but<i  faint  emblem
of  the  punishment  which  Masonry  here  declares,  shall  be  inflicted  on  the  vic-
tors of  masonic  Jaw,  on  those  whp'are  guilty  q£  anJnfraction  of  masonic*)™1"
gation!.'!  *-  'm"\

•  ^^^^£

itized  by  G00gk


228  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

word  as  a  recompence  for  his  labor.'  The  Wardens,  give  an  ac-
count to  the  Master,  who  says,  'Introduce  him  to  the  west  of
the  chapter  with  his  eyes  open.'  The  Wardens  bring  him  in  and
then  cover  him  again  with  his  vail.  Master.  'From  whence
came  you?'  Candidate.  'From  Judea.'  Master.  *By  what
road  have  you  passed?'  Candidate.  'By  Nazareth.'  Master.
'Who  conducted  you!'  Can.  'Raphael.'  Mast.  'What  tribe  are
you  of  V  Can.  'Of  the  tribe  6f  Judah.'  Mast.  'Take  the  initial
letters  of  each  of  these  words,  and  tell  me  what  they  form?'  Can.
'J,  N,  R,  J.'  Mast.  'My  brethren,  what  happiness!  the  word  is
recovered;  give  him  the  light.'  The  Vail  is  taken  off,  and  all  the
brethren,  striking  with  their  hands  seven  times,  cry,  'Hosanna  in
the  highest;  on  earth  peace,  good  will  towards  men !'  The  music
immediately  plays  the  following  anthem,  which  is  devoutly  snag
by  all  the  Knights.

ANTHEM.

Grateful  notesfand  numbers  bring,
While  the  lnamt  of  God,'  we  sing:
Holy,  holy,  holy  Lord,
Be  thy  glorious  name  adored.
Men  on  earth  and  saints  above
Sing  the  great  Redeemer's  love.
Lord,  thy  mercies  never  fail,
Hail,  celestial  goodness,  hail!
While  on  earth  ordained  to  stay,
Guide  our  footsteps  in  thy  way:
Mortals  raise  your  voices  high,
TiU  they  reach  the  echoing  sky.

After  the  anthem  is  sung,  the  Master  says  to  the  candidate,
'Approach,  my  brother,  I  will  communicate  to  you  our  perfect
mysteries.'  The  Wardens  conduct  him  to  the  Master,  who  says,
'I  congratulate  you,  my  brother,  on  the  recovery  of  the  word,
which  entitles  you  to  this  degree  of  Perfect  Masonry.  I  shall
make  no  comment  or  eulogium  on  it.  Its  sublimity  will,  no
doubt,  be  duly  appreciated  by  you.  The  impression  which,  no
doubt,  it  has  made  on  your  mind,  will  convince  you  that  you
were  not  deceived  when  you  was  informed  that  the  ultimatum  of
masonic  perfection,  was  to  be  acquired  by  this  dejftt'  It  cer-
tainly will  be  a  source  of  very  considerable  satisfaction  to  youj
that  your  merit  alone  has  entitled  yog  to;  it  And  I  hope,  my
brother,  that  your  good  conduct,  your^teal,  your  virtue  and  dis-
cretion, may  always  render  you  deserving  of  the  high  honor
which  you  have  received^antl  I  sincerely,  wish,  that  your  liffc
may  long  be  preserved^  to  enable  you  to  continue  an  useful

^^^  Digitized  by  GoOgk


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  229

member,  and  an  ornament  to  our  society.'  [Here  follow  the
signs,  token,  and  words.]  The  Sovereign  Master  then  says,
<Go,  my  brother,  and  make  yourself  known  to  all  the  members  of
the  Sovereign  Chapter,  and  return  again.'  The  candidate  goes
and  whispers  in  the  ears  of  the  Knights  the  pass  word;  he  then
returns,  and  kneels  before  the  altar.  All  the  brethen  place  their
right  hands  on  him.  The  Senior  Warden  [I  presume  it  should
read,  'The  Sovereign  Master,']  takes  the  ribbon,  to  which  is
suspended  the  true  jewel  uncovered,  and  says  to  him,  'By  the
power  which  I  have  received  from  the  Sovereign  Chapter  of
Rose  Croix  de  Heroden,  I  receive  and  constitute  you  Prince
Knight  of  the  Eagle,  Perfect  Free  Mason  de  Heroden,  under  the
title  of  the  Rose  Croix,,  that  you  may  enjoy,  now  and  for  ever
all  the  privileges,  prerogatives,  and  titles  attached  to  that  sub-
lime degree,  as  virtue  and  humanity  are  the  foundation  of  it.  I
hope,  my  brother,  never  to  see  you  dishonor  the  ribbon  with
which  you  have  been  invested,  and  which  a  Perfect  Mason  should
never  quit  but  at  his  death.'

LECTURE.

Q.  Are  you  a  Knight  and  Prince  of  Rose  Croix?  A.  Most
Wise  and  Perfect  Sovereign,  I  have  that  happiness!  Q.  Where
were  you  received?  A.  In  a  chapter  where  reigned  decency  and
humility.  Q.  Who  received  you?  A.  The  most  humble  of  all.
Q  How  were  you  received?  A.  With  all  the  formalities  requi-
site on  that  great  occasion!  Q.  How  were  you  presented  to  the
chapter?  A.  Of  ray  own  free  will  and  accord.  Q.  What  have
you  seen  on  entering  the  chapter?  A.  My  soul  was  in  ecstacy
it  the  sight  of  our  ineffable  mysteries  and  the  silence  which
reigned  in  the  lodge;  and  the  situation  of  the  Knights  gave  me
a  high  idea  of  what  was  going  to  be  communicated  to  me.  Q.
What  did  they  do  with  you  afterwards?  A.  They  made  me  travel
for  33  years.  [This  number  of  years  alludes  to  the  age  of  the
Saviour  when  he  was  crucified.  J  Q.  What  did  you  learn  in
your  travels?  A.  I  learned  the  name  of  the  three  columns
which  support  our  edifice,  and  as  they  are  three  great  virtues,
they  are  the  foundation  of  this  degree.  Q.  When  your  journey
was  over,'  was  your  labor,  pains,  and  work  finished?  A.  The
Most  Wis*"  ordered  me  to  be  conducted  to  the  altar,  and  there
to  kneel  in  the  presence  of  Him,  before  whom  alt  nations  bow,
and  to  take  a  most  solemn  obligation,  which  I  did  with  as
much  respect  as  possible,  my  heart  was  penetrated  with  what  I
was  saying,  with  a  firm  resolution  of  observing  the  same.  Q.
What  was  done  with  you  after  tliat?  A.  I  was  clothed  with
U

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


230  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.

marks  of  grief  and  repentance,  and  was  taught  die  reason  there  ~
of.  All  the  Einghts  then  made  a  journey,  by  which  we  passed
from  misery  to  happiness;  the  dark  and  obscure  road  by  which
we  travelled,  was  overcome  with  firmness,  and  we  received  as  a
recompence  the  object  of  our  desire.  Q.  What  was  you  seeking
for  in  this  journey?  A.  The  word  which  was  lost,  and  which
our  perseverance  enabled  us  to  recover.  Q.  Who  gave  it  to
you?  A.  It  is  not  permitted  to  any  person  to  give  it,  but  having
reflected  on  what  I  was  seeing  and  hearing,  I  found  it  myself
with  the  help  of  him  who  is  the  author  ofthe  word.  Q.  Give  it
to  me?  A.  I  cannot; .  interrogate  me.  Q.  What  country  are
you  of?  A.  Of  Judea.  Q.  Where  have  you  passed?  A.  By
Nazareth.  Q.  What  was  the  name  of  your  conductor?  A.
Raphael.  Q.  What  tribe  are  you  of?  A.  The  tribe  of  Judah.
Q.  I  am  not  better  instructed.  A.  Most  Wise,  enable  me  to
assemble  the  initial  letters  of  each  word,  and  you  will  find  the
subject  of  our  joy  and  our  mysteries.  Q.  J.  N.  R.  J.  Jesus,
Nazareth,  Rex,  Judea.  A.  It  is  very  just,  Most  Wise.  Q.  Did
they  give  you  any  thing  else?  A.  The  pass  word,  and  the  signs
and  tokens  to  make  myself  known.  Q.  Give  me  the  first  sign.
A.  (By  giving  it)  Q.  What  do  you  call  it?  A.  The  good  pas-
.  ture.  Q.  After  having  given  you  all  this,  what  did  they  do  wkh
you?  A.  The  Most  Wise  and  the  Knights  constituted  me
Prince  Knight  of  the  Eagle,  Perfect  Mason,  under  the  title  of
Sovereign  Knight  of  Rose  Croix,  and  decorated  me  with  the
ribbon  and  jewel,  and  gave  me  the  explanation  of  them,  after
which  I  made  myself  known  to  all  the  Knights,  and  took  my
place  in  the  chapter.  Q.  What  was  done  with  you  afterwards?
A.  The  Most  Wise  made  an  exhortation,  after  which  the  busi-
ness ofthe  chapter  was  gone  through  and  a  convocation  made  for
the  next,  and  the  chapter  was  closed  in  the  usual  form.  '

To  close. — The  Most  Wise  knocks  seven  times  on  the,%tep  of
the  altar.  The  Wardens  repeat  the  same.  The  Knights  rise
up.  The  Master  asks  the  following  questions:— 'Most  Excel-
lent brother  Senior  Warden,  what's  the  o'clock?*  A.  «The  mo-
ment when  the  word  was  recovered;  when  the  cubic  stone  was
changed  into  a  mystic  rose;  when  the  flaming  star  appeared  in
all  its  splendor;  when  our  altars  resumed  their  ordinary  form;
when  the  true  light  dispelled  darkness,  and  the  new  ltrw  becomes
visible  in  all  our  works.'  Then  the  Most  Wise  takes  the  charity
box  to  distribute  to  the  ordinary  servants,  or  the  brethren,  who  are
in  necessity.  After  which,  he  demands  if  any  of  the  Knights
have  any  thing  to  offer  for  the  go^d  of  the  order  and  this  chapter,
and  says,  'Brother  Wardens,  give  nonce  that  this  chapter  is  going
to  be  closed.'    This  done,  they  knock  the  same  as  the  Master,

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


\  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  231,

and  make  the  ordinary  acclamations.  The  Master  leaves  his
place,  makes  his  obeisance,  embraces  all  the  Knights,  and  says,
'Profound  peace.9  All  the  brethren  do  the  same.  The  Most
Wise  then  says,  (having  first  saluted  with  his  mallet,)  'My  breth-
.  lea,  this  Sovereign  Chapter  of  Rose  Croix  is  closed;  let  as  do
our  duty.'  They  all  exclaim  Vivat.  The  Master  says,  'Let  us
go,  my  brethren,  and  make  the  reflection  which  our  work  re-
quires; let  us  go,  and  return  in  peace.'  The  brethren  take  the
buckles  out  of  their  shoes,  and  wear  their  shoes  in  the  form  of
slippers.  The  only  banquet,  or  ceremony,  of  the  table,  used  in
the  chapters  of  Rose  Croix,  is  the  following,  which  is  indispen-
sably necessary,  being  in  commemoration  of  the  repast  of  our
Saviour,  which  he  gave  at  Emmaus,  when  he  made  himself
known  to  his  discij^es  after  his  resurrection.

The  Most  Wise  orders  the  youngest  Knight  to  go  and  prepare
every  thing  for  their  repast;  he  goes  into  an  apartment  appropri-
ated to  this  purpose*  and  covers  the  table  with  a  white  cloth,  and
places  thereon  a  loaf  of  white  bread  in  a  plate  in  the  centre  of  a
triangle,  formed  with  three  candlesticks,  in  which  must  be  candles
of  white  or  yellow  wax.  He  then  takes  to  the  Master,  wands  of
six  feet  high,  who  receives  them  and  returns  them  to  the  candi-
date, who  presents  one  to  each  Knight.  They  then  follow  the
Master  to  the  banquet,  where  they  place  themselves  round  the
table,  and  standing  with  their  heads  uncovered,  except  the  Mas-
ter, who  puts  on  his  hat  after  prayer.

Prayer. — Sovereign  Creator  o  all  things,  who  provides  for  all
our  necessities  and  wants,  bless  this  food  of  which  we  are  now
going  to  partake,  that  we  may  receive  it  for  thy  honor  and  glory,
and  for  our  satisfaction  and  refreshment.  Amen.

The  Master  breaks  the  bread  and  takes  a  pieee>then  passes  It
to  the»right  for  the  rest;  and  when  they  are  all  provided,  they  eat
it.  The  young  admitted  Knight  brings  a  goblet  of  wine  which
he  places  in  the  middle  of  the  table.  The  Master  takes  it,  and
makes  the  sign  of  the  Rose  Croix,  drinks,  and  presents  the  gob-
let to  the  brother  next  to  him,  who  drinks,  and  passes  it  round  till
it  comes  to  the  Master  again,  who  goes  with  all  the  Knights,  and
throws  what  is  left  into  the  fire,  being  all  kneeling  on  one  knee,
*  in  the  manner  of  making  an  offering: — they  all  rise,  when  the
Master  embraces  them,  and  says,  'Peace  be  among  you;'  they
answer,  'Be  it  so:  Amen.9  They  go  to  the  other  chamber,  where  *
they  put  their  buckles  in  their  shoes  and  retire.*

*  The  youngest  Knignt  is  to  clearHhe  table,  and,  during  the  whole  cere-
mony of  the  repast,  the  most  profound  silence  is  to  be  observed.  No  ser-
vants can  be  employed  in  this  office,  as  all  the  brethren  are  equal.    In  some

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


232  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

The  feast  of  this  chapter  is  on  Shrove  Tuesday,  which  cannot
be  dispensed  with;  and  if  there  is  but  one  Knight  in  a  place,  he
must  absolutely  perform  the  ceremony  of  this  festival,  that  he
may  reunite  himself  in  spirit  with  his  brethren,  who  do  the  same.
•  If  he  is  travelling  on  the  road,  and  meets  a  brother,  they  are
obliged  to  go  to  some  convenient  house  to  celebrate  it.

Ordinances. — The  Knights  of  the  Rose  Croix  have  the  privi-
lege of  holding  the  mallet  of  the  Master  in  all  lodges;  but  if  they
do  not  choose  to  receive  it,  they  place  themselves  at  the  side  of
the  Master,  taking  rank  of  all  the  officers.  If  the  Master,  through
ignorance  of  his  quality,  does  not  make  him  that  polite  offer,  he
must  seat  himself  on  the  floor,  at  the  column  of  the  Entered  Ap-
prentice. When  a  Knight  signs  a  masonic  paper,  he  must  affix
his  rank  to  his  signature,  and  also  seal  it  with  his  coat  of  arms; —

C.  S.  P.  D.  R.  C.   f^  or  K.  C.  P.  of  R.  C.

Where  there  is  a  regular  chapter,  they  must  assemble,  at  least,
six  times  a  year;  viz:  The  Annual  Feast — Shrove  Tuesday —
Tuesday  after  Easter — The  Day  of  Ascension,  and  All  Saints'
Day;  exclusive  of  two  Grand  Festivals  of  St  Johns,  which  can-
not be  dispensed  with.  In  a  Constituted  Chapter,  there  must  be,
at  least,  three,  till  the  number  becomes  greater;  then  the  officers
are  elected  as  in  other  lodges.  The  election  is  made  the  Tues-
day after  Easter,  when  they  enter  into  their  charge,  and  the  for-
mer officers  are  to  render  an  account  of  their  proceedings  for  the
year  past.

They  are  obliged  to  be  charitable  to  all  the  poor,  particularly
to  all  distressed  Masons.  They  must  visit  the  prisoners.  If  a
Knight  falls  sick,  they  are  obliged  to  visit  him,  and  pay  particular
attention  that  he  wants  for  nothing  which  they  can  supply  him
with.  On  the  death  of  a  Knight,  he  shall  be  decorated  with  his
ribbon  and  jewel  round  his  neck,  and  his  funeral  shall  be  attend-
ed by  all  the  Knights,  clothed  in  all  their  orders,  if  it  can  be  done
without  causing  reflection  on  the  order;  after  which,  a  chapter
shall  be  opened.  The  brother  who  succeeds  him,  shall  wear  his
jewel,  covered  with  black  crape,  for  three  days.  In  the  French
Chapters  it  is  usual  to  keep  the  anniversary  of  his  death,  and  pro-
nounce an  eulogy  on  his  virtues.

It  is  forbid,  under  any  pretext  whatsoever,  for  one  brother  to*
fight,  or  combat,  with  another.     No  brother  can  absent  himself

chapters  they  eat  a  roasted  lamb,  but  it  must  have  the  head  and  feet  on,
which  are  cut  off  in  the  chapter  and  thrown  into  the  fire,  as  an  offering,  be-
fore any  one  eats:  Here  there  must  be  only  one  knife  and  one  goblet,  but  no
bottle;  but  this  ceremony  has  been  abolished — the  first  being  only  made
use  of.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.  238

from  the  chapter,  unless  in  case  of  sickness,  or  other  good  and
sufficient  reasons,  of  which  the  chapter  must  approve.  The
chapter  must  only  be  lighted  with  wax  candles,  or  sweet  oil. —
Finis.


GRAND  PONTIFF,

OR

SUBLIME  SCOTCH  MASONRY.

Decorations  of  the  Lodge,  Titles,  SfC. — The  hangings  of  this
lodge  must  be  blue,  spread  with  gold  stars.  The  Master  of  this
lodge  goes  by  the  title  of  Thrice  Puissant:  he  is  clothed  in  a
"white  satin  robe,  and  sits  on  a  throne  under  a  blue  canopy,  behind
which,  in  a  niche,  is  a  transparent  light,  sufficient  to  light  the
iodge.  The  Thrice  Puissant  holds  a  sceptre  in  his  hand.  There
is  only  one  Warden,  who  sits  opposite  the  Thrice  Puissant  in  the
west,  and  holds  a  golden  staff  in  his  hand.  All  the  rest  of  the
brethren  are  clothed  in  white  robes,  and  have  the  title  of  Faithful
and  True  Brothers.  They  all  wear  a  blue  satin  fillet  round  their
foreheads,  with  12  golden  stars  embroidered  thereon.

The  draft  (or  carpet,)  of  the  lodge,  represents  a  square  city,
or  celestial  Jerusalem,  descending  on  clouds  from  heaven,  to
crush  the  remains  of  the  present  Jerusalem,  or  a  three  headed
serpent,  or  hydra,  in  chains,  representing  the  wickedness  of  the
infidels  yet  remaining  there.  This  celestial  Jerusalem  has  twelve
gates,  three  on  each  side.  In  the  centre  of  the  city  is  a  tree  which
bears  twelve  different  kinds  of  fruits.  The  present  Jerusalem
underneath,  seems  to  be  turned  upside  down,  and  the  celestial
Jerusalem  appears  to  crush  the  three  headed  serpent.  On  one
side  of  the  draft  you  see  a  high  mountain.

To  open  the  lodge. — The  Thrice  Puissant  strikes  12,  at  equal
distances,  and  then  demands  the  following  questions: — Q  Bro-
ther, what's  the  o'clock?  .#.  The  hour  foretold.  Mast  'Faith-
ful brethren,  the  whole  is  Alpha,  Omega,  and  Emanuel:  Let

u^  work.'     Then  the  Warden  knocks  12,  as  above,  and  says,

'Faithful  brethren,  the  lodge  of  Grand  Pontiff  is  open.'

Form  of  reception.— The  candidate  must  be  decorated  with
the  attributes  of  Knight  of  the  East  and  West,  a  blue  satin  fillet
with  twelve  gold  stars,  tied  round  his  forehead,  before  he  enters.
He  is  immediately  introduced  into  the  lodge,  when  the  Warden
places  him  on  the  top  of  a  mountain,  and  asks  him,  'Brother,  do

V2


d  by  Google


3g4  LfGBT    0*  MASONRY*    ,

you  detest  what  is  perfidious?  D*  you  promise  that  you  wiH  break
all  conununications,  correspondence,  and  friendship  with  those
who  ate  so?'  The  candidate  answers,  (I  promise  and  swear.'
Then- the  Warden  leaves  the  candidate,  and  comes  down  the
mountain  backwards,  and  goes  to  the  celestial  city,  and  with  a
surveyor's  chain  measures  the  four  sides  of  it,  when  he  goes  to
the  candidate  again,  and  tells  him,  'Brother,  that  city  (pointing  to
it,)  measures  12,000  furlongs  each  side.'  He  then  takes  the
candidate  by  the  hand,  and  both  come  down  backwards.  He
places  him  before  the  draft,  facing  the  Thrice  Puissant.  After  a
minute's  silence,  he  makes  him  take  three  square  steps  towards
the  chained  serpent,  then  one  step  on  each  side  of  the  three  heads,
he  then  kneels  three  times  with  his  right  knee,  holding,  at  the
same  time,  his  right  hand  horizontally  towards  the  Thrice  Puis-
sant [This  ceremony  is  instead  of  an  obligation.  ]  The  Thrice
Puissant  orders  htm  to  retreat  three  steps,  which  again  brings  him
to  the  bottom  of  the  draft,  where  the  Warden  gives  him  the  sign,
token,  and  word.  The  order  is  a  broad  red  ribbon,  with  twelve
golden  stars  embroidered  thereon.  It  is  worn  from  the  right
shoulder  to  the  left  hip.

The  jewel  is  a  square  of  gold;  on  one  side  is  engraved  Alpha,
on  the  other,  Omega.

LECTURE.

Q.   What  are  you?     A.   I  am  a  Sublime  {rrand  Pontiff.      Q.
Where  have  you  received  this  degree?     A.  In  a  place  where  there
is  neither  sun  nor  moon  to  light  it     Q.  Explain  this  to  me?     A.
As  the  Grand  Pontiff  never  wants  any  artificial  light,  the  faithful
and  true  brothers,  the  Sublime  Grand  Pontiffs,  do  not  want  riches
or  titles  to  be  admitted  into  the  Sublime  Degrees,  as  they  pTove
themselves  worthy  of  admittance  by  their  attachment  to  Mason-
ry,— the  faithful  discharge  of  their  several  obligations. — their  vir-
tue, and  true  and  sincere  friendship  for  their  brethren  in  general.
Q.    What  does  the  draft  of  this  lodge  represent?      A     A  square
city  of  four  equal  sides,  with  three  gates  on  each  side',  in  the  mid-
dle of  which  is  a  tree,  which  bears  twelve  different  kinds  of  fruit
The  city  is  suspended  as  on  clouds,  and  seem  to  crush  a  three
headed  serpent.      Q.    Explain  this  to  me.     A.    The  square  eiiy
represents  ancient  Free  Masonry,  under  the  title  of  Grand  Pon^
tiff,  which  comes  down  from  hemen  to  replace  the  ancient  temple,
which  is  represented  by  the  ruins  and  the  three  headed  aerpept
underneath.      Q.  How  comes  Masonry  to  have  fallen  into  wiin,
since  we  are  bound  to  .support  it,  and  are  attached  to  it  by  *¥r
obligations,  which  cannot  be  equivocal?    A.  It  tsqa so  dteret4  jn>

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   Off   MASONRY.  23&

otrf  time*,  which  we  Itmnfrom  tfcc writes*  afSU  John,  wuwmwe
Jbuw  to  Aotw  4ten  tfa  jlrt^  Mason  who  held  a  Lodge  <f  Perfec-
tion. Q.  Where  does  St.  John  say-thisl  A.  /»  &i»  revelation,
where  he  speaks  of Babylon  and  tht  celestsai  Jerusalem.  Q.  What
signifies  the  tree,  with  the  twelve  different  fruits,  which  stands  in
the  centre  of  the  square  city?  A.  The  tree  of  life  is  placed  there
to  make  us  understand,  where  the  sweets  of  life  arete  be  founds  and
the  twelve  fruits  signify  *hat  w  meet  in  entry  month  to  instruct
oursehes  mutually,  and  sustain  each  other  against  the  attacks  of
our  armies.  Q.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  satin  fillet  with  the
twelve  golden  stars,  which  the  candidate  wore  round  his  forehead?
A.  It  procures  those  who  wear  it  an  entrance  into  our  lodge,  a?
it  likewise  procures  the  entrance  of  those  who  near  it,  into  the  ce-
lestial Jerusalem,  as  St.  John  himself  informs  us.  Q.  What  is
the  meaning  of  the  twelve  golden  stars  on  the  fillet  of  the  candi-
date, and  on  those  of  the  brethren?  A.  They  represent  the
twelve  angels,  who  watched  at  the  twelve  gates  of  the  celestial
Jerusalem.  Q.  What  signifies  the  blue  hangings,  with  the  gold-
en stars  thereon?  A.  The  blue  is  the  symbol  of  lenity,  fidelity,
and  sweetness,  which  ought  to  be  the  share  of  every  faithful  and
true  brother;  and  the  stars  represent  those  Masons  who  have  giv-
en proof  of  their  attachment  to  the  statutes  and  rules  of  the  order,
which,  in  the  end,  wid  make  them  deserving  of  entering  into  the
celestial  Jerusalem.  Q.  What  age  are  you?  A.  I  reckon  no
more.  Q.  What  remains  for  you  to  .acquire?  A.  The  sublime
truths  of  the  degrees  above  this.  Q.  What  is  your  name?  A.
Faithful  and  true  brother.

To  close.— Thrice  Puissant.  'What's  the  o'clock?'  Wavdsn.
'Thrice  Puissant,  the  hour  accomplished.'  Thrice  Puis.  'Alpha
and  Omega:  let  us  rejoice,  my  brethren.'  He  then  strikes  12,
which  is  repeated  by  the  Warden,  and  the  lodge  is  closed.— Fjtm.


VENERABLE  GRAND  MASTER

OF  ALL  SYMBOLIC  LODGES,

Sotomtfiu  tyvivim  of  Jttaeonrj?,

MASTER  ADVITIAM,  Oil   GRAND   PONTIFF.

Decorations,  $c  This  lodge  must  be  decorated  with  blue
and  yellow.  The  Grand  Master  sits  on  a  throne,  elevated  by
nine  steps,  under  a  canopy,  before  it  is  an  altar,  on  which  is  a
sword,  bible,  compass,  square,  mallet,  &c  as  in  the  Symbolic
Lodges,    Betweenibc  ater  and  the  s»uth  is  a  imadlestwk  with

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


336  LIGHT  OH  MASONRY.

nine  branches,  which  is  always  lighted  in  this  lodge.  There  are
two  Wardens  in  the  west  The  Grand  Master  represents  Cyrus
Artaxerxes,  wearing  his  royal  ornaments  and  a  large  blue  and  yel-
low ribbon  crossing  each  other.

To  €jpeti— Grand  Master.  I  desire  to  open  the  Lodge.  He
then  descends  to  the  lowest  step  of  the  throne,  and  when  he  is
assured  that  the  lodge  is  tyled,  he  knocks  1  and  2  with  his  mallet
Each  Warden  repeats  the  same,  which  makes  9.  Gr.  Master.
'Where  is  your  Master  placed?'  War.  'In  the  east*  G.  M.
'Why  in  the  east?9  War.  'Because  the  glorious  sun  rises  in  the
east  to  illumine  the  world.9  G.  M.  'As  I  sit  in  the  east,  I  open
this  lodge,  which  is  repeated  by  the  Wardens.'  Then  all  the
brethren  clap  with  their  hands  1  and  2.

Reception.  The  candidate  represents  Zerubbabel,  who  enters
the  lodge  by  himself,  without  being  introduced,  decorated  with
the  jewels  and  badges  of  the  highest  degrees  he  has  taken.  The
Wardens  take  him  by  the  hand  and  place  him  in  a  blue  elbow
chair,  opposite  to  the  Grand  Master,  who  demands  from  him  all
the  words  from  an  Entered  Apprentice  up  to  a  Gr.  Pontiff;  and
after  he  has  satisfied  the  Grand  Master,  and  is  found  worthy  to
hold  a  sceptre,  they  make  him  travel  nine  times  round  the  lodge,
beginning  in  the  south,  and  then  by  nine  square  steps  he  advan-
ces to  the  throne,  and  walks  over  two  drawn  swords,  laid  across.
There  must  be  a  pot  with  burning  charcoal  close  by  the  throne,
that  the  candidate  may  feel  the  heat  of  the  fire  while  taking  the
obligation,  in  doing  which,  he  lays  his  right  hand  on  the  bible,
which  is  covered  by  the  Grand  Master's  right  hand,  and  then
takes  the  following  obligation.

Obligation.     I,  ■   do  most  solemnly  and  sincerely  swear

and  promise  under  the  penalties  of  all  my  former  obligations,  to
protect  the  craft  and  my  brethren  with  all  my  might,  and  not  to
acknowledge  any  one  for  a  true  mason,  who  was  not  made  in  a
regularly  constituted  and  lawful  lodge.  I  furthermore  do  swear
that  I  will  strictly  observe  and  obey  all  the  statutes  and  regula-
tions of  the  lodge,  and  that  I  never  will  disclose  or  discover  the
secrets  of  this  degree,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  except  by
virtue  of  a  full  power  in  writing,  given  me  for  that  purpose  by
the  Grand  Inspector  or  his  deputy,  and  then  to  such  only  as
have  been  Masters  of  a  regular  lodge: — All  this  I  swear  under
the  penalties  of  being  for  ever  despised  and  dishonored  by  the
craft  in  general.  He  then  kisses  the  bible.  Here  follows  the>
signs,  token  and  word.

One  word  is which  signifies,  <I  am  what  I  am.'    This

is  also  the  name  of  the  man  who  found  the  cavern  where  the  lion

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.  237

hid,  who  kept  in  his  mouth  the  key  of  the  ark  of  alliance,  which

was  lost     The  second  word  is ,  which  is  the  name  of

him  who  fought  the  Hon  in  the  cavern.  The  lion  had  a  gold  col-
lar round  his  neck,  on  which  was  engraved  the  word  Jechson.
The  rest  is  an  enigma  to  you,  as  it  is  only  known  to  the  Sublime
Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret;  a  degree  which  you  cannot  receive
unless  you  crush  the  serpent  of  ignorance.     The  third  word  is

,  which  was  the  name  of  htm  who  laid  the  first  foundation

stone  of  the  temple,  rebuilt  by  the  Princes  of*  Jerusalem.  The
Jewel  is  a  triangle,  on  which  is  engraved  Secret,  and  is  suspend-
ed by  a  broad  blue  and  yellow  ribbon.

LECTURE.

Q.    Are  you  a  Grand  Master  of  all  Symbolic  Lodges?     A.
They  know  me  at  Jerusalem  to  be  such.      Q.    How  shall  I
know  that  you  are  a  6.  Master  of  all  Symbolic  Lodges?      A.
By  observing  my  zeal  in  rebuilding  the  temple.     Q.  Which  way
did  you  travel?     A.  From  the  south  to  the  east.     Q.  How  of-
ten?    A.  Nine.     Q.  Why  so  many?     A.  In  memory  of  the  G.
Masters  who  travelled  to  Jerusalem,    Q.  Can  you  give  me  their
names?      A.    Their  names  are  Esdras,  Zerubbabel,  Phachi,
Joshua,  Elial,  Toyada,  Homen,  Nehemias,  and  Malchias.
Q.    What  are  the  pass  words?      A.      ***      ***      ***
Q.  What  object  engaged  your  attention  most,  when  you  first  en-
tered the  lodge  of  Grand  Masters?      A.    The  candlestick,  with
nine  branches.      Q.    Why  are  the  nine  candles  therein  always
kept  burning  in  this  lodge?     A.    To  remind  us  that  there  cannot
be  less  than  nine  Masters  to  form  a  Grand  Master's  lodge.     Q.
What  were  your  reasons  for  wishing  to  be  admitted  and  received
in  this  lodge  of  Grand  Masters?      A.   That  I  might  receive  the
benefit  of  the  two  lights  I  was  unacquainted  with.      Q.    Have
you  received  those  lights,  and  in  what  manner?     A.  In  receiving
first  the  small  light.     Q.  Explain  this*     A.  When  I  was  receiv-
ed by  steel  and  fire.     Q.  What  signifies  the  steel?      A.    To  re-
mind us  of  the  steel  by  which  our  Most  Respectable  Chief,  Hi-
ram Abiif,  lost  his  life,  and  which  I  am  sworn  to  make  use  of,
whenever  I  can  revenge  that  horrible  murder  on  the  traitors  of
Masonry.     Q.  What  means  the  fire?     A.  To  put  us  in  mind  that
our  forefathers  were  purified  by  fire.     Q.  By  whom  was  you  re-
ceived?    A.  By  Cyrus.      Q.    Why  by  Cyrus?      A.    Because  it
was  he  who  ordered  Zerubbabel  to  rebuild  the  temple.   Q.  What,
did  you  promise  and  swear  to  perform  when  you  received  this
degree?    A.  I  swore  that  I  would  see  the  laws,  statutes,  and  reg-
ulations stricfly  observed  in  our  lodge,     Q.  What  was  your  name

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


238  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

before  you  received  this  degree?     A.  Zerubbabel.     Q.  What  is
your  name  now!    A.  Cyrus.     Q.  What  means  the  word,  Ani-
mani?    A.  *I  am  that  T  am,'  and  it  is  also  the  name  of  him  who
found  the  lion's  den*     Q.  Why  is  the  lodge  decorated  with  blue
and  yellow?      A.    To  remind  us  that  the  Eternal  appeared  to
Moses  on  mount  Sinai,  in  clouds  of  gold  and  azure,  when  He
gave  to  his  people  the  laws  of  infinite  wisdom.     Q.  Where  do
you  find  the  records  of  our  order?      A.    In  the  archives  of  Kil-
willin,  in  the  north  of  Scotland.      Q.    Why  did  you  travel  from
the  south  round  to  the  east?     A.  In  allusion  to  the  power  of  the
Grand  Architect  of  the  universe,  which  extends  throughout  all
the  world.     Q.  Why  did  you  \*ash  your  hands  in  the  fourteenth
degree?     A.  To  show  our  innocence.     Q.  Why  is  the  history  of
Hiram  Abiff  so  much  spoken  of?     A.  To  put  us  always  in  mind
that  he  chose  rather  to  sacrifice  his  life,  than  reveal  the  secrets  of
Masonry.      Q.    Why  is  the  triangle,  with  the  word  secret  on  it,
considered  as  the  most  precious  jewel  in  Masonry?     A.  Because
by  its  justness,  equality,  and  proportion  it  represents  our  redemp-
tion.    Q.  By  what  mark  was  the  place  discovered,  where  Hiram
Abiff  was  buried  by  his  assassins?      A.   By  a  sprig  of  cassia,
(say  granate.)     Q.  For  what  reasons  do  the  Master  Masons  in
the  Symbolic  Lodges,  speak  of  a  sprig  of  cassia?     A.  Because
the  Sublime  Grand  Elected  descendants  of  the  ancient  Patriarchs
did  not  think  proper  to  give  the  real  name,  or  truth,  of  Masonry;
therefore,  they  agreed  to  say  that  it  was  a  sprig  of  cassia,  because
it  had  a  strong  smell*     Q.  What  are  the  reasons  for  the  different
knocks  «t  the  door  to  gain  admittance!      A.    To  know  and  be
assured  that  they  have  passed  the  different  degrees,  which  num-
ber we  must  understand.     Q.  For  what  reasons  dp  we  keep  our
mysteries  with  such  circumspection  and  secrecy?      A.    For  fear
there  might  be  found  amongst  us  some  traitorous  villains,  similar
to  the  three  Fellow  Crafts  who  murdered  our  chief,  h  iram  Abiff.
Q.    What  is  the  reason  that  the  Grand  Master  of  all  lodges  is
received  with  so  much  honor  m  the  Symbolic  Lodges?  A.  Those
homages  are  due  to  their  virtues,  as  Princes  of  Masons,  whose
firmness  has  been  shown  on  so  many  occasions,  by  spilling  their
blood  in  support  of  Masonry  and  the  fraternity.     Q.  Why  do  we
applaud  with  our  hands?     A.  In  that  manner  we  express  our  hap-
piness and  satisfaction  at  having  done  a  good  action,  and  render-
ed justice.     Q.  What  reflections  occur,  when  contemplating  the
conduct  of  Solomon?     A.  That  a  wise  man  may  err,  and  when
he  is  sensible  of  his  fault,  corrects  himself  by  acknowledging
that  fiadt,  whereby  he  claims  the  indulgence  of  his  brethren.   Q.
Why  do  tiie  Symbolic  Lodges  take  the  name  of  St.  John,  of  Je-

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


ught  on  ausovur.  239

rusalem?     A.    Because  in  the  Jime  of  the  crusades,  die  Perfect
Masons,  Knights,  and  Princes  communicated  their  mysteries  to
the  Knights  of  that  order;  whereupon  it  was  determined  to  cele-
brate their  festival  annually,  on  St  John's  day,  being  under  the
same  law.      Q.    Who  was  the  first  architect  that  conducted  die
works  of  Solomon's  temple?      A.    Hiram  Abiff;  which  signifies
die  inspired  man.     Q.   Who  laid  the  first  stone?      A.    Solomon
cut  and  laid  the  first  stone,  which  afterwards  supported  the  tem-
ple.    Q.  Was  there  any  thing  enclosed  in  that  stone?     A.  Yes;
some  characters,  which  were  like  the  name  of  the  Grand  Archi-
tect of  the  universe,  which  was  only  known  to  Solomon.      Q.
What  stone  was  it?     A.  An  agate,  of  a  foot  square.      Q.    What
was  the  form  of  it?     A.  Cubical.     Q.  At  what  tune  of  the  day
was  the  stone  laid?     A.  Before  sunrise.     Q.  For  what  reason?
A.    To  show  that  we  must  begin  early  and  work  with  vigilance
and  assiduity.      Q.    What  cement  did  he  make  use  of?     A.  A
cement  which  was  composed  of  the  finest  and  purest  flour,  milk,
oil,  and  wine.      Q.    Is  there  any  meaning  in  this  composition?
A.    Yes;  when  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  universe  determined
to  create  the  world,  he  employed  his  sweetness,  bounty,  wisdom,
and  power.      Q.  What  is  the  reas6n  why  the  number  81  is  held
in  such  esteem  among  Princes  of  Masons?     A.    Because  that
number  explains  the  triple  alliance  which  the  Eternal  operates  by
the  triple  triangle,  which  was  seen  at  the  time  Solomon  consecrat-
ed the  temple  to  God;  and  also  that  Hiram  Abiff  was  81  years
of  age,  when  he  was  murdered.      Q.    Was  any  thing  else  per-
ceived at  the  consecration?     A.   A  perfume  which  not  only  filled
the  temple,  but  all  Jerusalem.      Q.    Who  destroyed  the  temple?
A.    Nebuchadnezzar.      Q.    How  many  years  after  it  was  built?
A.    470  years,  six  months  and  ten  days  after  its  foundation?     Q.
Who  built  the  second  temple?     A.  Zerubbabel,  by  the  grant  and
aid  of  Cyrus,  kiug  of  Persia.      It  was  finished  in  the  reign  of
Darius,  when  he  was  known  to  be  a  Prince  of  Jerusalem.     Cy-
rus not  only  gave  Zerubbabel  and  the  captive  Masons  their  lib-
erty, but  ordered  all  the  treasures  of  the  old  temple  to  be  restor-
ed to  them,  that  they  might  embellish  die  second  temple,  which
he  had  ordered  Zerubbabel  to  build.     Q.  What  signifies  the  jew-
el of  the  Right  Worshipful  Grand  Master  of  all  lodges  being  a
triangle?     A.  He  wears  it  in  remembrance  of  the  presents  given
by  monarchs  and  the  protectors  of  the  order,  in  recompense  for
their  zeal,  fervor,  and  constancy.     Q.  What  way  have  you  trav-
elled to  become  a  Bight  Worshipful  Grand  Master  of  all  Lodges
and  Grand  Patriarch?    A.  By  the  four  elements.     Q.  Why  by
the  four  elements?    A.  To  put  us  in  mind  of  this  world,  and  the


d  by  Google  N


240  LIGHT  ON  MA80NRT.

troubles  in  which  we  lire;  to  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  impuri-
ties, and  thereby  render  ourselves  worthy  of  perfect  virtue.     Q.
1  Where  was  the  lodge  of  Grand  Masters  first  held?      A.    In  the
sacred  vault,  east  of  the  temple.  Q.  Where  is  that  lodge  held  at
present?     A.  All  over  the*  world,  agreeably  to  the  orders  of  Sol-
omon, when  he  told  us  to  travel  and  to  spread  over  the  universe,
to  teach  Masonry  to  those  whom  we  should  find  worthy  of  it,  but
especially  to  those  who  should  receive  us  kindly,  and  who  were
virtuous  men.     Q.  What  did  Solomon  give  you  to  remember  him
at  your  departure?     A*  He  rewarded  the  merits  of  all  the  work-
men, and  showed  to  the  Chief  Master  the  cubic  stone  of  agate,
on  which  was  engraved,  on  a  gold  plate,  the  sacred  name  of  God.
Q.  How  was  the  agate  stone  supported?     A.  On  a  pedestal  of  a
triangular  form,  surrounded  by  three  cross  pillars,  which  were  also
surrounded  by  a  circle  of  brass.      Q.    * » hat  signifies  the  three
pillars?     A.  Strength,  wisdom,  and  beauty.      Q.    What  was  in
the  middle  of  the  circle?      A.    The  point  of  exactness,  which
teaches  us  the  point  of  perfection.     Q.  What  else  did  Solomon
give  you?     A.  The  great  sign  of  admiration  and  consternation,
by  which  I  am  known  by  a  brother.     He  also  put  a  ring  on  my
finger,  in  remembrance  of  my  alliance  with  virtue,  and  loaded  us
with  kindness.      Q.    Why  have  you  a  sun  on  the  Jewel  of  per-
fection?     A.    To  show  that  we  have  received  the  jull  light,  and
know  Masonry  in  its  perfection.     Q.  Who  destroyed  the  second
temple,  which  was  finished  by  the  Princes  of  Jerusalem?      A.
Pompey  began  its  destruction,  and  king  Herodes  the  Great  fin-
ished it.     Q.  Who  rebuilt  it  again?     A.  King  Herodes  repent-
ing the  action  he  had  unjustly  done,  recalled  all  the  Masons  to
Jerusalem  who  had  fled,  and  directed  them  to  rebuild  the  temple.
Q.  Who  destroyed  the  third  temple?      A.  Tito,  the  son  of  the
emperor  Vespasian.      The  Masons,  who,  with  sorrow,  saw  the
temple  again  destroyed,  departed  from  Rome,  after  having  em-
braced the  Catholic  religion,  and  determined  never  to  assist  in
constructing  another.     Q.  What  became  of  those  Masons  after-
wards?     A.    They  divided  themselves  into  several  companies
and  went  into  different  parts  of  Europe,  but  the  greatest  part  of
them  went  to  Scotland,  and  built  a  town  which  they  called  Kil-
willin:  at  this  time  there  is  a  lodge  thtre,  bearing  the  same  name.
Q.  What  happened  to  them  afterwards?     A.  27,000  of  the  Ma-
sons in  Scotland  determined  to  assist  the  Christian  Princes  and
Knights,  who  were  at  that  time  at  Jerusalem,  in  a  crusade  for  the
purpose  of  taking  the  Holy  Land  and  city  from  the  infidels  who
.were  then  in  possession  of  it;  and  they  accordingly  obtained
leave  of  the  Scotch  Monarch.     Q.   What  happened  most  re-
Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  241

inarkable  to  them?     A.  Their  bravery  and  good  conduct  gained
them  the  esteem  and  respect  of  all  the  Knights  of  St  John,  of
Jerusalem.     The  General  of  that  order  and  the  principal  officers
took  the  resolution  of  being  admitted  into  the  secrets  of  Mason-
ry, which  they  accordingly  received,  and  in  return  they  admitted
them  Scotch  Masons  into  their  order,  by  the  name  of  Rose
Croix,  or  Pelican.     Q.  What  became  of  those  Masons  after-
wards?    A.  After  the  crusade,  they  returned  and  spread  Mason-
ry throughout  all  Europe,  which  flourished  for  a  long  time  in
France  and  England;  but  the  Scotch,  to  their  great  praise  be  it
spoken,  were  the  only  people  who  kept  up  the  practice  of  it.    Q.
How  came  it  again  in  vogue  in  France?      A.    A  Scotch  noble-
man went  to  France  and  became  a  resident  at  Bordeaux,  where
he  established  a  Lodge  of  Perfection  from  the  members  of  the
lodge  in  1744,  in  which  he  was  assisted  by  a  French  gentleman,
who  took  great  pleasure  in  all  the  Masonic  Degrees.    This  still
exists  in  a  most  splendid  manner.      Q.    What  means  the  fire  in
our  lodge?     A.  Submission,  purification  of  morals,  and  equality
among  brethren.      Q.    What  signifies  the  air?      A.    The  purity,
virtue,  and  truth  of  this  degree.     Q.  What  does  the  sign  of  the
sun  mean?     A.  It  signifies  that  some  of  us  are  more  enlightened
than  others  in  the  mysteries  of  Masonry,  and  for  that  reason  we
are  often  called  Knights  of  the  Sun*     Q.  How  many  signs  have
you  in  this  degree  of  Grand  Pontiff,  which  is  Grand  Master  of
all  lodges?      A.  1st,  The  Sign  of  the  Earth,  or  Apprentice;  2d,
of  Water— Fellow  Craft;    3d,  of  Terror— the  Master;   4th,  of
Fire;  5th,  of  Air;  6th,  of  the  point  in  view;  7th,  of  the  Sun;  8th,
of  Astonishment;  9th,  of  Honor;  10th,  of  Stench,  or  strong  smell;
11th,  of  Admiration;  12th,  of  Consternation. — End  of  the  lec-
ture.

To  close. — The  Grand  Master  says,  'My  brother,  enter  into
the  cave  of  Silol — work  with  Grand  Rofadam — measure  your
steps  to  the  sun,  and  then  the  great  black  eagle  will  cover  you
with  his  wings,  to  the  end  of  what  you  desire,  by  the  help  of  the
Most  Sublime  Princes  Grand  Commanders.'  He  then  strikes  1
and  2,  makes  the  sign  of  the  four  squares,  which  is  repeated  by
the  Wardens  and  the  lodge  is  closed.

The  Examination  of  a  brother  in  the  foregoing  degree,  is  as
follows: —

Q.  From  whence  came  you?  A.  From  the  sacred  vault  at
Jerusalem.  Q.  What  are  you  come  to  do  here?  A.  I  am  come
to  see  and  visit  your  works  and  show  you  mine,  that  we  may  work
together  and  rectify  our  morals,  and,  if  possible,  sanctify  the  pro-
fane—but only  by  permission  of  a  Prince  Adept,  or  Prince  of  tho
W

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


242  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

Royal  Secret,  (if  one  is  present)  Q.  What  have  you  brought?
A.  Glory,  grandeur,  and  beauty.  Q.  Why  do  you  give  the
name  of  St.  John  to  our  lodge?  A.  Formerly  all  the  lodges
were  under  the  name  of  Solomon's  lodge,  as  the  founder  of  Ma-
sonry; but  since  the  crusades  we  have  agreed  with  the  Knights
Templars,  or  Hospitallers,  to  dedicate  them  to  St.  John,  as  he
was  the  support  of  the  Christians  and  the  new  laws.  Q.  What
do  you  ask  more?  A.  Your  will  and  pleasure  as  you  may  find
me  worthy,  obedient,  and  virtuous.


KNIGHTS  OF  THIS  ROYAL  AXE  OB  HACHB,  (HATCHET.)

SOMETIMES  CALLED

GRAND  PATRIARCH,  BY  THE  NAME  OF

PRINCE  OF  L.AB  ANUS.

This  meeting  is  called  a  College.

To  open. — The  Chief  Prince  says,  'To  order,  brethren;,  which
is  answered  by  the  Senior  and  Junior  Grand  Wardens  in  the  same
words.     After  some  silence  is  observed,  the  Chief  Prince  holds
up  both  his  hands,  the  ringers  and  thumbs  extended  as  wide  as .
possible,  and  says,  'The  trees  of  Lebanus  are  grown  up  and  fit
to  cut;'  on  which  all  the  brethren  hold  up  both  their  hands  in  the
same  manner,  then  let  them  fall  on  their  thighs,  in  allusion  that
they  are  cut  down,  in  order  to  be  used  for  holy  purposes;  viz:  1st.
They  were  used  for  the  building  of  Noah's  ark:    2d.  They  were
used  for  the  construction  of  the  Ark  of  Alliance:    3d.  For  the
use  of  Solomon's  temple.     The  Chief  Prince  then  says,
Noah,         \      The  answer  to  these  i  Japheth,
Bezaleel,     >  words  are  made  by  the  <  Eliab,
Sidonians,   )  Senior  Warden.  I  Lebanus.

Ong»n.— This  degree  was  established  on  the  three  abovemen-
tioned  occasions,  the  cutting  of  cedar  for  holy  purposes.  The
explanation  of  the  letters  on  the  Axe*  or  Jewel,  will  teach  you.

L,  on  one  side  of  the  handle,  is  Lebanon:  S,  on  the  top,  Sol-
omon: AB,  on  the  same  side,  Abda:  A,  on  the  same  side,  Adon-
iram:  C,  on  the  same  side,  Cyrus:  D,  on  the  same  side,  Darius:
X,  on  the  same  side,  Xerxes:  Z,  on  the  same  side,  Zerubbabel:
A,  on  the  same  side,  Ananias.

On  the  other  side  of  the  axe  are  the  following  initials: — S.  on
the  blade,  Sidonians:  N.  on  the  top  of  the  handle,  Noah:  S.  on


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  243

do.  Shem:  C.  on  do.  Chum:  I.  on  do.  Japheth:  M.  on  do.  Mo-
ses: B.  on  dp.  Bezaleel:  E.  on  do.  Eliab.

The  said  axe,  or  jewel,  must  be  crowned,  and  should  be  of
gold,  and  must  hang  on  the  breast  to  a  ribbon  of  the  colors  of  the
rainbow.  It  may  also  be  worn  from  the  right  shoulder  to  the  left
hip.

The  Sidomans  were  always  very  zealous  for  the  holy  enter-
prises; before  the  deluge,  they  employed  themselves  in  cutting
cedars  from  mount  Lebanon  for  the  construction  of  Noah's  ark,
under  the  conduct  of  Japheth.  The  descendants  of  them,  like-
wise, cut  cedars  from  mount  Lebanon,  that  were  grown  up  again,
for  the  construction  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant;  and  their  posteri-
ty also  cut  in  the  same  forest,  under  the  conduct  of  Prince  de
Heroden,  for  the  construction  of  the  first  temple  of  God,  by  the
orders  of  Solomon.  The  Samaritans  assisted  in  bringing  the
timbers  down  from  the  mount  to  the  seaside,  to  be  transported
from  thence  to  Joppa.

Those  zealous  descendants  have  since  been  employed  to  fell
the  timbers  of  the  mountain,  for  the  construction  of  the  second
temple,  by  the  orders  of  Cyrus,  Darius,  and  Xerxes,  under  the
direction  of  Zerubbabel.  This  celebrated  nation  formed  on  the
said  mountain  colleges,  or  meetings,  and  always  in  their  works
adored  the  Great  Architect  of  the  universe.  They  had  the  same
signs,  and  their  different  words  were  taken  from  the  different  hv
spectors  and  conductors;  as  Noah,  and  his  three  sons.  Noah
being  the  chief,  and  his  sons  the  conductors  and  ancient  patri-
archs, we  owe  the  knowledge  of  these  events  in  succession  of
time  since  the  deluge.

In  the  earliest  ages  of  time,  colleges  were  established  on  the
mountain,  for  the  construction  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  in
some  ages  after,  the  same  colleges  were  held  for  the  construction
of  Solomon's  temple.  That  wise  king  ordered  a  small  palace  to
be  built  on  mount  Lebanon,  which,  when  finished,  he  used  to  go
to  see  what  progress  the  workmen  had  made  in  hewing  and  squar-
ing the  cedars.  Thus  by  their  example,  we  preserve,  with  the
greatest  respect,  the  names  of  those  venerable  patriarchs,  and
also  the  memory  of  the  Sidonians.  The  initials  of  the  jewel
form  an  abridgment  of  this  interesting  history,  as  well  as  the  fig-
ure of  the  draft.  The  college  is  closed  in  the  same  manner  as  it
was  opened.


y  Google


244  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

CHIEF  OF  THE  TABERNACLE.

Decorations  of  the  Lodge.-— The  hangings  are  principally
white,  supported  by  others  of  red  and  black  here  and  there,  ac-
cording to  the  taste  of  the  architect  At  the  bottom  of  this  hall
is  a  sanctuary,  separated  from  the  upper  part  by  a  balustrade,
and  by  a  red  curtain  on  every  side*  In  the  sanctuary  there  is
placed  the  throne  over  a  platform,  upon  which  you  enter  by  sev-
en steps.  Before  the  throne  is  placed  a  table  covered  with  a  red
cloth — upon  the  altar  is  laid  the  Holy  Bible  and  a  poniard.-  Be-
side of  the  throne  there  is  the  ark  of  alliance,  crowned  by  a
glory,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  seen  God's  name,  (  X[)ff  )
and  at  the  sides  the  sun  and  the  moon.  To  the  right  of  the  first
altar  and  a  little  further  upwards  is  the  altar  of  sacrifices;  (Holy
courts.)  In  front  to  the  left,  is  the  altar  of  perfumes.  In  the
west,  two  chandeliers,  of  five  branches,  arrayed  in  a  pyramidial
form.     In  the  east  one  chandelier,  with  two  branches.

The  president  is  seated  on  the  throne,  and  the  Wardens  before
the  altar.  During  receptions  there  is  a  dark  apartment  with  an
altar  in  the  middle,  over  which  is  placed  a  light  and  thtee  human
skulls.     In  front  of  the  altar  there  is  a  .human  skeleton.

Titles. — The  presiding  officer  is  styled,  'Great  Sovereign
Sacrificer.'  In  the  French  lodge  he  is  styled,  'Grand  Com-
mander.' The  Wardens,  'High  Priests;'  the  others,  'LevitesS
The  lodge  is  styled  an  * Hierarchy.'  In  France  it  is  called,  'Sove-
reign Council.9  The  Chief  represents  Aaron,  the  Wardens,  his
sons,  Eleazer  and  Ithamar.  The  candidate  represents  Hamar.
He  should  be  introduced  covered,  hat  on,  sandals  on  his  feet  and
linen  small  clothes  on.  Hour  of  opening  is  when  the  descend-
ants of  Hiram  came  to  the  sacrifices.  Of  closing— when  the
sacrifice  is  consumed,  knocking  7  blows,  by  6  and  1.  The
candidate  knocks  and  repeats  the  following

Obligation. — I,  —  do  promise  and  swear  never  to  reveal  the
secrets  of  this  degree  to  any  person  in  the  world,  except  he  has
acquired  all  the  preceding  degrees,  and  then,  not  unless  within
the  body  of  a  Sovereign  Council  of  this  degree  of  Chief  of  the
Tabernacle,  regularly  holding  its  authority  from  some  legally  es-
tablished Supreme  Council  of  the  33d  degree:  nor  will  I  be  pres-
ent, or  aid,  or  assist  at  the  communicating  them,  unless  with  the
abovenamed  authority,  regularly  obtained.  And  incase  I  should
violate  this  my  sacred  obligation,  I  perjure  myself.  I  consent  that
the  earth  should  be  opened  before  my  eyes,  and  that  I  should  be
engulfed  (swallowed  up,)  even  to  my  neck,  and  thus  miserably

Digitized  by  GoOgle


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  245.

{nerisb.  To  the  fulfilment  of  which,  may  God  preserve  me  in
nay  senses.  Amen*  In  token  of  your  sincerity  in  this  obligation
you  will  kiss  the  Bible.  (Nadab  and  Abihu,  Aaron's  two  sons,
were  punished  in  this  manner  for  their  crimes.  Numbers,  3d  ch.)

Dress. — The  Chief,  or  Grand  Sacrificer,  wears  a  large  red
tunic,  over  which  is  placed  another  of  yellow,  shorter  than  the
first  and  without  sleeves.  Upon  his  head  is  a  mitre  of  gold  cloth;
upon  the  front  is  painted  or  embroidered,  a  Delta,  with  the  inef-
fable name.  About  this  dress  he  puts  a  black  sash  with  a  silver
fringe,  from  which  hangs  (by  a  red  cockade,)  a  poniard.  This
sash  is  worn  from  left  to  right.  The  two  High  Priests,  or  War-
dens, have  the  same  dress,  with  the  exception  of  the  Delta  upon
the  mitre,  which  they  do  not  use.  The  Levites  wear  white  tunic,
tied  with  a  red  belt,  with  a  gold  fringe.  From  this  belt,  by  a
black  cockade,  is  suspended  a  thurible,  (censor,)  which  is  the
jewel  of  this  degree.

Apron. — The  apron  is  white,  lined  with  deep  scarlet,  and  bor-
dered with  red,  blue,  and  purple  ribbons.  In  the  middle,  it  has
a  gold  chandelier  of  seven  branches,  and  on  the  flap  a  myrtle  in
violet  color.  The  jewel,  which  is  a  thurible,  is  sometimes  worn
from  a  broad  sash  of  yellow,  purple,  blue,  and  scarlet  ribbon,
from  the  left  shoulder  to  the  right  hip.

PRIJTCE  OF  THE  TABERNACLE*

Decorations  of  the  Lodge  Rooms. — This  lodge  consists  of  two
apartments,  the  first  of  which  proceeds  directly  into  the  second^
and  is  called  the  vestibules,  where  the  brothers  clothe  them-
selves. It  is  ornamented  with  the  different  attributes  of  Free
Masonry.  The  second  apartment  is  made  completely  circular,  by
means  of  the  suit  of  hangings.  The  decoration  of  this  room  va-
ries agreeably  to  the  three  points  of  reception.  In  its  middle,  is
placed  a  chandelier,  with  seven  branches,  and  each  branch  with
seven  lights;  in  all  forty-nine  lights.

Apparel. — A  blue  silk  (taffeta,  or  sarcenet,)  tunic;  the  collar
of  which  is  decorated  with  rays  of  gold,  representing  a  glory.
The  surplice  is  sprinkled  with  gold  stars.  Upon  the  head,  a
close  crown,  encompassed  by  stars  and  surrounded  by  a  Delta.
The  sash  is  a  broad  watered  scarlet  ribbon,  worn  as  a  collar,  or
as  a  sash  from  right  to  left.

Apron. — The  apron  is  white  bordered  with  crimson.     In  the
French  lodges,  white,  lined  with  deep  scarlet,  and  bordered
with  green.     On  its  middle  is  painted,  or  embroidered,  in  red,  a
representation  of  the  tabernacle.    The  flap  is  sky  blue*
W2

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


246  LIGHT   ON  MASONBr.

Titles. — This  assemblage  is  called  a  'Hierarchy.'  The  Chief
Prince  is  called,  'Most  PowBEFtiL.'  There  are  three  Wardens
styled  'PotvetfulS-^ the  first  placed  io  the  south— the  second,  in
(he  west— and  the  third,  in  the  north.  The  officers  of  this  hie-
rarchy represents  Mosas,  the  giver  of  the  law,— Aason,  tbeChief
Priest, — Bezaleel,  the  son  of  Uw,- Ahouab,  the  son  of  Ami-
sAMAca^  The  candidate  represents  Eleazer,  win  succeeded
Aaron  in  the  duties  of  the  tabernacle.

To  open  the  Hierarchy. ~-J\to*t8.  *  Powerful,  are  we  weft  ty*.
ed  and  in  perfect  security;  arid  are  all  present,  Princes  of  the
Tabernacle!'  Aaron.  'We  are,  Most  Powerful,  insecurity;  and
all  present,  are  regular  Princes  of  the  Tabernacle.'  Mou».
'What  is  the  o'clock^  Adnm.  'It  is  the  first  hour  of  the  first  day
of  the  seven,  for  building  this  hierarchy.  It  is  the  first  of  the  day
of  hfe,  and  the  sweetness  of  the  seven.'  Moses.  'Since  k  is  so,
give  notice  that  I  am  about  to  open  this  Sovereign  Council  of
the  hierarchy.'  Aaron.  'Bevaleei  and  Moimb  repeat'  The
Chief  Prince  gives  6  equal  and  1  loud  taps,  and  the  Wardens  ail
repeat  them,  one  after  the  other,  when  Moses  says,  'I  declare
this  Sovereign  Council  duly  opened.

Form  of  Recefrtion.*-The  candidate  is  first  washed  in  water,
as  in  Exodus,  25th  chap,  from  1st  to  40th  verse.  He  is  brought
to  the  altar  by  six  equal  and  one  Jong  steps,  when  he  kneels  and
takes  the  following

Obligation.— I, do  promise  and  swear  that  I  will  never

reveal  to  any  person  in  the  world  whatever,  the  secrets  of  this
Degree  of  Prince  of  the  Tabernacle;  and  that  I  never  will  con-
fer them,  nor  aid,  or  assist  in  conferring  them  on  any  person,  or
persons,  by  my  presence,  Or  otherwise,  exeept  un»  =er  an  authority
regularly  obtained  from  some  Supreme  Conner!  of  the  33d  De-
gree, Which  has  <been  eonstitoJtionatly  established,  giving  fdfl
power  so  to  do.  That  1  will  stand  to,  and  abide  by,  all  the  laws,
rules,  and  regulations  which  belong  to  this  degree,  or  tnay  regu-.
larry  emanate  from  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  S3d  Degree,  un-
der which  we  are  now  acting;  and  in  case  I  should  violate  this
sacred  obligation,  I  consent  to  be  stoned  to  death,  (as  St.  Ste-
phen Was,)  and  that  my  body  be  left  to  rot  afbove  ground,  depriv-
ed of  burial.  For  the  faithful  performance  of  which,  may  fhe>
Almighty  Architect  df  the  universe  preserve  me.  Amen.  In
tofeetLofyour  sincerity  in  this  obligation  you  will  kiss  the  book.

The  Chief  Prince  approaches  him  (lie  still  kneeling;)  with  a
tatf  of  oil  and  a  trowel,  and  thus  ^rbceeds^-^Janotirt,  Weazer,
%  lUgia  w*r,  4hy  right  eye,  **<*  thy  right  thumb,  itith  the  kdlu
0tl94*ttfan>of>fa)ihtf*g  **pmm4fr6iiiiht  foibles  ofttev>erfa\


d  by  Google


LIGHT  ON  MA.SONRT.  247

und  to  set  thee  apart  of  well  doers  in  this  tabernacle  of  clay;  to
be  raised  at  the  great  and  awful  day  of  judgment,  aw  a  shining
monument  of  God's  glory,  in  the  house  not  made  with  hands  eter-
nal in  the  Heavens.9

0  Jewel. — The  jewel  of  a  Prince  of  the  Tabernacle  is  the  letter
A,  Hi  gold,  worn  from  a  collar  of  broad  crimson  ribbon. '

History. — The  history  of  this  degree  may  be  found  in  the  or-
ders which  the  Almighty  gave  to  Moses  and  to  the  children  of
Israel,  to  depart  from  Egypt  and  go  to  the  promised  land,  and
there  to  build  him  a  tabernacle.     Exodus,  ch.  25.

Table  Ceremony,  observed  by  the  Chiefs  and  Princes  of  the
Tabernacle.  The  table  is  round  and  the  victuals  are  not  placed
on  it,  but  successively  presented  to  the  brothers  in  turn,  who  are
served  each  to  his  taste.  In  the  middle  of  the  table  is  a  cluster
of  inflamed  hearts  (painted,)  and  some  incense — there  must  not
be  but  seven  lights  on  the  table.

Manner  of  Toasting.  First  Toast.  The  Master  says,  cThe
warm  mid-day  of  our  solemnities,  invite  our  inclinations  to  neu-
libations.

Let  us  charge. — 'Powerful  brother  Junior  Warden,  what  con-
tinuation of  success  do  you  announce  to  us?'  J  W.  answers
according  to  the  ritual.  Jun.  Warden.  'Powerful  brothers  War-
dens, and  yon  Powerful  brothers  of  the  hierarchy,  let  us  cele-
brate the  grandeur  of  the  glorious  destiny  which  associates  us.
lirink  off  the  cup  at  one  draught.'

Second  Toast.  The  Most  Powerful,  or  Chief  Prince  says,
'The  warm  mid-day  of  our  solemnities  invite  our  inclinations  to
new  libations.

Let  us  charge. — 'Powerful  brother  Senior  Warden,  what  is
the  hourt*  Sen.  Warden,  (From  the  ritual  answers.)  C.  P.
'How  do  you  combine  talents?'  (Answer  by  ritual.)  C.  P.
'Where  are  our  brothers?'  S.  W.  'The  Sovereign  Master  of
the  universe  directs  them  in  the  lodge,  and  preserves  them  in  the
hierarchy.'  C.  P.  'Powerful  brothers  of  the  Hierarchal  Lodge,
I  give  yon  the  health  of  all  Free  Masons,  elected,  or  to  be  elect-
ed, for  the  unity  of  the  seven  and  of  three.

Third  Toast.  The  Chief  Prince  orders  to  charge  the  censors
agreeably  to  the  ritual  and  says,  'Powerful  brothers,  let  us  drink
to  the  health  of  the  President  of  the  United  States,  and  to  all  in
authority.  May  the  Sovereign  Grand  Master  of  the  universe  (ill
them  and  us  with  his  joy  and  property.1  The  hour  of  closing  is
the  day  of  life  and  of  tranquifiity.  M arch— 6  equal,  and  1  long
steps;  in  all  seven.


y  Google


248  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.

HIEROGLYPHICS  OF   THIS  DEGBEE.
\BC    DE    FGHIJ    KLMNOPQRSTUVXYZ


KNIGHTS  OF  THE  BRAZEN  SERPENT.

Decorations  of  the  lodge. — The  hangings  are  red  and  blue.
Over  the  throne  there  is  a  transparency,  on  which  there  is  seen  a
burning  bush,  and  in  the  middle  the  name,  VtfiV*  In  the  cen-
tre of  the  lodge  there  is  a  mount,  elevated  by  five  steps,  in  the
form  of  a  truncated  cone.  One  torch  or  great  taper,  alone  en-
lightens the  lodge.

Titles. — The  lodge  is  called  the  court  of  Sinai;  the  Chief
Knight  is  called,  'Most  Powerful  Grand  Master;'  the  War-
dens, 'Minister*,  first  and  second;'  the  Orator,  'Pontiff;'  the
Secretary,  'Grand  Inquirer;9  and  the  other  brothers,  'Knigkts.'
There  is  also  an  'Examiner;9  and  they  style  the  candidate  a
'Traveller,'  &c.  He  ought  to  be  loaded  with  chains  to  the
weight  of  30  lbs.  at  least.  These  heavy  chains  denote  that  this
degree  has  reference  to  the  deliverance  of  the  captives.  The
lodge  represents  the  front  of  Moses'  tent,  where  be  waited  upon
(gave  authority)  to  the  Israelites,  who  came  to  prefer  their  com-
plaints and  grievances.  The  arch  over  head,  sprinkled  with
stars,  and  the  single  light,  represents  the  sun.  The  officers  rep-
resent Moses,  Aaron,  and  Joshua,  the  candidate  an  Israelite  in
chains,  upon  his  march.

Note.  The  pleasure  of  bearing  the  yoke  for  our  brothers,  remembering  that
they  are  our  equals,  and  that  the  same  arrow  cannot  wound  us  all;  should  de-
termine us  in  receiving  this  degree.  We  should  also  be  animated  by  the  Di-
vine Spirit,  to  avenge  our  country;  to  make  our  mysteries  respected  and  to
carry  the  law  of  the  Most  High  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  universe.

Jlpparel. — A  red  collar,  upon  which  is  painted,  or  embroider-
ed, the  device,  virtue  and  valor.

Jewel. — The  jewel  is  a  serpent  entwined  upon  the  environs  of
a  cross  pole,  in  form  of  a  T,  about  which  are  the  Hebrew  charac-
ters, Hilt    which  signify, •  'One  who  shall  live.'

This  is  the  image  which  Moses  is  said  to  Nhave
erected  in  the  camp  of  the  Israelites.  Numbers,  21st
ch.  6th  v.  &c.  which  possessed  the  virtue  to  heal  the
bites  of  serpents  which  molested  them  in  the  desert
It  was  afterwards  preserved  in  the  temple,  with  much
careful  attention;  but  as  it  came  in  process  of  time  to

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MA.SOHRT.  249

be  an  object  of  idolatry  with  the  Jews,  Hezekiah,  king  of  Judea,
commanded  to  take  it  to  pieces,  and  full  of  indignation  called  it
'JVe  hush  tan,  (iEneus  surpens,  brazen  serpent,)  old  copper  to
be  melted  up,'  sordid  stuff.  The  French  write  the  word  'Nechus-
chthare,'  which  at  the  same  time  signifies,  'Brazen,  creeping,
prophecying,9  because  of  the  superstition  of  the  Jews  in  consult-
ing the  oracles.

Hours  of  opening. — The  court  is  opened  at  1  o'clock,  and  is
closed  at  4  o'clock.  March — Nine  serpentine  steps.  Knocks —
Nine  blows;  five  slow,  three  hurried,  and  one  by  itself.

Obligation. — I,  ■  do  solemnly  promise  and  swear  in  the
presence  of  the  Almighty  God,  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  uni-
verse, that  I  will  never  reveal  the  secrets  of  this  Degree  of
Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent,  nor  by  my  presence,  aid  or  assist
in  revealing  them  to  any  person  or  persons  whatsoever,  unless
the  candidate  shall  have  taken  all  the  preceding  degrees,  in  a
regular  manner,  nor  without  a  legal  authority.  I  now  swear  al-
legiance and  true  faith.  In  case  I  should  transgress  this  my  sol-
emn obligation,  and  thus  perjure  myself,  I  freely  consent  to  have
my  heart  eaten  by  the  most  venomous  of  serpents,  and  thus  to  per-
ish most  miserably;  from  which  may  the  Almighty  Creator  of  the
universe  guard  and  defend  me!  In  token  of  your  sincerity  you
will  kiss  the  Bible.

Jlpron — Is  white,  bound  with  black  tears;  upon  the  flap  is  a
triangle,  in  a  glory;  in  its  centre  the  Hebrew  letter,  J\  Some-
times the  jewel  is  embroidered,  and  on  the  breast  of  a  broad  wa-
tered white  ribbon,  worn  from  the  right  shoulder  to  the  left  hip.

History. — The  history  of  this  degree  is  drawn  from  the  Bible.
Numbers,  ch.  2 1  st.  When  God,  to  punish  the  Israelites  for  their
wickedness,  sent  into  their  country,  serpents,  which  should  de-
vour them.  They  came  to  Moses  with  their  grievances  and
confessed  their  faults.  Moses  invoked  the  Almighty  for  them,
and  God  ordered  him  to  fasten  a  fiery  serpent  upon  a  pole,  that
all  the  Israelites  who  might  have  been  bitten,  should  turn  and
look  upon  it  and  be  made  whole.  The  signification  of  the  jewel
is  this;  when  Moses  made  a  brazen  serpent,  and  placed  it  upon  a
pole,  as  God  had  ordered  him,  and  it  came  to  pass  that  every  one
bitten,  looking  upon  it  ad  pronouncing  the  word,  'Holati,9  (I
have  sinned,)  was  immediately  made  whole.


y  Google


250  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY

Prince  of  mercy,

OR

SCOTCH  TRIJTITARI AS.

Decoration*  of  the  lodge.  The  hangings  are  green,  supported
by  nine  columns,  alternately  white  and  red,  upon  each  of  which
is  an  arm  of  a  chandelier,  sustaining  nine  lights,  forming  in  all
eighty-one  lights.  The  canopy  is  green,  white  and  red;  under
which  is  a  green  colored  throne.  The  table  before  the  throne
is  corered  with  a  cloth  of  the  same  color.  Instead  of  a  Hiram,
the  Most  Excellent  Chief  Prince  uses  an  arrow,  whose  plume  is
on  one  side  green,  and  on  the  other  side  red,  the  spear  being
white  and  the  point  gilded.  By  the  altar  is  a  statue  which  rep-
resents "Truth,"  covered  with  the  aforesaid  three  colors.  This
statue  is  the  palladium  of  the  order.

Titles.— This  Chapter  is  styled  the  "Third  Heaven."  The
Chief  Prince  is  called  "Most  Excellent."  Besides  the  two  War-
dens and  accustomed  officers,  there  is  a  "Sacrificer"  and  a
"Guard  of  the  Palladium."

The  Chief  Prince  represents  Moses;  Senior  Warden,  Aaron;
Junior  Warden,  Eleazer;  the  candidate,  Joshua.

Apparel. — The  Most  Excellent  Chief  Prince  wears  a  large
tricolored  tunic,  of  green,  white  and  red;  and  on  his  head  a
crown  of  lace,  surmounted  with  9  points.

Apron. — Red,  bordered  with  white  fringe;  upon  its  centre  is
painted  or  wrought  a  white  and  green  triangle.  In  the  centre  U
a  heart,  and  on  it  the  letter  ft  The  flap  is  ?ky  blue,  (some-
times green.)

Jewel — The  jewel  is  an  equilateral  triangle  of  gold,  and  in  the
centre  a  gold  heart.  Upon  the  heart  is  engraved  the  letter  ff
It  is  worn  from  a  broad  tricolbred  ribbon.  The  collar  is  green,
white  and  red.

Age. — Eighty-one  years  is  the  age  of  a  Prince  of  Mercy.

March. — Three  equal  steps  beginning  with  the  left  foot.

Knocking. — Fifteen  blows  by  three,  five,  and  seven.

Obligation. — I, —  do  promise  and  swear  in  the  presence  of  the
Grand  Architect  of  the  universe,  and  this  respectable  assembly,
and  by  the  most  sacred  of  obligations,  that  I  never  will  reveal  the
secrets  of  this  sublime  degree  of  Prince  of  Mercy,  to  any  person
or  persons  whatsoever,  in  the  world,  except  they  have  received  all
the  degrees  below  this  in  a  correct  manner,  and  so  thereby  I  shall
know  him  to  be  regularly  entitled  to  the  same.  I  furthermore
promise  and  swear  never  to  entrust  this  degree.  %  any  person,
aor  assist  at  any  reception  unless  I  or  they  s^all  have  been  or  are

Digitized  hy  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON  MASOHBY.  251

authorized  by  a  particular  permission  or  warrant  for  that  purpose,
from  some  Supreme  Council,  of  the  33d  degree,  regularly  and
constitutionally  established,  to  whose  authority,  laws,  rules  and
regulations,  I  now  swear  true  faith  and  allegiance;  and  in  that
case  I  promise  and  swear,  never  to  give  my  consent  before  I
have  been  plainly  informed  of  the  life,  manner  and  morals  of  the
candidate.  Should  I  violate  or  transgress  this,  my  solemn  obli-
gation, 1  consent  to  be  condemned,  cast  out  and  despised  by  the
whole  universe.  And  may  the  Supreme  Architect  of  Heaven  an<J
earth,  guide,  guard,  and  protect  me,  to  fulfil  the  same.  Amen.
Amen.  Amen.  In  token  of  your  sincerity,  m  this  obligation,
you  will  kiss  the  Bible.

LECTURE.

Q.  Are  you  a  Prince  of  Mercy?  A.  I  have  seen  the  great
light,  (Delta,)  and  our  Most  Excellent,  as  well  as  yourself,  in
the  'Triple  alliance'  of  the  'BLOOD  OF  JESUS  CHRIST/
of  which  you  and  I  have  the  mark.  Q.  What  is  the  triple  alli-
ance? A.  It  is  that  which  the  Eternal  made  with  Abraham  by
circumcision;  that  which  He  made  with  his  people  in  the  desert,
by  the  intercession  of  Moses;  and  that  which  He  made  wkh  mor-
tals, by  the  death  and  suffering  of  our  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ,  his
dearly  beloved  son.

HIEROGLYPHICS.
ABCDEFGH    IJ    KLMNOPQRSTU    VXYZ


SOVEREIGN  COMMANDER

l  OF    THE

TEMPLE  AT  JERUSALEM.

Decorations  of  the  lodge. — The  hangings  are  red,  ornamented
with  black  columns;  upon  each  of  which  there  is  an  arm  (or
branch,)  holding  a  light.  The  canopy  and  throne  are  red,  sprin-
kled with  black  tears.  In  the  centre'  of  the  lodge  there  is  a
chandelier,  with  three  rows  of  lights,  in  all  making  twenty-seven
lights,  thus  arranged: — twelve  on  the  lowest  tier  of  branches,
nine  on  the  second,  and  six  on  the  third  or  uppermost  tier;  twen-
ty-seven othtt^hts  are  placed  upon  a  rouniitoble,  about  which
the  CommanSHna^eated  in  council  of  the  wirt.


oth&tfghts  ar
aanSHtta^e


•  #


y  Google


252  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

Titles. — This  council  is  styled  a  court.  The  Grand  Conn
mander,  'All  Powerful.'  In  some  courts  he  is  styled,  'Most
Illustrious,'  and  'Most  Valiant.'  The  Wardens  are  called,
'Most  Sovereign  Commanders.'

Apparel. — The  'All  Powerful'  is  clad  in  a  white  tunic,  and
over  it  a  Knight's  mantle,  of  red,  lined  with  ermine  skin.  (In
France  the  robe  is  blue.)  Upon  his  head  he  wears  a  crown  of
lace.
Apr*n. — Flesh  colored,  lined  and  edged  with  black.  On  the
j  there  is  a  teutonic  cross,  (the  cross  of  the  order,)  encircled
by  a  crown  of  laurel.  Beneath  it,  upon  the  flap,  there  is  a  key.
All  these  ornaments  are  done  in  black.  The  gloves  are  white,
lined  and  bound  with  black.  (In  France  with  red.)  The  sash
or  military  scarf,  is  white  bound  (edged)  with  red,  worn  round
the  neck,  from  which  hangs  the  jewel.  Upon  its  two  sides  are
embroidered  in  red,  the  four  crosses  of  the  Commanders.  Be-
sides, they  wear  a  red  sash,  bordered  with  black,  put  from  the
right  shoulder  to  the  left  hip;  from  which  hangs  a  cross  of  a
Commander  of  enamelled  gold.

Jewel. — The  jewel  is  a  golden  triangle,  upon  which  is  engrav-
ed, in  Hebrew,  the  sacred  word    7W7P

Knocks. — Twenty-seven  blows  with  the  flat  of  your  sword,  by
12,  then  by  12  and  3.  The  candidate  passes  three  times  round
theroomf  Hours  of  opening. — 10  o'clock.  Hours  of  closing. —
4  o'clock.  ■

Obligation.— I, in  the  presence  of  the  one  Almighty  and

only  true  God,  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  universe,  and  of  this
Venerable  Court  of  Grand  Commanders  of  the  temple,  do,  of
my  own  free  will  and  accord,  most  solemnly  and  sincerely  vow,
promise,  and  swear,  never  to  reveal  the  secrets  of  this  degree
which  I  am  now  receiving,  to  any  person  or  persons  below  me,
except  in  a  court  lawfully  holden,  with  a  warrant  or  authority
from  some  regularly  established  Supreme  Council  *>f  the  33d
Degree,  empowering  me,  and  them  with  me,  to  work  in  this  Sub*
lime  Degree.  I  furthermore  promise  and  swear,  that  I  never
will  confer,  nor  assist  in  conferring  this  degree,  upon  any  person
who  has  not,  in  a  legal  and  regular  manner,  taken  all  the  forego-
ing degrees  of  Free  Masonry.  I  furthermore  promise  and  swear,
that  I  will  pay  due  regard  and  submission  to  the  Supreme  Coun-
cil, under  whose  authority  we  are  now  acting;  and  that  I  will  al-
ways govern  myself  by  their  laws,  rules,  and  regulations,  so  far
as  the  same  shall  come  to  my  knowledge,  and  will  do  all  in  my
power  to  support  item,  for  the  good  of  the  crafignd  the  advan-
tage of  Free  Mslonry,  agreeably  to  the  constiMphs  of  the  or-


LIGHT   ON    MASONRY.  253

der.  To  all  this  I  solemnly  swear,  under  the  penalty  of  having
the  several  tmatks  of  Almighty  God  inflicted  on  me;  and  may  He
have  mercy  on  my  soul  in  the  day  of  judgment,  agreeably  to  my
performance  of  this  sacred  obligation.  Amen.  Amen.  Amen
In  token  of  your  sincerity  you  will  kiss  the  Bible.  Here  follow
the  signs  and  tokens.

Note,  Itis  improper  to  confound  this  order  of  Grand  Commander  of  the  tem-
ple, 37th  degree  of  Sublime  Free  Masonry,  with  that  of  the  Knights  of  St  John
of  Jerusalem,  better  known  by  the  name  of  Knights  Templars,  the  immediate
successors  of  the  Ancient  Knights  of  the  temple.  This  Military  and  Reli-
gious Order  exists  at  this  day,-  in  spite  of  the  abolishment  pronounced  by
Pope  Clement  the  V.  It  is  known,  that,  since  that  time,  the  Ml  has  been
annulled.  *  The  Grand  Master,  James  p.  Molay,  before  his  death,  chose  a
successor,  who  has  transmitted  his  powers  to  the  actual  Grand  Commander
through  an  uninterrupted  series  of  Chiefs  of  the  order,  celebrated  for  their
many  uties  of  respect  and  valor.  Among  these  Chiefs  are  recorded  many
Princes  of  the  house  of  Bourbon.  The  Knights  of  the  temple  ought  not  then
to  be  considered  as  an  order  of  Free  Masonry.  Nevertheless,  from  the  ex-
ample of  their  predecessors  they  fraternize  [hold  fellowship  with]  the  Free
Masons,  and  visit  them  under  the  title  of  Brothers  of  the  Order  of  the  East
but  they  are  wanting  in  the  masonic  rites.  "  '


THE  KEY  OP  MASONRY-
PHILOSOPHICAL  LODGE.
KNIGHTS  ADEPTS  OP  THE  EAGLE  OR  SUN.*

This  Council  must  be  illuminated  by  one  single  light,  and
is  enlightened  by  one  divine  light.  Because  there  is  one
single  light  that  shines  among  men,  who  have  the  happiness  of
going  from  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and  pf  the  vulgar  preju-
dices, to  follow  the  only  light  that  leads  to  the  celestial  truth.
The  light  that  is  in  our  lodge,  is  composed  of  a  glass  globe
filled  with  water  and  a  light  placed  behind  it,  and  therefore  ren-
ders the  light  more  clear.  .  The  glass  of  reflection,  the  globe
when  it  is  lighted,  is  placed  in  the  South.  '

Robe  and  Sceptre.— The  Grand  Master  or  Thrice  Puissant,
is  named  'Father  Adam,'  who  is  placed  in  the  east,  vested  in  a
robe  of  pale  yellow  like  the  morning,  He  has  his  hat  on,  and
in  his  nght  hand  a  sceptre,  on  the  top  of  which  is  a  globe  of
gold ;  the  handle  or  extremity  of  the  sceptre  is  gilt.     The  rea-

*Thii i  degree  should  be  read  by  every  Christian.  It  is  a  dagger,  aime4
at  the  heart  of  Christianity !  The  language  in  which  it  is  written,  is  law,
and  some  parts  difcult  to  be  understood.

.        '  .  *  **

^  Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


254  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.

son  that  Father  Adam  carries  the  globe  above  the  sceptre  in
this  council  is,  because  he  was  constituted  'Sovereign  Master  ef
the  worltf  and  created  'Sovereign  Father  of  all  men.9  He  carries
a  sun  suspended  by  a  chain  of  gold  around  his  neck,  and  on  the
reverse  of  this  jewel  of  gold  is  a  globe.  When  this  degree  is
.  given,  no  jewel  or  apron  is  worn.

There  is  only  one  Warden  who  sits  opposite  Father  Adam  in
the  west,  and  is  called  Brother  Truth.  He  is  entitled  to  the
same  ornaments  as  Father  Adam  ;  and  the  order  that  belongs
to  this  degree  is  a  broad  white  watered  ribbon  worn  as  a  collar,
with  an  Eye  of  gold  embroidered  thereon,  above  the  gold  chain
and  jewel  of  the  sun.  The  number  of  other  officers  is  seven  ;
and  are  called  by  the  name  of  the  cherubims  as  follows;  Z  aphriel,
Zabriel,  Camiel,  Uriel,  Michael,  Zaphael  and  Gabriel.
These  ought  to  be  decorated  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Thrice
Puissant  Father  Adam.  If  there  are  more  than  that  number  of  the
Knights  of  the  Sun,  they  go  by  the  name  of  Sylphs,  and  are  the
preparers  of  the  council  and  assistants  in  all  the  ceremonies  or
operations  of  the  lodge.  They  are  entitled  to  the  same  jewel,
but  have  a  ribbon  of  a  fiery  colour  tied  to  the  third  buttonhole
of  their  coats.

To  open  the  Grand  Council. — Father  Adam  says,  'Brother

Truth  what  time  is  it  on  Earth  V     Br.  Truth.  'Mighty  Father,

it  is  midnight  among  the  profane  or  cowans,  but  the  sun  is  in  its

meridian  in  this  lodge.'     Father  Adam.  'My  dear  children,  profit

by  the  favor  of  this  austere  luminary,  at  present  showing  it#  light

to  us,  which  will  conduct  us  in  the  path  of  virtue  and  to  follow

that  law  which  is  eternally  to  be  engraved  on  our  hearts,  and  the

only  law  by  which  we  cannot  fail  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of

pure  truth.7     He  then  makes  a  sign  by  putting  his  right  hand  on

•his  left  breast,  on  which  all  the  brethren  put  up  the  first  finger

of  the  right  hand  above  their  heads,  the  other  fingers  clenched,

showing  by  that,  that  there  is  but  one  God,  who  is  the  beginning

of  all  truth  ; — Then  Father  Adam  says,  'This  lodge  is  opened.*

Form  of  Reception. — After  the  council  is  opened,  the  candidate

is  introduced  into  an  antechamber  where  there  are  a  number  of

Sylphs,  each  with  a  bellows,  blowing  a  large  pot  of  fire,  which

the  candidate  sees,  but  they  take  no  notice  of  him;  after  he  is

left  in  this  situation  two  or  three  minutes,  the  most  ancient  of

the  Sylphs  goes  to  the  candidate  and  covers  his  face  with  black

crape.     He  must  be  without  a  sword,  and  is  told  that  he  must

find  the  door  of  the  Sanctuary,  and  when  found,  to  knock  on  it

six  times  with  an  open  hand.     After  he   finte  the  door  and

knocks,  brother  Truth  goes  to4he  door,  and  having  opened  it  a

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.  255  ,

little,  asks  the  candidate  the  following  questions,  which  he  an-
swers by  the  help  of  the  Sylphs*     Q.  'What  do  you  desire  V
A.  'I  desire  to  go  out  of  darkness  to  see  the  true  light,  and  to
know  the  true  light  in  ail  its  purity.'     Q.  'What  do  you  desire
more  V     A.  'To  divest  myself  of  original  sin,  and  destroy  the
juvenile  prejudices  of  error,  which  all  men  are  liable  to,  namely,
the  desires  of  all  worldly  attachments  and  pride.'     On  which
brother  Truth  comes  to  Father  Adam,  and  relates  what  the  can-
didate has  told  him,  when  Father  Adam  gives  orders  to  introduce
the  candidate  to  the  true  happiness. — Then  brother  Truth  opt  ns
the  door,  and  takes  the  candidate  by  the  hand,  and  conducts  him
to  the  middle  of  the  lodge  or  sanctuary,  which  is  also  covered
by  a  black  cloth,  when   Father  Adam  addresses  him  thus : —
'My  son,  seeing  by  your  labor  in  the  royal  art,  you  are  now  come
to  the  desire  of  knowledge  of  the  pure  and  holy  truth,  we  shall
lay  it  open  to  you  without  any  disguise  or  covering.     But  before
we  do  this,  consult  your  heart  and  see  in  this  moment  if  you  feel
yourself  disposed  to  obey  her,  (namely  truth,)  in  all  things  which
she  commands.     If  you  are  disposed,  1  am  sure  she  is  ready  in
your  heart;  and  you  must  feel  an  emotion  that  was  unknown  to
you  before.     This  being  the  case,  you  must  hope  that  she  will
not  be  long  to  manifest  herself  to  you.     But  have  a  care  not  to
defile  the  sanctuary  by  a  spirit  of  curiosity,  and  take  care  not  to
increase  the  number  of  the  vulgar  and  profane,  that  have  for  so
long  a  time  ill-treated  her,  until  Truth  was  obliged  to  depart  the
earth  and  now  can  hardly  trace  any  of  her  footsteps.     But  she
always  appears  in  her  greatest  glory  without  disguise,  to  the  true,
good  and  honest  Free  Masons,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  zealous  ex-
tirpaters  of  superstition  and  lies.     [By  a  careful  perusal  of  this
degree  it  will  be  seen,  that  by  'euperstition  and  lie*?  is  meant  the
true  religion. — Ed.']  1  hope,  my  dear  brother,  you  will  be  one  of
her  intimate  favorites.  The  proofs  that  you  have  given,  assures
me  of  every  thing  1  have  to  expect  of  your  zeal,  for  as  nothing  now
can  be  more  a  secret  among  us,  I  shall  order  brother  Truth,  that
he  will  instruct  you  what  you  are  to  do  in  order  to  come  to  true
happiness.'     After  this  discourse  of  Father  Adam,  the  candidate
is  unveiled  and  shown  the  form  of  the  lodge  or  council,  with-
out explaining  any  part  thereof.     Brother  Truth  then  proceeds
thus,  'My  dear  brother,  by  mouth,  holy  truth  speaketh  to  you,
but  before  she  can  manifest  herself  to  you,  sh*,  requires  of  you
proofs  in  which  she  is  satisfied  in  your  entrance  in  the  Masonic
Order.     She  has  appeared  to  you  in  many  things,  which  you
could  not  have  apprehended  or'cornprehended  without  her  assis-
tance ;  but  now  you  have  the  happiness  to  arrive  at  the  brilliant

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC


256  LIGHT   ON    MASONRY.

day,  nothing  can  be  a  secret  to  you.  Learn,  then,  the  moral  use
that  is  made  of  the  three  first  parts  of  the  furniture,  which  yon
knew  after  you  was  received  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason;  viz:
Bible y  Compass  and  Square.  By  the  Bible,  you  are  to  understand,
that  it  is  the  only  law  you  aught  to  follow.  It  is  that  which
Adam  received  at  his  creation,  and  whieh  the  Almighty  engraved
in  his  heart.  This  law  is  called  natural  late,  and  shows  positively
that  there  is  but  one  God,  and  to  adore  him  only  without  any  sub-
division or  interpolation.  The  Compass,  gives  you  the  faculty
of  judging  for  yourself,  that  what  ever  God  has  created,  is  well,
and  he  is  the  sovereign  author  of  every  thing.  Existing  in  him-
self, nothing  is  either  good  or  evil,  because  we  understand  by
this  expression,  an  action  done  which  is  excellent  in  itself,  is
relative,  and  submits  to  the  human  understanding,  judgment  to
know  the  value  and  price  of  such  action,  and  that  God,  with
whom  every  thing  is  possible,  communicates  nothing  of  his  will,
but  such  as  his  great  goodness  pleases ;  and  every  thing  in  the
universe  is  governed  as  he  has  decreed  it,  with  justice,  being  able
to  compare  it  with  the  attributes  of  the  Divinity.  I  equally  say,
that  in  himself  there  is  no  evil,  because  he  has  made  eveiy  thing
with  exactness,  and  that  every  thing  exists  according  to  his  will ;
consequently  as  it  ought  to  be.  The  distance  between  good  and
evil  with  the  Divinity,  cannot  be  more  justly  and  clearly  compar-
ed than  by  a  circle  formed  with  a  compass;  from  the  points  being
reunited  there  is  formed  an  entire  circumference ;  and  when  any
point  in  particular  equally  approaches  or  equally  separates  from
its  point,  it  is  only  a  faint  resemblance  of  the  distance  between
good  and  evil,  which  we  compare  by  the  points  of,  a  compass
forming  a  circle,  which  circle  when  completed  is  God!

Square. — By  the  Square  we  discover  that  God  who  has  made
every  thing  equal,  in  the  same  manner  as  yo*u  are  not  able  to  dig
a  body  in  a  quarry  complete,  or  perfect;  thus  the  wish  of  the
Eternal  in  creating  the  world  by  a  liberal  act  of  his  own,  well  fore-
saw every  matter  that  could  possibly  happen  in  consequence
thereof;  that  is  to  say,  that  every  thing  therein  contained  at  the
same  time  of  the  creation  was  good.

Level — Tou  have  also  seen  a  level,  a  plumb,  and  a  rough  stone.
By  the  level  you  are  to  learn  to  be  upright  and  sincere,  and  not
to  suffer  yourself  to  be  drawn  away  by  the  multitude  of  the  blind
and  ignorant  people;  to  be  always  firm  and  steady  to  sustain  the
right  of  the  natural  lawy  and  the  pure  and  real  knowledge  of  that
truth  which  it  teacheth.

Perpendicular  and  rough  stone -^By  these  you  ought  to  un-
derstand that  the  perpendicular  man,  made  polished  by  reason;
and  put  censure  away  by  the  excellence  of  our  Master.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  257

'Trtetk-hoarfkr— You  have  seen  the  trestle-board,  to  draw  plans
•on.  This  represents  the  man  whose  whole  occupation  is  the  art
of  thinking,  and  employs  his  reason  to  that  which  is  just  and  rea-
sonable.

Cubic  atone. — You  have  seen  the  cubic  stone,  the  moral  of
which,  and  the  sense  you  ought  to  draw  from  it,  is  to  rule  your
actions,  that  they  might  be  equally  brought  to  the  sovereign  good.

Pillars. — The  two  pillars  teacheth  you  that  all  Masons  ought
to  attach  themselves  firmly  to  become  an  ornament  to  the  order,
-as  well  as  to  its  support — as  the  pillars  of  Hercules  formerly  de-
termined the  end  of  the  ancient  world.

,  Blazing  star. — You  have  seen  the  blazing  star,  the  moral  sense
of  which  is,  <a  true  Mason  perfecting  himself  in  the  way  of  truth,'
that  he  may  become  like  a  blazing  star  which  shineth  equally
during  the  thickest  darkness,  and  it  is  useful  to  those  that  it  shin-
eth upon,  and  who  are  ready  and  desirous  of  profiting  by  its  light

The  first  instructions  have  conducted  you  to  the  knowledge  of
Hiram  AbifF,  and  the  inquiries  that  were  made  in  finding  him  out.
You  have  been  informed  of  the  words,  sigps,  and  tokens  which
were  substituted  to  those  we  feared  would  have  been  surprised,
but  of  which  they  afterwards  learnt v  that  the  treacherous  villains
had  not  been  able  to  receive  any  JmowJedge  of,  and  this  ought  to
he  an  example  and  salutary  advice  to  you,  to  be  always  on  your
guard,  and  well  persuaded  that  it  is  difficult  to  escape  the  snares
that  ignorance,  joined  to  conceited  opinion,  lay  every  day  against
us,  and  thereby  to  overcome  us;  and  the  most  virtuous  men  are
liable  to  fallr  because  their  candor  renders  them  unsuspecting; —
but  in  this  case,  you  ought  to  be  firm,  as  our  Respectable  Fa-
ther, Hiram,  who  chose  rather  to  be  massacred  than  to  give  up
what  he  had  obtained.

This  will  teach  you  that  as  soon  as  truth  shall  be  fixed  in  your
heart,  you  ought  never  to  consider  the  resolution  you  should  take,
you  must  live  and  die  to  sustain  the  light,  by  which  we  acquire
the  sovereign  good;  we  must  never  expose  ourselves  to  the  con-
versation of  cowans,  and  must  be  circumspect  even  with  those
with  whom  we  are  the  most  intimate,  and  not  to  deliver  up  bur-
selves  to  any,  excepting  those  whose  character  and  behaviour
have  proved  them  brothers,  who  are  worthy  to  come  and  appear
in  the  sacred  sanctuary,  where  holy  truth  delivers  her  oracles.

You  have  passed  the  'Secret9  and  'Perfect  Master?  you  have
been  decorated  with  an  'ivory  key,'  a  symbol  of  your  distinction;
you  have  received  the  pronunciation  of  the  'ineffable  name'  of  the
Great  Architect  of  the  universe,  and  have  been  placed  at  the  first
balustrade  of  the  sanctuary;  you  have  had  rank  among  the  Le-
X2

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


258  LIGHT   ON  MASOrtlf.

vites,  after  you  knew  the  Word  'Zizon,'  which  signifies  a  <balug-
trade  of  the  Levites,*  where  ali  those  are  placed  as  well  as  your-
self, to  expect  the  knowledge  of  the  most  sublime  mysteries.

Coffin  and  rope. — In  the  Degree  of  Perfect  Master,  they  hare
shown  you  a  grave,  a  coffin,  and  a  *whhe  repe,'  to  raise  and  de-
posit the  body  in  a  sepulchre,  made  in  the  form  of  a  pyramid,  in
the  top  of  which  was  a  triangle,  within  which  was  the  sacred  name
of  the  Eternal,  and  on  the  pavement  were  the  two  columns  of
Jachin  and  Boaz  laid  across.

Ivory  hey. — By  the  'ivory  key'  you  are  to  understand  that  you
cannot  open  your  heart  with  safety,  but  at  proper  times.  By  the
corps*  and  grave  is  represented  the  Hate  of  many  before  he  had
known  the  happiness  of  our  order!

Rope  — The  rope  to  which  the  coffin  is  tied,  in  order  to  raise
it,  is  the  symbol  of  raising  a  unit,  as  you  have  been  raised  from
the  grave  of  ignorance  to  the  celestial  place  where  truth  resides.

Pyramid. —The  pyramid  represents  the  true  Mason  who  raises
himself  by  degrees,  till  he  reaches  heaven,  to  adore  die  sacred  and
unalterable  name  of  the  Eternal  Supreme.

Intimate  Secretary.  This  new  degree  leads  you  near  to
Solomon  and  honor,  and  after  you  redoubled  your  zeal,  you  gain-
ed new  honors  and  favors,  having  nearly  lost  your  life  by  curiosi-
ty; which  attachment  to  Masonry  gave  you  die  good  qualities  of
your  heart,  and  which  found  you  grace  and  led  you  to  the  'Inten-
dant  of  the  Buildings,'  and  where  you  saw  a  'blazing  star,' a  large
candlestick  with  seven  branches,  with  altars,  vases,  and  purifica-
tion, and  a  great  brazen  sea.

Blazing  star. — By  the  expression  of  'purification,'  you  are  to
understand  that  you  are  to  be  cleansed  from  impiety  and  preju-
dice, before  you  can  acquire  more  of  the  sublime  knowledge  in
passing  the  other  degrees  to  be  able  to  support  the  brilliant  light
of  reason,  enlightened  by  truth,  of  which  the  blazing  star  is  the
ngure.

Candlestick  and  seven  branches.~-By  the  candlestick  with  sev-
en branches,  you  are  to  remember  the  mysterious  number  of  the
seven  Masters  who  were  named  to  succeed  one,  and  from  that
time  it  was  resolved  that  seven  Knights  of  Masonry,  united  to-
gether, were  able  to  initiate  into  Masonry,  and  show  them  the
seven  gifts  of  the  Eternal,  which  we  shall  give  you  a  perfect
knowledge  of,  when  you  have  been  purified  in  the  brazen  sea.

Brazen  8ta. — You  have  passed  from  the  'Secret'  and  ^Perfect
'Master'  to  the  'Intimate  Secretary,'  'Provost  and  Judge,'  and
'Intendant  of  the  Buildings.'  In  these  degrees,  they  have  show-
ed you  an  'ebony  box,'  a  'key  suspended,'  a  'balance,'  and  an  'in*
flamed  urn.'

Digitized'by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  259

Ebony  box. — The  <ebony  box9  shows  y©u  wkh  what  scrupulous
attention  you  are  to  keep  the  secrets  that  have  been  confided  to
you,  and  which  you  are  to  reserve  ia  the  closet  of  your  heart,  of
which  the  box  is  an  emblem.  And  were  you  to  reflect  on  the
black  color  of  said  box,  it  would  teach  you  to  cover  your  secrets
with  a  thick  veil,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  pro&ne  cowans  can-
not possibly  have  any  knowledge  thereof.

Key.— The  key  demonstrates  that  you  have  already  obtained  o
key  to  our  knowledge  and  part  of  our  mysteries,  and  if  you  be-
have with  equity,  fervor  and  zeal  to  your  brothers,  you  will  arrive
shortly  to  the  knowledge  and  meaning, of  our  society,  and  this  in-
dicates the  reason  of  the  balance.

Inflamed  urn. — By  the  'inflamed  urn'  you  are  to  understand,
mat,  as  far  as  you  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Royal  and  Sub-
lime Art,  you  must,  by  your  behaviour,  leave  behind  you,  in  the
minds  of  your  brethren  and  the  vulgar,  a  high  idea  of  your  vir-
tue, equal  to  die  perfume  of  the  burning  urn.

Two  kings. — In  the  degree  of  'Intimate  Secretary,'  you  have
seen  and  heard  two  kings,  who  were  entering  into  their  new  alli-
ance and  reciprocal  promise,  and  of  the  perfection  of  their  grand
enterprise.  They  spoke  of  the  death  of  Hiram  Abiff,  our
Excellent  Master.  You  saw  guards  and  man's  overseer,  and
very  near  of  being  put  to  death  for  his  curiosity  of  peeping.  You
also  heard  of  the  prospect  of  a  plan  called  the  vault,  to  deposit
the  precious  treasure  of  Masonry,  when  the  time  should  be  ful-
filled, and  y<xx  afterwards  became  a  brother.  The  conversation
of  the  two  kings,  is  the  figure  and  report  that  our  laws  must  hold
with  the  natural  law,  which  forms  a  perfect  agreement  with  the
conveniences,  <and  promises  to  those  who  shall  have  the  happi-
ness to  be  connected  to  you  in  the  same  manner  and  perfect  alli-
ance, they  will  afterwards  come  to  the  centre  of  true  knowledge.

Tears.— The  tears  and  regret  of  the  two  kings  are  the  emblem
of  the  regret  you  ought  to  have,  when  you  perceive  a  brother  de-
part from  the  road  of  virtue.

The  man  peeping. — By  the  man  you  saw  peeping,  and  who  was
discovered,  and  seized,  and  conducted  to  death,  is  an  emblem  of
those  who  come  to  be  initiated  into  our  sacred  mysteries  through  a
motive  of  curiosity;  and,  if  so  indiscreet  as  to  divulge  their  obli-
gations, WE  ARB  BOUND  TO  CAUSE  T.HEIR  DEATH,  AND  TAKE
VENGEANCE   ON    THE    TREASON    BY    THE    DESTRUCTION    OF   THE

traitor  !!!*     Let  us  pray  the  Eternal  to  preserve  our  order  from

*  Since  the  immolation  of  William  Morgan  and  the  publication  of  his
'Illustrations,'  Masons  have  boastingly  said,  'If  the  penalty  of  our  laws  i»


y  Google


£$0  LIGHT  ON   BKASONBT.

such  an  evil  you  have  hereof  seen  an  example,  in  that  degree  to
which  you  came,  by  your  zeal,  fervor,  and  constancy.  In  that
degree  you  have  remarked,  that,  from  all  the  favorites  that  were
at  that  time  in  the  apartment  of  Solomon,  only  nine  were  elected
to  avenge  the  death  of  Hiram  A  biff;  this  makes  good,  that  a
great  many  are  often  called,  but  few  chosen.  To  explain  this
enigma; — a  great  many  of  the  profane  have  the  happiness  to  di-
vest themselves  of  that  name  to  see  and  obtain  the  entrance  in
our  sanctuary,  but  very  few  are  constant,  zealous,  and  fervent  to
merit  the  happiness  of  coming  to  the  height  and  knowledge  of  the
sublime  truth.

Requisitions  to  make  a  good  Mason.* — If  you  ask  me  what  are
the  requisite  qualities  that  a  Mason  must  be  possessed  of,  to  come
to  the  centre  of  truth,  I  answer  you,  that  you  must  crush  the  head
of  the  serpent  of  ignorance.  You  must  shake  off  the  yoke  of  in-
fant prejudice,  concerning  the  mysteries  of  the  reigning  religion,
which  worship  has  been  imaginary ,  and  only  founded  on  the  spirit
of  pride,  which  envies  to  command  and  be  distinguished,  and  to
be  at  the  head  of  the  vulgar,  in  affecting  an  exterior  purity  which
characterizes  a  false  piety,  joined  to  a  desire  of  acquiring  that
which  is  not  its  own,  and  is  always  the  subject  of  this  exterior
pride,  and  unalterable  source  of  many  disorders,  which  bemg
joined  to  gluttonness,  is  the  daughter  of  hypocrisy,  and  employs
every  matter  to  satisfy  carnal  desires,  and  raises  to  these  predomi-
nant passions,  altars,  upon  which  she  maintains,  without  ceasing,
the  light  of  iniquity,  and  sacrifices  continually  offerings  to  luxu-
ry, voluptuousness,  hatred,  envy,  and  perjury*  Behold,  my  dear
brother,  what  you  must  fight  against  and  destroy,  before  you  can
come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  true  good  and  sovereign  happiness  !
Behold  this  monster  which  you  must  conquer — a  serpent  which  WE
detest  as  an  idol  that  is  adored  by  the  idiot  and  vulgar  under  the
name  of  RELIGION ! ! !  [Here,  indeed,  the  principles  of
Masonry  are  taught  with  all  plainness;  and  if  the  reader  has  here-
tofore been  blind  to  the  nature  and  tendency  of  the  institution,
raethinks  he  can  see  them  now !  Here  the  Christian  beholds  his
blessed  Christ  rejected — himself  charged  with  the  basest  crimes —
condemned  as  an  idiot — his  worship  imaginary— his  religion
founded  on  the  spirit  of  pride,  the  daughter  of  hypocrisy — a  ser-
pent, a  monster,  an  idol  detested  by  Masonry! ! !     Editor.]

Solomon,  king  Hiram,  and  St.  John  the  Baptist. — In  the  De-


death,  no  one  is  bound  to  inflict  it.'  But  Masonry  says,  'We  are  I
take  vengeance  on  the  treason  by  the  destruction  of  the  traitor?  'We  ore  I
cause  his  deathVA*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  261

grces  of  'Elected  of  Fifteen,  Illustrious  Knights,  Grand  Master
Architects,  and  the  Royal  Arch,'*  you  have  seen  many  things
which  are  only  a  repetition  of  what  you  have  already  examined.
You  will  always  find  in  those  degrees,  initial  letters  enclosed  in
different  triangles,  or  Deltas.  You  have  also  seen  the  planet
Mercury,  the  chamber  called  'Gabion,'  or  the  'Third  Heaven;'
the  'winding  staircase' — the  'ark  of  alliance' — the  'tomb  of  Hiram
Abiff,'  facing  the  ark  and  the  urn — the  precious  treasure  found
by  the  assiduous  travellers — the  three  zealous  brethren  Masons —
the  punishment  of  the  haughty  Master  Mason,  in  being  buried
under  the  ancient  ruins  of  Enoch — and  finally  you  have  seen  the
figures  of  Solomon,  and  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  and  St.  John  the
Baptist.

3.  /.  /.  /. — By  the  3.  I.  I.  I.  you  know  the  three  sacred  names
of  the  Eternal,  and  'mount  Gabaon,'  (Third  Heaven,)  which  you
came  to  by  seven  degrees  which  compose  the  winding  staircase.

The  seven  stars  represent  the  seven  principal  and  different  de-
grees to  which  you  must  come  to  attain  the  height  of  glory  rep-
resented by  the  mount,  where  they  formerly  sacrificed  to  the  Most
High!  When  you  arrive  to  that,  you  are  to  subdue  yourself  in
your  passions,  in  not  doing  any  thing  that  is  not  prescribed  in  our
laws

By  the  planet  Mercury,  you  are  taught  continually  to  mistrust,
shun,  and  run  away  from  those,  who,  by  a  false  practice,  maintain
commerce  with  people  of  a  vicious  life,  who  seem  to  despise  the
most;  sacred  mysteries;  that  is,  to  depart  from  those,  who  by  the
vulgar  fear,  or  have  a  bad  understanding,  and  are  ready  to  deny
the  solemn  obligations  that  they  have  contracted  among  us. —
"When  you  come  to  the  foot  of  our  arch,  you  are  to  apprehend
that  you  come  to  the  'Sanctum  Sanctorum.'  You  are  not  to
return,  but  rather  to  persist  in  sustaining  the  glory  of  our  order,
and  the  truth  of  our  laws,  principles,  and  mysteries,  in  like  man-
ner as  our  Respectable  Father,  Hiram  Abiff,  who  deserved  to
have  been  buried  there,  for  his  constancy  and  fidelity.  We  have
also  another  example  in  the  firmness  of  'Galaad,'  the  son  of
'Sophonia,'  chief  of  the  Levites,  under  Surnam,  the  High  Priest,
as  mentioned  in  the  history  of  perfection.  Learn  in  this  moment,
my  dear  brother,  what  you  are  to  understand  by  the  figures  of
Solomon,  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  and  St.  John  the  Baptist.  The
two  first,  exert  you,  by  their  zeal  in  the  royal  art,  to  follow  the
sublime  road  of  which  Solomon  was  die  institutor,  and  Hiram,  of
Tyre,  the  'supporter;'  a  title  legitimately  due  to  that  king,  *ho

*  Knights  of  the  Ninth  Arch,

♦

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


262  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

not  only  protected  the  order,  but  contributed  with  all  his  might  to
the  construction  of  the  temple,  (furnishing  stone  from  Tyre,  and
the  cedars  of  Lebanus;)  which  Solomon  built  to  the  honor  of  the
Almighty.

The  third,  or  kSt.  John  the  Baptist,9  teaches  you  to  preach
marvellous  of  this  order,  which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  you  are  to
make  secret  missions  among  men,  which  you  beHeve  to  be  in  a
state  of  entering  the  road  of  truth,  that  they  may  be  able  one
day  to  see  her  virtues  and  visage  uncovered.

Hiram  Abiff,  was  the  symbol  of  truth  on  earth.  'Jubelum
Akirop'  was  accused  by  the  serpent  of  ignorance,  which  to  this
day  raises  altars  in  the  hearts  of  the  profane  and  fearful.  This
profaneness,  backened  by  a  fanatic  zeal,  becomes  an  instrument
to  the  religious  reign,  which  struck  the  first  stroke  in  the  heart  of
our  dear  Father,  Hiram  A  biff;  which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  un-
dermined the  foundation  of  the  celestial  temple,  which  the  Eter-
nal himself  had  ordered  to  be  raised  to  the  sublime  truth  and  his
glory.

The  first  stage  of  the  world  has  been  witness  to  what  I  have
advanced.  The  simple,  natural  law  rendered  to  our  first  fathers
the  most  uninterrupted  happiness;  they  were  in  those  times  more,
virtuous,  but  soon  as  the  'monster  of  pride'  started  up  in  the  air,
and  disclosed  herself  to  those  unhappy  mortals,  she  promised  to
them  every  seat  of  happiness,  and 'seduced  them  by  her  soft  and
bewitching  speeches;  viz  '1  hat  'they  must  render  to  the  Eternal
Creator  of  all  things,  an  adoration  with  more  testimony  anthtnore
extensive,  than  they  had  hitherto  done,'  &c.  1  his  Uyvra  with
an  'hundred  hea<ls?  at  that  time  misled,  and  continues  to  this  day
to  mislead  men,  who  are  so  weak  as  to  submit  to  her  empire;  and
it  will  subsist,  until  the  moment  that  the  true  elected  shall  appear
and  destroy  her  entirely.

The  Degree  of  *  Sublime  Elected,'  that  you  have  passed,  gives
you  the  knowledge  of  those  things  which  conducts  you  to  the
true  and  solid  good.  The  grand  circle  represents  the  ~~~
immensity  of  the  Eternal  Supreme,  who  has  neither
beginning  nor  end.  \V


O)


The  triangle,  or  Delta,  is  the  mysterious

A      figure  of  the  Eternal.     The  three  letters  which  you

/  q\   see  signify  as  follows: — G,  at  the  top  of  the  triangle,

Jl — H\  'the  grand  cause  of  the  Masons:9  the  S,  at  the  left

hand,  the  ^submission  to  the  same  order:9  and  the  U,  at  the  right

hand,  the  lunion  that  ought  to  reign  among  the  brethren:9  which

altogether  make  but  one  body,  or  equal  figure  in  all  its  parts.—

This  is  the  triangle  called  'equilateral.'      The  groat  letter  G,

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   OK   MASONRY.  263

placed  in  the  centre  of  the  triangle,  signifies  'Great  Architect  of
the  universe,'  who  is  God;  and  in  this  ineffable  name  is  found  all
the  divine  attributes.  This  letter  being  placed  in  the  centre  of  the
triangle,  is  for  us  to  understand  that  every  true  Mason  must  have
it  profoundly  in  his  heart.

There  is  another  triangle,  on  Which  is  engraved,  S.
B.  and  N.  of  which  you  have  had  an  explanation  in  a       A
preceding  degree.     This  triangle  designs  the  connex-    /BJ\

ion  of  the  brethren  in  virtue.      The  solemn  promise  ^

they  have  made  to  love  each  other;  to  help,  succor,  and  keep
inviolably  secret,  their  mysteries  of  the  perfection  proposed,  in
all  their  enterprises.  It  is  said  in  that  degree,  that  'You  have
entered  the  Third  Heaven,  that  means  you  have  entered  the  place
where  pure  truth  resides,  since  she  abandoned  the  earth  to  mon-
sters who  persecuted  her.'

The  end  of  the  Degree  of  Perfection,  is  a  preparation  to  come
more  clearly  to  the  knowledge  of  true  happiness,  in  becoming  a
true  Mason,  enlightened  by  the  celestial  luminary  of  truth,  in
renouncing,  voluntarily,  all  adorations,  but  those  that  are  made
to  one  God,  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  great,  good,  and
merciful.

The  Knights  of  the  East,  the  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  and
Knights  of  the  East  and  West,  are  known  to  us,  in  our  days,  to
be  Masonry  renewed,  and  all  of  them  lead  us  to  the  same  end  of
the  celestial  truth,  which  is  to  say,  finished.

The  Knights  of  the  'White  and  Black  Eagle,'  and  the  Sub-
lime Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret,'  and  'Grand  Commander,'  are
the  Chiefs  of  the  great  enterprise  of  the  order  in  general.  End
of  brother  Truth's  harangue.

Father  Adam  then  says  to  the  candidate,  'My  dear  son,  what
.  you  have  heard  from  the  mouth  of  Truth  is  an  abridgement  of
all  the  consequences  of  ail  the  degrees  you  have  gone  through,  in
order  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  holy  truth,  contracted  in
your  last  engagements.  Do  you  persist  in  your  demand  of  com-
ing to  the  holy  brother,  and  is  that  what  you  desire,  with  a  clear
heart? — answer  me.'  The  candidate  answers,  'I  persist.'  Then
Father  Adam  says,  'Brother  Truth,  as  the  truth  persists,  ap-
proach with  him  to  the  sanctuary,  in  order  that  he  may  take  a
solemn  obligation,  to  follow  our  laws,  principles,  and  morals,  and
to  attach  himself  to  us  forever.'  Then  the  candidate  falls  on  his
knees,  and  father  Adam  takes  his  hands  between  his  own,  and
the  candidate  repeats  the  following  obligation  three  times.

Obligation. — I promise  in  the  face  of  God,  and  between

the  hands  of  my,  Sovereign,  and  in  presence  of  all  the  brethren


Digitized  by


Google


264  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

now  present,  never  to  take  arms  against  my  king,  directly  or  in-
directly, in  any  conspiracy  against  him.  I  promise  never  to  re-
veal any  of  the  degrees  of  the  Eoight  of  the  Sun,  which  is  now
on  the  point  of  being  intrusted  to  me,  to  any  person  or  persons
whatsoever,  without  being  duly  qualified  to  receive  the  same;  and
never  to  give  my  consent  to  any  one  to  be  admitted  into  our  mys-
teries, only  after  the  most  scrupulous  circumspection,  and  full
knowledge  of  his  life  and  conversation;  and  who  has  given  at  all
times  full  proof  of  his  zeal  and  fervent  attachment  for  the  order,
and  a  submission  at  all  times  to  the  tribunal  of  'the  Sovereign
Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret.  I  promise  never  to  confer  the  de-
gree of  the  Knights  of  the  Sun,  without  having  a  permission  in
writing  from  the  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret,
or  from  the  Grand  Inspector  or  his  deputy,  known  by  their  titles
and  authority.  I  promise  also  and  swear  that  I  will  not  assist
any,  through  my  means,  to  form  or  raise  a  lodge  of  the  Sublime
Orders,  in  this  island,  (or  in  America  as  the  case  may  be,)  'with-
out proper  authority.'  I  promise  and  swear  to  redouble  my  zeal
for  all  my  brethren,  Knights,  and  Princes,  that  are  present  or  ab-
sent, and  if  I  fail  in  this  my  obligation,  I  consent  for  all  my  brethren,
whep  they  are  convinced  of  my  infidelity,  to  seize  me,  and  thrust
my  tongue  through  with  a  red  hot  iron;  to  pluck  out  both  my
eyes,  and  to  deprive  me  of  smelling  and  hearing;  to  cut  off  both
of  my  hands,  and  expose  me  in  that  condition  in  the  field,  to  be
devoured  by  the  voracious  animals;  and  if  none  can  be  found,  I
wish  the  lightning  of  heaven  might  execute  on  me  the  same
vengeance.  0  God,  maintain  roe  in  right  and  equity.  Amen.
Amen.    Amen.

After  the  obligation  is  three  times  repeated,  Father  Adam  raises
the  candidate,  and  gives  him  one  kiss  on  his  forehead,  being  the
seat  of  the  soul.  He  then  decorates  him  with  the  collar  and
jewel  of  the  order,  and  gives  him  the  following  sign,  token,  and
word.        *        •        *        •

After  these  are  given,  the  candidate  goes  round  and  gives
them  to  every  one,  which  brings  him  back  to  Father  Adam.  He
then  sits  down  with  the  rest  of  the  brethren,  and  then  brother
Truth  gives  the  following  explanation  of  the  Philosophical
Lodge.

Sun. — The  sun  represents  the  unity  of  the  Eternal  Supreme,
the  only  grand  work  of  philosophy.

3  s.  S.  S.— The  3  S.  S.  S.  signifies  the  Stiletto,  Sidech,  Solo,
or  the  resideuce  of  the  Sovereign  Master  of  all  things.

Three  caruUenticka. — The  three  candlesticks  shows  us  the
three  degrees  of  fire.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.  265

Four  triangles. — The  four  triangles  represent  the  four  ele-
ments.

Seven  planets.-*-The  seven  planets  design  the  seven  colors
that  appear  in  their  original  state,  from  whence  we  have  so  many
different  artificial  ones.

Seven  cherubims. — The  seven  cheruhims  represent  the  seven
metals,  viz.  gold,  silver,  copper,  iron,  lead,  tin,  and  quick  silver.

Conception  in  the  moon.*— The  conception  or  woman,  rising  in
the  moon,  demonstrates  the  purity  that  matter  subsists  of,  in  order
to  remain  in  its  pure 'state  unmixed  with  any  other  body,  from
which  must  come  a  new  king,  and  a  revolution  or  fullness  of
time,  filled  with  glory,  whose  name  is  Albra-^st.

Holy  Spirit — The  Holy  Spirit,  under  the  symbol  of  a  dove,  is
the  image  of  the  Universal  Spirit,  that  gives  light  to  all  in  the
three  states  of  nature;  and  on  the  'animal?  'vegetable,'  and  'min-
eral'

Entrance  of  the  temple. — The  entrance  of  the  temple  is  repre-
sented to  you  by  a  body,  because  the  grand  work  of  nature  is
complete  as  gold,  portable  and  fixed.

Gio6«.-T*The  globe  represents  the  matter  in  the  prijenal  statej
that  is  to  say,  complete.

Caduceus.— The  caducous  represents  the  double  mercury  that
you  must  extract  from  the  matter;  that  is  to  say,  the  mercury  fix-
«d,  and  from  thence  is  extracted  gold  and  silver.

Stibium* — The  word  stibium  signifies  the  antimony,  from
whence,  by  the  philosophical  fire,  is  taken  an  alkali  which  We.
empty  in  our  grand  work.  End  of  the  philosophical  explanation*
Theu  father  Adam  exprams  the

MORAL  LODGE.

Sun.— The  sun  represents  the  divinity  of  the  Eternal;  %br  as
there  is  but  one  sun  to  light  and  invigorate  the  earth,  so  there  is
but  one  God,  to  whom  we  ought  to  pay  our  greatest  adoration.

3  S.  8.  S. — The  3  S.  S.  S.  teaches  you  that  science,  adorn-
ed with  wisdom,  creates  a  holy  man.

Three  candlesticks. — The  three  candlesticks  are  the  image  of
4he  life  of  man,  considered  in  youth,  manhood,  and  old  age,  and!
happy  are  those  that  have  been  enlightened  in  these  ages,  by  th<
light  of  truth.

Four  triangles. — The  four  triangles  show  us  the  four  princi-
pal duties  that  create  our  tranquil  life;  viz:  Fraternal  love  among
men  in  general,  and  particularly  among  brethren,  and  in  the  same
dogree  with  us.  2dly.  In  not  having  any  thing  but  for  the  use
and  advantage  of  a  brother.  3dly.  Doubting  of  every  matter
Y

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


266  LIGHT  ON  MASONRY*

that  cannot  be  demonstrated  to  you  dearly,  by  which  an  attempt
might  be*  insinuated  as  mysterious  in  matters  of  religion,  and
hereby  lead  you  away  from  the  holy  truth.  4thly.  Never  do
any  thing  to  another  that  you  would  not  have  done  unto  you."
The  last  precept,  well  understood  and  followed  on  all  occasions,
is  the  true  happiness  of  philosophy.

Seven  planets* — The  seven  planets  represent  the  seven  prin-
cipal passions  of  man.

Seven  cherubim*. — The  seven  cherubime  are  the  images  of  the
delights  of  the  life:  namely,  by  seeing,  hearing,  tasting,  smelling,
feeling,  tranquillity,  and  health.

Conception. — The  conception  in  the  moon  shows  the  parity
of  matter,  and  that  nothing  can  be  impure  to4he  eyes  of  the  Su-
preme.

Holy  Spirit. — The  Spirit  is  the  figure  of  our  soul,  which  is
only  the  breath  of  the  Eternal,  and  which  cannot  be  soiled  by  the
works  of  the  body.

Temple. — The  .temple  represents  our  body,  which  we  are
obliged  to  preserve  by  our  natural  feelings.

Figure  0/ a  num.— The  figure  is  in  the  entrance  of  the  temple,
wnich  bears  a  lamb  in  his  arms,  and  teaches  us  to  be  attentive  to
our  wants,  as  a  shepherd  takes  care  of  his  sheep;  to  be  charita-
ble, and  never  to  let  slip  the  present  opportunity  of  doing  good,
to  labor  honestly,  and  to  live  in  this  day  as  if  it  were  our  last.

Columns  ofJachm  and  Boaz. — The  columns  of  J.  and  B.  are
the  symbols  of  the  strength  of  our  souls  in  bearing  equally,  mis-
fortunes, as  well  as  success  in  life.

Seven  steps  of  the  temple. — The  seven  steps  of  the  temple  are
the  figures  of  the  seven  degrees,  which  we  must  pass,  before  we
arrive  to  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God.

Glob&. — The  globe  represents  the  world  which  we  inhabit

Lux  ex  tenebrts. — The  device  of  'Lux  ex  tenebris,'  teacheth
that  when  man  is  enlightened  by  reason,  he  is  able  to  penetrate
the  darkness  and  obscurity,  which  ignorance  and  superstition
spread  abroad.

River. — The  river  across  the  *gk>be,  represents  the  utility  of
the  passions,  that  are  as  necessary  to  man,  in  the  course  of  his
life,  as  water  is  requisite  to  the  earth,  in  order  to  replenish  the
plants  thereof.

Cross  surrounded. — The  cross  surrrounded  by  two  serpents,
signifies  that  we  must  watch  the  vulgar  prejudices,  to  be  very'
%  prudent  in  giving  any  of  our  knowledge  and  secrets  in  matters,
especially  in  religion.     End  of  the  moral  explanation*


d  by  Google


liOHT  ON  HASONSY.  267

fhysical  explanation.  (In  Lecture.)
LECTURE.

Q.  Are  you  a  Knight  of  the  Sun?    A.  I  have  mounted  the
seven  principal  steps  of  Masonry;  I  have  penetrated  into  the
bowels  of  the  earth,  and  among  the  ancient  ruins  of  Enoch,  found
the  most  grand  and  precious  treasure  of  the  Masons.     I  have
seen,  contemplated  and  admired  the  great,  mysterious,  and  for-
midable name,  engraved  on  the  triangle;  I  have  broken  the  pillar
of  beauty,  and  thrown  down  the  two  columns  that  supported  it.
Q.  Pray  tell  me  what  is  that  mysterious  and  formidable  name?
A.  I  cannot  unfold  the  sacred  characters  in  this  manner,  but  sub-
stitute in  its  place  the  grand  word  of  7|^>       Q.  What  de
you  understand  by  throwing  down  the  columns  that  sustained  the
pillar  of  beauty?    A.  Two  reasons* — 1st.  When  the  temple  was
destroyed  by  Nabuzaradan,  general  of  the  army  of  Nebuchad-
nezzar, J  was  one  that  helped  to  defend  the  Delta,  on  which  was
engraved  die  ineffable  name;  and  I  broke  down  the  columns  of
beauty,  in  order  that  it  should  not  be  profaned  by  the  infidels .
2d.  As  I  have  deserved,  by  my  travel  and  labor,  the  beauty  of
die  great  'Adonai,'  (Lord,)  the  mysteries  of  Masonry,  in  pass-
ing the  seven  principal  degrees.     Q.  What  signifies  the  seven
planets?    A.  The  lights  of  the  celestial  globe  and  also  their  in-
fluence, by  which  every  matter  eiftsts  on  the  surface  of  the  earth
or  globe.     Q.  From  what  is  the  terrestrial  globe  formed?    A,
From  the  matter  which  is  formed  by  the  concord  of  the  four  ele-
ments, designed  by  the  four  triangles,  that  are  in  regard  to  them,
as  the  four  greater  planets.    Q  What  are  die  names  of  the  seven
planets?     A.   Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Venus,  Mercury,  and
Saturn.  Q.  Which  are  the  four  elements?  A.  Air,  fire,  earth,  and
water.     Q.  What  influence  have  the  seven  planets  on  the  four
elements?     A.  Three  general  matters  of  which  all  bodies  are
composed — life,  spirit,  and  body;  otherwise,  salt,  sulphur,  and
mercury.     Q.  What  is  life  or  salt?     A.  The  life  given  by  the
Eternal  Supreme,  or  the  planets,  the  agents  of  nature.    Q.  What
is  the  spirit  or  sulphur?    A.  A  fired  matter  subject  to  several
productions.    Q.  What  is  the  body  or  mercury?    A.  Matter  con-
ducted or  refined  to  its  form  by  the  union  of  salt  and  sulphur,  or
the  agreement  of  the  three  governors  of  nature.     Q.  What  are
those  three  governors  of  nature?     A.  Animal,  vegetable,  and
mineral.     Q.  What  is  animal?     A.  We  understand  in  this  life,
all  that  is  divine  and  amiable.     Q.  Which  of  the  elements  serve
for  his  productions?    A.  All  the  four  are  necessary,  among
which,  nevertheless,  air  and  fire  are  predominant;  and  it  is  those

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


268  LIGHT   ON  MASOlfeY.

that  render  the  animal  the  perfection  of,  the  three  government*?
which  man  is  elevated  to  by  one-fourth  of  the  breath  of  the  Di-
vine Spirit,  when  he  receives  his  soul.  Q.  What  is  the  vegeta-
ble? A.  All  that  seems  attached  to  the  earth  reigns  on  the  sur-
face. Q.  Of  what  is  it  composed?  A.  Of  a  generative  fire,
formed  into  a  body,  whilst  it  remains  in  the  earth,  and  is  purified
by  its  moisture  and  becomes  vegetable,  and  receives  life  by  air
and  water;  whereby  the  four  elements,  though  different,  co-ope-
rate jointly  and  separately*  Q.  What  is  the  mineral?  A.  All
that  is  generated  and  secreted  in  the  earth.  Q.  What  do  we  un-
derstand by  this  name]  A.  That  which  we  call  metals  and  demi-
metals  and  minerals.  Q.  What  is  it  that  composes  the  minerals?
A.  The  air  penetrating  by  the  celestial  influence,  into  the  earth,
meets  with  a  body,  which,  by  its  softness,  fixes,  congeals,  and
renders  the  mineral  matter  more  or  less  perfect  Q.  Which  are
the  perfect  metals?  A.  Gold  and  silver.  Q.  Which  are  the
imperfect  metals?  A.  Brass,  lead,  tin,  iron,  and  quicksilver.
Q.  How  come  we  by  the.  knowledge  of  these  things?  A.  By
frequent  observations  and  the  experiments  made  in  natural  phi-
losophy, which  have  decided  to  a  certainty,  that  nature  gives  a
perfection  to  all  things,  if  she  has  time  to  complete  her  opera-
tions. Q.  Can  art  bring  metal  to  perfection  so  fully  as  nature?
A.  Yes;  but  in  order  to  this,  you  must  have  an  exact  knowledge
of  nature.  Q.  What  will  assftt  you  to  bring  forth  this  knowl-
edge. A.  A  matter  brought  to  perfection;  this  has  been  sought
for  under  the  name  of  the  philosopher's  stone.  Q.  What  does  the
globe  represent?  A.  An  information  of  philosophers,  for  the
benefit  of  the  art  in  this  work.  Q.  What  signifies  the  words,
'Lux  ex  tenebris?'  A.  That  is  the  depth  of  darkness  you  ought
to  retire  from,  in  order  to  gain  the  true  light.  Q.  What  signifies
the  cross  on  the  globe?  A.  The  cress  is  the  emblem  of  the
true  elected.  Q.  What  represents  the  three  candlesticks?  A.
The  three  degrees  of  five,  which  the  artist  must  have  knowledge
to  give,  in  order  to  procure  the  matters  from  which  it  proceeds.
Q.  What  signifies  the  word  'Stibium?'  A.  It  signifies  antimo-
ny, or  the  first  matter  of  all  things.  Q.  What  signifies  the  seven
degrees?  A.  The  different  effectual  degrees  of  Masonry  which
you  must  pass  to  come  to  the  Sublime  Degree  of  Knights  of  the
Sun.     Q,  What  signifies  the  diverse  attributes  in  those  degrees?

A.  1st.  The  Btblt  or  God's  law,  which  we  ought  to  follow.

2d.  The  compass,  teaches  us  to  do  nothing  unjust.

3d.  The  square,  conducts  us  equal  to  the  same  end.

4th.  The  level,  demonstrates  to  us,  all  that  is  just  and  equitable.

5th.  The  perpendicular,  to  be  upright  and  subdue  the  vail  of
Prejudice.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  2£9

0th*  The  trestle-board,  is  the  image  of  our  reason,  where  the
functions  are  combined  to  effect,  compare,  and  think.

7th.  The  Rough  Stone,  is  the  resemblance  of  our  vices,  which
we  ought  to  reform.

8th.  The  Cubic  Stone,  is  our  passions,  that  we  ought  to  sur-
mount.

9th.  The  Columns,  signify  strength  in  all  things.

10th.  The  Blazing  Star,  teaches  that  our  hearts  ought  to  be
as  a  clear  sun,  among  those  that  are  troubled  with  the  things  of
this  life.

1 1th.  The  Key,  teaches  to  have  a  watchful  eye  over  those  who
are  contrary  to  reason.

12th.  The  Box,  teaches  to  keep  our  secrets  inviolably.

13th.  The  Um,  learns  us  that  we  ought  to  be  as  delicious
perfumes.

14th.  The  Brazen  Sea,  that  we  ought  to  purify  ourselves,  and
destroy  vice.

15th.  The  Circles  on  the  Triangles,  demonstrate  the  immen-
sity of  the  divinity  under  the  symbol  of  truth.

16th.  The  Poniard,  teacheth  the  step  of  the  elected,  many
are  called,  but  few  are  chosen  to  the  sublime  knowledge  of  pure
truth.

17th.  The  word  dlbra-est,  signifies  a  king  full  of  glory,  and
without  blot.

16th..  The  word  J&donai,  signifies  Sovereign  Creator  of  all
things.

19th.  The  Seven  Cherubims,  are  the  symbols  of  the  delights
of  life,  known  by  seeing,  hearing,  tasting,  feeling,  smelling,
tranquillity,  and  thought.

Q.  What  represents  the  sun?  A.  It  is  an  emblem  of  Di-
vinity, which  we  ought  to  regard  as  the  image  of  God.  This
immense  body,  represents  the  infinity  of  God's  wonderful  will,
as  (he  only  source  of  light  and  good.  The  heabof  the  sun  pro-
duces the  rule  of  the  seasons,  recruits  nature,  takes  darkness
from  the  winter,  iri  order  that  the  deliciousness  of  spring  might
succeed.— -End  of  the  Physical  Lecture.

GENERAL  LECTURE  IN  TfflS  DEGREE.

Q.  From  whence  came  you?  A.  From  the  centre  of  ihe
earth.  Q,  How  have  you  come  from  thence?  A.  By  reflec-
tion, and  the  study  of  nature.  Q.  Who  has  taught  you  this?
A.  Men  in  general  who  are  blind,  an*!ead  others  in  their  blind-
ness. Q:  What  do  you  understand  hf  this  Windness?  A.  Ido
not  understand  it  to  be  privy  to  their  mysteries^  but  I  understand

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


270  U6BT  ON  MASONRY.

undor  the  name  of  blindness,  those  who  cease  to  be  ardent,  after
they  have  been  privy  to  the  light  of  the  spirit  of  reason.  Q.  Who
are  those?  A.  Those  who,  through  the  prejudices  of  supersti-
tion and  fanatacism,  render  their  services  to  ignorance.  Q.
What  do  you  understand  by  fanatacism?  A.  The  zeal  of  all
particular  «ec&,  which  are  spread  over  the  earth,  who  commit
crimes,  by  making  offerings  to  fraud  and  falsehood.  Q.  And  do
you  desire  to  rise  from  this  darkness?  A.  My  desire  is  to  come
to  the  celestial  truth,  and  to  travel  by  the  light  of  the  sun.  Q.
What  represents  that  body?  A.  It  is  the  figure  of  an  only  God,
to  whom  we  ought  to  pay  our  adoration.  The  sun  being  the
emblem  of  God,  we  ought  to  regard  it  as  the  image  of  the  Di-
vinity; for  that  immense  body  represents  wonderfully,  the  infini-
ty of  God.  He  invigorates  and  produces  the  season,  and  re-
plenishes nature,  by  taking  the  horrors  from  winter,  and  produces
the  delights  of  spring.  Q.  What  does  the  triangle,  with  the  sun
in  the  centre,  represent?  A.  It  represents  the  immensity  of  the
Supreme.  Q.  What  signifies  the  three  B.  S.S?  A.  Sanctitas,
ScienUa,  and  SyrenUa,  which  signify  the  science  accompanied
with  wisdom,  which  make  men  holy.  Q.  What  signifies  the
three  candlesticks?  A.  Itrepresents  the  courses  of  life,  consid-
ered in  youth,  manhood,  and  old  age.  Q.  Has  it  any  other
meaning?  A.  Yes,  the  triple  light  that  shines  among  us,  in
order  to  take  men  out  of  darkness  and  ignorance  into  which  they
are  plunged,  and  to  bring  them  to  virtue,  truth,  and  happiness,  a
symbol  of  our  perfection.  Q.  What  signifies  the  four  triangles,
that  are  in  the  great  circles?  A.  They  are  the  emblems,  of  the
four  principal  views  of  the  life  of  tranquillity,  &o.  1st.  Fraternal
love  to  all  mankind  in  general,  more  particularly  for  our  brethren,
who  are  more  attached  to  us,  and  who,  with  honor,  have  seen  the
wretchedness  of  the  vulgar.  24.  To  be  cautious  among  us  of
things,  and  not  to  demonstrate  them  clearly,  to  any  who  are  not
proper  to  receive  them;  and  to  be  likewise  cautious  in  giving
credit  to  any  matter,  however  artfully  it  may  be  disguised,  with-
out a  self-conviction  in  the  heart  *  3d.  To  cast  from  us  every
matter  which  we  perceive  we  may  ever  repent  of  doing,  taking
cai»  of  this  moral  precept,  'To  do  to  every  one  of  your  fellow
creatures,  no  more  than  you  would  choose  to  be  done  to.'
4th.  We  ought  always  to  confide  in  our  Creator's  bounty,  and
to  pray  without  ceasing,  that  all  our  necessities  might  be  reliev-
ed, as  it  seems  best  to  him  for  our  advantage;'  to  wait  for  his
blessings  patiently  in  this  life;  to  be  persuaded  of  his  sublime
cjecrees,  that  whatever  might  fail,  contrary  to  our  wishes,  will  be
attended  with  good  consequences;  to  take  his  chastisements  pa.-


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  271

tiently,  and  be  assured  that  the  end  of  everything  has  been  done
by  him  for  the  best,  and  will  certainly  lead  us  to  eternal  happi-
ness hereafter.  Q.  Teach  us  the  signification  of  the  seven
planets  which  are  enclosed  in  a  triangle,  that  forms  the  rays  of
the  exterior  circles,  and  enclosed  in  the  grand  triangle.  A*  The
seven  planets,  according  to  philosophy,  represent  the  seven
principal  passions  of  the  life  of  man;  those  passions  are  very  use-
ful when  they  are  used  in  moderation,  for  which  the  Almighty
gave  them  to  us,  but  grow  fatal  and  destroy  the  body  when  let
loose,  and  therefore  it  is  our  particular  duty  to  subdue  them.
Q.  Explain  the  seven  passions  to  us?  A.  1st  The  propagation
of  species.  2d.  Ambition  of  acquiring  riches.  3d.  Ambition
to  acquire  glory  in  the  arts  and  sciences  among  men  in  general.
4th.  Superiority  in  civil  life.  5th.  Joys  and  pleasures  of  society.
6th.  Amusements  and  gaieties  of  life.     7th.  Religion.*

Q.  Which  is  the  greatest  sin  of  all  that  man  can  commit,
and  render  him  odious  to  God  and  map?  A.  Suicide  and  Homi-
cide. Q.  What  signifies  the  seven  cherubims,  whose  names  are
written  in  the  circle,  called  the  'First  Heaven?'  A.  They  repre-
sent the  corporeal  delights  of  this  life,  which  the  Eternal  gave  to
man,  when  he  created  him,  and  are,  seeing,  hearing,  smelling,
lasting,  feeling,  tranquillity,  and  thought.  Q.  What  signifies  the
figure  in  the  moon,  which  we  regard  as  die  figure  or  image  of
conception?  A.  The  purity  of  nature,  which  procures  the  holi-
ness of  the  body;  and  mat  there  ie  nothing  imperfect  in  the  eyes
ofthe  Supreme.  Q.  What  signifies  the  figure  of  the  columns?
They  are  the  emblem  of  our  souls,  which  is  the  breath  of  life,
proceeding  from  the  All  Puissant,  which  ought  not  to  be  soiled

•  by  the  works  of  the  body,  but  to  be  firm  as  columns.  Q.  What
does  the  figure  in  the  porch,  which  carries  a  lamb  in  his  arms,
represent?  A.  The  porch  ornamented  with  the  columns  of  Ja-
chin  and  Boaz,  and  surmounted  with  the  grand  I,  represents  our  .
body,  over  which  we  ought  to  have  a  particular  care,  in  watching
our  conversation,  and  also  to  watch  our  needs,  as  the  shepherd
his  flock,  Q.  What  signifies  the  two  letters  I  and  B,  at  the
porch?  A.  They  signify  our  entrance  in  the  order  of  Masonry;
also  the  firmness  ofthe  soul,  which  we  ought  to  p^wtess^from  the
hour  of  our  initiation;  these  we  ought  to  merit,  before  we  can
come  to  the  sublime  degrees  of  knowing  holy  truth,  and  we  bright
to  preserve  them,  and  be  firm  in  whatever  situation  we  may  be  in,

^  not  knowing  whether  it  may  return  to  our  good  or  evil  in  the  pas-
sage of  this  life.  What  signifies  the  large  I  in  the  triangle,  on
the  crown  of  the  portico?  A.  That  large  I,  being  the  initial  of
the  mysterious  name  of  the  Great  Architect  of  the  Universe,

*  Mind  this.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


272  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

whose  greatness  we  should  always  have  in  our  minds,  and  that
our  labor*  ought  to  be  employed  to  please  him;  which  we  should
always  have  in  our  view,  as  the  sure  and  only  source  of  our  ac-
tions. Q.  What  signifies  the  seven  steps,  that  lead  to  the  entry
of  the  porch?  A.  They  mark  the  seven  degrees  in  Masonry,
which  are  the  principal,  which  we  ought  to  arrive  to,  in  order  to
come  to  the  knowledge  of  holy  truth.  Q.  What  does  the  ter-
restial  globe  represent]  A.  The  world  which  we  inhabit,  and
wherein  Masonry  is  its  principal  ornament  Q.  What  is  the  ex-
planation of  the  great  word,  Adonai?  A.  It  is  the  word  which
God  gave  to  Adam,  for  him  to  pray  by;  a  word  which  our  com-
mon father  never  pronounced  without  trembling.  Q.  What  sig-
nifies Lux  ex  tencbrh.  A.  A  man  made  clear  by  the  k^ht  of
reason;  penetrating  this  obscurity  of  ignorance  and  superstition.
Q.  What  signifies  the  river  across  the  globe?  A.  It  represents
the  utility  of  our  passions,  which  are  necessary  to  man  in  the
course  of  his  life,  as  water  is  necessary  to  render  the  earth  fer-
tile; as  the  sun  draws  up  the  water,  which  being  purified,  falls  on
the  earth  and  gives  verdure.  Q.  What  signifies  the  cross,  sur-
rounded by  two  serpents,  on  the  top  of  the  globe?  A.  It  repre-
sents to  us  not  to  repeat  the  vulgar  prejudices;  to  be  prudent,  and
to  know  the  bottom  of  the  heart.  In  matters  of  religion  to  be
always  prepared;  not  to  be  of  the  sentiments  with  sots,  idiots,  and
the  lovers  of  the  mysteries  of  religion;  id  avoid  such,  and  not  in
the  least,  to  hold  any  conversation  with  them.  Q.  What  signifies
the  book,  with  the  word  Bible  written  in  it?  A.  As  the  Bible  is
differently  interpreted,  by  tile  different  sects,  who  dfvide  the  di£
ferent  parts  of  the  earth:  Thus  the  true  sons  of  light,  or  chil*
dren  of  truth,  ought  to  doubt  of  every  thing  at  present,  as*  rays-  *
teries  or  metaphysics:  Thus  all  the  decisions  of  theology  and
philosophy,  teach  not  to  admit  thai,  which  is  not  demonstrated  as
clearly,  as  that  2  and  %  are  equal  to  4;  and  on  the  whole  to  adore
God,  and  him  only;  to  love  him  better  than  yourself;  and  always
to  have  a  confidence  on  the  bounties  "and  promises  of  our  Crea-
tor, Amen.  Anden.  Amen.

To  dose  the  council— Q.  (By  Father  Adam,)  Brother  Truth,
what  progress  have  menrcaade  on  earth,  to  come  to  true  happiness?
A.  (By  Brother  Truth,)  Mett  havfc  always  ffcifenonthe  vu%ar
prejudices,  which  are  nothntg  but  falsehood;  very  few  have  strug-
gled, and  less  have  knocked  at  the  door  of  this  hoi/  place,  to  at-
tain the  full  light  of  real  truth,  which  we  afl  ought  to  acquire.

Then  says  Father  Adam,  'My  dear  children,  depart'  and  go
among,  men,  endeavor  to  inspire  them  with  the  desire  of  knowing
holy  truth,  the  pure  source  of  all  perfection;  Father  Adam  then.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.  273

puts  his  right  hand  on  his  left  breast;  when  all  the  brethren  raise
the  first  finger  of  the  right  hand,  and  then  the  Council  of  the
Knights  of  tiie  Sun  is  closed,  by  seven  knocks.


KNIGHT  OF  KADOSH*

Chapter  of  the  Grand  Inspector  of  lodgesr  Grand  Elected
Knight  of  Kadosh,  or  the  White  and  Black  Eagle.  The  Chief
is  the  Thrice  Illustrious  Frederick  king  of  Prussia,  under  the
title  of  Thrice  Illustrious  Knight,  Grand  Commander.

Opening  of  the  chapter.— The  chapter  of  the  Grand  Elected
must  be  composed  of  five  brothers,  every  one  vested  in  this  de-
gree. They  must  be  all  dressed  in  black,  with  white  gloves.
The  order,  a  broad  black  ribbon,  worn  from  the  left  shoulder  to
the  right  hip;  to  which  hangs  the  attribute  of  the  order,  being  a
Red  Cross;  the  same  as  the  Teutonic  Knights  used  to  wear,  in
the  middle  of  two  swordsr  a  cross,  like  a  St.  Andrews.  No
aprons  aie  worn.

In  this  chapter  there  are  no  decorations,  nor  any  emblem,  as
the  curtain  is  entirely  drawn.  There  is  nothing  figured  on  the
ground  but  the  mysterious  ladder,  which  must  be  covered  until
the  candidate  has  taken  his  obligation.  Observe  this  well;  you
are  never  to  admit  a  person  to  this  eminent  degree,  unless  you
have  full  proof  of  his  fidelity.  Of  the  five  brothers  who  com*
pose  this  chapter,  two  must  be  with  the  candidate  in  another
apartment,  until  he  is  introduced,  the  other  three  remain  in  the
chapter  to  assist  in  the  reception.  In  a  distant  place,  a  Knight
of  Kadosh  cannot  imitate  another  brother  in  this  eminent  de-
gree, unless  he  has  a.  proper  power  or  patent  from  an  Inspector
General  or  a  Deputy  Grand  Inspector,  under  his  hand  and  seal;
and  when  a  reception  is  made,  the  Grand  Commander  remains
alone  in  the  chapter  with  the  candidate,  and  must  be  so  situated
that  the  candidate  cannot  see  him,  as  he  is  not  to  know  who  in-
itiated him.

Form  of  opening  the  chapter. — Q.  Illustrious  Knight,  are  you
elected?  A.  Thrice  Illustrious  Knight,  Grand  Commander,  I
am.  Q.  How  came  you  to  be  elected?  A.  Fortune  decided
for  me.  Q.  What  proof  can  you  give  me  of  your  reception?
A.  A  cavern  has  been  witness  of  it.  Q.  What  did  you  do  in
the  cavern?  A.  I  executed  my  commission.  Q.  Have  you
penetrated  further?  A.  Yes,  Thrice  Illustrious  Grand  Com-
mander.    Q.  How  shall  I  believe  you?    A.  My  name  is  Knight

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


274  UGHT   ON  MASONRY.

of  Kadosh;  you  understand  me?  Q.  What's  the  o'clock?  A.
The  hour  of  silence.  Q.  As  it  is  so,  give  me  the  sign,  to  con-
vince me  of  your  knowledge,  ■  on  which  they  all  draw
their  swords,  when  the  Grand  Commander  knocks  owe,  re ry  hard,
on  the  table  before  him,  and  says:  Illustrious  Knights,  the  chap-
ter is  open.  As  soon  as  the  Knights  with  the  Candidate  in  the
antechamber,  have  heard  the  one  blow  in  the  chapter,  by  which
they  know  the  'chapter  is  open,  one  of  them  comes  and  knocks
oat  on  the  door,  one  in  the  chapter  goes  and  opens  the  door  and
asks  what  he  wants?  He  replies,  that  a  servant  Knight  demands
to  come  to  the  degree  of  Grand  Elected,  as  he  has  ail  the- de-
grees and  qualifications  of  Masonry  which  are  necessary;  which
being  reported  to  the  Thrice  Illustrious  Commander,  who  says:
Illustrious  Knights,  can  we  admit  this  Free  Mason  among  us,
without  running  any  risk  of  indiscretion  from  him?  The  other
two  Knights  then  answer,  we  swear  and  promise  for  him.  Then
the  Thrice  Illustrious  Grand  Commander  approaches  and  they
take  each  other  by  the  hand,  and  take  the  following  obligation  to
each  other:—*  We  promise  and  swear,  by  the  living  God,  always
supreme,  to  revenge  the  death  of  our  ancestor,  and  which  of  us
that  should  in  any  manner  commit  the  most  light  indiscretion,
touching  the  secret  of  our  order,  shall  suffer  death,  and  shaft
have  his  body  buried  under  the  throne  of  this  Illustrious  Assem-
bly; so  God  protect  us  in  our  design*,  and  maintain  us  in  equity
and  right,'  Amen.

Form  of  reception.— A  short  time  after  the  two  Knights  with
the  candidate,  have  heard  the  loud  rap  of  the  Grand  Commander,
to  open  the  chapter,  they  both  take  their  hands,  and  after  one  of
them  has  been  at  the  door,  and  when  they  think  the  Grand  Com-
mander has  finished  the  necessary  business,  they  introduce  the
candidate  and  leave  him  in  the  hands  of  the  Grand  Commander,
and  all  four  retire  to  guard  the  door  of  the  entrance,  and  every
other  door  of  the  adjacent  rooms,  (if  any.)  The  reason  of  their
leaving  the  chapter  is,  that  no  person  ever  assisted  at  the  recep-
tion of  a  Knight  Templar.  When  the  candidate  enters  the
chapter,  he  prostrates  his  face  to  the  ground,  when  the  Grand
Commander,  behind  the  curtain,  reminds  him  of  the  principal
points  of  Masonry,  from  its  beginning,  to  the  epoch  of  the  as-
sassination of  Hiram  Abiff;  Solomon's  desire  of  punishing  the
traitors,  in  the  most  exemplary  manner;  the  method  he  took  in
disposing  the  Masters  who  went  in  search  of  the  three  villains,
in  order  to  execute  his  vengeance;  he  repeats  to  him  the  zeal,
constancy  and  fervency  of  Joabert,  Stokin  and  Jubelum,  who,
after  the  most  painful  search,  (by  Solomon's  order,)  had  the  hap-


y  Google


LIGHT   Off   MASONRY.  275

piness  of  finding  among  the  ruins  of  Enoch's  temple  in  the  Ninth
Arch,  the  precious  treasure  of  the  Perfect  Masons,  &c.  &c.  &c.
He  continues  to  remind  him  of  the  firmness  of  the  Grand  Eject,
and  Perfect  Masons,  at  the  time  of  the  temple's  destruction,
when  they  passed  through  the  enemy,  at  all  risks,  till  they  ob-
tained an  entrance  into  the  sacred  vault,  to  find  the  pillar  of  beau-
ty, that  they  might,  by  effacing  the  ineffable  word,  hinder  its  be-
ing exposed  to  the  profane.     He  then  reminds  him  of  the  sev-
enty-two year's  captivity,  and  the  clemency  of  Cyrus,  king  of
Pjersia;  who,  by  the  request  of  Zerubbabel,  not  only  gave  the  Is-
raelites their  freedom,  but  ordered  that  all  the  treasure  of  the
temple,  taken  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  should  be  restored  to  them,
in  order  to  decorate  the  new  temple,  which  he  ordered  them  to
build  to  the  infinite  God,  and  created  them  Knights.     Then  he
repeats  the  clemency  of  Darius  to  Zerubbabel,  (at  the  head  of
the  embassy  from  Jerusalem  to  Babylon,)  with  their  complaints
against  the  Samaritans,  who  refused  to  contribute  to  the  sacrifi-
ces of  the  new  temple,  according  to  the  proclamation  of  his  pred-
ecessor, Cyrus,  in  faver  of  the  Knights  of  the  east;  when  they
received  Darius'  letters  to  all  the  governors  of  Samaria,  &c;
how  the  embassadors  were  received  on  their  return  to  Jerusa-
lem; and  elected  princes  by. the  people.    He  then  reminds  him,
that  after  this,  the  second  temple  being  destroyed,  how  the  most       A
zealous  Masons  united  under  chiefs,  and  worked  to  the  reforma-  ta^r
tion  of  manners,  and  elevated  in  their  hearts  some,  spiritual  edi-?'^
fice,  and  rendered  themselves  worthy  by  their  works.     They >
were  more  particularly  esteemed  and  distinguished  in  the  time
of  Manchin,  who  was  the  most  remarkable  among  them.    A
great  many  others  embraced  Christianity,  and  communicated  their
secrets  to  those  Christians,  whom  they  found  had  the  good  quali-
ties of  it,  living  in  common,  and  forming  themselves  as  one  fam-
ily; which  shows  how  the  brilliant  order  of  Masons  sustained
themselves  until  the  sixth  age,  and  how  it  fell  into  a  state  of  leth-
argy^ after  that;  notwithstanding  which,  there  have  been  always
round  some  faithful  Masons;  which  is  clearly  proved  by  the  bril-
liant manner  in  which  the  order  of  Masonry  was  received,  in  the
year  of  1118,  when  eleven  Grand  Elect  and  Perfect  Masons,
the  most  zealous,  presented  themselves  to  Garinous,  prince  of
Jerusalem,  Patriarch  and  Knight  Mason,  and  pronounced  their
promises  between  his  bands.     They  taught  him  the  succession
of  the  time,  and  progress  to  the  time  that  the  princes  went  to
conquer  the  holy  land.     The  alliance  and  obligations  that  were
formed  between  those  princes,  was,  that  they  would  spill  the  las*
drop  of  their  blood,  in  order  to  establish  in  Jerusalem,  the  wor-


y  Google


276  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

ship  of  the  Most  High.  He  informs  him,  that  the  peace  which
took  place  after  these  wars,  hindered  them  from  accomplishing
their  design,  and  therefore,  have  continued  in  theory,  what  they
had  sworn  to  do  practically,  never  admitting  in  their  order,  only
those  who  bad  given  proofs  of  friendship,  constancy  and  discre-
tion. In  fine,  the  Illustrious  Grand  Commander,  makes  a  gene-
ral history  in  genealogy,  of  the  Masonic  order,  its  progress,  its,
decline,  and  the  manner  how  it  was  sustained,  till  the  epoch  of
the  crusades,  and  until  the  historical  circumstances,  that  has
given  occasion  to  the  degree  which  the  candidate  expects;  a  de-
gree, that  will  give  him  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  precedent
degrees,  and  the  manner  how  Masonry  has  come  to  us;  after
which,  the  candidate  takes  the  following  obligation,  his  right
hand  on  the  Bible,  his  left  hand  between  the  hands  of  the  Grand
Commander.

Obligation.— I  promise  and  swear,  never  to  reveal  the  secrets
of  the  Grand  Elected  Knights  of  Kadosh,  or  White  and  Black
Eagle,  to  any  person.     I  swear  to  take  revenge  on  the  traitors  of
Ma8<mry\  and  never  to  receive  in  this  degree,  none  but  a  broth*
er  who  has  come  to  the  degrees  of  Prince  of  Jerusalem  and
Knight  of  the  Sun,  and  then  only  by  an  authority  given  to  me  by
a  Grand  Commander  or  Deputy  Inspector,  under  his  hand  and
seal.    I  promise  to  be  ready  at  all  times  to  conquer  the  Holy
Land,  when  I  shall  be  summoned  to  appear,  to  pay  due  obedi-
ence at  all  times,  to  the  Princes  ef  the  Royal  Secret;  and  ift  I
fail  in  this  my  obligation,  I  desire  that  all  the  penalties  of  nry
former  obligations  may  be  inflicted  on  me,  Amen.     He  kisses
the  Bible,  and  rises,     Then  the  Grand  Commander  proceeds
and  says,  'My  dear  brother,  he  who  has  bestowed  this  degree  on
you,  which  you  have  now  aspired  to,  and  who  is  described  in  this
place,  as  Grand  Commander,  and  Grand  Inspector  of  all  lodges,
and  Grand  Elected,  is  sensible  of  the  importance  of  the  secret
already  confided  in  you;  it  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  recommend
a  circumspection,  and  also  to  observe  to  those  who  take  the  name
of  Knights  of  the  White  and  Black  Eagle,  and  Kadosh,  to  be  al-
ways attentive,  and  not  to  give  the  least  suspicion  relative  to
our  mysteries,  order,  progress  and  end  of  Masonry.      The  im-
prudence and  indiscretion  of  many  brothers,  has  given  a  know-
ledge to  the  world  of  many  of  our  emblems,  by  which  Masonry
has  greatly  suffered,  and  will  be  repaired  with  difficulty.     Their
indiscretion  has  caused  the  loss  and  retreat  of  many  Puissant
brothers,  who  would  have  been  an  ornament  and  support  of  our
lodge.     Such  indiscretion  in  this  degree,  my  dear  brother,  would
be  without  any  recovery,  as  there  are  no  more  emblems;  when


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY?  277

tsrery  matter,  shall  be  discovered,  and  disclosed  to  you,  that  will
give  room  for  some  events,  of  which,  you  will  see  the  conse-
quences, when  you  shall  have  heard  all  my  instructions.  The
word  which  our  brothers  place  at  the  end  of  their  obligations,  viz.
Amen;  signifies  this  is  no  more,  that  shall  be  no  more;  if  this  shall
be  again.  This  ought  no  longer  to  be  a  secret  to  you,  who  are
going  to  have  an  explanation  of  the  origin  of  Masonry,  and  what
has  occasioned  the  society.

Truth  penetrates  the  cloud  and  the  shade,  which  we  can  leave,
to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  what  we  were  before  in  quality  of
Knights  of  Kadosh,  White  and  Black  Eagle,  and  what  we  are  as
Symbolic  Masons,  and  what  we  can  be  by  the  destruction  of  our
enemies ;  Let  us  pray.    Prayer.-^ 0  most  eternal,  beneficial
and  all  gracious,  great  Architect  of  the  universe;  we  from  the  se-
cret depths  of  our  hearts,  offer  thee  a  living  sacrifice.    We  be-
seech thee  to  inspire  our  enemies  with  a  just  sense  of  the  evil
they  have  done  us,  and  from  their  having  a  conviction  of  their
wrongs,  they  might  atone  for  their  manifold  injuries,  which  doth
not  belong  to  us  thy  servants  to  redress  ourselves,  but  by  their
eyes  being  opened  we  might  be  reconciled,  and  by  a  hearty  union
take  possession  of  those  blessed  lands  where  the  original  Temple*
was  first  established,  where  we  might  be  gathered  into  one  band,
there  to  celebrate  thy  holy  praises  once  more  on  the  holy  mount,
in  whose  Rowels  was  deposited  thy  ever  glorious,  respectable,
ever  blessed,  and  awful  name.  Amen*    Then  the  veil  is  taken
from  the  floor,  and  he  continues,  *  Learn  that  the  slightest  indis-
cretion, will  infallibly  undermine  us  and  throw  us  into  an  horrible
abyss,  where  we  should  see  buried  the  whole  order  of  Masonry,
the  remains  of  an  Illustrious  and  Glorious  Order.     By  its  hero-
ism, in  favour  of  the  unfortunate,  how  great  it  has  been  in  the
time  when  its  power,  authority  and  riches  were  arrived  to  the
highest  pitch,  when  the  distinguished  birth  of  those  who  Were*
members  of  it,  celebrated  its  glory.    It  was  not  less  so  in  its
tragic  end,  when  by  the  noble  firmness  of  these  knights  who
appeared  in  the  middle  of  irons,  frames  and  torments.     What
cun  we  think  of  the  prophecy  of  James  DeMolay,  and  which
was  verified  according  to  his  prediction.    What  respect  ought  we
not  to  have,  for  the  courageous  zeal  of  those,  who  have  kept  the
precious  remains  of  an  order  which  the  blackest  treason,  envy,
and  the  most  atrocious  malignity  has  not  been  able  to  extin-
guish !    What  hatred  ought  not  we  to  have ,  to  those  usurpers  who
occupy  theg  wealth  and  dignity  of  this  order  I    They  cannot  be
regarded  but  only  as  a  powerful  enemy,  the  ashes  of  which  ought
jto  renew  that  unfortunate  period,  when  the  members  of  the
Z

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


i


V


273  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.

knights  shall  be  increased,  so  that  they  shall  be  able,  under  the
auspices  and  conduct  of  a  Grand  arid  Powerful  Commander,  to
retake  the  possession  of  all  the  wealth  and  dignity  which  did  be-
long to  them  formerly,  and  is  now  held  by  those  who  have  no
other  title,  this  day,  but  injustice  and  malignity.

This  is  not  said,  my  dear  brother,  to  intimidate  those  who  have,
as  well  as  yourself,  aspired  to  this  degree  which  we  are  going  to
confer  on  you  this  day,  or  to  inspire  them  with  an  ardor  or
indiscreet  zeal,  for  they  ought  every  one  to  wait  the  time  in  si-
Jence,  to  become  essential;  and  if  the  trust  isf  the  more  authentic
mark  of  sincere  friendship,  they  ought  to  wish  to  augment  the
number  of  the  Knights,  and  fear  to  confer  this  degree,  with  too
much  confidence,  on  an  ordinary  friend,  lest  his  discretion  should
not  be  so  sure  as  your  own.  You  remember,  my  dear  brother,  the
obligation  you  have  taker!  between  my  hands,  at  the  beginning
of  the  ceremony— and  to  render  you  the  justice  yott  deserve,  I
have  too  good  an  opinion  of  you  to  fear  the  least  indiscretion  in
you,  concerning  the  first  notions  I  have  given  you  of  thickest
degree  of  Masonry.  If  in  this  discourse  you  have  made  any
remark  that  would  keep  you  from  pronouncing  the  obligation
or  vow  we  are  obliged  to  take  from  vou,  before  we  can  give  you
greater  knowledge  of  the  degree  of  *Grand  Elected  Knights  of
Kadosh,'  consult  yourself  and  see  if  you  are  disposed  to  pene-
trate farther,  and  fulfil  exactly  all  the  points  of  the  obligation
you  are  going  to  pronounce  with  me,  in'  order  to  link  you  to  us
for  ever.9    There  is  a  pause  for  some  time.

Note. — If  the  candidate  is  afraid  to  engage  in,  or  hesitates
to  pronounce  the  farther  obligations,  the  Illustrious  Grand
Commander,  without  going  further,  sends1  him  out,  and  closes
the  chapter.  In  regard  to  the  notions  which  the  candidate
might  have  already,  the  obligation  iohich  her  has  already  taken,
will  assure  us  of  Ins  discretion.  If,  on  the  contrary,  he  per-
sists in  going  further,  and  will  take  the  ^ligation,  the  Grand
Commander  continues*  the  ceremony  in  the^following  maimer:—
The  candidate  kneels  at  the  feet  of  the  Grdnd  Corrimander,
puts  his  right  hami  oh  the  Brole,  and  Imr  toft  itetwecn  the  hands
of  the  Grand  Commander— wrieir  in  thfa  posture,  the  €*rand
Commander  says,  *You  swear  and  promise  to  me,  on  that  you
hold  rriost  dear  and  sacred,  1st;  To  practSceiltbe'  works  of  'corpc^
real  mercy,  to  live  and  die  in  your  relig^,*:arid^ever  declare  to
any  man  whoreteived  yoti,  ot  assisted  at  your  reception  intKfc

♦Suppose  the  ttto&tat  of  the  candidate  tb  ,/Mjt,  end  he  betopn^  com4ne*ed
of  bit  error,  what  shall  he  do  ?  He  must  either  live  and  die  contending  for
that  he  knows  to  be  a  lie  or  break  his  masonic  oattt  I

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON  MASONBY  279

sublime  degree.'     Tbe  candidate  answer*,  (I  promise  and  swear;'
then  the  Grand  Commander  say*,  'say  with  me,  lhcdhaladJ
which  he  repeats.  2dly.  ' You  promise  and  swear  to  have  candor
in  all  your  actions,  in  consequence  never  to  receive  in  this  de-
gree, any  brother  who  is  not  your  most  intimate  friend,  and  therr
by  the  consent  of  two  Grand  Elected  Inspectors,  if  to  be  met
with,  or  by  a  patent  given  you  for  that  purpose  ;'  the  candidate
answers,  cl  promise  and  swear.'     He  then  repeats  iSc1larlahac.,
3cUy.  'You  promise  and  swear  at  all  times  to  possess  a  sweet-
ness of  mind,  as  much  as  you  are  capable;,  to  love  and  cherish
your  brothers  as  yourself,  to  help  them  in, their  necessities,  to
Visit  and  assist  them  when  they  are  sick,  and  never  draw  arms
against  them  on  any  pretence  whatsoever.'    Ans.  'I  promise  and
swea^ — say  with  me,  'Jlfofecfc.'    4th.  'You  promise  and  swear
to  regulate  your  discourse  by  truth,  and  to  keep  with  great  cir-
cumspection and  regard  the  degree  of  the  White  and  Black  Ea-
gle or  Kadosh.'   He  answers,  '1  promise  and  swear;'  say  with  me,
* EmunahS     5th.  'You  promise  and  swear  that  you  will  travel
for  the  advancement  of  heaven,  and  to  follow  at  all  times,  and  in
all  points,  every  matter  that  you  are  ordered  and  prescribe,  by
the  Illustrious  Knights  and  Grand  Commander,  to  whose  orders
you  swear  submissio  n  and  obedience,  on  all  occasions  without  any
restrictions.'    He  answers/ 1  promise  and  swear*'    Say  with  mer
'Hamach  Sciata.     6th.  'You  promise  and  swear  to  me,  to  have
patience  in  adversity,  and  you  swear  never  to  receive  a  brother
in  this  degree,  on  any  pretext  whatsoever,  whose  will  is  not  free,
as  religious  monks  and  all  those  who  have  made  vows  without
restriction  to  superiors.'     He  answers,  'I  ^omise  and  swear.'
Say  with  me  'SabaeU    7th»  'You  promise^jyHe  end,  and  swear
to  keep  inviolably  secret,  what  I  am  goinf^fco  confide  'to  you
— to  sacrifict  the  traitors  of  Masonry — and  4^  look  upon  the
Knights  of  Malta,  as  our  enemies — to  renounce  for  ever  to  be  in
that  order,  and  regard  them  as  the  unjust  usurpers  of  the  rights,
titles  and  dignities  of  the  Knights  Templars,  in  whose  possession
you  hope  to  outer  with  the  help  of  the  Almighty.'    He  answers,
*'I  promise  and  swear.'     Then  say  with  me  'Gkotmelf  'BinahJ
'Tabinah.'     After  the  candidate  has  pronounced  the  last  word,
the  Grand  Commander  relieves  him  and  says,   'By  the  seven
conditions,  and  by  the  power  that  is  transmitted  to  me,  which  I
have  acquired  by  my  discretion,  my  untired  travels,  zeal,  fervor
and  constancy, .  I  receive  you  Grand  Inspector  of  all  lodges,
Grand  Elect  Knight  Templar,  and  take  rank  among  the  Knights
of  Kadosh,  or  White  and  Black  Eagle  which  we  bear  the  name  of,
I  desire  yau  not  to.  forget  it*,   fi  is  indispensable  for  you,  my

Digitized  by  VjC


280  LIGHT   OX   MASONRY.

brother,  to  mount  the  mysterious  ladder,  which  you  see  there,  it
will  serve  to  instruct  you  in  the  mysteries  of  our  order  and  h  is
absolutely  necessary  that  you  should  have  a  true  knowledge  of  it.
The  candidate  then  assends  the  ladder,  when  he  is  on  the  seventh
or  highest  step,  and  has  pronounced  the  three  last  words,  the
ladder  is  lowered,  and  the  candidate  passes  over  it,  because  he
cannot  retire  the  same  way,  as  he  would  in  such  a  case  be  obliged
to  go  back  against  which  he  has  taken  an  obligation,  not  to  re-
tire by  the  interests  and  views  of  the  order,  which  is  the  reason
that  the  ladder  is  lowered  and  he  passes  over  it.  He  then  reads
the  words  at  the  bottom  of  the  ladder,  'JW  plus  ultra.?


o


*2

o


I


c


<&-


o


y  Google


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  231

Then  the  Grand  Commander  embraces  the  candidate,  and
says  to  him,  'My  dear  brother,  I  am  going  to  give  you  the  sign,
token,  and  word,  with  the  pass  word  of  the  Grand  Elected  and
Grand  Inspectors,  after  I  have  given  you  the  explanation  of  the
mysterious  ladder  which  you  have  ascended  and  passed  over,
without  knowing  the  reason  thereof.  This  ladder,  my  dear  bro-
ther, is  the  most  essential  and  analagous  to  the  history  which  I
shall  recite  to  you.  Like  a  ladder  she  is  composed  of  two  sup*
porters,  which  will  give  you  a  just  idea  of  the  strength  which
Philip  Le  Belle,  (or  the  fair,)  king  of  France,  had,  in  his  union
with  Pope  Cltment  the  VI.  The  reunion  of  the  second  suppoit-
crs,  by  the  seven  steps,  gives  you  a  just  idea  of  the  seven  condi-
tions that  Philip,  the  fair,  imposed  on  the  archbishop,  Birtrand
Got,  to  make  him  Popo,  and  the  two  supporters  being  united  by  the
seven  steps  or  conditions,  are  the  base  of  the  union  between  the
King  and  this  Pope  elect*  The  seven  steps  are  also  a  resem-
blance of  the  seven  points  of  your  obligation,  which  you  have
contracted,  and  in  the  same  manner  Philip,  the  fair,  made  JBer-
trand  Got  take;  that  by  the  seventh  article,  he  swore  the  final
destruction  of  the  Knights  Templars;  and  in  the  same  manner,  of
the  seven  points  of  your  obligation,  you  swear  to  bear  an  impla-
cable hatred  to  the  Knights  of  Malta,  and  engage  yourself  to
endeavor  their  total  destruction,  in  order  to  reclaim  the  rights  and
dignities  which  they  possess,  Lastly,  this  moment,  my  dear  ^f -
brother,,  is  the  time  to  instruct  you  in  full,  in  the  degree  of  Grand^^
Elected,  and  which  gives  us  a  true  knowledge  how  Masonry
came  to  us.  Attend  to  that  painful  story — you  will  easily  make
the  application  yourself  the  more  you  are  instructed^

The  hitfory. — After  the  death  of  Benedict  the  XL  who  died  Ju-
ly 13th,  1304,  the  cardinals  met  for  the  election  of  a  new  Pope,
and  formed  themselves  in  two  factions,  French  and  Italians;
Philip,  the  fair,  king  of  France,  had  then  several  views  which
could  be  accomplished  without  the  assistance  of  the  Pope,  to
be  elected;  and  as  his  party  in  the  conclave  fomented  these  divi-
sions to  favor  Philip's  design,  who  taking  advantage  of  these
circumstances,  sent  for  Rertrand  GotT  then  archbishop  of  Bor-
deaux, son  of  Bertrand,  lord  of  Villaodran,  in<  the  same  diocese,
and  in  the  conference  which  he  had  with  him  at  a  pleasant  coun-
try seat,  near  St.  John  of  Angels,  when  he  informed  him  of  his
design,  and  the  division  in  the  conclave,  which  put  it  in  his  pow-
er to  elect  a  Pope,  and  that  he  was  disposed  to  favor  him,  pro-
vided he  would  swear  to  perform  seven  articles,  the  seventh  of
which  was,  to  be  even  a  secret  to  him  until  the  time  for  the  exe-
cution of  it  should  be  ripe.     Accordingly  he  revealed  the  six  first

Zi

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


282  treHT*  ON  MASONRY.

articles  which  are  foreign  to  our  history,  but  the  Seventh,  for  the
exact  performance  of  which,  they  both  took  the  sacrament  to
each  other's  promise;  and  Philip,  the  fair,  took  the  brother  and
nephew  of  Btrtrand  Le  Gfof,  as  hostages  for  the  seventh  article.
This  king  having  found  a  man  fit  for  his  purpose  to  be  the  agent
for  his  revenge,  caused  him  to  be  elected  Pope,  and  promoted  to
St.  Peter's  chair,  in  the  year  1305,  under  the  name  of  CUmtnt  Y.
This  Pope  after  his  election  established  his  see  at  the  city  of  Ly-
ons, where  his  first  care  was  to  execute  the  six  first  conditions
which  Philip  had  imposed  on  him.  The  time  of  declaring  the
seventh  being  arrived,  Philip  did  not  delay  in  declaring  to  the
Pope,  that  by  his  oath  he  was  to  join  him,  to  entirely^destroy  and
exterminate  the  Knights  Templars,  to  the  extent  of  Christianity,
Here  is  what  attracted  the  hatred  of  Philip  the  fair,  and  what
made  him  take  the  barbarous  resolution  against  them  all.

Some  time  before  the  death  of  Benoit  the  XI.  there  was  a  se-
dition in  Paris,  occasioned  by  Philip,  who  had  coined  some  mo-
ney, which  was  light,  mixed  with  base  metal,  on  which  the  popu-
lace were  mutinous,  who  plundered  and  demolished  the  house
of  Stephen  Beribet,  master  of  the  mint.  They  went  afterwards
to  the  king's  dwelling  and  committed  a  great  deal  of  indecency,
so  that  every  matter  conspired  an  insurrection.  The  Knights
Templars  (against  whom  envy  had  raised  many  powerful  ene-
mies,) were  suspected  to  have  been  at  the  bottom  of  these  outra-
_  i,  although  without  any  foundation,  and  their  rain  was  deter-
mined by  the  king;  for  which  purpose  he  sought  the  means  of
obtaining  assistance,  when  the  most  favorable  opportunity  offered
itself  by  the  death  of  Benoit  the  XI.  In  order  to  pot  in  his  stead
a  Pope,  on  certain  conditions,  that  should  be  imposed  on  him,.
nothing  was  now  wanting  but  a  pretence,  for  when  force  and  au-
thority are  in  hand,  every  matter  becomes  easy;  for  which  purpose
they  prevailed  on  two  abandoned  men  with  money,  whose  names
were  Gerard  Labe  and  Benoii  Mehuy.  They  proposed  to  them
to  get  admission  among  the  Knights  Templars,  and  when  admit-
ted into  their  mysteries,  to  accuse  the  whole  order  of  the-greatest
crimes,  which  these  two  villains  executed  exactly*  They  desir-
ed to  be  received  into  the  order,  which  was  an  easy  matter,  as
they  had  an  honest  exterior,  titles,  and  apparent  qualities,  be-
sides a  supposed  credit  at  court  Everyone  was  in  their  favor,
and  they  were  received;  but  it  was  not  long  before  the  Templars
repented  heartily  of  having  lighted  the  firebrand,  which  was  the
cause  of  the  deplorable  and  tragic  scene,  in  whichraost  all  of  the
Templars  were  involved  in  one  common  destruction;  for  these
two  wretches,  soon  after  their  admission)  accused  die  whole  or-

'    Digitized  by  VjC


LIGHT   Ofl  MASONRr.  28S

tier  of  tfie  nwsl  dreadful  and  most  execrable  crimes,  demanding
to  be  separated  from  them,  for  the  unheard  of  terrible  things
which  were  suggested*  The  treason  is  good,  (he  who  commits
treason;)  but  the  traitor  is  detestable,  and  they  suffered  the  same
lot  that  was  intended  for  the  Templars,  for  they  for  their  treach-
ery received  the  most  dreadful  torments,  and  were  not  suffered
to  lire*  They  had  been  the  instruments,  or  the  cause  of  ven-
geance to  the  Templars,  by  their  false  accusations.  Upon  their
reports,  the  King,  (who  had  lately  an  interview  with  the  Pope  at
Potier,)  took  the  surest  measures  to  arrest  all  the  Templars  uv
his  dominions  in  one  day-  This  was  done  on  the  13th  of  Octo-
ber, 13(r7,  twtf  years  after  the  accusation  of  these  two  villains
was  made.  They  seized  on  all  their  papers,  titles,  and  treasures,
and  most  of  their  wealth,  over  which  were  placed  overseers  and.
stewards.  King  Charles,  of  Naples,  in  like  manner,  ordered  all
the  Templars  in  bis  province  to  be  arretted.  Thpse  taken  m
France  were  locked  up  in  the  Castile  of  Melup,  to  wait  for  their
trials.  The  Pope,  at  the  same  time,  sent  for  their  Grand  Mas-
ter, 'James  de  Molay,'  a  native  of  Burgundy.  Soon  as  he  re-
ceived the  orders  of  the  Pope,  he  came  to  Paris  with  sixty  Knights
of  the  order,  among  which  was  one  ft*y,  brother  of  the  dauphin,
Devienois  Hugueg  de  Per  aides,  and  Theodore  Sazillede  Monan-
coart.  They  were  all  arrested  and  made  toeuffer  the  most  dreadful
torments,  in  order  to  draw  from  them  a  confession  of  the  crimes*
they  were  accused  of,  though  without  effect,  as  they  bore  brav
ly  every  torment,  rather  .than  accuse  themselves  of  things
which  they  were  innocent  So  that  on  no  other  proof  than  mat
Of  two  infamous  suborners,  their  trials  were  concluded,  (it  being
impossible  to  obtain  the  least  evidence  against  them,  as  never
any  person  assisted  at  the  making  of  a  Templar. )  They  execu-
ted and  burnt  alive  fifty-seven  in  one  day;  on  the  next  fifty^nine,
and  so  on,  until  they  had  completed  almost  their  total  destruc-
tion. They  pardoned  none,  not  even  those  that  served  them  in
accusing  the  whole  order,  for  as  Templars  they  were  included
sn  the  general  sentence  and  bur nt  alive  with  the  others!

Let  the  end  of  these  unhappy  wretches  serve  as  a  lesson  to
us,  that  we  are  not  in  future  to  be  seduced  by  fiqe  promises,  and
initiate  any  but  these  who  have  given  us,  by  a  long  train  of  ser-
vice, proofs  of  the  most  solid  worthiness,  lest  we  might,  by  their
indiscretion,  be  dragged  again  with  all  the  Knights  of  the  Black
Eagle,  or  Kadosh,  in  a  common  fate.  The  Grand  Master  and
the  three  above  mentioned  brethren,  were  nevertheless  not  com-
prehended in  the  first  execution.  The  Pope,  for  reasons  which
«o  historian  has  mentioned,  kept  the  judgment  to  himself.—

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


fui    jd

r


Ik       al


294  LIGHT  ON   MASONRT.

Most  all  of  the  Templars  at  the  time  of  this  prosecution,  (which
lasted  till  1314,)  were  arrested  in  ail  Christian  states,  but  were
not  all  pat  to  death.  Philip  the  fair,  was  continually  hurrying  the
Pope  to  make  an  end  of  James  de  Molay,  the  Grand  Master  of
his  companions,  (after  having  groaned  nearly  seven  years  in  pri-
son, overloaded  with  irons,)  which  was  at  last  executed,  when
they  were  burnt  alive,  the  11th  March,  1314,  in  the  isle  of  Paris,
which  moved  to  pity  and  tears,  the  numerous  spectators,  who
were  present.  They  were  steady,  heroic,  constant,  and  made
the  most  solemn  vows  of  their  innocence,  which  was  afterwards
apparent,  supported  by  an  event  extremely  memorable*  Jacque
or  James  de  Molay,  the  Grand  Master,  seeing  himself  on  the
scaffold  ready  to  end  his  life  in  the  flames,  (after  having  lingered
in  irons  for  several  years,  death  in  any  manner  was  now  a  relief
to  him,  rather  than  to  linger  in  prison  in  this  uncertain  world,)
with  great .  composure  turned  himself  and  directed  to  God  the
following  prayer:  'Oh,  Almighty  and  Everlasting  God,  who
knows  the  innocence  of  the  victims,  who  have  been  sacrificed  tor
several  years,  permit  us  to  reflect  on  the  reproach  and  infamous
torments  which  you  permitted  J.  C.  to  be  covered  with  at  his
death,  to  redeem  us  from  the  slavery  of  our  sins,  to  give  an  ex-
ample to  the  innocent,  in  teaching  them,  by  bis  mildness,  to  suf-
fer without  murmuring,  the  persecution  and  torments,  which  in-
justice and  blindness  prepare  for  them.  Forgive,  O  God,  the
jfelse  accusations  and  imputations,  which  have  caused  the  de-
'rudtion  of  the  whole  order,  of  which  your  Divine  Providence
had  established  me  chief;  and  if  you  are  pleased  to  accept
the  prayer  which  we  now  humbly  offer  you,  permit,  O  God,
that  one  day  these  people  may  know  the  innocence  of  those
who  have  endeavored  to  live  in  thy  holy  fear  and  love:  w©
wait  your  bounty  and  compassion,  the  reward  of  the  torments
and  death  we  suffer,  which  we  offer  to  you  in  order  to  enjoy,  your
divine  presence  in  everlasting  happiness. \  Then  addressing  him*
self  to  the  people,  he  said:  'Good  people,  who  see  us  ready  to
perish  in  the  flames,  you  willto  able  to  judge  of  our  innocence,
for  I  now  summon  Pope  Clement  the  P.  in  forty  days,  and  Phil-
ip, the  fair,  in  twelve  months,  to  appear  before  the  awful  and  tre-
mendous throne  of  the  ever  living  God,  ta  render  an  account  of
the  blood  they  have  wickedly  shedt'  after  which  they  were  hurried
to  execution,  fearing  a  rescue  from  the  populace.  The  predio
tion  of  James  c!e  Molay  was  accomplished,  as  Pope  Clement  the
V.  died  the  19th  of  April,  the  same  year,  at  'Roeque  Mowt?  on
the'Rhone,  and  Philip  the  fair,  within  twelve  months  at  Fontain-
bleace.    The  news  of  the  persecution  of  the  Knights  Templars

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


UGHT   ON   MASONRT.  2S5

had  already  reached  the  Knights  which  were  left  in  Cyprus,  and
in  the  absence  of  their  Grand  Master  had  been  overpowered  by
the  Turks,  when  they  lost  Acre,  with  several  other  strong  places
in  that  island,  and  were  obliged  to  retire  to  the  isle  of  Rhodes
and  the  adjacent  islands.  ,  The  prosecutions  against  them  in
open  council  at  Vienna,  the  1st  of  October  1311,  when  their  or-
der was  banished,  their  estates  confiscated  and  left  at  the  Pope's
disposal,  who  in  the  year  1312,  gave  a  part  to  the  Knights  of  St.
John  of  Jerusalem,  who  at  this  day  possess  the  greatest  part  of*
their  estates.     This  adversion  makes  to  this  day,  a  part  of  the
obligations  of  the  Grand  Elect  and  Knights  Templars.     As  the
number  of  them  who  escaped  was  very  small,  it  rendered  that
adversion  the  more  powerful,  they  sought  to  increase  their  order
by  admitting  persons,  in  whom  they  believed  and  thought  worthy
of  keeping  (he  most  important  secret.     Such  they  found  among
the  good  and  virtuous  Masons,  whom  Solomon  had  distinguished
and  favored,  after  the  construction  of  the  temple.    The  candor
and  intrepidity  which  appeared  among  them  in  the  greatest  dan-
gers; their  wisdom,  union,  charity,  love,  impartiality,  firmness,
discretion  and  zeal,  all  led  them  to  believe  they  could  do  no
better  than  to  unite  themselves  to  them.     Their  fathers,  protec-
tors, and  supporters  sought  the  favor  to  be  admitted  into  their
.society,  and  initiated  into  their  mysteries.     Those  who  were
newly  initiated  into  their  mysteries,  were  informed  bytiieTtfa-
sons,  who  they  were,  and  the  barbarous  events  they  lay-escap-
ed, and  the  resolutions  they  had  taken,  secretly  to  increase  their
numbers,  re-establish  their  order,  and  take  possession  again  of
their  estates.     The  Templars  then  offered  their  brethren,  the
Masons,  their  assistance,  in  taking  their  revenge,  and  as  a  com-
mon cause  to  accept  the  tribute  from  them,  of  the  most  just  grat-
itude and  thankfulness.     The  Grand  Elected  Knights,  and  Prin-
ces Masons,  approved  their  designs,  accepted  their  offers,  and
agreed  among  themselves*  instead  of  the  character  of  their  order,
which  was  a  cross,  to  use  the  sign,  token,  and  word  of  Masons,
and  by  the  conformity  of  several  analogies,  (events  in  their  his-
tory,) persuaded  them  that  the  different  signs  of  Masons  would
put  them  entirely  under  cover,  against  the  maliciousness  of  such
as  'Gerard  Labef  or  'Benoit  Mehuy,9  should  they  undertake  to
be  admitted  into  the  order,  and  that  they  should  not  entrust  the
true  secret  to  any  but  those  whom  they  had  tried,  and  of  whom
they  had  the  utmost  confidence.     After  having  made  them  pass
through  the  different  degrees  which  we  know  in  Masonry,  the
birth  of  which  was  taken  from  the  construction  of  Solomon's
temple,  until  its  destruction ;  characterised  by  the  most  remark-

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


286  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

able  events,  and  by  an  event  entirely  analogous  to  the  destruc-
tion of  the  Knights  Templars,  whom,  as  elects  of  Masonry,  cri-
eth  only  to  revenge  the  death  of  their  Illustrious  Grand  Master,
and  retake  their  possession.  My  dear  brother,  from  the  degree
of  Master  Mason  that  you  have  received,  and  from  your  having
learned  to  shed  tears  at  the  tomb  of  Hiram  Abiff,  have  you  oot
been  disposed  to  take  vengeance?  Did  they  not  show  you  the
traitor,  Jubelum  Akirop,  (or  Abiram,)  in  the  most  dreadful  col-
ors. Would  it  be  exaggerating  to  compare  the  conduct  of  Phil-
ip, the  fair,  with  his?  and  to  compare  the  two  infamous  informers,
1  Gerard  Lobe/  and  lBen<rit  MthvyJ  to  the  two  villains  who*
joined  Akirop,  to  murder  Hiram  Abiff?  Do  they  not  kindle  in
your  heart  the  sa.me  revenge  which  those  Fellow  Crafts  deserv-
ed, and  was  executed  on  them?

The  trials  you  have  gone  through,  to  learn  the  historical  (act?
of  the  ancient  Bible;  do  they  not  serve  to  make  an  impression  on
your  heart  and  enable  you  to  make  a  just  application  of  the  death
of  Hiram  Abiff,  in  comparing  it  with  that  of  James  de  Molay?
By  the  degree  of  'Elected  Knights  of  Nine,'  where  your  heart
was  disposed  to  revenge.,  you  have  been  prepared  to  the  impla-
cable hatred  that  you  have  sworn  to  the  Knights  of  Malta,  op
whom  you  ought  to  revenge  the  death  of  James  DeMolay.  As
a  Grand  Elected,  you  have  acquired,  by  your  proved  discretion
is  Symbolic  Masonry,  the  light  which  leaves  nothing  more  for
you  to  desire,  than  your  submission  <o  the  Degree  of  the  Sublime
Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret,  our  Chief  and  Grand  Elected  of  the
Order,  who  has  bestowed  on  you  this  singular  favor.  This  is,  my
Most  Illustrious  brother,  how,  and  by  whom,  Masonry  is  derived
and  has  been  transmitted  to  us.  You  ought  to  see  what  it  is,  to
enter  to  our  lawful  rights,  which  leads  us  to  associate  with  men
whom  merit,  bravery,  and  good  manners  gives  titles  to;  which
only  birthrights  grant  to  the  ancestors  of  the  Templars.  You
are  now  a  Knight,  and  on  a  level  with  them;  you  have  the  same
hazards  to  run,  as  much  from  the  side  of  envy  as  persecution,
which  you  may  escape  by  keeping  carefully  your  obligation,  and
secreting  from  the  vulgar,  your  estate  and  what  you  are.

Having  attained  to  this  degree  of  light,  which  you  merit,  and
the  knowledge  we  have  of  your  manners,  we  are  persuaded  that
our  confidence  towards  you,  will  bo  sufficient  Jo  make  you  ap-
prehend, how  important  it  is  to  you,  not  to  be  the  cause  of  our
repenting  your  initiation.  We  know  you  too  well,  to  have  the
least  doubt  of  you.  We  therefore  did  not  hesitate  to  enlighten
you  into  the  true  interests  of  the  order,  and  that  by  your  uniting
yourself  to  us,  with  a  sincere  submission,  will  aeajike  thai  per.*-

•


LIGHT   ON   MASOtfftV.  287

faction  your  zeal  deserves.  You  are  now  in  the  rank  of  those
who  shall  be  elected  to  the  grand  work.  When  once  your  name
is  in  the  urn  of  your  election,  the  delicious  perfumes  of  your  ac-
tions will  bring  you  to  the  true  happiness  of  your  desire,  which  I
wish  you.  Amen.  Amen;  Amen.

After  this  discourse  the  Grand  Commander  knocks  one  great
fclow  on  the  table ;  in  order  to  call  the  four  Knights  to  enter  into
the  chapter,  who  wero  out.  After  which  the  Grand  Commander
finishes  the  reception,  and  gives  the  new  Knight  the  sign,  tokeri,
and  word.  He  armsr  him  and  decorates  him  with  the  attributes,
*md  communicates  the  name  he  must  take  in  future,  which  is  un-
common to  all  others,  and  is  Knight  Kadosh,  or  Knight  of  the
White  and  Black  Eagle,  instead  of  Knight  Templars.

The  Jewel  is  a  red  cross,  as  before  described,  but  in  the
room  of  that  $  now  it  is  a  black  spread  eagle,  with  two  heads  sus-
pended to  a  broad  order  of  fiery,  bloody  color,  worn  from  the
left  shoulder  tb  the  right  hip;  The^  eagle,  as  if  going  to  fly,  with
a  naked  sword  in  his  claws*.

The  brother  who  desires  to  be  bettet  acquainted  with  the
foregoing  interesting  history  of  the  Knights  Templars,  may  con-
sult the  following  authors,  viz: — Villancus*  History;  History  of
^ali  Orders,  by  Mttthai,  (in  Paris;)  History  of  Maka,  by  Yerto;
4*nd  an  essay  on  Paris,  by  St.  Foix;

LECTBRE*

Q.  Are  you  a  Grand  Elected?    A.  I  am,  Thrice  Illustrious
Knight.     Q.  Who  received  you  in  this  degree.    A.  A  worthy
Deputy  Grand  Inspector,  by  the  consent  of  twb  others.     Q.
What  Was  done  with  you?    A.  He  created  me  Knight.     Q.
How  can  I  believe  you?    A.  My  name,  which  I  leave,  will  con-
vince you.    Q.  What  is  your  name?    A.  Kadosh,  or  Knight  of
the  Black  Ea£le.     Q.  Wa*  any  thing  else  done  to  you?     A.
The  Deputy  Inspector  adorned  me  with  the  habft,  ribbon,  and
jewel  of  the  order.    Q^  "Where  have  you  received  the  prize  of
your  election?  A.  Ihave  received  it  in  a  very  deep  grotto,  and  in
the  silence  of  the  night.    <$.  To  what1  do  you  apply  to?     A.  I
work  with  all  my  might  abd  strength  to  rdisfcan  edifice' worthy
my  brothers.     Q.  What  prbgress  have  yort  made?    A.  I  have
t>or<queTed  the  knowledge  of  the  ntysteridusW^:    &  Of  what
is  that  ladderJ  composed!    A'.  Two  supporters  and  steps.     Q.
What  are  the  name*  of  the  two  smpporfers;    A;  O  Lebdr  Eloe,
O  Ltte  Barttbac.    Q;  What  design  have  these  two  supporters?
A.  The  first'  is  the  love  of  God,  and  the  othei- the  love  of  our
neighbors.    Q;  What  are  the  *W5tt  Btej*  of  the  mysterious

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


2S8  LIGHT  OK  MASONRT.

ladder?     A.  The  virtues  which  I  must  practice,  conformable  to
my  obligations.     Q.  Name  them  to  me.     A.  Isedhalad,  prac-
tice or  works  of  mercy.     2d.  Scharfabac.  Candor  of  our  actions.
3d.  Moteck.  Sweetness  of  character  which  all  brethren  must  fol-
low.    4th.  Emunah.  Truth  in  discourse.     5th.  Hamaeh  Scioto*
Advancement  to  the  practice  of  Heaven.  6th.  SabaeL  Patience  in
adversity.    7th.  Choemel,  Binah,  Tabinah.  Signifies  that  we  must
be  prudent  to  keep  secret  every  matter  confided  to  us.    Q.  What
are  your  ordinary  pass  words?  A.'  Manchin,  a  name  of  the  Grand
Master  most  renowned  among  the  Solitaries,  known  by  the  name
of  Eadosh.     Q.  What  signifies  that  name.    A.  Solitary  or  sep-
arate.    Q.  What  was  the  answer  of  the  solitaries,  when  they
were  asked  to  what  they  pretended?    A.  Jlbarticiah,  Bechalget,
Adonai,  Taltnid,  TehiUatko  Bephy;  which  is,  I  wjll  bless  God  at
all  times,  and  will  praise  him  with  my  mouth.     Q.  Do.  they
never  say  any  thing  else? .  A.  Yes,  they  say  also,  Begaherod,  Sli-
factum,  Hewcey;  which  is,  I  will  assist  the  poor,  and  always  sus*  -
tain  them  with  all  my  might  and  power.     Q.  How  comes  the
cross  surmounted  with  the  eagle  and  the  sword?    A.  That  is,
that  it  shall  remember  to  employ  my  sword,  in  the  fullness  of
time,  under  the  banner  of  the  black  eagle,  to  support  the  order.
Q.  Where  did  you  work?    A.  In  a  place  of  security,  to  re-estab-
lish secretly,  the  edifice  ruined  by  the  traitors.     Q.  What  sue*
cess  do  you  expect  from  it?    A*  The  right  of  virtue,  the  accord
of  brothers,  and  the  possessions  of  our  forefathers,  and  ever-
lasting  happiness,    Q.  Have  you  shed  tears?    A,  I  have.     Q»
Have  you  wore  mourning?    A.  Yes,  I  wear  it  still.    Q.  Why  do
you  wear  it?    A.  Because  virtue  is  despised,  and  as  long  as  vice
reigns,  innocence  will  be  oppressed  and  crimes  will  be  left  un-
punished.   Q.  What  is  it  that  will  punish  vice  and  reward  vir-
tue?   A.  The  Great  Architect  of  the  Universe  alone.    Q.  How
so.     A.  To  favor  our  designs  and  desires.   [Here  every  brother
says  three  times,  'God  favor  our  designs.']     Q.  Have  you  any
other  name  than  Kadosh,  or  Knight  of  the  Black  Eagle/     A.  I
have  still  the  name  of  Adam  to  teach  me,  that  from  the  most  low
I  must  go  to  the  most  high.    Q.  Give  me  the  sign  of  knowledge
against  surprise.     A.  Here  it  is,  [and  he  gives  it  in  the  follow-
ing manner.    He  puts  his  right  hand  on  the  heart  of  a  brother,
in  the  same  manner  as  with  the  poniard  in  the  degree  of  'Nino
Elected,'— then  give  the  token  of  the  'Grand  Elected,'  and  then
both  strike  the  right  knee.]    Q.  How  came  you  to  carry  .your  fin-
gers extended  on  your  heart?    A,  That  my  trust  is  in  GocL
Q,  How  came  you  after  that  to  extend  your  hand?   A*  To  show
$o  my  brother  that  he  is  welcome  to  all  in  my  power,  and  to  ffl*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC

0       .


L


LIGHT   ON   JgASONRY.  289

oarage  him  to  vengeance  /*  Q.  How  came  you  to  let  your  hand
fall  on  your  right  knee?  A.  To  show  we  must  bend  our  knees
to  adore  God.  Amen.     End  of  the  Lecture.

To  close. — Q.  What's  the  o'clock?  A.  The  break  of  day
cbmonstraies.  Gr.  Com.  'If  the  break  of  day  demonstrates,  let
us  depart  for  revenge.9  After  which  the  Grand  Commander  puts
bis  hand  on  his  heart;  then  lets  it  fall  on  his  right  knee,  which  is
answered  by  all;  then  the  Grand  Commander  embraces  each,
and  each  other  all  around  and  then  the  chapter  is  closed.

*  'Vengeance  is  mine;  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord;'


f

Aa


y  Google


(390)


FRENCH  DEGREES.


The  following  degrees,  with  some  others,  are  conferred  in  France  and  in  this
country  as  Honorary  Degrees.  The  reader,  perhaps,  may  not  have  been
apprised  that  the  masonic  systems  of  different  countries  vary  much  after
the  Master's  Degree.

THE  DEGREE  OF

"ELU*  DE  PERIGNAN."

Description  of  the  lodge. — The  room  represents  the  cabinet  of
Solomon,  hung  with  many  colors,  lighted  by  twenty-seven  lamps,
distributed  by  3  times  9.  Solomon,  dressed  in  royal  robes,  sits
in  the  east — holds  a  blue  sceptre,  gilt  with  a  luminous  triangle
at  the  top,  emblematical  of  his  wisdom,  power,  and  benevolence.
Solomon  wears  gloves,  adorned  with  a  black  fringe,  and  his  apron
(white,)  trimmed  with  silver  lace.  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  is  dressed
like  Solomon,  and  holds  a  large  poniard  in  his  hand.

Dress. — The  brethren  are  clad  in  black,  and  wear  a  small
breastplate  on  the  left  side,  on  which  is  embroidered  in  silver  a
death's  head,  a  bone,  and  a  dagger  across,  surrounded  by  these
words,  'Vaincre  ou  mourir:'  (Victory  or  death.)  They  wear  a
black  sash,  four  fingers  wide,  from  right  to  left,  with  the  same
words  on  it.  On  the  bottom  is  a  black  rose,  from  which  is  sus-
pended a  poniard.  The  apron  is  of  white  lambskin,  lined  and
trimmed  with  black.  On  the  flap  is  a  'death's  head,'  with  a  bone
and  a  sword  across.  On  the  upper  part  of  the  apron  is  repre-
sented a  large  drop,  or  tear,  and  on  the  sides  and  below  eight
smaller  tears;  at  the  bottom,  is  a  branch  of  cassia;  the  gloves  are
white,  bordered  with  black.

Officers. — The  Master  is  styled  'Most  Respectable,9  and  sits
in  the  east.  The  Wardens  are  styled  'Venerable;9  one  in  the
south,  the  other  in  the  north.

Ceremony  of  opening. — Master.  'Brother  S.  W.  are  we  well
tyled?  S.  W.  <M.  R.  we  are.'  M.  'Venerable  S.  W.  as  an
'Elu  de  Perignan,'  do  you  know  any  thing  besides  the  letters  N.
N.V      S.  W.    <I  know  the  letter  P.'      M.    'At  whatAour  is  a


*  Elu  means  'Elect.'  S  -

*■••-'■    'f

-    .gitizedbyC^OOQle


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  291

lodge  of  this  degree  to  be  opened?'  S.  W.  *A<  the  commence-
ment of  night,  or  the  end  of  day.'  JVf.  'What  is  the  hour?'  S.
W.  'The  end  of  day.'  Master  knocks  3  times  9,  gives  the  sign,
and  says,  'Give  notice,  brother  Wardens  in  the  south  and  north,
that  the  lodge  is  opened.'  (This  is  done.)  After  the  brethren
are  seated,  Master  says,  'Venerable  brothers  S.  and  J.  Wardens,
is  there  any  thing  to  be  proposed?  'Master  of  Ceremonies'  rises
and  says,  'There  is  an  'Elect  of  Nine,'  who  wishes  to  learn  the
mysteries  of  this  degree.'  Master.  'Brother  M.  of  C.  go  to  the
candidate,  examine  him  on  his  former  degrees,  and  introduce  him
in  due  and  ancient  form.'

Reception. — The  candidate  should  be  led  through  rough,  bushy
places  to  the  cavern,  where  is  a  burning  bush;  after  viewing  this,  •
he  is  led  into  the  lodge,  dressed  as  an  'Elect  of  Nine,'  (which  is
in  black,)  and  placed  in  the  west,  between  the  two  Wardens.

Master.  'What  is  your  desire?  Candidate.  'To  receive  the
Degree  of  'Elu  de  Perignan.' '  JVf.  'My  brethren,  do  you  be-
lieve this  candidate  to  be  worthy]'  The  J.  W.  and  M.  of  C.  re-
ply, 'We  do.'  JVf.  'Brother  M.  of  C.  cause  the  candidate  to
travel.'  Candidate  passes  to  the  east,  by  the  way  of  the  south,
and  returns  .  again  to  the  west;  he  then  goes  directly  to  the  east,
and  returns  to  the  west  twice;  he  goes  to  the  east,  by  the  way  of
the  north,  and  returns  again  to  the  west,  and  then  goes  directly  to
the  altar  in  the  east,  to  take  the  obligation.

Obligation. — I  swear  and  promise  on  my  word  of  honor,  on
the  faith  of  an  honest  man,  in  the  presence  of  the  Grand  Archi-
tect of  the  universe,  and  before  this  assembly,  to  guard  and  pre-
serve the  mysteries  of  this  degree,  which  has  been  conferred  on
me,  not  only  from  the  profane,  but  from  all  of  an  inferior  degree,
under  the  penalties  of  all  my  former  obligations;  and  I  consent,
if  I  violate  this  obligation,  to  .have  my  tongue  torn  out  by  the
roots.     May  God  keep  me  in  this,  &c.  Amen.

LECTURE.

.  Master.  Do  you,  as  an  'Elu  de  Perignan,'  know  any  thing  be-
sides the  letters  N.  N.1  S.  W.  Yes;  I  kna^the  letter  P.  M.
What  does  that  letter  signify]  S.  W.  It  is  the  fojtial  of  the  name
of  the  stranger  who  discovered  to  Solomon  where  the  ruffian
Akirop,  otherwise,  called  Abiram,  was  concealed.  M.  Pro-
nounce the  name.  S.  W.  Perignan.  M.  How  were  you  intro-
duced into  the  lod$3?  &  W.  By  3  tjmes9.  M.  What  do  these
signify?  S.  W.  The  first  9  signifies,  mat  I  was  one  of  the  nine
elect,  who  were  chosen  to  search  for  the  assassin  of  our  Respec-
table Master,  'Hiram  AbhT:'  tfee  second  9,  the  number  of  Ma-


y  Google


292  T.IGHT   ON  MASOJTKr.

sons  who  searched  for  the  body  of  Hiram  Abiff:  and  the  last  3,
the  three  gates  of  the  temple,  the  first  Grand  Masters,  and  the
three  Wows,  struck  by  the  three  assassins,  on  the  body  of  Hiram
Abifc     M*  What  do  the  letters  A.  K.  and  C  on  the  catpet,  sig-
nify!    S.  W.    The  names  of  -the  assassins  tff  our  Respectable
Master,  Hiram  Abiff.      M.    What  were  their  names?      S.  W.
Akirop,  or  Abirara,  Kranuvil,  and  Gravolet.     M.  How  did  they
station  themselves  to  accomplish  their  design?      S.  W.  KutbuviI
was  at  the  south  gate,  armed  with  the  twenty-four  inch  gauge —
Gravolet  at  the  west  gate,  armed  with  the  square,  and  Akirop  at
the  east  gate,  armed  with  the  gavel.     M.  How  did  the  stranger
Perignan  discover  that  Akirop  was  concealed  in  the  cavern?     S.
W.  Perignan  was  at  work  by  the  light  of  a  burning  bush,  near
which  was  a  cavern.     His  dog  suddenly  began  to  bark,  and  look-
ing towards  the  mouth  of  the  cavern,  he  saw  a  man  who  appear-
ed terrified,  suddenly  look  out  and  immediately  retire.     Moved
by  curiosity,  Perignan  entered  the  cavern.     Akirop,  finding  him-
self discovered,  threw  himself  at  his  feet,  confessed  his  guilt,  and
entreated  him  to  keep  it  secret,  kissed  his  hand,  and  besought
him  to  procure  hhn  some  food.     M .  Why  did  the  stranger  inform
Solomon  of  this?    S.  W.  In  otoedience  to  a  proclamation  issued
by  Solomon,  and  that  justice  might  be  done.     M*  How  long  did
Perignan  furnish  Akirop  with  food,  before  he  gave  information  to
Solomon]     S.  W.  Seven  days.     M.  Why  did  he  not  inform  the .
king  sooner?      S.  W.    He  was  ignorant  of  the  existence  of  the
proclamation,  until  he  saw  it  at  a  village  where  he  went  to  pur-
chase (bod  for  Akirop  and  himself.     IVf .  What  is  the  word  of  this
degree?     S.  W.    'Maobon;*  which  signifies,  'Thanks  to  God,
the  criminal  is  punished!'     M.    What  is  the  sign?      S.  W.    To
make  the  motion  of  tearing  out  the  tongue,  with  the  hands  ex-
tended.    M.  What  is  the  answer  to  this  sign?      S.  W.    To  lift
the  eyes  and  hands  to  heaven,  as  if  imploring  mercy!     M.  From
what  are  these  signs  taken?     S.  W.    Partly  from  my  obligation,
and  partly  from  the  surprise  which  Akirop  manifested  when  he
was  discovered.     M.    What  is  the  token?      8;  V.    To  present
the  hand  to  a  brother,  who  kisses  it.      M.   To  what  does  oris  to-
ken relate?     S.  ^V.    To  the  fact  that  Akirop  kissed  the  band  of
Perignan,  that  he  might  induce  him  to  be  silent  respecting  hfe  dis-
covery.    M.  What  is  the  pass  Word*     S.  W.    ^hmatn;7  *ft£eh
signifies*  Swwrmw'  or  <frmr4***K'    M.  What  was  done  wfth  the
head  of  this  ruffian?    S.  W.  Solomon  caused  it  to  be  ejttbatatfd
and  ptoced  <5ft  the  east  phmaefe  of  the  temple,  with  a  poniard  jtwt
below  ft,  &ftt  fc  aright  be  seen  that  the  crime  had  been  punished.
M.   What  w*s  signified  by  the  nine  journeys,  whk&  you  made

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  29fc


before  taking  tfee  obligation?    &  W.  The  erne  4*ys  Akirop  re-
i&atnetf  concealed  in  &  cavern.

The  lodge  **  elided  by  8  times  9;  that  is,  tweaty*seven  knocks
by  the  Master.

THE  DEGREE  OF

"M2  PETIT*  ARCHITECT.*

Description,  #c-— The  carpet  or  floor,  is  an  oblong  square,
•drawn  east  and  west,  at  the  west  end  is  a  triangle,  containing  a
blazing  star,  in  which  is  the  letter  G  On  the  corner  of  the  tri-
angle, are  the  letters  S.  U.  G.  The  triangle  is  enclosed  in  a  circle.
The  lodge  is  bung  withblack  and  lighted  by  twenty-one  candles,
eighteen  of  which  are  placed  by  nine,  in  two  chandeliers.  The
throne  is  elevated  on  three  steps,  on  one  side  is  an  altar,  on  which  is
placed  a  Bible,  compass,  square,  triangle  and  a  chandelier,  with
the  three  remaining  lights  and  an  urn,  containing  a  golden  trowel
and  a  paste  made  of  flour,  milk,  oil  ana  wine.  The  brethren  wear  an
apron,  lined  and  trimmed  with  crimson.  The  Master  and  brethren,
wear  a  broad  crimson  ribbon  around  the  neck,  at  the  bottom  of.
which  the  jewel  is  attached  by  a  blue  rose.  £The  jewel  is  a  tri-
angjle,]  The  jewels  of  the  officers  are  worn  within  the  triangle.
The  brethren  are  armed  with  swords  and  are  covered.  On  the
hat  is  a  crimson  cockade.  The  Master  represents  i  Solomon, y
and  is  called  'Powerful  Master.'  The  Wardens  are  called
4 Respectable,'  and  the  brethren,  '  Venerable.'

Opening. — Master  knocks  seven,  (!! !  II!!)  the  Wardens  re-
peat it  Master.  'Respectable  brother  Wardens,  assist  me  in
opening  this  lodge  of 'Petit  Architect'  Wardens  give  notice  that
the  Master  is  about  to  open  the  lodge.  M.  'Are  we  well  tyledT
S.  W.  'We  are,  Powerful  Master.*  M.  'Respectable  Wardens,
to  prevent  discovery  receive  from  each  brother  the  Sign,  Word
and  Token  of  this  degree,  and  give  them  to  me.'  The  Wardens
do  this  and  say,  'The  brethren  are  all  Petit  Architects.'  M.
'Brother  S.  W.  what  is  the  hour?'  &.  W.  'The  first  instant,  the
first  hour,  the  first  day,  which  the  Grand  Architect  employed  in
the  creation  of  the  universe.'  M.  'My  Brethren  :  It  is  the  first
instant,  the  first  hour,  the  first  day,  in  which  the  Grand  .Architect
employed  in  the  creation  of  the  universe.  It  is  the  first  hour,  the
first  day,  the  first  year,  when  Solomon  commenced  the  temple. — ^
The  first  day,  the  first  hour,  the  first  instant,  for  opening  this'
lodge.    It  is  time  to  commence  our  labors/    S.  W.  'My  breth-


*  Minor  Architect.
Aa2


y  Google


294  LIGHT  OK  HA80MBT.

renk  is  thetet  day*  the  first  hour,  and  the  fit*tiastgffi$  wutaom
Powerful  Master  opens  this  lodge  of  Petit  Architect,*  The  lodge
of  Petit  Architect  is  open.4  The  Junior  Warden  repeats  the
same  words.

Reception. — The  candidate  is  placed  in  a  room,  lighted  by  a  lit-
tle lamp  placed  on  the  floor.  The  Master  of  Ceremonies  leaves
him,  and,  entering  the  lodge,  gives  the  key  of  the  preparation
room  to  the  Secretary  and  Treasurer,  who  go  to  the  candidate
and  receive  his  dues  for  the  degree.  The  Master  of  Ceremo-
nies returns,  and  divests  the  candidate  of  all  weapons,  which  are
carried  into  the  lodge.  He  blindfolds  the  candidate,  and  ties  a
rope  with  a  slip  noose  on  his  wrist,  and  leads  him  into  the  lodge,
giving  the  alarm,  &c.  as  usual:  he  places  him  between  the  War-
dens, one  of  whom  savs,  'Powerful  Master,  the  candidate  is  pres-
ent with  us.'  Master.  'My  brother,  this  degree  cannot  be  ob-
tained, unless  you  give  us  satisfactory  proof  that  you  have  not
been  an  accomplice  in  the  death  of  our  Master,  Hiram  A  biff. —
To  assure  us  of  this,  we  require  you  to  participate  in  a  symbolic
offering  of  the  portion  of  the  heart  of  our  Respectable  Master,
Hiram,  which  we  have  preserved  since  his  assassination.  Yon
are  to  swallow  the  portion  which  we  shall  present  to  you.  Every
faithful  Mason  of  this  degree  may  receive  it,  but  it  cannot  remain
in  the  body  of  one  who  is  perjured.  Are  you  disposed  to  submit
to  this  proof?'  Jlns.  'Yes.'  Master.  'Respectable  Wardens,
cause  die  candidate  to  advance  by  three  steps  to  the  place  where
the  urn  is  deposited,  containing  what  is  to  be  presented  to  himP
[The  urn  is  placed  on  the  altar.']  The  candidate  is  brought  by
•three  steps  to  the  altar — he  kneels  on  one  knee — his  right  hand
resting  on  the  triangle  placed  on  the  Bible'.  Master.  'Befoie  we
admit  you  to  this  august  participation,  you  must  give  us  an  assur-
ance of  your  fidelity.  Are  you  willing  to  take  upon  you  an  obli-
gation belonging  to  this  degree?'     Jlns.  'Yes.'

Obligation. — I  promise,  under  the  same  obligations  which  I
have  already  contracted,  and  in  the  presence  of  this  august  as-
sembly, to  hold,  guard,  and  conceal  the  secrets  of  this  Degree  of
Petit  Architect,  and  never  to  reveal  them  to  any  one  of  an  inferior
degree,  or  to  any  other  person,  under  the  penalty  of  being  depriv-
ed of  that  honorable  burial  which  was  given  to  our  Honorable
Master.  Finally,  I  promise  to  support  Masonry  with  all  my  pow-
er, and  to  assist  my  brethren,  as  far  as  lies  in  my  power.  So
mote  it  i-e.

The  Master  taking  the  trowel,  presents  with  it  a  portion  of  the
paste  to  the  candidate,  who  swallows  it.  Master.  'This  mystic
oblation,  which  we  partake  with  you,  forms  henceforth  a  tie  so


y  Google


LIGHT   ON  VAJGtf&Y.  295

indissoluble  that  nothing  can  break  it;  say  wita  me,  and  with  all
the  brethren— Wo  to  him  who  shall  disunite  us!'  Master  raises
the  candidate  and  the  Wardens  conduct  him  to  the  west  by  three
steps  backwards.  Master.  'My  brother,  one  thing  which  you
come  here  to  learn  is,  that  you  ought  Beyer  to  refuse  to  confess
your .  faults;  obstinacy  ought  to  be  banished  from  the  heart  of
every  good  Mason.'

The  Wardens  seize  the  candidate,  and  place  him  on  his  hands
and  knees,  his  face  towards  the  floor,  nearly  touching  the  'blaz-
ing star,'  and  his  mouth  on  the  letter  G.  In  this  position,  the  J.
W.  removes  the  bandage  from  his  eyes,  and  the  S.  W.  covers  his
body  with  a  black  cloth;  (covering  his  head  so  mat  he  sees  no-
thing except  the  star.)

Master*    'My  brother,  what  do  you  see?'      Candidate.    'The
letter  G,  in  a  blazing  star.'     M.    'What  does  that  letter  signify?'
C.  'Glory,  Grandeur,  and  Geometry.'     M.  'Does  it  signify  any
thing  else?'      C.    'Yes;,— God.'     M.    'My  brother,  that  is  the
name  of  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  universe!      Your  position
represents  that  in  which  our  Respectable  Master  was  buried;  that
is,  his  face  towards  the  blazing  star,  his  mouth  on  the  letter  G.  en-
graved on  a  golden  plate  of  a  triangular  form,  which  is  emblematic
of  three  mystic  angles  united  in  one.     The  circle  represents  the
immensity  of  space,  and  also  the  space  enclosed  in  the  third  part  of
the  temple,  called  the  'holy  of  holies,'  and  in  Hebrew,  'Hekal.9  Do
you  promise  us,  that  if,  during  the  journey  you  are  about  to  make
through  the  forests  and,  mountains,  you  should  discover  any  ac-
complices in  the  death  of  Hiram,  you  will  arrest  them  at  the  haz-
ard of  your  life?'     Arts.  'Yes.'     The  Master  knocks  one,  as  a
signal  to  the  Wardens  to  raise  the  candidate,  to  remove  his  bonds
and  cause  him  to  make  the  tour  of  the  lodge  eighteen  times,
[these  are  reduced  usually  to  three,  six,  or  nine;]  by  the  way  of
the  north,  south,  and  east      When  this  is  done,  the  S.  W.  an-
nounces it  to  the  Master.      Master.    'Have  you  met  with  no  ob-
stacles in  your  journey?'     Candidate.  'No.'     Mctster.  'It  is  with
much  joy  I  proceed  to  recompense  your  zeal  for  Masonry,  by
conferring  on  you  the  rank  of i  Petit  Architect,'  with  the  direction
of  the  works  of  the  temple:  Approach  and  learn  the  mysteries  of
this  degree.'     The  S.  W.  takes  off  the  apron  of  the  candidate,
which  he  throws  on  the  floor,  and  causes  the  candidate  to  advance
to  the  throne  by  three  steps,  (of  a  Master  Mason.)  Master  gives
the  candidate  the  apron  of  this  degree,  saying,  'Your  business
hereafter  consists  in  architecture,  and  in  completing  the  ornaments
of  the  temple.'      Master  gives  the  candidate  the  cordon,  jewel,
and  gloves,  and  says,  'We  have  in  this  degree  one  wordy  a  token,


y  Google


X


296  MfllW  ON  lUSOMLT.

and  two  aig**  onoof  which  is  called  the  (piM,«^ii/  because
none  can  enter  the  lodge  without  giving  it.  It  is  given  than:  Ope
says,  *Are  you  an  Architect?'  at  the  same  time  placing  his*  right
hand  on  his  right  hip,  the  thumb  mod  fore  finger  being  clomd,  rais*
ing  his  eyes  to  heaven,  and  making  a  motion  as  though  to  retreat
backwards*  The  other  answers  by  doing  die  same  thing  on  his
left  hip,  with  his  left  hand,  and  saying,  'I  am/

The  other  sign  in  demanding,  is  made  by  carrying  the  'right
band  to  the  heart,  then  carrying  the  hand  diagonally  to  the  ton  of
the  forehead,  the  thumb  touching  the  forehead,  forming  a  triangle,
and  then  placing  the  arm  across  the  belly.  The  answer  is  to  car-
ry the  right  hand  open  to  the  right  side,  and  making  a  movement
as  if  to  retire,  and  placing  the  right  foot  behind  the  left,  so  as  to
form  a  square;  The  'to&e*'  is  that  of  giving  the  'Past  Master's'
'token/  thrice  pronouncing  each  time  one  syllable  of  the  word,
'Ga-ba-oV  (French;)  Gib-e-on,  (Enghsh.)  'Go  salute  your
brethren,  and  return  to  me/  After  he  has  done  so,  Master  says,
'My  brother,  after  die  death  of  'Hiram,'  the  labors  were  lighter.
Solomon,  willing  to  gratify  the  desires  of  the  Masters,  resolved
to  choose  another  new  Architect  for  the  work.  For  mis  purpose
he  assembled  the  most  wormy  Masters,  distinguished  by  their
genius,  capacity,  and  virtues,  m  the  hall  of  his  palace.  By  the
plans  which  were  presented  to  him,  he  ascertained  mat  the  first
part  of  the  building  was  perfected.  He  named  some  of  these
•Masters  'Petit  Architects/  Their  engagements  were  the  same
which  you  have  taken,  and  which  entitle  you  to  their  rank.  Long-
may  you  enjoy  tins  rank  with  honor  to  yourself  and  advantage
to  us!'

LECTURE.

The  Master,  giving  the  'paw  sign?  says,  Respectable  brother
S.  W.  are  you  a  Petit  Architect?  S.  W.  Powerful  Master,  I  am.
M.  In  what  place  were  you  received?  S.  W.  In  the  circle  of
the  square,  and  the  holy  of  holies.  M.  What  does  that  circle
signify?  S.  W.  The  eternity  of  the  G.  A.  who  has  neither  be-
gmning  nor  end.  M.  What  does  the  square  signify?  S.  W.
The  oblong  square  of  the  tomb  of  Hiram.  M.  What  is  signified
by  the  holy  of  holies?  S.  W.  The  space  within  the  triangle,
where  the  name  of  the  G.  A.  is  engraved.  M.  By  what  means
were  you  received  as  a  P.  A.?  S.  W.  By  the  eement  which  was
employed  in  laying  me  stones  of  the  temple.  M.  What  cement
was  employed?  S.  W.  A  mystic  cement,  composed  of  flour,
milk,  wine,  and  oil.  M*  What  does  this  represent?  S.  W.  The
flour  represents  goodness;  the  nuJk,  gentleness;  the  wine,  strength;

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON  MASONftV.  297

the  oil,  wisdom:— qualities  which  distinguished  our  Respectable
Master.     M.  How  was  he  buried?     S.  W.  His  face  to  the  cen-
tre, his  mouth  on  the  letter  G.  engraved  within  the  blazing  star.
M.    In  what  place?     S.  W.    Behind  the  sanctuary,      M.    Did
Solomon  suffer  the  death  of  Hiram  to  remain  unpunished?     S.
W.  No.  He  named  those  Architects,  who  were  willing  to  engage
themselves  by  new  promises,  to  pursue  his  murderers.     M.  How
did  the  Architects  pursue  them?      S.  W.    They  travelled  round
mount  Lebanon  three  times  seven,  visited  me  neighboring  moun-
tains, and  the  most  secret  places,  unti  they  were  discovered.  M.
What  was  he  called,  who  killed  Hiram?     S.  W.  Akirop,  or  Abi-
ram;  which  signifies  assassin,  or  morderer.     M.    How  did  you
come  to  this  degree?      S.  W.    By  three  steps  forward  and  three
backward.      M.    In  what  have  you  been  employed?     S.  W.  In
perfect  architecture,  in  composing  and  in  forming  the  triangle,
placed  in  the  tomb  of  Hiram.     M.  Describe  that  work.     S.  W.
The  middle  contains  the  letter  G.  and  the  corners,  the  letters  S.
U.  G.     M*  What  do  those  letters  signify?     8.  W.  The  G.  is  the
initial  of  the  word  'GOD;7  the  S.  of  the  word  'Submmien;'  the
U.  of  *  Union?  and  the  G.  of  the  word  HZ&mtz:' — the  grand  word
said  to  be  the  first  word  pronounced  fey  the  first  man.     M.  Have
you  no  other  letters  in  your  lodge?      8.  W.    We  nave  the  letters
M.  B.  which  signify  the  word  which  we  do  not  pronounce  alottd,
and  which  was  uttered  in  raising  the  body  of  our  Resp.  Master;
and  three  other  letters  of  brass,  incrusted  on  the  border  of  his*
tomb.     M*  Give  me  those  letters,  with  their  signification.  S.  W.
They  are  M.  A.  S.     The  M.  signifies  'MoriahJ  the  name  of  the
mountain  where  the  temple  stood;  the  A*  lJLd&niramS  or  Hiram,
the  Master;  and  the  8.  'StokinS     M.  Were  your  labors  confined
to  the  temple  alone?      8.  W.    JSo;  I  have  traced  a  circle  by  its
circumference,  upon  a  space  which  we  term  the  hory  of  holies.
M.  What  does  that  circumference  signify?     S.  W.  The  eternity
of  the  Supreme  Being,  which  geometry  represents  to  us  under
that  emblem.     M.  What  are  your  marks?    8.  W.  Two  signs,  a
word,  a  token.     M.  What  do  you  call  the  token?     8.  W.    The
double  arch.      M.   Give  me  the 'pass  wordv'    8.  W.  Ga-ba-on.
(Gibeon,  according  to  the  English  Bible.)     M.   Give  me  the
grand  word.     8.  W.  'Gomez.'

Clo8i7ig.-~-M.  'My  brethren*  it  is  the  last  hfstant,  the  last  hour,  '
the  kst  day  which  the  Master  of  the  adverse  employed  in  the
creation;  it  is  the  last  instant,  the  last  hour,  and  the  last  day
when  Solomon  wrought  in  building  the  temple;  and  the  last  in-
stant when  Architects  ought  to  labor.  It  is  time  for  us  to  repose*'
He  knocks  7,  which  is  repeated  by  the  Wardens,  and  the  Master
says,  'My  brethren,  the  lodge  is  closed!'

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


J98  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY*

THE  DEGREE  OF

"GRAND  ARCHITECT,"
OR  COMPAGNON  ECOSSOIS

The  lodge  is  divided  into  two  parts,  by  a  black  curtain  be-
hind the  throne.  Near  the  throne  is  the  altar,  on  which  is  the
Bible,  a  double  triangle,  a  square,  a  compass  and  a  plan  of  the
temple  finished,  as  far  as  the  third  story.  The  whole  lodge  is
hung  with  red,  adorned  with  hyacinth  flowers,  but  the  hangings
of  the  first  apartment  should  be  covered  with  a  black*  drapery,
which  may  be  removed  when  the  proper  time  arrives.  This  first
apartment  is  illuminated  by  twenty-seven  lights,  distributed  by
3  times  9.  The  titles  of  the  officers  are  the  same  as  in  the  pre-
ceding degree.  The  carpet,  or  flooring,  only  differs  in  having
the  triangle  double.  The  jewel  is  a  double  triangle  formed  wkh
a  compass  and  level,  and  contained  within  a  golden  circle.  The
head  of  the  compass  has  a  golden  sun,  whose  rays  touch  the  head
of  the  level.  This  jewel  is  worn  by  a  large  red  cordon*  from
left  to  right.  In  the  first  apartment,  when  hung  with  black,  the
cordon  of  the  jewel  is  black  ;but  the  instant  file  hangings  are
changed,  the  cordon  is  changed  also.

Second  Apartment.— (Used  in  the  next  degree.)  Behind  the
black  curtain  is  an  'altar,'  with  masonic  emblems  painted  on  it.
it  is  erected  on  seven  steps  and  lighted  with  eighty-one  candles,
placed  in  a  triangular  form.  Above  it  is  a  transparent  painting
representing  a  'ff/ory,'  surrounded  by  seven  celestial  intelligences.
In  the  middle  a  luminous  'triangle,' 'in  which  is  written  }[)7[* ;  on
the  edge  of  the  cloud  appear  seven  angel's  heads.  The  ark  of
alliance  supported  by  two  cherubims,  covering  it  with  their  wings.
Before  the  ark  is  a  lamb,  reposing  on  a  book  sealed  with  seven
seals.  Before  the  ark,  on  the  right,  is  the  brazen  sea.  On  each
side  of  the  room  are  placed  five  urns,  in  the  middle  is  the  altar  of
burnt  offerings,  the  golden  candlestick,  and  table  of  shew-bread.

Opening. — The  Powerful  Master,  seated  on  a  moveable  throne,
knocks  1,  which  is  repeated  by  the  Wardens,  and  Master  says,
'Most  Respectable  Wardens,  before  the  opening  of  this  lodge  of
Grand  Architects,  examine  the  brethren,  and  see  if  all  the  avenues
of  the  temple  are  %uardedV  This  is  done,  and  J*  W.  says,
*P.  M.  all  die  brethren  present  are  G.  A.  and  all  the  avenues  of
the  temple  are  guarded.'

Master. — *Most  Respectable  Wardens,  assist  me  in  opening

♦Collar.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  299

this  lodge  of  G.  A.  Respectable  S.  W.  what  is  the  hour?'  The
response  and  the  residue  of  the  ceremony  of  opening,  is  the  same
as  in  the  degree  of  P.  Architect.

Reception. — The  candidate  being  divested  of  all  weapons,  and
Minded  and  lead  to  the  door,  the  Master  of  Ceremonies  gives  the
alarm  of  the  P.  Architect.     The  J.  W.  knocks,  the  alarm  of  this
degree*  Mrhich  is  repeated  by  the  S.  W.  and  then  by  the  Master.
J.  W.  says,  'Respectable  brother  S.  W.  some  one  knocks  at  the
door  after  the  manner  of  a  P.  Architect!'      S.   W.  'Powerful
Master,  some  one  knocks  at  the  door,'  &c.     Mast.  'Venerable
brother  S.  W.  see  who  knocks.'     J.  W.  goes  to  the  doorj  gives
the  alarm  of  a  P.  A.  which  is  answered  from  without,  and  he  asks,
'What  is  your  desiref  JVf,  ofC.  'Here  is  a  br.  P.  A.  who  wishes
to  be  examined,  that  he  may  receive  the  degree  of  G.  A.  The  J.
W.  shuts  the  door  and  repeats  to  the  S.  W.,  who  repeats  to  the  M.
Master.  'Respectable  brother  J.  W.  demand  his  name,  if  he  is
properly  prepared,  and  has  resolution  to  undergo  the  severe  trials
as  all  GL  A.  have  done,  who  have  gone  this  way  before  him.'  The
J.  W.  does  this,  and  repeats  the  answers  of  candidate  to  S.  W.
who  reports  to  Master.     Brethren  all  rise,  and  Master  says,  'My
brethren,  the  second-story  of  the  temple  according  to  the  Supreme
orders— It  is  necessary  that  it  should  be  elevated  another  story,
which  will  be  the  height  which  it  ought  to  have  according  to  the
designs  given  by  the  G„  A.  of  the  universe.     The  direction  of
*  this  part  of  our  work  has  been  reserved  for  the  G.  A.  who  is  to
replace  Hiram.     The  work  ought  to  be  deferred  no  longer;  it
must  be  completed  before  our  next  meeting.     It  is  necessary  that
the  Architect  who  presents  himself,  should  make  us  acquainted
with  the  justice  of  his  plans,  since  none  but  skilful  G.  Architects
can  bring  the  temple  to  perfection.     Is  it  your  wish,  my  brethren,
that  we  should  admit  and  examine  him  who  is  at  the  door?'  Breth-
ren assent  by  clapping  hands  three  times.    Master.  'Brother  J.  W.
cause  '  Moabon'  to  be  introduced  in  due  forjn.'    Candidate  is
led  in,  and  placed  in  the  west,  his  feet  or  toes  on  the  points  of  the
square.     Master  knocks  1  for  order,  J.  W.  knocks  7,  (alarm  of
G.  A.)  this  is  repeated  by  S.  W.  and  by  Master.     J.  W.  says,
•'Powerful  Master,  you  behold  'Moabon,'  who  desires  to  obtain
the  degree  of  G.  A.'     Mooter.    'My  brother,  the  degree  which
you  desire  to  obtain,  is  one  of  high  rank.     The  perfecting  of  the
temple  is  a  work  of  such  importance,  that  we  fear  you  will  not
submit  to  the  trials  to  which  we  subject  those  whom  we  admit.
Yet  the  necessity  of  finding  a  worthy  successor  to  Hiram,  renders
m  it  necessary  to  prove  those  who  think  themselves  capable  of  filling
his  place.    It  is  necessary  to  make  the  tour  of  the  temple  twenty-


y  Google


3Q0  LIGHT  ON   MASONXY.

seven  time,  which  I  have  reduced  to  nine,  for  the  purpose  of  ex-
amining the  work.  It  is  also  necessary  to  produce  a  plan  drawn
with  exactness.  You  wiH  present  this  to  the.  G.  A.  who  will  judge
whether  you  are  worthy  to  replace  Hiram,  whom  we,  ha^e  lastV
Master  knocks  1,  as  a  signal  for  the  J.  W.  to  lead  candidate  round
the  lodge;  be  also  puts  the  plan  in  the  hands  of  the  candidate;  he
travels  as  in  the  degree  of  P.  A.  J.  W.  lmocks  1,  and  says,
'Respectable  brother  S.  W. '  Moaboa'  has  finished. his  mysteeioua
travels.'  S.  W.  repeats  this  to  the  Master.  Master.  'My  bro*
tber,  what  are  the.  fruits  of  youu  travels?'  Candidate*  'Powerful
Master,  I  have  brought  a  plan  of  the  works  e£  the  temple,  which  I
am  ready  to  present  for  inspection.'  Matter.  'My  brother,  pre-
sent it  to  me  by  three  steps.'  Candidate  makes  three  steps,  and
falls  on  one  knee  at  the  foot  of  the  throne.  Master  receives  it,
and  alter  examining  it,  hands  it  to  the  brother  next  to  him,  who
passes  it  on;  thus  it  returns  again  to  the  Master  in  the  east,  who
receiving  it,  places  the  hand  of  the  candidate  on,  the  square  $nd
double  triangle,  placed  on  the  altar.  The  compass  on  his  wrist,
a  sword  is  held  above,  and  he  takes  the  obligation. .

Obligation. — 'I  promise,  under  the  same  obligations  which  I
have  already  taken,  never  to  reveal  the  secrets  of  this  degree  of
G.  A.  to  any  one  of  an  inferior  degree,  or  to  any  other  person,
under  the  penalty  of  being  expelled  from  all  our  lodges.  Amen/

Master.  'Brother  S.  W.  conduct  the  candidate  backward  by
three  steps.'  In  the  west  he  is  turned  with  his  back  to  the  east,  *
and  is  seated  on  a  stool  before  the  table*  and  then  turned,  again
towards  the  east  Master.  'Dp  you  persist  in  your  determination
to  keep  our  secrets  inviolably?'  Jkw.  'Yes.'  Master.  'Brother
S.  W.  remove  the  veil  of  obscurity;  'Moabon'  is  worthy  to  be-
hold our  labors.'  (The  bandage  is  removed  from  his  eyes  at  the
stroke  of  the  mallet*)  Master.  'My  brother,  it  is  with  pleasure
we  have  seen  you  fulfil  the  conditions  prescribed  to  you.  The  ex-
actness of  your  plan  induces  us.  to  admit  you  among  our  number,
that  with  us  you  may  complete  this  vast  and*  sublime  edifice. —
Approach,  my  brother,  and  receive  the  marks  of  distinction  to
which  your  constancy  entitles  you!'  'We  have  in  tnis  degree,  a
sign  of  demand,  oneof  response,  a  token,  and  two  words.  The
sign  of  demand  is  made  by  placing  the  hands  on  the  stomach  so
as  to  form  a  triangle  with  the  thumbs  and  fore  fingers,  This  is
termed  the  'summoning  sign;'  and  the  sign  of  response  is  made
by  carrying  the  two  hands  in  the  same  form  above  the  head.  This
is  the  sign  of  distress,  and  is  only  to  be  used  in  danger.  The
token  is  made  by  joining  right  hands  and  reversing  them  three  ,
times.    The  word  is  'Moabon,'  given,  by  pronouncing  a .  syllable

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRT.  30]

«ach  time  the  hands  are  reversed  in  the  token.  Pass  word  the
«ame  as  the  pass  word  of  Fellow  Craft  Go,  my  brother,  salute!
the  brethren,  and  return  to  me.'  When  the  candidate  has  done
this,  he  takes  his  seat  in  the  west,  and  hears  the  lecture.

LECTURE.

M.  Most  Resp.  S.  W.  are  you  a  G.  A.?  S.  W.  Powerful
Master,  I  have  wrought  in  the  third  story  of  the  temple.  M.
Where  were  you  received!  S.  W.  In  the  middle  chamber.  M.
What  is  that  chamber?  S.  W.  The  place  where  king  Solomon
completed  the  plan  of  the  temple  with  the  Grand  Architects.  M.
How  were  you  employed  in  the  degree  of  G.  A.?  S.  W.  In
building  the  third  story,  which  was  the  top  of  the  temple.  M.
How  did  you  merit  this  degree?  S.  W.  By  the  perfection  of  the
designs  which  I  presented  to  Solomon.  M.  What  was  your  re-
ward? S.  W.  Two  signs,  a  token,  and  two  words.  M.  Give
them  to  me.  S.  W.  P.  Master,  give  me  the  first  and  I  will  give
you  the  second.  M.  What  are  these  signs,  called?  S.  W.  The
first  the  sign  of  demand,  and  thtr  second  the  sign  of  distress.  M.
What  does  the  first  sign  show,  and  why  does  it  bear  that  name?
S;  W  That  a  good  Mason  in  distress,  may  depend  on  the  assist-
ance of  his  brethren;  also,  that  it  is  only  to  be  given  in  the  lodge
or  in  danger.  M.  Give  the  token  to  your  nearest  brother.  (Giv-
en, saying  Moabon.)  M.  What  is  the  word  you  cannot  pro-
nounce? S.  W-  The  word  given  me  by  Solomon.  M.  What  is
the  other  word?  S.  W.  (Repeating  the  pass  word  of  the  Fellow
Craft,)  which  is  the  pass  word.  M.  What  is  your  age?  S.  W.
Twenty-seven  years.

Cbsing.-^Maater.  'Resp.  brethren  S.  W.  and  J.  W.  give  no-
tice that  I  am  about  to  close  this  lodge  of  G.  A.'  (They  do  it.)
JVforfer.  'What  is  the  hour,  brother  S,  W.?>  S.  W.  'The  last
instant,  the  last  hour,  the  last  day  in  which  the  G.  A.  of  the  uni-
verse was  employed  in  creating  the  world;  the  last  instant,  the
last  hour,  the  last  day  which  Solomon  employed  in  constructing
the  temple.'  .  Master*  'Therefore  it  ought  to  be  the  last  instant
of  holding  this  lodge;  it  is  time  to<dose,  and  repose  ourselves.'
Wardens^repeat  this.  Master  knocks  27,  and  «ay5>  'My  brethren,
tjhe  locjge  is  closed !'

Note.  The  apartment  behind  the  black  curtain  is  not  used  in  this  degree!
•but  in  that  of  *Le  mmte  Ecossoig.*


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


302  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY,

THE  DEGREE  OF

I,E  MAITRE  ECOSSOIS  *

Description,  #c. — The  two  apartments  mentioned  in  tfye  last
degree,  are  those  used  in  this,  except  that,  in  the  first  apartment,
the  altar  is  placed  in  the  west  between  the  Wardens,  and  in  the
place  of  the  first  plan,  one  is  used  which  represents  the  temple
complete,  but  destitute  of  any  ornaments.  Below  the  temple  are
represented  many  working  tools,  and  on  the  back  are  written  the
names  of  those  who  have  taken  the  degree,  in  the  lodge;  below
these  names  the  word  'excluded?  is  wjitten,  for  the  purpose  of  be-
ing filled  up  with  the  names  of  those  who  may  have  refused  to
undergo  the  trials  hereafter  mentioned.  Such  a  refusal  excludes
the  person  for  ever  from  all  lodges  of 'Maitre  Ecossois,'  and  con-
sequently from  all  the  degrees  above  it.  Before  the  altar  is  a
stool,  on  which  the  candidate  is  made  to  sit,  leaning  his  head  on
the  altar,  at  the  time  the  hangings  of  the  lodge  are  changed  from
Mack  to  red.

Titles. — Master — 'Most  Puissant;9  Wardens — 'Most  Respec-
table;1 and  brethren — 'Most  Honorable .'

Opening — like  that  of  the  last  degree*

Reception.— -Candidate  is  prepared  as  in  the  degree  of  G.  A.
except  that  he  is  not  blinded.  'Master  of  Ceremonies*  causes  him
to  sign  his  name  on  the  back  of  the  plan,  without  letting  him  see
the  other  side,  and  tells  him  that,  if  he  wants  resolution  to  under-
go the  trials,  he  had  better  go  no  further;  since,  if  he  shows  any
weakness,  he  will  be  for  ever  excluded.  If  he  persists,  the  M.
of  C.  knocks  at  the  door  the  alarm  of  a  G.  A.  which  is  answer-
ed within  by  the  alarm  of  this  degree.  He  is  led  in  and  placed
in  the  west,  facing  the  east,  between  the  Wardens.  The  War-
dens give  the  alarm,  which  the  Master  answers  and  says,  'Most
Resp.  Wardens,  what  do  you  desire?'  S.  W*  'Most  Puissant,
here  is  'Moabon,'  who,  full  of  zeal,  strength,  and  courage,  wish-
es to  submit  to  all  the  trials  which  you  may  impose  on  mm,  to  ob-
tain the  'Puissant  Degree'  of  Superintendent  Maitre  Ecossois.' '
Master.  'My  brother,  we  approve  the  zeal  which  induces  you  to
make  this  request,  btrt  you  know  not  the  sublimity  of  the  degree
which  you  solicit.  The  temple  is  finished,  and  it  only  means  to
complete  the  'altars9  and  'tabernacles'  which  Hiram  left  unfinish-
ed, and  of  which  he  has  furnished  the  designs.  He  is  no  more:
it  is  necessary  to  have  a  successor  who  will,  with  honor  and  skill,

*  Scotch  Master.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRlf.  303

pursue  and  finish  his  designs.  Are  you  capable  of  doing  this?'
Candidate.  'M.  P.  if  zeal,  labor,  and  constancy  claim  any  right,
condescend  to  prove  me.'  Master.  'M.  R.  J.  Warden,  cause
the  candidate  to  make  the  usual  journey  by  3  times  27,  and  if  the
designs  which  he  shall  submit  to  us,  are  worthy  of  being  pursued,
we  will  proceed  to  the  trials  necessary  to  enable  him  to  see  the
brilliant  light!'  J.  W.  gives  the  plan  to  the  candidate,  causes
him  to  travel,  and  then  the  Wardens  knock,  and  the  S.  W.  says,
<M.  P.  Moabon  has  fulfilled  your  orders,  and  wishes  to  present
his  designs  to  you/  Master.  'M.  Resp.  J.  W.  cause  him  to
advance  by  three  steps:'  he  does  this — the  Master  examines  the
plan,  and  passes  it  to  the  brethren.  Master.  'My  brother,  this
alone  is  not  sufficient;  there  are  other  trials  to  be  submitted  to.
Do  you  persist  in  your  first  demand?  Candidate.  'Yes,  M.  P.*
Master.  'Most  Resp.  J.  W.  cause  the  candidate  to  return  to  the
west,  by  three  steps  backward,  that  he  may  see  his  duty  to  be
firm  in  the  path  of  virtue,  notwithstanding  the  humiliations  which
will  be  required  of  him!'  When  the  candidate  is  placed  in  the
west,  Master  says,  'My  brother,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  you
on  the  degrees  which  you  have  already  taken.'  This  is  done,  and
Master  says,  'My  brother,  though  you  have  passed  through  all
these  degrees,  you  are  not  yet  one  of  the  most  perfect.  It  re-
mains for  you  to  behold  the  brilliant  light,  which  is  submitted  to
the  view  of  those  only,  who  have  been  well  tried.  It  is  necessa-
ry that  you  should  take  an  obligation,  which  is  contained  in  the
paper  which  I  present  to  you;  read  to  yourself,  and  afterwards,  if
you  are  willing  to  take  it,  read  it  aloud.'

Obligation. — 'In  the  name  of  the  Most  High,  who  has  created,
sustained,  and  guided  me  thus  far  in  my  life,  I  promise  and  swear
that  I  will  keep  inviolably  all  the  secrets,  signs,  and  mysteries  of
this  degree,  except  it  shall  be  in  a  just  and  regular  lodge  of  the
same;  and  if  I  shall  violate  this  obligation,  I  consent  that  the
veins  of  my  temples  and  throat  shall  be  opened,  and  my  body  ex-
posed on  the  highest  pyramid,  in  the  open  air,  to  the  rigor  of  the
winds,  the  heat  of  the  sun,  the  dews  of  the  night,  until  the  blood
flowing  gradually  from  my  veins,  my  life  shall  be  extinct  through
loss  of  blood  and  famine.  May  the  G.  A.  of  the  universe  keep
me  in  this  obligation.  Amen.'

Master  says,  'My  brother,  have  you  resolution  to  pronounce
this  obligation  from  your  heart,  in  a  loud  voice,  before  this  august
assembly?'  If  the  candidate  refuses,  the  Wardens,  placing  the
]K>ints  of  their  swords  in  his  back,  cause  him  to  make  the  twenty-
seven  tours  of  the  G.  A.  and  the  eighteen  of  the  P.  A.  round  the
room  and  then  drive  him  out  oT  the  room.     If  the  candidate  con.


y  Google


304  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

sents,  he  reads  the  obligation  with  a  loud  voice,  and  the  J.  W.
then  bums  it  in  one  of  the  lights*  When  it  is  consumed,  they  all
clap  hands  thrice.

Masttr.  'My  brother,  since  your  zeal  has  induced  you  to  per-
severe, we  recognize  you  as  'Superintendent  of  the  Tabernacled
we  are  about  to  raise.  You  will  succeed  our  Resp.  Master,  Hi-
ram; but  before  your  honor  is  proclaimed  in  the  east  of  the  tem-
ple, let  us  render  a  tribute  of  respect  to  the  memory  of  him  whose
loss  we  deplore  in  profound  silence.'  Master  says,  'CiviJ  and
knocks  1;  all  the  brethren  place  one  knee  on  the  floor,  and  rest-
ing the  head  on  one  hand,  remain  silent.  Master  knocks  1,  and
the  Wardens  place  the  candidate  on  his  knees  before  the  table,
his  face  covered  with  his  hands  and  placed  on  the  open  Bible,  so
that  he  sees  nothing.  The  Wardens  cross  their  swords  on  his
neck.  While  he  is  in  this  posture,  the  black  drapery  of  the  first
apartment  is  removed,  and  the  black  curtain  of  the  second  drawn,
and  all  the  brethren  put  on  the  red  cordon  when  the  change  is
made;  the  Master  knocks  1  for  silence.  He  knocks  again,  and
says,  'Caki,'  (rise.)  Brethren  all  rise,  and  the  Wardens  raise  the
candidate;  as  he  rises,  Master  knocks  1,  and  all  the  brethren  say,
c Hiram  is  dead,  and  'Moabon'  supplies  his  place.'

After  a  moment's  silence,  Master  says,  'It  is  with  pleasure,  my
brother,  that  we  have  proclaimed  you  a  'Superintendent  Maitre
Ecossois!'  Approach  and  learn  the  mysteries  of  this  degree/
He  is  caused  to  advance  to  the  brazen  sea,  from  which  the  Mas-
ter takes  water  with  an  urn,  and,  throwing  some  drops  on  the  left
side  of  the  candidate,  says,  'Be  purified!'  He  is  then  placed  at
the  foot  of  the  throne,  and  the  Master,  giving  hhn  the  cordon  and
jewel,  says,  'This  cordon  and-jcwel  gives  you  the  command  over*
all  other  Masons  of  inferior  degrees.  (Giving  the  gloves,)
These  gloves  belong  to  this  degree.  We  have  in  this  degree
two  signs,  a  token,  and  four  words.  The  two  first  words  are
'Urhn'  and  'ThtinmimS  The  secret  and  incommunicable  word
is  TftTP  >  (Jehovah;)  the  word  of  Ancient  Masters,  which
had  been  lost!  The  pass  word  ia  {ZedidiacJi  The  sign  is  to  .
present  the  hands,  forming  a'itfarigle,  at  the  top  of  the  forehead,
saying,  'The  triangle  on  the1  forehead  is  my  supportP  The  an-
swer to  this,  sign  is  made  by  placing  the  fight  hand  on  the  eyes,
inclining  the  head,  and  bending  the  knee.  The  token  is  tp  take
the  right  hand  (as  in  the  degree  of  G.  A.  but  in  place  of  reversing
them;)  three  times,  and  giving  mutually  three  light  Wows  with  the
four  fingers  joined,  placing  the  left  hind  on  the  right  shoulder,
saying,  'Virtue  unites  two  hearts,  two  bodies,  and  two  hands;  and
the  whole  make  but  one!'  Go,  my  brother,  salute  the  Wardens*
*nd  return  to  the  east  for  further  instruction.'

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


tIGtIT   ON  UXSOttfLf*  305

LECTUJtE.

M.  Most  Resp.  brother  S.  W.  what  do  you  know  as  a  Mai-
tro  Ecossois?     8.  W.  Most  Puissant,  I  know  the  grand  light  of
the  third  apartment.     M.  Where  were  you  received?     S.  W.  In
the  high  place.     M.  What  road  did  you  travel?     S.  W.  By  that
of  the  middle  chamber,  to  the  third  apartment.     M.  Has  not  this
third  apartment  another  name?     S.  W.  It  is  named  'Gibeon,9  and
is  the  high  place  w&ere  David  and  Solomon  offered  their  burnt
offerings,  before  the  building  of  the  temple.     M.  In  what  were
you  occupied  as  a  *Maitre  Ecossois?'     S.  W.  In  furnisftiog  the
attars  and  tabernacles,  and  in  completing  the  precious  orna-
ments.    M.  What  are  those  ornaments?     S.  W.  The  ark  of  al-
liance and  cherubime,  the  brazen  table,  the  table  of  skew-bread,
the  altar  of  burnt  offerings,  and  the  candlestick  of  seven  branch-
es.   M.  What  was  above  the  ark  of  alliance?    S>  W.  The  <She-
einah,'  between  the  cherubim's  wings.     M.  Under  what  form
is  the  'Shekinah'  represented]     8;  W.  Under  that  of  a  lamb  re-
posing on  a  book  sealed  with  seven  seals.     M.  Of  what  wood
was  the  ark  made?    S.  W.  Of  shittim  wood,  which  is  incorrupti-
ble, and  it  was  covered  with  gold.      M.  What  was  its  size?     S.
W.  Two  cubits  and  a  half  long,  one  cubit  and  a  half  broad,  and
one  cubit  and  a  half  high.*  M.  Wbatthd  the  ark  contain?    S.  W.
The  tables  of  the  law,  Aaron's  rod,  and  the  pot  of  manna.    M»
Give  me  the  sign  of  that  law.     S.  W.  It  is  given  by  placing  the
two  hands  on  the  head,  the  fingers  extended,  which  represents
the.  ten  commandments.     M.  In  what  place  was  the  ark  made,
and  by  whom?     S*  W.  It  was  made  at  Horeb  by  Bezaleel  and
Aholiab.     It  was  carried  from  Horeb  to  Moab,  from  Moab  to
Shecnem,  afterwards  to  Shilo,  from  8hilo  to  the  temple  of  Da-
gon,frem  thence  to  the  house  of  Aminadab,  then  to  the  house  of
Obed  Erdom,  afterwards  to  Kirjath  Jearim,  thence  to  Jerusalem,
and  placed  on  Mount  Zioh,  and  afterwards  to  the  temple  on
Mount  Moriah.    M.  Where  were  the  ornaments  placed?    S.  W.
The  altar  of  burnt  offerings  was  placed  before  the  door  of  the
tent  of  the  congregation.     The  altar  of  incense  was  at  the  west
end  of  the  holy  place  of  the  tabernacle.    The  table  of  shew-bread
on  the  north,  and  the  golden  candlestick  of  seven  branches  on
the  south.     The  ark  itself  was  placed  in  the  west  end  of  the
most  holy  place.     M.  What  is  represented  by  the  candlestick
of  seven  branches?    S.  W.  The  seven  days  of  creation,  includ-
ing the  day  of  rest.     8.  W-  How  did  you  become  acquainted
with  all  these  things?     8.  W*  By  the  designs  which  I  presented
to  Solomon  after  a  dangerous  journey.   M.  What  was  that?     gfc.
Bb2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


306  LIGHT  ON  ausoiritr.

W.  I  made  foe  tour  of  all  the  works  of  the  temple,  3  times  27,
M.  Was  a  sight  of  the  brilliant  light  the  reward  of  this  labor*
S.  W.  No,  M.  P.;  I  was  subjected  to  three  trials.  M.  What
wore  those?  S.  W.  The  first,  to  make  three  steps  backward,  to
teach  me  firmness  in  the  path  of  virtue  under  humiliations.  The
second,  to  give  an  exact  account  of  the  progress  which  I  had
made  in  Masonry,  and  in  the  practice  of  virtue.  The  third,  to
make  a  voluntary  engagement  which  my  heart  approved,  and  ray
lips  avowed.  M.  What  did  this  engagement  produce?  S.  W.
A  tribute  of  respect  to  the  memory  of  Hiram.  M.  What  follow-
ed? S.  W.  The  word  'Civi,9  which  signifies  kneel.  M.  Did
the  grief  for  the  death  of  Hiram  continue  long?  S.  W.  After
seven  minutes  the  word,  'Caki,'  was  pronounced,  which  signifies
rise.  M.  What  followed  that  word?  S.  W.  A  surprise,  splen-
dor, the  brilliant  light,  and  a  proclamation.  M.  What  was  the
surprise?  S.  W.  My  sight  was  struck  with  the  view  of  scarlet
and  hyacinth.  M.  What  was  the  splendor  and  brilliant  light/
vS.  W.  The  Sbekinah,  and  the  glory  of  the  6.  A.  M.  What  was
the  use  of  the  proclamation?  S.  W.  To  show  that  all  my  breth-
ren had  selected  me  to  replace  Hiram  and  had  declared  me  Su-
perintendent of  all  the  works  of  the  temple  by  the  name  of  Moa-
hon.  M.  What  does  the  luminous  triangle  represent?  S.  W.
The  glory  of  the  G.  A.  of  the  universe,  and  his  three  divine  at-
tributes: eternity,  wisdom,  and  power.  What  do  the  letters  with-
in signify?  S.  W,  The  name  of  'God/  the  sacred  word  of  'M.
£cossois.'  It  shows  us  that  God  is  the  centre  and  source  of
all  light,  and  the  only  one  who  is  able  to  know  all  tfungs.  M,
Why  do  the  Maitre  Ecossois  wear  the  triangle?  S.  W.  Because
it  is  an  emblem  of  the  triple  unity.  M.  What  does  the  circle,
enclosing  the  triangle,  represent.  3.  W.  That  God  has  neither
beginning  nor  end.  M.  Why  is  this  jewel  suspended  by  a  flame
colored  ribbon?  S.  W.  To  teach  us  the  order  wkh  which  we
should  endeavor  to  destroy  vice.  M.  In  what  place  was  your
.  first  lodge  holde^f?  S.  W.  Between  three  mountains  inaecessa-
ble  to  the  profane,  in  a  deep  valley,  where  peace, 'virtue,  and  un-
ion, reign.  M.  What  are  those  three  mountains?  S.  W.  Mt.
Moriah,  Mt  Sinai,  and  Mt  Herodeo.  M.  Where  is  Mt  Hero-
den  situated?  S.  W.  Between  the  west  and  north  of  Scotland,  at
the  end  of  the  Sun's  course,  where  the  highest  masonic  lodge  is
"holden  in  that  country,  which  has  given  a  name  to  this,  degree.
M.  What  do  you  mean  by  a  deep  valley?  S.  W.  The  tranquillity
which  reigns  in  our  lodges.  M.  What  produces  this  tranquillity?
S.  W.  The  preservation  of  our«narks  unchanged.  M.  What
are  the  marks  of  a  Maitre  Ecossois?    S.  W.  Two  signs,  a  to-

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON  VA80NBT.  307

ken,  and  four  words,  of  which  one  is  incommunicable.  M*  Give
me  Resign.  (That  of  response  is  given.)  M.  Give  the  token
to  your  nearest  brother.  (It  is  given.)  M.  What  do  you  call
that  token?  S.  W.  'The  perfect  proof.'  M.  Give  me  the  grand
word.  S.  W.  I  will  letter  it  with  you.  (Done.)  M.  What  does
that  word  signify?  S.  W.  The  name  of  G.  A.  M.  Give  me
the  two  first  words.  (Given.)  M.  Give  me  the  pass  word.
(Zedidiac)  M.  Why  is  the  lodge  purified  before  labor  begins?
S.  W.  After  the  construction  of  the  temple,  the  G.  A.  caused
fire  to  descend  from  Heaven  to  purify  it,  and  to  consume  the
burnt  offering.  M.  What  is  your  age?  S.  W.  As  an  Appren-
tice, three  years;  as  a  Fellow  Craft,  five;  as  a  Master,  nine;  as  a
Petit  Architect,  twenty-one;  as  a  Grand  Architect,  twenty-seven;
as  a  Maitre  Ecossois,  eighty-one.

Close. — Same  as  in  Degree  of  Grand  Architect.


THE  DEGREE  OF

KNIGHT  OF  THE  EAST,

OR

'CHEVALIER  DE  L'ORIENT.'

Description  of  the  lodge. — For  this  degree  two  apartments  are
necessary,  situated  on  the  same  flour.

First  Jrpartment — Is  hung  with  green  on  the  east,  west,  and
north  Sides,  so  as  to  leave  a  space  of  six  feet  between  the  hang-
ings and  the  wall.  The  space  enclosed  is  an  oblong  square.  It
represents  the  apartment  of  Cyrus,  king  of  Assyria;  the  throne  is
in  the  east,  two  arm  chairs  in  the  west,  and  the  seats  for  the  mem-
bers in  the  south.  Behind  the  throne  is  a  transparency,  repre-
senting the  dream  of  Cyrus,  (mentioned  hereafter,)  and  above,
near  the  ceiling,  is  a  triangular  glory,  and  in  it  *?J1|tV  (Jeho-
vah.) The  glory  rests  on  a  luminous  cloud,  from  which  an  ea-
gle is  issuing,  with  a  label  in  its  beak,  and  on  it  the  words,  'Give
liberty  to  the  captives.9  Below  appear  Nebuchadnezzar  and  Bel-
shazzer,  loaded  with  chains.  No  carpet  is  placed  in  this  apart-
ment, but  that  which  supplies  its  place  is  a  long  square,  formed
by  a  little  wail  of  wood  or  painted  cloth,  one  foot  round,  and  half
a  foot  high.  This  little  wall,  commencing  at  the  two  sides  of  the
throne,  pisses  by  the  feet  of  the  brethren  in  the  south,  and  ex-
tends t&  1be  hanging  in  the  west,  so  that  the  two  chairs  may  be
within  the  long  square;  it  is  thed  continued  the  whole  length  of


308  tlOHT  ON  MASONR?.

the  north  aide,  until  it  reaches  the  east.  At  the  four  corners  of
this  wall,  and  also  in  the  middle  of  the  south  and  north,  is  a  little
tower,  one  and  a  half  feet  nigher  than  the  wall.  In  the  west  is
the  seventh  tower,  which  divides  both  the  wall  and  the  hangings.
This  tower  should  he  seven  feet  high,  and  large  enough  to  con-
tain a  roan.  It  has  two  doors,  one  within  the  lodge  and  one
without  At  this  last  door  are  two  sentinels,  armed  with  spears
and  swords.  They  are  in  the  six  feet  of  space  before  named.
The  residue  of  this  space,  from  the  north  to  the  east,  (where  the
door  of  the  second  apartment  is  placed,)  is  occupied  by  a  iiridge
lighted  by  a  lantern.  At  the  entrance  of  the  bridge  it  is  guarded
by  many  armed  men.  The  other  end  reaches  to  the  door  of  the
second  apartment.  Water  so  placed  as  to  be  agitvted,  is  be-
neath the  bridge,  and  represents  the  river  Staburzania,  (or  Eu-
phrates.)

Second  Apartment — Represents  the  court  of  the  temple,  hung
with  red.  The  carpet  represents  the  furniture  of  the  holy  and
most  holy  places.  Above  the  ark,  the  Shekinah,  (symbol  of  the
presence  of  Jehovah,)  represented  by  a  lamb  reposing  on  a  book
sealed  with  seven  seals.  At  the  corner  of  the  temple  is  the  col-
umn Boaz,  broken.  The  carpet  is  covered  with  blacky  which
is  removed  at  the  proper  time  for  its  being  uncovered.

Titles,  ornaments  and  jewels  of  the  first  apartment — Master —
Cyrus,  called  Sovereign;  Senior  Warden — Nebuzaradan,  called
First  General;  Junior  Warden — Mithridates,  called  Second
General;  Secretary — Chancellor;  Master  of  Ceremonies — Grand
Master;  Brethren — Knights.  %

The  Sovereign  carries  a  sceptre.  All  the  officers  wear  »
broad  green  ribbon,  crossed,  round  the  neck  without  any  jewel.
The  Wardens  and  brethren  have  naked  swords  in  their  hands,
and  wear  a  single  ribbon  (green,)  from  right  to  left  without  any
jewel.  Apron,  white,  lined  and  bordered  with  green,  without
any  emblems.

Titles,  ornaments,  and  jewels  of  the  second  apartment—Masted
is  called  Most  Excellent;  Wardens,  Most  Powerful;  Brethren.
Most  Venerable;  and  candidate,  Zerubbabel.     In  passing  from
the  first  apartment  to  the  second  they  change  the  color  green  for
red.     The  cordon  is  red,  and  at  the  bottom  are  rosets  \
the  color  of  the  preceding  degrees,  with  one  of  green*  for  3
of  the  East,  and  one  of  black  for  Knight  of  1he  Eagle^
brethren  wear  a  girdle  of  water  colored  silk,  embroide
gold  fringe,  sprinkled  with  'death  heads'  and  'cross  I
the  middle  a  representation,  in  gold,  of  a  bridge,  origL
the  letters,  L.  D.  P«    The  Master  and  officers  wear  tfflk jev

Digitized  by  GoOgle  '  */


li£ht  on  masojjey.  309

suspended  from  the  neck,  and  the  brethren  from  the  bottom  of
the  cordon.  The  jewel  of  the  Master  is  a  triple  triangle  enclos-
ed in  a  circle.  The  Senior  Warden  wears  a  'square,'  and  the
Junior  Warden,  a  'level,'  within  the  triple  triangle.  The  other
officers  wear  the  usual  jewel  in  a  triple  triangle.  The  brethren
wear  the  triple  triangle,  crossed  by  two  swords,  the  hilts  resting
on  the  level.  The  jewels  are  of  gold;  each  brother  has  a  trowel
suspended  from  the  string  of  his  apron.

Preparation. — The  candidate  is  to  be  clothed  as  a  Maitre
Seossois;  his  hands  bound  with  a  chain,  whose  links  are  trian-
gular. This  chain  must  be  so  long  mat  he  may  use  his  hands.
He  is  informed  that  he  represents  Zerubbabel,  and  is  to  assume
the  air  of  a  captive.  He  is  unarmed,  and  puts  his  hands  over  his
face,  at  the  door  of  the  tower,  where  the  guards  search  him  (for
weapons,)  before  he  is  admitted.

Opening. — Sovereign.  'My  brethren,  assist  me  to  open  a
lodge  of  Knight  of  the  Sword.'*  The  Generals  repeat  this.
The  Sovereign  knocks  seven,  (!!!!!  !  1 )  The  Generals  repeat
this.  Sovereign.  'Senior  General,  see  S  we  are  well  guarded*
and  if  we  are  all  Knights  of  the  South.*  The  General  obeys,
and  says,  'Sovereign  Master,  we  are  well  guarded  from  the  view
of  the  profane  and  are  all  K.  S.'  Sovereign.  'What  is  the  timel7
S.  General.  'This  day  completes  the  seventy  years  of  captivity.'
(Sovereign.  'Generals,  Princes,  and  Knights,  I  have  long  since
resolved  to  liberate  the  Jews  who  are  in  captivity:  I  am  wearied
with  seeing  them. in  chains,  but  before  I  liberate  them  1  wish  to.
consult  yc0  respecting  a  dream  which  I  have  had  this  night,  and
which  requires  an  interpretation.  I  imagined  I  saw  a  ferocious
ljon  about  to  throw  himself  on  me  and  devour  me:  his  appearance
terrified  me,  and  I  hastily  looked  for  some  shelter  from  his  fury;
but  at  that  instant  I  saw  my  two  predecessors,  habited  as  slaves,
beneath  a  glory,  which  Masons  designate  by  the  name  of  the  G.  A.
of  the  universe.  1  was  made  to  understand  two  words  which  I  saw
issuing  from  a  biasing  stan  they  signified  'Liberate  the  captives;'
and  I  understood  if  1  did  not  do  this,  my  crown  would  pass  from
me  to  strangers.  I  remained  speechless  and  confused,  and  sud-
denly awoke.  From  that  instant  my  tranquillity  fled.  Itie-
mains  for  you  Princes  to  assist  me  with  your  advice  on  this  oc-
casion?'

t  During  this  relation  the  brethren  look  downwards,  but  when  it
is  edded  they  look  at  the  S.  Gen.  and  imitate  him.    The  S.  Gen.

*  Thig  degree  is  called  <Kni$ht  of  the  Sword,'  and  'Knight  of  the  Eagle,'  as
well  as  'Knight  of  the  East.'  .


y  Google


310  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.         #

draws  his  sword,  elevates  the  point,  his  arm  being  extended  be*
fore  him.  He  then  poults  it  down  to  signify  his  agreement  in
the  opinion  of  the  Sov.;  he  then  directs  its  point  upwards,  to  sig-
nify liberty,  and  remains  in  that  position.  Sov.  'Let  the  captiv-
ity be  finished;  Generals,  Princes,  and  Knights,  this  L.  of  K.  S.
is  open/  The  Generals,  each  in  his  place,  repeat  these  words.
Reception. — The  Master  of  Ceremonies  leads  the  candidate  to
the  door  of  the  tower,  where  he  is  thus  interrogated  by  the  guards.
Gen.  'What  do  you  wish?'  Can.  'I  wish,  if  possible,  to  speak  with
your  Sovereign.9  Gen.  'Who  are  you/'  Con.  'The  first  among
my  equals,  by  rank  a  Mason,  by  misfortune  a  captive.'  Gen.
'What  is  your  name)'  Can.  'Zerubbabel.'  Gen.  'What  is  your
age?'  Can.  'Seventy  years.'  Gen.  'What  is  the  cause  of  this
application?'  Can.  'The  tears  and  misery  of  my  brethren.'
Gen.  'We  will  endeavor  to  make  your  request  known  to  the
Sovereign.'  The  guard  knocks  (!!!!!  ! ! )  at  the  door  of  the
lower.  This  alarm  is  repeated;  one  by  the  J.  General,  two  by
the  S.  General,  and  three  by  the  Sovereign.  The  J.  Gen*  says,
'The  guard  knocks  at*the  door  of  the  tower,  in  the  manner  of
a  Knight  of  the  Sword.'  S.  Gen.  'Sovereign  Master,  the  guard
knocks,'  &c.  Sov.  says,  'Senior  General,  some  one  is  to  be
introduced.  Be  prudent.'  — — —  'In  my  present  embarrassed
state  the  least  advice  is  not  to  be  disregarded.'  The  Jun.  Gen.
goes  to  the  door  of  the  tower,  knocks,  and  it  is  opened.  The
guard  lays  aside  his  spear,  comes  before  the  Sovereign,  crosses
his  arms,  bows,  and  says,  'The  first  among  Masons,  his  equals,
aged  seventy  years,  wishes  to  appear  before  you.'  %v.  'When
he  shall  have  been  introduced  into  the  tower  of  the  .palace,  we*
will  examine  him.'  The  guard  bows,  retires,  and  makes  the
candidate  enter  the  tower  which  is  closed  on  him.  The  Sove-
reign questions  the  candidate' through  the  door,  which  is  shut.
Sov.  'What  is  the  cause  of  this  application?'  Can.  'I  come  to
implore  the  justice  and  benevolence  of  the  Sovereign.'  Sov.
'For  what  purpose?'  Can.  'That  mercy  may  be  shown  to  my
brethren,  who  have  been  in  captivity  seventy  years!'  Sov.
'What  is  your  name?'  Can.  'Zerubbabel;  the  first  among  my
equals,  by  rank  a  Mason,  by  misfortune  a  captive.'  Sov.  'What
is  that  mercy  which  you  demand  of  me?'  Can.  'That,  under  the
protection  of  the  G.  A.  of  the  universe,  the  king  will  restore  our
liberty  and  allow  us  to  return  and  rebuild  the  temple  of  our  God.
Sov.  'Since  motives  so  just  have  conducted  you  hither,  you  are
permitted  to  appear  in  our  presence.'  The  guards  open  the  door
of  the  tower,  and  cause  the  captive  to  prostrate  himself  in  the
west;  (done.)    Sov.  'Zerubbabel,  I  have;  like  you,  lamented  the


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  311

Severity  of  your  captivity.  I  promise  to  grant  you  liberty  in-
stantly, if  you  will  communicate  to  me  the  secrets  of  Masonry,
for  which  I  haye  always  entertained  the  greatest  veneration.'
Can.  'Sov.  Master,  when  Solomon  communicated  to  us  the  first
principles  of  Masonry,  he  informed  us  that  equality  was  its  foun-
dation. Equality  does  not  reign  here;  and  your  rank,  your  ti-
tles, and  your  court,  are  not  admissible  in  the  place  where  in-
struction is  given  in  our  mysteries.  Besides,  our  exterior  mark*
are  unknown  to  you;  my  engagements  are  inviolable;  I  am  una-
ble to  reveal  our  secrets,  and  if  liberty  is  to  be  obtained  at  this
price,  I  prefer  captivity.'  Sov.  *I  admire  the  discretion  and  the
virtue  of  Zerubbabel;  he  deserves  liberty  as  a  reward  for  his
firmness.'  The  brethren  assent,  by  pointing  their  swords  down-
wards, and  then'  upwards.  Sov.  'Jun.  Gen.  cause  Zerubbabel
to  undergo  the  seventy  trials,  which  I  reduce  to  three,  viz.  1st.
That  of  the  body;  2d.  That  of  his  courage;  3d.  That  of  his
mind;  after  which,  perhaps,  he  may  merit  the  favor  which  he
demands;'  The  J.  6*  causes  him  to  go  round  the  lodge  three
times; — the  first  time,  a  small  'sheW  is  exploded;  the  second  time,
he  is  examined  to  ascertain  whether  he  persists  in  his  demand;
the  third  time,  he  holds  his  bands  at  the  top  of  his  forehead.
After  this,  the  J.  G.  knocks  7,  and  the  S.  G.  says,  'Wha*  do  you
wish?'  J.  G.  'The  candidate  has  submitted  to  his  trials  with
firmness  and  constancy.'  Sov.  'Zerubbabel,  I  grant  to  you  the
favor  which  you  solicit,  and  consent  that  you  shall  be  set  at  lib-
erty.' Sov.  knocks  7,  which  is  the  signal  at  which  the  Generals
divest  Zerubbabel  of  his  chains.  Sov.  'Return  to  your  bwn
country;  I  permit  you  to  rebuild  the  temple,  destroyed  ly  my
ancestors;  its  treasures  shall  be  sent  to  you  before  the  setting  of
the*  sun;  you  shall  be  acknowledged  chief  over  your  brethren.  I
ordain  that  all  shall  obey  you  in  the  country  through  which  you
shall  pass;  that  they  shall  render  you  assistance  as  though  it  were
to  myself;  I  will  only  exact  a  tribute  from  you  of -three  lambs,
five  sheep,  and  seven  rams,  which  I  will  receive  under  the  porch
of  the  new  temple;  if  I  demand  this,  it  is  rather  in  remembrance
of  the  friendship  which  I  have  promised  you,  than  as  a  reward.
Approach,  my  friend.'  The  Generals  place  him  at  the  foot  of  the
throne.  Sov.  'I  arm  you  with  this  sword,  as  a  mark  of  your  su-
periority over  your  equals,  I  am  persuaded  you  will  employ  it
only  in  their  defence,  and  I  create  you  a  'Knight  of  the  sword.' '
In  saying  these  last  words,  the  Sov.  strikes  with  his  sword  on  the
shoulders,  and  then  raises  him.  He  gives  die  candidate  the  apron,
and  green  cordon,  which  passes  from  left  to  right,  and  says, ' A»  «
mark  of  ©yjesteem,  Idecoxateyou  wilh*n  apron,  and  sash,  which

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


312  LIGHT  ON  MASONRV.

I  have  adopted  in  imitation  of  the  workmen  of  your  temple.  Tho1
these  decorations  are  not  accompanied  with  any  mysteries,  yet  I
confer  them  on  the  princes  of  my  court  as  marks  of  honor;  hence-
forth yon  enjoy  the  same  honor.  I  now  commit  you  to  the  care
of  Nebuzaradan,  who  will  give  you  guides  to  conduct  you  in
safety  to  your  brethren,  in  the  place  where  you  will  found  the
new  temple— Thus  I  decree!'  The  S.  G.  leads  the  candidate
and  places  him  in  the  tower,  where  he  remains  while  the  breth-
ren silently  pass  into  the  second  apartment.  After  they  are  in
order,  the  candidate  is  led  behind  the  hangings  to  the  bridge.
At  its  entrance  he  is  opposed  by  guards,  who  rob  him  of  his
apron  and  sash,  and  endeavor  to  prevent  his  passage;  he  at-
tacks, drives  them  off,  and  arrives  at  the  door  of  the  second
apartment  The  Master  of  Ceremonies  knocks  7  at  the  door:
[M.  of  C.  accompanies  candidate.]  When  the  brethren  hear
the  alarm,  they  detach  the  trowel  from  their  aprons,  and  bold  it
in  the  left  hand,  and  the  sword  in  the  right  The  Junior  Gene-
ral knocks  seven.  This  is  repeated  by  Senior  General  Jun»
ior  General.  'I  hear  a  knocking  at  the  door  of  the  lodge,  in  the
manner  of  Knights  of  the  Sword.'  Senior  General.  'Most  Ex-
<iellent  Master,  some  one  knocks  at  the  door  of  the  lodge,  in  the
manner  of  Knights  of  the  Sword.'  Matter.  'Most  Powerful
brother  Junior  Warden,  see  who  knocks.'  The  Junior  Warden
goes,  knocks,  and  opening  the  door,  says,  'What  do  you  wish?'
Candidate.  'I  wish  to  see  my  brethren,  that  I  may  inform  them
of  my  deliverance  from  Babylon,  and  that  of  the  unhappy  rem-
nant of  the  fraternity,  which  has  been  freed  from  captivity.'.  J.
Warden  shuts  the  door  and  reports  to  Master.  Master  says,
<The  news  which  the  captive  brings  is  true.  The  seventy  years
are  expired,  and  the  day  has  arrived  for  rebuilding  the  temple.
Ask  the  captive  his  name,  his  age,  and  country,  for  fear  of  sur-
prise.' Junior  Warden  knocks  7,  and  is  answered;  he  opens
the  door,  and  says,  'What  is  your  name?  Candidate.  'Zerub-
babel.'  Junior  Warden.  'What  is  yourftget'  Candidate.  'Sev-
enty years.'  Junior  Warden,  'Where  is  your  country?'  Can-
didate. 'On  this  side  of  the  rivet  Staburaania,  to  the  west  of  As-
syria.' Junior  Warden  shuts  the  door,  reports  to  Senior  War-
den, who  reports  to  the  Master.  Master  says,  'His  name  is
Zeruhbabel,  his  country  lies  on  this  side  of  the  river  Stabutza-
nai,  his  age  seventy  years;  yes,  mytoetbten,  the  captivity  is  end-
ed!   The  caplrve  is  truly  tthePxme^^

is  to  rebuild  the  temple.  Let  him  be  adsaitted  among  as  nmi
acknowledged  as  the  one  who  is  to  direct  and  assist  our  labors.*
Junior  Warden  knocks,  opens  the  door,  and  conducts  the  captive

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON   MASOICRT.  31)

to  the  west.    S.  W.  'Most  Excellent  Master,  behold  Zerubbabel,
who  demands  to  be  admitted  into  the  bosom  of  our  fraternity!'
M.  'Zerubbabel,  give  us  an  exact  relation  of  your  deli  erance!'
Can.  'Cyrus  gave  me  permission  to  approach  the  foot  of  bis
throne,  he  was  touched  with  the  miseries  of  the  fraternity,  he
armed  me  with  this  sword,  for  the  defence  of  my  brethren,  and
honored  me  with  the  title  of  brother  among  his  companions.     He
finally  granted  me  my  freedom,  and  committed  me  to  the  care  of
his  faithful  subjects,  who  conducted  me  on  my  journey,  and  as-
sisted me  in  conquering  our  enemies  at  the  passage  of  the  river
Staburzanai,  where,  notwithstanding  our  victory,  we  lost  the  marks
of  distinction,  which  had  been  given  to  us  by  the  king,  our
deliverer.'     M.  'My  brother,  the  loss  which  you  have  met  with
shows  that  the  justice  of  our  fraternity  would  not  endure  the  tri-
umph of  pomp  and  grandeur,    In  decorating  you  with  these  hon-
ors, Cyrus  was  not  guided  by  that  spirit  of  equality,  which  has
always  characterized  you.    By  this  loss,  afl  the  marks  of  distinc-
tion received  from  that  prince  have  disappeared,  but  you  have
preserved  those  of  true  Masonry;  but  before  I  can  communicate
to  you  those  secrete,  which,  since  our  captivity  have  been  preserv-
ed among  the  remnant  of  our  fraternity,  we  must  require  of  you
assurances  that  you  have  not  lost  the  sentiments,  or  the  know-
ledge of  Masonry,  during  your  servitude.'     Can.  'Examine  me;
I  am  prepared  to  answer/    M.  'What  degree  have  you  received
in  Masonry/'  Can.  'That  of  Most  Excellent  Master.'  M.  'Give
me  the  signs;'  (given.)    M.  'Give  me  the  grip;'  (given.)     M.
*My  brethren  Knights,  I  beheve  Zerubbabel  is  worthy  to  parti-
cipate in  our  new  mysteries.'     The  brethren  assent  by  elevating
their  swords.     M.  'Most  Powerful  S.  W.  cause  the  candidate
to  advance  by  three  steps;    and  at  the  third,  let  him  kneel  at  the
foot  of  the  throne  of  the  G.  and  S.  Architect,  where  he  will  make
the  engagements  which  we  require.'

Obligation. — I  promise,  under  the  same  obligations  which  I
have  contracted  in  the  different  degrees  of  Masonry,  never  to
reveal  the  secrets  of  the  'Knight  of  the  Sword,'  or  Free  Ma-
sons, to  any  one  of  an  inferior  degree,  or  to  one  who  is  not  a
Mason,  under  the  penalty  of  enduring  a  captivity  so  rigorous  that
my  chains  shall  never  be  broken,  and  that  my  body  be  exposed
to  the  beasts  of  the  forest,  and  that  a  thunder  bolt  may  dash  me
to  atoms,  as  an  example  toothers  who  are  indiscreet.  So  mote
it  be.

The  Master  raises  the  candidate,  and  (while  he  and  the  breth-
ren are  sheathing  their  swords)  says,  'My  brethren,  the  destruc-
tion oC  the  temple  subjected  Masons  to  such  severe  calamities*
Cc

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


314  LIGHT  ON    MASONRY.

we  have  feared  lest  their  captivity  and  dispersion?  might  have  im-
paired their  fidelity  to  their  engagements;  for  this  reason,  we  haver
been  obliged,  while  rebuilding  the  temple,  to  remain  in  a  secret
and  retired  place,  where  we  carefully  preserve  some  ruins
of  the  ancient  temple.  We  do  not  introduce  any  to  that  place,,
unless  we  know  them  to  be  true  and  worthy  Masons;  net  alone
by  their  signs,  words,  and  grips,  but  also  by  their  conduct;  to
such  we  communicate  our  new  secrets  with  pleasure,  but  we  re-
quire as  a  pledge,  that  they  should  bring  with  them  some  remains
or  monuments  of  the  ancient  temple;  those  which  Cyrus  has  given
to  you  are  sufficient.'  (While  these  last  words  are  pronounced,  the-
captive  is  uncovered. )  M.  'Most  Powerful  S.  W.  cause  the  candi-
date to  recede  three  Steps,  that  he  may  learn  that  we  esteem  per-
fect resignation  as  a  Masonic  virtue.'  Candidate  stands  in  the
west,  and  Master  says,  *  My  brother,  the  object  of  our  labors  is-
to  rebuild  the  temple  of  the  G.  A.  of  the  universe;  tbis  subHme
work  has  been  reserved  for  Zerubbabel.  The  engagements  into
which  you,  with  us,  have  entered,  under  that  name,  require  you  to
aid  us  in  rebuilding:  the  temple  in  its  splendor.  The  sword  which
Cyrus  has  given  you,  is  to  be  used  in  defending  your  brethren,
and  punishing  those  who  would  profane  the  august  temple  which
we  raise  to  the  glory  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  It  is  on  these
conditions  you  participate  in  our  secrets.'  The  pass  word  is  *  * .
Go  give  the  brethren  of  this  lodge,  the  signs,  grips,  and  words,
and  return  to  me.'  He  goes  by  the  north,  and  returns  by  the
south.  M.  'My  brother,  after  your  deliverance,  Cyrus  had  you
created  a  Masonic  Knight,  and  I  now  present  you  with  the  trow-r
el,  the  symbol  of  your  new  dignity,  that  hereafter  you4  may  labor
with  the  trowel  in  one  hand,  and  use  the  sword  with  the  other,  if
the  temple  should  ever  be  destroyed,  for  it  is  in  that  manner  we
have  proceeded  to  rebuild  it. '  (Master  givetf  the  gjrdle,  and  says,)
'This  scarf  ought  always  to  accompany  you  in  all  lodges;  you
will  have  a  mark  of  true  Knighthood,  which  you  acquired  at  the
river  Staburzanai,  by  the  victory  obtained  over  those  who  oppose
edyour  passage!'  (Gives  the  green  rosette,  saying,)  'Though:
we  do  not  admit  among  our  ceremonies  any  of  the  decorations
given  you  by  Cyrus,  yet  we  are  willing  to  preserve  their  remem-
brance by  a  rosette  of  that  color,  which  he  had  chosen,  and  we
affix  it  to  your  cordon.'  (Gives  the  jewel,)  'This  jewel  is,a
badge  of  the  K.  of  the  S.;  may  justice  and  equity,  represented
by  the  sword,  be  your  guides!'  (Gives  the  gloves,)  'We  pro-
ceed to  proclaim  you  a  'Knight  of  the  Sword.'  My  brethren,
see  that  Zerubbabel  shall  hereafter  rule  the  labors  of  Masonry!'
They  assent  by  saluting  with  swords.  Candidate  is  then  COn-
Digitized  by  LjOOQIC  .


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  315

ducted  to  a  chair  designed  for  him,  the  Master  saying,  'My  bro-
ther ascend  the  throne  of  the  Sovereigns  of  our  lodges;  preserve
1he  triangular  stone  of  this  edifice,  and  rule  the  laborers  as  Solo-
mon, Hiram  of  Tyre,  and  Joabert  have  done  before  you!'  When
candidate  is  seated,  the  brethren  sheath  their  swords;  clap  their
hand*  three  times,  crying  Zerubbabel  each  time,  and  then  com-
mence the

LECTURE.

Master.  Br.  S.  W.  hbw'did  you  arrive  at  the  eminent  dignity
of  the  K.  S.?  S.  W.  By  humility,  patience,  and  frequent  solic-
itations. M.  To  whom  did  you  apply?  S.  W.  To  the  great
king.  M.  What  is  your  name?  S.  W.  Zerubbabel.  M.  What
is  your  country?  S.  W.  Judea;  I  was  bom  of  noble  parents,  of
the  tribe  of  Judah.  M.  What  art  do  you  prqfess?  S.  W  Ma-
sonry M.  What  buildings  have  you  erected?  S.  W.  Temples
and  tabernacles.  M.  Where  have  you  constructed  them?  S.
W.  For  want  of  ground,  we  build  them  in  our  hearts.  M.  What
is  the  namo  of  a  Masonic  Knight?  S.  W  A  Mason,  perfectly
free.  M.  Why  perfectly  free?  S.  W.  Because  the  Masons  se-
lected by  Solomon  for  the  work  of  the  temple,  were  for  them-
selves and  their  descendants,  declared  free  from  all  tributes.  They
also  possessed  the  privilege  of  carrying  arms.  When  the  tem-
ple was  destroyed  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  they  were  led  captive
with  the  rest  of  the  Jews;  but  king  Cyrus  kindly  gave  them  per-
mission to  build  the  second  temple,  under  Zerubbabel,  and  de-
clared them  free;  since  that  epoch  we  bear  the  name  of  Free
Masons.  M.  Was  the  ancient  temple  distinguished  for  ite  beauty?
S.¥  W.'Ifrwas  the  first  edifice  in  the  world  for  its  richness  and
grandeur.  The  court  would  contain  200,000  persons.  M.  Who
was  the  principal  Architect  of  this  building?  S.  W.  God  was  the
first,  Solomon  the  second,  and  Hiram  the  third.  M  Who  laid
the  first  stone?  S.  W.  Solomon.  M.  At  what  hour?  S.  W.
Before  the  rising  of  the  sun.  M.  Why  at  that  hour?  S.  W.  To
teach  us  that  in  the  service  of  the  G.  A.  of  tfce  universe,  we
should  exercise  vigilance.  M.  What  cement  was  employed?  S.  W. .
A^ mystic  cement  composed  of  flour,  of  milk,  of  oil,  and  of  wine.
M-  Explain  the  mystic  signification  of  this.  S.  W.  In  forming  the
first  man,  God  employed  his  kindness,  his  wisdom,  his  power,
and  his  benevolence.  M.  Where  was  the  first  stone  of  the  tem-
ple placed?  S.  W.  In  the  middle  of  the  chamber  designed  for
tfee  sanctuary.  M.  How  many  gates  had  the  ancient  temple?
S.  W.  Three;  one  at  the  east,  one  at  the  south,  and  one  at  the
north.     iVf.  How  long  did  that  temple  stand?    S.  W.  470  years.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


316  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

6  months,  and  10  days.     M.  Under  what  king  of  Israel  was  it
destroyed?    S.  W.  Zedekiah,  the  last  of  the  family  of  David.
M.  What  is  signified  by  the  column  Boaz,  which  you  see  bro~
ken?     S.  W.  The  confusion  and  injury  arising  from  the  recep-
tion of  an  unworthy  Mason.     M.  Why  is  the  number  81  held  in
veneration  among  Masons?    S.  W.  That  number  is  symbolic
of  the  three  persons  of  the  Divine  Being,  represented  by  the
triple  triangle,  by  the  square  of  9,  and  the  number  3.     M.  Why
were  the  chains  of  the  Jewish  captives  of  a  triangular  form?     8.
The  Chaldeans  knew  that  the  triangle  was  with  the  Jewish  Ma-
sons, an  emblem  of  the  name  of  God;  they  therefore  made  their
chains  of  that  form  to  inflict  greater  pain  upon  the  captives.     M.
4  Why  were  Masons  forbidden  to  work  in  erecting  profane  edi-
fices?   S.  W.  To  make  us  remember  that  we  are  not  to  frequent
irregular  lodges.     M.  What  was  the  plan  given  by  Cyrus,  for
the  new  temple?     S.  W.  100  cubits  in  length,  60  in  breadth,  and
60  in  height    M.  Why  did  Cyrus  order  timber  to  be  cut,  in  the
forest  of  Lebanon,  and  stones  to  be  taken  from  the  quarries  of
Tyre,  for  the  construction  of  the  new  temple?    S.  W.  Because  it
was  necessary  that  the  2d  temple  should  be  entirely  like  the  first.
•M .  Give  me  the  name  of  the  principal  architect  of  the  second
temple.  S.  W.  'Bibot.'    M.  Why  do  the  workmen  carry  a  sword
when  they  labor?     S.  W.  Because,  while  they  wrought  with  one
hand  in  bringing  materials  for  building  the  temple,  being  subject
to  invasion  from  their  enemies,  they  held  their  swords  in  the  oth-
er, to  defend  their  labors  and  their  brethren.    M.  Why  ia  this
lodge  enlightened  by  seventy  tapers?     S.  W.  In  memory  of  the
seventy  years  of  the  Babylonish  captivity.    M.  Are  you  a  K.  S«?
S.  W.  Look!  (places  his  hand  on  his  sword.)    M.  Gi\e  me  the
sign.  (Gives  the  second  sign  )     M.  Give  me  the  words  and  the
pass  word.     S.  W.    'Judah,'  'Benjamin,*  and  'Libertas.'    M.
Give  the  grip  to  the  J.  W.;  (given.)   M.  Where  have  you  labored?
S.  W.  At  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple.    M.  What  hour  is  it?    S.
W.  The  hour  of  commencing  that  work.  M.  My  brethren,  since
we  have  sufficient  time  to  rebuild  the  temple  of  the  LORD,  let
us  remember  tnese  things  in  silence,     It  is  time  to  repose. —
Brothers  S.  W.  and  J.  W.  announce  in  the  south  and  in  the
north,  that  I  am  about  to  close  this  lodge  of  E.  S.'    It  is  an-
nounced.    Master  knocks  7,  and  the  two  Wardens  repeat.

Master.  'The  lodge  is  closed;  retire  in  peace.9    The  Wardens
repeat  this,  and  the  lodge  is  closed.

[N.  B.     The  letters  on  the  girdle,  L,  D,  P:  Liberie  de  pas-
ser.]

Digitized  by  VjC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  317

%E  CHEVALIER  ROSE  CROIX.'*

Titles  and  jewels. — The  lodge  is  called— 'Sovereign  Chapter?
The  Master — 'Most  Wise?  Senior  Warden — 'Most  Respectable
first  Knight  Warden;9  Junior  Warden — 'Most  Respectable  second
Knight  Warden;' — the  other  officers  are  called — 'Most  Respec-
table. *

The  jewel  is  a  kind  of  quadrant,  formed  by  a  compass  and  a
quarter  circle.  In  the  middle  is  a  cross  on  which  is  a  rose,  and
at  the  foot,  a  pelican  feeding  its  young  with  blood.  The  jewel  is
suspended  from  the  neck,  or  from  right  to  left,  by  a  red  watered
ribbon. — This  jewel  is  worn  in  aH  lodges,  except  in  that  called
'the  first  point  of  the  Red  Cross,'  where  the  ribbon  is  black.

Observations  on  the  degree. — Though  this  lodge  is  the  'JVe  phis
ultra'  of  Masonry,  and  when  one  has  received  it,  he  has  a  right
to  assist  in  all  others  without  being  subjected  to  an  examination,
yet  he  ought  to  attend  lodges  which  are  free  from  ail  suspicion,
as  such  will  only  admit  those  who  are  well  known  and  vouched
for.  It  is  necessary  for  receiving  this  degree,  to  have  taken  those
of  the  '£/«,'  the  'Ecassois*  and  the  'Kni^t  of  the  East.'  There
are  three  points  or  parts  in  this  degree;  two  for  reception,  and  the
third  called  the  'Mystic  Sacrament,'  which  is  only  used  at  quar-
terly communications  or  on  festivals.

Lodge  Room — Is  hung  with  red.  In  the  east,  in  place  of  a
throne,  is  a  triangular  altar,  one  side  of  which  faces  the  west.
This  is  elevated  on  seven  steps.  On  this  is  placed  a  'transparen-
cy,' representing  'Calvary.'  The  two  side  crosses  are  plain,
but  that  in  the  middle  has  a  nose  and  drapery  interlaced  and  above
the  letters  I.  N.  R.  I. — Below,  before  metr  ansparency  are  bro-
ken columns.  On  the  ruins  of  which,  guards  are  sleeping;  and
in  their  midst  is  seen  a  tomb,  the  stone  of  which  is  removed,  and
at  its  mouth  grave  clothes  are  seen.  There  are  three  triangular
tables  with  a  light  on  each.  One  is  placed  at  the  right  of  the
altar  in  the  east,  at  the  foot  of  the  steps.  The  two  others
facing  each  other  in  the  west.  All  this  decoration  is  necessary
whenever  a  chapter  is  opened.  But  the  time  of  reception  the
lodge  is  hung  with  black,  &c.  No  furniture  is  used  except  that
in  'the  second  point,'  except  three  triangular  columns  placed  east,
west  and  south,  with  a  transparent  inscription  on  each;  that  is,
in  the  east,  'Faith;'  in  the  south,  'Hope;'  and  in  the  west,  'Chai>
ity.'  Two  preparation  rooms  are  necessary,  one  containing  a
table  i    "  ****


\  and  chair.     The  other  is  entirely  dark.

Knights  ef  the  Rose  Cross.
Cc2


y  Google


31S  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

Opening.  The  "Most  Wise"  is  seated  on  the  3d  step  of  the'
altar,  his  head  leaning  on  one  hand,  he  knocks  4  (! !  ! !)  on  the
triangular  table  near  him  and  says  'Most  Respectable  first  and  se-
cond Knight  Wardens,  what  is  the  hour?  tS.  W?  The  first  hour
of  the  day.  Master.  It  is  time  to  commence  our  labors  Most  Re-
spectable firsthand  second  Knight  Wardens;  request  our  respecta-
ble Knights  to  assist  me  in  opening  this  *  Sovereign  Chapter  of
R.  C:  They  obey.  Master.  'Most  Respectable  1st  and  2d  Kt.
Wardens,  are  all  the  Knights  in  order]'  The  Knights  are  un-
covered and  ranged  in  two  columns.  S.  W.  'They  are,  Most
Wise.'  Master.  'My  Brethren,  I  am  overwhelmed  with  distress,
all  is  changed,  the  veil  of  the  temple  is  rent,  the  columns  of  Ma-
sonry are  broken,  the  cubic  stone  is  sprinkled  with  blood,  the
word  is  lost,  and 'consummatunx  est.' '  'Most  Respectable  1st
and  2d  Knight  Wardens.  Examine  each  of  your  columns,  and
see  if  by  the  aid  of  these  Knights,  some  remedy  for  our  distress
may  not  be  found  and  report  to  me.'  The  Wardens  go  one  to
the  north  column  and  one  to  the  south,  and  in  a  whisper  de-
mand the  word  of  each  Knight.  It  is  given  in  a  whisper  with-
out any  sign;  they  begin  with  the  west  wing  of  each  column,  and
proceeding  eastward,  give  the  word  to  the  Master.  They  re-
turn to  their  places  and  Master  says,  'Most  Respectable  1st  Kt
Warden;  now  the  word  is  discovered,  what  remains  for  us  to  do?'
8.  W.  'Most  Wise,  to  respect  the  decrees  of  the  Most  High,
to  render  homage  to  the  Supreme  Architect,  and  always  to  hum-
ble ourselves  before  him,  who  is  able  to  reinstamp  bis  image  up-
on us!'  Master.  'Respectable  Knights,  you  see  the  object  of
our  labors:  my  brethren,  let  us  bend  our  knees  before  Him  who
has  given  us  our  existence!'  All  rise;  each  one  faces  the  east,
makes  the  sign,  bows  and  kneels  on  one  knee,  afterwards  the
Master  and  all  rise.  Master  and  all  clap  hands  seven  times,  say-
ing three  times  'Amlu.'  Master.  'Respectable  Knights,  the  Sove-
reign Chapter  is  open.'     The  Wardens  repeat  this.

Reception. — While  in  the  press  room,  the  candidate  writes  his
•name,  profession  and  the  names  of  the  degrees  which  he  has  re-
ceived; and  also  states  that  his  age  is  thirty-three  years.  The
Master  of  Ceremonies  leads  him  to  the  lodge  door  and  gives  the
alarm  of  a  Knight  of  the  East.  The  G.  Marshall  within  answers
at  by  that  of  the  R.  Cross,  and  informs  the  J.  W.  that  an  alarm,
is  heard  at  the  door  of  the  Sovereign  Chapter.  The  Junior  War-
den repeats  it  to  the  Senior  Warden,  who  reports  to  the  Master.
The  Master  orders  the  Junior  Warden  to  see  who  knocks,  when
the  report  is  made.  The  Master  puts  the  question  as  to  the  admis-
sion of  candidate.    The  brethren  assent  by  clapping  hands  se-

■


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  319

ven  times  and  crying  'Houze,'  thrice.    After  this,  Master  orders
6.  Marshall  to  admit  him.    In  the  mean  time  the  Master  of  Cere-
monies takes  from  him  the  decorations  of  his  former  degrees,
puts  a  sword  by  his  side,  and  takes  him  by  the  hand.     He  is  in-
troduced and  placed  between  the  two  Wardens.     (The  Master
and  brethren  assume  an  appearance  of  sorrow.)     The  two  War-
dens knock,  and  Master  answers  it     Senior  Warden.    'Most
Wise,  you  behold  a  worthy  Knight  of  the  East,  who  presents  him-
self before  the  Sovereign  Chapter,  that  he  may  obtain  the  favor
of  being  admitted  to  the  most  sublime  degree  of  'Rose  Cross!'
Master.  'Worthy  Knight,  who  are  you?'  Candidate.  'I  am  de-
scended from  noble  parents,  of  the  tribe  of*Judah.' .  Master.
'What  is  your  country?'  Candidate.  'Judea.1,  Master.  'What  art
do  you  profess/'  Candidate.  '^Masonry.'"  Master.  ^Worthy  Kt.
you  inspire  me  with  esteem,  but  you  see  us  overwhelmed  with
sorrow.     All  is  changed,  the  gr^at  support  of  Masonry  is  gone,
the  veil  of  the  temple  is  rent  in  twain,  the  dolurans  are  broken,
the  most  precious  ornaments  are  removed,  and  the  word  is  lost,
and  we  have  no  other  hope  of  Recovering  it„  than  what  rests  on
your  courage.  Will  you  employ  it  Jo  aid  us?  Candidate.  'I  will.'
Master.  'Will  you  give  us  an  assurance  by  taking  an  obligation
that  you  will  keep  all  oiu*  mysteries  profoundly  secret?'  Candid-
ate. 'I  will'  Candidate  kneels  pn  one  knee  at  the  triangular  ta-
ble, near  the  Master,  right  hand  on  the  Bible,  a  sword  and  com-
pass are  laid  on  the  same  hand.

Obligation. — 'In  the  presence  of  these  Respectable  Knights,  I
swear  and  promise  on  my  word  as  an  honest  man  and  Mason,  that
I  will  not  reveal  any  of  the  secrets  of  this  degree  of  Rose  Cross,
under  the  penalty  of  being  dishonored  and  banished  from  all  lodg-  .
es,  as  unworthy  to  associate  with  virtuous  Masons:  I  pray  God
to  keep  me  steadfast.  'Master  raises  candidate  and  says,  'My
brother,  you  understand  the  importance  of  your  obligation,  it  re-
mains for  you  to  travel  a  dangerous  journey.  The  brother  Kt.
Master  of  Ceremonies  will  make  you  know  how  you  are  to  con-
duct yourself.  Brother  Knight  Master  of  Ceremonies,  show
this  worthy  Knight  the  means  by  which  the  word  may  be  recov-
ered?' The  Master  of  Ceremonies  causes  the  candidate  to  walk
round  the  chapter,  showing  him  successively  the  columns  of
'Faith,'  'Hope'  and  'Charity.'  After  this  the  Master  of  Ceremo-
nies apprises  the  Master  through  the  Wardens,  that  the  candidate
lias  been  properly  instructed.  Master.  'Worthy  Knight,  remem-
ber what  you  have  learned  and  recollect  we  await  your  return
with  anxiety.  May  you  be  prospered  and  restore  peace  and  hap-
piness to  our  minds?'  'The  Master  of  Ceremonies  leads  out  the

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


320  LIGHT  Ott   MASONRY.

candidate,  and  conducts  him  to  the  dark  room  and  makes  him  go
round  it  seven  times.  In  the  mean  time  the  black  drapery  of  the
lodge  (which  covers  the  red)  is  removed  and  the  decorations  ap-
pear. Master  of  Ceremonies  brings  candidate  to  the  door  of  the
chapter,  gives  the  alarm  as  before,  he  enters  and  is  thus  ques-
tioned by  the  Mister.

Master.  'My  brother,  from  whence  do  you  comer  Can.
'From  the  land  of  Judea.'  M.  'Through  what  place  have  you
passed?'  C.  'Nazareth.'  M.  'Who  conducted  you?'  C.  'Ra-
phael.' M.  'Of  what  tribe  are  you?'  C.  'Of  the  tribe  of  Judah.'
M.  'Pronounce  the  initial  letters  of  these  four  words,'  (above  the
cross,  'Jesus  Nazaremus  Rex  Judacorum.')  M.  'What  word  do
they  form?'  C.  'I.  N.  R.  I.'  M.  'My  dear  brother,  this  is  the
inscription  which  you  see  above  the  cross,  it  is  the*  word  which
we  had  lost,  and  which  your  zeal  has  recovered.  Approach
the  foot  of  this  altar  and  receive  the  reward  due  to  you.' —
Candidate  kneels,  and  me  Master,  laying  his  naked  sword  on
his  head,  says,  'In  virtue  of  the  power  which  I  have  received
from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Heroden,  before  this  august  assembly
of  Knights,  my  brethren,  my  equals,  I  admit,  receive,  and. con-
stitute you,  now  and  from  henceforth,  a  Knight  and  Prince  of  the
Eagle  and  Pelican,  Perfect  Free  Mason  of  Heroden,  under  the
title  of  Sovereign  of  the  Rose  Cross,  to  enjoy  the  titles  and  pre-
rogatives of  'Princes  of  Perfect  Masons,9  wherever  they  are,  with
power  to  hold  a  lodge  in  lodges  regularly  assembled,  and  to
confer  the  different  degrees.'

Master  raises  candidate  and  gives  him  the  cordon,  word,  sign,
and  grip.  The  word  6InrV  is  given  by  lettering  it.  The  sign  is,
to  cross  anus  on  the  breast  and  incline  the  body  as  if  to  kneel
on  one  knee.  Grip.  The  two  brethren  mutually  place  the  right
hand  on  each  other's  right  shoulders,  and  the  left  hand  on  the
left  shoulder,  the  arms  crossing  Sid  interlaced;  one  says  'Eman-
uel,' the  other  'Pax  vobiscum^  (Peace  De  wfth  y°U-)'  The  can-
didate gives  the  sign,  grip,  and  word  to  the  Wardens;  he  is  then
placed  in  the  south,  where  he  makes  an  offering  of  mercy,  for  the
use  of  the  poor  brethren,  and  then  hears  the  lecture.

LECTURE.

M.  Most  resp.  Kt  Wardens,  whence  do  you  come?  S.  W*
Most  Wise,  from  Judea.  M.  Through  what  place  have  you
passed?  S.  W.  Through  Nazareth.  M.  Who  conducted  you?
S.  W.  Raphel.  M.  Of  what  tribe  are  you?  S.  W.  Of  the  tribe
Judah.  M.  Pronounce  the  initial  letters  of  those  four  words.
S.  W.  Most  Wise,  I  cannot  do  it  without  your  assistance.     M

*  Digitized  by  VjC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY,  321

I.  S.  W.  JT.  M.  B.  S.  W.  I.  M.  What  do  those  letters
spell?  S.  W.  'Inri,'  the  sealed  word  of  the  Knights  of  the  Rose
Cross.  M.  How  were  you  admitted  to  this  degree?  S.  W.  By
the  three  theological  virtues,  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity.  M.  What
can  you  give  besides  the  word?  S.  W.  A  sign  and  a  token.  M.
Give  me  the  sign;  (given.)  M .  Give  the  token  to  one  of  our
Resp.  Knights;  (given.)  M.  Do  you  know  the  'Pelican?'  S.
W.  I  do.  M.  What  does  it  signify?  S.  W.  Among  us  it  is  a
symbol  of  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  and  of  his  perfect  humani-
ty.* M.  What  is  the  object  of  the  degree  of  K.  R.  C.  S.  W.
To  lead  us  to  respect  the  decrees  of  the  Most  High,  to  render
homage  to  the  Supreme  Architect,  and  always  to  humble  us  be-
fore him  whogis  able  to  reinstamp  his  image  on  us.  M.  My  br.
Knight,  that  is  the  object  of  every  true  Mason.  My  brethren,
let  us  kneel  before  him  who  has  given  us  existence.  Knights
kneel  and  rise  as  in  opening.

Close. — Master  'Most  Resp.  first  Knight  Warden,  what  is
the  hour?'  S.  W.  'The  last  hour  of  the  day.'  M.  'If  it  is  so,
Most  Resp.  first  and  second  Knight  Wardens,  inform  our  bro-
ther Knights  that  it  is  time  to  close  mis  Sovereign  Chapter,  and
to  retire  in  peace.'

The  Wardens  give  notice.  Master  knocks  7;  this  is  repeated
by  the  Wardens.  All  rise  and  face  the  Master,  who  gives  the
sign;  they  do  the  same.  All  clap  hands  seven  times  and  cry
«Houze,'  thrice.  Master.  'M.  R.  first  and  second  Knight  War-
dens, the  Sovereign  Chapter  is  closed!'

[N.  B.  The  instant  when  the  Sovereign  Chapter  is  hung  with
black,  for  a  reception  is  called  the  'first  point,'  the  instant  when
the  decoration  is  changed  or  hung  with  red,  is  the  'second  point'
of  this  degree.]

Third  point  of  Rose  Cross. — It  is  after  having  held  a  chapter,
as  above  described,  that  this  ceremony  is  practical.  On  occa-
sions when  this  is  to  be  done,  the  Master  does  not  close  the
chapter,  but  only  suspends  the  demand  of  'What  is  the  hour?'
The  decorations  in  the  same  state.  A  table  covered  with  white,
on  which  is  a  loaf,  and  a  cup  of  wine,  stands  in  the  middle  of  the
room.  On  the  table  is  placed  a  small  paper  on  which  is  'I.  N.
R.  I.'  Each  Knight  holds  a  staff  in  his  hand.  They  are  rang-
ed in  two  lines  from  north  to  south;  the  Wardens  are  at  the  head
and  the  Master  between  them.  Master  knocks,  and  gives  notice
that  the  chapter  resumes  its  power;  the  Wardens  repeat  this.
The  Master,  followed  by  the  rest,  passes  seven  times  around  the


*  Why  do  they  not  also  admit  his  perfect  Divinity.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


322  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

lodge,  and  then  stops,  facing  the  east,  and  makes  the  sign;  he
breaks  a  small  piece  from  the  loaf  and  gives  it  to  the  S.  W.  at
his  right  hand,  who  breaks  a  piece  and  passes  it  to  his  brother  at
the-right  hand,  and  in  this  manner  it  is  passed  on  until  it  reaches,
at  last,  the  J.  Warden,  who  eats  it.  The  Master  takes  the  wine,
drinks,  and  passes  it  as  he  did  the  bread.  Sen.  Warden  turns
to  the  Master  who  gives  him  the  token,  saying  'Emanuel.'  -  The
Sen.  Warden  replies  'Pax  vobiscum.'  When  the  cup  has  reach-
ed the  Junior  Warden  he  gives  it  and  the  token  to  the  Master.
The  Master  shows  the  brethren  that  nothing  remains  in  the  cup.
He  advances  to  the  table,  takes  the  paper,  sets  it  on  fire,  and
casts  it  into  the  cup,  where  it  is  consumed;*  he  makes  the  sign,
and  says,  'Consummatmn  ost;'  (It  is  finished.)  Aflkr  this,  all  the
Knights  repeat  the  sign,  and  the  chapter  is  closed  as  before  de-
scribed.


*  Let  the  friend  of  Jesus  read  this  again,  and  then  answer  the  question,
*Can  you  fellowship  Masonry?1


THE  DEGREE  OF  "NOAHITE,"
OR

"CHEVALIER  PRUSSIEJT."*

Origin  and  dignities. —  The  Grand  Master,  Genera]  of  the
Order,  whose  title  is  'Chevalier  Grand  Commander,'  is  Frederic
William,  Knight  of  Prussia.     His  ancestors,  for  three  hundred
years,  have  been  protectors  of  this  order.     The  Knights  were
formerly  known  by  the  name  of  'Noahites,'  or  descendants  of
Noah.     By  the  Pagans  they  were  called  the  'Titans,'  who  were
said  to  have  attempted  to  scale  the  Heavens  for  the  purpose  of
dethroning  Jupiter.     But  the  Prussians,  who  acknowledge  no
other  God  but  the  Supreme  Architect  of  the  universe,  each  year,
on  the  night  of  the  full  moon  of  the  month,  March,  celebrate  the
confusion  of  languages  and  the  dispersion  of  the  builders  of  the
tower  of  Babel,  one  of  the  miracles  of  the  Creator.     That  time
is  the  anniversary  of  that  day  of  his  vengeance.

It  is  for  this  reason,  these  Knights  assemble  on  the  night  of
the  full  moon,  in  a  secret  place,  to  hold  their  lodges;  and  they
cannot  initiate  a  candidate  into  the  mysteries  of  this  degree  un-
less by  the  light  of  the  moon.

^Prussian  Knight.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY*  323

The  Master  of  the  lodge  is  called  'Chevalier  Lieutenant
Grand  Commander,  the  officers  are  a  Deputy  Lieut.,  G.  Com.,
Chevalier  Master  of  Ceremonies,  Chevalier  of  Eloquence,  (ora-
tor,) Chevalier  of  the  Guard,  Chevalier  Chancellor,  Chevalier  of
the  Finances*  The  title,  Chevalier  Prussian  Mason,  is  given  to
ordinary  Masons*  The  three  officers,  viz:  1st,  Lieut.  Grand
Commander,  2d,  Dep.  Grand  Commander,  and  3d,  Master  of
Ceremonies, ^must  always  be  present  when  a  lodge  is  opened.

The  'Noahites'  now  called  'Prussian  Chevaliers,'  are  descend-
ed from  'Peleg,'  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  tower  of  Babel,  their
origin  being  much  more  ancient  than  that  of  the  Masons,  de-
scended from  Hiram.  In  the  time  of  the  crusades,  when  the
different  orders  of  European  Knighthood  were  established  by  the
Christain  Pieces  leagued  for  the  conquest  of  Palestine,  the  Ma-
sons descended  from  Hiram  through  their  respect  for  the  'Noah-
ites'  who  were  in  high  esteem,  wished  to  be  made  acquainted
with  their  mysteries.  The  Prussian  Chevaliers  were  persuaded
none  could  be  found  to  whom  they  could  more  properly  confide
their  mysteries  than  to  these  descendants  of  Hiram.  Since  that
period  the  'Noahites'  always  require,  therefore,  that  their  candi-
dates should  be  Masters  of  the  Order  of  Hiram.  In  the  statutes
of  this  order,  preserved  among  the  archives  of  the  king  of  Prus-
sia, it  is  expressly  forbidden  to  any  Prussian'  Chevalier,  to  re-
ceive any  candidate,  unless  he  has  given  proofs  of  his  zeal  and
capacity  in  the  Order  of  Masters,  descended  from  Hiram.  It  is
also  necessary  that  he  should  prove  that  he  has  discharged  the
duties  of  an  office  in  some  regular  lodge.

Disposition  of  the  lodge. — The  Commander  is  placed  opposite
to  the  moon;  the  next  four  officers  before  him,  that  they  may  bet-
ter attend  to  his  orders.  They  have  no  fixed  place,  as  a  sign  that
a  Chevalier  has  renounced  pride  and  glories  in  the  practice  of  hu-
mility, at  sM  times.  The  room  is  enlightened  by  a  large  window,
so  made  as  to  receive  a  feeble  light  from  the  moon.  According
to  %4jie  statutes  of  the  order,  it  is  forbidden  that  the  lodge  should
be  enlightened  by  the  rays  of  the  sun,  or  those  of  any  artificial
light

Opening. — Commander  knocks  three  gentle  blows  at  equal
distances.  The  Deputy  Commander  answers  by  a  single  blow
on  the  hilt  of  his  sword.  Com.  'Order,  Chevaliers!'  He  lifts
liis  arms  extended  towards  heaven,  his  face  turned  to  the  east,
where  the  moon  appears.  The  others  do  the  same,  and  the  Com-
mander, after  asking  some  questions  from  the  lecture,  says' to  the
Deputy  Commander,  •'Announce  to  all  the  Chevaliers  that  the
Jodge  is  enlightened.'     This  is  done,  and  all  resume  their  natu-


y  Google


324  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

ral  attitudes.      The  Chevaliers  remain  looking  at  the  firmament
until  the  candidate  arrives.

Reception. — The  candidate  unarmed,  his  head  uncovered,  in
ms  ordinary  clothing,  has  on  the  white  apron  and  gloves  of  Mas-
ter Masons.  The  Master  of  Ceremonies,  who  is  with  him,  gives
three  light  blows,  at  equal  distances,  at  the  door.  The  Cheva-
lier of  the  Guard  replies  by  a  single  blow,  in  a  whisper  repeats'
the  alarm  to  the  Commander,  and  by  his  order  goes  to  the  door,
opens  it,  and  in  a  whisper  demands  of  the  Master  of  Ceremonies
the  sign,  token,  word,  and  pass  word.  He  then  closes  the  door,
and  whispers  his  report  to  the  Deputy  Commander,  saying,  The
Chevalier  Master  of  Ceremonies  has  answered  well  and  demands
to  enter.9  The  Deputy  Commander  repeats  this  aloud  to  the  Com-
mander, who  orders  him  to  tell  the  Master  of  Cere^nies  he  may
enter  if  he  is  alone.  Deputy  Commander.  'He  is  accompanied
by  a  Master  descended  from  Hiram,  who  has  on  a  'white  apron,'
and  'white  gloves.' '  Com.  'In  this  case  inquire  of  the  Master
of  Ceremonies,  what  this  Mason,  descended  from  Hiram,  wants.'
Deputy  Commander  goes  to  the  door,  knocks  1,  which  Master  of
Ceremonies  answers  by  three  light,  equal  blows.  The  Chevalier
of  the  Guard  opens  it,  and  the  Deputy  Commander  says  to  the
Master  of  Cerapaonies,  'What  is  your  desire?'  M.  of  C.  'Here
||nded  from  Hiram,  who  wishes,  if  it  is  accord-


bjof  the  1  hevalier  Lieutenant  Commander,  to  be
ft  Chevalier.'  Deputy  Commander  reports  this.
to  the  Commander,  who  orders  him  to  let  the  Master  enter,  after
he  has  given  the  Master's  pass  word.'  When  this  is  given,  the
Master  of  Ceremonies  leads  the  candidate  into  the  lodge,  and
causing  him  to  go  to  the  other  door,  within  the  lodge,  by  three
Master's  steps.  Com.  'Chevalier  Master  of  Ceremonies,  will
you  vouch  for  the  Master  whom  you  present  to  me?'  JVT.  of  C.
'I  vouch  for  him  that  he  is  a  Master  descended  from  Hiram.'
Th*.Commander  quits  his  place,  goes  to  the  candidate,  and  de-
mands the  Master's  word;  it  is  given  as  usual.  Com.  'Cheva-
liers, I  announce  to  you  a  Master  Mason  descended  from  Hiram,
who  wishes  to  be  received  a  'Chevalier  Prussian;'  do  you  con-
sent?' The  brethren,  without  saying  a  word,  draw  their  swords,
and  present  their  points  to  the  body  of  the  candidate.  Through
the  Master  of  Ceremonies,  he  replies,  'I  continue  my  request,  if
it  shall  be  according  to  the  pleasure  of  the  Chevalier  Lieutenant
Commander,  and  the  Chevaliers  of  this  lodge.'  Com.  'These
brave  Chevaliers,  with  me,  consent  to  your  request,  provided  you
renounce  all  pride  for  the  remainder  of  your  life.  Commence,
then,  by  rierfonning  an  act  of  humiliation.'     The  Master  of  Cer-


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  325

emonies  and  Deputy  Commander  conduct  the  candidate  to  the v
feet  of  the  Commander  by  three  genuflections  of  the  left  knee;
having  arrived  there,  be  prostrates  himself  before  the  Command-
er, who  orders  him  to  kiss  the,  hilt  of  his  sword:  the  Chevalier  of
£loquence  pronounces  a  discourse  on  the  pride  of  the  sons  of
Noah,  and  upon  the  humility  of  him  who  was  sensible  of  his
fault.  (Peleg.)  During  all  this  the  candidate  is  kneeling  on  one
knee.  He  rises,  and  the  Commander  and  all  the  brethren,  with
their  swords,  give  the  sign  of  a  Master  Mason.  Commander
says  to  candidate,  'Do  you  promise  on  the  faith  of  a  Master  Ma*
son  descended  from  Hiram,  to  keep  the  secrets  which  I  shall  con-
fide to  you  under  these  three  conditions:  1st.  That  you  will  nev-
er reveal  any  0  our  mysteries  to  any  descendant  of  Adam,  unless
you  know  him  to  be  a  Mason:  2d.  That  you  will  be  obliging  and
kind  to  the  charities  of  this  order:  34  That  you  will  suffer  no  one,
even  at  the  hazard  of  your  life,  to  wear  the  jewel  of  our  order,
unless  he  shall  have  made  himself  known  to  you  as  'Chevalier
Prussian."  Candidate  says,  'I  swear  and  engage  under  these
conditional'

Commander  then  gives  a  history  of  the  order,  and,  at  its  close,
says,  'You  "see,  Chevalier,  the  grand  secret  of  our  order,  which
is  unknown  to  all  but  Chevaliers.  I  confer  it  on  you  with  plea-
sure, but  wo  to  you  should  you  violate  your  engagemen
circumspect,  and,  o©  every  occasion,  practice  humility  after  the
example  of  our  Orand  Architect '  The  brethren  sheath  swords.
and  the  Commander  gives  one  to  the  candidate,  and  fastens  to
the  third  buttonhole  of  his  vest,  with  a  black  ribbon,  the  jewel,
which  is  of  silver,  and  orders  him  to  lay  aside  the  decorations  of
a  Master  descended  from  Hiram,  and  he  gives  him  those  belong-
ing to  this  order.  He  wears  the  apron  like  a  Fellow  Craft.  The
M.  of  Oer.  directs  the  candidate  to  offer  the  gloves  to  the  Com-
mander, who,  having  received  them,  gives  him  the  sign,  to^pi,
word,  and  pass  word,  which  the  candidate  gives  to  each  of  the
brethren  on  their  presenting  htm  with  their  .gloves.  r^t.v

It  being  contrary  to  the  statotes  of  this  order,  to  hold  a  Table  ^|f  .'■  *
Xodge,  (i.  e*  one  forlecturwg  and  re&eshmentj>ajrfi«s  the  cand£  "*;;  '
date  cannot  be  instructed!  without  the  aid  of  j^flplight,  besides
that  of  the  moon,  the  Che vaUer  lieu^nant  Commander,  who  is
the  sote.depository  of  the  lecture,  is  authorized  to  hold  a  Feljo^
Craft's  table  lodge;  in  which,  however,  only  a  frugal  collation
4jan  be,  introduced,  but  nojiquoxs.

Ctoae.-^ComBaaoder  strikes .3,  winch  Deputy  Commander  an-
swers by  one  blow.     Com.  'Chevaliers  Deputy  Lieutenant  Com-
mander  and,  Maatex  ,of  Oeemociee,  give  notice  to  aU  the  Cheva*
Do

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


326  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY-

liers  present,  that  the  lodge  is  darkened  and  it  is  time  to  retired
All  the  Chevaliers,  standing  in  order,  repeat  thrice,  in  a  melan-
choly tone,  * ,'  and  the  lodge  is  closed.

Dress  and  jewel. — The  apron  and  gloves  are  yellow.  The
jewel  is  an  equilateral  triangle,  traversed  by  an  arrow,  pointing
downward.  It  should  be  of  gold,  attached  to  a  large,  black  rib-
bon, passing  from  the  right  shoulder  to  the  left,*  unless  one  wears
it  at  the  buttonhole,  then  it  is  of  silver.

Coat  of  arms. — 1st.  Azure,  moon  of  silver,  and  golden  stars.
2d.  Sable,  triangle,  and  arrow  of  gold.

LECTURE.

Q.  Whoareyau?  A.  Inform  me  who  you  arAand  I  will  tell
you  who  I  am.  Q.  Do  you  know  the  sons  of  Noah?  A.  I
know  three.  Q.  Who  are  they?  A.  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhet
Q.  What  do  these  names  signify?  A.  The  initial  letters  are  the
sacred  word.  Q.  Give  me  the  token.  A.  Behold!  (embracing
three  times.)  Q.  Give  me  the  sign.  A.  I  will:  (given.)  Q.
Give  me  the  pass  word.  A.  *  *  *  Q.  Do  you  know  the  G.
A.  of  the  tower  of  ttabel?  A.  His  name  was  'Peleg.'  Q.  Who
gave  you  his  history?  A.  The  Chevalier  Lieutenant  Command-
er Prussian.  Q.  In  what  lodge?  A.  In  a  lodge
gave  liijht.  Q.  Was  no  other  light  allowed?
•Jo.  Q.  Was  that  edifice  a  commendable  one?  A.  No;  it
was  impossible  to  complete  it.  Q.  Why  was  it  impossible  >to
complete  it?  A.  Because  pride  was  its  first  foundation.  Q.
Do  you  remember  the  sons  of  Noah  to  imitate  them?  A.  No;
but  to  avoid  their  fault,  by  having  it  before  my  eyes.  Q*  Where
does  the  body  of  Peleg  repose?  A.  In  a  tomb*  Q.  Was  he
rejected-  for  his  guilt?  A.  No;  the  agate  stone  declares  that
God  had  mercy  on  him,  because  he  humbled  himself.  Q.  How
\%s  you  received  a  Chevalier  Prussian?  A.  By  three  genuflec-
tions, after  I  had  kissed  the  sword  hilt  of  the  Chevalier  Lieuten-
ant Commander.  Q.  Why  was  you  caused  to  make  these  genu-
flections? A.  To  make  me  remember,  that,  during  my  whole
life,  I  ought  4*ttpractice  humility.  Q.  Why  do  Chevaliers  wear
•a  triangle?  i£*&i  memory  of  die  temple  of  Peleg.  Q.  Why
is  the  arrow  represented  as  inverted?     A.  In  memory  of  the  ruin

*which  came  upon  the  tower  of  Babel.  ,  The.  apron  and  gloves
are  in  memory  of  the  laborers  of  the  tower.  The  black  ribbon  is
a  mark  of  grief.  Q.  Did  the  laborers  work  day  and  night?  A.
Yes;  in  the  day  by  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  m  the  night  by  the
light  of  the  moon.

History. — The  descendants  of  Noah,  notwithstanding  Gou

/had  appointed  the  bow  in  the  clouds  a  sign  of  the  covenant  which

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON  MASOxVRV.  327

he  had  made,  that  he  would  not  again  destroy  men  by  a  universal
deluge,  resolved  to  buM  a  tower  sufficiently  elevated  to  shelter
them  from  -the  divine  vengeance.  They  selected,  for  this  pur-
pose, a  plain  called  Shinar,  in  Asia.  Ten  years  after  they  had
laid  the  foundation  of  this  edifice,  God,  according  to  the  scrip-
tures, cast  his  eyes  upon  the  earth,  and  saw  the  pride  of  the  30ns
of  men.  He  came  down  to  confound  their  rash  designs  and
their  language.  It  was  for  this  reason  the  tower  was  called  Ba-
bel, which  signifies  confusion.  Some  time  after  Nimrod,  who
first  established  distinctions  of  rank  among  men,  and  arrogated
to  himself  the  reverence  and  worship  due  to  God,  built  a  city
called  after  the  tower,  Babylon;  that  is,  the  'Court  of  confusion.'
.  It  was  on  the  night  of  the  full  moon  of  March,  that  God  wrought
this  miracle.*  The  Noahites  held  their  grand  meeting  on  the
night  of  the  full  moon  of  March.  Their  ordinary  meetings  were
in  all  the  rest  of  the  months,  only,  however,  when  the  moon  was
full;  no  light  but  that  of  the  moon  was  admitted  in  (heir  lodges.
After  their  language  was  confounded,  the  workmen,  being  obliged
to  separate,  each  pursued  his  own  course.  Peleg,  who  had  sug-
gested the  plan  of  this  tower,  and  had  been  Grand  Architect,
was  the  most  culpable.  He  condemned  himself  to  a  rigorous
penance.  He  retired  to  the  north  of  Germany,  where  he  arriv-
ed, after  having  suffered  great  fatigue  and  pain  in  the  desert
countries  through  which  he  passed,  where  no  articles  of  food
could  be  found,  except  roots  and  wild  fruits.

In  that  part  which  is  now  called  Prussia,  he  constructed  some
huts  to  shelter  himself  from  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  and
he  also  built  a  temple  in  the  form  of  a  triangle,  where  he  enclos-
ed himself  that  he  might  implore  from  God  the  forgiveness  of
his  sin.

In  digging  in  the  salt  mines  of  Prussia,  in  the  year  553,  there
was  found  among  the  rubbish,  at  the  depth  of  fifteen  cubits,  a
triangular  foundation  of  an  edifice,  in  which  was  a  marble  col-
umn, on  which  the  whole  history  was  inscribed  in  Hebrew.  At
the  side  of  this  column,  was  a  tomb  of  free  stone,  in  which  was
found  a  quantity  of  dust— and  an  agate  stone,  on  which  was  this
epitaph;  'Here  repose  the  ashes  of  our  Grand  Architect  of  the
tower  of  Babel.  God  showed  him  mercy  because  he  humbled
himself.'

These  monuments  are  in  the  possession  of  the  king  of  Prus-
sia. The  epitaph  does  not  declare  that  Peleg  was  the  Architect
of  the  tower  of  Babel;  but  the  history,  which  was  on  the  base  of
the  column,  informs  us  that  'Peleg  was  the  son  of  Eber,  whose
father,  Salah,  was  the  son  of  Arphaxad,  who  was  the  son  of  Shem,
the  youngest  son  of  Noah*'

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


(328)


PROCEEDINGS  AJTD  KSSStWt

OF    A

CONVENTION  OF  THE  8ARATOGA  BAPTIST  ASSOCIATION,

t 'on taming  Fifteen  Reasons  for  their  diirfellowahipping  Free  Masonry.

HELD  AT  MILTON,  SEPT.  12  AltD  13,  1827.

Wednesday,  September  12,  1827.
Agreeably  to  the  vote  of  the  Saratoga  association,  in  June,
1827,  delegates  from  various  churches  composii£the  same,  as-
sembled at  Milton,  to  confer  on  certain  grievances  in  reference  to
active  Free  Masonry,  intimated  to  the  association,  by  the  church-
es at  Battenkill,  and  Milton.

Elder  Seamans  opened  the  meeting  by  prayer.

Deacon  Child  called  upon  the  delegates  to  signify  what  church-
es were  represented  at  this  convention — which  furnished  the
following  result.

Amsterdam. — Timothy  Crane,  Waterman  Sweet.
,     BattenkM. — Elder  Edward  Barber,  Richard  Parker,  Samuel
HaicvJamefcTeft,  Eber  Crandell,  WilMnm  Henry.

Broadalbin. — Elder  Wrn.  Groom,  John  Tanner,  Amos  C\
Cornwell,  James  H.  Sumner.

Burnthilh. — Nathaniel  Jennings,  David  Schauber,  Bradley
Morehouse.

Corinth. — Elder  Benjamin  St  John,  Ira  Heath,  John  Eggles-
ton,  Zira  H.  Coles.

Edinburgh. — Elias  Manning,  Eli  Manning,  Daniel  Corey.

1st  Gahoay. — Alpheus  Moore,  Daniel  Ludlow,  Ira  Barberry.

2d  'Gakoay — Elder  Wm.  E.  Waterbury,  Eli  Smith,  Asa  Cor-
nell, Edmond  Hewitt,  Peter  Wright,  David  Benedict,  Samuel
Cook.

Kingsbury. — Chester  Cook,  Samuel  Cole.

Kingsborougk. — Elder  John  Lathrop,  Alexander  Gloss.

Milton.— Elder  Thomas  Powell,  Gilbert  Waring,  Salmon  Child,
Silas  Adams,  Increase  W.  Child,  Adam  Swan.

Northampton.— -Elder  Aaron  Seamans.

Saratoga  Spring*. — Wm,  Wait)  John  C.  Whitford,  John  A.
Waterbury.

Stillwater. — Samuel  Moore,  David  Newland,  Daniel  Munger.

Saratoga.— Elder  Jonathan  Finch,  Wm.  L  Smith,  Reuben
Perry.


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  329

JHiwsdft.— Pardon  Elms,  John  W.  Angle,  Nathan  Kingsley.

Total  of  the  Saratoga  association — 16  churches,  55  del-
egates.

The  convention  heing  thus  organized,  Elder  Seamans  was
chosen  moderator,  Elder  Powell,  clerk.

Invited  delegates  from  other  churches  and  associations  to  share
in  our  deliberations — accordingly  Elder  David  Bernard  read  cre-
dentials of  appointment  as  a  delegate  to  this  convention,  from  five
churches,  Elba,  Le  Roy,  York,  Middlebury,  and  Warsaw,  and
took  his  seat:  together  with  John  Ford,  John  D.  Lmdsey,  and
Peter  I.  Warndell,  delegates  from  the  church  at  Northumberland.

Invited  the  brethren  generally  present,  to  share  in  all  the  privi-
leges of  the  meeting,  voting  excepted.

The  delegates  from  the  church  at  Milton,  expressed  a  desire
that  a  spirit  of  Christian  wisdom  and  moderation  might  character-
ize this  meeting:  and  stated  that  their  investigation  of  Masonry
arose  from  complying  with  the  vote  of  the  association  in  1826,
in  relation  to  Battenkill  church— that  they  utterly  disclaimed  any
hostility  to  Masons,  and  condemned  that  proscription  of  them  in
general,,  which  had  prevailed  in  some  parts  of  our  state — and  that
as  men  holding  property  by  the  same  tenure,  and  possessing  simi-
lar unalienable  rights  with  others,  Masons  were  entitled  to  respect,
arid  fully  qualified,  when  possessing  integrity  and  talents,  to  hold
all  civil  offices  of  f»ower  and  trust.

Adjourned  for  30  minutes.     Prayer  by  Elder  Finch^

Met  pursuant  to  adjournment.  Elder  Wayland  opened  by
prayer*

Written  communications  were  read  from  the  churches  at  Bat-
tenkill, and  Milton.

Elder  Bernard  made  some  statements  illustrative  of  his  views,
and  opposition  to  Masonry.

Brother  Increase  W.  Child  read  to  the  convention,  touching  a '
part  of  the  tendency  of  Masonry,  the  8th  chapter  of  Town's  trea-
tise on  mat  subjeot.

One  of  the  brethren  read  several  decided  renunciations  of  Free
Masonry,  made  by  persons  formerly  members  of  that  fraternity,
and  testimonies  to  the  correctness  of  Wm.  Morgan's  book — and
likewise  letters  addressed  to  the  convention  from  sundry  churches
in  the  western  parts  of  the  state.  In»  answer  to  an  inquiry  from
the  chair,  it  appeared  that  nine  of  the  churches  here  represented,
belonging  to  this  association,)  had  expressed  decisions  approba-
tory of  the  views  of  the  churches  at  Battenkill  and  Milton,  on  the
subject  of  Masonry,  *

Appointed  a  committee  consisting  of  Elders  Finch,  Groom  aw*
Dn2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


330  MW?  OS  MJVS9NRY,

Waterbury,  and  brethren  Incwase  W.  ChiM,  and  James  Teft,  to
draft  an  instrument  expressive  of  the  views  and  decisions  of  this
convention  and  present  it  for  consideration  to-morrow.

Adjourned  until  9  o'clock  to-morrow  morning,  requesting  Elder
Herrick  to  deliver  a  sermon  at  that  hour-  Prayer  by  Elder
Bernard.

Thursday,  September  13.

Elder  Herrick  preached  from  Isa>  liv.  17.

The  minutes  of  yesterday  were  read  and  approved.

The  committee  appointed  to  draft  an  instrument  expressive  of
the  views  and  decisions  of  the  convention,  brought  in  the  follow-
ing report,  which,  after  a  second  reading  by  sections,  with  the  au-
thorities quoted  in  it,  was  adopted.  f

Resolved,  That  this  convention  hereby  approve  of  the  conduct
pursued  by  the  churches  at  BattenkiA,  and  Milton,  and  further  de-
clare—as we  trust  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  in  accordance  with  his
revealed  will — to  the  association,  stater  churches,  and  brethren  in

feneral— that  we  have  no  fellowship  for  or  with  the  institution  of
?ree  Masonry.     We  thus  declare:—

1.  Because  Free  Masonry  professes  to  have  its  origin  in,  and
from  God.  'This  supreme  and  divine  knowledge  being  derived
from  the  Almighty  Creator  to  Adam,  its  principles  ever  since  have
been,  and  still  are,  most  sacredly  preserved,  and  inviolably  con-
cealed.—They  (Masons)  have  the  art  of  finding  new  arts,  which
art  the  first  Masons  received  from  God.'  Vid.  Calcotty  Disqui-
sition, Boston  ed.  1772,  pp.  89-90.

'It  is  no  secret  that  Masonry  is  of  divine  origin. — In  view,  there-
fore, of  the  divine  origin  of  ancient  Masonry/  &c.  Town's  spec-
ulative Masonry,  ed.  1818,  pp.  37-175.

2.  Because  it  professes  to  correspond  with,  and  bear  an  affini-
ty to  the  ancient  Egyptian  phUospphy.  'Our  records  inform  us  that
the  ways  and  customs  of  Masonry  have  ever  corresponded  with
those  of  the  Egyptian  philosophers,  to  which  they  bear  a  near
affinity.'  Bradley,  Albany  ed.  1821,  pp.  60.  Monitor,  1805
ed.  pp.  38.

3.  Because  it  adopts  a  novel  and  unseriptura^  manner  <*f  in-
structing men  m  the  doctrines,  promises,  androonfelattojBe  of  (the


lets,  chisels,  and  other  wej&ag  tools*  'The  n>std*gre#  in  Mason-
ry naturally  suggests/tbat  state,  of  mecal  darkness  which  begleom-
ed  our  woddV  On  the  apostaoy  of  our  first  comsaon  parent*  not
a  gleam  of  light  was  left  to  cheer,  his  deaporwbng-  muid,  Stan,
however,  the  first  kind  promise  was  made. .  *  •  Adan>  was,  Attire?
fere,  ux  A  comW&*9  &Wh*m  «  dariftefle.  . .  .  Such  is  the

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  **  MASONBT.  331

very  nature  of  the  first  degree,  that  every  observing  candidate  is
led  to  view  his  moral  blindness,  and  deplorable  state  by  nature
Under  these  impressions  he  enters  on  the  second  degree,  which
in  view  of  his  moral  blindness,  be  is  to  consider  emblematical  of
a  stale  of  imprisonment  and  trial.  Such  was  the  second  state  of
Adam.  Hence  arises  the  idea  of  probationary  ground.  A  due
observance  of  all  former  requisitions,  and  a  sincere  desire  to  make
advances  in  knowledge  and  virtue,  open  the  way  for  the  reception
of  mere  Mgnt,  .  . ,  Having  diligently  persevered  in  the  use  of  ap-
pointed means,  the  thkd  degree  prefigures  the  life  of  the  good  man
in  his  pilgrimage  state.  Although  the  true  light  has  etioed  into
ln>  heart,  and  he  has  experienced  much  consolation,  yet  he  some*
•  times  wanders  into  devious  and  forbidden  paths.  In  the  midst  of
sue**  trials,  he  resolves  to  be  faithful,  and  manfully  jo  withstand
temptations.  He  determines  to  pursue  that  sacred  trust  commit-
ted to  his  care,  and  therefore  endeavors  to  escape  with  his  life
to  the  great  Ark  of  his  salvation.  ...  In  advancing  to  the  fourth
degree,  the  good  man  is  greatly  encouraged  to  persevere  in  the
ways  of  well  doing  even  to  the  end.  He  has  a  name  which  no
man  knoweth  save  he  that  receiveth  it  If,  therefore,  he  be  re-
jected, and  cast  forth  amongst  the  rubbish  of  the  world,  he  knows
full  well,  the  great  Master  Builder  of  the  universe,  having  chosen
and  prepared  him  as  a  lively  stone  in  that  spiritual  building  in  the
heavens,  will  bring  him  forth  with  triumph,  while  shouting  grace
grace,  to  bis  divine  Redeemer.  .  .  .  Hence  opens  the  fifth  degree'
where  he  discovers  his  election  to,  and  his  glorified  station  in  the
kingdom  of  his  Father.  Here  he  is  taught  how  much  the  chosen
ones  are  honored  and  esteemed  by  those  on  earth,  who  discover
and  appreciate  the  image  of  their  common  Lord.  This  image
being  engraven  on  his  heart,  he  may  look  forward  to  those
mansions  above,  where  a  higher  and  more  exalted  seat  has  been

pr&paredfor  the  faithfulfrom  the  foundations  of  the  world With

these  views  the  sixth  degree  is  conferred,  where  the  riches 'of  di-
vine grace  are  opened  in  boundless  prospect.  Every  substantial
good  is  clearly  seen  to  be  conferred  through  the  great  atoning
sacrifice,  .  .  .  In  the  seventh  degree,  the  good  man  is  truly  filled
wrth  heartfelt  gratitude  to  his  heavenly  Benefecfor,  for  all  those
wonderful  deliverances  wrought  out  for  him,  while  joumeyinxr
though  the  rugged  paths  of  human  life.  Great  has  been  his  re-
demption from  the  Egypt  and  Babylon  of  this  world He

behoMa  in  the  eighth  degree,  tbataH  the  heavenlv  sojourners  will
be  admitted  within  the  veil  of  God's  presence; "  where  they  will
become  kings  and  priests  before  the  throne  of  his  glory  for  ever
and  ever.  . .  .  Such,  my  brethren,  in  lirief,  ia  the  moral  and  reli-

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


332  LIGHT   ON  MASOMtr.

gious  instruction  derived  merely  from  the  order  of  Masonic
degrees.'    Town's  Speculative  Masonry,  whole  of  8th  chapter.

•The  twenty-four  inch  gauge — Free  and  Accepted  Masons  are
taught  to  make  use  of  it  for  the  noble  and  glorious  purpose  of
dividing  our  time.  The  common  gavel — we,  as  Free  and  Ac-
cepted Masons  are  taught  to  make  use  of  it,  for  the  more  noble
and  glorious  purpose  of  divesting  our  minds  and  consciences  of
all  the  vices  and  superfluities  of  life,  thereby  fitting  our  bodies  as
Jiving  stones  for  that  spiritual  building;  that  house  not  made  with
bands  eternal  in  the  heavens. . .  The  chisel  morally  demonstrates
the  advantages  of  discipline  and  education. . .  .The mallet  morally
teaches  to  correct  irregularities,  and  to  reduce  man  to  a  proper
leveL,     Free  Mason's  Monitor,  1805  ed.  p.  36 — 87.

4.  Because  it  publishes  to  the  world  songs,  &c.  of  such  a
contrariety  of  character  as  to  serve  the  purposes  of  profanity,
revelry,  the  worship  of  the  true  God,  and  heathen  deities.

"Then  from  their  high  windows  the  heavens  did  pour,

Forty  days  and  nights  one  continual  shower,
Till  nought  could  be  seen  but  the  waters  around,
And  in  this  great  deluge  most  mortals  were  drowned,

Derry down,. down,  deny  down-
Sure  ne'er  was  beheld  so  dreadful  a  siffht,

As  the  old  world  in  such  a  very  odd  plight,
For  there  were  to  be  seen  all  animals  swimming,
Men,  monkeys,  priests,  lawyers,  cats,  lapdogs  and  women-
Deny  down,  down,  deny  down."
1  id.  Ahiman  Rezon,  p.  166.

"Glory  to  God  on  high,
Let  earth  and  skies  reply,

Worthy  the  Lamb."
Vid.  Masonic  Minstrel,  ed.  1816,  p.  316,  &c. '  Also  See  Monitor.

5.  Because  it  pretends  that  its  religion  and  morality  are  the
same  as  those  taught  in  the  Bible.  'Our  principles  being  drawn
from  revelation  do  not  require  us  to  make  the  secrets  of  Mason-
ry known.'     Bradley,  ed.  1821,  p.  12.

'The  principles  of  speculative  Free  Masonry  have  the  same
co-eternal  and  unshaken  foundation,  contain  and  inculcate  in  sub-
stance the  same  truths,  and  propose  the  same  ultimate  end,  as
the  doctrines  of  (Christianity  taught  by  Divine  revet&Hon*  This
is  a  position  of  very  high  import;  yet  the  truth  of  it  is  not  doubt-
ed by  those  who  are  thoroughly  versed  in  Masonic  knowledge.
If  we  would  give  universal  celebrity  to  our  institution,  the  world
must  be  convinced  that  the  foundation  is  laid  in  evangelical  truth.'
Town,  ed.  1822,  p.  13,  14.


tIGHT   OK   aUSOHRY.  333

Because  the  ancient  Egyptian  philosophy,  with  its  hyeroglyph-
ics  and  mysteries,  and  the  religion  of  Christ  cannot  correspond
or  hear  affinity  to  each  other.  *  Beware  lest  any  man  spoil  you
through  philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  after  the  tradition  of  men,
after  the  rudiments  of  the  world,  and  not  after  Christ.'  Col.  ii.
8.  'And  have  no  fellowship  withjthe  unfruitful  works  of  dark-
ness, hut  rather  reprove  them.  For  it  is  a  shame  even  to  speak
of  those  things  which  are  done  of  them  in  secret.'  Eph.  v.  11,
12.

'Besides  the  public  worship  of  the  heathen  deities— the  Greeks,
the  Egyptians,  the  Indians,  and  some  others  had  recourse  to  a.
dark  and  concealed  species  of  worship,  under  the  name  of  mys-
teries. . .  None  were  admitted  but  such  as  had  approved  them-
selves by  .  .  perseverence  in  .  .  .  initiatory  forms.  The  votaries
were  enjoined  on  peril  of  instant  death  to  observe  the  most  pro-
found secrecy  respecting  every  thing  that  passed. . .  These  mys-
teries were  first  invented  in  Egypt,  from  whence  they  spread  in-
to most  countries  of  Europe  and  Asia.  The  most  noted,  were
the  Eleusiinian. . .  Bishop  Warburton,  who  contends  for  high
honor  in  this  primary  institution,  acknowledges  that  the  myste-
ries of  those  deities  being  performed  during  nocturnal  darkness
or  in  gloomy  recesses,  and  under  the  seal  of  the  greatest  secre-
cy, the  initiated  indulged  themselves  on  these  occasions  in  all  the
abominations  with  which  the  object  of  their  worship  was  suppos-
ed to  be  delighted.  In  fact,  the  enormities  committed  . .  .
became  so  intolerable  that  their  rites  were  proscribed  in  various
countries.  .  •  In  proportion,  therefore,  as  the  gospel  made  its  pro-
gress in  the  world,  the  mysteries  fell  into  disrepute,  and  together
With  all  the  other  pagan  solemnities  were  at  length  suppressed/
Jones'  Church  History,  Cone's  ed.  p.  10  to  13.

7.  Because  it  perverts  and  degrades  the  meaning  of  scripture
passages,  and  by  their  use  and  application  to  Masonic  ceremo-
nies, dishonors  God  the  Son.  *fn  the  honorable  character  of
Hark  Master . . .  while  such  is  your  conduct,  should  misfortunes
assail  you,  friends  forsake  you,  envy  traduce  your  good  name ....
yet  may  you  have  confidence  among  Mark  Master  Masons . . .
ever  bearing  in  mind  as  a  consolation  and  encouragement  to  hope
for  better  piospeets,  that  the  stone  which  the  builders  rejected
(possessing  merit,  to  them  unknown)  became  the  chief  stone  of
the  corner.'    Bradley,  ed.  1821.  p»  101.

"On  the  order  of  High  Priest^-of  a  Royal  Arch  cbapte*— the
following  passages  of  scripture  are  made  use  of  during  the  cere-
monies. And  Meichisidec,  king  of  Salem,  brought  forth  bread
and  wiae,  and  he  was  the  priest  of  the  Most  High  Godv ,  Thou


y  Google


334  LIGHT   ON   MASONRr.  '

art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melcbisidec.  And  inas-
much as  not  without  an  oath  he  was  made  priest' — Bradley,  pv
233,  233.

'Laying  the  foundation  stone  of  a  monument  in  memory  of
Washington,  in  Baltimore,  the  grand  chaplain  read  the  following
passages  from  the  holy  writings.  'Thussaith  the  Lord  God,  Be-
hold I  lay  in  Zion,  for  a  foundation,  a  stone,  a  tried  stone,  a  pre-
cious corner  stone,  a  sure  foundation.  Judgment  also  will  1  lay
to  the  line,  and  righteousness  to  the  plummet.  For  behold  the
stone  which  I  have  laid  before  Joshua,  upon  one  stone  shall  be
seven  eyes*  Behold  I  will  engrave  the  engraving  thereof,  saHh
the  Lord  of  hosts.' '  Appendix  to  Masonic  Minstrel,  by  Veriton,
p.  432.

8.  Because  it  unwarrantably  and  irreverently  employs  the  name
of  Jehovah,  in  the  dedication  of  Masonic  balls.

'In  the  name  of  the  Great  Jehovah,  to  whom  be  all  honor  and
glory,  I  do  solemnly  dedicate  this  Hall  to  Masonry.9  Masonic
Chart,  ed.  1824,  p.  79.     Monitor,  ed.  1825,  p.  130.

9.  Because  it  dedicates  lodges,  chapters,  &c.  to  the  St.  John
and  Zerubbabel.

'To  the  memory  of  holy  St.  John,  we  dedicate  this  lodge.9
Monitor,  ed.  1825,  p.  104.  To  our  Most  Excellent  Patron,
Zerubbabel,  we  solemnly  dedicate  this  chapter.'  Masonic  Chart,
ed.  1824,  p.  60  and  130.

10.  Because  it  authorizes  the  practice  of  religious  rites,  cere-
monies and  observances,  not  commanded  or  countenanced  in  the
New  Testament;  such  as  observing  St.  John's  days,  wearing
garments  in  imitation  of  those  worn  by  the  Jewish  High  Priests,
making  and  carrying  in  procession,  a  mimic  representation  of  the
ark  of  the  covenant;  making  and  wearing  similar  representations
of  the  breast  plate;  inscribing  on  mitres,  'Holiness  to  the  Lord;*
and  sundry  other  ceremonies  and  observances.

In  confirmation  of  these  facts,  we  appeal  to  all  who  have  wit-
nessed the  celebration  of  St.  John's  days,  masonic  funerals,  lay-
ing foundation  stones  in  masonic  order,  &c.

11.  Because  it  imposes  obligations  of  a  moral  and  religious
nature,  which  cannot  be  communicated  to  any  other  than  Ma-
sons or  candidates  of  the  order,  not  even  to  brethren  in  the
church  of  Christ.  'Such  is  the  importance  of  our  secrecy,  were
no  other  ties  upon  our  affections  or  consciences,  than  merely  the
sense  of  the  injury  we  should  do  to  the  poor  and  the  wretched.
By  a  transgression  of  this  rule,' we  are  persuaded  it  would  be  suf-
ficient to  lock  up  the  tongue  of  every  .  .  .  Mason,  and  lead  him
solemnly  to  look  in  the  heavens  and  say,  'Set  a  watch,  O  Lord,


y  Google


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  335

before  my  mouth;  keep  thou  the  door  of  my  lips.'  Every  candi-
date for  admission  .  .  .  may  be  informed  .  .  .  that  the  obliga-
tion which  he  is  to  take  is  perfectly  moral,  and  compatible  with
the  principles  of  Christianity.  It  cannot  be  criminal  that  we
make  every  candidate  promise  to  keep  the  secrets  of  Masonry.'
Bradley,  p.  1 1  to  15,  and  Cabest's  Disquisitions,  Boston  ed.  1772,
p.  46  to  54.

12.  Because  it  affixes  new  names  and  appellations  to  both
God  the  Father,  and  God  the  Son,  and  those  which  are  immoral
and  irreligious  to  men.  'The  Great  Architect  of  the  universe,
.  .  .  Great  Architect  in  Heaven,  .  .  .  Supreme  Architect,  .  .  .
Grand  Overseer,  .  .  .  Supreme  High  Priest.'  Bradley,  p.  157
to  186.  'Supreme  Grand  Master.'  Cabest's  Disquisition,  ed.
1772,  p.  156.  'Most  Excellent,  Most  Worshipful,  Prince  of
Mercy,'  &c.  vide  Monitor,  Bradley,  &c.

13.  Because  it  amalgamates  in  its  societies  men  of  all  religions,
professing  to  believe  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being  of  any
description,  thereby  defeating  all  its  pretensions  to  the  morality
and  religion  of  the  Bible,  and  sapping  the  foundation  of  Chris-
tian fellowship.  'There  is  one  body  and  one  spirit,  even  as  ye
are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling;  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one
baptism,  one  God  and  Father  of  all,  who  is  above  all,  and
through  all,  and  in  you  all.'  Ephesians,  ch.  iv.  ver.  5  and  6. —
'Masonry  becomes  an  universal  language;  .  .  .the  distant  Chi-
nese, the  wild  Arab,  and  the  American  savage,  will  embrace  a
brother  Briton.'  Monitor,  Albany  ed.  1797,  p.  8  and  9 — into
the  merciless  hands  of  unrelenting  Turks,  ...  the  shackles  of
slavery  are  broken,  through  the  interposition  of  a  brother.' —
Town,ed.  1818,  p.  160.

14.  Because  it  authorizes  forms  of  prayer,  accommodated  to
the  prejudices  of  the  Jews,  thus  rejecting  the  only  Mediator  and
way  of  access  to  the  Father.  'O  Lord,  .  .  .  enlighten  us,  we
beseech  thee,  in  the  true  knowledge  of  Masonry,  by  the  sorrows
of  Adam,  thy  first  made  man;  by  the  blood  of  Abel,  the  holy  one;
by  the  righteousness  of  Seth,  in  whom  thou  art  well  pleased;
and  by  thy  covenant  with  Noah,  in  whose  architecture  thou  wast
pleased  to  save  the  seed  of  thy  beloved,  number  us  not  among
those  that  keep  not  thy  statutes,  nor  the  divine  mysteries  of  the
secret  Cabala;  but  grant  ...  the  ruler  of  this  lodge  may  be
endued  with  knowledge  .  .  .  to  explain  to  us  his  secret  myste-
ries as  .  .  .  Moses  did  (in  his  lodge,)  to  Aaron,  to  Eleazer,  and
Ithamar,  .  .  .  and  tbe  seventy  elders  of  Israel,  .  .  .  Am©P>
hord.'    Ahjmau  Rezow,  New  York  ed,  1825,  p.  93.


y  Google


336  MGHT  OH  MA80MBY.

15.  Because  it  receives  and  adopts  orSers  of  Knighthood
from  Popery.  'Masonic  degrees  .  .  .  conferred  in  the  Sublime
Grand  Lodges  in  Charleston,  S.  €.  in  the  city  of  New  York,
and  in  Newport,  R.  I.  .  .  .  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross,  Knight
of  Malta,  Knight  of  the  Holy. Sepulchre,  Knight  of  the  Christian
Mark,  Knight  Templar,  GraAd  Pontiff, .  .  .  Knight  of  the  Bra-
zen Serpent,  .  .  .  Knight  of  the  Sun,  .  .  .  Knight  of  the  Holy
Ghost'    Masonic  Minstrel,  ed.  1826,  p.  421.

And,  whereas,  we  cannot  fellowship  Free  Masonry  for  the
reasons  assigned,

Resoked,  That  we  do  not  fellowship  our  Baptist  brethren,  un-
less they  completely  abstain  from  the  same.

We  commit  our  doings  in  this  matter,  to  Him  who  is  head  oyer
all  things,  blessed  for  ever:  praying  him  to  correct  and  restore  us,
(if  we  have  erred)  to  the  paths  of  truth,  and  (if  we  have  not  err-
ed) to  give  us  wisdom  and  strength  to  maintain  the  truth  as  it  is
in  Him.

We  commend  our  brethren  and  sister  churches  to  the  word  of
His  grace,  which  is  able  to  build  them  up,  and  give  them  an  inher-
itance among  the  sanctified.

The  delegates  from  the  churches  in  Battenkill,  Broadalbin,
Edinburgh,  1st.  Gal  way,  Kingsborough,  Milton,  Northampton,
Saratoga,  Northumberland,  2d.  Elba,  2d.  Le  Roy,  1st.  York,
1st.  Middkbury,  and  Warsaw,  voted  to  accept  the  report.

Those  from  Amsterdam,  Brunthills,  Corinth,  2d.  Gal  way,
Kingsbury,  Saratoga  Springs,  Stillwater,  and  Moreau,  conclude
ed  to  waive  expressing  a  decision,  and  to  lay  before  their  res-
pective churches  the  proceedings  of  the  convention,  in  order  te
have  their  voice  on  the  same,  prior  to  the  next  association.

Rt$oked,  That  the  clerk  prepare  and  forward  the  minutes  and
report  of  this  convention,  for  insertion  in  the  New  York  Baptist
Register;  and  procure  a  number  of  extra  copies  for  distribution
amongst  our  churches,  reserving  #ne,  to  be  read  at  the  next  asso-
ciation.

Elder  Herrick  closed  the  convention  with  prayer.

AARON  SEAMAN'S,  Mohrpicr;

Thomas  Powell,  Clerk.


y  Google


(337)


A  NARRATIVE

Of  the  facts  and  circumstances  relating  to  the  kidnap-
ping AND  PRESUMED  MURDER  OF  WlLLIAM  MORGAN,  AND  OF
THE  ATTEMPT  TO  CARRY  OFF  ^AVID  C.  MlLLER,  AND  TO
-BURN,  OR  DESTROY,  THE  PRINTING  OFFICE  OF  THE  LATTER,
FOR  THE  PURPOSE  OF  PREVENTING  THE  PRINTING  AND  PUB-
LISHING OF  A    BOOK    ENTITLED,    "ILLUSTRATIONS   OF  MASON-

rt."     Prepared  under  Tip  direction  of  the  several

COMMITTEES  APPOINTED  AT  MEETINGS  OF  THE  CITIZENS  OF
THE    COUNTIES    OF    GENESEE,    LIVINGSTON,    ONTARIO,   MoN-

roe,  and  Niagara,  in  the  State  of  New  York:  with  an
appendix,  containing  most  of  the  depositions  and  oth-
j5r  documents,  to  substantiate  the  statements  made,
and  disclosing  many  particulars  of  the  transactions,
not  included  in  the  narrative.


ADVERTISEMENT.

The  committees,  upon  whom  their  fellow  'citizens  in  different
-counties  and  towns  imposed  the  duty  of  investigating  the  trans-
actions detailed  in  the  subjoined  narrative,  were  soon  convinced!
that  it  would  be  their  duty  to  publish,  as  soon  as  should  be  prac-
ticable, an  account  of  them.  They  were  anxious  to  use  all  pos-
sible precaution  to  avoid  errors  in  the  statements.  For  that  pur-
pose, three  of  their  number  visited  Lewiston  and  Niagara  in
March  last,  by  which  some  unimportant  mistakes  were  corrected,
and  some  further  important  information  was  elicited.  It  should  be
noticed  by  the  reader,  that  the  transactions  detailed,  extended
over  a  distance  of  170  miles;  that  the  information  is  drawn  from
various  and  distant  sources;  that  the  character  of  the  conspiracy
is  entirely  new;  that  the  committees  have  no  means  of  acquiring
information  but  persuasion,  which  often  fails  of  success;. that  their
investigation  encountered  almost  every  kind  of  opposition  from
the  parties  concerned,  and  the  numerous  friends  of  those  impli-
cated in  the  conspiracy.  Under  all  these  embarrassments,  they
trust  that  the  candid  part  of  their  fellow  citizens  will  attribute  the
delay  in  the  publication  of  this  account,  to  the  causes  assigned,
and  not  to  negligence  or  improper  motives.  Good  faith,  and  a  due  .
regard  to  the  course  of  public  justice,  require  them,  even  how,  to
withhold  many  facts  and  circumstances,  until  legal  investigations
are  instituted  and  finished*


y  Google


(338)


INTRODUCTION.

The  following  narrative  has  been  compiled  with  as  much  care
and  accuracy  as  the  circumstances  would  admit  It  has  been
frequently  called  for,  and,  as  many  may  think,  has  been  too  long
kept  back;  but  the  causes  of  delay  were  such  as  the  committees
could  not  prevent  or  obviate.  We  trust  mat  it  will  be  found  to
contain  a  plain  and  unvarnished  statement,  and  that  we  have  used
no  harsh  terms  or  extravagant  expressions.  The  committees
have  considered  the  duty  of  preparing  it  as  one,  the  performance
of  which  they  could  not  neglect,  without  disappointing  the  rea-
sonable expectations  of  a  large  number  of  their  respectable  fel-
lpw  citizens.  The  transactions  detailed  in  the  narrative,  have,
in  themselves,  a  character  of  such  enormous  wickedness — they
exhibit  such  utter  disregard  of  all  those  principles  and  rules  of
conduct,  which  have,  heretofore,  been  held  sacred  in  all  civilized
communities — their  consequences  seem  to  us  so  entirely  subver-
sive of  the  principles  of  our  government,  and  so  destructive  of
our  rights,  that  any  attempt,  on  our  part,  to  comment  upon  them
appeared  superfluous.

The  general  voice  of  the  community  has  been  heard  already.
The  free  and  enlightened  citizens  of  our  country  have  not  been
unmindful  of  the  duty  they  owed  to  themselves,  their  country,  and
their  offspring.

We  have  not  been  left  to  act  alone  and  unsupported.  What-
ever apprehensions  some  of  us  might  at  first  have  entertained,
as  to  the  extent  of  the  enmity  and  violence  we  might  be  called
upon  to  encounter,  in  the  prosecution  of  objects  we  had  in  view,
we  were  not  long  left  in  doubt  or  apprehension  whether  we  should
receive  the  support  of  the  virtuous  part  of  our  countrymen.

Those  objects  were,  1st — To  aid  in  re-estabhshtngtbe  authori-
ty of  the  laws,  by  the  restoration  of  William  Morgan  to  his  coun-
try, his  liberty,  and  his  family.

2d.  To  aid  in  the  discovery,  exposure,  and  punis'hment  of  those
who  had,  by  violence  and  fraud,  deprived  him  of  his  liberty,  and*
as  We  now  believe,  of  his  life.

'  3d.  The  discovery  and  disclosure  of  the  fextent  of  'fee  feon-
^piracy,  which,  it  was  manifest  to  us,  had  been  fdrraed  to  etfect
the  unlawful  objects  of  (he  conspirators.     And,

4th   The  making  known  to  the  public,  the  princes  tfftdifeo-


d  by  Google


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  339

tives  which  appeared  to  have  governed  the  conspirators,  so  far  as
those  principles  seem  to  us  in  direct  hostility  to  our  civil  rights,
and  so  far  as  those  motives  are  calculated  to  prompt  persons,  un-
der their  influence,  to  actions  destructive  of,  and  inconsistent  with,
our  free  institutions.

The  first  of  these  declared  objects,  we  deeply  regret  to  say,
we  have  failed  to  accomplish,  and  scarcely  a  ray  of  hope  enlight-
ens the  dark  cloud  of  guilt  and  mystery  which  impends  over  the
fate  of  our  fellow  citizen.

The  probability  that  several  hundred  of  our  fellow  citizens,
most  of  whom  had,  heretofore,  maintained  a  good  character,  had
conspired  to  effect  the  murder  of  a  helpless  man,  seemed  to  us
so  shocking,  so  at  war  with  that  reverence  for  the  life  of  our  fel-
low creatures,  which  God  himself  has  impressed  upon  the  human
mind,  so  decidedly  in  opposition  to  that  general  benevolence  of
feeling  which  has  distinguished  our  countrymen  in  particular,  that
for  many  months,  we  resisted  the  supposition,  of  the  bare  possi-
bility of  such  a  crime,  with  disgust  and  horror.  We  were  un-
willing to  believe  that  respectable  men,  would,  directly  or  indi-
rectly, suggest  or  aid  the  commission  of  a  crime  which  seldom
escapes  punishment,  or  expose  themselves  to  the  disgrace  which
any  attempts,  on  their  part,  to  baffle  investigation  by  secrecy  or
silence,  could  not  fail  eventually  to  bring  upon  them.  But  we
have  been  compelled  to  feel  the  justice  of  the  remark  made  to  us
by  one  well  versed  in  the  operations  of  the  human  mind: — "That
when  the  demon  of  fanaticism  is  at  work,  there  is  no  knowing
to  what  extent  of  mischief  and  turpitude  he  may  lead  his  disci-
ples."

The  second  object  has  been,  in  part,  effected  by  the  influence
of  that  high  and  holy  regard  to  official  duty,  which  has  operated
upon  the  public  officers,  and  grand  jury  of  Ontario  county,  and
which  is  still  manifesting  itself  by  a  faithful  application  of  the
powers  vested  in  them  by  their  country.  How  far  their  honora-
ble example  will  be  imitated  in  other  counties  remains  to  be  seen.

The  third  and  fourth  objects,  it  is  not  intended  to  prosecute  in
the  following  statement,  excepting  so  far  as  they  may  be  of  ne-
cessity brought  into  view,  in  the  detail  of  facts  which  we  purpose
to  make.

We  do  not  feel  qualified,  nor  have  we  time,  for  the  proper  per-
formance of  a  duty  in  which  our  fellow  citizens,  and  those  who
shall  succeed  us,  are  so  deeply  interested*  Time,  the  test  of  truth,
which  brings  to  light  the  hidden  works  of  iniquity,  and  exposes
the  unhallowed  designs  of  the  guilty,  will  contribute  to  unfo^t^e
principles  and  motives  which  have  prompted  the  crimes  of  fraud-

Digiiizedby  \jQ


340  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

ulent  arrests,  by  the  abuse  of  civil  process,  riot,  kidnapping,  and'
perhaps  murder,  and  which  have  induced  so  many  to  sancti6n
them  openly.

Those  who  have  more  leisure  and  more  ability  than  ourselves,
may,  and  we  have  no  doubt  will,  hereafter  call  the  attention  of  our
fellow  citizens  to  the  questions,  how  far  these  principles  are  in
conformity  with  our  republican  maxims — how  far  their  influence
is  calculated  to  corrupt  and  destroy  the  integrity  of  the  human,
mind — and  how  far  the  existence  of  the  source  from  which  they
are  believed  to  emanate,  is  reconcilable  with  the  stability  and
preservation  of  the  constitution,  and  the  enjoyments  of  our  rights
and  liberties.

We  trust  we  have  no  desire  to  give  to  the  transactions  we  have
detailed,  a  consequence  which  they  do  not  deserve.  Those  ac-
tions cannot  be  unimportant,  in  which  so  large  a  portion  of  our
countrymen  have  taken  so  deep  an  interest.  That  they  have  done
so,  we  think  is  honorable  to  themselves,  useful  to  their  country,
and  has  been  gratifying  to  us.

We  have  studiously,  and  we  hope  conscientiously,  avoided
throwing  the  slightest  imputations  upon  any  one,  however  humble
his  situation  in  life,  when  a  correct  statement  of  facts  did  not  re-
quire it;  and  we  have  not  refused  to  disclose  the  names  of  the  ac-
tors, when  we  had  unexceptionable  evidence  of  the  parts  they
have  performed.  We  have  disclosed  things  truly  as  they  have
come  to  our  knowledge,  without  fear  or  favor.


d  by  Google


(341)


A  NARRATIVE,  &c.

William  Morgan  was  a  native  of  the  state  of  Virginia,  born  in
Culpepper  county,  in  the  year  1775  or  6,  and  a  mason  by  trade.
Having  by  his  industry  accumulated  a  fund  sufficient  for  me  pur-
pose, he  commenced  business  as  a  trader,  or  merchant,  in  Rich-
mond, in  that  state.

During  his  residence  there,  in  October  1819,  he  married  Lu-
cinda  Pendleton,  the  oldest  daughter  of  the  Rev.  Joseph  Pendle-
ton, of  the  Methodist  connexion,  and  a  respectable  planter,  re-
siding in  Washington  county.     He  removed  from  the  state  of
Virginia  in  the  fall  of  1821,  and  commenced  the  business  of  a
brewer,  near  York,  in  Upper  Canada.    The  destruction  of  his  es-
tablishment by  fire,  reduced  him  from  a  comfortable  situation  to
poverty,  and  rendered  it  necessary  for  him  to  resume  his  trade  of
a  mason:  with  that  intention  he  moved  to  Rochester  in  this  state,
where  he  labored  at  that  business  for  some  time.     From  Roch-
ester he  removed  to  Batavia,  in  Genesee  county,  where  he  work-
ed at  his  trade  until  a  short  time  before  he  was  carried  away  from
his  home  and  his  family.     Sometime  in  the  year  1826,  rumours
were  heard,  that  Morgan,  in  connexion  with  other  persons,  was
preparing  and  intended  to  publish  a  book  which  would  reveal  the
secrets  of  Free  Masonry,  and  that  David  C.  Miller,  a  printer
in  the  village  of  Batavia,  was  engaged  in  putting  the  work  to  the
press.     This  rumor,  like  all  others,  in  which  the  community  at
large  feel  no  interest,  excited  no  attention  from  the  respectable
part  of  it,  who  supposed  that  the  publication,  whatever  it  might
be,  was  intended  as  a  catch-penny  production,  for  the  supply  of
pedlars  and  hawkers.     It  was  at  last  noticed  by  some  of  the  cit-
izens, that  an  excitement  of  some  kind,  existed  among  certain
persons  in  the  village,  in  relation  to  the  publication  of  the  book,
which  it  was  said  Morgan  was  engaged  in  compiling;  and  it  was
at  length  openly  avowed  by  a  number  of  persons,  who  were  un-
derstood to  be  members  of  the  masonic  fraternity,  that  the  sup-
pression of  the  work  was  determined  on  at  all  hazards.    A  large
number  of  the  subscribers  to  Mr.  Miller's  paper  suddenly  with-
drew their  subscriptions,   numerous  suits  were    commenced
against  him,  to  enforce  the  payment  of  small  debts,  and  their  col-
lection was  prosecuted  in  the  manner  most  calculated  to  distress,
and  embarrass  him.

On  the  ninth  day  of  August,  1826,  an  advertisement  was  in-
serted in  a  paper  printed:  in  Canandaigua,  of  which  the  following
is  an  exact  copy.
E&2


y  Google


342  LIGHT  09   MASONEt.

'NOTICE  AND  CAUTION.
'If  a  man  calling  himself  William  Morgan,  should  intrude  him-
self on  the  community,  they  should  he  on  their  guard,  particular-
ly the  Masonic  FRATEMfiTr.   Morgan  was  in  this  viRage  m  May
last,  and  his  conduet  while  here  and  elsewhere,  calls  forth  this
notice.    Any  information  in  relation  to  Morgan,  can  be  obtained
by  calling  at  the  Masonic  Hall,  in  this  village.    Brethren  and
Companions  are  particularly  requested  to  obtertity  mcfrk  and  gw-
ern  themselves  accordingly,
fi^r  Morgan  is  considered  a  swindler  and  a  dangerous  man.
(£>There  are  people  in  this  village  who  would  be  happy  tb  see
this  Oapt.  Morgan.
Canandaigua,  August  9th,  1826.'

This  notice  and  caution  was  immediately  Copied  into  <Jie  *Spir-
it  of  the  Times,'  and  the  'People's  Press,'  two  newspapers  print-
ed in  the  village  of  Batavia,  and,  as  we  are  well  assured,-  it  was
inserted  in  many  other  public  papers,  printed  in  the  western  conn-
ties  of  this  state.

We  are  assured  also,  and  to  some  of  the  committee  it  is  person-
ally known,  that  about  the  same  time  that  this  notice  appeared,
Morgan  and  Miller  were  industriously  slandered,  and  abusive  ep-
ithets heaped  upontfhem,  by  a  number  of  individuals  whoalhedged
no  particular  crimes  against  them,  and  with  whom  they  were
noflmDwn  to  have  had  any  recent  connexions  or  collisions  what-
ever, that  were  apparent  to  the  public  at  large.

Miller  declared  to  his  particular  friends  that  he  was  alarmed  for
his  personal  safety,  and  feared  an  attack  upon  his  office,  and  he
took  measures  to  defend  himself  against  Secret  or  open  violence.
What  reasons  he  bad  for  his  apprehensions  we  do  not  thinto  it  ne-
cessary or  proper  to  state  in  this  place,  but  the  most  careless  ob-
server took  notice  that  the  reputed  members  of  the  masonic  fra;
ternity  had  frequent  assemblages,  and  very  many  strangers  ap-
peared in,  and  disappeared  from  the  village  of  Batavia,  Without
openly  assigning  any  object  for  their  visit,  or  appearing  to  have
any  ostensible  business  to  transact,  and  most  of  whom  seemed
desirous  of  avoiding  observation.  About  the  middle  of  August,
a"  man  calling  himself  Daniel  Johns,  suddenly  appeared  iff' Bata-
via and  took  up  his  lodgings  at  one  of  the  public  houses;  he  soon
proposed  associating  himself  with  Miller  in-  the  publication  or
Morgan's  book,  and  offered  to  advance  any  sunt  of  motley  that
might  be  wanted;  he  was  accepted  and  received  hflo' their  confi-
dence.

His  history,  and  the  object  of  his  visit,  were  tnfcs  detailed  by
James  Ganson,  of  LeRoy,  formerly  a  member  of  the  legislature

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON  fcUSONRT.  343

from  the  county  of  Genesee,  and  a  Knight  Templar,  to  a  person
whose  affidavit  of  that  statement  is  now  in  our  possession.  That
he  was  sent  for  from  thirty  miles  beyond  Kingston,  to  cheat  or
take  in  Miller;  that  he  was  a  Knight  Templar,  and  a  cunning  fel-
low, and  had  answered  the  purpose  he  was  sent  to  accomplish:
for  he  had  got  away  part  of  the  papers  and  cut  the  work  into  two
parts,  so  that  Miller  could  not  go  on  with  it.*

On  the  25th  day  of  July,  1826,  Morgan  was  committed  to  the
custody  of  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of  Genesee,  at  the  suit  of
Nathan  Follett,  and  gave  bail  for  the  jail  limits.  He  had  been
sued  sometime  before  in  the  Supreme  Court,  for  a  considerable
debt  due  to  a  gentleman  of  Rochester,  and  two  of  his  then  friends
had  become  his  special  bail,  to  wit:  Nahum  Loring  and  Orange
Allen-  During  the  month  of  August,  his  family  and  himself
boarded  at  Mr.  Stewart's  in  the  crowded  part  of  the  village,  but
for  the  purpose  of  security  and  to  avoid  interruption,  he,  himself
spent  most  of  the  time  in  the  upper  room  of  Mr.  John  Davids'
house,  some  distance  from  his  lodgings,  and  separated  by  the  Ton-
awanda  creek  from  the  business  part  of  the  town.  On  the  19th
of  August,  1826,  Johnson  Goodwill,  Kebey  Stone,  and  John
Wilson,  residents  of  the  village,  but  holding  no  official  station,
accompanied  by  one  Daniel  H.  Dana,  a  constable  residing  at
Pembroke,  about  fourteen  miles  distant  from  the  village  of  Pa*
tavia,  went  together  to  Davids'  house.  They  first  inquired  for
Davids'  and  Towsley,  the  two  men  who  were  heads  of  the  two
families  that  occupied  the  house,  and  being  told  they  were  not  at
home,  without  asking  for  Morgan,  or  giving  any  previous  notice
to  the  families,  they  rushed  at  once  up  the  stairway  into  the  room
where  he  was  writing,  siezed  his  person  and  all  the  papers  which
he  was  then  busied  in  arranging  for  the  press,  and  took  him  at
once  to  the  county  jail,  without  allowing  him  time  or  opportunity
to  procure  other  bail.

We  pretend  not  to  state  how  far  the  sheriff  was  a  party  in  this
transaction.  He  was  observed  to  be  in  the  company  of  the  four,
and  went  with  them  to  the  bridge,  where  he  appeared  to  stay  on
the  look  out  until  they  returned  with  Morgan,  when  he  accom-
panied them  to  jail.  Morgan  remained  in  close  confinement  from
Saturday  afternoon  until  Monday  morning,  during  which  time  he
received  numerous  visits  from  the  persons  who  kid  interested
themselves  in  the  suppression  of  the  book.  As  soon  as  Morgan's
imprisonment  was  known  to  his  friends,  which  was  not  more  than
an  hour  after  his  capture,  three  of  them  nade  diligent  search  for

*  See  Appendix,  No.  1,  end  of  the  volume.

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


344  Z.IOBT  ON  MASONRT.

the  sheriff  in  all  the  usual  places  of  his  resort,  for  the  purpose  of
offering  themselves  as  hail  for  him.     They  went  three  times  to
his  dwelling  house,  without  being  ahle  to  see  him;   they  inquired
at  the  jail  and  sheriff's  office  for  the  jailer:  neither  sheriff  or  jailer
was  to  be  found  until  after  12  o'clock  at  night,  when,  of  course,  it
was  too  late  to  procure  his  release  until  Monday  morning.     On
the  evening  of  the  same  Saturday,  about  sunset,  the  same  John-
son Goodwill,  and  Daniel  H.  Dana,  with  Thomas  McCully,  re-
paired to  the  dwelling  house  of  Mr.  Stewart,  where  Morgan
boarded.     They  alledged,  and  we  presume  they  had  an  execution,
in  which  McCully  was  plaintiff,  and  Morgan  defendant.     McCully
inquired  of  Mrs.  Morgan,  whether  Morgan  had  any  property,  who
answered,  'You  know  we  have  none;  we  have  got  nothing  since
we  came  from  ypur  house.'  To  a  similar  inquiry  addressed  to  Miss
Stewart,  she  answered,  'She  knew  of  none,  but  that  they  lodged
in  an  upper  chamber.'     Goodwill  and  Dana  passed  into  the  cham-
ber, leaving  McCully  below,  and  proceeded  to  rummage,  without
permission  or  ceremony,  among  the  trunks,  boxes,  drawers,  and
every  other  place  where  it  was  probable  that  papers  could  be  found;
they  examined  such  letters  as  they  found,  and  seized  a  small  trunk
of  Morgan's,  which  had  a  few  papers  in  it,  saying  they  would  ex-
amine, and  if  they  were  of  consequence  to  Morgan,  they  would
return  them.     While  Goodwill  and  Dana  were  thus  employed
above  stairs,  McCully  observed  to  Miss  Stewart,  who  remained
with  him  below,  'That  he  should  like  to  find  property  to  satisfy
his  execution,  but  that  was  not  his  principal  object,  he  did  not  care
so  much  about  that,  as  he  did  to  get  some  papers  belonging  to
Morgan.'     One  of  the  chests  or  trunks  was  found  locked.     It
belonged  to  a  lodger  in  the  house.     His  name  was  mentioned,
and  McCully  declared  'He  did  not  wish  to  examine  that,  as  he
was  a  Royal  Arch  Mason.'      After  remaining  in  the  house  about
half  an  hour,  they  departed;  and  as  they  were  leaving  the  house,
McCully  or  Goodwell  said  to  Mrs.  Morgan,  'We  have  just  con-
ducted your  husband  to  jail,  and  shall  keep  him  there  until  we
find  his  papers.'     That  numerous  individuals,  in  different  and
distant  parts  of  our  country,  took  a  deep  interest  in  the  suppres-
sion of  the  book,  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  doubt  in  the  slightest
degree;  and  the  intenseness  of  their  anxiety,  betrayed  them,  in  very
many  instances,  into  the  avowal  of  intentions  and  feelings  which
manifested  how  little  they  were  disposed  to  regard  the  laws  of  the
land,  and  the  lives  of  their  fellow  citizens,  if  the  violation  of  the
first,  and  the  destruction  of  the  second,  should'become  necessary
to  effect  that  object.     Some  of  the  particular  declarations  of  in-
dividuals from  which  we  have  drawn  these  conclusions,  will  he

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  34&

found  in  an  appendix,  with  some  of  the  authorities  upon  which
they  are  published.*

After  Morgan  was  taken  away,  the  sheriff  of  the  county  of
Genesee  avowed  to  Mrs.  Morgan  his  belief  that  the  real  object
of  taking  him  away,  was  to  coerce  the  surrender  of  his  papers;
and  he  opened  a  negotiation  with  her,  by  the  aid  of  Nathan  Fol-
let  and  George  Ketchum,  for  the  restoration  of  her  husband,
upon  condition  of  surrendering  his  papers  to  the  Masons;  and  if
any  doubts  could  have  existed  in  our  minds,  of  the  anxiety  to
suppress  this  work,  and  the  determination  to  effect  it  at  all  haz-
ards, they  would  have  been  set  at  rest  by  the  affidavits  of  Nicholas
G.  Chesbro,  and  Edward  Sawyer,  read  before  the  court  which
sentenced  them,  of  which  copies  will  be  found  in  the  appendix,  j*

On  the  8th  day  of  September,  1826,  Nathan  Follet,  an  active
member  of  the  masonic  fraternity,  residing  at  Batavia,  desired
James  Ganson,  who  then  kept  a  tavern  at  the  village  of  Stafford,
six  miles  east  of  Batavia,  to  prepare  a  cold  supper,  or  refresh-
ment, for  between  forty  and  fifty  men,  who,  he  said,  would  be
there  that  night.  They  accordingly  assembled,  and  were  headed
or  commanded  by  a  Col.  Edward  Sawyer,  residing  at  Canandai-
gua.  From  the  affidavit  of  Green,  and  other  information  re-
ceived, it  appears  that  this  mob,  which  was  to  act  under  the  di-
rection of  Sawyer,  was  to  have  been  composed  of  persons  from
several  different  and  distant  places,  and  some  of  them  even  from
Upper  Canada.  At  a  late  hour  of  the  night,  the  conspirators,
conducted  by  Sawyer,  departed  from  Ganson's,  and  proceeded
to  Batavia,  for  the  purpose,  as  was  avowed,  of  procuring  the
manuscript  papers,  and  printed  sheets,  and  suppressing  the
publication  of  Morgan's  book,  by  breaking  into  the  printing  of-
fice, and,  if  necessary  to  effect  their  object,  carry  off  Morgan
and  Miller.  What  circumstances  or  occurrences  deterred  them
frtfm  proceeding  to  extremities,  are  not  known,  further  than  have
been  derived  from  their  own  statements  since,  and  the  affidavit  of
Green.^  They  received  information,  it  is  supposed,  of  the  fact,
that  Miller  knew  of  their  intention,  and  had  prepared  to  defend
the  office  with  fire  arms,  and  of  course  concluded  that  their  pro-
ject could  not  be  carried  into  effect,  without  the  risk  and  proba-
ble loss  of  some  of  their  lives;  and  however  anxious  to  prevent
the  disclosure  of  the  secrets  of  Masonry,  they  seem  to  have  been
unwilling  to  sacrifice  their  limbs  or  lives  in  its  service.    At  day

*  Appendix,  No.  30.

f  Appendix,  Nos.  8  and  9,

|  Appendix,  No.  16*


y  Google


346  LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.

dawn  they  separated,  and  retreated  from  the  village,  without  bar-
ing affected  any  thing.  Part  of  them  re-assembled  at  Ganson's
house,  in  Stafford,  where  Sawyer  was  branded  as  a  coward  for
not  effecting  the  object  for  which  he  had  started.*

Miller  occupied,  as  printing  offices,  the  second  story  of  two
wooden  buildings  in  the  compact  part  of  the  village  of  Batavia,
nearly  all  of  which  consists  of  wooden  buildings — the  twe  offices
were  separated  by  an  alley  about  twelve  feet  wide.  A  family  of
ten  persons  occupied  the  lower  part  of  one  of  the  buildings,  and
Miller's  assistants,  six  in  number,  always  slept  in  the  upper
rooms.  On  the  night  of  Sunday,  the  10th  of  September,  1826,
the  inhabitants  of  the  village  were  alarmed  by  the  cry  of  fire,
which  proceeded  from  these  offices,  but  was  soon  extinguished;
the  fire  was  first  discovered  by  bright  flames  bursting  from  under
the  outside  stairways,  leading  into  the  printing  offices.  On  ex-
amination it  was  evident  that  the  attempt  had  been  made  with
very  minute  preparations.  Remains  of  straw,  and  cotton  balls,
saturated  with  spirits  of  turpentine,  were  found  under  the  stairs:
a  short  brush  was  found,  which  had  evidently  been  dipped  in  tur-
pentine; and  the  sidings  of  the  houses  were  smeared  with  that
liquid.  A  short  distance  from  the  building  a  dark  lantern  was
found.  It  will  be  manifest  to  every  person  who  sees  the  situation
of  the  offices,  and  adjacent  buildings,  that  if  the  fire  had  gotten
much  headway,  a  considerable  portion  of  the  village  would  have
been  consumed.  For  some  other  information  relating  to  the
different  attempts  on  Miller's  office,  the  reader  ia  referred  to.  the
affidavits  of  John  Mann,  and  Thomas  G.  Green,  contained  in
the  appendix.  (No.  16,  and  17.)

In  March,  1827,  the  committee,  on  the  affidavit  of  John  Mann,
(to  which  the  reader  has  been  referred,)  obtained  a  warrant  for
the  apprehension  of  Richard  Howard,  as  the  incendiary,  and  de-
spatched a  messenger  to  Buffalo  for  the  purpose  of  arresting  hi*.
That  no  step  should  be  taken  without  due  caution,  they  requested
a  friend  in  Buffalo  to  examine  into  the  affair,  and  instructed  him*
that,  if  satisfactory  proof  existed  that  Howard  was  at  Buffalo,  oa
Monday  morning  early,  engaged  in  his  usual  occupations,  he  was
authorized  to  withhold  the  precept.  The  friend  to  whom  they
had  written,  chose  to  call  in  to  bus  aid  four  others,  who,  after
much  reflection,  say  they  'felt  it  to  be  right  to  advise  the  officers
not  to  arrest  Howard,  and  had  taken  their  measures  with  such
prudence  as  they  thought  would  prevent  all  knowledge  of  the

*  Sawyer,  and  some  ethers,  have  been  indicted  fcr  this  attempt,  but  their
trials  have  not  yet  taken  place.


y  Google


LIGHT  ON  MASOJOfY.  347

complaint  from  coming  to  his  ears;  that  they  had  felt  the  more
confidence  in  that  course,  from  the  belief  that  Howard  would  not
leave  the  place,  but  would  be  found  to  answer  the  charge,  if  such
proof  should  thereafter  be  produced,  as  should  warrant  the  pur-
suit of  criminal  proceedings  against  him.'  A  few  days  after  re-
ceiving the  letter  of  these  gentlemen,  the  committee  obtained  sat-
isfactory proof  that,  about  the  time  the  attempt  was  made,  Howard
had  been  at  Batavia,  in  secret  consultation  with  a  member  of  the
fraternity.  A  second  officer  was  despatched,  with  positive  direc-
tions to  arrest  him  for  examination.  But  the  officer,  on  his  arrival
at  Buffalo,  was  informed,  by  one  of  the  gentlemen  who  had  writ-
ten the  letter,  that  the  night  after  its  date,  (March  9th,)  Howard
kad  absconded,  though  they  could  not  ascertain  by  what  means
he  had  been  alarmed.  He  has  never  since  been  heard  of  by  any
member  of  the  committee.  The  secrecy  and  celerity  of  his  de-
parture— the  active  part  he  took  in  the  conspiracy — and  the  facts
detailed  in  the  second  affidavit  of  John  Mann,  will  leave  not  much
doubt  on  the  minds  of  the  readers,  that  he  feared  an  arrest  on  a
much  higher  charge  than  that  of  attempting  to  sot  fire  to  the  print-
ing offices  of  Miller.*

On  Sunday  morning,  the  tenth  day  of  Sept.  1826,  Nicholas
G.  Chesebro,  of  the  village  of  Canandaigua,  a  hatter  by  trade,
and  Master  of  the  Masonic  Lodge  in  that  place,  and  one  of  the
coroners  of  Ontario  county,  applied  for,  and  obtained  from  Jeffrey
Chipman,  a  justice  of  the  jfcace,  a  warrant  for  the  apprehension
of  William  Morgan,  on  a  charge  of  stealing  a  shirt  and  cravat,
in  May  previous,  from  an  innkeeper  named  Kingsley,  who  after-
wards deposed  that  he  had  no  intention  of  entering' a  complaint
against  Morgan,  until  he  was  prompted  to  it  by  Chesebro  and  his
associates.  Having  obtained  the  warrant,  which  was  directed  to
him  as  coroner,  he  called  upon  Holloway  Hayward,  a  constable,
who,  with  Chesebro,  Henry  Howard,  a  merchant  of  Canandai-
gua, Harris  Seymour,  Moses  Roberts,  and  one  Joseph  Scofield,
took  their  departure  from  Canandaigua,  on  the  morning  of  the
same  day,  in  an  extra  stage,  hired  for  the  occasion  by  Chesebro.

At  Avon,  the  party  were  joined  by  Asa  Nowlea,  an  innkeeper;
at  Caledonia,  by  John  Butterfield,  a  store  keeper;  and  at  Le  Roy,
•by  Ella  G.  Smith:  all  of  whom,  as  Hayward  has  since  deposed,
seemed  to  know  that  he  had  a  warrant  against  Morgan.  The
"party  proceeded  t6  the  village  of  Stafford,  where  they  stopped  to
take  supper  at  a  public  house  then  kept  by  James  Ganson.  Im-
mediately after  their  arrival  at  Stafford,  on  Sunday  evening,  &****-

*  Appeadix,  No.  26.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


348  LIGHT  ON   BUSONEY.

\iel  S.  Butler,  a  physician  residing  there,  was  introduced  to  some
©f  die  party,  and  informed  that  they,  or  the  officer,  had  a  warrant
for  Morgan,  and  he  was  requested  to  mention  that  circumstance
to  Nathan  Follett  and  William  Seaver,  then  Master  of  the  Bata-
via  Lodge,  both  residents  of  Batavia  village,  for  which  he  imme-
diately started.  The  party  having  finished  their  supper  were  now
joined  by  Ganson,  and  started  for  Batavia.  About  two  miles
from  that  place  they  were  met  by  Dr.  Butler,  who  had  some  con-
versation, in  a  low  voice,  with  Ganson,  and  communicated  to  him
the  answer  of  Follett,  which  was,  that  they  should  not  come  on'.
Some  of  the  party  said  they  would  proceed;  they  had  come  for
the  purpose,  and  would  go  on.  They  concluded,  however,  that
it  was  not  adviseable  to  proceed  in  the  carriage,  and  most  of  the
party  left  it  about  a  mile  and  a  half  east  of  the  village,  and  pro-
ceeded on  foot  to  Batavia,  and  the  remainder  returned  with  the
carriage.  The  next  morning  early,  Morgan  was  arrested  and
taken  to  the  public  house  where  the  party  had  slept.  An  extra  stage
was  procured  for  the  return  of  the  party,  in  which  they  left  the
village  with  Morgan.  Just  as  they  were  about  to  start,  Miller
came  up  and  insisted  that  Morgan  should  not  be  taken  away,  as
he  was  in  custody  of  the  sheriff  of  the  county  for  debt,  and  he,
Miller,  was  one  of  his  bail.  Miller,  however,  was  immediately
pushed  aside  by  Danolds,  the  tavern  keeper,  who  closed  the  door,
and  Chesebro,  having  seated  himself  on  the  outside  with  the  driv-
er, urged  him  to  drive  fast  until  he  should  get  out  of  the  county.
But  the  driver  became  uneasy,  and  stopped  about  eighty  rods
from  Danolds,  refusing  to  proceed.  He  was,  however,  persuad-
ed to  go  as  far  as  Stafford,  where  he  was  assured  Ganson  would
become  his  surety  against  all  responsibility;  and  on  his  arriving
at  Stafford,  Ganson  accordingly  gave  him  such  assurances  as  in-
duced him  to  proceed.  At  Le  Roy,  Hayward,  who  held  the  pro-
cess, offered,  as  he  afterwards  said,  to  take  Morgan  before  the
justice  of  the  peace,  who  had  endorsed  the  warrant,  that  he  might
give  bail  if  he  chose.  No  such  offer  was  made  to  him  in  Bata-
via, where  he  might  have  found  bail,  and  there  was  no  reason  to
suppose  that  he  could  have  friends  in  Le  Roy,  to  whom  he  could
apply  in  such  an  emergency.  He  accordingly  declined,  saying,
that  when  he  got  to  Canandaigua,  he  could  convince  Mr.  Kings-
ley,  the  apparent  prosecutor,  that  he  did  not  intend  to  steal  the
shirt  and  cravat  The  party  arrived  at  Canandaigua,  fifty  miles
east  of  Batavia,  about  sunset,  and  Morgan  was  examined  by  the
magistrate.  Loton  Lawson  appeared  as  a  witness  on  his  behalf
and  made  such  statements  as  induced  the  discharge  of  Morgan.
To  have  procured  his  imprisonment  for  a  larceny,  would,  df-


y  Google


LIGHT   0$  MASON RV.  349

course,  have  defeated  the  real  object  of  the  conspirators,  because
his  person  would  have  been  out  of  their  control.  As  soon  as
Morgan  was  thus  discharged  from  arrest  under  the  criminal  pro-
cess, Chesebro  produced  a  claim  against  him  for  a  debt  of  two
dollars,  due  to  one  Aaron  Ackley,  an  innkeeper  in  Canandaigua,
with  an  authority  to  collect  the  debt  on  his  own  account  Mor-
gan admitted  the  debt,  confessed  judgment,  and,  seemingly  aware
of  the  determination  to  detain  him,  pulled  off  his  coat,  and  desir-
•  ed  the  constable  to  fevy  on  it,  or  take  it  as  security  for  the  debt.
Hayward,  the  constable,  refused  to  take  it,  and  conducted  Mor-
gan to  jail,  whore  he  was  left  about  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening.

On  Tuesday,  the  12th  day  of  September,  about  noon,  a  crowd
of  men  suddenly  appeared  in  the  village  of  Batavia,  nearly  all  of
whom  carried  with  them  clubs,  or  sticks,  newly  cut,  and  resem-
bling one  another,  and,  to  all  appearance,  provided  for  the  occa-
sion. The  crowd  assembled  themselves  at  the  house  of  Danolds,
an  innkeeper.  To  the  oldest  inhabitants  of  the  village,  almost
,all  of  them  were  strangers,  and  to  this  day  the  names  of  very
few  have  been  distinctly  ascertained  by  us,  although  the  whole
number  thus  equipped  was  sixty  or  seventy.  They  were  mani-
festly selected  for  the  occasion,  because  their  names  and  persons
were  not  known  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  village  generally.  No
motive  for  their  sudden  appearance  was  assigned.  Immediately  ,
after  this  assemblage,  Jesse  French,  one  of  the  constables  of  the
county,  repaired  to  Miller's  printing  office,  and,  in  a  rude  and
violent  manner,  arrested  him,  alleging  that  he  had  a  criminal
process,  or  a  process  in  behalf  of  the  people.  After  detaining
him  in  a  room  at  Danolds'  tavern  about  two  hours,  they  put  him
into  an  open  wagon.  Seven  men,  exclusive  of  the  driver,  all
armed  with  clubs,  took  their  seats  in  the  wagon,  all  of  whom
were  unknown  to  him.  French,  the  constable,  having  mounted
his  horse,  the  whole  mob  proceeded  to  Stafford,  a  village  about
six  miles  east  from  Batavia.  On  arriving  there,  Miller  was  seiz-
ed by  two  men,  and  conducted  to  a  room  in  the  third  story  of  a
stone  building,  ordinarily  used  as  a  masonic  lodge  room.  In  this
room  he  was  guarded  by  five  men,  who  said  they  were  acting  as
assistants  to  French,  and  under  his  orders.  While  thus  secluded
and  guarded,  his  counsel,  with  four  or  five  of  his  friends,  arrived,
and  the  former,  after  some  short  detention,  was  permitted  by
French  to  seejiira.  The  constable  was  then  asked  for  a  sight,
or  description,  of  the  warrant,  by  virtue  of  which  he  held  Mttler
in  custody;  but  he  steadily  refused  to  exhibit  or  describe  it;  but
still  left  no  doubt  on'  the  mind  of  Miller  or  his  counsel,  that  the
warrant  was  in  a  criminal  proceeding!  and  at  length  avowed  that
Fp

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


350  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

it  bad  been  issued  by  a  magistrate  at  Le  Roy.     It  should  here
be  stated,  that,  about  three  days  before  the  successive  arrests  of
Morgan  and  Miller,  Daniel  Johns,  -whose  sudden  appearance  at
Batavia  has  been  mentioned,  suddenly  disappeared  from  that
place.  A  short  time  after  Miller's  introduction  to  the  lodge  room,
at  Stafford,  this  same  Daniel  Johns  entered  the  room,  hotdiag  hi
his  hand  a  drawn  sword,  and  walked,  with  large  and  quick  steps,
across  the  room,  and,  as  Miller  describes  ft,  seemed  anxious  to
inspire  terror  into  the  captive.    Miller,  however,  ventured  to  re-
monstrate with  him;  having  learned,  in  some  way  which  be  can-
not recollect,  mat  Johns  was  his  prosecutor.    Johns,  however,
answered  in  a  voice  that  faltered  a  little,  'Miller,  I  am  only  doing
what  I  have  been  ordered  to  do.'     During  his  detention  in  the
room,  one  of  the  guards  told  him,  in  language  loud  enough  to  be
heard  by  all  in  the  room,  that  he  was  not  to  be  tried  at  Le  Roy,
nor  to  stop  there,  nor  to  be  tried  by  an  ordinary  tribunal;  but  was
going  where  Morgan  was.     Miller  asked  what  tribunal;  he  repli-
ed, you  will  see.      The  others  made  no  remarks  in  denial  or  ex-
planation, but  he  heard  due  man  say  to  another,  Miller  is  nothing
but  an  Entered  Apprentice.    To  detail  all  the  evasive  falsehoods
and  idle  assertions,  by  which  French  and  his  coadjutors  endeav-
ored to  excuse  themselves  from  proceeding  with  MMler  to  the  jus-
tice's office  at  Le  Roy,  would  be  a  useless  waste  of  our  own
time,  and  the  patience  of  the  reader.

It  was  manifest  that  the  conspirators  wished  to  consume  the
time,  until  night  should  favor  the  completion  of  their  projects,  and
that  to  proceed  to  Le  Roy  was  no  part  of  their  plan,  if  it  could
be  avoided.  But  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon,  French,  seem-
ingly by  inadvertence,  admitted  mat  the  process  he  had  against
Miller,  was,  in  fact,  a  process  in  a  civil  suit;  and  from  that  time
his  resolution  seemed  somewhat  shaken.  About  dusk  the  whole
crowd  proceeded,  with  much  noise  and  tumult,  to  Le  Roy,  four
miles,  and,  after  many  efforts  on  the  part  of  French  to  prevent
him  from  so  doing,  Miller  got  himself  placed  before  the  justice,
who  had  issued  the  warrant.  French  then  gave  directions  to  two
of  his  assistants,  and  disappeared.  Mifier  staid  in  the  office
about  half  an  hour,  during  which  time  the  Justice  called  for  the
constable  and  warrant,  but  neither  constable,  warrant,  or  plain-
tiff appeared,  and  the  justice  informed  Mr.  Miller  that  he  was
at  liberty  to  go  wherehe  pleased.  This  was  abotit  nine  o'clock
in  the  evening.  It  appeared  from  the  docket  of 'the  magistrate
that  a  warrant  had  been  issued  against  Miller,  and  one  John  Da-
vids, on  the  oath,  and  at  the  request  of  Daniel  Johns :  John  Da-
vids had  been  also  arrested  by  the  directions  of  French,  "but  me

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT    ON   MASONRY.  35l

sheriff  of  the  county  informed  them  that  he  was  in  his  custody  on
the  jail  limits,  upon  which  he  was  discharged  from  the  arrest —
Miller  having  thus  obtained  permission  to  return,  was  making  the
best  of  his  way  to  a  public  house,  when  French  and  Johns  sud-
denly appeared  again:  The  former  endeavored  to  seize  Miller
by  the  collar,  and  called  loudly  for  help  to  retake  the  prisoner;
Johns  asked  if  there  was  no  person  there  who  would  help  to  se-
cure that  man.  But  although  attempts  were  made  to  regain
possession  of  Miller^ne  succeeded  in  reaching  a  public  house;
and  after  another  ineffectual  attempt  by  French,  and  his  associ-
ates, to  prevent  him,  he  returned  late  at  night  to  Batavia,  and  re-
lieved his  family  from  terror  and  alarm.  That  this  lawless  as-
semblage of  men  took  place  for  the  purpose  of  securing  the  ar-
rest of  Miller,  by  virtue  of  a  process  never  intended  to  be  acted
upon,  we  shall  take  no  trouble  to  show  to  the  public.  We  have
conclusive  proof  from  the  express  declarations  of  those  who  led
the  troop,  and  from  various  other  sources,  that  one  of  the  objects
they  had  in  view  was  to  pull  down  the  office  of  Miller,  if  that
should  be  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  getting  possession  of  the
printed  sheets  and  manuscripts  of  the  expected  book.

We  are  satisfied  that  their  visit  was  expected  by  many  decent
men  in  the  village  of  Batavia,  and  their  intention  to  pull  down
the  printing  office  of  Miller,  if  such  a  step  should  become  neces-
sary to  get  possession  of  the  printed  sheets  and  manuscripts  of
Morgan's  book,  has  been  repeatedly  proved:  And  we  are  also
bound  to  declare,  that  some  of  those  who  were  in  the  secret,  dis-
approved of  the  design,  and  endeavored,  by  the  exertion  of  their
personal  influence,  to  prevent  them  from  coming.     We  are  not,
however,  able  to  state,  what  it  would  give  us  satisfaction  to  state,
that  any  information  was  given  to  the  magistrates,  or  other  pub-
lic officers,  or  to  any  other  respectable  inhabitants  of  the  village,
which  would  have  apprised  them  of  the  intended  outrage,  and
justified  them  in  requiring  the  interference  of  the  civil  or  milita-
ry authority.     It  was  a  singular  circumstance,  that  on  the  day
when  the  visit  of  this  mob  took  place,  all  the  magistrates  of  the
village  were  called  upon  to  attend  as  witnesses  before  a  justice
of  the  peace,  in  an  adjoining  town,  and  were  actually  absent
when  they  arrived,  and  continued  so,  absent,  until  they  had  de-
parted.    We  are  satisfied  that  they  were  regularly  summoned  to
attend  as  witnesses;  and  if  the  circumstance  was  not  accident-
al, it  must  of  coarse  have  been  known  to  the  leaders  of  the  mob
that  their  operations  on  that  day  would  not  probably  be  interrupt-
ed by  any  interference  on  the  part  of  the  official  conservators  of
*  he  peace.    At  the  October  sessions  of  the  county  court,  James


d  by  Google


352  LIGHT   ON    MASONRY.

Ganson,  Jesse  French,  Roswell  Wilcox,  and  James  Huriburt,
were  indicted  for  a  riot,  and  for  assaulting  and  falsely  imprison-
ing David  C.  Miller.  Their  trial  took  place  at  the  court  of  Oyer
and  Terminer,  held  in  April  before  judge  Birdsall,  in  Genesee
county.  French,  Wilcox  and  Hurlburt,  were  found  guilty,  and
sentenced  to  close  confinement  in  the  county  jail  for  different  pe-
riods— viz:  French  for  one  year,  TVilcox  for  six  months,  andHurl-
burt  for  three:  Ganson  was  acquitted:  two  other  indictments,  were
found  against  him — one  for  a  conspiracy  yvith  Daniel  Johns,
and  George  Ketchum,  to  obtain  Morgan's  manuscripts  or  printed
sheets:  the  other,  for  a  conspiracy,  with  sixteen  others,  to  de-
stroy Miller's  office.     On  these  he  has  not  yet  been  tried.

On  the  trial,  above  mentioned,  it  was  proved,  that  on  the  morn-
ing of  the  12th,  before  the  party  came  to  Batavia,  at  Stafford,
and  in  the  lodge  room,  Ganson  was  appointed  the  leader  or  cap-
tain of  the  expedition  against  Miller's  office.

Supposing  the  reader  to  have  perused  the  affidavit  6f  Mrs.
Morgan,  contained  in  the  Appendix,  we  proceed  to  mention  that,
immediately  after  her  return,  (i.  e.  not  more  than  a  few  hours)
from  her  useless  visit  to  Canandaigua,  to  her  desolate  home,  the
same  Thomas  M'Cully,  whom  we  have  mentioned  before,  called
on  her,  and  said  'that  he  had  been  appointed  by  the  lodge  to  pro-
vide for  the  support  of  herself  and  her  children,  and  had  pro-
vided board  for  them  at  a  public  tavern  in  the  village;'  the
same  in  which  her  husband  had  been  detained  after  his  arrest  un
Monday  morning,  before  he  was  put  into  the  carriage  and  taken
away.  The  unfortunate  woman  promptly  answered, 'that  she
should  accept  no  assistance  from  'the  Masons,'  for  she  attribu-
ted to  them,  without  any  hesitation,  the  afflictions  she  was  suffer-
ing.'

It  will  be  seen  by  her  statement  that,  on  her  way  home,  James
Ganson  got  into  the  stage  at  Le  Roy,  and  assured  her  that  he
was  then  on  his  way  to  Batavia  'to  make  arrangements  for  for
'support.'  He  told  her  'That  her  husband  had  not  been  killed,
'but  that  she  must  not  be  surprised  if  she  did  not  see  him  again
'in  a  year:  and  if  she  never  saw  him  again  she  should  be  well
'provided  for,  and  her  children  sent  to  school  as  soon  as  they
'were  old  enough.'*

*  About  the  first  of  March,  1827,  Henry  Brown,  esquire,  of  Batavia,  said
to  the  Grand  Commander  of  the  Knights  Templars  Encamped  at  Le  Roy,
called  at  Mrs.  Morgan's  lodgings,  and  exhibited  to  the  woman  with  whom
she  boarded,  a  bag,  containing,  as  he  said,  silver  dollars,  which  tie  professed
great  anxiety  to  give  to  her  without  delay.  Mrs.  Morgan  never  sent  ifor  th*
dollars,  and  they  were  taken  away  by  Mr.  Brown,  bat  it  is  not  known  tA
what  use  they  were  subsequently  appropriated.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  35B

Her  distress  of  mind,  and  unprotected  situation,  did  not  fail
to  excite  the  sympathy,  and  call  forth  the  kind  offices  of  those
whose  sensibilities  were  not  blunted  by  vice  or  hatred  to  her
husband.  To  compel  her,  by  dire  necessity,  to  cast  herself
upon  die  bounty  of  those  who  had  almost  avowed  their  agency
in  producing  the  sudden  calamity  which  had  come  upon  her,
and  had  declared  their  certain  knowledge  that  there  was  no
probability,  that  she  would  again  have  the  support  and  protection
of  her  husband  until  after  the  lapse  of  a  year,  if  ever,  could  not
be  tolerated.  Her  immediate  wants  were  provided  for,  and  an
agent  sent  to  Canandaigua  to  make  inquiries  into  the  fate  of
her  husband.  He  procured  the  information  contained  in  the
depositions,  No.  2,  3,  4,  5,  6;  and  7,  which  gave  such  an  ex-
traordinary aspect  to  the  transactions,  that  it  was  deemed  abso-
lutely necessary  to  lay  them  at  once  before  the  public,  at  a  meet-
ing called  for  that  purpose,  in  the  village  of  Batavia.  The  com-
mittee, appointed  at  that  meeting,  published  the  notice  contained
in  the  Appendix,  No.  12;  and  sent  an  agent  to  make  inquiries
along  the  road  from  Rochester  to  Lewiston  and  Fort  Niagara.

Hopes  were  for  many  weeks  entertained  that  he  was  merely
detained  in  confinement  until  the  suppression  of  his  book  could
be  effected  by  terror  or  negotiation:  but  week  after  week  passed
away,  and  no  correct  information  of  him  was  received.  In  this
state  of  suspense  and  anxiety,  circumstances  occurred  wbich  in
a  great  degree  destroyed  all  hopes  of  his  being  discovered,  and
created  the  most  unpleasant  feelings  in  the  community.  It  soon
became  manifest  to  the  committee  of  Genesee  county,  that  seve-
ral hundred  men  had  been  actually  concerned  in  different  parts
of  the  transactions  which  had  ended  in  his  disappearance.  Ma-
ny of  them  were  men  of  high  standing,  and  good  general  charac-
ters. Numbers  of  them,  without  hesitation,  openly  declared  that
Morgan  would  never  be  seen  again;  men,  who  had  frequently
asked  for,  and  obtained,  the  confidence  of  their  fellow  citizens,
unreservedly  justified  the  conduct  of  those  by  whom  he  had  been
kidnapped,  and  laughed  at  the  efforts  that  were  making  to  discov-
er his  fate.  The  distress  of  his  wife  was  spoken  of  with  con-
temptuous levity  in  the  streets.

Chesebro  had  assured  the  keeper  of  the  jail  at  Canandaigua,
that  Morgan  (had  gone  where  Miller  would  never  see  him  again.1
James  Ganson  exultingly  told  a  member  of  the  Genesee  com-
mittee, whom  he  met  in  the  streets  of  Rochester,  that  Morgan,
could  not  have  been  rescued  if  he  had  been  closely  followed  by
his  friends— that  if  the  committee  'could  hang,  draw;  and  quarter
<all  the  Masons  that  had  a  hand  in  it,  they  could  not  get  run*
Ff2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


354  uoht  o»  maso**?*

'back— i^h^wM^noidmd.Mwaif^whettymMiUm^
until  God  Almighty  should  call  for  AtW  Similar,  aad  wall  au-
thenticated, dscJaratioas  reached  up  from  the  usighhoriag  towns,
and  front  distant  places;  and  a  large  number  of  citizen*,  who
wore  understood  to  be  members  of  lodges,  spoke  of  the  occur-
rence with  a  visible  air  of  triumph.  The  members  of  the  com-
mittee, as  they  walked  the  streets,  were  several  times  asked  by
men  who  had  openly  justified  the  conduct  of  his  kidnappers,
'Well,  have  you  found  Morgan  yet?'

Various  efforts  were  made  to  deter  sosne  of  them  from  acting,  by
friendly  remonstrances,  byhiatoof  thegratl  disadvantage  it  would
be  to  them,  by  saying  they  wouW  raise  op  nuaaerou*  end  power-
ful enemies.  Many  decent  men  of  the  order  of  Hasoas  deelar-
<od,  'That  eflerts  to  learn  the  site  ef  Morgan  would  be  nseleao
'that  if  we  could  discover  the  guilty,  we  could  not  get  them  pan*
'ished;  that  they  had  acted  according  to  their  order*,  and  would
'be  borne  out— that  their  body  had  a  right  to  deal  with  their  own
'members  according  to  their  own  laws— that  if  they  had  done
'any  thing  with  him,  it  was  no  one's  business  hut  their  own."*
They  said  that  the  men  who  had  determined  to  suppress  the
book*  acted  in  a  body,  and  in  concert;  were  well  organized,  and
could  act  with  effect,  and  possessed  the  offices,  talenteand  wealth
of  the  country;  that  they  understood  one  another,  and  would  pur*
sue  with  their  vengeance  ail  who  should  interfere  with  diem.

Far  from  effecting  to  think  thai  Morgan  had  disappeared  vol-
untarily, and  for  sinister  purposes,  or  was  cottnding  with  his  kid-
nappers to  deceive  the  public,  and  excite  attention  to  his  book,
(the  first  part  of  which  was  not  then  published,  and  did  not  ap-
pear for  some  weeks  afterwards,)  we  heard  not  the  slightest  in*
stnuation  of  the  kind.  On  the  contrary,  his  abduction  was  spo-
ken of  as  having  defeated  the  publication;  and  we  believe  they,
in  general,  supposed  that  it*  suppression  was  accomplished;  and

*  A  similar  declaration,  in  relation  to  the  destruction  of  Miller's  office,
should  not  be  omitted.  Two  of  the  justices  <#tbe  peace,  residing  in  the
village  of  Batavia,  are  active  members  of  the  masonic  society.  On  the  day
when  Miller  was  taken  away,  they  were,  as  before  related,  attending  as  wit-
nesses before  a  magistrate  in  Bethany.  One  of  them  declared  to  a  member
of  the  Genessee  cosomitteo,  in  toe  presence  of  the  otbei,  that  "be  seed  not
'be  surprised  if,  when  he  returned  to  Batavia,  he  found  Miller's  office  level-
led with  the  ground.'  He  asked  them*  'if  they,  beint  justices  of  the  peace,
'thought  such  proceedings  right.*  *'Whv,'  said  onoof  them,  tf  you  found
*a  rasa  abusing  your  marriage  bfj^would  you  have  recourse  to  law,  or  take
'a  oluband  beat  hi* brains  outr  Tio*  person  bUII  holds  the  office  wai<*  ren-
^era  it  hi*  peculiar  duty  to  preserve  the  peace  of  the  county*  and  secure  by
"""*" -piisalice  or  imprisonment  the  persons  of  those  who  may  threaten  to


y  Google


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY*  355

were  extremely  mortified  and  disappointed  when  it  made  its  ap
pearaaee,  with  assurances  from  the  publisher  that  the  other  parts
of  the  work  had  been  finished  by  Morgan,  and  would  certainly
bepafckshed.*

We  now  resume  our  narrative  in  relation  to  the  fate  of  Mor-
gan, after  he  had,  as  before  related,  been  imprisoned  in  the  jail
at  Canandatgua.

The  next  evening  after  Morgan's  imprisonment  for  the  small
debt,  soon  after  dusk,  Loton  Lawson  called  at  the  jail,  and  de-
sired to  see  Morgan,  which,  after  some  objections  from  the  keep-
er, he  was  permitted  to  do,  He  proposed  paying  the  debt,  and
taking  Morgan  with  him  to  his  house,  a  short  distance  from  the
vRkge;  Morgan  seemed  willing  to  be  relieved,  but  expressed  an
inclination  to  wait  in  jail  until  the  next  morning,  and  retired  to  his
bed*  After  a  short  absence  Lawson  returned  again;  and  having
procured  a  carriage,  and  the  assistance  of  a  sufficient  number  oi
men,  he  eventually  obtained  the  consent  of  the  jailer's  wife,  who
was  acting  in  the  absence  of  her  husband,  to  the  discharge  of
Morgan,  and  he  accordingly  left  the  apartment  in  which  he  had
been  confined,  (Lawson  holding  him  by  the  arm,)  at  about  nine
o'clock  in  the  evening.  Almost  directly  in  front  of  the  jail  he  was
siezed  by  his  supposed  friend  Lawson,  and  some  other  person,
and  notwithstanding  his  struggles  and  cries  of  murder,  he  was  gag-
ged, and  led  away  from  the  jail  The  cry  of  murder,  and  the
appearance  tof  a  struggle  in  the  street,  excited  a  momentary  at-
tention from  the  people  living  in  the  vicinity  of  the  jail,  and  a  man
ran  out  to  ascertain  what  was  the  cause.  The  first  person  he
came  up  with  was  Col.  Edward  Sawyer,  who,  with  Nicholas  G.
Chesebro,  was  standing  near  by,  spectators  of  the  scene. —
When  asked  what  was  the  matter,  Col.  Sawyer  answered  him
promptly,  'Nothing,  only  a  man  has  been  let  out  of  jail,  and  has
been  taken  on  a  warrant,  and  is  going  to  be  tried.'  Receiving  -
this  answer  from  a  person  of  good  character,  whom  he  knew,  the

*  The  reader  will  readily  perceive  that  their  confidence  in  having  suppress-
ed the  work,  was  not  without  plausible  foundations.  Ketchum  had  obtain-
ed from  Mrs.  Morgan  the  original  manuscript  of  the  three  first  degrees:  (see
t  her  affidavit: )  they  were  delivered  to  her  by  Miller  for  the  purpose  of  nego-
tiating with  the  fraternity  for  the  restoration  of  her  husband,  after  he  had  no
further  use  for  them.  Goodwill)  Stone,  and  others,  had  surreptitiously  got-
ten several  of  the  sheets  into  their  possession,  when  they  broke  into  Morgan's
room;  and  they,  the  same  evening,  had  ransacked  every  place  at  his  lodgings*
where  they  could  hope  to  find  the  manuscripts.  Such  parts  of  the  imprint-
ed work  as  wars  then  completed,  and  had  not  been  delivered  to  Miller,  were
at  the  time  concealed  in  a  straw  bed,  in  the  room  from  which  Morgan  was
taken.


y  Google


356  LIGHT   ON   MABOWBY.

man  turned  about  and  declined  to  interfere.    Sawyer's  owa  ac-
count of  the  transactions,  and  the  part  he  took  in  it,  will  be  seen
by  the  copy  of  his  affidavit  in  the  Appendix,  No.  9.     The  car-
riage, after  having  left  Canandaigqa,  was  next  noticed  at  the  vil-
lage of  Victor:  it  was  first  driven  into  the  open  shed  of  a  tavern,
kept  by  Dr.  Thomas  Beach,  from  thence  into  the  yard  of  one
Enos  Gillis,  back  of  the  bam,  and  out  of  sight  of  the  road,  about
forty  rods  from  the  tavern  of  Beach.  James  Gillis  here  took  from
his  brother's  stable  a  horse,  which  he  mounted,  and  proceeded
on.     The  ostler  was  called  oi^to  get  ahorse  for  Lawson,  whom
he  knew.    James  Gillis,  who  .then  resided  at  Montmorency,  in
Pennsylvania,  a  brother  of  Enos  Gillis,  was  recognized  at  Victor
by  several  persons  who  knew  him  well,  and  was  seen  the  next
day  on  horseback  in  the  vicinity:  his  participation  in  the  transac-
tion will  account  for  the  assertion  of  George  Ketchum,  as  stated
in  Mrs.  Morgan's  affidavit,  'that  a  man  had  come  from  Pennsyl-
vania, and  had  taken  him  away  in  a  private  carriage.'    A  com-
parison of  these  assertions  and  circumstances  will  enable  the
reader  to  form  some  opinion  of  the  extent  of  the  conspiracy,
the  ample  preparations  that  had  been  made  to  effect  the  object  of
it,  and  the  accuracy  of  the  information  possessed  by  all-concern-
ed in  it,  as  to  who  were  the  principal  managers.     Gillis  disap-
peared immediately,  and  has  not  since  been  seen  in  this  state.  He
was  included  in  the  first  indictment  found  against  Lawson,  Saw-
yer, Ghesebro,  and  others,  but  as  yet  has  not  bee*  arrested  or
tried.    Enos  Gillis  also  soon  afterwards  left  the  country,  and  has
lately  moved  his  family  away,  and  since,  lie  was  examined  before
the  jury  in  November,  1 &Jt>,  has  always  been  absent  from  the
county  at  such  times  as  it  was  probable  he  would  be  called  on  to
testify.     After  leaying  Victor,  the  party  drove  to  Rochester,  28
miles  north  westerly  from  Canandaigua,  and  reached  Hanfbrd's
tavern,  about  three  miles  below  that  place,  a  little  after  day  light,
with  horses  very  much  fatigued.  Hubbard,  who  owned  and  drove
the  carriage,  when  applied  to ,  for  information  in  relation  to  his
employers,  and  his  journey,  gave  the  extraordinary  and  incredi-
ble account  detailed  in  the  affidavit  "of  Mr.  Fitch;*  and  when  af-
terwards examined  on  oath  before  the  grand  jury,  his  account
was  entirely  the  same:  he  has,  however,  been  since  indicted  as  a
conspirator,  but  has  not  yet  been  tried.  Before  the  Canandaigua
carriage  arrived  at  Rochester,  a  carriage  belonging  to  Ezra  Piatt,
a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  and  a  livery  stable  keeper  in  that  place,  was
procured,  and  sent  forward  in  advance  of  the  Canandaigua  car*

*  Appendix,  No.  7.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  357

nj,*nd  stapt  at  some  sequestered  place,  while  it  was  yet  dark,
e  vicinity  of  Hanford's  tavern.  The  Canandaigua  carriage,
on  its  arrival  at  Hanford's  tavern,  was  driven  under  a  shed,  op-
posite the  house,  before  any  of  the  party  alighted.  Two  men
then  got  out  of  it,  went  into  the  tavern,  and  requested  some  grain
for  their  horses,  and  something  to  drink  for  themselves:  they  drank
at  the  bar,  and  took  a  bottle  of  gin  and  a  glass  to  the  carriage.
One  of  the  men  remarked  to  the  other,  while  standing  on  the  steps
of  the  house,  4He  was  damned  glad  to  get  out  of  jail.'  This  ob-
servation attracted  Mrs.  Hanford's  attention,  as  she  suspected
from  it  that  a  person,  for  whom  one  of  her  neighbors  was  ball,  had
been  spirited  away  from  the  limits,  and  she  feared  her  neighbor
might  be  injured  by  it.  The  men  came  in  soon,  and  said  they  had
not  time  to  feed  their  horses,  and  did  not  want  the  grain.  All  that
had  alighted  returned  to  the  carriage,  except  one,  who  remained
walking  the  piazza.  This  tavern  stands  at  the  intersection  of  the
Lewiston  ridge  road  and  the  Genesee  river  road;  and  the  carriage
drove  out  upon  the  ridge  with  the  curtains  all  down:  it  was.  absent
nearly  an  hour,  and  returned  with  the  curtains  up,  and  a  man  on
ahorse,  (also  belonging  to  the  same  Ezra  Piatt,)  riding  before  it.
This  man*  was  recognized  as  being  the  same  person  who  bad  come
to  the  tavern  and  made  inquiries  for  a  carriage  of  such  descrip-
tion, and  the  direction  it  had  taken,  and  who,  upon  being  informed,
had  immediately  rode  in  the  direction  which  he  was  told  the  car-
riage had  taken;  and  the  informant  has  declared  that  he  recogniz-
ed the  rider  in  the  person  of  Edward  Doyle,  of  Rochester,  a
merchant.*  Hubbard  deposed  before  the  grand  jury,  that  the
persons  whom  he  took  from  Canandaigua  left  his  carriage  in  a
secluded  place,  a  short  distance  from  Hanford's,  and  entered  into

*  On  the  trial  of  Chesebro,  Sawyer,  Lawson,  and  Sheldon,  for  kidnapping
William  Morgan,  Burrage  Smith  and  John  Whitney  were  called  as  witnesses.
Both  of  them  objected  to  answering  any  questions,  because  to  do  so  would
criminate  themselves:  after  being  well  instructed  by  the  court  as  to  the  na-
ture of  this  privilege,  they  in  substance  deposed— That  they  were  at  Lewis-
ton  on  the  14th  of  September;  that  two  or  three  days  before  that  day,  they
went  together  from  Rochester,  (where  they  lived,  and  had  families,)  to  Can-
andaigua, where  they  arrived  about  3  o'clock,  P.  M.  that  they  heard  that
Morgan  was  in  jail  at  that  place;  that  they  saw  Lawson  in  the  evening;  that
they  heard  Lawson  converse  that  night  about  the  taking  away  of  Morgan,  in
company  with  three  or  four  others.  Smith  admitted  that  he  left  Canandai-
gua the  night  Morgan  was  taken  awstf,  and  as  he  said,  Drobably  about
8  o'clock.  Whitney  refused  to  say  at  what  time  he  had  left  Canandaigua.
because  it  would  criminate  him,  and  the  court  decided  that  he  Was  not  bound
to  answer  the  question.  A  few  days  after  the  trial,  these  twoimen  abscond-
ed, leaving  their  families  at  Rochester,  where  they  were  both  tengag *■"?***
gular  business.  They  had  before  enjoyed  a  respectable  standing  in  that  p  ac  ,
and  were  generally  considered  thnvmgmen.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


358  LIGHT  Oil   MASOHBY.

the  Rochester  carriage,  which  proceeded  along  the  ridge  road.
It  was  next  noticed  at  Clarkson,  fifteen  miles  furthefwest,  about
nine  o'clock  in  the  morning.  It  was  an  extremely  warm  day,  and
the  singularity  of  the  circumstances,  that  the  curtains  were  all
closed  in  a  warm  morning,  attracted  attention — the  carriage  made
a  short  stop  in  the  middle  of  the  street,  which  also  attracted  some
notice.  No  person  alighted,  except  the  driver,  who  went  into
Baldwin's  tavern,  and  then  immediately  proceeded  onward.

The  horses  were  exchanged  about  two  and  a  half  miles  west
of  Clarkson,  at  the  house  of  one  Allen,  whose  horses  were  taken
from  the  field  for  that  purpose.  Here,  too,  the  carriage  remained
closed,  and  no  one  alighted  while  the  horses  were  changed.  The
person  who  drove  the  carriage  from  Rochester  to  this  place,  as
soon  as  inquiries  in  rotation  to  the  transaction  were  set  on  foot,
left  the  country,  and  has  not  yet  returned.  The  carriage  arrived
at  the  village  of  Gaines,  about  12  o'clock,  closed  in  the  same
manner  as  at  Clarkson;  passed  through  the  village  without  stop-
ping, and  proceeded  about  one  mile  west  of  the  village,  where  it
stopped  in  the  road  at  a  distance  from  any  house.  Ehhu  Mather,
of  that  place,  took  a  pair  of  horses  belonging  to  his  brother,
James  Mather,  and  overtook  the  carriage,  about  one  mile  from
Gaines,  where  the  horses  were  exchanged  in  the  middle  of  the
road,  and  at  a  distance  from  any  house.  Mather  himself  then
mounted  the  box,  and  drove  on,  which  circumstance  excited  ob-
servation, as  he  is  a  man  of  property,  at  the  head  of  a  large  tan*
riing  establishment,  and  of  course  not  accustomed  to  be  seen  in
such  employment.  On  his  return,  he  stopped  at  Hughes'  tavern
— said  he  had  driven  the  carriage  for  his  brother  to  Morehouse's
tavern,  and  added,  'I  think  I  make  a  good  stage  driver,  do  I  not?
At  Ridgeway,  one  Jeremiah  Brown,  supervisor  of  that  town,  and
lately  a  member  of  the  legislature,  suddenly  took  his  horses  from
the  field,  where  they  were  hitched  to  a  harrow,  led  them  to  the
nearest  public  house,  where  they  were  fed,  and  then  harnessed
them  to  the  carriage,  and  mounted  the  box  himself,  and  drove  on.*
About,  or  shortly  before  sun  down,  the  carriage  arrived  at  Wright's
tavern,  nearly  north  of  the  village  of  Lockport,  and,  instead  of
driving  up  to  the  door  of  the  house,  it  was  driven  into  the  barn,
and  out  of  sight.  The  persons  who  came  with  it,  guarded  the  barn
and  carriage  in  such  a  manner  as  to  keep  off  all  persons  from
seeing  the  carriage. f  A  large*  number  of  men  were  seen  assem-
bled at  Wright's,  some  of  whom  appeared  to  be  armed  with

*  See  note  in  the  Appendix,  No,  30.

t  Between  the  house  and  barn  there  was  a  large  open  shed,  amply  snfi>
*iont  to  cover  many  carriages  and  horses.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  OH  MASONKT.  359

clubs,  and  the  horse  of  Wright  wis  kept  standing  all  night  at  the
post,  saddled.  Much  whispering  and  clustering  was  observed,
and  it  was  rumored  or  given  out  that  they  were  collected  for  the
purpose  of  preventing  the  escape  or  rescue  of  a  prisoner,  under
the  charge  of  the  people  in  the  carriage.  The  next  day  a  niece
of  the  innkeeper  told  one  of  the  neighbors,  that  they  hadprepared
supper  for  a  number  of  Masons,  and  had  received  previous  no-
tice to  be  ready  for  them.  About  10  o'clock  at  night,  the  gate
keeper  heard  the  carriage  pass  the  toll  house,  distant  a  few  rods
from  Wright's  tavern,  very  quietly,  and  supposing  it  was  intended
to  pass  without  paying  toll,  he  went  hastily  to  the  door.  On  open-
ing it,  he  found  Brown  standing  in  front  of  it,  holding  the  toll
money  in  his  hand,  but  the  carriage  had  passed  on  a  short  dis-
tance. Being  well  acquainted  with  Brown,  he  asked  him  familiar-
ly, 'What  is  the  great  hurry.'  Brown  answered  nothing,  and
immediately  went  to  the  carriage,  which  drove  off  with  great


About  sunrise,  the  next  morning,  the  same  carriage  repassed
the  gate,  driven  by  Mather,  the  curtains  up,  and  Brown,  the  only
passenger,  asleep,  or  pretending  to  be  so.     Maxwell,  the  gate
keeper,  asked  the  person  driving,  'How  far  did  you  go  last  night;
did  you  go  to  Lewiston?'     He  answered,  with  a  little  hesitation,
cNo,  not  so  far.'     This,  as  relates  to  the  carriage,  was  a  false-
hood, as  will  be  seen  by  the  subsequent  narration.     The  distance
from  Wright's  to  Mollineux's  tavern,  in  Cambria,  is  about  six
miles,  and  from  thence  to  Lewiston,  is  thirteen  miles.     About
11  o'clock  at  night,  of  the  same  13th  of  September,  Eli  Bruce,
then  and  now  the  high  sheriff  of  Niagara  county,  who  resides  at
Lockport,  about  four  miles  from  the  ridge  road,  arrived  at  Mol-
lineux's tavern,  in  company  with  the  carriage  driven  by  Brown.*
It  stopped  in  front  of  the  house,  the  curtains  being  closed  quite
round.    Bruce  went  into  the  house  and  inquired  for  the  landlord,
who  was  in  bed.    He  was  shown  to  his  room  by  a  hired  girl,  the
only  person  up.     After  a  short  conversation  in  private  with  the
landlord,  Bruce  called  up  his  son,  and  desired  him  to  put  a  pair
of  horses  before  the  carriage,  to  go  as  far  as  Lewiston.     Trie


*  A  few  minutes  before  Bruce  arrived  with  the  carriage,  a  man  rode  up,  on
horseback,  to  the  same  tavern,  and  inquired  for  Col.  Mollineux,  a  son  of  the-
tavern  keeper,  and  a  member  of  the  fraternity;  and  being  told  that  he  bad
gone  to  Lewiston,  rode  off  at  a  quick  rate  eastward,  and  returned  with  the  car-
riage. From  this,  and  similar  inquiries  and  occurrences  at  Hanford's,  ana
other  places,  the  reader  will  observe  how  accurate  was  the  information  pos-
sessed by  the  conspirators,  as  to  the  time  when  the  carriage  would  arrive  a
places  sixty  miles  distant  from  each  other,  and  he  may  form  some  op
of  the  extent  of  the  conspiracy,  and  the  number  concerned  in  n.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


360  LIGHT  OK   MASONRY.

son  expressed  to  Brace  his  desire  to  drive  himself,  as  the  horses
were  young,  and  he  did  not  like  to  trust  them  with  other  persons:
Bruce  objected  to  his  doing  so,  and  said  he  had  a  careful  driver,
pointing  to  a  man  who  he  (young  Mollineux)  knew  to  be  Jere-
miah Brown.  The  apparent  hurry,  and  the  circumstance  that
Bruce  was  sheriff  of  the  county,  induced  the  girl  to  inquire  of
Bruce  what  was  the  matter.  He  answered, '  You  cannot  know  at
present.'  The  carriage  soon  afterwards  started  for  Lewiston,
driven  by  Brown,  and  Mather  remained  at  Mollineux' a.  Brown
returned  with  the  same  carriage  before  day  light,  having  travel-
'  led  a  distance  of  twenty-six  miles  in  about  five  hours.  The  horses
were  so  much  jaded  that  young  Mollineux  was  very  angry  at  their
usage,  and  declared  to  a  relation  'that  Bruce  should  never  have
his  horses  again  to  drive  in  that  fashion.'

Sometime  in  the  night  of  the  same  13th  of  September,  the  car-
riage arrived  at  Lewiston,  70  miles  westerly  from  Rochester.
Bruce,  and  Samuel  Barton  of  Lewiston,  one  of  the  stage  pro-
prietors, went  together  into  the  stage  office  at  Lewiston,  and
Barton  inquired  of  Joshua  Fairbanks,  (who  kept  the  stage  books y
and  usually  slept  in  the  office,)  what  drivers  were  at  home.
Fairbanks  answered  him,  none  but  Fox,  who  was  asleep  in  an
adjoining  room.  Barton  immediately  called  up  Fox,  and  soon
left  the  office,  followed  by  Bruce,  When  Fox  went  out,  Bar-
ton told  him  to  get  up  a  carriage,  and  drive  some  gentlemen  to
Youngstown.  The  carriage  was  accordingly  got  ready  by  Fox,
who  drove  it  up  to  the  front  door  of  the  tavern,  called  the  Frontier
House,  where  he  found  Bruce  waiting,  who  immediately  got  into
it,  and  told  him  to  drive  round  the  house  into  a  back  street,  where
he  drove  accordingly,  and  found  a  carriage  standing  in  the  mid-
dle of  the  street,  in  front  of  Samuel  Barton's  dwelling  house.
The  horses  had  been  taken  from  it,  and  the  curtains  were  all
closed:  he  drove  along  side  of  that  carriage,  but  remained  on  his
seat.  Here  Bruce  got  out,  and  Fox  then  saw  him  and  another
man  assist  a  third  man  to  get  out  of  one  carriage  into  the  other,*
they  then  both  entered  the  carriage,  and  Bruce  told  Fox  to  drive/

*  Another  witness  deposed,  that  on  the  morning  of  the  14th  September,
1826,  he  was  up  taking  care  of  a  sick  person  about  one  or  two. o'clock;  that
he  looked  towards  Samuel  Barton's  stage  barn;  saw  a  carriage  and  horses,
driven  near  a  carriage  without  horses;  saw  three  men  go  from  the  standing
carriage,  to  the  one  with  horses;  one  of  the  men  appeared  to  have  a  handker-
chief around  his  head,  and  to  be  intoxicated,  and  was  helped  by  the  other
two .  Sometime  afterwards  he  saw  aman  in  Lewiston,  whom  he  believed  was
the  same  he  saw  at  the  carriage:  asked  who  he  was,  and  was  told  it  was  ER
Bruce:  knew  the  driver  at  the  time—it  was  Corydon  Fox:  he  stood  about
iOO  feet  from  the  carriage;  it  was  a  bright  moonlight  night.  '

»

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  361

Km.  During,  all  this  time,  as  Fox  deposed,  not  a  word  was  said;
not  even  a  whisper  heard  from  any  one  of  the  three  men.  The
carriage  then  proceeded  to  Youngstown,  a -distance  of  six  miles,
daring  all  which  time,  the  same  profound  silence  seemed  to  he
preserved  by  those  in  the  carriage.  At  Youngstown,  the  car-
riage stopped  by  order  of  Bruce,  in  the  street  in  front  of  the
house  occupied  by  Col.  William  King;  then  Bruce  got  out,  and
knocked  at  the  door,  and  called  up  Col.  King;  the  door  was  soon
opened,  and  a  light  soon  after  seen  in  the  house,  where  Bruce
remained  aj>out  fifteen  minutes:  during  that  time,  the  driver
heard  something  said  by  a  person  in  the  carriage,  which  appear-
ed to  him  a  call  for  water;  tfruce  appeared  to  hear  the  voice,  and
replied,  'Yea,  yes,  you  shall  have  some;'  no  water,  however,  was
brought  to  the  carriage.  King  came  out  of  the  door,  and  with
Bruce  got  into  the  carriage,  and  Bruce  directed  the  driver  to  go
on,  when  the  carriage  proceeded  towards  Fort  Niagara;  which  is
about  one  mile  distant  from  Youngstown.  About  eighty  rods  from
the  Fort,  near  the  grave  yard,  Bruce  ordered  him  to  stop,  which
he  did;  but  (as  he  said)  still  did  not  leave  his  seat,  when  four
persons  left  the  carriage,  and  walked  from  it  in  a  huddle  (as  he
expressed  it)  towards  the  Fort:  when  they  had  proceeded  a  short
distance  from  the  carriage,  Bruce  told  him  he  might  go  back
about  his  business;  and  he  (Fox)  returned  with  the  carriage,  to
Lewiston,  empty,

The  next  day  Fox  mentioned  the  singularity  of  the  circum-
stances attending  his  jaunt  to  Paul  Mosher,  a  Mason;  and  told
him,  he  (Fox)  thought  he  heard  King  say,  as  he  came  to  the  car-
riage, i  What,  Morgan,  are  you  here!'  Mosher  being  struck  with
the  strangeness  of  the  transaction,  asked  another  member  of  the
lodge  what  it  meant?  who  told  him  'he  believed  it  was  Morgan/
He  made  similar  inquiries  of  another  Mason,  who  told  him  'it
was  Morgan,  for  Bruce  told  him  so.'  In  the  forenoon  of  the
same  day,  September  14th,  Mosher  saw  Bruce  at  Lewiston,  and
asked  him  why  he  was  so  imprudent  as  to  have  the  driver  he  did,
for  he  was  not  a  Mason:  Bruce  answered  that  Sam  (meaning
Samuel  Barton,)  was  more  in  fault  than  he  was,  for  he  told  him
to  send  a  Mason.  Mosher  asked  Bruce  if  he  actually  had  Mor-
gan, who  answered  that  he  had.  On  the  same  day,  S.  Barton,
asked  Mosher  if  Fox  mistrusted  that  Morgan  was  in  die  carriage:
Mosher  told  him  that  Fo«  was  telling  the  circumstance  about  the
Tillage.  Barton  then  told  him  to  say  to  Fox,  if  he  knew  any
4)ung  he  must  keep  it  to  himself,  and  hold  his  tongue,  or  he  wouIA
^discharge  him;  and  at  the  same  time  remarked  to  Mosher  that
&ere  must  be  another  man  smuggled  away,  to  blind  that  trans-

/KJkOOQU


362  LIGHT   OS  MAS05KT.

action;  that  Masher  being  a  Mason,  ought  to  have  been  sent,
bat  having  been  called  up  in  the  night,  in  his  hurry  he  did  not
think.*

Thus  far  we  have  positive  testimony,  sufficient,  we  think,  to
prove  most  satisfactorily  that  YVm.  Morgan  was,  in  Hie  manner
we  have  related,  conducted  to  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Niagara;  and
here  our  direct  and  positive  proof  ends:  but  the  facts  and  cir-
cumstances hereafter  detailed,  are  authenticated  by  unquestiona-
ble testimony,  and  will  be  submitted  to  the  reader  that  he  may
draw  such  conclusions  as  he  shall  think  they  warrant.

The  Fort  at  that  trate  was  unoccupied,  except  by  the  keep-
er and  his  wife;  and  there  is  no  dwelling  house  near  it  excepting
a  small  ferry  house,  directly  on  the*  bank  of  the  river,  occupied
by  Mr.  Giddins,  who  then  occasionally  entertained  travellers,
and  has  had  charge  of  the  Fort  from  May,  1S26,  when  the  troops
left  it,  until  August  1st,  1826,  when  he  surrendered  it  to  the  care
of  the  person  who  still  has  charge  of  it.  The  magazine  is  a
very  strong  building,  the  entrance  to  which  is  secured  by  two
doors:  the  first  or  outside  door  is  usually  fastened  by  an  iron  bolt,
secured  from  being  slipped  by  a  padlock;  the  inside  door  is  made
of  white  oak  plank,  cased  on  the  outside  with  sheet  iron,  and
was  originally  fastened  by  a  large  stock  lock,  nailed  to  a  large
piece  of  white  oak  plank,  which  had  been  nailed  to  the  inner
side  of  the  door,  with  wrought  nails  of  a  large  size.  Directly
opposite  to  the  inside  door  is  a  thick  stone  wall,  forming  one
side  of  a  stone  portico,  built  around  Oho  inner  door  which  opens
into  the  portion,  and  is  furnished  with  a  large  wooden  handle,
spiked  on,  to  facilitate  the  pulling  of  it  open.  No  light  can  en-
ter the  building  except  from  two  very  small  windows,  very  near
the  ridge  of  the  roof,  elevated  abSut  fifteen  feet  from  the  floor.
The  keys  have  usually  hung  in  the  open  entry  of  the  mess  room,
a  very  large  building  occupied  by  the  keeper.  It  will  be  seen  by
the  affidavit  of  Giddrns,t  (who  is  a  member  of  the  masonic  so-
ciety,) that  he  surrendered  the  building  to  the  present  keeper  on
the  first  of  August,  in  perfect  order;  that  the  empty  ammunition
boxes  were  ranged  along  the  walls*  at  the  distance  of  about  a
foot  from  "them;  that  he  recollects  ef  no  loose  door  being  inside
of  the  building,  when  he  delivered  it  up  to  the  present  keeper*
and  should  not  have  considered  it  proper  to  leave  that,  or  any
ether  thing  there,  whieh  did  net  properly  belong  to  it;  that  it  was,
as  usual,  white  washe$onthe  inside,  about  the  l*t of  May.  lnthe
•  month  of  January  !ast*(1887,)lhtt

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


UGHT   ON  MASONRY.  363

of  gentlemen  from  different  counties,  who  wew  members  of  the
committees  appointed  at  meetings  of  tbe  citizens;  and  in  March,
1827,  it  was  again  examined  by  three  of  those  who  have  signed
this  narrative,  for  the  express  purpose  of  reexamination,  and  to
ascertain  as  far  as  possible,  the  accuracy  of  the  opinion  formed,
and  the  facts  stated,  by  the  person  who  first  visited  it  for  investi-
gation. It  was  found  that  one  of  the  floor  planks  had  been  bro-
ken up;  that  part  of  the  floor  was  covered  with  the  loose  door,
mentioned  in  the  affidavit  of  Mr.  Giddins,  on  which  were  piled
a  number  of  the  empty  ammunition  boxes.  The  large  stock  lock,
and  the  block  to  which  it  was  nailed,  were  found  knocked  off,
and  marks  on  the  door  showed  that  they  had  been  forced  off  by
striking  on  the  upper  edge  of  them;  this  was  also  evidenced  by
the  bend  of  the  wrought  nails,  and  the  appearances  of  the  holes
from  which  the  nails  had  been  .forced:  this  lock  and  block  had
manifestly  been  thrown  with  great  force,  and  very  many  times,
against  the  door,  at  the  upper  corners;  and  the  blows  had  been  so
continually  repeated ,  that  the  door  was  bruised  in  two  places,  so
as  to  make  it  easy  to  pick  splinters  from  the  oak  plank,  which
was  done  by  one  of.  the  visiters:  a  corresponding  bruise  was
found  on  one  comer  of  the  lock  and  block.  Outside  of  the  in-
ner door  was  found  a  piece  of  wide  pine  board,  one  end  of  which
had  been  recently  sawed  in  an  irregular  line  across  to  a  length
which  made  it  reach  exactly  from  under  the  large  handle  on  the  out-
side of  the  inner  door,  to  the  bottom  of  the  stone  wall  opposite,
and  when  placed  in  that  position  it  effectually  prevented  the  inner
door  from  being  pushed  open  from  the  inside,  after  the  lock  was
forced  off.  The  rust  of  the  sheet  iron  was  found  on  the  edge  of
the  hoard;  and  corresponding  marks  were  distinctly  observed  on
the  door  directly  under  the  handle.

Neither  Mr.  Giddins,  or  the  men  keeper,  could  give  any  ac-
count of  the  manner  in  which  the  lock  )iad  been  taken  off,  or  the
bruises  on  the  door,  or  why  the  b#ard  had  been  used;  and  neither
of  them  recollected  ever  to  have  noticed  these  appearances  be-
fore they  were  pointed  out  at  that  time.  Outside  of  the  door,
and  very  near  it,  was  found  an  ammunition  box,  which  was
seen  there  in  October  previous,  and  the  bottom  of  which  was
covered  almost  two  inches  thick,  with  a  substance  that  two  per-
sons who  then  saw  it,  supposed  to  be  human  excrements.  "When
seen  in  March,  the  bpttom  was  clean,  but  one  <d  the  sides  was
still  stained.  From  these  circumstances,  the  persons  who  visit-
ed the  place  in  March,  were  perfectly  satisfied,  that  after  Gid-
dins had  surrendered  the  care  of  the  Fort,  in  August,  some  per-
son had  been  confined  in  the  magazine,  who  had  made  violent

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


364  LIGHT   OH  MASOKRT.

and  reiterated  efforts  to  force  nts  way  out,  and  that  these  efforts
must  have  been  attended  with  much  noise.  How  far  these  ap-
pearances will  account  for  the  declaration  of  Barton,  made  on  the
14th  of  September,  that  there  was  trouble  at  the  Fort,  the  reader
must  conjecture  for  himself.

Mr.  Giddins  was  distinctly  asked  by  one  of  the  visiters  in
March,  whether  he  had  not,  on  the  night  of  the  13th  of  Septem-
ber, seen  Bruce  and  King,  and  was  not  called  up  by  them.  He
declined  answering  the  question,  saying  that  when  legally  called
on,  he  would  attest  to  all  he  knew.  He  was  then  told  that  his
declining  to  answer  so  plain  a  question,  left  on  the  mind  of  the
person  who  asked  him,  the  inevitable  impression  that  he  had  seen
them,  and  would  probably  make  the  same  impression  on  the  minds
of  others — to  which  he  made  no  answer  or  observation.

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  of  September,  a  party  of  ladies
and  gentlemen  went  into  the  steam  boat,  Martha  Ogden,  from
Youngstown  to  Lewiston,  to  attend  the  installation  of  a  chapter,
which  was  to  take  place  that  day:  on  board  the  boat  was  Bruce T
King,  Mrs.  Giddins,  and  other  ladies.  During  the  voyage,  one.
of  the  ladies  familiarly  asked  Bruce  what  he  meant  by  going
about  at  nights,  and  disturbing  people,  and  calling  up  her  hus-
band. Yes,  observed  Mrs.  Giddins,  they  came  too  and  routed
up  my  poor  husband.

The  certificate  of  the  magistrate,  and  the  affidavit  of  Mosher,
were  transmitted  by  the  Genesee  committee  to  the  governor,  for
the  purpose  of  obtaining  his  proclamation,  offering  a  reward  for
the  discovery  of  Morgan,  or  his  murderers.  On  the  suggestion
of  his  excellency,  a  regular  complaint  was  made  against  Bruce*
and  laid  before  him.  To  obviate  the  charge,  Bruce  transmitted
to  him  affidavits,  impeaching  the  character  of  Mosher,  and  his
motives  of  action,  but  did  not  attempt  to  deny  or  explain  by  his
own  depositions,  or  that  of  any  other  person,  the  part  attributed
to  him;  nor  did  he  produce  the  deposi tiorf  of  Barton,  or  Mol{ineux,
or  any  othei  person,  to  show  what  was  the  occasion  of  the  extra-
ordinary course  he  had  pursued.*

A  reverend  clergyman,  residing  in  the  village  of  Lewiston,  and
a  member  of  the  masonic  lodge,  or  society,  declared  in  Batavm
to  the  gentleman,  at  whose  house  he  lodged,  while  attending  the*
synod  in  the  month  of  September,  1826,  that  Morgan  had  passed
through  Lewistpo  on  his  way  to  Canada.  -When  requested  by  n
member  of  the  Genesee  committee  to  give  what  information  he

*  We  are  officially  informed  that  his  excellency  has  told  the  counselor
Bruce  that  he  shall  expect  a  satisfactory  accoant  of  his  proceedings  on  tho

*3th  and  1 4th  of  September,  before  he  pronounces  his  acquittal*

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON  &IASONRT.  365

possessed  on  the  subject,  ho  declared,  that  on  the  morning  of  the
14th  of  September,  about  ten  o'clock,  P.  M.  he  was  going  to
the  house  where  the  lodge  was  to  meet,  and  heard  some  person
in  the  crowd,  assembled  in  front  of  the  bouse,  say  that  Morgan
had  passed  on  tha  night  before  to  Canada,  but  he  declined  saying,
or  did  not  recollejR,  who  had  made  the  assertion.*

On  the  nighrbf  the  14th  of  September,  1826,  nine  persons  or-
dered supper  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Giddins,  live  of  whom  were
known  to  him.  They  aU  left  his  house  at  about  eleven  o'clock
at  night;  and  he  could  not  tell  where  they  had  spent  the  jest  of
the  night.  They  did  not  lodge  and  were  hot  seen  that  night  at
either  of  the  taverns  in  the  village  of  Youngstown.  The  next
morning  before  day  light,  and  between  the  hours  of  three  and  four
o'clock,  four  of  the  five  men  designated  by  Giddins,  and  anoth-
er man,  were  seen  by.  Josiah  Try  on,  whose  deposition  will  be
found  in  the  Appendix,  travelling  on  foot  about  two  miles  from
Lewiston,  and  about  five  miles  from  the  house  of  Giddins,  walk-
ing towards  Lewiston,  where  three  of  them  resided.  One  of  the
other  two  resided  at  the  Falls  of  Niagara,  and  one  at  Black  Rock.

On  the  afternoon  of  September  the  14th,  Samuel  Barton  told
Mosher,  who  was  then  in  his  employment,  to  borrow  a  saddle
andbridle,  and  put  them  on  a  horse  as  soon  as  possible,  and  hitch
him  beside  another  horse,  then  standing  under  the  shed.  He  did
as  directed,  and  found  that  the  latter  horse  appeared  to  have  been
ridden  very  fast  carton  said  to  Mosher  that  'he  had  heard
from  the  Fort,  and  must  send  a  man  down,  for  he  was  afraid
there  would  be  trouble  yet.'  The  two  horses  were  rode  off  the
same  afternoon;  one  by  a  Mason  resident  at  Lewiston,  the  other
by  a  person  whom  he  did  not  know.  Next  morning  Mosher
asked  Barton  if  there  was  any  trouble  at  the  Fort,  to  which  Bar-
ton answered,  'I  guess  it  is  still  enough  now.'

It  is  known  to  many  persons,  that,  in  a  letter  written  by  ono  of
the  gentlemen  who  visited  Niagara,  in  January  last,  it  was  stated
that  Morgan  had  been  taken  to  the  house  of  a  member  of  par-
liament, residing  in  the  village  of  Newark,  or  Niagara,  in  Upper
Canada.  This  assertion  was  erroneous,  and  it  occurred  in  part
from  haste,  or  want  of  care,  in  writing  a  confidential  letter,  and
in  pari  from  misapprehension  of  the  information  given  by  Wil-
liam Terry,  of  that  place,  who  had  received  his  information  from

*  How  could  such  a  report  have  gotten  about  in  that  place  a  few  hows-
after  the  mysterious  carriage  left  the  front  of  Barton's  house,  unless  some
person  knew  the  fact,  or  some  circumstances  were  known  which  created  that
belief  among  some  of  those  who  had  assembled  there.  Burrage  Smith,
-Mm  Whitney*  Loton  Uwjftm,  Eli  Bruce,  were  all  at  Lewiston  on  that  day.
Qq2


30*  LJGSff  ON  MJLWOmt*

one  Stocking,  »  respectable  batter  living  in  that  town.  The  in-
tormatioo  intended  to  be  given  by  Mr.  Terry,  will  be  seen  by
reading  hie  depoeiteon,  contained  in  the  Appendix.  The  MasOn,
before  whom  Morgan  was  said  to  hare  been  taken,  Is  now  un-
derstood to  hare  been  a  Mr^  M'Bride,  a  member  of  the  provin-
cial  parliament  His  letter,  purporting  to  be- a  contradiction,  or
denial  of  the  facts  stated  in  the  letter  first  mentioned,  will  bo
found  in  the  Appendix.  Since  the  publication  of  these  tetters,
M'Bride  and  Stocking  called  upon  Mr.  Terry,  in  company  of
Dr.  Chapia,  and  in  presence  of  a  large  number  of  respectable
inhabitants  of  Niagara,  for  the  purpose  of  explanation.  At  this
meeting  Terry  distinctly  declared,  'Stocking  you  said  that
M'Bride  saw  the  man;  that  he  was  here  onftrasside  the  water,«nd  -
he  saw  him.'  Stocking,  then  acknowledged  that  he  had  named
M'Bride.  M'Bride  appeared  to  drop  his  head  and  eyes,  and
said,  'he  did  not  see  what  right  any  man  under  heavens  had  to
say  that;'  but  did  not  deny  that  be  said  any  tang  of  the  kind  to
Stocking,  nor  declare  in  any  other  way  that  he  did  not  see  Mor-
gan, or  that  he  knew  nothing  of  the  transaction,  jlre  have  been
informed  by  those  whose  veracity  we  have  no  reason  to  question,
that  the  worthy  and  respectable  gentleman  alluded  to  in  the  let-
ter of  M'Bride,  as  having  slept  that  Bight  at  his  house,  has  dis-
tinctly declared,  that  late  in  the  night  alluded  to,  M'Bride  was
called  up  by  a  loud  rap  on  the  door,  which  qwoke  the  lodgers,
who,  with  his  wife,  arose  from  bed,  and  looked  out  the  window;
they  saw  two  men  near  the  house.  M'Bride  dreased  himself?
and  went  away  with  thera,  and  was  gone  about  half  an  hour,
perhaps  ;more  that  on  the  next  morning  he  did  net  mention  or

■    explain  the  circumstance.

That  after  M'Bride  bad  prepared  his  letter,  and  before  its
publication,  he  submitted  it  to  the  perusal  of  the  same  gentle-
men to  whom  he  alluded;  after  looking  it  over,  his  friend  ebeerv-
ed  in  •substance  to  M'Bride,  'Your  letter  does  not  amount  to  a
full  denial;  you  4o  not  say  you  did  not  see  Morgan.'  M'Bride
replied,  intimating  that  k  was  fuM  enough.

It  will  be  readily  perceived  that  the*  assertions  of  M'Bride*  nr
his  letter,  'that  Morgan  was  not,  on  the  night  of  the  14th  of  Sep-
tember,' 1826,  at  his  home;  that  Morgan  is  to  him  an  utter  stran-
ger; that  he  never  exchanged  a  word' with  bun  in  hie  Mfe$  and
would  not  know  him  from  the  greatest  stranger  in  existence^
may  all  be  perfectly  true,  and  yet  are  perfectly  reconcilable  witfc
tbe Tracts  that  Moigau  was  taken  to  the  British  side  of  the  river,

•    and  was  seen,  by  M'Bride^  and  km  omission  to  declare  io  his  let-
ter, (and  that,  too,  after  the  observation  of  his  friend,)  and  before

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON  MASONRV,  307

Mr.  Terry,  and  his  townsman,  that  he  never  saw  Morgan,  and
had  no  knowledge  of  his  abduction  on  the  night  of  the  13th  of
September,  (not  the  14th,)  or  any  other  night,  or  day,  or  was  ap-
plied to,  to  assist  in  disposing  ef  him,  like  the  silence  of  Giddins,
amounts  to  very  strong  presumptive  proof,  that,  in  fact,  he  did,  on
the  night  of  the  13th  of  September,  or  morning  of  the  14th,  have
an  interview  with  some  persons  who  he  knew  had  Morgan  under
their  control,  and,  in  fact,  that  he  did  see  him.

About  the  1st  of  November,  and  before  the  publication  of  the
Governor's  first  proclamation  offering  a  reward  for  the  discovery
of  Morgan,  and  the  conviction  of  his  kidnappers,  and  before  se-
rious apprefceitsiona  of  his  murder  was  entertained,  and  before
any  investigations  had  been  made  along  the  ridge  road,  a  re-
spectable inhabitant  of  Niagara  county,  Sylvester  R.  Hatha  way,
called  upon  a  member  of  the  Genesee  committee,  whom  he  met
at  Lockport,  and  informed  him  'that  he  had  been  for  some  time
past,  working  pn  the  Wetland  Canal;  that  a  friend  who  resided  in
Canada  near  the  canal  had  a  few  days  before  called  on  him,  and
exacted  a  promise  frdm  him  to  go  to  Batavia,  and  communicate  to
the  committee  that  Morgan  had*  been  taken  to  Fort  Niagara,  in
the  night,  put  into  the  Fort,  and  detained  there  three  or  four  days;
thai  they  tried  to  get  the  Masons  on  tile  Canada  side  to  take  him,
but  they  refused;  that  afterwards,  two  ruffians  had  taken  him  out;
and  cut  his  throat,  and  tied  his  body  to  a  rope  and  .stone,  and
threw  it  into  the  lake;  mat  he  had  been  told  so  by  Masons,  of
winch  society  he  was  a  member,  and  that  he  conscientiously  be-
lieved it;  that  his  name  must  not  be  used,  or  given  in,  for  if  it  was
known  that  he  had  informed,  he  should  fare  no  better/  The
messenger  assured  us  that  his  informant  was  a 'grave  respectable
man  of  the  society  of  Friends,  and  not  inclined  to  confide  in,  or
to  repeat  idle  tales,  or  improbable  stories.  Tins  communica-
tion was  not  made  known  even  to  the  other  members  of  the  com-
mittees, nor  any  other  person,  excepting  .the  governor  of  the  state,
until  some  time  after  the  examination  took  place  in  January,  and
after  two  other  accounts  were  distinctly  stated  to  as  from  other
soarcee,  which  did  not  diner  from  it  in  any  essential  partic-
ulars.

A  physician,  residing  at  or  near  Niagara,  U.  C.  informed  one
of  his  friends,  that  during  the  sitting  of  this  court  of  that  province
in  September,  a  person  called  on  him  at  the  court  house,  and  re-
quested him  to  attend  as  one-  of  the  counsel  on  Morgan:  he  said
to  his  friend,  'I  did  not  go,  and  I  am  glad  of  it;  for  if  I  had  gone,

I  should  have  gotten  into  a  d d  pretty  scrape,  for  they  »«£

dered  Morgan  afterwards/    This  communication  was  obtained

#  Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


3SS  LIGHT  OS  MA809BT.

in  writing,  in  March,  1827,  from  the  physician's  friend,  who  is  a
professional  gentleman  of  high  standing  at  Niagara.

The  communications  made  to  Dr.  Terry,  and  the  letter  of
IVTBride,  (affecting  to  deny  their  correctness,)  will  be  found  in
the  Appendix,*  upon  the  contents  of  which  some  comments
have  already  been  submitted.

Let  the  reader  connect  the  various  accounts  received  from
distinct  and  entirely  separate  quarters  and  persons,  with  the  cor-
responding and  authenticated  facts  detailed  in  this  narrative,  or
in  the  Appendix,  and  form,  if  he  can,  any  other  conclusion  than
that  which  both  parties  of  the  visiters  to  Niagara  for  examina-
tion did  form,  and  do  not  hesitate  to  declare;  t6  Wit:  that  the
persons  who  had  Morgan  under  their  conduct  at  Lewiston  and
Yonngstown,  on  the  night  of  September  the  13th,  1826,  took  him
over  the  Niagara  river;  that  some  persons  on  that  side  knew  he
was  brought  over  and  had  an  interview  with  his  conductors;  that
he  was  taken  back  and  confined  in  the  magazine  at  Fort  Niagara;
and  that  a  court  or  council  of  some  kind  was  held  on  him  under  a
pretext  of  masonic  authority.  Those  of  us  who  did  make  inves-
tigations at  that  place  in  January  and  March,  think  that  no  per-
son of  common  candor,  whose  mind  is  not  blinded  by  prejudice,
er  under  the  influence  of  strong  delusion-,  can  visit  there,  and
examine  for  himself,  witheut  forming  similar  conclusions.

But,  again,  it  will  be  seen  by  the  reader  that  at  the  court  of
Oyer  and  Terminer,held  at  Canandaigua  in  January,  1827,  before
judge  Threop,  Lawson,  Sawyer,  and  Chesebro,  withdrew  their
pleas  of  not  guilty,  which  they  had  at  a  previous  court  interposed,
and  plead  guilty,  and  that  Sheldon  was  convicted  after  a  triaL
The  indictments  against  allthese  men  charged  them  with  having
kidnapped  Wm.  Morgan,  and  taken  him  oat  of  the  state  of  New-
York,  and  out  of  the  United  States,  and  to  placumknown.  They
were  beyond  any  doubt,  informed  by  the  able  counsellors,  who
defended  them,  that  the,  uncertainty  as  to  Morgan's  fate,  and
the  probability  of  his  having  been  murdered,  would  gseatly  en-
hance their  punishment,  unless  they  could  show  that  they  had
not  participated  in  the  murder  of  their  victim,  or  been  concerned
in  the  latter  part  of  the  transaction.  Three  of  them,  Sawyer,
Chesebro,  and  Sheldon,  accordingly  produced  their  deposittotos,
to  show  how  far  they  had  acted.  If  these  depositions  can  be  relied
upon,  both  Chesebro  and  Sawyer,  by  their  confession  of  guilty
to  the  charges  contained  in  the  indictments,  voluntarily  exposed
themselves  to  punishment  for  the  most  heinous  part  of  the  crane

*  Appendix,  No.  24  and  27.

tizect  by  VjOC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  369

alleged  against  them;  when,  in  fact,  they  had  not  participated  in
that  part  of  the  >crime  charged.  *  The  court,  however,  seem  ta
have  given  credit  to  their  depositions,  and  apportioned  their  pun-
ishment accordingly.     But  Lawson,  it  will  be  seen,  gave  no  ac-
count whatever  of  the  part  he  had  performed,  and  left  the  court
and  the  public  at  liberty  to  form  no  other  opinion  than,  'that  fit
had  been  guilty  of  all  that  the  indictment  charged  on  him :'  and
gaye  them  not  even  his  naked  assertions  to  show  Hhat  Morgan
had  not  been  immolated  as  a  victim  to  their  rage,  or  was  then  in-
the  land  of  the  Hring.'*    We  know  that  he  was  at  Lewiston  and
Youngstown  late  in  the  night  of  the  14th  of  *  September;'  and
that  on  his  return  he  stopped  at  Wright's  tavern,  and  left  a  message
for  a  relation  who  then  resided  a  short  distance  from  that  place.  •
If  Lawson  had  dared  to  depose  that  he  had  handed  Morgan
over  to  the  care  or  custody  of  other  persons,  of  whose  subsequent
action  he  (Lawson)  had  no  knowledge,  (as  Chesebro  had  done,)
that  he  had  voluntarily  absented  himself,  (as  Sawyer  pretended
to  think,)  that  he  had  left  him  well,  and  knew  not  where  he  had
gone,  that  he  was  then  residing  at  any  place,  or  that  he  was  then
alive,  can  it  be  believed  that  he  would  not  have  offered  such  a
deposition,  and  thus  entitled  himself  to  the  lenity  of  the  court,  from
which  Chesebro  and  Sawyer  reaped  such  substantial  fruits?     Did
not  these  men,  who  were  so  anxious  to  reduce  the  measure  of
their  punishment,  and  so  well  informed  as  to  the  mode  of  effect-
ing that  object — did  not  they  (unless  they  knew  that  Morgan  was
dead)  importune  Lawson  to  depose  to  that  effect  in  their  behalf,
even    if   he  was   indifferent   about  exonerating   himself  from
the  crime  of  being  accessary  (at  least)  to  murder,  which  he  must
have  known  his  silence  could  not  fail  to  make  the  community  im-
pute to  him?    Nay,  would  they  not  have  all  gladly  given  to  the
court,  and  to  their  fellow  citizens,  any  evidence  in  their  power  to
have  shown  that  Morgan  was^probably  alive,  or  that  none  of  them
had  been  concerned  in  his  death?    If  Morgan  was  then  living,
could  not  Lawson  have  givon  a  clue  by  which  to  trace  him?
If  no  motive  whatever,  neither  the  desire  to  serve  his  associates
in  guilt,  nor  the  wish  to  diminish  the  measure  of  his  own  punish-
ment, nor  a  decent  regard  to  the  opinion  of  his  fellow  citizens,  and
the  feelings1  of  his  family,  could  induce  him  to  yenture  on  a  dec-
laration, under  oath,  that  Morgan  was  then  alive,  or  might  be  for
aught  he  knew,  who  can  doubt  that  he  knew  of  his  death?    If  lte
chose  to  sit  down  quietly  under  such  overwhelming  suspicions  of
his  being  an  accessary  to  murder,  who  can  suppose  that  Morgan
was  then  living?

*  Sec  the,  sentence  of  Judge  Throop,  in  the  Append*,  No- 11*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


370  LIGHT   ON   BU80NKY,

We  hare  now  laid  before  our  fellow  eitizens  the  detail,  or  re-
port, which  has  been  so  often  called  for.  If  it  has  not  been  as
interesting  as  they  had  been  led  to  expect,  they  must  remember
thafwe  did 'not  undertake  to  gratify  curiosity,  or  give  our  own
speculations.  We  have  given,  as  we  promised,  'A  Narrative  of
facts  and  circumstances,'  relating  to  transactions  which  have  ex-
cited the  earnest  attention  of  the  community.  Those  facts  and
circumstances  are  evidenced  by  the  depositions  of  credible  wit-
nesses, or  vouched  for,  by  the  distinct  allegations  (most  of  them
in  writing)  of  men,  entitled  to  our  entire  confidence  for  veracity
and  integrity,  to  whom  we  can  resort  for  legal  proof,  if  called  for.
Whether  the  conclusions  which  we  have  drawn  are  the  legitimate
results  of  those  facts  and  circumstances,  our  readers  inust  of
course  decide  for  themselves.  Let  them  recollect  that  our  exer-
tions (which  have  not  been  feeble  ones)  to  trace  Morgan  beyond
Fort  Niagara,  have  been  unavailing;  that  the  pecuniary  rewards
offered  hy  the  governor  of  the  state  of  New  York,  and  governor  of
Upper  Canada,  have  not  elicitedttie  slightest  information  on  the  sub-
ject; that  the  governor's  offer  of  pardon,  promised  inhis  proclama-
tion at  our  request,  has  produced  no  effect;  that  bo  attempt  has  been
made,  that  we  know  c£  by  those  so  directly  implicated  to  explain
or  deny  the  extraordinary  conduct  and  occurrences  which  have
fastened  such  strong  and  well  founded  suspicions  upon  them;  that
they  have  thus  long  set  public  opinion  at  defiance,  and  relinquish-
ed their  claim  to  the  good  opinion  of  their  fellow  citizens,  without
a  struggle  to  retain  it;  that  five  of  them  have  absconded,  viz:
James  Gillis,  Joseph  Scofield,  Burrage  Smith,  John  Whitnej,
and  Richard  Howard;  that  others  have  absented  themselves  from
their  families,  and  the  state,  and  continue  absent,  with  a  full
knowledge  of  the  suspicions  which  rest  upon  them;  mat  many  of
the  witnesses  have  suddenly  disappeared,  and  cannot  be  traced;
that  two  of  those  who  were  called  as  witnesses  before  the  grand
jury  of  Monroe  county,  at  Rochester,  to  wit:  Edward  Doyle,
merchant,  and  Simon  B.  Jewet,  attorney  at  law,  refused  to  tes-
tify, because,  as  they  alleged,  they  could  not  do  90  truly,  without
criminating  themselves;  that  others  have  related  stories  on  oath,
which  are  utterly  incredible;  and  what  inference  can  be  drawn  from
all  this  but  that  Morgan  has  been  murdered,  and  that^reat  num-
bers of  men,  heretofore  respectable,  have  been  accessaries  to  his
murder?  Whether  ALL  who  were  concerned  in  bis  kidnapping
have  been  accessaries,  or  consented  to  hjs  death,  we  undertake
not  to  decide:  But,  whatever  were  the  original  designs  or  mo*
tives  of  those  who  were  concerned  in  his  disappearance;  all  of  them,
who  have  not  fully,  frankly,  and  promptly  explained  die  part  they

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.


371


are  knowr/to  have  performed,  have,  we  think,  no 'right  to  complain;
if  their  fellow  citizens  in  general  regard  them  as  accessaries  to  the
mnrderofWiilmm  Morgan,  and  shall  hereafter  treat  them  accord-
ingly.

COMMITTEE.


GENESEE   COMMITTEE.

T.  F.  TALBOT,
TRUMBULL  CARV,
TIMOTHY  FITCH,
JAMES  t\  SMITH,
LYMAN  D.  PRINDLE,
ELEAZER  SOUTHWORTH,
WILLIAM  KEYES,
JONATHAN  LAY,
WILLIAM  DAVIS,
HINMAN  HOLDEN.      •

ROCHESTEE   COMMITTEE,]

JOSIAH  BISSELL,  Jr.
F.  F.  BACKUS,
HEMAN  NORTON,
FREDERIC  WHITTLESEY,
THURLOW  WEED,  ,
SAMUEL  WORKS.

TICTOR  COMMITTEE.

SAMUEL  RAWSON,
ELIJAH  SEDGWICK,
SAMUEL  EWING,
NATHAN  JENKS,
JAME8  M.  WHEELER,


THOMAS  WRIGHT,
JOHN  SARGEANT.        '

CHIU  COMMITTEE.

ISAAC  LACY,
WILLIAM  PIXLEY,
BENJAMIN  BOWEN,
SAMUEL  LACY.

WHEATLAND   COMMITTEE.

JOHN  GARBUT,
TRUMAN  EDSON,
CLARK  HALL.

BLOOMF1BLD  COMMITTEE.

RALPH  WILCOX,
HEMAN  CHAPIN,
BANI  BRADLEY,
JOSIAH  PORTER,
ORSON  BENJAMIN,
JONATHAN  BUELL.

LEWttTOK   COMMITTEE.

BATES  COOK,
JOHN  PHILIPS.


POSTSCRIPT.

We  had  long  expected  to  receive  a  statement,  or  deposition,  from  an  eye
witness,  which,  we  had  good  reason  to  suppose,  would  put  an  end  to  all
conjectures,  as  to  the  course  that  had  been  pursued,  in  disposing  of  William
Morgan,  after  his  arrival  at  Fort  Niagara.  After  the  narrative  had  been  put
to  the  press  we  received  the  following  statement,  made  to  two  members  of
one  of  the  committees,  by  a  credible  witness,  a  man  of  good  character  and
standing,  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  as  from  his  own  knowledge,  but  who  has  as
yet  declined  giving  his  deposition,  because  he  has  been  called  upon  as  a  wit-
ness, and  expects  to  testify  in  court  his  knowledge  of  the  matter.  Hie  stat#
qient  is  as  follows: —  ,

"  Aftef  Morgan  left  the  carriage  at  the  grave  yard,  he  was  taken  to  the
bottom  of  tho  rail  at  the  Fort.  The  ferryman  was  called  up  by ^those Jjho  had
*he  «harga  of  bim.    Here  Morgan  received  some  water,  which  he  na«  cane*


y  Google


372  LIGHT   ON   MASONRV.

for  in  front  of  Col.  Jung's,  at  Youn$stown.  When  taken  to  the  boat  he  was
soDDOrted  by  two  men;  he  was  pinioned  and  hoodwinked;  he  was  placed  in
the  boat  and  carried  to  the  Canada  shore.  On  reaching  that  shore  two  of  the
keepers  left  the  boat;  Morgan  and  two  others  remained  on  the  beach,  while
thevfi  e.  the  two  first,)  went  into  the  town.  Those  who  were  left  with  the
boat,  were  directed  to  leave  the  shore  in  the  boat,  if  any  person  should  ap-
proach it  without  giving  a  signal  which  had  been  agreed  upon.  There  was,
however,  no  intrusion.  The  two  who  had  gone  into  the  town,  returned,  a£
ter  an  absence  which  might  have  been  one  and  an  half;  or  two  hours.  The
time  of.  their  absence  seemed  long  to  the  informant,  who  waited  with  the
boat  Two  other  persons  came  to  the  shore  with  them  on  their  return:  they
came  near  the  boat,  and  held  a  consultation  in  a  low  tone  of  voice,  which
the  informant  did  not  hear.  When  it  broke  up,  all  who  had  crossed  from  the
United  States'  shore,  returned  in  the  boat  to  the  Fort.  Morgan,  as  before,
w»*upported  from  the  shore  by  two  men,  taken  into  the  Fort,  and  put  into
iflti&gazine.  This  place  had  been  fixed  upon  one  or  two  days  previous,  a3
one  where  Morgan  could  be  lodged  in  case  of  necessity.  This  took  place  in
the  morning  of  the  14th  of  September.

"During  that  day  Morgan  made  much  noise;  and  in  the  course  of  the
day  two  messengers  weft  sent  to  Lewiston,  where  a  chapter  .was  that  day
installed,  to  procure  aid  to  silence  the  noise.  %ome  persons  came  down  to
the  Fort  from  Lewiston,  and  produced  stillness.  On  the  evening  of  the  14th
of  September,  twenty  or  thirtv  persons  came  to  the  fort  in  the  steam  boat,  of
otherwise,  aU  of  whom  soon  disappeared,  excepting  about  eleven;  after  a  time
several  of  those  last  went  away.  ......

'During  the  night  several  persons  were  together  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Fort,
•among  whom  the  fate  or  disposition  of  Morgan  was  discussed.  This  discus-
aion  ended  some  time  after  midnight,  and  nothing  was  decided  upon.  The
next  evening  a  small  number  debated  the  same  subject  with  great  animation,
"but  came  to  no  decision.  Morgan  was  still  in  the  magazine  on  the  seven-
teenth, when  our  informant  left  the  place  and  did  not  return  until  the
twenty  first  day  of  the  same  month,  when  he  found  that  Morgan  had  been
disposed  of  Those  who  had  Morgan  in  their  custody,  when  he  left  the
place,  gave  him,  on  his  return,  to  understand  that  Morgan  had  been  pot  u>
death.  That  the  interior  of  the  magazine  was  put  in  order,  and  as  our  in-
formant was  told,  had  been  examined  by  one  or  more  persons  from  Lewis»
ton,  who  visited  the  Fort  for  that  purpose,  and  all  things  were  pronounced  to
be  in  order;  that  the  walls  were  closely  looked  over  to  see  if  Morgan  had
left  any  writings  upon  them;  after  all  which,  a  man,  or  perhaps  two,  were
requested  to  traverse  the  shore  of  the  lake,  to  see  if  any  body  should  float
ashore."


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


(373)
TO   ALL   HONEST   MASONS.

IN  EIGHT  NUMBERS.


NO.  I.

To  all  tomsi  Masons:

Brethren,  when  our  institution,  assailed  by  its  enemies  as  con-
taining principles  derogatory  to  the  laws  of  our  country,  stands
tottering  to  its  base,  an  inquiry  into  the  principles  of  the  institu-
tion becomes  of  vital  importance.  If  I  mistake  not,  we  have
taken  too  much  for  granted,  and,  charmed  with  its  high  sounding
titles,  have  not  scrutinized  the  fundamental  principles  which  have
kept  it  in  existence  thus  long  with  that  caution  which  the  impor-
tance of  the  case  demands.  When  I  speak  of  principles,  I  mean
not  those  published  to  the  world  in  the  Monitor  and  Chart,  for  no
society,  however  base,  but  exhibit  to  the  worl^  some  degree  of
decency:  but  I  mean  by  principles,  the  obligations  and  their  ten-
dency upon  the  members,  and  also  inquire  whether  the  occur-
rences, which  have  made  a  blot  on  our  society  which  ages  cannot
obliterate,  and  all  the  waters  of  the  Atlantic  can  never  wash  away,
were  not  performed  in  strict  observance  of  those  obligations.  A
free  people,  very  justly  alarmed  at  seeing  the  majesty  of  the  law
trampled  upon,  have  commenced  an  inquiry  into  the  causes;  and
I  repeat,  we  must  examine  before  the  pillars  of  the  temple  fall
and  bury  us  in  its  ruins.

According  to  Masonic  tradition,  our  society  was  formed  at  a
very  early  age  of  the  world,  when  there  were  no  laws  to  protect
the  weak  against  the  assaults  of  the  strong,  but  violence  and  out-
rage were  the  predominant  features  of  the  day;  the  arts  and
sciences  were  very  imperfectly  known  to  any,  and  not  known  to
the  great  mass  of  the  people.  At  such  a  time,  it  might  have
been  necessary  that  a  society  be  formed  with  a  strong  bond  of
union  for  the  protection  of  its  members,  and  a  repository  for  the
very  imperfect  arts  and  sciences.  For,  such  purposes  a  selfish
society,  which  should  bind  its  members  to  aid  and  assist  each  oth-
er in  preference  to  mankind  generally,  might  have  been  as  goo&
as  any  that  could  have  been  devised.  We  need  not  rest  upon
Masonic  tradition  alone,  to  support  the  antiquity  of  our  order.
Our  forms  and  ceremonies  point  conclusively  to  what  is  now  era-
Hh

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


374  LIGHT   an   M1SONEY.

phaticafiy  called  the  dark  ages.  The  Masonic  society  is,  beyond
dispute,  a  selfish  one;  having  exclusively  in  view  the  advantage
of  the  few  who  have  bound  themselves  together  for  mutual  bene-
fits. That  this  society  should  be  useful  to  its  members,  it  was
necessary  that  some  method  excommunication  should  be  devised;
hence  our  signs,  grips,  and  pass  words:  and  to  preserve  its  selfish
purposes,  its  own  peculiar  method  of  communication  must  be
kept  secret  from  the  world;  hence  those  barbarous  oaths  which
bind  us  to  protect  one  another  whether  'right  or  wrong,'  and  to
infuse  more  deeply  the  minds  of  the  new  members,  those  degra-
ding scenes  which  we  pass  through,  previous  to  our  taking  those
obligations,  were  invented.  I  do  not  deny  but  such  a  society  was
necessary,  where  the  only  law  was  that  of  power..  Thus  we  see
it  was  well  adapted  to  the  day  of  its  birth.

But  we  live  in  a  brighter  and  better  day:  mankind,  emerging
by  degrees  from  darkness  and  doubt,  have  arrived  at  a  period
when  all  rights  of  citizens  are  well  known  and  secured.  ft",  in
the  Roman  government,  the  exclamation,  'I  am  a  Roman  citizen/
was  a  good  protection,  is  not  I  am  an  American  citizen,  a  pass
word  which  will  admit  us  into  the  'inner  temple'  of  freedom,  or
the  'sanctum  sanctorum'  of  liberty,  where  equal  rights  and  privi-
leges are  administered  to  all  this  American  people,  whether  high
or  low,  rich  or  poor?  Can  you  point  me  to  a  single  privilege  our
society  guarantees  to  us,  which,  as  good  citizens,  ought  to  be
granted,  that  the  laws  of  the  republic  does  not?  Any  protection
mat  we  may  lawfully  claim,  which  is  not  secured  to  us  by  the
constitution  and  laws  of  our  country?  Not  one,  my  brethren,  in
the  whole  catalogue  of  our  boasted  privileges,  which  we  can  law-
fully claim,  but  what  is  secured  to  the  lowest  citizen  of  this  coun-
try* There  is,  indeed,  a  protection  granted  which  our  laws  do
not  give;  but  it  is  a  protection  which  we,  as  good  citizens,  do  not
wish.  It  is  a  protection  (as  I  shall  in  some  future  number  show)
to  the  designing,  and,  in  too  many  cases,  to  those  who  have  be*
come  amenable  to  the  laws  of  their  country?

What  then,  I  ask,  is  the  institution  in  this  country?  Milkens
of  dollars  have  been  paid  to  support  it  in  all  its  gaudy  splendor.
It  has,  indeed,  attracted  the  attention  of  people;  yet  no  substan-
tial good,  but  much  real  evil  has  resulted  from  it  I  have  seen
the  poor  man,  in  his  eagerness  to  become  a  member  of  our  so-
ciety, part  with  his  last  cow  to  pay  the  initiation  fee:  I  have  seea
the  society  in  their  meetings,  devote  the  hard  earned  money  of
their  members  to  purposes  worse  than  useless.  Does  not  ths
frequent  meetings  of  the  society  addict  its  members,  to  idleness?
Ifear  the  Junior  Warden's  too  frequent  call  from  labor  tore-

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  375

freshment,'  has  created  dissipation  in  many  members,  which  will
<end  in  wretchedness  and  despair.  Brethren,  when  you  consider
the  enormous  amount  of  money  which  has  been  expended  to  sup-
port it — the  many  evils  that  have  resulted  from  it— -the  corruption
which  is  embosomed  within  it — will  you  not  say  its  day  of  use-
fulness is  past,  and  you  are  contented  to  be  nothing  more  than
plain  American  citizens,  and  look  for  no  support  but  what  the  in-
estimable laws  of  this  republic  grant  to  every  one  of  its  citizens?

A  Mason.

NO.  II.

Tv  oft  honest  Masons:

Brethren,  in  my  first  number  I  attempted  to  show  that  our
society  was  adapted  to  the  dark  ages,  and  consequently  could
not  apply  to  the  present  age;  and  also,  if  it  did  apply,  h  had
become  perfectly  useless.  I  shall,  in  this  number,  show  that
the  titles  given  to  the  officers  of  our  institution,  have  a  very
bad  effect  upon  republican  principles.  Our  ancestors,  oppress-
ed by  the  aristocratical  principles  of  Europe,  having  endured
for  a  long  series  of  years,  the  oppression  of  kings,  lords,  and
dukes,  and  no  choice  left  them  but  slavery  or  flight,  resolutely
chose  the  latter,  and  breaking  asunder  the  bonds  which  bind
friends  together,  and  suffering  the  hardships  of  a  tempestuous
passage,  sat  themselves  quietly  down  in  the  savage  wilds  of
North  America.  No  lords  or  dukes,  no  grand  high  priests,  nor
grand  kings  were  there,  to  extort  the  hard  earnings  of  the  labor-
ing poor;  bound  together  by  mutual  wants,  and  asking  no  privi-
lege from  others  which  they  were  unwilling  to  bestow,  they  here
sowed  the  first  seeds  of  equal  rights  and  privileges,  which  has
sprung  up  and  yielded  an  abundant  harvest;  they  here  taught  their
sons  to  prefer  death  to  slavery.  After  the  struggle  of  the  revo-
lution, and  no  enemy  near  to  disturb  their  deliberations,  a  gov-
ernment was  founded  on"  plain,  simple,  republican  principles.
No  high  sounding  titles  found  a  place  in  the  government;  no
high  priests  were  exacting  tythes;  no  grand  kings,  with  their
royal  robes,  were  demanding  the  adoration  of  the  people.  All
were  reduced  to  a  common  level,  and  the  man  that  held  the  high
est  and  most  enviable  station  mortal  ever  held,  was  simply  styl-
ed, President  of  the  United  States.  Such  Was  the  government
founded  hj  a  Washington,  a  Franklin,  a  Jefferson,  and  the  pat-
riots of  the  revolution.  Now  let  us  examine  our  own  institution,
and  clearly  ascertain  whether  it  is  established  on  as  pure  a  basis
as  that  of  our  common  country.  If  it  is  as  pure  and  well  adapt-
ed to  our  circumstances,  we  had  better  ingraft  with  it  our  politi-

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


376  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.

cal  government;  if  not,  and  it  does  have  a  tendency  to  inculcate
artstocratical  principles,  then  abandon  Masonry  and  adhere  to  the
government  established  by  pur  ancestors;  for  it  is  true,  that  in
the  various  requirements  of  life  we  cannot  fulfil  our  duty  to  both
at  the  same  time.     The  government  was  founded  in  open  day
with  all  the  light  of  heaven  shining  upon  it,  its  principles  open
and  equal  to  all  men.     Masonry  is  the  child  of  darkness,  and
nothing  but  secrecy  can  sustain  it.     Its  principles  are  partial,  and
its  ultimate  aim  is  the  benefit  of  the  few  at  the  expense  of  the
many.     All  its  ceremonies  are  anti-social  and  anti-republican;
the  titles  given  to  its  officers,  I  do  not  believe,  are  very  republi-
can.   I  will  rehearse  them,  that  you  may,  with  a  single  glance,
see  the  bearing  they  may  have  on  the  pure  republican.

In  the  Grand  Lodge  they  have  their  Grand  Lecturer,  Grand
Junior  and  Senior  Deacons,  Grand  Master  of  Ceremonies,
Grand  Marshal,  Grand  Secretary,  Grand  Treasurer,  Grand
Chaplain,  Worshipful  Grand  Junior  and  Senior  Wardens,  Right
Worshipful  Deputy  Grand  Master,  Most  Worshipful  Grand
Master.

In  the  Genera]  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  there  is  an  Excel-
lent General  Grand  Marshal,  Excellent  General  Grand  Chap-
lain, Excellent  General  Grand  Treasurer,  Excellent  General
Grand  Secretary,  Most  Excellent  General  Grand  Scribe,  Most
Excellent  General  Grand  King,  Most  Excellent  General  Grand
High  Priest.

The  titles  in  the  Grand  Encampment  are,  Worshipful  Grand
Sword  Beared,  Worshipful  Grand  Standard  Bearer,  Worshipful
Grand  Marshal,  Worshipful  Grand  Recorder,  Worshipful  Grand
Treasurer,  Worshipful  Grand  Wardens,  Worshipful  Grand  Cap-
tain General,  Worshipful  Grand  Generalissimo,  Worshipful
General  Grand  Master.

What  titles  the  Knights  of  Tutons,^he  Knights  of  Calatrava,
Knights  of  Alcantara,  Knights  of  Redemption,  Knights  of  Christ,
Knights  of  the  Mother  of  Christ,  Knights  of  Lazarus,  Knights
of  the  Star,  Knights  of  the  Band,  Knights  of  the  Annunciation
of  the  Virgin  Mary,  Knights  of  St.  Michael,  Knights  of  St.  Ste-
phen, and  Knights  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  gave  to  their  officers  I  do
not  know;  but  thus  much  I  do  know,  that  every  officer  in  the
long  catalogue  of  titles,  had  some  emblem  of  royalty  affixed  to
him.  This  being  the  case,  my  brethren,  and  it  being  equally
true  that  the  great  end  and  aim  of  Masonry,  is  to  create  distinc-
tions among  mankind,  and  secure  to  the  few  the  rights  of  the
many,  will  any  of  you  blindly  adhere  to  Masonry  when  it  comes
in  contact  with  the  least  of  those  equal  laws  which  were  secured

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LrGHT   ON  MASONRY.  377

to  you  by  the  blood  of  your  fathers?  If  you  will,  then  I  must  bid
farewell  to  you  and  Masonry;  but  before  we  part  let  me  ask  you,
if,  when  you  were  young  and  your  minds  Unsullied  with  the  aris-
tocratic trappings  of  Masonry,  when  your  playful  spirits  were
buoyant,  and  your  consciences  void  of  offence;  if  then,  when
you  heard  recounted  the  many  attempts  of  the  tyrants  of  die  Old
World,  to  chain  down  and  enslave  your  fathers,  and  to  enforce
their  unholy  system  of  distinctions  and  divine  rights  of  kings
upon  them,  and  had  heard  enumerated  the  long  sufferings  and
manly  fitmnesa  of  your  sires,  in  not  only  driving  those  tyrants
from  their  shores,  but  also  their  unequal  and  accursed  principles
with  them;  did  not,  I  say,  your  bosoms  burn  with  a  pure  patriot-
ism which  made  you  swear,  that  should  the  enemies  of  civil  lib-
erty and  equal  rights,  ever  assail  the  fair  fabric  of  freedom,  your
blood  should  flow  as  freely  in  maintaining  it,  as  your  fathers  did
to  achieve  it:  if  so,  then  for  heaven's  sake  abandon  an  institution
which  has  a  direct  tendency  to  contaminate  the  minds  of  almost
all  who  unite  themselves  with  it,  and  insensibly  steals  away  that
purity  of  sentiment,  which  alone  can  support  a  free,  and  equal,
and  happy  government  A  Mason.

NO.  III.

7b  uU  hontst  Masons:

Brethren,  as  a  general  thing,  secret  associations  are  formed  for
the  purpose  of  evading  the  laws,  or  fbr  the  overthrow  of  the  gov-
ernment; ever  since  our  government  was  formed,  tfte  people  have
regarded  them  with  jealousy.  The  patriots  of  the  revolution,
after  our  liberty  was  established,  entered  their  solemn  protest
against  secret  associations  of  every  kind.  All  lawful  purposes
need  not  the  covering  of  mystery  or  secrecy  to  sustain  them.
Their  views,  principles  and  purposes  being  honest,  are  open  and
can  be  examined  by  every  freeman.  No  midnight  meetings  are
necessary  for  societies  who  have  nothing  but  honest  and  honora-
ble objects  to  effect.  But  on  the  other  hand,  if  a  society  has  un-
lawful purposes  to  effect,  how  can  they  effect  them  if  their  de-
signs are  exposed?  No  band  bound  together  for  unlawful  pur-
poses, but  have  their  domes  covered  with  the  mantle  of  secrecy;
and  the  darkness  of  ipidnight  protects  their  nefarious  purposes.
Jt  is  not  surprising  that  a  free  people,  ever  jealous  of  their  rights,
should  look  with  suspicion  upon  a  society  like  ours,  whose  meet-
ings are  held  in  secret  and  at  the  late  hour  of  midnight.  No
ene  of  the  people  are  allowed  to  enter  within.  Nothing  but
mystery  attends  them  in  their  whole  progress;  they  acknowledge
Hh2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


378  UGtaT  ojf  masoKKY.

they  are  bound  by  solemn  oaths  not  to  discover  the  nature  of  the
institution;  and  no  one  can  but  discover  that  the  greatest  facilities
are  offered  for  unlawful  purposes.  If  there  had  been  no  wrongs
committed  by  such  a  society,  an  independent  and  free  people
whose  freedom  had  been  purchased  by  the  blood  of  their  fathers,
and  transmitted  to  them  under  solemn  instructions  to  preserve  it,
even  at  the  expense  of  life,  ought  to  lift  their  voice  against  it,
when  they  find  it  extending  through  the  Union,  embracing  all  the
officers  of  the  land,  and  possessing  every  means  of  crushing,  at
one  blow,  the  proud  and  elevated  title  of  freemen.  But  if  a  se-
cret society  of  itself  will  cause  suspicion  when  combined  with  the
actual  evils  which  have  been  the  result  of  such  societies, .  we
cannot  expect  this  free  people  will  any  longer  suffer  it  to  exist  in
this  country.

It  is  well  known  to  all  'active  Masons'  and  to  persons  gener-
ally, that  in  the  dark  conclave  and  secret  meetings  of  masons,
have  been  planned  conspiracies  that  have  caused  convulsions
wUch  have  been  felt  in  every  part  of  the  government  under
which  they  were  bound  to  live  as  good  citizens.     There  has  been
planned  and  executed  deeds  by  them  in  their  midnight  conspira-
cies (I  cannot  call  such  meetings  by  a  more  gentle  term,)  at
wmch  humanity  has  revolted.     In  France  all  was  thrown  into
confusion,  and  anarchy  came  near  ruling  a  people  striving  for
liberty,  by  the  society  of  Free  Masons.     At  one  time  consider-
ing they  had  all  power,  they  threw  off  ail  disguise  and  discovered
their  real  object.     The  candidate  for  the  degree  of  Master  Ma-
son had  the  following  question  put  to  him  'Brother,  are  you  dis-
posed to  execute  all  the  orders  of  the  Grand  Master,  though  you
were  to  receive  contrary  orders  from  a  king,  emperor,  or  any  oth-
er sovereign  whatever?'    In  one  instance,  receiving  a  candidate
not  as  much  infatuated  as  the  others,  they  were  answered  'No!'
'What,  No!'  replies  the  venerable,  'are  you  only  entered  amongst
'  us  to  betray  our  secrets?     Would  you  hesitate  between  the  in-
terests of  Masonry  and  those  of  the  profane?    You  are, not  aware
then  that  there  is  not  one  of  our  swords  but  is  ready  to  pierce
the  heart  of  a  traitor!'     Comment  on  such  language  is  not  ne-
cessary.    I  need  not  say  more  on  the  dangerous  tendency  of
Free  Masonry.     In  France  it  is  too  well  known  to  be  soon  for-
got by  that  people.     But  France  is  not  alone  in  having  her  li-
berties invaded  by  Masons.    It  at  one  time  came  near  overthrow-
ing the  government  of  Germany,  and  those  that  were  honest
Masons  among  them  separated  and  forsook  the  institution.     The
following  is  the  language  of  a  venerable  Master  of  a  lodge  in
Germany,  pronounced  at  the  dissolution  of  the  lodge,  and  closing
it  up  for  ever.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  379

*  However  holy  our  mysteries  nay  have  been,  the  lodges  are
**ow  profaned  and  sullied.     Brethren  and  companions,  attired  in
your  .mourning  robes,  attend  and  let  us  seal  up  the  gates  of  our
temple,  for  the  profano  have  found  means  of  penetrating  into
them — they  have  converted  them  into  retreats  for  their  impiety,
into  dens  of  conspirators.     Within  the  sacred  walls  they  have
planned  the  horrid  deeds  and  the  ruin  of  nations.     Lodges  which
serve  as  hiding  places  for  these  conspirators,   must  remain  for
ever  shut  both  to  us  and  every  good  citizen.'  Brethren,  ought  wc
not  to  adopt  the  language  and  actions  of  this  venerable  man?  Ma-
sonry was  considered  in  Spain,  Portugal,  and  Russia,  of  such  a
dangerous  tendency,  that  it  was  put  down  by  the  strong  arm  of  the
law.  It  is  now  disturbing  the  tranquillity  of  our  brethren  in  South
America.  In  England,  the  king  being  Grand  Master  of  all  the
lodges,  and  all  being  sworn  to  obey  bis  mandate,  it  is  made  subser-
vient to  his  own  purposes,  and  consequently  he  suffers  it  to  exist
in  his  government.  But  we  need  not  go  abroad  for  proof  that  se-
cret associations  are  dangerous;  the  proof  is  nigh,  even  at  the  door.
Passing  by  all  the  smaller  transactions  of  the  fraternity,  and  making
no  mention  of  the  perversion  of  justice  by  it  in  our  courts,  and  its
intrigue  at  elections,  another  and  blacker  transaction  stares  us  in
the  face.  A  deed  has  been  committed  in  this  country,  on  this  sa-
cred ground  of  liberty,  which  ought  to  stamp  with  'everlasting  infa-
my and  disgrace,' the  society  by  whose  mandate  the  damning  deed
was  committed.     A  free  citizen  has  been  deprived  of  his  liber-
ty and  life!    And  by  whom]    Did  the  light  of  day  shine  upon  the
meeting  which  plotted  the  hellish  deed?    Was  it  the  great  body
of  a  free  people  which  sanctioned  a  deed,  without  a  parallel,  ex-
cept on  Masonic  record?     No,  my  brethren,  it  was  in  the  dark,
mysterious,  secret,  and  midnight  meeting  of  the  ancient  and
honorable  fraternity  of  Free  Masons,  the  damning  deed  was
planned;  it  was  the  Great  Grand  Worshipful  members  which
justified  the  'deep  damnation  of  his  taking  off!'     Not  by  a  few
individuals  of  the  order,  but  by  them  as  a  body,  assembled  in
their  lodges  for  the  purpose  of  learning  his  fate  and  planning  the
destruction  of  others,  and  by  their  vote  were  the  murderers  of
Morgan  justified     Do  you  expect  that  our  society  will  be  sup-
ported by  a  free  and  independent  people?    Were  the  causes
which  produced  a  separation  of  the  then  colonies  and  mother
eountry,  more  alarming  than  our  society  in  this  republic,  at  this
lime,  and  under  the  present  circumstances?     The  great  body  of
freemen  have  been  insulted  for  attempting  to  put  it  down;  but
there  have  been  no  transactions  which  are  to  be  so  much  feared,
as  overthrowing  the  government  of  the  United  States,  as  the


380  tlGUT  OS   MASONEY.

transactions  of  the  fraternity  for  Hie  last  six  menths.  The  im-
pressment of  seamen,  which  was  a  very  just  cans*  for  the  deciar-
ation  of  war  against  Great  Britain,  bears  no  comparison  with
this.  In  that  case  they  were  impressed  by  a  rival  nation,  and
we  could  defend  manfully  our  rights.  The  cans©  was  open,  aiid
an  enemy  met  us  in  open  day.  On  the  other  hand,  the  late
outrages  were  committed  by  citizens  of  our  common  country,
connected  by  oaths  not  to  betray  each  other;  membtWMrfa  soci-
ety, whose  meeting  were  in  secret  and  whose  ramifications  ex-
tended through  the  Union,  holding  all  the  ofiees  of  power,  and
impiously  saying  the  people  could  not  help  themselves:  tboy
would  do  what  tbey  pleased  to  their  members,  who  were  woken
in  sheep's  clothing.  Such  a  deed  strikes  the  very  foundation,  of
our  libertv.  If  our  society  considers  itself  powerful  enough  to
deprive  one  citizen  of  his  liberty  and  Hfe,  you  soon  see  it  take
great  strides  and  claim  all  power.  Can  it  be  possible,  my  breth-
ren, that  you  will  longer  attempt  to  support  a  society,  which  .has
not  only  become  obsolete  and  useless  and  savors  of  aristocracy
but  is  stained  with  the  blood  of  a  fre^  citizen?  Rather  eome  out
like  good  citizens  and  say  it  is  worse  than  useless;  and  inasmuch
as  nine  or  ten  millions  of  people  say  they  do  not  wish  it  to  exist
in  this  republic,  magnanimously  say  you  wltt  desert  it  and  be-
good  citizens  in  common  with  all.  This  people  wiH  never  snflfer
the  institution  to  exist  in  this  republic;  if  they  do  permit  it  to  as-
sume all  its  former  power  and  grandeur,  then,  indeed,  are  they
slaves,  and  fit  only  for  vassalage.  A  Masot;

NO.  IT.

To  all  honest  Masons:

Brethren,  in  all  countries  and  under  all  governments  where  se-
cret societies  have  existed,  they  have  never  failed  to  create  dis-
trust among  the  uninitiated,  and  eventually  to  overturn  all  fair
principles.  But  the  greater  part  of  them  have  long  since  gono
to  their  graves;  and  all  that  have  gone,  sleep  in  disgrace.  In  this
country,  no  secret  society  has  an  existence,  except  that  oC  Ma-
sonry; and  with  regard  to  this,  an  inquiry  has  gone  forth,  and  yon
might  as  well  place  your  hands  against  the  sun  of  a  summer's
morning  and  stop  its  rising,  as  to  stop  the  inquiry,  or  prevent  the
downfall  of  the  order.  Some  of  you  may  believe,  that,  #oa*  the
many  ties  which  bind  Masons  together,  and  from  their  almost
united  exertions  to  smother  crime  and  distract  public  opinion,  that
the  cause  of  the  people  will  ultimately  go  down,  and  you  rise?  tri-
umphant. If  any  of  you  who  are  honest,  have  fallen  into  this
*n-or  at  this  time,  I  sincerely  pity  you.     You  must  be  sensible,

.    Digitized  by  LjOOQI^


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.  381

at  this  late  day,  that  all&ir  and  honorable  members  of  the  insti-
gation; men  who  were  not  concerned  in  the  late  disgraceful  trans-
actions, in  their  incipient  stages,  nor  parties  to  their  succeeding
crimes;  men  who  since  have  not  done  all  in  their  power  to  palli-
ate and  smother  them,  and  paralyze  the  strength  of  the  law,  will
leave  their  hiding  places  and  endeavor  again  to  deserve  the  con-
fidence of  their  country.  No  matter  how  many  kings  and  em-
perors you  enroll  on  your  tablets:  no  matter  how  many  governors
and  judges  are  found  in  your  halls,  and  are  now.  exercising  the
power  of  the  country:  no  matter  how  many  servile  and  con-
temptible editors  are,  either  publicly  justifying  kidnapping  and
murder,  or  are  palliating  Masonic  crimes,  or  are,  in  the  most  de-
grading condition,  peddling  their  silly  gingerbread  stories:  all  in
this  country,  who  support  the  Monster,  must  give  place  to  others,
and  your  dark  temple  of  crime  and  iniquity,  tumble  to  the  ground.

Turn-  your  attention  to  old  Peter,  the  hermit,  and  under  him
trace  your  different  orders  of  knighthood  to  their  respective
founders.  Follow  diem  through  their  mad  career  of  bloodshed
and  slaughter  to  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  there  prepare  to
weep  over  a  scene  of  carnage  and  crime  which  beggars  all  de-
scription. Neither  arms  defended  the  valiant,  nor  submission
theUimorous.  No  age  or  sex  was  spared:  infants  on  the  breasts
were  pierced  by  the  same  blow  with  their  mothers  who  implored
for  mercy:  even  a  multitude  to  the  number  of  ten  thousand  per-
sons, who  had  surrendered  themselves  prisoners,  and  were  prom-
ised quarter,  were  butchered  in  cool  blood  by  the  magnanimous
founders  of  your  illustrious  orders.  Long  shall  the  friends  of
humanity  bemoan  this  unhallowed  and  blood-stained  day;  and
long  shall  the  warm  and  smoking  blood  of  murdered  innocence
cry  from  the  ground  for  vengeance.

Next,  behold  these  holy  and  blood-stained  hypocrites,  in  dark
conclave,  plotting  another  feast  of  blood  in  the  heart  of  Germa-
ny! See  wretched  France  groan  beneath  their  dark  designs,  and
bleeding  at  every  pore.  And,  even  now,  and  while  I  am  writing,
behold  our  sister  republic  (Mexico)  reel  to  its  base,  beneath  a
wretched  conspiracy  of  York  and  Scotch  Masons.  When  you
have  done  this,  and  when  you  have  clearly  sketched  in  'the  mind's
eye'  the  general  outlines  of  this  pretty  picture,  then  sit  down  aild
calmly  ask  yourselves,  Where  is  the  author  of  Jachin  and  Boaz?
Where  is*  Smith,  of  Vermont?  Where  is  Murdoek,  of  Rensse-
laerville?  Where  is  Morgan,  and  where  are  his  lonely  widow  and
orphan  children?  Alas!  my  brethren,  this  is  a  sorry  and  blood-
stained  picture,  and  you,  who  are  not  satisfied  with  what  Masons
have  already  done,  let  your  distorted  eyeballs  glare  upon  it,  until


y  Google


382  LIGHT  OH  MASONBT.

your  carnivorous  appetites  are  glutted  witk  Wood  for  once,  and
after  that  return  to  your  dens  of  carnage  and  plot  more  mischief.
But  to  you,  my  honest  brethren,  who  have  seen  enough  of  Sa-
tan's kingdom  already  displayed;  and  you,  who  k>*e  your  country
more  thai  Masonry,  arise  from  this  den  of  conspirators,  and,
with  minds  unalloyed,  feast  your  eyes  on  the  effulgent  mom  of
our  rising  REPUBLIC,  and  I  will  vouchsafe  to  my  country  that
you  will  never  return  again.  '    A  Masos.

NO.  V.

To  mil  honest  Mount:

Brethren,  having  in  my  former  nambers  touched  upon  the
general  principles  of  the  order,  I  bow  shall  ask  you  to  candidly
traverse  with  me,  a  more  particular  charge  against  the  Masonic
order;  which  is  that  the  laws  or  masonry  rjf  and  of  thbm*

SELVES,  DO  AUTHOBIZB  «E  TAXING  OF  THE  UFB  OF  A  MEMBER
'OF   THE  FRATKSNITY  GUILTY   OF  DIVULGING   THB   SEOftETS   OF

masonry.  Startle  not,  my  brethren,  at  this  appalling  charge,-  but
candidly  follow  me  through  my  observations  and  proof.  I  must
here  remark,  that  I  could  satisfy  the  most  scrupulous  of  the  or-
der, were  I  at  liberty  to  write  some  of  the  hidden  mysteries  of
the  different  degrees,  but  shackled  as  I  am  with  these  ahstard
ties,  enough  can  be  shewn,  without  violating  any  of  our  princi-

§les,  to  convince  that  part  of  my  brethren  whom  I  now  address.
J  ow  then  to  the  subject.  It  is  not  denied,  i  believe,  by  any
Masons,  mat  the  penalty  of  their  obligations  is  death.  [ I  stall
not,  at  present,  refer  to  Morgan's  ttiustrationa,  for  I  neither  deny
nor  acknowledge  mat  book.]  Almost  all  Masons  admitted  this
in  their  assertions  for  three  months  after  the  abduction  of  Mor-
gan, by  saying,  that  he  (Morgan)  had  submitted  himself  to  tbe
punishment  of  death,  by  revealing  the  secrets  of  Masonry.  I
believe  that  the  most  careful  do  not  pretend  to  deny  that  such  is
the  penalty.  But  it  is  useless  to  remark  farmer  on  tins  point,  for
we  do  know  that  the  penalty  in  that  case  is  death,  i*  the  most
shocking  and  barbarous  manner.  If  then  such  is  the  penalty;  was
it  never  intended  to  inflict  that  penalty?  It  is  absurd  in  the  ex-
treme, to  suppose  that  a  society,  ranking  among  it  members  such
illustrious  personages,  as  we  pretend  ours  does,  with  aH  that  pomp
and  parade  attached  to  it,  with  all  our  monarchal  titles  of  Kings,
Grand  and  Sublime  Masters,  would  attempt  to  make  a  mockery
of  laws  which  they  call  sublime  and  useful,  tell  a  candidate  if  he
divulges  the  secrets  he  shall  be  put  to  death,  and  after  the  sofann
ceremonies  are  over,  tell  him  we  never  intend  to  inflict  tk*t
penalty,  but  only  meant  to  scmre  you.    Such  a  course  would  very

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


WGHT  ON  MiflONBT.  383

aaon  rink  the  institution  into  merited  contempt.  Why  then  hind
our  members  under  penalty  of  death,  to  keep  inviolate  our  se-
cret^ if  we  never  intended  to  inflict  mat  penalty?  What  has
kept  thousands  from  divulging  the  secrets  long  before  now?
Would  simply  expelling  them  from  the  lodge  have  deterred  them
from  it?  No!  It  was  the  well  known  fact  that  the  laws  and  prin-
ciple* of.Mawnry  were  such  mat  they  would  he  barbarously  mur-
dered, or  in  the  Masonic  phrase  executed.  There  are  many  of
the  craft,  who  have  long  since  wished  them  known  to  the  whole
world,  and  care  not  for  expulsion,  knowing  full  well  that  reveal-
ing the  iniquities  of  our  dark  conclaves  would  justify  them  in  the
minds  of  an  enlightened  people.  There  is  an  another  class  who
have  been  expelled  from  the  lodge,  and  out  of  revenge  would,  if
they  dare,  write,  print,  stamp,  &e.  all  the  secrets  ef  the  order.

I  repeat,  then,  it  was  a  net,  which  recent  events  fully  prove,
that  their  kves  would  pay  the  forfeiture  of  such  an  act.  The  on-
ly question  that  can  possibly  be  raised,  is,  that  there  is  no  person
designated  in  our  statutes  to  execute  the  (ration  But  I  think  a
little  reflection  and  examination  will  obviate  this  difficulty.  Pre-
cedents of  long  standing  is  aH  well  established  societies  and  gov-
ernments, constitute  law.  Hence,  in  all  legal  proceedings,  where
there  is  no  statute  direct  to  the  point,  they  refer  to  former  deci-
sions, and  what  has  been  done  under  similar  circumstances.  In
this  case,  then,  if  we  have  no  express  statute  appointing  the  exe-
cutive officer,  (the  manner  of  execution  is  pointed  out  explicitly  in
the  obligation,)  when  a  traitor,  if  found,  we  must  refer  to  what  has
oeen  done  under  similar  circumstances  by  our  society;  and  as
all  former  decisions  of  law  are  more  or  less  binding,  by  the  wis-
dom or  ignorance  of  the  persons  giving  those  decisions,  so  in
this  case,  we  ought  to  examine  carefully  the  precedents,  and  see
if  they  were  given  by  persons  who  were  well  informed  as  to  the
laws  and  principles  of  our  order.  I  will  now  refer  you  to  some
of  those  precedents  which  do  show  conclusively  mat  we  are  au-
thorized to  execute  any  member  of  the  fraternity  who  so  far  loses
sight  of  his  safety  as  to  divulge  the  secrets  of  the  craft.  These
precedents  may  be  found  in  the  'Free  Masons'  Monitor,'  publish-
ed by  Thomas  S.  Webb;  and  mat  no  one  may  say  the  hook  is  not
good  authority,  I  will  give  you  the  vote  of  the  Grand  Royal  Arch
Chapter,  which  is  as  Mows:

Hooked  unmHmoudyj  That  this  Grand  Chapter  recommend
the  Free  Masons'  Monitor  to  the  attention  and  study  of  all  the
members  of  the  fraternity  to  whom  Ae  same  may  come.

Anm  T.  Jencks,  Gmmd  Secy.


y  Google


3$4  LIGHT   05  tfASONRT.

The  first  precedent  I  shall  give,  may  be  found  at  page  242  of
the  Monitor.  It  appears  that  several  of  the  craft  became,  m  the
language  of  Masons,  traitors.  Six  had  fled  Jerusalem.  Solo-
mon published  a  particular  description  of  all  those  who  had  mode
their  escape:  shortly  after,  he  received  information  that  several
persons  answering  his  description  had  arrived  in  the  country  of
Cheth,  and  believing  themselves  perfectly  secure,  had  began  to
work  in  the  quarry  of  Bendaca.  As  soon  as  Solomon  was  made
acquainted  with  this  circumstance,  he  wrote  to  Maacha,  fcing  of
Cheth,  to  assist  in  apprehending  them,  and  cause  them  to  be*de-
livered  over  to  persons  he  should  appoint,  to  secure  mem  and
have  them  brought  to  Jerusalem  to  receive  the  punishment  due
their  crimes.  Solomon  therr  elected  fifteen  Masters  in  whom
he  could  place  the  highest  confidence,  and  among  whom  were
those  who  had  been  in  the  cavern,  and  sent  them  in  quest  of
the  villains,  and  gave  them  an  escort  of  troops.  Frve  days  were
spent  in  the  search,  when  Tirbal  discovered  them  cutting  stoop
in  the  quarry;  they  immediately  seized  them  -and  bound  them  in
chains.  When  they  arrived  at  Jerusalem,  they  were  imprisoned
in  the  tower  of  Achizer,  and  the, next  morhing  a  punishment  was
inflicted  on  tiem  adequate  to  their  crimes.

The  next  precedent  which  I  shall  cite,  i&  found  at  page  289,
and  is  styled,  'Observations  on  the  degree  of  Knights  of  the  Ninth
Arch,'  called  a  chapter.  This  case  is  so  striking,  and  in  many
parts,  so  similar  to  mat  of  the  Morgan  case,  I  shall  be  more  mi-
nute in  description,  and  more  profuse  in  extracts.  That  you
may  realize  it  in  its  full  force,  I  here  will  remark  that  this  degree
was  instituted  by  Solomon  after  the  execution  of  the  traitor,  to
reward  the  zeal  of  the  persons  engaged  in  his  execution,  and  to
give  more  weight  to  their  offices,  and  impress  the  minds  of  the
fraternity  with  the  great  danger  of  divulging  the  secrets  of  Ma-
sonry; the  furniture  and  dress  of  the  chapter  and  members,  were
of  the  bloodiest  kind  imaginable.  I  shall,  therefore,  give  a  de-
scription of  the  dress  and  fiirniture.

'This  chapter  represents  the  audience  chamber  of  Solomon,
and  is  to  be  decorated  with  white  and  red  hangings;  the  red  with
white  flames.  There  are  nine  lights  in* the  east  and  eight  in  the
west.  The  Master  represents  Solomon  seated  in  the  east,  with
a  table  before  him  covered  with  black,  ami  is  styled  Most  Potent.
There  is  only  one  Warden  in  the  west,  who  represents  Stockin,
(one  of  the  executioners,)  with  seven  brethren  around  him.  All
the  brethren  must  be  dressed  in  black,  and  their  hats  flapped
(surely  a  suitable  dress  for  assassins)  with  a  broad  black  ribbon
^Vom  the  left  shoulder  to  the  right  hip,  on  the  lower  part  of  which

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  385

ore  nine  red  roses,  (an  emblem  that  Masonic  murderers  shall  be
highly  valued  an^  protected,)  four  on  each  side  and  one  at  the
bottom,  to  which  is  suspended  a  poniard.  The  aprons  are  white,
lined  with  black,  speckled  with  blood;  on  the  flap,  a  bloody
arm  with  poniard;  and  on  the  area,  a  bloody  arm  holding
by  thb  hair  a  bloody  head.  Near  to  the  lodge  is  a  small
dark  place  representing  a  cavern,  in  which  is  placed  a  lamp;  a
-place  representing  a  spring,  with  a  basin  to  hold  water;  and  a  ta-
ble>  on  which  are  laid  a  poniard,  and  the  representation  of  a
bloody  head  as  just  severed  from  the  body.  Near  the  ta-
ble a  large  stone  to  sit  on,  and  below  the  lamp,  in  capital  letters
is  written,  vengeance.

The  history  of  this  degree  is  as  follows: — In  the  reign  of  So-
lomon, several  of  the  workmen  had  been  guilty  of  some  crime  of
an  enormous  nature,  [What  more  enormous  crime  can  there  be
than  to  expose  their  impious  ceremonies  and  bring  to  light  their
internal  deeds?]  and  made  their  escape  from  Jerusalem.    A  great
assembly  of  Masters  had  sat  in  consultation,  [It  has  been  sworn
to,  that  70  or  80  met  at  Stafford  to  consult  on  the  Morgan  case]
on  the  best  means  of  discovering  and  apprehending  them.     Their
deliberations  were  interrupted,  by  the  entrance  of  a  stranger,
[DanielJohns,  the  Canadian  spy,  suddenly  made  his  appearance
at  Stafford,]  who  demanded  to  speak  to  the  king  in  private.  Upon
being  admitted,  he  acquainted  Solomon  that  he  had  discovered
where  Akirop,  one  of  the  traitors,  lay  concealed,  and  offered  to
conduct  whom  the  king  should  please  to  appoint  to  go  with  him.
This  being  communicated  to  the  brethren,  one  and  all  request-
ed to  he  partakers  in  the  vengeance  due  the  villain.     Solomon
checked  their  ardor,  declaring  that  only  nine  should  undertake  the
task;  and  to  avoid  giving  any  offence,  ordered  all  their  names  to
be  put  into  an  urn,  and  that  the  first  nine  that  should  be  drawn
should  he  the  persons  to  accompany  the  stranger.     [They  de-
parted from  this  rule  in  the  Batavia  cases:  (or  between  one  and
two  hundred  went  for  Miller.]  At  break  of  day,  Joabert,  Stockin,
and  seven  others,  conducted  by  the  stranger,  travelled  through
a  dreary,  country.     On  the  way,  Joabert  found  means  to  learn
from  the  stranger,  that  the  villain  they  were  in  quest  of  had  hid-
den himself  in  a  cavern  not  far  from  the  place  they  then  were;  he
soon  found  the  cavern,  and  entered  it  alone,  where  by  the  light  of
the  lamp  be  discovered  the  villain  asleep,  with  a  poniard  at  his
feet.     Inflamed  at  the  sight,  and  actuated  by  an  impatient  zeal,  ho
immediately  seized,  the  poniard  and  stubbed  him  first  in  th©  head
and  then  in  the  heart;  he  ha,d  only  time  to  cry,  Vengeance  is  taken—
and  expired.     When  the  other  eigl4  arrived  and  had  retresn-
Ii

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


386  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

ed  themselves  at  the  spring,  Joabert  severed  the  head  from  the
body,  and  taking  it  in  one  hand  and  his  poniard  in  the  other,  be
with  his  brethren  returned  to  Jerusalem.  Solomon  was  at  first
very  much  offended  that  Joabert  had  put  it  out  of  his  power  to
take  vengeance  himself  in  presence  of,  and  as  a  warning  to  the
rest  of  the  workmen  to  be  faithful  to  their  trust;  (not  their  work;)
but  by  proper  intercession  was  again  reconciled.  Joabert  became
highly  favored  of  Solomon,  who  conferred  upon  him  and  his  eight
companions  the  title  of '  Elected  KnightsS*  Ought  not  the  Grand
Lodge  to  confer  upon  the  murderers  of  Morgan  some  new  and
sublime  degree  of  Masonry,  with  stilt  more  bloody  emblems?
To  show  you,  beyond  the  possibility  of  a  doubt,  that  this  transac-
tion was  in  strict  conformity  with  principles  of  the  order,  I  will
quote  once  more  from  page  243,  where  you  will  find  the  history
of  the  Illustrious  Knights,  which  is  as  follows: — *  After  venge-
.  ance  had  been  fully  taken  on  the  traitors  mentioned  in  the  fore-
going degrees;  Solomon  instituted  this,  both  as  a  reward  for
the  zeal  and  inteority  of  the  Grand  Masters  elect  of  fifteen,
(the  persons  who  took  vengeance  on  the  traitors,)  and  also  by
their  preferment  to  make  room  for  other  worthy  brethren  (mur-
derers) from  the  lower  degrees  to  that  of  Grand  Masters  elect  of
fifteen.  He  accordingly  appointed  twelve  of  the  fifteen  to  con-
stitute a  Grand  Chapter  of  Illustrious  Knights,  and  gave  them
command  over  thetwelve  tribes.  He  expressed  ^particular  regard
for  this  order,  and  showed  them  the  precious  things  in  the  taber-
nacle. Herefollowthe  names  of  the  twelve  'Illustrious  Knights:9
Joabert,  the  man  who  assassinated  Akirop  and  Stockin,  and  the
other  zealous  assassins,  head  the  list.  Here,  ray  brethren,  I.  must
ask  you  to  pause,  ponder,  and  deeply  reflect  on  the  history  here
given,  and  fate  of  Akirop:  compare  it,  with  all  its  bearings,  with
die  fate  of  Morgan,  and  then  say,  if  you  dare  say  it,  that  Morgan
was  not  executed  according  to  the  laws, — yes,  the  infernal  laws  of
Masonry.  Why  has  a  degree,  instituted  to  keep  in  remembrance
the  execution  of  a  traitor,  been  kept  in  existence  ever  since,  if  not
to  stimulate  the  brethren  to  a  similar  act,  should^a  similar  circum-
stance ever  arise?  Such  a  degree  is  in  existence  at  this  day  in
the  United  States — yes,  in  the  state  of  New  York — and  it  is  pre-
posterous to  suppose,  that  the  members  of  that  degree,  assem-
bled in  their  bloody  dens,  with  bloody  aprons  and  representations
of  the  bloody  head  of  a  traitor  before  them,  and  seeing  venge-
ance written  in  capital  letters  upon  the  walls  of  their  dark  cavern,
and  knowing  Morgan  was  writing  the  secrete  of  Masonry,  that
they  would  not,  one  and  all,  with  all  thelfcfei  of  Joabert  and
Stockin,  arise  in  their  wrath  and  strike  the  villain  to  the  heart.
♦See  Illustrations  of  Masonry,  bj  T.  S.  Webb*  p.  12 ;  Salem  ed.  181&

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON    MASONRY.  387

If  they  were  active  members  and  believed  thoir  obligations  bind-
ing, it  was  their  duty  to  strike  the  deadly  blow,  deep  and  to  the
heart,  even  as  Murdock  was  so  struck.  I  have  heard  Masons
blame  those  concerned  in  the  recent  transactions:  some  have
even  said  the  murderers  of  Morgan  ought  to  be  hung.  This  my
brethren  is  wrong.  If  there  is  a  blame  to  be  attached  any  where,
it  is  to  the  institution.  If  these  men  were  firm  supporters  of  the
order,  they  acted  right.  They  expected  the  laws  of  the  institu-
tion to  support  them  in  such  an  act,  and  that  the  members  (ex-
cept the  recreants)  would  justify  them;  and  they  had  good  grounds
for  so  supposing.  On  the  contrary,  any  member  of  the  institu-
tion, being  fully  satisfied  that  Morgan  w\ts  writing  the  secrets  of
Masonry,  and  did  not  immediatefy  proceed  to  apprehend  the  vil-
lain, 'that  he  might  have  a  punishment  inflicted  adequate  to  his
crime,'  neglected  the  laws  of  Masonry,  and  ought,  in  strict  con-
formity to  those  laws,  to  be  expelled  as  an  unworthy  member.
Blame  not  those  who  acted  in  strict  conformity  to  the  laws  of  the
institution,  but  cast  the  blame  where  it  is  richly  deserved,  namely,
upon  an  institution  which  required  of  them  such  an  act.  These
men  expected  our  support;  and  when  their  trouble  comes  upon
them  it  is  cowardly  to  say,  punish  them,  the  institution  did  not
require  such  an  act.  Thus*  my  brethren,  we  have  gone  through
this  subject,  and  do  see  that  those  engaged  in  the  late  outrages
had  ancient  authority  for  so  acting.  No  one  who  candidly  ex-
amines the  cases  here  cited,  but  will  say  that  murder  is  authorized
by  the  Masonic  institution,  under  particular  circumstances.  I
now  ask  you  again,  will  you  longer  support  such  an  institution?

— : —  A  Mason.

NO.  VI.
To  all  honest  Masons:

Brethren— The  great  subject  which  agitates  the  people  at
present,  seems  every  day  of  its  existence  to  draw  nearer  to  the
point  which  is  to  decide  the  destiny  of  the  Masonic  institution.
On  the  one  hand  it  is  contended  that  Morgan  was  carried  off  and
murdered  by  a  few  Masonic  stragglers  and  outlaws ;  and  that  the
usages  and  customs  of  the  order  in  no  way  encourage  or  sanction,
such  acts;  while  on  the  other  hand  it  is  asserted,  that  those  concern-
ed in  the  outrages  were  some  of  the  first  men  of  the  order;  and  that
the  ancient  usages  and  customs  of  the  institution  required  such
acts  at  their  hands.  If  this  be  true,  it  requires  no  great  discernment
to  discover  that  we  have  a  government  within  a  government;  and
that  either  the  coqgjtitution  and  laws  of  our  country,  or  those  of
ancient  Free  Masonry  must  give  away;  and  that  if  oar  government
is  triumphant  in  the  present  conflict,  Masonry  must  go  down  for
ever.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


388


UGHT   ON    MASONRY.


4


Again,  if  the  men  cooceraed  in  the  outrages  were  in  no  way
authorized  or  encouraged  by  the  usages  and  customs  of  Free
Masonry,  to  kidnap  and  execute  the  traitor,  and  the  principles  of
the  order  in  no  way  come  in  contact  w  ith  the  constitution  and
Jaws  of  our  country,  and  are  otherwise  pure  and  wholesome,  then
indeed  Free  Masonry  may  stand  for  ages.  Jn- order,,  therefore,,
to  iuvestigale  thu  subject,  it  is  necessary  we  should  touch  in  a
slight  degree  upon  some  of  the  mysteries  and  principles  of  ancient
and  modern  Free  Masonry.

And  first,  my  brethren,  I  shall  have  the  hardihood  to  assert,
that  before  any  of  you  ever  entered  a  lodge,  you  pledged  your
honor  cheerfully  to  conform  to  aH  the  ancient  usages  and  customs
of  the  order.  m     ,

After  this  you  went  farther — yo\  entered  the  lodge  and  there
solemnly  made  oath  not  only  to  adhere  to  the  ancient  usages  and
customs  of  the  order,  but  to  have  your  throat  cut  across,  your
tongue  torn  out,  and  your  body  buried  in  the  rough  sands  of  the  sea
should  you  ever  be  wilfully  guilty  of  divulging  any  of  the  secrets
of  Free  Masonry;  and  so  on  from  an  Entered  Apprentice  in  every
degree  up  to  that  of  the  Thrice  Illustrious  Order  of  Knights  of  the
Cross,  you  have  solemnly  sworn  to  suffer  some  penalty  to  be  in-
fli  ted  on  your  body,  which  if  inflicted  would  take  life,  should  you
evfcr  be  wilfully  guilty  of  revealing  any  of  the  secrets  of  either  or
all  their  degrees.  Surely,  the  good  Mason  says,  we  have  sworn  to
suffer  all  these  penalties,  if  we  betray  our  trust.  But  the  traitor
will  not  inflict  them  upon  himself,  and  there  is  no  one  authorized
to  inflict  them  upon  him.  If  this  be  true,  thee  indeed  those
concerned  in  the  Morgan  case.were  nothing  but  a  Masonic  ban-
ditti and  murderers,  and  the  institution  in  no  way  to  blame.  But
I  shall  not,  as  readily  as  some  do,  stop  exactly  here.  1  shall  go
a  little  further  and  inquire  what  the  ancient  usages  and  customs
\  are,  which  our  honors  and  oaths  are  pledged  to  support.  It  is  a
fact  I  believe  well  known  to  all  Masons,  that  Solomon  was  the
the  great  founder  and  pattern  of  ancient  Free  Masonry,  and  that
j'ati  the  Grand  Masters  from  his  day  down  to  this  time,  have  one
(after  another,  in  regular  succession,  been  considered  the  succes-
sors and  representatives  of  Sojomon;  and  aJl  the  laws,  usages  and
I  customs  which  were  established  in  his  day*  II  Masons  ever  since
of  both  low  and  high  degree  have  most  religiously  pledged  their
honors  and  their  solemn  oaths  and  obligations  always  to  observe
and  maintain.  To  illustrate  my  ideas  more  familiarly  on  this
subject,  suppose  -one  of  you  were' elected  to  preside  over  the
Masonic  institution  in  the  United  States  for  seven  years;  that  in
**£  the  degrees  from  Entered  Apprentice  up  to  the  higher  and

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  389

sublimer  station  which  you  fill,  and  that  all  the  ancient  laws,
usages  and  customs  of  the  order,  were  enforced  upon  the  mind
with  all  the  power  and  ingenuity  which  man  could  invent,  &s  the
only  means  of  preserving  the  institution  from  ruin  and  destruc-
tion. Suppose,  at  your  installation,  it  was  required  of  you  as  the
presiding  officer  of  the  institution,  to  deviate  in  no  instance  from
the  ancient  landmarks  and  customs,  but  to  preside  with  that
promptness  and  decision  of  character  which  will  carry  down  to
future  ages  the  secrets  of  the  order,  as  pure  and  unimpaired  as
they  were  given  to  you;  and  suppose,  under  all  of  these  cir-
cumstances, and  while  you  were  at  the  head  of  the  institution,
and  in  the  place  of  Solomon,  a  messenger  should  arrive  and  in-
form you  that  Morgan,  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  was  writing  the
secrets  of  Masonry,  and  Miller,  an  Entered  Apprentice  Mason,
was  absolutely  about  to  publish  them,  even  up  to  the  Royal  Arch;
and  unless  measures  were  immediately  taken  to  bring  the  traitors
to  condign  punishment,  the  small  streams  which  cause  the  mo-
ney for  quarterly  dues,  initiations,  and  for  the  sale  of  charters,  to
flow  in  such  profusion  from  a  thousand  ways  to  the  fountain  head
would  dry  up;  that  in  short  they  would  publish  the  real  and  genu-
ine secrets  of  Free  Masonry  up, to  the  arch,  to  the  world,  and
Masonry  be  ruined  and  undone  for  ever.  What  would  you  do?
Would  you  disregard  your  honor,  your  solemn  oaths,  and  all  your
admonitions  at  your  installation;  suffer  the  traitors  under  your
administration  to  publish  the  sacred  and  holy  secrets  of  ancient
Free  Masonry  to  the  world,  and  the  institution  be  ruined  for
ever?  Or  would  you  rather  have  some  little  regard  to  your  ho-
nor, your  solemn  oaths  and  admonitions?  Look  about  you  and
inquire  what  are  the  ancient  laws,  usages  and  customs  of  the
order  which  are  every  where  so  rigorously  enforced  upon  the
candidate?  What  did  Solomon  do  in  the  case  of  Jubela,  Jubelo,
and  Jubelum,  where  the  ruffians  attempted  to  extort  the  Master's
word  from  our  worthy  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiff ?  How  was
it  in  the  case  of  the  seven  traitors  that  fled  from  Jerusalem?
And  how  was  it  in  the  case  of  Akirop?  Surely  in  all  these  cases
Solomon  appointed  discreet  Masons  to  seize  the  villains  and
traitors,  and  to  bring  them  before  him;  and  'he  ordered  punish-
ments to  be  inflicted  on  them  proportionate  to  their  crimes,  ex-
cept in  the  case  of  Akirop,  and  there  the  Mason  whom  Solomon
appointed  took  the  power  into  his  own  hands  and  executed  the
traitor  himself.  Solomon  approved  of  this,  and  conferred  on  the
executive  officer  new  and  lasting  honors.  How  has  it  been  with
all  succeeding  Grand  Masters  in  cases  of  treachery,  from  Solo-
mon down  to  this  day?  Surely  Masonic  traitors  have  every.
Ii2

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


;390  light  on  srAscmnr.

where  had  those  penalties  inflicted  upon  them,  whfeft  they  had
swora  might  be  inflicted,  were  they  ever  wilfully  guilty  of  reveal-
ing any  of  the  secret  and  hidden  mysteries  of  Masonry.  Would*
voti  not  say,Sovereign  Master,  these  are  the  laws,  usages  and  cus-
ion)*  of  the  order  which  we  have  all  pledged  all  that  is  sacred  orr
earth  or  holy  in  heaven  cheerfully  to  conform  to — therefore,  I  will
do  in  the  Morgan  and  Miller  case,  as  is  required  of  me  to  do  by
the  order.  I  will  do  as  all  former  Grand  Masters  have  done  iri
similar  cases.  1  will  appoint  discreet  and  subtle  Masons  to  in-
flict upon  Morgan  and  Miller,  those  penalties  which  they  have
sworn  to  suffer  should  they  ever  be  wilfully  guilty"  of  revealing
the  secrets  of  the  order,  and  thereby  save  the  institution  of  Ma-
sonry from  everlasting  disgrace  and  abso/ute  ruin.  Daniel
Johns  is  a  discreet  ana  subtle  Mason,  and  what  is  more,  he  is
a  stranger  in  the  country  where  the  traitors  reside:  I  will  select
him  as  my  chief  executive  officer;  and  as  all  my  Masonic  sub-
jects have  every  where  solemnly  sworn,  with  their  hands  on  the
Holy  Bible,  and  in  the  presence  of  Almighty  God,  to  obey  all
due  sign3  and  regular  summons,  given,  handed,  sent  or  thrown  to
them  by  the  hand  of  a  Master  Mason, — I  will  furnish  hhrr  with
some  regular  summonses  requiring  of  them  to  obey  him  in  what-
ever ho  may  direct  with  regard  to  the  traitors,  and  send  him  away
to  the  place  where  they  reside;  and  I  have  no  doubt  a  punish-
ment will  be  inflicted  i  n  them  adequate  to  their  crimes/  When
you  have  gone  thus  far,  Most  Sovereign  Grand  Master  Elect,
you  have  done  your  duty,  and  the  remainder  is  left  to  the  sub-
tlety and  cunning  of  DanieUohns  and  allthoso  to  whom  he  may:
give,  hand  or  send  summons  to  assist  him.  Thus,  my  brethren,
the  conclusion  is  irresistibly  forced  upon  us,  that  the  institution
of  Free  Masonry  does  hold  its  members  in  the  strong  bonds  oF
life  and  death;  that  our  Sovereign  Grand  Master,  as  far  as  re-
gards the  revealing  of  the  secrets  of  the  order,  is  absolute  in
power,  and  all  that  are  under  him  are  bound  to  obey.  This  ac-
counts in  the  most  satisfactory  manner  foT  what  we  have  wit-
nessed in  this  part  of  the  country  fourteen  months  past;  and*  this,
in  my  humble  opinion,  Masonically  justifies  all  those  who- were
concerned  in  the  abduction  of  Morgan,  and  the  attempt  on  the
life  of  Miller.

Such  being  the  facts,  my  brethren,  do  you  not  discover  that
the  'ancient  laws,  usages  and  customs  of  Free  Masonry'  are  dia-
metrically opposed  to  the  constitution  and  law*  of  our  country!
If  so,  (and  on  this  point  there  can  be  no  doubt*  for  if  the  Sove-
reign Blaster  had  not  been  absolute  in  power,  the  traitors  long
since  would  have  swarmed  like  the  locusts  of  fegypt,)  ought  we*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT    ON   MASOJTRY.  391

not  as  honest  men  and  good  citizens,  with  one  accord,  to  rise  in
the  dignity  of  freemen,  and  like  our  fathers,  tear  asunder  those
bonds  which  make  us  slaves,  and  tend  to  entail  misery  upon  our
children?  Our  fathers  were  under  solemn  obligations  to  be
faithful  to  the  crown  of  Great  Britain;  but  when  they  discovered
that  an  observance  of  their  oaths  and  obligations  which  they  had
taken,  were  detrimental  to  freedom  and  the  rights  oi  man,  they
with  a  manliness  of  spirit  which  all  future  ages  will  admire,  tore
their  bonds  asunder,  fought  the  monarch  whom  they  were  sworn
to  protect;  established  freedom  for  themselves,  and  as  they  fondly
hoped,  had  entailed  it  upon  their  children.  Why  not  we  then,
when  we  becomo  convinced  that  our  obligations  jeopardize  our
lives,  and  make  slaves  of  us,  and  endanger  the  liberties  of  our
children — why  not  we,  I  say,  like  our  fathers,  rend  our  bonds
asunder;  open  the  bowels  of^  the  beast,  and  expose  to  the  scorn
contempt  of  all  mankind,  the  selfishness  and  sin  that  has  there
been  smothered  so  long.*

Do  you  think  this  would  be  unmasonic,  and  therefore  we  had
better  withdraw  and  say  nothing  about  it,  if  we  are  displeased
with  it.  Such  advice  I  know  is  given  every  day  in  the  streets,
but  this  was  not  the  course  pursued  by  our  fathers — they  not
only  withdrew  their  oath  and  allegiance  from  the  crown  of  Great
Britain,  but  they  turned  about  and  fought  her  with  a  firmness  of
purpose  which  always  ensures  success.  Therefore,  my  breth-
ren, if  you  agree  with  me,  that  under  existing  circumstances  it  is
proper  and  necessary  so  far  to  disregard  the  Masonic  obligations
as  to  make  open  and  honorable  war  upon  the  monster, — then  I
beseech  you, by  all  the  fondness- you  ever  bore  for  the  purity  of  our
government  and  the  rights  of  mankind,  to  come  out  of  that  dark,
absolute,  and  bloody  government  of  Free  Masonry,  which  was
established  in  the  dark  and  bloody  ages  of  the  world,  and  is  hand-
ed down  unimpaired,  with  all  its  horrid  rites  and  ceremonies.
And  then,  my  brethren,  when  you  have  done  this,  instead  of  re-
treating into  some  dark  garret,  with  a  Tyler  at  the  door  with  an
old  rusty  sword  m  his  hand  to  guard  it,  and  there  under  the  black,
flag  of  iniquity  and  crime  marching  around  the  room  and  singing,
Mark  Masters  all  appear
Before  your  Grand  Overseer, —

we  in  open  day  will  hoist  high  in  the  air  the  star  spangled  banner
of  our  country  that  floated  over  the  bloody  field  of  our  fathers,
and  shout  aloud  in  presence  of  the  universe,

Hail  Columbia,  happy  land,
Hail  ye  heroes,  heaven  born  band;
and  then  march  on,  conquering  and  to  conquer,  (the  mind  only  I

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


392  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

mean,)  until  every  dark  and  wicked  rite  and  ceremony  of  ancient
Free  Masonry,  be  driven  far  away  beyond  the  borders  of  our
country.  A  Mason.

NO.  VII.

To  all  honest  Masons:

Brethren — I  again  aak  you  to  examine  the  charge  made  in  No.
5;  for  the  reported  attempts  to  clear  the  institution  of  Masonry,
at  the  expense  of  the  individuals  engaged  in  the  kidnapping  and
murder  of  Morgan,  calls  for  the  serious  attention  of  every- per-
son who  wishes  to  fix  the  blame  where  it  deservedly  belongs.
That  the  institution  required  those  acts  of  its  members,  is  as  evi-
dent as  any  proposition;  and  one  would  suppose,  that,  at  this
day,  there  are  none  who  would  have  the  effrontery  to  deny  it.
But,  strange  as  this  may  appear,  there  are  some  who  deny  that
the  laws  and  customs  of  Masonry  do  authorize  the  abduction  and
murder  of  a  Masonic  traitor.  They  say,  it  is  true  I  have  sworn
to  suffer  ray  throat  cut  across,  &c;  but  J,  nor  no  one  else,  have
sworn  or  promised  to  perform  the  execution:  it  is  merely  an  im-
precation without  meaning.  Once  more,  I  ask  you  to  candidly
examine  the  laws  of  the  order,  and  I  am  satisfied,  unless  you  al-
low your  prejudices  to  influence  you,  you  will  be  fully  satisfied  on
that  point.  In  the  Free  Mason's  Monitor,  at  page  31,*  the  can-
didate is  requested  to  answer  the  following  questions: — 'Do  you
seriously  declare,  upon  your  honor,  before  these  gentlemen,
(members  of  the  lodge,  who  conduct  him  through  the  ceremo-
nies,) that  you  will  cheerfully  conform  to  all  the  ancient  es-

TABLISHED    USAGES    AND   CUSTOMS  OF  THE    FRATERNITY? and

not  until  he  has  answered  this  in  the  affirmative,  is  he  allowed  to
observe  even  the  form  of  the  lodge.  At  page  46f  is  the  first  charge
a  Mason  ever  receives;  it  is  a  charge  to  a  newly  initiated  Enter-
ed Apprentice:  he  is  there  solemnly  charged — 'If,  in  the  circle  of
your  acquaintance,  you  find  a  person  desirous  of  being  initiated
into  Masonry,  be  particularly  careful  not  to  recommend  him  un-
less he  will  conform  to  our  rules.'  No  matter  how  fair  a
character  he  may  sustain;  you  need  not  inquire  whether  he  be  a
believer  in  the  sublime  doctrines  of  Christianity — no  matter  if  he
be  the  veriest  infidel — the  only  question  is,  will  he  conform  'to
our  rules*'

In  the  charge  to  a  Fellow  Craft,  at  page  65,  J  they  thus  address
the  candidate! — 'Our  laws  and  regulations  you  are  stre-
nuously TO  SUPPORT,  AND  RE  ALWAYS  READY  TO  A8SI8T  IN  SEE-
ING thrm  duly  executed.'  In  the  charge  to  a  Master  Mason,
at  page  74,||  the  Worshipful  Master  thus  addresses  the  new  made

*  Salem  ed.  p.  30.        t  do.  p.  44.        J  do.  p.  62.        ||  do.  p.  72.

'  Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  393

Master  Mason: — 'You  are  now  bound,  by  honor  and  gratitude,  •
to  be  faithful  to  your  trust;  to  support  the  dignity  of  your  charac-
ter on  every  occasion;  and  to  enforce,  by  precept  and  example,
obedience  to  the  tenets  of  our  order.  The  ancient  landmark  of
the  order  intrusted  to  your  care,  you  are  carefully  to  preserve,
and  never  suffer  them  to  be  infringed,  of  cotmtenance  a  deviation
from  the  established  usages  and  customs  of  the  fraternity/
Before  a  lodge  can  do  any  business,  there  must  be  granted  to
them  a  charter;  and  the  Master,  in  a  solemn  manner,  is  instruct-
ed what  are  the  duties  of  his  office,  by  the  Grand  Master,  or
some  person  representing  the  Grand  Master.  You  will  find  all
these  instructions  at  page  96*  of  the  Monitor.  The  Master  thus
addresses  him:  (the  Master  elect:) — 'Previous  to  your  investure,
it  is  necessary  that  you  should  signify  your  assent  to  those  an-
cient charges  and  regulations,  which  point  out  the  duties  of
a  Master  of  a  lodge.'  Among  other  charges  is  the  following: —
*You  agree  to  hold  in  veneration  the  original  rulers  and  patrons  of
the  order  of  Masonry,  and  their  regular  successors,  supreme  and
subordinate,  according  to  their  station^.'  Page  lOOf — <rlhe  Grand
Master  then  addresses  the  Master  elect  in  the  following  manner:
Do  you  submit  to  these  charges,  and  promise  to  support  these
regulations,  as  Masters  have  done  in  all  ages  before  you?7  And
not  until  he,  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  in  presence  of  all  his
brethren  and  the  officers  of  the  Grand  Looge,  pledged  himself
to  do  it,  can  he  be  vested  with  authority  to  govern  a  lodge.  At
page  152,  j  you  find  the  same  doctrine  insisted  upon,  earnestly,  in
a  charge  to  a  newly  exalted  Royal  Arch  Mason.

'We  expect  you  will  never  recommend  any  candidate  to  this
chapter,  whose  abilities  and  knowledge  of  the  foregoing  degrees
you  cannot  fully  vouch  for,  and  whom  you  do  notfiwnly  and  t  onf-
dently  believe  will  conform  to  the  principles  of  our  order,  and  Jul-
fil  the  obligations  of  a  Royal  Arch  Mason.9  Thus,  my  brethren,
we  find  insisted  upon,  with  an  earnestness  which  nothing  but  a
case  of  desperation  can  urge,  that  we  support  *<*//  the  ancient
usages  and  customs  of9  ancient  Free  Masonry.  I  wish  you  to
examine  these  instructions  with  care  and  candor,  for  I  do  consi-
der there  is  a  meaning  rloaked  under  them,  which,  in  the  M|ried
manner  the  degrees  are  usually  given,  do  not  meet  our  view  at  •
first  sight.  Why  do  they  so  earnestly  urge  us,  from  the  timewc
step  into  the  preparation  room  to  prepare  to  be  initiated  into  tho
sublime  mysteries  of  an  Entered  Apprentice,  up  to  the  time  wo
arc  exalted  to  the  degree  of  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  to  support
lall  the  ancient  usages  and  customs  of  the  fraternityV  I  wlU/J°^
show  you  what  are  some  of  the  laws  of  Masonry,  and  then  mos\
*  Salem  ed.  p.  93.        f  do.  p.  97.        }  do.  p.  1*6-

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


394  LIGHT   OX   MASONRY.

*  conclusive]/  prove  that  the  'ancient  usage  and  custom?  of  our  an-
cient brethren  was,  to  inflict  on  a  Masonic  traitor  punishment  ade-
quate to  his  crime*

The  first  law  of  Masonry  which  I  shall  give  you,  may  be  found
at  page  20  of  the  'Ulustrations  of  Masonry,'  as  given  by  Mor-
gan: how  near  it  is  to  the  obligations  which  you  actually  took  up-
on you  in  the  lodge,  I  leave  y#u  to  judge.  'Furthermore,  I  do
promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  not  write,  print,  stamp,  stain,  hew,
cut,  carve,  indent,  paint,  or  engrave  it,  (the  secrets  of  Masonry,)
to  any  thing  moveable  or  immoveable,  under  the  whole  canopy  of
heaven,  whereby  or  whereon  the  least  letter,  &c.  may  become
legible  or  intelligible  to  myself,  or  any  person  in  the  known  world,
whereby  the  secrets  of  Masonry  may  become  unlawfully  obtain-
ed through  my  unworthiness:  binding  myself  under  no  less  pen-
alty, than  to  have  my  throat  cut  across,  my  tongue  torn  out  by  the
roots,  and  my  body  buried  in  the  rough  sands  of  the  sea,  at  low
watermark,  where  the  tide  ebbs  and  flows  twice  in  twenty-four
hours.9  One  would  suppose,  if  true,  this  was  n  powerful  law;  1
should  wish  for  no  greater  punishment,  than  the  penalty  of  this
law  to  be  inflicted  on  me.  The  next  Masonic  law  I  shall  cite,
may  be  found  at  page  45  of  the  same  work: — 'Furthermore,  do
I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  support  the  constitution  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  the  United  States,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  this
state,  under  which  this  lodge  is  held,  and  conform  to  all  the  by-laws,
rules,  and  regulations  of  this,  or  any  other  lodge,  of  which  I  may
at  any  time  hereafter  become  a  member,  as  far  as  in  my  power.
Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  i  will  obey  all.
(no  exceptions)  regular  signs  and  summons,  given,  handed,
sent,  or  thrown  to  me  by  the  hand  of  a  brother  Fellow  Craft
Mason,  or  from,  the  body  of  a  just  and  lawfully  constituted  lodge
of  such:  binding  myself  under  no  less  penalty,  than  to  have  my
left  breast  torn  opten,  and  my  heart  and  vitals  taken  from  thence
and  thrown  over  my  left  shoulder,  and  carried  into  the  valley  of
Jehosaphat,  thereto  become  a  prey  to  wild  beasts  of  the  field
and  vultures  if  the  air,  if  ever  I  should  prove  wilfully  guilty,  &c.'
Stronger  still,  page  62,  same  work,  obligation  of  a  Master  Ma-
£onjppFurthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  sup-

^portthe  constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  state  of ,

"uader  which  this  lodge  is  held,  and  conform  to  all  the  by-laws  y
rules,  and  regulations  of  this,  or  any  other  lodge,  of  which  I  may
Hereafter  become  a  member.  Furthermore,  do  1  promise  and
swear,  that  I  will  obey  all  regular  signs,  summons,  or  to-
kens, given,  handed,  sent,  or  thrown  to  me,from  the  hand
of  a  brother*  Master  Mason,  or  from  the  body  of  a  just  and  l*wfuUy>

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   Off  HASOV&T.  395

romtitoted  lodge  of  such.  Furthermore,  doi  promise  and  swear,
that  I  will  go  on  a  Master  Mason9 8  errand,  whenever  required,
even  should  I  have  to  go  barefoot  and  bareheaded:  binding  myself
under  no  less  penalty  than  to  have  my  body  severed  in  the  midst
and  dividtd  to  the  north  and  south,  my  bowels  burnt  to  ashes  in
the  centre,  and  the  ashes  scattered  before  the  four  wmds  ef  heaven,
thai  there  might  not  the  least  track  or  trace  of  remembrance  re-
main among  men  or  Masons,  of  so  vile  and  perjured  a  wretch  as  I
shotdd  be,  were  I  ever  to  prove  wilfully  guilty,9  £c.  Stronger  and
stronger,  and  thus  they  continue  to  increase  in  all  important  parts,
up  to  the  degree  of  Knights  of  the  Jloly  and  Thrice  Illustrious
Order  of  the  Cross,  as  many  of  us  full  well  know.  I  have  given
authority  sufficient  to  satisfy  any  one,  beyond  the  bare  possibility
of  a  doubt,  that  every  Mason,  from  the  days  of  our  founder,  Solo-
mon, down  to  that  of  the  murdered  Morgan,  who  has  'received  a
part  of  the  rights  and  benefits  of  a  Worshipful  Lodge,'  have  been
bound  by  their  honor,  and  the  strongest  obligations  which  man
could  invent,  to  support  iaU  the  ancient  usages  and  customs,9  as
well  as  laws  of  ancient  Free  Masonry.  One  point  only  is  want-
ing to  establish  the  charge  made  in  number  five,  that  die  ancient
usages  and  customs  of  our  ancient  brethren,  was  to  execute  any
Masonic  traitor  found  among  them.  On  this  point  proof  is  abun-
dant. As  we  all  know,  in  the  different  degrees  we  have  taken,
Masonic  tradition  inform  us  of  a  number  of  instances  of  the  kind.
No  Fellow  Craft  Mason  can  forget  the  slaying  of  forty  and  two
thousand  of  die  Ephraimites  in  one  day*  and  that  our  ancient
brethren  adopted  the  pass-word  used  on  that  occasion,  as  a  pro-
per pass-word  to  be  given  before  entering  any  well  regulated
lodge  of  Fellow  Crafts.  Every  Master  Mason  must  remember
the  execution  of  the  three  Fellow  Crafts,  executed  by  order  of
king  Solomon.  I  will  now,  my  brethren,  show  conclusively,  that
the  ancient  usages  and  customs  of  our  brethren,,  was  to  inflict  on
the  Masonic  traitor  a  punishment  due  his  crimes.  Before  enter-
ing on  that  point  I  would  remark,  that  in  all  the  ancient  ceremo-
nies we  allow  the  Master  of  a  lodge  foil  and  complete  power;  no
one  can  direct,  but  all  must  obey  his  mandate;  and  thus  <rf  the
Grand  Master:  all  the  subordinate  officers  are  under  his  cotatrol,
and  must  execute  whatever  he  directs;  equally  so  is  it  with  the
presiding  officer  of  .the  Chapter  and  Grand  Chapter  and  General
Grand  Chapter,  who  represents  king  Solomon,  and  according  to
*ancient  usage  and  custom,'  gives  orders  for  the  apprehension  and
execution  of  Masonic  traitors.  I  do  not  wish  to  be  misunder-
stood, for  I  well  know  that  in  all  minor  concerns,  such  as  dispos-
ing of  the  fanda,  fcc.  he  hi  under  control  *f  the  member*  of  his

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


396  LIGHT  OK   MASONRY*

lodge;  butl speak  expressly  of  his  power  as  derived  from  'an-
cient usages  and  customs*'  Thus,  for  example,  all  the  subordi-
nate officers  say: — 'You  will  wait  until  the  Worshipful  Master  can
be  informed  and  his  order  given — It  is  the  order  of  the  Worship-
ful Master — The  Worshiped  Muster  ordered  roe,  &c.;'  showing
conclusively  that  the  Master  in  all  cases  which  refer  to  'ancient
usages  and  customs  of  the  fraternity'  is  absolute,  and  all  the
brethren  are  sworn  to  *o6ci/  all  signs,  summons  er  tokens,  given,
handed,  sent  or  thrown  to  them.9

I  shall  first  quote  from  p.  49  of  the  'Illustrations,'  where  the  Ju-
nior Warden  inquires  of  the  considerate,  why  was  this  pass  insti-
tuted? Jlns.  In  consequence  of  a  quarrel  which  had  long  existed
between  Jeptha,  judge  of  Israel,  and  the  Ephraimites,  die  latter
of  whom  had  long,  been  a  stubborn  and  rebellious  people,  whom
Jeptha  had  endeayored  to  subdue  by  lenient  measures,  but  to  no
effect.  The  Ephraimites  being  highly  incensed  against  Jeptha,  for
not  being  called  to  fight  and  share  in  the  rich  spoils  of  the  Amori-
tish  war,  assembled  a  mighty  army  and  passed  over  the  river  Jor-
dan to  give  Jeptha  battle;  but. he  being,  apprised  of  their  approach,
called  together  the  men  of  Israel  and  gave  them  battle  and  put
them  to  flight;  and  to  make  his  victory  more  complete,  he  order-
ed guards  to  be  placed  at  the  different  passes  of  the  river  Jordan,
and  commanded  if  the  Ephraimites  passed  that  way,  that  they
should  pronounce  the  word  Shibboleth;  but  they  being  of  a  differ-
ent tribe,  pronounced  it  Sibolctb;  which  trifling  defect  proved  them
spies  and  cost  them  their  lives;  and  there  fell  that  day,  at  the  differ-
ent  passes  on  die  banks  of  the  river  Jordan,  forty  and  two  thousand.
This  word  was  also  used  by  our  ancient  brethren,  to  distinguish
a  friend  from  a  foe,  and  has  since  been  adopted  as  a  proper  pass-
word,  to  be  given  before  entering  any  well  regulated  and  govern-
ed lodge  of  Fellow  Craft  Masons.

I  am  well  aware  you  will  say  this  is  not  directly  to  the  point;
but  a  very  little  reflection  will  show  you  that  it  has  an  important
bearing  on  this  question.  It  is  said  to  be  a  proper  pass  word.
It  is  so  truly;  the  candidate  hears  of  the  slaughter  of  forty  and
two  tjwusand  of  the  Ephraimites,  to  impress  his  mind  of  the  great
danger  of  being  an  enemy  to  Free  Masonry.  It  has  another  still
more  important  bearing,  and  is  in  substance  the  sarue  as  to  tell
the  candidate,  should  you,  or  any  number  of  you,  turn  traitors  rod
expose  the  true  pass-word,  we  can  invent  a  new  'check-word,'
and  armed  with  the  dirks  of  the  Knights,  can  require  of  you,  'Say-
now  our  new  chec&word;'  and  every  man  of  you  not  having  the
new  check- word  shaft  be  slain;  and  the  day  may  arrive  when  we
shall  make  as  great  slaughter  among  our  enemies  a$  did  Jeptha
among  the  Ephraimites.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  *  39/

This,  my  brethren,  is  no  trifling  subject;  the  Grand  Lodge  has
seen  fit,  in  the  plentitude  of  their  wisdom,  to  invent  a  new  pass-
word, and  no  man  can  be  admitted  into  any  lodge  under  their
jurisdiction  without  he  can  distinctly  pronounce  this  new  Shibbo-
leth, (fidelity,  the  new  pass  word;)  and  when  the  time  may
come  when  those  who  cannot  pronounce  it  may  receive  the  dead-
ly thrust,  no  one  can  tell.  It  carries  also  one  other  important
lesson  with  it:  as  Jeptha  had  full  power  to  command  the  forces
of  Israel  to  fight  his  battles,  and  invent  a  new  pass- word  to  detect
his  enemies;  so  has  our  Grand  Master  an  undoubted  right  to  call
upon  every  Mason  under  his  jurisdiction,  to  turn  out  at  his  com-
mand and  fight  for  the  cause  of  Masonry,  and  give  the  deadly
thrust  to  every  one  who  cannot  distinctly  pronounce,  Fidelity.

The  next  instance  of  Masonic  execution  I  shall  give,  may  be
found  from  page  80  to  82,  and  is  a  history  of  the  death  of  our
Worthy  Master,  Hiram  Abiff,  and  the  execution  of  the  three  Fel-
low Crafts  who  murdered  him.     I  am  aware  that  some  of  the
brotherhood,  like  drowning  men  catching  at  straws,  will  say  this
was  for  murder  and  did  not  relate  to  the  revealing  the  secrets  of
Masonry.     I  only  answer  that  my  object  now  is  to  show  that  if  a
person  is  found  guilty  of  a  crime  deserving  death  in  the  Masonic
order,  our  'ancient  usages  and  customs'  give  sufficient  power  to
execute  him,  and  it  is  left  to  the  successors  of  king  Solomon  to  de-
termine whether  he  be  worthy  of  death  or  not;  and  still  farther,  if  the
'ancient  usages  and  customs'  were  to  execute  a  member  for  doing
an  act  which  he  had  not  sworn  to  refrain  from,  surely  those  same
'ancient  usages  and  customs'  would  not  allow  a  member  to  escape
punishment  who  by  his  oath  had  submitted  himself  to  be  executed
should  he  commit  certain  acts:  then  if  our  'ancient  usages  and
customs'  are  such  that  a  person  can  be  executed  when  the  repre-
sentative of  king  Solomon  supposes  he  has  committed  a  crime
worthy  of  death,  they  most  assuredly  will  authorize  the  inflicting
a  penalty  which  the  member  has  subjected  himself  to,  should  he
reveal  the  secrets  of  Masonry.     I  would  farther  remark,  they
were  executed   'agreeably  to  the  imprecations  of  their  own
mouths:9  then  certainly  any  member  according  to  the  same  rule
can  be  exeeuted  according  to  the  'several  imprecations'  they  take
upon  themselves  in  their  obligations,  when  they  swear  in  the  pre-
sence of  Almighty  God  and  this  Worshipful  Lodge  erected  to
him,'  that  they  will  never  reveal  the  secrets  of  Masonry.

The  substance  of  that  history  is  as  follows: — A  number  of  the

workmen  of  the  temple  became  dissatisfied,  because  they  had

wrought  long  on  the  temple,  and  had  not  received  the  grand  and

sublime  word  of  a  Master  Mason;  wishing  to  obtain-  it,  that  they

Kk

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


398  &IOBT  ON    MASONEV.

might  travel  in  foreign-parts  and  obtain  better  ^ges,  they  accost-
edHiram  and  demanded  the  word  from  him.  He  told  them  he
could  not  give  it,  unless  there  were  three  present,  to  wit,  Solomon,
Hiram  king  of  Tyre,  and  himself;  but  to  wait  with  patience  until
they  were  assembled  in  the  Grand  Lodge  at  Jerusalem,  and  if
found  worthy  they  should  receive  it.  But  they  wished  not  to  wait;
and  in  their  attempts  to  get  it,  they  killed  our  Grand  Master,  Hi-
ram AbirT.  Solomon  coming  to  the  temple,  as  was  his  usual  cus-
tom, found  the  workmen  in  confusion,  and  on  inquiring  the  cause
was  told  there  were  no  designs  drawn  on  the  trestle  board.  After
considerable  ceremony  it  was  found  Hiram  was  missing.  He  then
orders  twelve  of  them  to  go  in  search  of  him.  They  returned  with
no  distinct  tidings,  but  related  some  suspicious  circumstances.
He  then  orders  them  to  go  a  second  time,  and  return  with  the  mur-
derers. After  some  search,  the  murderers  are  heard  lamenting
the  act,  and  asking  certain  punishments  inflicted  on  their  heads
for  the  murderous  deed.  They  were  seized  and  brought  before
king  Solomon,  'who  after  hearing  the  testimony  of  the. three  Fel-
low Crafts,  and  the  three  rufians  having  pleaded  guilty,  orders
them  to  be  taken  out  at  the  west  gate  of  the  temple,  and  there

EXECUTED    ACCORDING     TO    THE     SEVERAL    IMPRECATIONS     OF

their  own  mouths.'  It  is  true  that  is  not  direct  in  point,  so
far  as  the  revealing  the  secrets  was  the  crime,  but  conclusively
shows  the  power  of  punishing  was  vested  in  king  Solomon.  The
history  of  Akirop  and  the  other  six  traitors,  as  given  in  No.  5,
comes  directly  to  the  point  in  question.  Here  were  six  persons
executed  by  lung  Solomon,  for  some  enormous  crime;  and  from
the  circumstances  as  recorded,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  it  was
for  revealing  some  of  the  secrets  of  the  order.  Indeed,  some
who  have  taken  mat  degree,  do  not  deny  such  to  be  the  feet.
The  execution  of  Akirop  is  no  common  execution:  found  resting
secure  as  he  supposed,  the  executioner  entered  the  cave;  'inflam-
ed at  the  sight,  he  seised  the  poniard  and  plunged  it  first  in  the
head,  then  in  the  heart;9  not  satisfied  with  this,  he  severs  the  head
from  the  body,  and  taking  his  poniard  in  one  hand  and  the  bloody
head  in  the  other,  he, /proceeds  back  with  his  bloody  trophies  to
king  Solomon.  t>o  you  hear  him  condemning  Joabert  for  his
bloody  act?  Does  he-mourn  the  loss  of  Akirop?  It- is  true  he
was  at  first  displeased  because  be  put  it  but  of  tes  power  to  take
vengeance  himself,  in  presence  of  afl  the  craft,  as  a  warning  to
them  against  such  an  act;  but  so  easily  is  he  reconciled,  that  Joa-
bert is  soon  received  into  favor,  and  new  and  distinguished  ho-
nors conferred  upon  him,  to  reward  his  seal  in  an  act  at  which  hu-
manity *ouJd  shujMen  and  the  Wood/  deed  is  to  be  kept  in  remain*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  399

brance  and  transmitted  down  to  the  latest  posterity,  by  institu-
ting a  new  degree  of  Masonry,  and  having  the  emblems  and  furni-
ture of  it  represent  this  same  bloody  act.     The  halls  of  their  dark
cavern,  to  strike  fear  to  the  heart  of  those  who  would  otherwise
become  traitors,  and  to  stimulate  the  zeal  of  those  who  are  deter-
mined to  stick  to  the  order  at  all  hazards,  are  painted  to  represent
the  execution  of  Akirop  in  its  full  force.     The  candidate,  on  en-
tering this  chapter,  by  the  feeble  light  of  one  lamp  has  represent-
ed the  cavern  where  Akirop  reposed.     He  sees  the  bloody  po-
niard which  struck  the  fatal  blow;  he  sees  the  representation  of
Akirop's  bloody  head,  as  just  severed  from  the  body,  held  by  a
bloody  arm  in  an  attitude  of  exultation  at  the  death  of  a  traitor;
and  some  kind  brother,  with  his  apron  sprinkled  with  blood,  points
to  him,  vengeance,  written  in  capital  letters  upon  the  walls  of
tile  cavern.     Should  any  person  caught  in  the  street  be  blind-
folded and  carried  into  this  chapter,  and  when  brought  to  light,
see  the  bloody  trophies  scattered  about  the  cave,  and  the  members
should  crowd  around  him  with  their  bloody  dress* — instead  of  sup-
posing he  had  been  introduced  to  the  society  of  honest  men,  he
would  rather  conclude  that  demons  of  darkness  had  dragged  him
down  to  the  regions  of  despair.     All  things  considered,  my  breth-
ren, it  is  not  surprising  that  mis  society  has  existed  thus  long;  for
tvfco,  under  any  government,  wnere  personal  Iroerty  is  not  as
safely  secured  as  in  this  republic,  would  dare  divulge  the  secrets
of  Masonry.     In  the  foregoing  cases  we  see  clearly  what  were
the  'ancient  usages  and  customs  of  the  fraternity'  which  we  have
all  pledged  our  honor,  and  have  solemnly  sworn  to  support.

There  is  one  case  more  which  I  shall  here  cite,  and  I  trust
show  plainly,  was  performed  in  strict  accordance  with  the  'ancient
usages  and  customs  of  ancient  Free  Masonry.'  I  shall  refer  you
to  no  book  for  this  instance,  for  it  is  not  written  on  perishable  ma-
terials, but  with  imperishable  characters,  on  the  memory  of  every
true  patriot  in  the  United  States;  and  the  bloody  tale  will  be  told
to  their  children,  and  transmitted  down  to  all  posterity,  as  a  con-
vincing proof  of  the  bloody  character  of  mis  ancient  and  honora-
ble society.  I  speak  now  of  the  Morgan  case,  the  tragical  scenes
of  which  are  too  well  known  in  this  section  of  the  country  to
need  a  full  description.  I  shall  only  show  the  similarity  between
this  case  and  those  I  have  quoted*

I  am  well  aware,  that  from  the  difference  of  the  government
under  which  the  Morgan  case  was  performed,  and  that  under
which  the  other  Masonic  executions  were  performed,  that  an  ex*
act  similarity  could  not  exist,  but  where  it  was  possible  to  follow;
fbe  'ancient  usages  and  customs  of  the  ancient  fraternity   nave

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


400  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

been  copied  so  nearly  as  to  show  that  those  engaged  in  the  Mor-
gan case  'did  carefully  preserve  the  ancient  landmarks  of  the  or-
der, committed  to  their  care,  and  did  not  suffer  them  to  be  infring-
ed upon,  nor  suffer  a  deviation  from  the  established  usages  and
customs  of  the  fraternity,'  more  than  was  possible.    In  the  case  of
the  murderers  of  our  Grand  Master,  Hiram  Abiti*,  as  soon  as  Solo-
mon had  learned  the  case,  he  despatched  a  number  of  the  craft  to
apprehend  the  villains,  that  they  might  receive  a  punishment  ade-
quate to  their  crimes:  they  did  find  the  murderers,  and  he  ordered
them  to  be  punished  'agreeably  to  the  several  imprecations  of  their
own  mouths.'    In  the  case  of  Akirop  a  great  assemblage  of  Masters
was  held,  to  consult  on  the  best  means  of  apprehending  the  traitor;
and  after  the  consultation,  Solomon  ordered  nine  of  the  craft  to  ap-
prehend the  traitor,  and  bring  him  to  a  punishment  due  his  crimes:
'  they  did  find  the  traitor,  but  instead  of  bringing  him  back,  they  only
returned  with  such  bloody  evidence  as  convinced  all  that  the  trai-
tor had  been  executed.     In  the  case  of  the  six  traitors,  who  had
fled  from  Jerusalem,  Solomon  elected  fifteen  persons,  'in  whom
he  could  place  the  highest  confidence,'  and  sent  them  in  quest  of
the  villains,  and  gave  them  letters  to  different  persons  on  their
way,  'to  assist  them  in  apprehending  the  villains.'    Not  knowing
the  complete  history  of  the  Morgan  case,  we  cannot  follow  it
with  that  minuteness  we  can  the  other  cases,  but  we  can  discover
a  most  striking  similarity  between  the  cases;  from  which  we  may
suppose,  with  confidence,  they  followed  those  cases  in  almost
every  particular.     Agreeably  to  the  'ancient  usages  and  cus-
toms' o>'  the  fraternity,  the  person  representing  Solomon,  our
former  Master,  should,  upon  hearing  Morgan  was  publishing,  and
Miller  printing,  the  secrets  of  Masonry,  appoint  some  judicious
person  or  persons,  in  whose  discretion  and  prudence  he  'could
place  implicit  confidence,'  to  ascertain  the  fact,  and  give  hint  a
'summons;'  and  should  such  be  the  fact,  to  call  for  such  assistance
as  the  case  should  require.     It  is  not  in  my  power  to  say  that  the
person  representing  Solomon/  in  the  United  States,  did  thus  ap-
point a  person,  thus  qualified;  but  I  well  know  that  a  person  call-
ing his  name  Daniel  Johns,  and  unknown  to  any  one  in  this
section,  'suddenly'  made  his  appearance  in  Batavia,  and  by  his
cunning  and  prudence,  (which  are  well  worthy  the  'implicit  con-
fidence,' of  the  representatives  of  Solomon,)  gained  admittance
into  the  printing  office  of  D.  €.  Miller,  and  learned  the  fact  that
Morgan  had  written,  and  Miller  was  publishing  the  secrets  of
Masonry,  and  did  actually  call  uponraany  Masons  to  'assist  him
in  apprehending  the  villains;'  and  some  of  our  brethren  have  said,
(how  true  it  is,  I  do  not  say,)  that  he  had  written  orders  to  that
effect.     It  has  also  been  sworn  to,  that  some  of  the  leaders  in

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.  401

that  transaction  said  he  had  been  sent  here  expressly  for  that
purpose;  but  who  sent  him  I  cannot  tell.

In  the  case  of  Akirop  and  the  other  six  traitors,  'a  great  as-
sembly of  Masters  was  held,  in  consultation  on  the  best  means
of  apprehending  the  villains.'  It  has  been  fully  proved  that  a
large  assemblage  of  Masons  was  held  in  Stafford,  on  the  8th  of
September,  and  Dr.  Butler  has  testified,  to  consult  on  the  best
means  of  stopping  the  publication  of  Morgan's  book;  and  others
have  said,  if  no  means  could  effect  it,  to  devise  means  to  carry
off  Morgan.  What  means  were  actually  devised,  can  only  be
drawn  from  what  transpired  after  the  meeting:  on  the  next  Mon-
day, Morgan  was  taken  from  Batavia;  on  the  next  day,  Miller
was  violently  torn  from  his  family  and  brought  to  this  place,
where,  by  the  timely  assistance  of  his  friends,  he  was  saved  from
the  fate  allotted  to  Morgan,  who  was  amidst  the  cries  of  mur-
der taken  from  Canandaigua.  and  carried  to  the  magazine  of
Fort  Niagara,  a  place  as  nearly  representing  the  cave  in  which
Akirop  was  executed,  as  any  that  could  conveniently  be  found,
and  there  probably  murdered;  but  his  murderers  did  not  dare  re-
turn with  the  bloody  trophies  of  their  vengeance  to  the  person
authorizing  the  transaction.  I  cannot  positively  state  that  Da-
niel Johns  carried  with  him  such  a  summons  as  we  have  all  sworn
to  obey,  whether  given,  handed,  sent,  or  thrown,  unto  us;  but  we
all  know  that  many  obeyed  some  summons  or  sign,  by  neglect-
ing their  common  avocations  and  assisting  in  transporting  him
beyond  the  reach  of  his  friends;  others,  when  called  upon,  took
their  horses  from  their  plough,  to  aid,  and  in  other  ways  assisted
in  getting  him  through  a  large  tract  of  country,  which  nothing
can  reconcile,  unless  they  had  a  'sign,  summons  or  token,  given,
handed,  sent  or  thrown  to  them,'  which  they  had  sworn  to  obey.
I  give  one  more  reason  for  supposing  the  Morgan  case  to  be
in  strict  conformity  to  the  'ancient  usages  of  ancient  Free  Ma-
sonry.' On  the  morning  they  were  going  on  this  infernal  errand,
many  of  them  said  they  had  sworn  never  to  suffer  the  secrets  of
Masonry  to  be  published,  if  in  their  power  to  prevent  it,  and  they
could  prevent  it  by  going  to  Batavia  that  day;  others  said  they
had  ancient  authority  for  this  conduct  in  the  Morgan  case;  and
one  of  the  captains  of  the  band,  when  asked  for  a  reason,  took
his  Monitor  and  read  the  rase  of  Akirop  and  the  other  six  trai-
tors, as  given  in  No.  5,  supposing  that  would  suppress  any
further  inquiry  on  that  point.  Whemer  Morgan  suffered  a  fate
similar  to  mat  of  Akirop;  or  whether,  according  to  the  several  im-
precations of  his  own  mouth,  he  had  his  throat  cut,  'left  breast
torn  open,  body  severed  in  two,  bowels  burnt  to  a$hes,  those  ashes

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


402  LIGHT  ON  MASOlHir.

scattered  to  the  four  winds  of  Aeove*,  that  theft  mifrkt  4e*6  mare
tractor  remembrance  among  men  or  Masons,  of  *o  tilt  and  perjnr-
ed  a  tfrtteh  as  he  vaef  as  well  at  those  who  were  actually  his
murderers,-- it  is  true,  remains  somewhat  in  doubt  Ret  should
Masonry  survive  this  tremendous  shock,  and  assume  a)!  its  former
sower  and  glory  in  some  after  age,  our  Monitor  would  disclose  to
future  generations  the  manner  of  his  murder,  and  his  murderers
occupy  as  conspicuous  a  place  in  it  as  does  Joabert  in  the  execu-
tion of  Akirop;  hut  should  it  he  left  tmtil  mat  time,  I  (ear  it  wffl
never  be  known,  for  Masonry  is  now  ki  the  test  convulsive  ago-
nies of  death.  Let  us  now,  my  brethren,  candidly  review  mis
subject,  for  it  is  of  great  importance.  It  is  fully  proved  from  un-
questionable authority,  that  before  entering  a  lodge  we  are  re-
quired to  pledge  our  honor,  and  after  entering  it  we  are  repeat-
edly charged  to  support  sit  the  ancient  usages  and  customs  of
•  ancient  Free  Masonry,  and  never  suffer  the  least  deviation  from
the  established  rules  and  customs  of  the  fraternity.  Morgan  m
his  illustration  informs  us  that  all  Masons  solemnly  swear  to  obey
aH  signs,  summons  or  tokens,  given,  handed,  sent  or  thrown  to
them,  by  a  Fellow  Craft  or  Master  Mason,  thereby  establishing
a  sure  way  to  carry  into  effect  the  'ancient  usages  and  customs'
of  our  ancient  brethren;  ako,  that  should  we  divulge  any  of  the
secrets  oX  Masonry,  we  will  sinter  death  in  the  most  cruel  and
barbarous  manner;  establishing  clearly  that  the  law  of  Masonry
is  to  execute  any  member  who  shall  divulge  the  secrets  of  Ma*
sonry.  It  is  most  conclusively  shown)  from  unquestionable  au-
thority, that  the  usages  and  customs  of  our  ancient  brethren  were
to  execute  a  Masonic  traitor  according  to  the  'several  impreca-
tions  of  his  own  mouth,'  or  inflict  a  punishment  upon  hnn  ade-
quate to  his  crimes.  It  is  also  clearly  shown,  that  in  almost
every  particular,  so  far  as  the  facts  have  come  to  light,  that  Mor-
gan was  dealt  with  agreeably  to  the  ancient  usages  and  customs
of  the  fraternity;  therefore  I  do  consider  the  charge  made  in  Nir.
5  proved  beyond  the  bare  possibility  of  a  doubt.  One  doubt,
however,  has  been  raised,  and  as  it  comes  from  a  source  I  high-
ly respect,  I  will  answer  it  It  is  said  that  the  Masons  of  the
present  age  are  under  no  more  obligations  to  obey  the  laws  of
Solomon,  than  they  are  those  of  Moses;  thereby  admitting  fully
that  the  laws  of  Solomon  were  such  as  have  been  given.

Iti  answer,  it  might  be  said  we  are  bound  to  obey  all  laws
which  we  have  pledged  our  honors  and  oaths  to  support  and  ne-
ver suffer  a  deviation  from.  I  admit  Masons  are  not  hound  m
their  Masonic  capacity  to  obey  all  the  laws  and  advice  Solomon
has  given  to  the  sacred  writings,  any  more  than  they  aw  these

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  403

'which  Moses  has  so  given;  but  1  do  contend  that  til  the  Masonic
laws  which  Solomon,  as  Grand  Master  of  the  lodge,  gave,  are
as  blading  upon  us,  if  we  adhere  to  the  Masonic  institution,  as
the  laws  of  Moses  are  binding  upon  the  Jews  as  firm  believers  in
the  Mosaic  dispensation,  and  who  suppose  that  all  the  customs
of  the  ancient  Jews  under  Moses,  their  leader,  are  binding  upon
them.  But  I  will  not  pretend  to  say,  that  for  following  the  an-
cient usages  and  customs  of  our  ancient  brethren,  as  given  to
them  by  Solomon,  the  wrath  of  heaven  will  be  as  severely  poured
upon  our  heads  as  it  is  upon  the  Jews:  so  that  we  be  scattered
among  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  become  a  by-word  and
reproach  among  men.

I  witt  make  a  few  more  observations,  and  close  this  part  of  the
^^snbject  I  have  addressed  my  numbers  to  all  honest  Masons.
Such  I  wish  to  examine  tins  subject  with  care  and  attention.  To
these  who  are  dupes  to  the  designing  part  of  the  fraternity,  and
are  blindly  determined  to  adhere  to  the  institution  through  /thick
and  thin;'  or  to  those  who  adhere  to  it  because  it  has  shielded
diem  from  merited  punishment,  or  expect  it  will  still  aid  them  to
commit  crime  with  impunity;  or  those  who  expect  still  to  defraud
the  lodges  and  chapters  of  their  funds,  I  have  nothing  to  say — I
wish  to  address  those  who  are  honest,  and  who  have  honestly
supported)  from  the  many  borrowed  morals  which  have  been  ad-
ded to  Masonry  to  deceive  the  world,  and  not  having  frequently
attended  the  meetings  of  their  brethren,  and  heard  the  obligations
administered,  and  seen  the  ceremonies  of  Masonry,  that  no  evils
have  or  can  arise  from  Masonry,  when  its  memb-  rs  performed  all
that  is  required  of  them  by  its  principles.  Such  I  would  earnest-
ly request  to  examine  this  subject  with  all  the  care  and  attention
the  importance  of  it  deserves;  we  have  slumbered  too  long  upon
our  posts;  but  let  the  cries  of  the  murdered  Morgan  arouse  us
from  our  slumber,  and  inquire  by  whom,  for  what,  and  by  what
laws  was  he  murdered?  After  thus  examining  the  case,  let  us
honestly  and  fearlessly  cast  the  blame  of  this  murderous  trans-
action where  it  actually  belongs.  Some  of  those  men  engaged
in  the  late  outrages  are  well  known  to  all  of  us  to  be  men,  in
other  respects,  of  good  character,  who  would  shudder  at  the  com-
mission of  any  crime.  Then  if  they  are  murderers,  what,  I  ask,
has  made  them  sol  Shall  we,  to  save  an  institution  groaning  un-
der the  blackest  of  crimes,  make  them  common  murderers  and
vagabonds  of  the  land?  They  adhered  closely  to  the  ancient
usages  and  customs  which  we  have  all  of  us  pledged  our  honor,
and  have  solemnly  sworn  in  presence  of  Almighty  God  to  ^PP0**
I  beseech  you  then,  my  brethren,  come  out  manfully  and  sftow

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


404  LIGHT  OS  MASONRY.

some  sympathy  for  them  and  their  families;  acknowledge  it  was
for  adhering  to  an  institution  which  has  become  not  only  useless,
but  dangerous,  that  has  produced  this  disastrous  transaction  which
has  thrown  this  section  of  country  in  such  confusion.

A  Mason.

NO.  VIII.

To  all  Honest  Masons:

Brethren — In  my  former  numbers  I  have  fully  shown  that  our
society  was  not  only  useless,  but  dangerous,  in  a  republican  go-
vernment— that  the  laws  of  Masonry  authorized  the  murder  of  a
Masonic  traitor  who  should  divulge  their  secrets;  I  have  also
shown  that  Morgan  was  executed  in  the  same  way  all  other  Ma-
sonic traitors  have  been,  as  laid  down  by  our  best  Masonic  wri-
ters. /  now  assert  j  and  will  prove,  that  the  obligations  which  are
given  in  our  Masonic  lodges  to  their  members,  are  not  binding,  mo-
rally, religiously,  or  legally — but  on  the  contrary,  it  is  a  duty
from  which  no  honest  Mason  trill  shrink,  to  absolve  himself  from
all  allegiance  to  Masonry,  and  expose  to  the  scorn  and  contempt  of
all  mankind  their  unlawful  and  blasphemous  obligations.  To  as-
certain this  point,  let  us  inquire  what  is  the  nature  of  these  obli-
gations. They  are  not  oaths  in  a  legal  sense;  for  to  constitute  a
lawful  oath  it  is  necessary  that  the  person  administering  it  should
be  legally  authorized  to  do  thus,  and  the  person  receiving  should
swear  to  things  within  his  knowledge;  but  in  this  case  the  person
administering  our  obligations  derives  no  authority  for  it  by  any
law — the  person  swearing  to  perform  the  promise  knows  nothing
what  will  be  required  of  him;  therefore,  they  cannot  be  called
legal  oaths.  If  not  legal  oaths,  they  cannot  be  any  thing  more
than  mere  simple  conditional  promises.  I  am  ready  to  grant  that
a  promise  made,  (the  maker  of  it  knowing  the  subject  matter  of
the  promise,)  and  the  performance  of  the  same  being  lawful,  that
the  promise  is  morally  binding.  On  the  contrary,  however,  not
knowing  at  the  time  of  making  it  the  subject  matter  of  the  pro-
mise, and  the  performance  of  it  being  unlawful,  we  are  in  no  man-
ner bound  to  perform  the  promise.  The  manner  of  administer-
ing the  obligation  is  such  that  we  cannot  conceive  even  the  na-
ture of  the  promises  until  after  we  have  taken  them,  and  time  is
afforded  to  examine  them.  After  going  through  a  scene  of  non-
sense and  fright  well  calculated  to  confuse  our  ideas,  we  are  re-
quired to  kneel  and  say  after  the  person  administering  the  obli-
gations— only  a  few  words  are  said  a!  a  time,  and  this  in,  broken
sentences,  in  a  manner  in  which  no  one  can  obtain  a  correct
knowledge,  even  after  hearing  them  administered:  for  example.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  405

the  roaster  says,  requiring  the  candidate  to  repeat: — I,  A.  B.,  of
my  own  free  will  and  accord,  in  presence  of  Almighty  God  and
the  Worshipful  Lodge,  &c.    No  person  can  possibly  tell  the  bear-
ing which  the  obligations  may  have  on  his  conscience  or  duty  to
his  country,  until  he  has  had  sufficient  time  to  peruse  and  reflect
upon   it.     If  after  the  ^ceremonies  are  performed — and  in  his
cooler  moments  he  can  deliberately  examine  the  nature  and  ac-
tual promise — he  is  satisfied  that  it  does  interfere  with  either  his
'religion  or  his  politics,'  most  assuredly  he  cannot  be  bound  to
perform  the  same;  and  he  only  can  determine  for  himself  whether
it  does  interfere  with  his  own  individual  duty  to  his  God  or  his
country.     We  ought  not  therefore  to  judge  too  severely  those
who,  considering  them  thus  to  interfere,  throw  them  aside  as  null
and  void;  for  men  will  construe  the  same  passages  differently;
and  in  this  land  of  freedom  the  inestimable  privilege  of  thinking
for  ourselves,  provided  it  does  not  interfere  with  the  laws  of  our
country,  is  fully  and  perfectly  secured  to  every  citizen.    That
you  may  fully  understand  the  subject,  and  not  rest  on  my  indi-
vidual assertion,  I  will  give  you  the  opinion  of  moral  and  reli-
gious writers  on  this  subject     Paley,  a,  great  Theologian,  and
one  of  the  best  moral  writers  of  our  ages,  says,  'Promises  are  not
binding  when  the  performance  is  unlawful.     There  are  two  cases
of  this*,  one  where  As  unlawfulness  is  known  at  the  time*  of  ma*
king  the  promise;  the  other  case  [which  is  even  stronger  and
more  applicable  to  Masonic  promises]  is  when  the  unlawfulness
did  not  exist,  or  was  unknown  in  the  making  of  the  promise.
When  the  promise  is  understood  to  proceed  upon  a  certain  sup-
position, and  that  promise  turns  out  to  be  false,  the  promise  is  not
binding.'     Thus,  when  we  are  about  to  receive  the  obligation,  we
are  told  it  does  not  interfere  with  our  'religion  or  politics. '     Should
they  interfere  with  either  they  certainly  cannot  be  binding  upon
any  man  receiving  them.     The  examples  which  Paley  gives  in
his  Moral  Philosophy,  it  is  useless  to  quote,  as  they  are  familiar
with  all  of  you.     The  Rev.  Thomas  Scott  has  written  upon  the
subject  of  oaths,  and  describes  the  nature  of  Herod's.     He  says
'Herod's  oath  was  rash  and  profane  in  the  extreme;  and  when  it
was  found  to  involve  such  consequences,  it  became  absolutely
unlawful  to  observe  it     He  ought  to  have  repented  of  his  impiety,
and  with  abhorrence  have  rejected  Salome's  application.     Rash
oaths  are  above  all  things  to  be  avoided;  but  if  men  are  entangled
by  them,  they  ought  rather  to  infringe  tho  sinful  oaths  than  add  sin
to  sin  and  ruin  to  their  own  souls.'    It  is  unnecessary  to  quote
from  other  authors  on  this  subject;  for  every  one  must  at  once
perceive  the  only  crime  there  can  be  is  in  taking  the  obligations.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


406  LIGHT   OK  MASONRY.

Are  die  obligations  which  are  administered  in  oar  different  lodges,
chapters,  councils,  and  encampments,  of  the  nature  of  those  de-
scribed by  Paley,  Scott,  and  others,  as  not  binding]  I  shall  give
a  part  of  the  different  obligations;  and  should  any  Mason  in  the
United  States  dare  deny  that  the  quotations  from  these  obligations
are  not  sabstantially  correct,  I  pledge  myself  to  prove  them  so
by  competent  witnesses,  if  such  person  will  give  his  name  to  the
editors  of  the  Le  Roy  Gazette,  he  proving  that  he  has  taken  the
degree  the  obligation  of  which  he  disputes.    In  the  Master  Ma-
son's obligation,  as  given  by  Morgan  in  his  <Illustratioii8' — and  no
Mason  who  regards  his  veracity  dare  deny  the  correctness  of  that
bookr-^is  the  following: — 'Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,
that  I  will  not  give  the  grand  hailing  sign  of  distress  except  I  am
in  real  distress,  or  for  the  benefit  of  the  craft  when  at  work;  and
should  I  ever  see  that  sign  given,  or  the  word  accompanying  it,
and  the  person  who  gave  it  appearing  to  be  in  distress,  I  will  fly
to  his  relief  at  the  risk  of  my  Hie,  should  there  be  a  greater  pro-
bability of  saving  his  life  than  losing  my  own.     Furthermore,  do
I  promise  and  swear,  that  a  Master  Mason's  secrets,  given  to  me
in  charge  as  such,  and  I  knowing  him  to  be  such,  shall  remain  as
secure  and  inviolable  in  my  breast  as  in  his  own,  when  communi-
cated to  me  as  such,  murder  and  treason  excepted,  and  they  left
to-  my  ow»  ebcitation.'     Thus,  under  ihm  solemnity  of  an  oa&,
should  we  ever  see  a  brother  giving  the  grand  hailing  sign  of  dis-
tress, we  are  bound  to  fly  to  his  relief,  should  there  be  a  greater
probability  of  saving  his  life  than  loosing  our  own.     We  are  here
sworn  without  any  reservation;  neither  are  there  any  distinguished
marks  drawn  about  the  kind  of  distress;  the  only  question  is,  does
he  appear  in  any  kind  of  danger?     Should  he  flee  from  the  pu-
nishment due  his  crimes,  we  are  sworn  to  protect  him,  so  long  as
there  is  more  probability  of  saving  his  life  than  losing  ouf  own —
a  lawful  promise,  truly,  in  a  government  where  the  only  safety
of  our  property  consists  in  affording  our  aid  in  the  execution
of  our  laws.     To  show  rally  the  force  of  this  part  of  the  obli-
gation, I  will  put  a  case  which  has  too  often  been  realized
since  the  establishment  of  our  order.     A  Master  Mason  com-
mits arson — is  seen  or  suspected— the  necessary  steps  are  ta-
ken-^an  officer  attempts  to  arrest  him — a  Master  Mason  gives
him  'timely  nonce'—- (the  reason  for  his  so  doing  I  will  presently
explain)— and  he  attempts  to  flee— the  officer  closely  pursues- —
perceiving  a  probability  of  receiving  his  just  deserts,  he  at  ven-
ture gives  the  grand  hailing  sign  of  distress— you,  standing  per-
haps in  the  door  of  your  house,  see  him  'give  the  sign,'  or  it
being  dark,  'bear  the  words  accompanying  the  same,'  you  are

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.  407

bound  (if  the  oath  is  obligatory)  to  fly  to  his  relief,  rescue  him
from  the  officer,  and  receive  him  into  your  house,  and  there  de-
fend him  so  long  as  there  is  a  'greater  probability  of  saving  his
life  than  losing  your  own.'    You  do  thus  defend  your  criminal
brother;  and  the  officer  seeing  he  cannot  execute  the  laws  of  his
country  without  endangering  his  life,  at  length  desists  and  leaves
you  in  possession  of  your  criminal  brother.     After  the  officer  has
withdrawn  from  the  contest,  your  criminal  brother  confesses  the
crime,  and  tells  you  when,  where,  and  how,  it  was  committed,
and  you  become  in  possession  of  all  the  facts  concerning  it     At
length,  supposing  all  is  safe,  you  admit  your  brother  to  escape
from  your  house— the  officer  waiting  without  to  execute  his  duty,
seizes  the  criminal,  and  he  is  brought  to  the  trial — from  the  cir-
cumstances it  is  supposed  he  has  entrusted  you  with  all  the  facts.
You  are  called  upon  the  stand  and  legally  swom  to  tell  the  'truth,
the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth.'    The  question  is — Did
your  brother  Mason  tell  you  he  committed  the  crime  he  is  charged
with?    What  a  situation  are  you  placed  in?    Your  criminal  bro-
ther gave  the  secret  to  you  'in  charge  as  such,  and  you  knew  him
to  be  as  such,'  and  you  are  sworn  'that  they  shall  remain  as  se-
cure and  inviolable  in  your  breast  as  in  his  own.'     Should  you
consider  your  Masonic  obligation  as  binding,  you  must  necessa-
rily perjure  yourself:  should  you  be  a  true  patriot  and  supporter
of  the  laws  of  your  country,  it  is  true  you  will  break  your  Ma-
sonic promise;  but  there  should  bono  promise,  especially  an  oath,
which  is  in  contradiction  to  the  obligations  we  are  under  to  our
country.     I  ask — Is  it  lawful  to  protect  a  criminal,  and  screen
him  from  the  punishment  due  his  crime? — Is  it  lawful  to  conceal  a
crime  committed  against  the  laws  of  your  country?-— Should  you
do  it,  do  you  not  become  accessory  after  the  fact?  and  as  such  are
you  not  liable  by  law  to  be  punished?    The  promise  made  in  the
Master  Mason's  obligation  there  is  unlawful,  and  no  one  can  for
a  moment  suppose  he  is  bound  by  such  obligation.    In  the  same
obligation  is  the  following: — Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and
swear,  that  I  will  not  speak  evil  of -a  brother  Master  Mason,  &c.;
but  will  apprize  hm  of  all  approaching  danger,  if  in  ray  power.    I
have  before  said  that  some  Mason  would  give  a  criminal  brother
timely  notice— the  reason  has  been  explained;  he  has  sworn  to
apprise  htm  of  approaching  danger.    Should,  therefore,  any  Ma-
son know  his  brother  guilty  of  any  crime,  and  there  is  a  probability
of  his  being  arrested,  he  is  sworn  to  apprize  him  of  ms  danger.
The  same  material  points  are  kept  in  view  through  the  other  de-
grees.   Haying  reached  the  Royal  Arch*  they  suppose  7ou >**«
prepared  in  full  to  assist  thtti  in  their  purpose**  <  You  are  then

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


408  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

required  to  swear  in  the  following  manner: — 'Furthermore,  do  I
promise  and  swear,  that  I  will  protect  a  companion  Royal  Arch
Mason,  whether  right  or  wrong.'  Throwing  off  all  reserve,  they
here  tell  us  at  once  we  must  'go  the  whole  load,'  and  protect  them
in  any  villauy  whatever,  and  however  guilty  they  may  be.  Can
any  Royal  Arch  Mason,  if  he  has  any  regard  for  his  Masonic
promise  sit  on  a  jury  .'where  a  Royal  Arch  Mason  is  to  be
tried  for  -any  crime,  and  bring  in  a  verdict  of  guilty,  when  he  has
swonrto  protect  a  companion,  *  whether  right  or  wrong — under
the  no  less  penalty  than  to  have  his  scull  smote  off  and  his  brains
exposed  to  the  scorching  rays  of  the  sun?'  Can  he  do  justice  to
a  man  who  knows  not  our  order,  when  his  antagonist  is  a  Royal
Arch  Mason?  Most  assuredly  he  cannot!  for  he  has  sworn  to
'protect  a  companion  of  this  exalted  degree,  whether  right  or
wrong.'  It  is  absurd  in  the  extreme,  to  urge  such  obligations
upon  a  person.  We  are  all  bound  by  every  tie  which  binds  so-
cieties together,  to  dispense  justice  and  equity  whenever  we  are
called  upon,  either  by  the  laws  of  our  country,  or  as  disinterested
persons,  to  decide  any  dispute  which  may  arise  in  a  government
founded  upon  equal  rights.  There  should  be  no  distinction  in
any  case  whatever.  We  are  all,  both  by'  nature  and  law,  entitled
to  every  privilege  which  can  be  .granted  to  any  person;  and  to
mark  outlines  of  distinction,  and  afford  protection  to  one  man  in
preference  to  another,  because  he  may  belong  to  an  order  we  are
unacquainted  with,  and  can  scientifically  draw  his  hand  across
his  forehead  in  allusion  to  the  penalty  of  this  obligation,  is  con-
trary to  every  principle  of  virtue,  morality,  religion,  or  law;  and
no  obligation  which  requires  us  to  do  so,  can  possibly  be  bind-
ing. The  following  outrageous  and  unlawful  promise  is  con-v
tamed  in  the  same  oath: — Furthermore,  do  I  promise  and  swear,
that  a  companion  Royal  Ar.ch  Mason9 8  secrets,  given  me  in  charge
as  such,  and  I  knowing  him  to  be  such,  shall  remain  as  secure  and
inviolable  in  my  breast  as  in  his  own,  when  communicated  to  me,

MURDER  AND  TREA80N  NOT  EXCEPTED.

Paley  says,  'Promises  are  not  binding,  where  there  is  a  prior
obligation  to  the  contrary.'  Every  citizen  of  the  United  States
w  under  a  natural  and  paramount  obligation  to  support  the  gov-
ernment which  affords  him  protection.  As  good  citizens  we  are
bound  to  afford  every  assistance  to  preserve  the  good  order  of
society,  and  aid  in  the  execution  of  the  laws.  Therefore,  we
must  communicate  to  the  proper  authorities,  all  crimes  which,
come  within  our  knowledge.  Should  we,  by  any  means  whatever,
know  murder  to  have  'ireen  committed,  humanity,  the  laws  of
God  and  man,  all  require  us  to  communicate  the  same  imms-

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT    ON   MASONRY.  409

tliately,  that  the  murderer  may  receive  a  punishment  'due  his
crime,'  and  the  majesty  of  our  laws  be  not  trampled  upon  with
impunity.     But  as  Royal  Arch  Masons,  we  are  sworn  to  conceal
the  horrid  crime  of  murder,  provided  the  person  committing  it
should  be  a  companion  Royal  Arch  Mason!   What  security  have
we,  if  crimes  of  the  deepest  dye  are  to  be  committed  and  con-
cealed?   .file  cries  ot  murder  may  arouse  us  from  our  sleep  at
the  silent  hour  of  night — our  villages  may  be  wrapt  in  flames — our
property  stolen  and  destroyed — and  the  person  committing  these
flagrant  crimes  may  escape  punishment,  if  he  is  so  fortunate  as
to  be  a  'companion  Royal  Arch  Mason!'     Should  it,  however,  be
suspected  by  'those  who  know  not  our  order,'  that  a  'companion
of  this  exalted  degree'  had  performed  these  diabolical  acts,  and
he  should  be  brought  to  trial,  a  Royal  Arch  Mason  sitting  on  the
jury  is  bound  by  all  they  call  sacred  to  clear  him,  'right  or  wrong,'
and  he  will  of  course  escape  punishment.     But,  should  he  be  so
unfortunate,  however,  as  to  have  no  'companion  Royal  Arch- Ma-
son' on  the  jury,  and  he  is  found  guilty  of  this  crime  by  his  lawful
peers,  he  sues  a  Royal  Arch  Governor  for  pardon;  and  the  said
Koyat  Arch  Governor,  if  he  supposes  his  Masonic  oath  binding,
must,  and  will  grant  his  petition.     We  have  no  security  for  our
lives  or  property,  while  such  obligations  are  administered  and  ad-
hered to.     We  have  had  a  full  demonstration  of  this  fact,  in  the
unhappy  fate  of  Capt.  William  Morgan.     A  free  citizen  may  he
torn  from  his  family  and  his  friends — deprived  of  his  liberty  and
life — and  no  punishment  awarded  to  the  villains  performing  so
hellish  an  act,  (should  they  be  Royal  Arch  Masons  who  commit-
ted the  same) — and  none  but  Royal  Arch  Masons  be  privy  to  the
circumstance;  or  a  Royal  Arch  Mason  who  regards  his  Masonic
obligation  as  binding,  may  sit  upon  the  jury  to  try  the  criminals.
But  if  so  dangerous  in  the  case  of  individual  property,  or  the
b  safety  of  individuals  themselves,  how  is  their  dangerous  tendency
magnified,  when  even  treason  is  not  excepted  in  their  obligations?
We  live  under  the  best  organized  government  ever  formed;   a
government  dispensing  its  salutary  influence  equally  upon  all — all
partaking,  when  administered  in  its  purity,  of  its  equal  rights  and.
protection.    But  it  maybe  overthrown  and  destroyed  at  any  time;
and  should  none  but  Royal  Arch  Masons  know  the  existence  of
the  treasonable  purposes,  there  can  be  no  remedy.

There  is,  perhaps,  ifrom  three  to  five  hundred  thousand  Royal
Arch  Masons  scattered  over  the  United  States,  possessing  means
*f  communicating  their  Jaws  and  objects  over  any  other  society.
JTo  member  of  that  degree  hazards  any  thing  by  disclosing  his.
treasonable  purposes  to  them  all  in  their  meetings;  hoWmg  out
hh  •

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


410  LICHT  ON  MASONRY*

inducements  of  different  kinds  to  each,  there  may  be  no  such
number  of  them  who  will  conspire  with  him  to  overthrow  the  only
republican  government  in  the  world.  Should  they  thus  agree,
what  means  do  they  possess  to  carry  their  designs  into  effect?
Possessing  a  key  which  has  for  ever  (until  of  late)  been  unknown
to  any  but  Royal  Arch  Masons,  they  can  communicate  without
danger;  for  should  their  letters  be  intercepted,  none*but  'com-
panions of  this  exalted  degree9  can  know  its  contents;  and  they
are  sworn  to  protect  them  right  or  wrong;  and  'murder  and  trea-
son' are  not  excepted  in  their  oath  of  secrecy.  That  this  may
not  seem  too  much  like  fiction,  I  would  remark,  that  in  the  cele-
brated conspiracy  of  Aaron  Burr,  this  same  Royal  Arch  key  was
used,  and  their  characters,  in  his  letters  to  his  coadjutors.  How
can  taey  be  punished?  None  but  'companions  of  this  exalted
degree,'  have  any  knowledge  of  their  purposes,  and  they  are
sworn  not  to  divulge  it;  and  should  any  of  them  not  enter  the
conspiracy,  they  are  sworn  to  protect  those  who  may,  'right  or
wrong*'  1  again  ask,  what  safety  have  we  for  our  lives,  or  liber*
ties,  or  government,  if  such  obligations  are  administered  and
adhered  to?  But  so  far  from  these  obligations  being  binding,  we
are  bound  by  our  prior  obligations  to  the  government,  to  absolve
ourselves  from  all  allegiance  to  an  institution  administering  them;
and  to  expose  them  to, the  world.

I  will  now  ask  you  to  examine  the  obligation  of  the  Holy  and
Thrice  Illustrious  Order  of  the  Cross: — 'You  further  swbar,

*HAT  SHOULD  YOU  EVER  KNOW  A  COMPANION  VIOLATE  AXY  ES-
SENTIAL PART  OF  THIS  OBLIGATION,  YOU  WILL  USX  YOUR  MOST
DECIDED  ENDEAVORS,  BY  THE  BLESSING  OF  GOD,  TO  BRING  SUCH
PERSON  TO  THE  HOST  STRICT  AND  CONDIGN  PUNISHMENT,  AGREE-
ABLY TO  THE  RULES  AND  USAGES  OF  OUR  ANCIENT  FRATERNITY;

(See  No.  7;)  and  thus*  by  pointing  him  out  to  the  world  as  an
unworthy  and  vicious  vagabond;  by  opposing  his  interest;  by  dis*
arranging  his  business;  by  transferring  his  character  after  him,
wherever  he  may  go;  by  exposing  him  to  the  contempt  of  the  whole
fraternity  and  the  world9but  of  our  illustrious  order  more  especial-
ly, during  his  whole  natural  hfeS  That  masterpiece  ofmen9  the
declaration  of  independence,  declares  that  man  possesses  cer-
tain inestimable  rights:  such  as  life,  liberty,  and  the  pursuits  of
happiness.  The  laws  of  our  country  guarantee  to  us  the  privi-
lege of  following  such  pursuits  as  we  please,  in  safety;  and  de-
clares it  a  misdemeanor  for  any  number  of  men  to  conspire  to
destroy  the  lawful  pursuits  of  any  person.  Slander  is  punishable
by  heavy  fines.  Morality,  religion,  and  the  best  interests  of  so-
-*Sety,  forbid  as  to  destroy  the  reputation  of  any  person  whatever.


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRV.  411

But  has  it  com©  to  this,  that  a  set  of  men  are  combined  to  bring
to  strict  and  condign  punishment  citizens  of  a  free  repub-
lic, for  no  offence  against  the  law  of  the  land — for  no  offence
of  the  \aw  of  God — for  no  offence  against  the  equal  rights  of
mankind]  What  offence  is  reoognisable  by  this  band,  worse
than,  a  banditti,  who  attack  not  only  the  property,  but  the
reputation  of  a  man?  It  is  the  heinous  offence  of  telling  the
world,  here  are  a  horde  of  villains,  self-created,  bound  together
by  oaths  to  protect  each  other,  'right  or  wrong;'  and  that  an  hon-
est man  who  disbelieves  in  their  infernal  principles,  must  be
branded  wi£h  infamy.  Is  it  lawful  to  punish  'strictly,  and  with
condign  punishment,'  a  man  who  has  violated  no  law?  And
how  punish?  'By  pointing  him  out  to  the  world  as  an  unworthy
and  vicious  vagabond.9  We  can  here  exclaim  with  emphasis,
'Tell  it  not  in  Gath — publish  it  not  in  the  streets  of  Askelon' — that
in.  this  land  of  liberty,  where  we  are*  daily  boasting  of  our  supe-
rior advantages  of  equal  rights,  we  are  fostering  m  our  bosom  a
set  of  men  possessing  the  spirit  of  demons;  who  are  sworn  to
make  a  vagabond  of  a  man  who  does  not  subscribe  to  their  hel-
lish tenets.  No  matter  how  fair  a  character  he  may  have  sus-
tained; no  matter  if  the  'frost  of  seventy  winters'hae  whitened
his  head  in  the  cause  of  his  Redeemer;  no  matter  if  his  whole
life  has  been  one  continued  act  of  benevolence  and  good  will  to
mankind;  still  he  must  be  poipted  out  to  the  world,  by  the  fingers
of  scorn,  as  an  'unworthy  and  vicious  vagabond.'  Again,  sBu^
opposing  his  interest. '  Not  satisfied  with  destroying  his  reputation,
they  must  even  oppose  his  interest  in  society.  I  had  ever  sup-
posed that  any  individual  had  an  undoubted  right  to  advance  his
'  political  or  worldly  interest  by  all  lawful  means.  Mas  he  talent
and  honesty  sufficient,  he  may  aim  at  filling  any  office  under  the
government  which  he  lives.

But  this  blood-stained  few  say,  that  if  he  fias  violated  any  es-
sential part  of  our  law,  w.a-  will  not  allow  him  the  privilege  of  gain-
ing any  interest  whatever  with,  his  fellow  citizens;  however  capable
be  may  be,  he  shall  gain  no  influence  in  society,  but  shall  be
forced  to  submit  to  become  an  outcast  of  society;  and  to  carry  this
into  full  effect,  the  most  palpable  falsehoods  are  circulated.  This
has  been  verified  for  sometime  past;  but  of  this  more  anon.
Again, '.%  destroying  his  business.'  Not  satisfied  with  destroy-
ing his  reputation,  the  brightest  jewel  in.  his  possession;  not
satisfied  with  opposing  bis  beat  interest  in  the  world;  but  should
he  after  this  be  pursuing  some  lawful  vocation— perhaps  the  opty
support  for  himself  and  family— thej  swear  to  derange  even  this,
and  ton  aim  out  upon  the  world*  as  a  vagabond  both  m  property

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


412  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

and  reputation.    Freedom  and  equality  indeed !  *  Boast  no  more
of  our  wholesome  laws,  and  of  the  equality  of  our  government;
boast  no  more  of  the  'land  of  the  brave,  and  the  home  of  the  free/
where  every  citizen  can  pursue  his  vocation  in  peace,  if  the  com-
bination is  yet  in  the  bosom  of  our  country,  pretending  to  be  the
moat  honorable  and  respected  part  of  community,  and  sworn  to
take  the  bread  from  the  mouth  of  honest  industry,  and  to  turn  a  man
destitute  and  dependent  upon  the  cold  charity  of  the  world.  Should
he  be  found  in  the  street,  sustaining  the  'peltings  of  the  pitiless
storm'  and  asking  the  charities  of  the  world  which  are  given  to  the
meanest  vagabond,  for  some  scanty  provision,  even  the  'crumbs
which  fall  from  the  rich  man's  table,'  to  support  for  a  short  time
a  destitute  but  unfortunate  family,— they  are  sworn  to  represent
him  in  such  a  view,  thai  even  this  scanty  provision  cannot  bo
given  him.     What  awful  crjme  has  "he  been  guilty  of,  that  the
common  acts  of  charity  cannot  be  administered  to  him?     None:
no  offence  against  the  laws  of  his  country  whatever,  has  he  been
guilty  of;  but  on  the  contrary,  he  has  ever  sustained  a  good
character;  but  he  supposed,  and  rightly  too,  that  the  obligations
imposed  upon  him  in  the  lodges,  chapters,  &c.  were  at  variance
with  the  best  interests  of  society;  and  he  boldly  steps  forward,
and  fearless  of  consequences,  tells  the  world  what  are  truly  the
Masonic  principles.     For  this  he  must  be  deprived  of  every
privilege  of  citizenship;  made  ah  outcast  from  society;  and  his  bu-
siness destroyed;  while  many  a  dishonest  man,  guilty  of  crimes
which,  if  strictly  punished,  would  gain  him  a  residence  at  state
prison,  is  applauded  and  held  out  to  the  world  as  deserving  their
patronage;  and  too  often  do  they  receive  the  patronage  and  good
wishes  of  community,  through  the  influence  of  this  dark,  myste-
ous,  midnight,  and  hellish  banditti.  lO  shame,  where  is  thy  blush/
But  still  farther — ;  By  transferring  his  character  [that  is,  the ,
character  which  they  give  him]  after  him  wherever  he  may  go.*
The  unhappy  sufferer,  satisfied  that  Masonic  vengeance  will  des-
troy every  hope  of  gaining  a  subsistence  for  himself  and  thoso
dependent  upon  him,  unless  he  becomes  dishonest,  seeks  some
distant  part  of  the  community,  and  there  hopes  to  avoid  the  fiend-
like  malice  of  the  brotherhood,  and  pursue  his  avocation  in  peace;
but  alas!  even  this  consolation  is  not  left  him.     iThey  swear  *to
transfer  his  character  after  him  wherever  he  may  go/    ^ot  satis-
lied  with  traducing  his  character,  destroying  his  business,  and  op-
posing his  interest  in  the  immediate  vicinity  where  he  has  ever
supported  the  character  of  an  honest  and  respectable  citizen;  but
he  must  be  utterly  destroyed.  With  malice  well  becoming  the  in-
fernal spirits,  they  pursue  their  Masonic  Victim  to  th£  'uttermost

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MA30NKV.  41g

parts  of  the  earth,'  and  destroy  every  vestage  of  hope.     To  carry
this  into  full  and  complete  effect,  the  council  which  receive  him
require  him  to  give  his  name,  the  names  of  his  parents,  the  place
where  he  was  born,  where  he  was  educated — in  fact,  a  descrip-  '
tion  of  every  circumstance  of  his  life  by  which  he  may  be  traced
through  the  world,  is  registered  in  their  bloody  annals.  No  hope
is  left  the  unhappy  fugitive,  even  in  flight !     He  must  be  pursued
and  ruined  in  reputation,  and  become  a  vagabond  and  an  outcast  '
of  society,  and  a  mark  put  upon  him  as  indelible  as  that  put  upon
Cain  by  the  hand  of  Omnipotence,  through  the  influence  of  an
ancient  and  honorable  society.     Filially,  lBy  exposing  him  to  the   '
contempt  of  the  whole  fraternity  and  the  world,  but  of  our  ilhkri- '
+us  [illustrious  indeed!]  order,  more  especially,  during  his  whole
natural  life.7    If  he  has  committed  an  error  and  becomes  con-v
vinced  of  it,  (no  matter  if  he  repent  of  his  frailties  in  sincerity,)
no  pardon  can  be  granted  him*  he  must  be  held  out  to  the  scorn  *
and  contempt  of  the  '  whole  world,  during  the  whole  of  his  na'ju-  *
ral  life.' .  No  consolation  or  inducement  of  reform  can  be  found; '
no  mitigation  of  Masonic  vengeance  can  be  realized,  neither  in
flight  Or'  repentance.      Conduct  worthy,  indeed,  of  a  society
styling  themselves  'ancient*  honorable,  and  the  handmaid  of
religion.'  A  Mason.  (    *

Notb.  The  foregoing  eight  numbers  of  'A  Mason'  were  originally  pub-
lished in  1828,  in  the  Lt  Roy  Gazette,  Genesee  county,  N.  Y*.  '  '

•    •'•  *

CONVENTION  OF  SECEDING  MASON* :    "

Held  at  Lb  Rot,  Februm*  \9th  and  SOf*,  and  My  4th  and  5<A,  1828. ;  w

At  a  convention  of  Free  Masons  opposed  to  secret  societies,
held  at  Le  Roy,  in  the  county  of  Genesee,  New  York,  on  Tues-
day, February  19th,  1828—

The  convention  organized  at  one  o'clock,  P.  M.  and  Elcler
David  Bernard,  of  Warsaw,  addressed  the  Throne  of  Grace;
Leonard  B.  Rose,  Esq.  of  Castile,  was  ealled  to  the  chair,  and
Elder  David  Bernard  appointed  secretary.  Toted,  That  the  Rev.
James  Cochrane,  of  Batavia,  be  requested  to  deliver  an  address
to  the  convention  upon  the  subject  of  its  present  meeting.*

*  Nearly  one  year  and  a  half  had  elapsed^  after  the  abduction  and  mujrder
of  Wilham  Morgan,  before  this  convention  was  called;  during  which  petfod
but  few  had  the  moral  eourage^fo  openly  (hesent  from  the  Maeonic  institu-.
tion,  and  denounce  it  t»  wicked  and  dangerous..  Those  who  dared  to  etanjl
in  defence  of  their  country's  rigbtf,  at  the  baaard  of  Maionic  **D§e^ft3ej
ateppedftrth  and  united  with  their  fellow  citiieoa  in  their  noble  sttepgfcftfr

Digitized  by  VjOQQIC


414  LIGHT  01?  MA86HBT.

Mt.  Cochrane  Ihen  rose  and  delivered  an  address.

The  object  of  the  meeting  having  been  stated,  it- was  agreed
{hat  the  principles  and  obligations  of  free  Masonry  he  freely
discussed: — Therefore,

Toted,  That  the  first  obligation  in  Masonry  be  read.  Mr.  H.
A.  Read  read  the  obligations  of  an  'Entered  Apprentice,9  as
published  by  Capt.  William  Morgan.  The  chairman  addressed
the  meeting  on  the  binding  nature  of  Masonic  obligations.  Mr.
8.  D.  Green,  of  Batavia,  followed  htm  on  die  same  subject  Mr.
H.  A.  Read,  of  Le  Roy,  spoke  largely  on  the  principles  and  ob-
ligations of  the  order;  he  was  followed  by  J.  Hascalf,  Esquire,
on  the  same  subject.  The  secretary  then  addressed  the  con-
vention on  the  antiquity  of  the  institution,  showing  that  it  was  not
ancient^  on  the  morality  of  the  institution,  showing  that  it  did  not
fKomote  morality;  on  the  benevolence  of  the  institution,  show-
.  tag  that  it  was  not  benevolent;  on  the  ceremonies  of  the  institution,
as  far  as  the  Royal  Arch  degree,  showing  that  they  were  not  only
degrading  to  human  nature,  but  blasphemous;  on  the  principles
af  tho  institution,  showing  that  they  were  opposed  to  Ckristkmity;
and  gave  his  reasons  for  believing  it  the  duty  of  honest  Masons
do  expose  its  secrets  and  obligations  to  die  world.

Voted,  That  the  second  and  third  obligations  in  Masonry  be
read.    They  were  accordingly  read,  as  published  by  Morgan.

Toted,  That  the  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  obligations  be
tead,  as  submitted  to  the  convention,  in  manuscript.  They  were
accordingly  read  by  Mr.  Read.

Mr.  Read  then  spoke  very  extensively  upon  the  obligations  of
Masonry — showing  that  they  were  diametrically  opposed  to  good
government,  and  subversive  of  the  principles  of  justice  and  goad
otder.

The  convention  then  adjourned  until  seven  o'clock,  P.  M.

Curing  the  adjournment,  Solomon  South  wick,  JCsa.  of  Albany,
who  had  been  invited  to  attend  the  convention)  atrived  to  take
fus  seat  as  a  member.

J)L  Urge  and  respectable  concourse  of  citizens  having  convened,
attt  being  anxious  to  see  the  man  whom  they  considered  the

%Hf  the  beast!.  But  the  *monster,*  by  his  cunning  devices,  foiled  every
'attempt  to  take  his  life.     At  length  a  few  became  convinced  that  it  was  their
4u4f,  at  the  hazard  of  every  thing  dear  on  earth,  to  publish  dl  the  secrets  of
'the  order  to  the  world;— Uiat  this  was  the  onty  way  in  which  this  institu- .
4igA  of  darkness  could  be  destroyed,  an  A  our  country  saved  from  ruin!
flrough  they  weoe  few  in  number— though  they  had  a  secret,  midnight,  and
Powerful  foe  to  encounter;  yet,  with  'truth  and  justice'  inscribed  on  their  •
^toeld,  and  the  God  of  battles  to  lead  them  on,  they  moved  forward  undaunt-  -
*$  to  the  mighty  conflict— they  bravely  fought— they  nobly  conquered!!


y  Google


LI6HT  oil  vaseHBT*  41$

^bampioo  of  their  liberties,  weee  admitted  into  the  convention
chamber,  when  Mr.  Southwick  was  introduced  by  Elder  Ber-
mwd.  He  briefly  addressed  them  upon  the  subject  of  seJAcrea-
ted  societies  in  any  government,  particularly  a  republican  govern-
ment;  reminded  them  with  what  jealousy  the  people  of  these
United  States  had  watched  the  introduction  of  societies  and
combinations  anti-republican  in  their  tendencies;  and  instanced
the  decline  of  the  Cincinatti  society*  composed  of  many  of  the
veterans  of  the  revolution;  and  the  oppositiea  to  thai  article  of
our  federal  constitution  which  autheruses  secret  sessions  of  Con-
gress, although  they  had  not  until  lately  become  suspicious  that
the  Masonic  institution  had  been  ell  this  while  growing  up  amidst
them,  with  their  indulgence,  to  subvert  their  liberties.  He  re*
marked  that  be  had  not  the  least  anticipation  of  being  called  upon
to  address  his  fellow  citizens;  that  he  was  wholly  unprepared,
and  completely  exhausted  with  his  journey.

The  citizens  then  departed,  and  the  convention  then  re-orga*
nosed.    The  following  resolution  was  then  passed  unanimously.

Resolved,  That  the  hoelt  written  by  Capt.  William  Morgan  and
published  by  Ool.  David  C.  Miller,  entitled  'Illustrations  of  Ma-
sonry/ is  affair  and  full  exhibition  of  the  three  first  degrees  o£
■speculative  Free  Masonry;  that  we  solemuly  and  unequivocally
testify  to  the  above,  we  cheerfully  subscribe  our  names  thereto.
We  certify  according  to  the  degrees  we  have  taken.

Entered  Apprentices— UlaXL  S.  Beech,  Henry  Peck,  David  CV
3fiHer.

Fellow  Craft—G*orge  W.  Blodgetfc

Matte  Ma*oM~~L*QQMdB>Ros%,  George  W.  Harris,  James
Cochrane)  Jonathan  Foster,  Edmund  Badger,  Orasmus  Bowers,
Jason  Grotton*  James  Gray,  Benjamin  Oooley,  Enos  Bachelder,
A.  E.  Hutchiasy  John  Tonttinson,  Samuel  D.  Green,  Pelatiah
Dewy,  Adam  Riehmond,  David  Webb,  John  Ammock,  James
Taylor,  William  W.  Phelps,  B.  Bliss*

Mark  Jtf osferwSolomon  Southwick*

Royal  Arch  Mmone — Males  P.  Lampson,  David  Bernard*

Knegktoftke  Red  frets—Richard Hollister.

KniehU  Templars  and  IUmetnom  Knights  *[  the  Cro**-An-
thony  €oofey,  Cephas  A.  8mith,  Augustus  P.  HaseaJl,  Hem*
Pratt,  Herbert  A.  Read,  Jame*  Ballard,  Jean.  HascalL

The  obligations  of  Mark  Master,.  Past  Master,  Most  Excel-
lent Master^  end  4he  Royal  Arch  degrees,  were  agaie  read.
£€fee*be  obligations  in  the  degveee^nftoed  ia  the  chapter*]

The  poWcal,  moral;  and  relgiousaaturo  and.tendaaef  of  w*
foregoing  obligations,  were  again  freely  discussed;  whoreuf^w

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


416  UOHT  ON  MA80JOIY,

was  resolved  by  all  the  Royal  Arch  Masons,  that  the  foregoing
obligations  are,  according  to  oar  best  recollections,  substantially
true— and  by  the  convention  unanimously,  that  they  are  neither
legally^  morally,  or  religiously  binding;  and  that  they  be  published
to  the  world.

The  obligation  of  the  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,  Knights  Tem-
plar, the  sealed  obligation  and  obligations  of  the  Thrice  Illustrious
Order  of  tne  Cross,  were  then  read.  [See  the  obligations  in  the
degrees  conferred  in  the  encampment.]

After  another  short  discussion,  the  knights  present  then  unanin
mousry  resolved,  That  the  foregoing  obligations  are  substantially
correct — and  by  this  convention  unaiiimously,  that  they  are  nei-
ther legally,  morally,  or  religiously  binding;  and  that  they  be  pub-
lished to  the  world.

The  convention  then  adjourned  to  nine  o'clock  of  the  next  day-

Leonard  B.  Rose,  Chn.

I>avu>  Bernard,  Sec.

Wednesday,  Feb.  20, 1828.

The  convention  met  pursuant  to  adjournment

In  the  absence  of  Messrs.  Rose  and  Bernard,  Solomon  {South-
wick,  Esq.  of  Albany,  was  unanimously  chosen  chairman.  Mr*
Richard  Hollister  was  then  unanimously  appointed  secretary.

The  chairman  addressed  the  meeting  briefly,  to  the  following*
effect:

Gentlemen — I  have  a  proposition  to  make,  which  is  demanded
by  what  we  owe  to  the  character  of  our  country,  and  the  cause  in
which  we  are  engaged.  If  it  be  true,  as  has  been  stated,  that
William  Morgan  was  incarcerated  in  the  magazine  of  the  fortress-
of  Niagara,  it  was  a  prostitution  of  that  bulwark  of  out  freedom
and  independence  unparalleled  h>the  history  of  our  country,  or
in  that  of  any  other  country  pretending  la  the  possession  of  civil
liberty.  If  done,  it  must  have  been  done  by  or  through  the  tacit
permission  or  direct  agency  of  the  person  or  persons  having
charge  of  that  fortress,  as  servants  of  the  people  of  these  United
States;  and  hence  both  the  government  and  people  owe  it  to  their
own  dignity  of  character  and  the  cause  of  civil  liberty,  to  dis-
charge the  guilty  from  their  service,  if  true;  or  to  wipe  off,  both
from  the  accused  and  themselves,  the  foul  stainf  if  the  report  be>
false.  For  myself  I  know  nothing  of  the  facts;  but  I  have  seen
them  stated  under  sanction  of  such  names  as  command  my  futt
confidence.  I  allude,  gentlemen,  to  what  is  called  the  Lewiston
Convention;  authors  of  which,  though  greatly  abused,  I  beHeve
to  have  been  actuated  by  the  purest  of  motives,  and  to  deserv*

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  417

the  gratitude  of  their  country.  They  have  made  the  report  ou
testimony  satisfactory  to  themselves;  and  it  is  now  due  to  the-
character  of  our  country  and  its  government,  that  the  charge  be*
investigated  by  those  whose  (if  not  exclusive)  province  it  was  in
the  first  place.

The  chairman  then  moved  the  following  resolutions,  which  were
unanimously  adopted:

Resolved,  That  a  committee  be  appointed  to  draft  a  memorial
to  Congress,  on  the  subject  of  the  prostitution  of  the  fortress  of
Niagara  to  the  incarceration  of  William  Morgan,  a  free  citizen
of  the  United  States,  by  persons  calling  themselves  Free  Masons.
and  without  any  legal  authority  for  such  a  violence  and  coercion.
Resolved,  That  Solomon  Southwick,  James  Ballard,  John
Hascall,  Herbert  A.  Read,  Anthony  Cooley,  W.  W.  Phelps,  and
Edward  Badger,  compose  said  committee;  and  that  tfcey  sign  the
memorial  in  behalf  of  this  convention.     On  motion,

Resolved,  That  a  committee  of  fifteen  be  appointed  to  prepare
the  degrees  of  Free  Masonry  above  that  of  Master,  for  publica-
tion; and  Elder  David  Bernard,  Elder  John  G.  Stearns,  Solo-
mon Southwick,  Rev.  Reuben  Sanborn,  David  C  Miller,  John
Hascall,  Herbert  A.  Read,  Richard  Hollister,  Samuel  D.  Green,
Oliver  Forward,  Edward  Giddins,  Judge  Hinman,  (of  Pike,  Al-
legany county,)  William  Perry,  and  W.  W.  Phelps,  (of  the  stato
of  Vermont,)  compose  the  said  committee.     On  motion,

Resolved,  That  a  committee  of  seven  be  appointed  to  draft  a
circular  invitation  to  all  Free  Masons  who  are  opposed  to  the  in-
stitution  of  Masonry,  and  to  secret  associations  in  general  in  the
United  States,  to  meet  at  this  place  on  the  4th  of  July  next;  that
they  prepare  an  address  to  be  delivered  on  the  occasion;  and  that
Solomon  Southwick,  John  Hascall,  John  Tomlinson,  Herbert  A.
Read,  David  C.  Miller,  W.  W.  Phelps,  and  A.  P.  Hascall,  com-
pose said  committee.

Resolved,  *Fhat  the  editors  of  the  following  papers  be,  and
they  are  hereby  requested  to  publish  the  proceedings  of  this  con-
vention, to  wit — Republican  Advocate,  Western  Advertiser,  Buf-
falo Patriot,  Jamestown  Journal,  Western  Star,  Le  Roy  Gazette,
Livingston  Register,  Anti-Masonic  Inquirer,  Seneca  Farmer,
Lake  Light,  Cazenovia  Monitor,  National  Observer,  Sandy  Hilt
Sun,  Palladium  of  Liberty,  New  Jersey  Union  Telegraph,  Indiana
and  Jefferson  Whig,  National  Intelligencer,  and  Georgetown  Co-
lumbian, and  all  others  who  are  willing  to  gpve  the  public  mforroa*
iion  upon  this  subject.

S.  Southwick,  Ch».

Rjcbard  Hollister,  Sec,

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


(418)


•    ANTI-MASONIC  CONVENTION
0/  the  twice  western  cvmUeseJNYthddatLmMojtJdmxh  Gth  auL7th,  162&

At  &  convention  of  delegates  from  twelve  counties,  at  the  village  of  Le
Roy,  on  the  6th  of  March,  General  William  Wai>swo*th,  of  the  county  of
Livingston,  wan  appointed  president,,  and  J)oct.  Matthew  Brown,  jun.  of  the
county  of  Monroe,  and  the  Hon.  Robert  Fleming,  of  the  county  of  Niagara,
appointed  secretaries.

The  president  took  the  chair,  and  the  following  delegates  presented  cre-
dentials and  took  their  seats.

Frem  the  county  #/  Ckmdauque*— -Joseph  White,  jun.,  Abper  Hazeltine.

Erie.— Thomas  C.  Love,  H.  Rutgers  Stagg,  Willard  Filmore,  Henry  £.
Davies,  Calvin  Bishop,  Benjamin  0.  Diverts,  Aaron  Parker.

Niagara. — George  H.  Boughton,  Bates  Cooke,  Robert  Fleming,  Asher  Sax-
ton,  Asher  Freeman.

Genesee.— -Samuel  Warner,  Amos  TyreU,  Calvin  P.Bayiev,  Timothy  Fitch,
Andrew  Dibble,  David  C.  Miller,  Edinund  Barnes,  Luther  A.  Baker,  John
Haskall,  Shubacl  Dunham,  Daniel  Woodward,  Chauncey  P.  Smith,  Martin
C.  Coe,  George  W.  Lay,  Moses  Taggart,  Harvey  Putnam*,  James  Lathrop7
Leverett  Seward,  Amot?W.  Muxzy.

Oriemt. — Benjamin  W,  Van  Dyke,  Chauncey  Robinson.

Jtfonroe.— Matthew  Brown,  jun.,  William  Groves,  John  G.  CrandaH,  Zol-
ved  Stephens,  William  B.  Brown,  Simeon  M.  Coe,  "Joseph  Randall,  William
Garbutt,  Joshua  Howell,  Thomas  Bingham,  Milton  Sheldon,  Frederick  Whit-
tlesey, James  K.  Livingston,  Thurlew  Weed.

Livingston.— William  Wadsworth,  Andrew  Arnold,  Halloway  Long,  Tabor*
Ward,  S.  M.  Smith,  Levi  Sadler.

Wayne. — Israel  J.  Richardson,  Robert  Luze,  Henry  S.  Gilbert,  William  P.
Richardson,  Loammi  Beadle,  Charles  S.  Williams.

Outers— James  Watson,  J.  Mason,  Elian*  Peck,  Isaac  Lapham,  Oliver
Heartwell,  John  Crandal.

Yalta. — Alexander  Parkman.

Seneca.— William  Child,  Aaron  Davis,  William  Thompson,  Charles  Starret,
Allyn  Boardman,  Elnathan  Winans,  Jacob  B.  Farr,  John  Goltry.

TampAww.— H.  Jerome,  Jonathan  Owen.

The  objects  of  the  meeting  being  explained  by  T.  Fitcjb  Esq.,  it  was,  on
motion  of  Mr.  Love,  of  Buffalo,  resolved,  That  a  committee  of  one  from  each
county  represented,  be  appointed  toc'igest  and  report  to  the  convention  pro-
per questions  for  its  deliberations;  and  the  following  persons  were  appointed
said  committee:— Messes.  Haseltiae,  Love.  Cooke,  Fitah,  Van:  Dyke,  Whit-
tlesey, Ward,  W.  P.  Richardson,  Heartwell,  Parkman,  Child,  and  Jerome.

The  committee  appointed  to  report  the  subjects  that  ought  to  claim  the
consideration  of  this  convention,  report:

That  it  is  expedient  to  present  an  address  from  this  convention  to  the  peo-
ple of  the  state  of  New  York,  expressive  of  the  views  of  tms  convention  upon
the  subject  of  Free  Masonry;  and  that  a  committee  of  five  he  appointed  to
draft  the  same.

That  it  is  expedient  that  resolutions  be  adopted  by  this  convention,  ex-
preserve  of  their  views;  and  that  a  committee  of  &yq  be  appointed  to  draft
the  same.


y  Google


HGHT   OS  MASONJtT.  41^

That  it  is  expedient  to  present  a  memorial  to  Congress  upon  the  subject  of
the  incarceration  of -a  citizen  in  a  fortress  of  the  United  States,  praying  for
an  inquiry  into  the  same.
That  h  is  expedient  to  appoint  a  General  Central  Committee.
That  it  is  expedient  to  raise  means  for  the  publication  and  dissemination
of  light  and  truth,  relating  to  the  character  and  principles  of  Free  Masonry.
That  it  is  expedient  that  this  convention  recommend  a  State  Convention
to  be  held  at  a  suitable  time  and  place,  for  the  purpose  of  adopting  more
general  and  efficient  means  for  the  destruction  of  the  Masonic  institution.

The  report  of  the  committee  was  accepted,  and  the  following  gentlemen
appointed  to  carry  its  recommendations  into  effect:

Committee  to  draft  an  address  to  the  people  of  this  state.— Bates  Cooke,  Thur-
low-Weed,  William  Thompson,  Timothy  Fitch,  Horace  Jerome.

To  if  aft  resolutions.— Frederick  Whittlesey,  George  W.  Lay,  A.  Hazeltioe,
I.  J.  Richardson,  Jonathan  Mason.

To  draft  a  memorial  to  the  legislature. — Thomas  C.  Love,  B.  W.  Van  Dyke
John  Haskall,  Oliver  Heartwell.  J     '

To  draft  a  memorial  to  Congress. — James  K.  Livingston,  William  Groves,
Joseph  White,  jun.,  Edmund  Barnes.

Mr.  Whittlesey,  from  the  committee  to  draft  resolutions,  reported  the  fol-
lowing, which  were  unanimously  adopted:

Resolved,  That  it  is  a  peculiar  feature  of  our  free  government,  that  all
measures  should  be  open  and  amenable  to  public  opinion;  and  that  the  exis-
tence of  any  nociety  in  this  country,  whose  objects,  principles,  and  measures,
are  secret  and  concealed,  is  not  merely  useless  but  hostile  to  the  spirit  of  our
free  institutions.

Resolved,  That  the  bare  existence  of  secret  societies  in  these  United  States,
justify  fears,,  jealousies,  arid  Suspicions  as  to  their  objects,  in  the  breasts  of
the  uninitiated,  which  have  a  tendency  to  distract  society  and  sow  ill  will  and
dissentions  in  community.

Resolved,  That  the  disclosures  which  have  befen  made  of  the  principles  and
obligations  of  speculative  Free  Masonry,  prove  it  to  be  an  institution  of  dan-
gerous tendency*— liable  to  be  used  by  the  ambitious  and  designing  as  an  en-
gine for' exalting  unworthy  men,  and  effecting  improper  measures — placing
the  citizen  in  a  situation  in  which  his  duty  to  his  country  must  in  many  in-
stances conflict  with  his  obligations  to  the  fraternity—- and  weakening  the
sanctions  of  morality  and  religion  by  the  multiplication  of  profane  oaths,  and
an  irreverent  familiarity  with  religious  forms  and  sacred  things.

Resetted,  That  we  discover  in  the  ceremonies  and  obligations  of  the  higher
degrees  of  Masonry,  principles  which  deluged  France  in  blood,  and  which
lend  directly  to  the  subversion  of  all  religion  and  government.

Resolved,  That  the  obligation  in  one  of  the  degrees  of  Free  Masonry  to
protect  a  brother,  'right  or  wrong,'  and  to  preserve  his  secret  inviolate,  even
in  cases  of  murder  and  treason,  has  a  tendency  to  unnerve  the  arm  of  jus-
tice, and  to  afford  protection  to  the  vicious  and  profligate  from  the  punish-
ment due  to  their  crimes.

Resolved,  That  the  tendency  of  ouch  obligations  is  to  weaken  the  sanction
of  virtue  in  the  minds  of  the  recipients,  by  making  bad  men  bold  and  un-
*  blushing  to  frost  the  history  of  their  crime&to  the  ears  of  a  brother,  and  thus
-  making  them  familiar  with  iniquity,  to  the  destruction  of  all  correct  moral
principles.

Reedttd,  That -we  view  the  impious  personification  of  the  Peity,  and  the
irreverent  introduction  of  the  name  of  our  blessed  Saviour,  and  the  Holy
Trinity,  in  Masonic  meetings  and  ceremonies,  with  mingled  pain  and  abhor-
Teoce;  and  that  we  regard  the  unhallowed  substitution  of  the  profane  orgies
-of  Free  Masonry  for  the  Christian  religion,  as  fraught  with  mure  danger  to

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


420  LIGHT  ON   MASONRT.

the  peace  of  society  and  the  truth*  of  revelation,  than  open  Deism  or  avowed

infidelity.  *

Resolved.  That  the  outrages  upon  the  liberty  of  one  citizen,  and  upon  the
liberty  and  life  of  another,  committed  by  Masons  in  these  western  counties,
aflbrd  horrible  proof  of  the  sanguinary  nature  of  Masonic  oaths.

Resolved,  That  the  wide  spread  conspiracy  of  numerous  Masons  to  plot
these  outrages— their  attempts  to  stifle  investigation  after  they  had  been
coinmitted— and  to  screen  the  actual  offenders  from  the  justice  doe  their
vrimes — sufficiently  identities  the  institution  with  these  enormities,  and  jus-
tifies as  in  holding  it  and  its  supporters  responsible  for  the  same.

Resolved,  That  an  institution  whose  rites  are  impious — whose  obligations
are  blasphemous — and  if  observed  in  the  spirit  of  their  horrid  import,  must
necessarily  lead  to  perjury  and  murder — an  institution  in  one  instance  at
least  stained  with  the  blood  of  one  of  its  members,  by  a  crime  which  has  in  an
unequivocal  manner  received  the  sanction  of  the  order,  is  unworthy  to  exist
in  a  free  government;  and  that  we  pledge  ourselves  to  each*  other  and  to  the
world,  that  we  will  use  all  lawful  and  constitutional  means  to  banish  entirely
from  our  country  that  bloody  ieJic  of  barbarism.         *

Resolved,  That  those  Masons  who  have  disclosed  the  horrid  obligations
which  bind  the  fraternity  together,  deserve  the  wannest  gratitude  of  .their
fellow  citizens;  and  that  we  will  do  every  thine  in  our  power  to  sustain  them
against  those  persecutions  which  the  nature  of  those  obligations  and  the  vin-
dictive character  of  the  institution  teach  us  to  fear  will  be  their  lot

Resolved,  That  this  convention  are  satisfied,  from  the  evidence  adduced
before  them,  of  the  substantial  truths  of  the  Masonic  obligations  recently  pub-
lished—and that  the  same  be  published  to  the  world  in  connection  with  the
proceedings  of  this  convention.

Resolved,  That  we  regard  the  pubhc  presses  the  sentinel  of  freedom,  and
cannot  but  lament  its  entire  subjugation  throughout  the  Union  to  the  con-
trol of  Free  Masonry.

Resolved,  That  we  earnestly  recommend  to  the  citizens  of  the  several  coun-
ties of  this  state  to  procure  the  establishment  of  free  presses,  whose  editors
-will  fearlessly  vindicate  the  rights  of  its  citizens,  and  laws  of  the  land. '

Resolved,  That  a  State  Convention,  to  be  composed  of  delegates  from  the
several  counties  of  the  state  of  New  York,  euual  to  doubieethe  number  of
their  representatives  in  the  Assembly,  be  called  to  meet  at  the  village  of
TJtiea,  on  the  fourth  day  of  August  next,  to  take  measures  for  the  destruction
of  the  Masonic  institution;  for  sustaining  the  liberty  of  the  press,  and  assert-
ing the  supremacy  of  the  laws;  for  protecting  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the
eitizens  against  the  vindictive  persecutions  of  members  of  the  Masonic  society;
and  to  take  into  consideration  such  other  business  as  the  said  ^convention
shall  deem  expedient  in  furtherance  of  such  objects— and  that  it  be  and  is
hereby  recommended  to  the  different  counties  in  this  state  to  send  delegates
to  the  same.

Resolved,  That  a  General  Central  Committee,  consisting  of  five  mem-
bers, be  appointed  by  this  convention;  and  that  it  be  and  is  hereby  recom-
mended to  the  different  counties  to  appoint  Committees  of  Correspondence,
and  report  theirnames  to  the  General  Central  Committee  at  Rochester.

Resolved,  That  the  several  towns  in  the  county  that  have  not  already  done
so,  be  requested  to  appoint  town  Committees  of  Correspondence,  and  for-
*w&rd  their  names  to  the  Central  Corresponding  Committee.

Resolved,  That  it  be  and  is  hereby  recommended  to  the  several  counties  to
jcaise  funds  for  defraying  the  expenses  of  publishing  the  proceedings  of  this
invention,  and  such  other  publications  as  the  General  Central  Committee
3uay  think  proper  to  make;  and  to  defray  the  expenses  heretofore  incurred


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  421

hy  the  different  committees  in  the  investigation  of  the  late  outrages;  and  that
such  funds  be  transmitted  to  the  General  Central  Committee.     -

Resolved,  That  the  proceedings  of  this  convention  be  signed  by  the  chair-
man and  secretaries — and  that  five  thousand  copies  be  published  in  a  pamph-
let form  for  distribution,  under  the  direction  of  the  General  Central  Com-
mittee.

Resolved,  That  Samuel  Works,  Habvet  Ely,  Frederick  F.  Backus,  Fred-
irick  WHitTLBSET,  and  Thurlow  Weed,  of  the  village  of  Rochester,  be  ap-
pointed a  General  Central  Committee  of  Correspondence  and  Publication.

Mr.  Davies,  from  the  committee  to  whom  was  referred  the  subject  of  tho
charges  made  by  Masons  against  the  Morgan  committee,  made  the  following
report,  which  was  read  and  adopted  unanimously:

Whereas  reports  of  the  most  malignant  and  scandalous  nature  have  been
circulated  by  the  Masonic  fraternity,  in  relation  to  the  members  of  the  seve-
ral committees  commonly  denominated  the  Lewis  ton  Committee,  charging
them  with  having  misrepresented  fact*  in  their  possession,  and  with  having
from  sinister  views  created  an  unjust  excitement:

And  whereas  this  convention  have  had  adduced  to  them  the  most  satisfac-
tory and  conclusive  evidence  that  the  said  committee  have  fairly  and  impar-
tially conducted  all  their  inquiries — therefore,

Resolved,  That  the  said  Lewiston  Committee  are  entitled  to  the  thanks  of
this  convention  for  their  patriotic  and  praiseworthy  exertions  in  exposing  to
the  world  the  extensive  Masonic  conspiracy  formed  in  this  country,  which
seemed  to  threaten  the  civil  liberty  of  tliis  nation;  and  that  they  merit,  and
we  trust  will  receive,  the  countenance  and  gratitude  of  every  well  wisher  to
the  perpetuity  of  our  free  institutions.         (

Resolved,  That  all  the  newspapers  in  the  Union  friendly  to  the  cause  of  ci-
vil liberty,  be  requested  to  publish  these  proceedings.

Mr.  Love,  from  the  committee  to  draft  a  memorial  to  tho  legislature  on
the  subject  of  unlawful  oaths,  made  a  report,  which  was  read  and  adopted  by
the  convention.

Mr.  Livmgstonitrom  the  committee  appointed  to  draft  a  memorial  to  Con-
gress, reported  the  same,  which  was  read  and  adopted.

Bates  Cooke,  Esq.,  from  the  committee  appointed  for  that  purpose,  report-
ed an  address^  the  people  of  the  state,  which  was  read  and  adopted.

ADDRESS

TO  THE  PEOPLE  OF  THE  STATE  OF  NEW  YORK.

Fellow  citizens — The  institution  of  speculative  Free  Masonry
has  existed  in  these  U.  States,  ever  since  the  formation  of  our  go-
vernment.  Assuming  to  be  the  patron  of  science,  the  protector  of
morality,  and  the  handmaid  of  religion,  it  has  been  suffered  to  exist
without  question  or  suspicion.  Its  votaries  have  ever  been  enthu-
siastic and  extravagant  in  praise  of  its  character,  principles,  and
tendency.  It  is,  in  their  own  language,  a  system  not  only  beau-
tiful, but  divine — whose  principles  are  the  purest  morality;  whose
objects  are  to  inculcate  universal  benevolence  and  good  will
among  the  brethren;  and  whose  operations  have  been  an  extended
system  of  holy  and  healing  charity^  ,  It  is  calculated,  they  say,
Mm


d  by  Google


422  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.

to  enlighten  the  ignorant— to  reform  the  bad— to  protect  the
weak—- and  to  relieve  the  necessitous.  We  have  seen  many  good
men,  venerable  sages,  worthy  patriots,  and  pious  divines,  belong-
iog  to  this  institution;  and  have  suffered  ourselves  to  be  lulled
into  security  by  the  impression  that  such  men  could  not  lend  their
countenance  to  an  association  whose  principles  were  dangerous
to  society,  government,  or  religion.     Their  principles  have  thus
been  taken  upon  trust,  and  the  institution  has  been  suffered  to
exist  in  a  community  prone  to  suspect  that  where  all  is  not  open
all  is  not  honest.    It  is,  perhaps,  a  singular  fact,  that  in  a  free
government  like  ours,  a  government  of  opinion,  operating  upon
a  people  jealous  of  their  rights  and  peculiarly  suspicious  and
jealous  of  any  secret  influence,  and  of  any  thing  that  could  bear
the  semblance  of  an  insiduous  encroachment  upon  their  liberties, —
such  an  institution  should  have  been  permitted  to  grow  and  in-
crease in  strength,  without  subjecting  itself  to  those  investiga-
tions which  the  nature  and  spirit  of  our  government  are  so  well
calculated  to  encourage.     Other  secret  societies  have,  after  a
brief  existence,  been  frowned  into  oblivion,  as  dangerous  to  a
free  government.     It  is  owing,  doubtless,  to  the  circumstances
above  set  forth,  and  to  the  fact  that  many  whom  we  esteem  as
our  fathers,  brothers,  and  connexions,  are  members  of  this  insti-
tution, that  speculative  Free  Masonry  has  not  shared  the  fate  of
other  secret  societies*     Some  weight  too  may  be  attached  to  the
fact  that  most  men  of  influence  and  political  eminence — those
who  are  wont  to  take  the  lead  in  affairs  that  concern  the  govern-
ment— have  themselves  been  high  officials  in  the  institution,  and
of  course  interested  in  its  support.     But  whatever  the  cause  may
have  been,  it  is  certain  that  Free  Masonry  has  been  suffered  to
exist  and  to  extend  itself  in  this  free  government,  and  that  without
question  or  inquiry.     Addressing  itself  to  the  cupidity,  the  am-
bition, the  vanity,  or  the  curiosity  of  individuals,  it  has  gone  on
increasing  like  the  fame  of  the  classic  poet,  until  it  has  become
wide  spread  in  its  influence,  extended  in  its  operations;  and  in  its
multiplied  mystic  ramifications,  it  has  become  interwoven  with
the  very  frame  and  fabric  of  society,  and  secretly  connected  with
all  our  institutions.     A  cool  observer  cannot  but  look  back  with
astonishment  and  see  how  secretly  and  covertly,  and  at  the  same
time  how  rapidly,  it  has  spread  itself  through  this  tJnion — how
speciously  it  has  insinuated  and  connected  itself  with  almost
every  interest,  either  of  a  private  or  public  nature.     Iti  the  foun-
dation of  every  public  building  we  have  beheld  the  interference
of  these  mystic  artisans  with  their  symbolic  insigna;  in  eveiy
public  procession  we  have  seen  their  flaunting  banners,  their

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  423

muslin  robes,  and  mimic  crowns.    In  the  executive  of  the  state
we  have  beheld  a  man  holding  the  highest  office  in  the  order  bound
to  his  brethren  by  secret  ties,  of  whose  nature,  strength,  and  char-
acter, we  knew  nothing.  We  have  seen  our  legislature  controlled
by  majorities  bound  to  the  fraternity  by  the  same  ties.     The
ermine  of  justice  we  have  seen  worn  by  men  whose  brows  were
decorated  with  the  gilded  mitre  of  the  order  in  their  midnight  and
secret  meetings.     We  have  seen  others  of  Jhis  mystic  tie  em-
panneled  as  jurors  to  hold  the  balance  of  justice  between  a
brother  and  a  stranger  to  the  order,  and  that  brother  capable  of
communicating  with  such,  his  judges,  by  a  mystic  and  symbolic
language  unintelligible  to  his  adversary.     We  cannot  now  but
be  astonished  that  so  much  should  have  passed,  and  that  no  dan-
ger should  have  been  apprehended.     Perhaps  it  may  have  occa-
sionally occurred  to  some  minds  more  than  ordinarily  watchful,
that  some  designing  men  may  have  made  use  of  the  order  as  a
ladder  to  their  ambition;    that  more  than  an  ordinary  share  of
official  patronage  was  distributed  among  the  brethren;  that  the
even  balance  of  justice  may,  in  some  instances,  have  been  made
to  incline  its  scale  in  favor  of  a  brother;  that  her  descending
sword  may  have  been  averted  from  the  head  of  a  guilty  member
by  the  broad  shield  of  the  order.     But  these  suspicions,  if  any
such  have  been  entertained,  were  partial,  and  the  institution  has
felt  itself  so  strong,  that  it  has  been  supposed  that  it  might  safely
set  at  defiance  every  effort  to  pull  it  down.

The  year  1826,  however,  introduced  a  new  era  in  the  history
of  Masonry  and  of  our  country.  From  that  year  to  the  present
time,  enough  has  transpired  to  show  in  a  broad  and  fearful  light
the  danger  of  secret  institutions.  That  citizen  who  will  close
bis  eyes  to  this  light,  is  criminally  negligent  to  his  own  rights
and  the  safety  of  this  government.  The  order  has  been  bold
enough  to  assume  to  itself  powers  which  belong  only  to  the  go-
vernment of  the  land;  and  in  the  exercise  of  these  assumed
powers  has  violated  the  liberty  of  one  citizen  and  taken  the  life
of  another,  for  an  alleged  breach  of  obligations  which  our  laws
do  not  recognise.

In  September,  1826,  Capt.  William  Morgan,  a  citizen  of  this
state,  was  seized  under  feigned  process  of  the  law,  in  the  day
time,  in  the  village  of  Batavia,  and  forcibly  carried  to  Canandai-
gua  in  another  county.  Capt  Morgan  was  engaged  in  the  pub-
lication of  a  book  which  purported  to  reveal  the  secrets  of  Free
Masonry.  This  contemplated  publication  excited  the  alarm  of
the  fraternity,  and  numbers  of  its  members  were  heard  to  say  that
it  should  be  suppressed  at  all  events.    It  is  known  that  meetnw

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


424  LIGHT   Oft   MASONRY.

of  delegates  from  the  different  lodges  in  the  western  counties
were  held  to  devise  means  for  most  effectuaUy  preventing  the
publication.  It  is  known  that  the  matter  was  a  subject  of  anx-
ious discussion  in  many  and  distant  lodges.  It  is  known  that
the  zealous  members  of  the  fraternity  were  angry,  excited,  and
alarmed,  and  occasionally  individuals  threw  out  dark  and  des-
perate threats.  It  is  known  that  an  incendiary  attempt  was  made
to  fire  the  office  of  Col.  Miller,  the  publisher  of  the  book.  That
this  attempt  was  plotted  by  Masons,  and  attempted  to  be  carried
into  execution  by  Masons.  The  gang  who  seized  Morgan  at
Batavia  were  Masons.  They  took  him  to  Canandaigua;  after
a  mock  trial  he  was  discharged,  but  was  immediately  arrested
and  committed  to  prison  on  a  stale  or  fictitious  demand.  The
next  night,  in  the  absence  of  the  jailer,  he  was  released  from
prison  by  the  pretended  friendship  of  a  false  and  hollow  hearted
brother  Mason.  Upon  leaving  the  prison  door  he  was  again
seized  in  the  streets  of  Canandaigua,  and  notwithstanding  his
cries  of  murder,  he  was  thrust  with  ruffian  violence  into  a  car-
riage prepared  for  that  purpose.  At  Batavia  he  had  been  torn,
from  his  home — from  his  amiable  wife  and  infant  children.  At
Canandaigua  he  had  been  falsely  beguiled  from  the  safe  custody
of  the  law,  and  was  forcibly  carried,  by  relays  of  horses,  through
a  thickly  populated  country,  in  the  space  of  little  more  than
twenty-four  hours,  to  the  distance  of  one  hundred  and  fifteen
miles,  and  secured  as  a  prisoner  in  the  magazine  of  Fort  Niagara.
This  outrage  necessarily  required  many  agents — and  to  tho
shame  of  our  country  enough  Masons  were  found,  and  of  these,
too,  many  who  were  bound  by  their  Official  oaths  to  protect  tho
liberty  of  the  citizen  and  prevent  the  violation  of  the  laws — wHo
readily  lent  their  personal  assistance,  and  the  aid  of  their  carriages
and  horses,  in  the  transportation  of  this  hapless  man  to  the  place
of  his  confinement  and  subsequent  death.

This  was  not  their  only  outrage.  About  the  same  time  Col.  Da-
vid C.  Miller  was  also  seized  in  Batavia,  under  like  color  of  legal
process,  and  taken  to  Le  Roy.  He  was  also  seized  by  Masons,
and  accompanied  to  Le  Roy  by  a  ferocious  band  of  Masons
armed  with  clubs.  He  was  discharged  from  die  process  under
which  he  was  arrested,  and  with  lawless  violence  they  attempted
to  seize  him  again;  but  to  the  praise  of  the  citizens  of  Le  Roy,
and  to  some  who  were  members  of  the  Masonic  fraternity,  t6o,
be  it  3poken,  he  was  rescued,  and  suffered  to  reten  to;  Salvia.
The  avowed  intention  of  Col.  Miller's  seizure  Was  to^Sjfc^htm
where  Morgan  was—rand  where  that  was  may  be  b^^gfetfajerred
from  the  impious  declaration  of  one  of  the  conspira^oi^r«hies

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


.  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  4£5

Sanson,  for  several  years  a  member  of  our  legislature:  that  'he
wag  put  where  he  would  stay  put  until  God  should  call  for  him.9

These  acts  of  outrage  and  violence  at  length  became  the  sub-
ject of  inquiry,  and  excited  the  honest  indignation  of  a  commu-
nity always  alive  to  the  rights  of  the  citizen  and  the  violation  of
the  law3.  Committees  of  investigation  were  appointed  in  the  dif-
ferent counties  which  were  the  scenes  of  this  violence,  with  in-
structions to  do  every  thing  in  their  power  to  ferret  out  this  crime
and  trace  it  to  the  perpetrators.  It  was,  however,  perpetrated
under  the  cover  of  so  much  secrecy,  that  it  was  long  before  even
the  course  which  had  been  taken  wjth  Morgan  could  be  traced.
Certainly  the  committees  did  not  commence  their  investigations
under  the  impressions  that  they  should  find  the  fraternity  impli-
cated in  the  transaction.  They  were  slow  to  believe,  as  the  public
have  generally  and  very  properly  been  slow  to  believe,  that  a  s°r
ciety  which  embraces  among  its  members  so  many  worthy  and
pious  men,  could  have  ever  connived  at  so  foul  a  crime.  It  was
considered  as  a  blot  upon  the  escutcheon  of  .Masonry;  and  Ma-
sons were  publicly  called  upon  to  assist  in  the  investigation  of
this  transaction,  for  the  honor  of  the  order,  and  to  wipe  out  the
stain.  The  committees  soon  discovered,  with  no  little  surprise,
that  they  could  expect  no  assistance  from  members  of  the  frater*
nity.  On  the  contrary,  every  obstacle  and  impediment  was  thrown
in  the  way.  They  found  the  fraternity  in  a  hostile  attitude,
They  found  that  they  were  made  the  objects  of  ridicule,  threats
and  detraction — that  their  motives  were  impugned,  and  their  cha-
racters vilified.  Defeat,  disgrace,  and  ruin,  were  confidently  pre-
dicted to  them;  and  certainly  no  means  were  spared  to  give  to
these  predictions  the  character  of  prophecy.  These  acts  of  vio-
lence were  made  a  jest  of — the  excited  feeling  of  the  public  was
ridiculed — their  honest  indignation  was  defied.  The  courts  have
been  appealed  to  for  justice;  but  in  very  few  instances  has  jus-
tice been  visited  upon  the  heads  of  the  offenders.  The  Masonic
oath  was  soon  found  to  be  a  shackle  upon  the  officers  and  minis-
ters of  the  law — the  lips  of  witnesses  were  sealed  by  a  mysterious
and  invisible  influence,  or  opened  only  in  the  utterance  of  false-
hoods. Jurors  were  influenced  in  their  verdicts  by  an  obligation
more  powerful  than  their  paths  as  jurors.  Many  of  the  chief  of-
fenders fled  the  country;  and  the  crime  yet  remains  in  a  great
measure  unpunished,  and  the.  violated  laws  unavenged.  -  When  it
was  found  that  the  laws  were  too  weak  to  vindicate  their  offended
majesty,  the  committees  appealed  to  the  legislature  of  this  state
to  institute  an  inquiry  into  these  outrages.  Here,  too,  it  was
found  that  the  obligations  which  bound  members  to  the  fraternity
Mm2

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


426  MSHT  ON  MASONftV.

were  stronger  than  their  oaths  to  support  the  constitution  and  the
taws— and  here  too  they  wore  baffled  and  left  to  seek  such  re-
dress as  a  few  men  could  obtain  against  the  united  influence,
wealth,  and  die  determined  and  persevering  hostility  of  a  power-
ful combination.

When  it  came  16  be  ascertained  that  great  numbers  of  the  fra-
ternity had  been  long  engaged  in  devising  means  for  suppressing
Morgan's  book — when  it  became  known  that  the  subject  was  a
matter  of  discussion  in  many  different  and  distant  lodges — when
it  was  also  known  that  many  individuate,  all  members  of  the  fra-
ternity, and  some  high  in  civil  office,  were  implicated  as  accom-
plices in  the  actual  outrages — when  the  course  pursued  by  mem-
bers of  die  fraternity  generally,  in  relation  to  the  investigation,  was
nwiked-^aHcoolthinkmg  people  began  to  look  farther  for  the  ori-
gin of  the  crime,  and  felt  fully  justified  in  identifying  the  Masonic
institution  with  these  outrages,  and  holding  that  responsible  for  it

The  matter  began  to  assume  a  new  complexion:  the  dangers
of  secret  societies  began  to  flash  across  the  minds  of  the  reflect-
ing: here  was  a  bloody  text  which  afforded  matter  for  fearful
comment  The  conviction  became  general  that  the  safety  of  go-
vernment and  religion,  the  rights  of  the  citizen,  and  the  impartial
administration  of  justice,  required  that  this  institution  should  be
banished  from  our  soil.  The  freedom  and  boldness  with  which
the  principles  and  tendency  of  the  Masonic  institution  began  now
to  be  discussed,  encouraged  many  honest  and  conscientious  mem-
bers of  the  fraternity  who  had  heretofore  been  shackled  by  fear,
to  renounce  their  connexion  with  the  society,  and  to  disclose  the
nature  of  these  secret  obligations  which  bound  them  together.
Taking  upon  themselves  those  horrid  obligations  as  they  do,  ig-
norant of  their  nature  and  import,  there  rests  no  obligation  upon
tljem,  either  legal,  moral,  or  honorable,  to  consider  them  of  any
binding  force.  On  the  contrary,  the  duty  which  they  owe  to  so-
ciety and  their  country,  as  citizens— the  duty  which  they  owe  to
God  and  his  church — loudly  call  upon  them  to  divulge  the  princi-
ples of  an  institution  so  hostile  to  government  and  religion.  This
class  of  men  are  entitled  to  the  gratitude  of  the  public  for  their
disclosures,  and  have  deserved  and  should  receive  the  countenance
and  support  of  every  patriotic  citizen,  to  sustain  them  against
every  attempt  to  injure  them,  or  defame  their  characters.  These
obligations  have  been  published  to  the  world,  andfifcnsked  farther
and  weighty  evidence  of  the  dangers  of  the  Masonic  institution:
with  the  substantial  truth  of  these  obligations— and  that  they  are
such  as  are  actually  taken,  we  have  every  reason  to  be  satisfied;
^adjfr  encourages  us  in  the  pledge  which  we  have  mutually  given

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


I4GHT  ON   MASONBY.  437

to  each  other  and  to  the  world — that  we  will  use  our  best  endea-
vors to  banish  this  relic  of  barbarism  from  our  land.  It  is  upon
the  subject  of  the  dangers  of  the  Masonic  institution,  fellow  citi-
zens, that  we  desire  to  address  you;  and  we  are  anxious  that  you
should  give  the  subject  that  consideration  which  its  importance
demands.  This  k  not  an  ordinary  topic.  It  is  not  a  question
whether  this  or  that  man  shall  be  president  or  governor — it  is  not
a  question  whether  this  or  that  line  of  measures  shall  be  pursued
—but  it  is  a  question  of  immeasurably  greater  importance— a
question  whether  the  rights  of  the  citizen  shall  be  held  sacred-*^
whether  the  laws  shall  be  impartially  administered^-whether  reli-
gion shall  be  duly  reverenced.  ,

It  may  be  safely  said  that  secret  societies,  in  their  best  shape?'
are  useless  in  a  free  government;  calculated  to  excite  jealousies
and  suspicions  in  the  breasts  of  the  uninitiated,  which  may  lay
the  foundation  of  dissentions  and  ill  will.    If  their  objects  are
honest  and  praiseworthy,  there  is  no  need  of  secrecy:  honesty
needs  no  cloak,  and  deeds  of  charity  seek  not  the  cover  of  dark*
ness.     Secrecy  and  concealment  ever  afford  pounds  of  suspicion.
If,  however,  Masonry  is  only  what  it  has  ever  been  professed  to
be,  perhaps  it  might  be  safely  left  to  the  amusement  of  full  growft
children;  perhaps  they  might  be  safely  left  to  the  enjoyment  of  their
mock  dignities— their  muslin  robes— their  pasteboard  crowns— and
their  gilded  mitres.    But  when  the  obligations  which  birid  them  'to
vote  for  a  brother  before  any  other  person  of  equal  qualifications'—
to  always  support  his 'military  fame  and  political  preferment  in  op*
position  to  another*— to  aid  and  assist  a  brother  in  difficulty,  so  far
as  to  extricate  from  the  same,  'whether  he  be  right  or  wrong7 — to
keep  bis  secrets  in  all  cases  inviolably,  'murder  and  treason  not
excepted/  and  these  under  no  less  penalties  than  a  torturing  and
ignominious  death— then  it  becomes  a  question  of  serious  import,
whether  such  an  institution  can  be  tolerated  in  our  free  govern-
ment.    By  the  force  of  these  obligations  a  member  can  claim  the
vote  of  a  brother  for  any  elective  office,  in  derogation  of  that
equality  guaranteed  to  us  by  our  constitution;  and  the  brethren
thus  elected,  gradually  obtaining  the  control  of  the  executive,  le-
gislative, and  judicial  departments  of  the  government,  can  and
must  dispense  their  patronage,  in  strict  consonance  with  the  obli-
gations of  this  mysterious  fraternal  tie:  so  that  soon  the  govern-
ment, in  all  its  branches,  must  be  controlled  by  the  members  of
the  order.     What  guarantee  is  there  for  the  impartial  discharge
of  official  duties,  when  the  officer  is  shackled  by  such  obligations?
What  hold  have  we  upon  the  conscience,  the  integrity  or  justice
of  such  a  man?    Is  it  his  oath  to  support  the  constitution  ot  ttus

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


428  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

state  and  the  United  States?  Is  it  his  oath  to  faithfully  discharge
the  duties  of  the  office  which  he  fills?  He  has  taken  a  previous
oath  of  more  horrid  import,  and  of  paramount  obligation,  to  which
all  other  oaths,  all  other  ties,  all  other  duties,  must  yield.  He  is
not  a  free  man.  He  stands  shackled  and  bound  by  invisible  and
mysterious  chains.  He  cannot  do  his  duty  to  his  country  if  he
would — he  has  a  duty  to  perform  to  the  fraternity,  under  the  sever-
est penalties  of  Masonic  vengeance.  What  guarantee  have  we
for  the  impartial  administration  of  justice?  A  felon  communi-
cates the  mystic  sign  to  a  brother  on  the  grand  inquest — the  ju-
ror's oath  to  screen  no  man  from  fear,  favor,  or  affection,  must
yield  to  the  obligation  to  extricate  a  brother,  'whether  h*  be  right
or  wrong.'  If  he  escapes  not  here,  there  is  the  same  facility  of
communication  with  (the  jurors  who  are  to  try  him — and  strange
would  h  be  if  some  of  the  brethren  who  have  found  means  to  inr
sinuate  themselves  into  every  station,  should  not  be  found  upon
the  panel — and  in  a  panel  where  one  stout  and  persevering  nega-
tive prevents  his  conviction — or  the  judge  who  tries  him  may  re-
ceive the  'grand  hailing  sign,'  and  the  purity  of  the  ermine  may
be  sullied  by  the  contamination  of  Masonic  iniquity.  If  all  this
is  not  sufficient,  the  mystic  signal  may  avail  with  the  executive,
and  the  avenging  sword  of  the  law  may  be  turned  aside  from  the
execution  of  justice.  Where  is  the  security  for  justice  between
.man  and  man?  Can  a  Masonic  judge  or  Masonic  jurors  hold  the
scales  even  between  adverse  parties,  when  one  can  appeal  for  as-
sistance through  the  medium  of  mysterious  signals?  1  his  is  not
all.  Witnesses  who  solemnly  appeal  to  God  to  tell  the  tn,tb,  the
whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth,  in  what  th<  y  shall  be  calkd
upon  to  relate,  may  be  bound  under  obligations  more  awful,  and  un-
der penalties  more  severe,  not  to  disclose  the  secrets  of  a  brother.
No!  though  it  extend  to  the  murder  of  a  fellow  being,  or  to  treason
to  the  state.  Is  there  then,  fellow  citizens,  any  safety  in  trusting
those  persons  who  have  taken  such  obligations  and  believe  in  their
binding  sanction,  with  any  office  in  our  government?  Is  there  any
safety  in  committing  our  lives,  our  liberty,  our  property,  or  our  re-
putation to  them,  as  judges  or  jurors?  Is  any  confidence  to  be
placed  in  witnesses  who  have  bound  themselves  under  such  awful
obligations  to  keep  the  secrets  of  a  brother?  These  obligations
strike  at  the  very  existence  of  our  government— at  the  very  foun-
dation of  our  rights — and  at  the  impartial  administration  of  our
laws.

This  institution  threatens  not  only  danger' to  government  and
the  cause  of  justice,  but  strikes  at  the  basis  of  all  morality  and
religion.    The  obligation  not  to  disclose  the  secrets  of  a  brother*


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  429

even  in  cases  of  murder  and  treason,  has  a  tendency  to  invite
the  confidence  of  a  brother  Mason.     Under  the  sanction  of  this
oath,  a  bold  bad  man  will  not  fear  to  disclose  the  history  of  his
crimes  to  the  ears  of  the  virtuous,  to  the  ears  of  even  a  minister
of  the  holy  gospel,  and,  secure  against  detection,  make  an  im-
pudent boast  of  his  iniquities.     This  will  make  virtuous  men  fami-
liar with  the  detail  of  crimes,  and  confidants  in  criminal  secrets —
and  vice  is  of  a  character  so  contagious,  that  one  cannot  even
listen  to  its  history,  or  be  familiar  with  its  secrets,  without  some
danger  of  contamination — and  that  nice,  delicate,  moral  sense,
which  characterizes  a  virtuous  man,  must  be  gradually  effaced,  and
his  principles  of  virtue  must  be  in  a  great  measure  rendered  unset-
tled.   Is  Free  Masonry  the  handmaid  of  religion?    That  institution
in  whose  writes  and  ceremonies  tho  most  touching  portions  of  that
Holy  Book,  which  holds  out  to  us  the  promise  of  eternal  life,  are
introduced  in  solemn  mockery,  and  represented  in  the  shape  of
a  miserable  theatrical  farce! — where  a  weak  sinful  mortal  under-
takes to  personify  the  Almighty  God! — where  the  name  of  our
blessed  Saviour  and  the  Holy  Trinity  are  introduced  in  a  vain  and
irreverent  manner! — where  the  belief  of  the  immortality  of  tho
soul  is  pledged  in  a  libation  from  the  skull  of  a  Masonic  traitor!
-*-where  the  life  eternal  in  the  heavens  is  represented  only  as  one*
great  lodge,  and  the  Almighty  is  blasphemously  typified  as  Grand
Master  thereof!     Is  such  an  institution  the  handmaid  of  religion?
We  think  we  are  safe  in  saying  that  the  frequent  use  of  profano
oaths,  the  irreverent  familiarity  with  religious  forms  and  sacred
things,  the  blasphemous  mockery  of  the  name  of  the  Triune  God,
in  the  recesses  of  the  lodge  room,  are  more  dangerous  to  the
cause  of  the  benign  religion  of  Jesus  than  open  and  avowed  in-
fidelity.    It  is  to  be  feared  that  many  substitute  and  rely  on  the
religion  of  Masonry  instead  of  the  religion  of  Him  who  died  to
atone  for  our  sins;  or  if  not,  they  come  to  the  belief  that  all  reli-
gion is  only  the  farce  which  their  impious  ceremonies  represent
it  to  be.     It  is  time  these  delusions  were  dispelled.     Masonry
now  stands  before  us  in  its  naked  deformity,  stripped  of  its  tinsel
ornaments  and  solemn  mummery.     It  behoves  us  to  take  warn*
ing  from  the  past,  and  receive  instruction  from  the  school  of  ex-
perience.    VVe  see  in  these  disclosures  the  same  principles  which
deluged  France  in  blood,  and  were  the  cause  of  the  dark  crimes
which  stained  that  distracted  country  during  the  period  of  her
sanguinary  revolution.     We  see  xthe  same  principles  which  go-
verned Illuminism  in  the  last  century  and  lighted  her  path  in  that
foul  plot  which  would  have  substituted  anarchy  for  government
and  civil  rule,  and  Atheism  for  the  religion  of  the  Cross.     It  v

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


430  LIGHT   OK   MASONRY.

from  the  bosom  of  Free  Masonry  that  this  dark  conspiracy  ori-
ginated. To  the  bosom  of  Free  Masonry,  every  revolution  and
conspiracy  which  has  agitated  Europe  for  the  last  fifty  years,
may  be  distinctly  traced,  and  the  secret  workings  of  this  all  per-
vading order  can  be  clearly  seen.  The  governments  of  the
world  are  beginning  to  be  awake  to  the  danger.  Russia  has
suppressed  the  order  in  her  own  dominions:  Spain  has  suppressed
it;  and  our  sister  republic  of  Mexico  is  exerting  herself  to  crush
one  of  its  hydra  heads.  Shall  we  alone  look  tamely  qn  and  use
no  endeavors  to  check  the  spread  of  its  contaminating  principles!
You  ask  how  it  is  to  be  suppressed  in  this  free  government
They  confidently  boast  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  man  to  sup-
press it — that  even  this  government  itself,  with  all  its  power,  can-
not do  it  This  may  be  true.  But  there  is  a  power  in  this  free
land,  superior  even  to  our  government,  and  which  guides,  con-
trols, and  directs  it;  and  that  power  ia  public  opinion.  The  laws
we  have  found  too  weak.  Government  may  be  too  weak;  but
there  is  a  moral  force  in  pubUc  opinion  which  must  in  this  free
country  crush  every  thing,  however  powerful,  which  is  arrayed
against  it  This  opinion  speaks  in  our  public  meetings — it
speaks  from  the  sacred  desk — it  speaks  through  the  organ  of  the
press — it  speaks  through  the  ballot  boxes,  when  Masons  appeal
to  you  in  this  manner  for  support  and  countenance.  This  power,
fellow  citizens,  you  have  under  your  control.  It  is  the  only  le-
gitimate and  proper  force  that  can  be  put  in  operation  in  this
emergency  and  in  this  country.  This  is  a  power  for  you  to
wield — and  in  its  exercise  remember  the  warning  voice  of  the
father  of  his  country:  to  'beware  of  all  secret  societies.'

As  the  convention  was  about  to  adjourn,  Mr.  Thompson  of-
fered the  following  resolution,  which  was  unanimously  adopted :

Resoked,  That  the  thanks  of  this  convention  be  presented  to
our  highly  respected  fellow  citizen,  Gen.  William  Wadsworth,
the  president  of  this  convention,  for  his  patriotic  <  and  able  dis-
charge of  the  duties  of  the  chair;  and  also  to  Doct.  Brown  and
Col.  Fleming,  as  secretaries  on  this  interesting  occasion.

William  Wadswqrth,  President


Matthew  Brown,  *    a™.**-;*.
Robert  Fleming,  )  *cnlmrt*8.


d  by  Google


(431)


PROCEEDINGS

Of  the  Legislature  of  the  State  of  AVw  York,  March  19,  182S.

In  Senate. — A  message  from  his  honor  the  Lieutenant  Go-
vernor was  received  and  read,  as  follows:

To  the  Senate.  *

Gentlemen — Among  the  duties  devolved  hythe  constitution
upon  the.  person  administering  the  government,  that  of  'taking
care  that  the  laws  are  faithfully  executed,'  is,  perhaps,  the  most
important.     A  large  portion  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  state  has
been  for  more  than  a  year  highly  excited  by  the  alleged  forcible
and  clandestine  removal  of  a  citizen,  and  by  the  uncertainty  of
his  fate.     It  is  believed  by  many  that  he  has  been  murdered,  and
it  is  certain  that  if  alive,  he  is  held  in  captivity.     The  outrage
upon  our  laws  has  justly  alarmed  our  fellow  citizens  in  that  part*
of  the  state,  and  has  produced  exertions  such  as  might  have  been
expected  from  freemen  conscious  of  their  rights  and  determined
to  maintain  them,  to  develope  the  mysterious  transaction,  and  to
bring  the  offenders  to  justice.     As  yet  their  efforts  have  failed.
The  rewards  and  inducements  heretofore  proffered  for  a  discovery
have  been  unavailing.     The  trials  and  convictions  that  have  ta"
ken  place,  have  rather  increased  the  mystery  of  the  transaction-
The  efforts  of  individual  citizens,  stimulated  by  a  patriotic  zeal,
have  not  always  been  guided  by  discretion;  and  there  is  reason
to  fear  that  they  have  sometimes  tended  rather  to  prevent  than  to
promote  a  judicial  developement  of  the  truth.     It  is  publicly  sta-
ted that  a  witness,  while  on  his  way  to  attend  the  trial  of  some  of
the  persons  charged  with  a  participation  in  the  original  outrage,
has  suddenly  and  unaccountably  disappeared,  and  advertisements
offering  rewards  for  his  discovery  have  been  extensively  circula-
ted.    If  there  be  any  foundation  for  this  suggestion,  it  affords  a
strong  reason  for  the  adoption  of  proper  measures  to  quiet  the
alarms  of  our  fellow  citizens.     Under  these  circumstances,  it  has
appeared  to  me  important  that  such  constitutional  measures  as
may  be  within  the  power  of  the  legislature,  should  be  adopted,  in
order  to  facilitate  the  discovery  and  punishment  of  the  offenders.
It  is  equally  due  to  the  violated  majesty  of  the  laws,  to  the  aPP^f-
hension  of  our  fellow  citizens,  which  never  can  or  ought  to  be
satisfied  until  justice  is  obtained,  and  to  those  who  have  been  o-


y  Google


432  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

may  be  included  in  the  general  and  vague  suspicions  which  are
always  produced  by  such  transactions.  It  is  an  imperative  duty
to*  the  innocent,  that  those  really  guilty  should  be  detected  and
punished.

Without  intending  to  encroach  upon  the  particular  duties  of  the
legislature,  I  respectfully  recommend,  in  accordance  with  these
views,  that  a  law  be  passed  authorizing  the  appointment  of  a
competent  person  for  the  special  purpose  of  investigating  the  al-
leged criminal  transactions  in  relation  to  the  removal  of  Williaia
Morgan,  and  all  the  incidents  connected  therewith;  that  the  pow-
ers of  district  attornies  be  also  vested  in  him;  that  it  be  made  his
duty  to  repair  to  the  places  where  the  offences  were  committed;
to  examine  witnesses;  to  enter  complaints;  to  cause  witnesses
and  parties  implicated  to  be  bound  over  to  appear;  to  conduct  all
criminal  prosecutions  which  may  be  instituted;  and  to  perform  all
other -acts  and  duties  which  shall  be  necessary  to  a  full  and  fair
judicial  investigation  and  determination  of  the  alleged  offences.

That  our  government  is  adequate  to  the  punishment  of  crimes
and  the  protection  of  innocence,  is  the  belief  of  all  who  are  best
acquainted  with  its  principles.  Hitherto,  justice  has  been  admin-
istered without  any  arbitrary  stretch  of  power,  or  any  violation  of
constitutional  principles  by  the  constitutional  authorities,  and
without  the  interference  of  any  private  citizens  not  clothed  with
public  authority.  By  exerting  the  power  of  the  government  in  a
constitutional  manner,  we  can  show  that  the  present  instance  need
not  form  an  exception  to  the  general  course  of  justice.  AH  ex-
perience teaches  us,  that  designing  men  will  be  found  ready  al-
ways to  avail  themselves  of  a  strong  and  honest  public  feeling  to
pervert  it  to  their  own  selfish  purposes.  Any  such  attempts  will
be  most  effectually  prevented  by  the  interposition  of  the  govern-
ment; because  it  will  then  be  perceived  that  all  individual  inter-
ference will  be  unnecessary — then  the  public  mind  will  be  pre-
served from  unnecessary  agitation  and  .prejudice;  fair  and  impar-
tial trials  will  be  secured  to  those  who  may  be  accused;  and  the
course  of  justice  will  be  uniform,  steady,  and  effectual.  Calm
inquiry  will  succeed  feverish  conjecture;  deliberate  decision  will
take  the  place  of  impatient  prejudice;  and  the  impartial,  unbiassed
judgment  of  independent  juries  will  vindicate  the  law  and  estab-
lish the  vigor  and  efficacy  of  our  institutions.

Albany,  March  18,  1828.  Nathaniel  Pitcher.

March  21. — Mr.  Spencer,  from  the  committee  on  the  judi-
ciary to  whom  was  referred  the  message  from  the  Lieutenant
Governor  recommending  the  adoption  of  legislative  measures  to

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  433

ensure  the  detection  and  punishment  of  persons  concerned  in  the
forcible  removal  of  William  Morgan,  reported:

That  from  the  facts  and  circumstances  stated  in  the  message
referred  to  the  committee,  and  from  general  information,  it  ap-
pears that  the  transactions  connected  with  the  abduction  of  Wil-
liam Morgan,  took  place  in  the  several  different  counties.     The
testimony  in  relation  to  it  must  therefore  necessarily  be  scattered
over  those  different  counties,  and  over  an  extensive  region  of
country.     Under  such  circumstances  it  is  obvious  that  the  Dis-
trict Attorney  of  any  one  county,  from  the  limited  scope  of  his
authority,  would  be  incapable  of  connecting  the  various  ramifica-
tions of  the  offence,  and  of  collecting  the  scattered  and  disjointed
testimony,  so  as  to  bring  it  to  bear  in  any  one  case.     The  neces-
sity of  the  employment  of  some  competent  person,  whose  autho-
rity would  extend  over  all  the  counties  which  formed  the  scene  of
the  alledged  offences;  whoso  whole  time  and  attention  would  be
devoted  to  the  investigation;  and  who  would  concentrate  the  ne-
cessary information,  seems  manifest.     The  very  circumstance,
that  hitherto  no  judicial  developement  of  the  facts  has  taken  place,
affords  strong  reasons  to  believe  that  it  has  arisen  from  the  want
of  united  and  connected  efforts.     The  committee  concur  with  the
Lieutenant  Governor  in  the  opinion  expressed  by  him,  that  it  is
due  Ho  the  violated  majesty  of  the  laws,  and  to  the  apprehensions
of  our  fellow  citizens,'  that  all  proper  measures  within  the  consti-
tutional power  of  the  legislature  should  be  adopted  to  secure  r
full  investigation  of  the  high-handed  offence  committed  en  the
person  of  William  Morgan;  a  fair  and  impartial  trial  of  the  persons
'implicated;  the  detection  and  punishment  of  the  guilty;  and  the
acquittal  and  exoneration  of  the  innocent — and  they  know  of  no
means  so  effectual  as  those  recommended  by  him.     The  employ-
ment of  the  Attorney  General  for  this  purpose,  would  be  wholly
incompatible  with  the  duties  of  that  officer  at  the  seat  of  govern-
ment, and  with  that  attention  which  is  requisite  to  the  civil  busi-
ness of  the  state.     The  committee  have  accordingly  prepared  a
bill  providing  for  the  temporary  employment  of  competent  counsel,
according  to  the  recommendation  of  the  Lieutenant  Governor
which  is  herewith  reported.

An  Act  to  provide  for  the  employment  of  counsel  for  the  purposes
therein  mentioned.
The  people  of  the  state  of  New  York  represented  in  Senate  and
Assembly,  do  enact  as  follows:

Sec  1.  The  person  administering  the  government  of  this  state
is  hereby  authorized  to  employ  and  appoint  a  competent  person

Nn  .

Digitized  by  VjC


434  LIGHT  OK   MASdNRY.

of  the  degree  of  counsel  in  the  Supreme  Court,  whose  special  duty
it  shaU  be,

1.  To  institute  inquiries  concerning  the  abduction  of  William
Morgan,  and  his  fate  subsequently,  and  all  the  incidents  con-
nected therewith.

2.  To  ascertain  the  witnesses  whose  testimony  can  establish
the  commission  of  any  crime  against  the  laws  of  this  state,  in
and  of  the  said  transactions.

3.  To  cause  such  witnesses  to  be  examined  before  the  proper
magistrates,  and  to  be  bound  over  to  appear  before  the  proper
courts,  in  order  to  testify.

4.  To  cause  the  necessary  process  to  be  issued  for  the  appre-
hension of  the  persons  implicated.

5.  To  assist  in  preparing  any  indictments  that  may  be  found
against  such  persons,  and  to  prepare  for  the  trial  thereof.

6.  To  attend  the  trials  of  persons  indicted  at  any  court  of  Oyer
and  Terminer  or  General  Sessions  of  the  Peace;  and  to  superin-
tend and  conduct  such  trials,  with  the  like  authority  and  in  the
same  manner  as  the  Attorney  General  of  this  state:  and

7.  To  perform  all  other  acts  and  duties  which  shall  be  neces-
sary to  a  full  and  fair  judicial  investigation  and  determination  of
the  offences  alleged  to  have  been  committed,  by  the  persons  so
indicted.

Sec.  2.  The  person  so  appointed  is  hereby  vested  with  pow-
ers and  authority  of  District  Attornies,  in  the  several  counties  in
which  any  such  accusations  shall  be  made;  and  shall  be  autho-
rized to  attend  any  grand  jury  for  the  purpose  of  examining  wit-
nesses before  them,  but  not  to  be  present  at  their  deliberations;
he  shall  have  authority  to  issue  subpoenas  signed  by  himself,  to
compel  the  attendance  of  any  witness  at  any  court  of  Oyer  and
Terminer,  or  court  of  General  Sessions  of  the  Peace;  which  sub-
pcenas  shall  have  the  same  force  and  effect  as  if  issued  by  the
clerks  of  such  courts  respectively,  under  the  seal  thereof.

Sec.  3.  The  expenses  attending  the  execution  of  the  duties
hereby  imposed,  shall  be  paid  out  of  the  treasury,  on  the  order  of
the  person  administering  the  government  of  this  state,  after  being
audited  by  the  comptroller.

Sec  4.  This  act  shall  be  in  force  until  the  first  of  May,  one
thousand  eight  hundred  and  twenty-nine,  and  no  longer.

March  25. — A  part  of  the  day  was  spent  in  committee  of  the
whole,  on  the  bill  for  the  employment  of  counsel  to  investigate
the  facts  in  relation  to  the  abduction  and  supposed  murder  of
William  Morgan.     The  bill  was  opposed  by  Messrs.  Livingston

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT    ON   MASONRY.  435

and  Crary,  and  supported  by  Messrs.  Spencer,  Viele,  Wilkeson,
and  Allen;  and  was  passed  by  the  committee.  On  the  question
of  agreeing  to  the  report,  Mr.  Crary  offered  an  amendment,  which
was  previously  lost  in  committee  of  the  whole:  that  all  the  expen-
ses heretofore  incurred  by  any  person  to  effect  the  objects  con-
templated by  this  bill,  shall  be  paid  out  of  the  treasury.  Lost,
ayes  3,  noes  23.  The  ayes  were,  Messrs.  Crary,  M'Martin,.
and  Porter.

The  report  of  the  committee  was  then  agreed  to,  ayes  23,  noes
3,  as  follows:

Ayes.—Messrs.  Allen,  Benton,  Dayan,  Elswoith,  Enos,  Ha-
ger,  Hart,  Lake,  M'Carty,  M'Martin,  Oliver,  Porter,  Schenck,
Spencer,  Stebbins,  Todd,  Throop,  Tyson,  Yiele,  Warren,  Wheel-
er, Wilkeson,  and  Woodward:  23.

Noes. — Messrs.  Crary,  Livingston,  M'Michael:  3.  Adjourned.

March  26. — Bill  read  the  third  time  and  passed:  for  the  em-
.  ployment  of  counsel  to  investigate  the  facts  relative  to  the  abduc-
tion and  supposed  murder  of  William  Morgan,  ayes  24,  noes  3.
(The  noes  were,  Messrs.  Crary,  Livingston,  and  M'Michael.)

In  Assembly,  March  19. — Mr.  Childs  presented  a  memorial
from  delegates  from  several  western  counties,  assembled  in  con-
vention at  Le  Roy  to  take  into  consideration  the  effects,  &c.  of
Free  Masonry.  They  say  the  oaths  of  that  society  are  impious
and  profane,  &c.  They  pray  that  a  law  may  be  passed,  declar-
ing that  oaths  administered  by  other  than  public  officers  under
the  laws,  are  illegal;  and  that  their  administration  may  be  forbid
under  a  penalty.  After  the  memorial  was  read,  it  was  referred  to
a  select  committee,  consisting  of  Messrs.  Childs,  Granger,  and
Wardwell.

April  2.— Mr.  Childs,  from  the  select  committee  to  which
was  referred  the  memorial  of  the  delegates  from  twelve  of  the
western  counties  of  the  state,  on  the  subject  of  Free  Masonry,
reported  and  asked  leave  to  bring  in  a  bill  to  prevent  the  adminis-
tration of  extra  judicial  oaths.  Leave  was  granted  and  a  bill
brought  in  accordingly,  subjecting  every  person  taking  or  ad-
ministering an  extrajudicial  oath  to  fine  and  imprisonment — fine
not  to  exceed  $200,  and  imprisonment  not  to  exceed  six  months.
[The  following  is  the  report  of  this  committee:]

The  select  committee  to  which  was  referred  the  memorial  of
the  counties  of  Chautauque,  Erie,  Niagara,  Orleans,  Genesee,
M6nroe,  Livingston,  Wayne,  Yates,  Seneca,  and  Tompkins,  0n
the  subject  of  extra  judicial  and  Masonic  oaths,

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


436  LIGHT   ON    MASONRY.

Report — That  they  have  devoted  to  the  subject  of  the  memo-
rial, that  diligent  Examination  which  was  demanded  by  its  intrin-
sic importance,  magnified  as  it  is  by  acts  set  forth  in  the  memo-
rial.    I®  deliberating  upon  this  subject,  your  committee  have  di-
rected their  attention  to  the  general  character  and  consequences
o\  all  oaths  unsanctioned  by  the  laws,  as  well  as  the  particular
nature  and  policy  of  those  set  forth  in  the  papers  referred  torn  the
memorial.     Under  every  form  and  character  which  human  gov-
ern neat  has  at  any  time  assumed,  the  principle  of  responsibility
tj  higher  power,  however  modified  or  perverted,  has  been  appealed
to  as  furnishing  the  foundation  of  the  highest  obligations  which
could  be  imposed  upon  human  nature.     Most  civilized  govern-
ments have  approved  the  wisdom  of  resorting  to  an  oath  as  a  se-
curity for  the  faithful  discharge  of  official  duty;  and  all  have
deemed  it  indispensable  in  the  administration  of  justice.     The  *
most  sacred  rights  of  society  and  individuals  are  subjected  to
its  disposal,  and  no  vice  could  be  regarded  as  more  alarming  than
a  practice  which  in  any  degree  should  have  the  effect  to  weaken
the  obligation,  or  impair  the  confidence,  which,  not  less  by  the
law  than  the  authority  of  the  human  heart,  is  reposed  in  an  oath.
The  right  to  exact  it  belongs  to  the  sovereign  power  of  the  state;
and  in  most  instances  its  efficacy  is  attempted  to  be  increased
by  inflicting  the  severest  penalties  upon  its  violations.     The  du-
ties it  imposes  must  be  the  same,  whatever  may  be  the  form  of
ils  administration;  but  it  is  entirely  obvious  that  reverence  to  the
being  whose  attention  is  invoked,  not  less  than  a  regard  to  its  in-
iluence  upon  the  mind,  demand  that  the  occasion  should  be  im-
portant and  the  ceremony  solemn.     The  frequent,  unauthorised
an<J  irreverent  administration  of  oaths,  has  a  powerful  influence,
ia  the  judgment  of  your  committee,  to  destroy  that  religious  sen-
sibility to  their  nature,  and  that  scrupulous  and  conscientious  re-
gard to  all  their  requirements,  which  alone  entitle  them  to  confi-
dence.    Great  and  enlightened  men  have,  with  one  accord,  con-
demned the  multiplication  of  oaths  with  or  without  the  sanction
of  law,  as  immoral  and  impolitic.

If  these  very  general  considerations  were  not  entirely  satis-
factory to  your  committee,  the  most  unanswerable  reasons  for
abolishing  extra  judicial  oaths,  would  be  found  in  the  character
and  consequences  of  a  certain  description  of  oaths  as  stated  and
set  forth  in  the  memorial.  The  memorial  has  called  the  atten-
tion of  the  legislature  specifically  to  the  abuse  of  the  practice  of
administering  oaths,  as  it  is  alledged  to  exist  in  Masonic  socie-
ties; and  subjoined  the  forms  of  obligations,,  as  they  are  said  to
he  administered  in  the  different  stages  of  advancement  in  that

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LJGUT    ON    MASONRY.  437

society.  When  it  is  recollected  that  these  oaths  have  been  com-
municated to  the  public  by  members  of  that  society  highly  ele-
vated and  maintaining  a  fair  character  and  respectable  standing
in  community,  it  is  not  perhaps  unjust  to  Relieve  those  annexed
to  the  memorial  are  substantially  correct.  They  exhibit  a  per-
version of  the  appropriate  office  of  an  oath,  which  strongly  re- .
commends  the  policy  of  a  law  prohibiting  the  administration  of
any  extra  judicial  oath.  These  oaths  could,  by  no  possibility,
enjoin  the  practice  of  a.  virtue  not  already  commanded  by  reli-
gion and  morality;  and  a  literal  observance  of  them  would  bind
the  sworn  individual  under  the  severest  penalties  to  the  perfor-
mance of  acts  forbidden  by  both.  The  efficacy  of  these  oaths
is  illustrated  by  the  petitioners,  by  ascribing  to  their  injunctions
the  outrage  committed  within  a  recent  period  upon  two  of  our
citizens,  followed  by  what  is  now  generally  admitted  to  be  the
murder  of  one.

Whether  the  oaths  referred  to  would  authorize  the  commission
of  the  crime,  when  right!/  understood,  is  deemed  by  your  com-
mittee altogether  immaterial.  The  petitioners  represent,  that
persons  upon  whom  these  oaths  have  been  imposed,  acting  under
a  belief  of  their  controlling  power,  have  committed  violence  upon
the  liberty  of  one  citizen,  and  upon  the  life  of  another;  and  that
no  doubt  can  exist  upon  that  subject  in  the  mind  of  any  person
who  has  attentively  examined  and  weighed  the  testimony  disclos-
ed upon  the  trial  of  the  several  indictments  which  have  grown
out  of  the  abduction  of  William  Morgan,  an  unoffending  citizen
of  this  state.  If  there  is  reasonable  ground  for  this  belief — and
the  circumstances  which  have  been  developed  leave  little  doubt —
it  is  the  duty  of  government  to  adopt  such  measures  as  may  be
best  calculated  to  prevent  the  recurrence  of  an  outrage  so  fla-
grant as  that  to  which  the  petitioners  have  referred,  and  which
so  anxiously  and  painfully  occupies  the  public  mind.

The  possibility  that  the  obligations  imposed  by  an  extra  judi-
cial oath  may  conflict  with  the  duty  which  a  citizen  may  be  called
upon  to  discharge,  is  conclusive  in  the  minds  of  your  committee,
in  favor  of  granting  the  prayer  of  the  memorialists.  Although
the  law  would  pronounce  an  extra  judicial  oath,  and  all  its  obli-
gations, nugatory,  when  in  collision  with  a  legally  administered
oath;  yet,  having  done  so,  it  is  apparent  that  the  individual  must
judge  for  himself  of  the  relative  power  of  conflicting  obligations.
There  is  danger  then  that  justice  may  be  perverted,  and  truth  fal-
sified, in  courts  created  to  develope  truth  and  administer  justice.
The  suspicion  that  such  may  be  the  consequence,  is  sufficient,  in
tffee  judgement  of  your  committee,  to  induce  the  legislature  to  re*
.Nx\2

*


438  LIGHT   ON    MASONRr.

move  the  possibility  of  it  by  a  statute  prohibiting  all  oaths  not
authorized  by  law.  The  committee  have  therefore  directed  their
chairman  to  ask  leave  to  introduce  a  bill.

T.  Childs,  Chairman.

Jpril  4. — The  house  resolved  itself  into  a  committee  of  the
whole  on  the  bill  from  the  Senate  for  the  appointment  of  a  com-
missioner to  investigate  the  transactions  relative  to  the  abduction
of  William  Morgan — Mr.  Ruggles  in  the  chair.

Mr.  Gross  moved  to  strike  out  the  first  section,  or  in  other  *
words  to  reject  the  bill.     He  avowed  himself  a  Mason;  but
warned  the  house  against  partaking  of  the  excitement  which  was
felt  on  this  subject  in  the  western  part  of  the  state,  and  under  its
influence  to  pass  a  law  which  would  hereafter,  when  the  passions
of  men  become  cool,  subject  the  legislature  to  contempt.     The
powers  with  which  it  was  proposed  to  clothe  this  officer  to  be
appointed  by  the  executive,  were  enormous;    it  would,  in  fact,
be  establishing  an  inquisition  in  our  state  which  would  violate
the  principles  of  our  institutions,  and  involve  the  innocent  with
the  guilty  in  one  common  ruin.     He  believed  Morgan  was.  mur-
dered and  murdered  by  Masons,  but  he  would  consider  the  con-
furring  of  this  inquisitorial  power  an  infinitely  greater  evil,  aud
more  to  be  deprecated  than  even  the  murder  of  Morgan  by  de-
luded and  wicked  men.     He  was  not  disposed  to  condemn  the
excitement  which  existed  on  this  subject  in  the  western  part  of
the  state;  on  the  contrary,  he  was  proud  of  it,  for  the  honor  of
human  nature;  for  a  deed  of  the  darkest  dye  had  been  perpe-
trated, and  that  by  Masons,  by  members  of  a  numerous  rrater*
nity;  and  it  was  honorable  to  the  character  of  our  citizens  that
they  should  deeply  interest  themselves  on  the  occasion;    but  it
became  the  legislature  of  the  state  of  New  York  to  act  with  cau-
tion and  deliberation — to  free  themselves  from  the  contagion  of
this  excitement — boldly  to  stem  the  current  of  popular  feeling —
and  to  save  unimpaired  the  principles  of  liberty,  by  refusing  to
violate  the  principles  of  sound  jurisprudence,  and  refraining  from
setting  a  precedent  of  the  most  dangerous  character.

Mr.  Skinner  hoped  the  motion  to  strike  out  would  not  prevail.
He  urged  that  two  years  had  now  elapsed  since  the  perpetration
of  this  horrid  crime;  and  all  the  ordinary  means  to  bring  to  justice
the  actors  of  this  dark  scene  had  proved  unavailing.  He  con-
tended that  this  bill  did  propose  to  erect  a  new  tribunal  unknown
to  our  laws,  but  simply  provided  the  means  of  investigation  which
do  not  now  exist.  Nor  was  the  precedent  of  sending  a  public
officer  to  attend  to  those  duties  novel;  as  the  Attorney  General

Digitized  by  VjQOQlC


LIGHT    ON   MASONRY.  439

was  frequently  required  to  attend  in  particular  counties  the  prose-
cution of  criminal  offences,  either  of  the  requisition  of  the  execu-
tive or  one  of  the  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court.  He  thought
this  an  occasion  which  demanded  extraordinary  efforts  for  the
detection  and  punishment  of  offenders,  to  which  the  ordinary
course  of  judicial  proceedings  was  totally  inadequate.

The  speaker,  Root,  addressed  the  house  in  support  of  the  mo-
tion to  reject  the  bill.  He  alluded  to  various  instances  in  the
history  of  England,  to  show  the  effect  of  popular  excitement  and
the  injurious  effect  flowing  from  it.  Admitting  that  Morgan  was
murdered,  he  asked  whether  it  was  right  to  change  our  course  of
judicial  proceedings  on  that  account.  If  our  laws  were  defective,
they  should  be  amended;  but  when  amended  they  should  be
made  to  bear  upon  all  offenders  alike.  He  asked  whether  Mor-
gan, though  .murdered  by  Free  Masons,  was  entitled  to  more
commiseration  than  if  he  had  been  destroyed  by  a  highwayman  ?

Mr.  Granger  said  that  the  excitement  in  the  western  section
of  the  state  on  this  subject  was  as  much,  if  nof  more,  attributa-
ble to  Free  Masons,  than  to  those  who  were  charged  with  carry-
ing on  a  crusade  against  Free  Masonry.  If  Free  Masons,  and
those,  too,  distinguished  men,  had  done  their  duty,  this  excite-
ment might  have  been  checked.  As  to  the  delusion  which  is
supposed  to  prevail  on  this  subject,  he  could  say  that  amongst
those  who  £e\t  a  deep  interest  on  this  question,  there  were  men
second  to  none  in  the  United  States,  as  the  list  of  the  names  of
the  delegation  who  attended  the  convention  from  whom  emanated
the  memorial  to  the  legislature  would  show.  He  could  not  per-
ceive the  evil  which  was  apprehended  from  sending  a  public  agent
to  investigate  this  affair,  to  collect  testimony  and  drag  offenders
to  justice.  He  was  not  conscious  how  such  a  proceeding  en-
croached upon  the  fundamental  principles  of  government.  The
comptroller  had  been  vested  with  similar  powers  to  investigate
frauds  upon  the  canal.  He  regretted  that  the  proposition  made
last  winter  to  send  a  special  commissioner  of  the  legislature  into
the  section  of  the  state  where  the  outrage  had  been  committed,
had  not  been  adopted.  If  much  good  might  not  result  from  this
measure,  it  would  have  a  tendency  to  produce  something  like
quiet  and  harmony,  when  the  people  saw  that  the  legislature  did
not  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  their  prayers.  The  people  at  the  west  were
not  exactly  crazy;  but  there  is  abroad  in  the  community  a  feeling,
a  deep  toned  feeling,  which  is  not  to  be  trifled  with — it  is  not  to  be
scouted  or  laughed  at,  but  must  be  soothed  and  not  aggravated.

Mr.  Brinokerhoof  said  he  had  hoped  that  the  bill  would  have
passed  witjsdMebate.     Whatever  excitement  existed  elsewhere,

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


Uti  LIGHT    ON    MASONKT.

it  ought  not  to  be  brought  into  action  here;  and  to  prevent  every
thin<*  like  feeling  in  the  house,  he  called  for  the  question.

Mr.  Emmet  said  be  was  a  Mason,  and  as  yet  he  had  no  cause
to  regret  iL  He  was  decidedly  in  favor  of  the  bill.  If  a  crime
had  been  committed,  whether  by  Masons  or  others,  and  (be  ordi-
nary process  of  the  law  was  not  sufficient  to  bring  the  offenders
to  punishment,  it  was  tfee  duty  of  the  legislature  to  afford  every
facility  to  accomplish  the  end.  He  was  inclined  to  believe  that
(his  measure  would  have  a  tendency  to  allay  excitement  As  a
Mason,  he  could  not  perceive  any  objection  to  the  bill;. on  the
contrary,  the  xery  principles  of  Free  Masonry  bound  him  to  do
all  in  his  power  to  bring  the  perpetrators  of  the  crime  to  punish-
ment.

Mr.  Ward  well  also  acknowledged  himself  a  Mason,  and  said,
when  he  first  heard  of  this  tragedy  he  was  disposed  to  laugh  at
the  stories  which  were  told,  deeming  them  unworthy  of  notice,
and  believing  (hat  there  was  not  a  Mason  in  this  country  so  de-
luded and  wicked  as  to  commit  so  great  a  crime.  He  however
had  changed  his  opinion,  and  now  believed  that  Morgan  had  been
murdered,  and  murdered  by  Free  Masons;  and  could  he  believe
that  all  Masons  could  act  under  similar  delusions,  he  would  not
only  abolish  all  extra  judicial  oaths,  as  proposed  by  a  bill  brought
in  on  this  subject,  but  he  would  abolish  all  Free  Masonry,  by
making  it  penal  to  attend  a  lodge.  This  was  not  an  ordinary
case  of  murder  It  was  perpetrated  by  members  of  a  numerous
fraternity;  and  it  is  said  and  believed  that  many  Masons  were
engaged  in  the  transaction,  and  that  several  in  different  counties
combined  and  acted  together  in  bringing  about  the  destruction  of
the  individual.  If  men  under  a  mistaken  sense  of  duty  had  com-
mitted the  crime,  others  under  a  similar  delusion  might  be  guilty
of  similar  offences.  A  high  degree  of  excited  feeling  existed  on
this  subject  in  the  western  part  of  this  state;  he  therefore  thought
that  a  public  officer  should  be  sent  to  make  the  necessary  inqui-
ries on  the  spot,  to  elicit  all  the  evidence  that  could  be  obtained,
and  to  bring  the  offenders  to  public  punishment.  The  commis-
sion of  the  crime  was  without  excuse  or  palliation.  There  were
no  principles  of  Free  Masonry  which  require  a  man  to  act  con-
trary to  the  dictates  of  morality  and  religion,  and  to  run  counter
to  the  principles  of  good  order.

The  questfcn  was  taken  on  striking  out  the  first  section,  and
lost,  only  seven  rising  in  favor  of  it.

Mr.  Williams,  after  adverting  to  the  forms  which  the  bill  pro-
posed to  confer  on  this  special  Attorney  General,  observed  that
ihe  was  not  prepared  to  give  the  bill  his  assent;    he, wished  time


jgffi    'jS


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  441

to  examine  it;  and  with  that  view  moved  that  the  committee  rise
and  report,  which  motion  prevailed,  ayes  49,  noes  21.  Then
the  house  adjourned.

April  9. — Mr.  Childs  made  the  same  motion  as  to  the  bill  to
appoint  a  commissioner  to  make  inquiries  in  relation  to  the  ab-
duction of  Morgan,  and  the  bill  to  prevent  extra  judicial  oaths.
Carried,  ayes  36,  noes  3d.
'  The  house  then  went  into  committee  of  the  whole,  Mr.  Rug-
gles  in  the  chair,  on  the  said  bills.  The  first  section  of  the
former  bill  passed,  when  Mr.  Gross  moved  an  amendment
directing  the  payment  of  all  expenses  heretofore  incurred  by  in-
dividuals in  investigating  this  business.  Mr.  G.  spoke  some
time  in  opposition  to  the  bill;  but  if  it  must  pass,  he  hoped  this
amendment  wonld  be  adopted.  So  far  as  he  could  learn,  the
western  people  did  not  want  this  bill  to  pass.  South  wick's  pa-
per and  some  western  papers  had  condemned  it.  Mr.  South-
wick  was  opposed  to  the  bill  in  principle;  and  he  believed  it
would  be  inefficacious  in  its  ends.

Mr.  Childs  said  the  people  in  the  west  had  not  called  for  this
bill — it  was  the  offspring  of  tlife^Lieutenant  Governor;  but  the*
people  wanted  further  investigation.  r^

Mr.  Bryan  saijd  no  body  asked  for  compensation;  wait  till  tho
people  who  have  endeavored  to  ferret  out  this  business  ask  for
pay,  before  it  is  offered  to  them.

Mr.  Sackett  spoke  against  the  bill.     If  the  law  was  insuffi-
cient, ietit  be  altered;  but  he  was  opposed  to  making  a  provision
for  a  particular  case.     The  almost  inquisitorial  powers  given  to    %
this  commissioner,  he  disapproved  of.

Mr.  Chever  spoke  in  favor  of  the  bill.  V.

Mr-  Speaker  asked  wherefore  was  this  disposition  to  change
the  whole  course  of  law.  Is  it  because  Free  Masons  have  kill-
ed Morgan;  (that  is,  admitting  that  he  is  killed,  which  is  not  cer-
tain, though  conjectures  fasten  strongly  on  the  belief  that  he  is;)
and  because  by  persecuting  them  it  is  hoped  to  get  into  power?
He  spoke  of  the  jury  of  inquest  which  determined  that  the  body
found  at  Oak  Orchard  creek  was  that  of  Morgan.  When  fanati-
cism, whether  political  or  religious,  rages,  we  often  find  men  of
private  worth  hurried  away  by  it,  and  doing  acts  of  which  in  mo-
ments of  reflection  they  would  be  ashamed.  He  did  not  wish
to  derogate  from  the  respectability  of  the  western  people;  but
they  could  be  led  away  by  fanaticism  as  well  as  others.  The
times  of  1817, 1S24,  and  1825,  sufficiently  elucidate  the  truth  of
this.     He  alluded  to  the  cry  raised  against  secret  societies  in


442  LIGHT    ON    MASONRY.

Europe,  about  the  time  of  the  French  revolution,  when  so  much
lbehng  was  excited  without  cause.  He  adverted  to  the  inquisi-
tion in  Spain,  where  all  Free  Masons  were  considered  as  devils,
and  were  put  to  the  torture  and  made  to  confess  that  they  were
guilty  of  crime  whether  they  were  or  not — where  a  trial  was
made  of  the  mathematical  question:  strength  of  nerve  and  sen-
sibility of  muscle  given,  required  to  know  what  degree  of  torture
i9  necessary  to  make  man  confess  himself  guilty  of  crime.  He
said  that  this  tiradin*  uboat  secret  societies  and  extra  judicial
oaths,  did  not  become  sensible  men;  and  they  would  not  pursue
it,  unless  they  were  driven  by  political  fanaticism.  He  did  not
care  whether  Masonry  were  put  down  by  legislative  enactment
or  not;  but  if  it  were  put  up  or  down  by. such  enactment,  it  would
be  acting  foolishly.  All  this  cry  is  to  get  power  or  to  retain  it.
Some  of  the  members  were  elected  on  the  Anti-Masonic  ticket;
and  they  came  here  and  were  compelled  to  cry,  Morganize  Ma-
sons! Morganize  Masons!  Away  with  him!  Crucify  him!
Crucify  him!  The  excitement  has  been  got  up  and  fostered
and  fanned  to  get  into  power.  We  did  not  make  so  much  fuss
in  Delaware  county,  a  few  years  ago,  when  an  Irishman  killed
twoN8cotchmen:  we  caught  him,  and  hangfed  him.

This  is  made  a  political  question.  It  is  said  that  one  of  the
presidential  candidates  is  a  Mason,  and  that  the  other  is  not,  and
therefore  the  excitement  must  be  kept  up:  that  is  ail  there  is  to
harp  on.  The  six  militiamen  and  ebony  and  topaz  are  worn
out.  One  of  the  political  parties — and  I  don't  know  how  many
political  parties  there  are  in  the  state — but  one  of  the  parties  de-
sire to  keep  up  the  excitement,  in  order  to  induce  votes  in  favor
of  the  candidate  who  is  said  not  to  be  a  Free  Mason.  And  how
do  they  work  it  on  the  other  side,  in  the  party  to  which  I  belong,
but  which  party  sometimes  acts  a  little  to  silly.  Why  they  show
themselves  eager  to  hunt  down  Free  Masons,  in  the  hope  that
they  will  get  votes  by  it.  They  cry,  we  don't  approve  of  Masons
murdering  Morgan;  we  are  as  eager  to  find  them  out  as  the  other
party.  They  mean  to  be  first  in  the  chase;  and  I  dont  know  but
they  will  be  first  in  at  the  death.  Why  should  we  perform  such
a  foolish,  silly  act,  to  get  votes  next  November,  when  many  of  us
do  not  much  care  which  side  we  go  on.

Mr.  Johnson  made  some  remarks  against  Mr,  Gross'  amend-
ment, and  it  was  lost.

The  whole  bill  then  passed.     When  the  committee  rose,  their
report  was  agreed  to,  82  to  17.

The  committee  of  the  whole  then  took  up  the  bill  to  prevent
extra  judicial  oaths.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  443

Mr.  Speaker  then  moved  to  rise  and  report.     Lost

A  motion  to  rise  prevailed.

Mr*  Emmet  hoped  that  leave  to  sit  again  would  be  refused.
He  wished  to  get  rid  of  this  ridiculous  subject,  for  it  was  ridicu-
lous in  the  extreme,  if  not  something  worse.  We  have  import-
ant business  before  us;  and  a  thing  like  this,  of  not  a  particle  of
merit,  should  not  be  suffered  to  interfere  with  it.

Mr.  Bucklin  was  willing  leave  should  be  given  to  sit  again.
This  bill  was,  he  supposed,  a  part  of  the  crusade  against  Free
Masonry.  But  they  were  ignorant  of  the  institution  who  sup-
posed it  would  touch  it;  but  it  would  touch  a  more  important  por-
tion of  society;  it  would  interfere  with  a  long  established  practice
of  Christian  churches;  and  if  gentlemen  were  willing  to  go  on
with  it  they  might.     Adjourned.

Jlpril  12. — The  bill  authorizing  the  employment  of  counsel
foribe  investigation  of  facts  relative  to  the  abduction  of  William
Morgan,  and  the  incidents  connected  with  that  transaction,  was
read  a  third  time:  a  discussion  ensued,  in  which  several  gentle-
men took  a  part,  and  which  occupied  a  greater  part  of  the  morn-
ing session.     The  bill  was  passed  by  a  vote  of  66  to  44.


SPEECH  OF  THE  HON.  JOHN  CRARY,

In  the  Senate  of  the  State  of  N.  York,  March  25, 1828,
Oil  the  proposition  for  appointing  an  inquisitor  in  the  case  of  William  Morgan,

Mr.  Chairman — The  complaint  is,  that  a  citizen  has  been  for-
cibly taken  and  held  in  captivity,  or  inhumanly  murdered.  This
awful  act  of  violence  was  committed  in  September,  1826,  upon
the  person  of  William  Morgan.  He  was  seized  by  ruffian  hands,
and  taken  against  his  will,  in  the  village  of  Batavia,  and  carried
from  thence  to  Fort  Niagara;  beyond  which  he  has  not  been
traced;  nor  has  he  been  heard  of  since  that  time.

The  cause  assigned  for  his  abduction  and  murder  is,  that  he
was  a  Free  Mason,  and  as  such  had  disclosed  the  3ecrets  of  Ma-
sonry; and  when  we  consider  that  the  persons  concerned  in  the
acts  of  violence  committed  upon  him,  were  Free  Masons — and
for  such  acts  there  is  no  other  assignable  reason,  than  that  he
had  published  the  secrets  of  Masonry — the  conclusion  is,  that  for
such  publication  he  has  suffered  death.

The  ostensible  object  of  the  bill  under  consideration  is,  to
provide  for  detecting  the  offenders;  and  the  question  is,  will  it  be
likely  to  have  the  effect?

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


444  LIGHT   ON    MASONRY.

It  will  be  recollected  that  Morgan  is  considered  a  victim  of
Masonic*  vengeance,  and  a  martyr  in  the  cause  of  liberty  and  his
country.  This  is  a  reproach  to  the  Masonic  fraternity;  and  as
such  they  have  tried  to  get  rid  of  it,  while  the  people  have  en-
deavored to  fix  it  upon  them.

A  war  thus  waged,  is  not  likely  to  terminate  short  of  the  poli-
tical extermination  of  one  of  the  parties.  Is  it  then  probable,
that  this  voluntary  Masonic  measure,  at  this  very  late  day,  will
restore  harmony  between  them?  Will  it  not  rather  be  considered
as  tantalizing  the  feelings  of  the  people — especially  as  it  is  not
called  for  by  them — and  more  particularly  so,  as  the  offenders
have  already  escaped  to  parts  unknown,  and  the  fraternity  are
charged  with  facilitating  the  escape?

Assistance  was  prayed  for  last  year,  but  refused  by  the  legisla-
ture; and  now,  when  a  law  to  abolish  extrajudicial  oaths  is  prayed,
instead  of  granting  it,  we  give  that  which  is  not  called  for,  and
refuse  that  which  is.  Thu3  treating  the  people  like  children  (hat
do  not  know  what  is  good  for  themselves.

All  attempts  to  bring  the  perpetrators  of  the  crime  to  justice,  have
hitherto  proved  abortive.  Repeated  trials  have  been  had,  but  no
convictions  have  followed;  and  a  general  belief  is  now  entertain-
ed, that  the  offenders  have  in  more  than  one  instance  been  borne
off  by  the  perjured  testimony  of  their  brethren.  As  the  means
of  discovering  and  punishing  the  offenders,  the  biH  authorizes  the
person  administering  the  goyernment  of  this  state  to  appoint
some  person,  of  the  degree  of  counsellor  in  the  Supreme  Court,
to  repair  to  the  west  and  institute  inquiries  concerning  the  ab-
duction of  William  Morgan.  This  is  adding  one  to  the  number
who  have  for  the  last  eighteen  months  been  engaged  in  perform-
ing that  service  and  duty.  And  is  it  any  thing  more?  Can  the
person  thus  authorized  do  any  thing  that  has  not  already  been'
done  without  effect?

Is  it  not  then  time  to  change  the  manner  of  proceeding,  and  if
we  cannot  punish  for  the.  crime  committed,  prevent  the  future  re-
petition of  it?  It  would  seem  from  the  petition  in  the  house,  that
such  is  the  conclusion  of  the  people  of  the  west:  and  when  we
consider  that  the  Free  Masons  of  that  region  have  met  in  con-
vention at  Le  Roy;  disclosed  the  secrets  of  the  higher  orders  of
Masonry,  not  known  to  Morgan;  and  publicly  renounced  Masonry;
and  that  a  subsequent  Anti-Masonic  convention  have,  by  their
memorial  in  the  other  house,  suggested  the  remedy  of  prohibit-
ing extra  judicial  oaths  as  the  most  effectual:  it  is  difficult  to  con-
ceive on  what  principle  we  are  proceeding  on  the  bill  under  con-
sideration.   Will  it  not  be  considered  the  contrivance  of  Masonry

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC  ^


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  445

to  perpetuate  the  order;  and  thus,  instead  of  allaying  the  excite-
ment, tend  to  increase  it.  The  people  will  suspect  rather  than
confide  in  this  state  commissioner,  after  they  have,  both  sepa-
rately and  collectively,  exhausted  all  the  means  which  by  this  bill
is  placed  in  his  power.  It  is  insulting  to  suppose  that  a  single
individual  with  the  mandate  of  the  legislature,  can  do  what  the
great  body  of  the  people  have  not  been  able  to  perform.  The
people  of  the  west  are  laboring  under  a  deep-toned  sense  of  in-
jury; and  any  preferred  redress  which  is  evasive,  will  be  consi-
dered as  sporting  with  their  feelings.  Whatever  is  done  should
be  to  soothe,  and  not  to  aggravate,  sufferings  which  are  the  most
excruciating,  the  most  tormenting.

Hitherto  I  have  considered  this  question  as  between  the  Freo
Masons  who  were  concerned  either  directly  or  indirectly  in  the
abduction  and  murder  of  William  Morgan,  on  the  one  hand;  and
the  people  contiguous  to  the  place  where  the  catastrophe  hap-
pened striving  to  bring  the  offenders  to  justice,  on  the  other:  But
there  is  another  view  of  the  subject,  compared  to  which  the  fate
of  William  Morgan  dwindles  into  a  point.  His  cause  has  be-
come that  of  the  constitution  and  the  law;  and  in  that  view  I  shall
now  proceed  to  consider  it

When  the  future  historian  shall  relate  the  fate  of  William  Mor-
gan, he  will  pause  and  inquire  for  the  persons  concerned;  but
when  he  is  told  the  abduction  was  perpetrated  in  open  day,  in  the
populous  yet  peaceful  village  of  Batavia;  and  above  all,  when  he
is  also  told  the  persons  concerned  have  escaped  detection;  he
cannot  but  exclaim,  how  impotent  are  human  laws,  and  how  in-
efficient the  administration  of  justice,  even  in  the  most  civilized
part  of  the  world!  It  cannot  be  denied  but  that  our  system  of
jurisprudence  is  defective;  there  is  a  power  among  us:  it  is  a  se-
cret invisible  power,  exerted  by  Free  Masons,  which  is  above  the
law.  While  the  order  of  Free  Masons  did  not  pervert  public
justice,  or  interfere  to  prevent  the  apprehension  and  conviction  of
offenders,  their  pretended  mysteries,  though  they  sought  conceal-
ment, excited  no  alarm.

The  attribute  of  secrecy  was  accorded  to  the  order,  as  a  pre-
rogative handed  down  from  high  antiquity  and  always  claimed
and  exercised;  the  pretence  for  continuing  and  perpetuating  Free
Masonry  has  been  the  security  >  protection,  and  advantage,  which
it  afforded  to  the  traveller  and  the  stranger;  while  it  has  been  sup-
posed the  order  did  not  interfere  with  the  duties  of  the  citizen,
the  politician,  the  statesman.  Under  such  pretences,  not  con*
tradicted  by  appearances,  it  has  hitherto  been  viewed  with  com-
placency; its  members  respected  and  esteemed.  And  it  was  not
Oo

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


446  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

until  it  was  found  that  the  obligations  of  the  order  had  alienated
■  those  belonging  to  it  from  their  allegiance  to  the  constitution  and
the  law,  and  the  community  began  to  suspect  the  imposition  which
had  been  practiced  upon  them,  and  exert  the  supremacy  of  their
power  to  bring  the  kidnappers  and  murderers  of  Morgan  to  jus-
tice. On  this  occasion  the  people  soon  found  their  own  impotence
and  that  of  the  laws  when  exerted  against  Free  Masons  for  the
abduction  and  murder  by  them  of  one  belonging  to  the  order.
It  is  this  secret  invisible  power  to  which  I  am  opposed;  a  power
exerted  in  the  midst  of  us,  from  the  horrible  and  tragical  effects
of  which,  neither  friends  nor  foes,  not  even  the  wandering  stran-
ger can  escape.

By  the  common  consent  of  mankind,  each  individual  has  certain
absolute  and  unalienable  rights:  these  are  the  right  of  personal  li-
berty, the  right  of  personal  security,  and  the  right  of  private  pro-
perty; The  great  end  and  object  of  government  should  be  to  pro-
tect each  individual  in  the  enjoyment  of  these  rights:  when  that  is
not  done,  the  government  must  be  defective  either  in  the  form  or
in  the  administration.  Public  sentiment  is  the  only  test  to  deter-
mine whether  it  be  done  or  not;  and  every  thing  depending  on  public
sentiment  must  be  open  and  exposed  to  public  scrutiny  and  ob-
servation. Publicity,  then,  is  and  must  be  the  redeeming  pru>
ciple  of  every  system;  without  it  (he  most  perfect  government
will  be  found  in  practice  to  permit  every  thing  that  is  wrong,  and
afford  no  security  for  any  thing  that  is  right.  That  the  order  of
Free  Masons  has  always  required  secrecy  from  those  belonging
to  it,  is  a  fact  that  cannot  be  questioned.  If  for  that  they  ought
to  be  condemned,  they  will  not  complain  that  it  is  done  without
testimony.  Let  us  then  test  the  order  by  one  of  its  cardinal  prin-
ciples, and  see  whether  it  is  at  variance  with  truth  and  justice.

Openness  and  honesty  form  the  criterion  by  which  the  cha-
racter of  every  transaction  relating  to  the  affiairs  of  men  is  in-
vestigated and  determined.  '  Vice  has  always*  shunned  the  light.

The  concealment  of  the  fact  is  evidence  that  the  fact  itself,
if  it  appeared,  would  disclose  something  that  is  wrong.  Thus,
if  a  man  be  found  with  stolen  goods  in  his  possession,  and  he  has
concealed  or  attempts  to  conceal  them,  it  is  evidence  that  he  re-
ceived the  goods  knowing  that  they  were  stolen.  A  person  is
examined  on  a  charge  of  felony  and  conceals  the  facts  and  states
what  is  not  true:  the  conclusion  is  that  he  is  guilty.  A  party  in
a  suit  secretes  a  paper:  the  conclusion  is,  that  U  it  Were  produced
it  would  disclose  some  facts  against  him  which  without  it  do
not  appear;  and  thus  it  is  that  secrecy  and  concealment  have  al-
ways been  considered  as  tantamount  to  deceit  and  falsehood.     It


y  Google  .


LIGHT   ON   MASONRV.  447

was  so  at  the  beginning;  for  after  eating  the  forbidden  fruit  our
first  parents  hid  themselves  from  the  presence  of  t*od.

Jf  I  have  succeeded  in  showing  that  the  first  principle  of  the
order  is  wrong,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  in  practice  that  it  can
ever  become  right;  when  the  principle  on  which  it  is  founded  is
erroneous,  it  will  practically  proceed  on  the  same  wrong  ground.
If  we  take  the  wrong  road  at  the  commencement  ot  our  journey,
the  longer  we  travel  it  the  farther  we  are  from  the  place  of  desti-
nation.

The  ostensible  objects  of  Free  Masonry  are  benevolence  and
kindness:  but  if  it  should  appear  that  the  real  objects  are  selfish-
ness and  cruelty  in  disguise,  no  one  not  of  the  order  will  hesi-
tate to  admit  that  it  is  time  the  veil  was  torn  off,  and  the  society
exhibited  in  all  its  deformity.  Names  can  never  alter  things;  but
care  should  be  taken,  that  things  have  their  proper  names.  The
appropriate  use  of  names  is  to  represent  things  truly;  but  that
they  do  so,  should  never  be  taken  for  granted:  For  as  often  as
the  despot  has  intended  to  lead  the  multitude  captive  at  his  will,
he  has  done  it  by  the  delusion  of  a  name.  If  vigilance  is  the
price  of  liberty,  the  point  at  which  it  should  first  be  exerted,  is  to
distinguish  between  names  and  things.  To  do  so  we  tnust  be-
come familiar  with  the  thin#  itself,  which  we  never  can  if  it  is  to
us  invisible;  and  that  I  understand  to  be  the  precise  character  of
the  order  of  Free  Masonry:  and  why  is  it  so?  men  never  act
without  a  motive.  Is  it  not  then  fair  to  conclude  that  these  stolen
abuses  are  secret  pleasures  enjoyed  at  the  expense  of  others
not  belonging  to  the  order?

Unity  of  action  and  design  has  always  enabled  those  belonging
to  the  combination  not  only  to  protect  themselves,  but  to  oppress
others;  hence  it  is  that  an  act  done  by  a  conspirator  is  more  hei-
nous in  the  eye  of  the  law,  and  alarming  to  the  community,  than
if  done  by  an  insulted  individual.  But  when  impunity  is  added
to  secrecy  of  design,  it  is  then  that  we  realize  in  imagination  the
horrors  which  William  Morgan  must  have  indured  when  the  mid-
night assassin  stalked  forth  before  his  swimming  eyes.

The  entering  of  a  dwelling  house  against  the  will  of  the  occu-
pant, in  the  day  time,  is  a  simple  tresspass;  but  when  the  same
act  is  done  in  the  silent  watches  of  the  night,  it  is  felony.  Why
is  it  so?  Can  there  be  any  other  reason  for  k,  than  the  helpless
condition  of  the  tenant  at  that  season  destined  by  nature  for  si-
lence and  repose?

Hence  it  is  obvious  that  no  other  relation  among  men  can  be
just  but  that  which  places  them  on  a  footing  of  equality.  Tnat
which  is  not  known  to  us  can  never  be  guarded  against  by  us.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


448  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.

It  is  by  deceit  or  falsehood  that  distress  and  misery  have  been
communicated  and  extended  far  and  wide  among  the  human  race;
and  if  deceit  and  falsehood  be  not  descriptive  of  Free  Mjasonry,
they  are  of  its  effect  and  operation  upon  the  rest  of  mankind.

To  illustrate:  A  witness  that  is  interested  is  incompetent  to  tes-
tify: a  juror  that  has  a  bias  upon  his  mind  is  disqualified  from  sit-
ting in  judgment  But  how  can  the  one  or  the  other  be  excluded,
when  the  fact  of  such  interest  or  bias  is  not  known  to  the  parties?
It  may  be  said  that  the  bias  which  one  Free  Mason  has  in  favor
of  another  is  slight  and  trifling;  admitted,  and  what  follows?  Do
we  not  know  that  when  all  other  things  are  equal  the  least  item
inclines  the  scale?  and  it  is  by  the  influence  of  these  impercepti-
ble trifles  that  every  doubtful  question  is  decided.

It  has  been  said,  that  a  man  might  as  well  be  suspected,  be-
cause he  belonged  to  another  church.  But  on  what  principle
does  the  argument  rest?  It  must  be  upon  the  assumption  that
there  is  no  difference  between  Christianity  and  Free  Masonry;
and  will  that  be  pretended  by  the  most  devoted  friend  of  the  or-
der? It  is  sufficient  for  my  purpose  to  mention  one  particular
about  which  there  is  no  controversy.  The  obligation  of  secrecy
is  enjoined  according  to  the  order  of  Free  Masonry;  while  the  Sa-
viour, at  parting  with  his  disciples,  said  unto  them,  "Go  ye  into
all  the  world  and  preach  tJu  gospel  to  every  creature."

The  charge  against  Free  Masons  is  not  that  they  are  all  bad
men,  or  that  they  ought  to  be  condemned  because  there  are  some
bad  men  among  them:  But  it  is,  that  the  order  justifies  indivi-
duals belonging  to  it,  who  could  not  be  justified  by  the  laws  of  so-
ciety. The  conclusion,  therefore,  is  against  the  order,  not  the
individuals  belonging  to  it.  The  individuals  may  be  good  or  bad,
like  other  men;  their  character  must  depend  upon  their,  walk  and
conversation.  It  will  not  be  pretended  that  individuals  belong-
ing to  any  society  are  for  that  reason  to  be  justified  for  anything
they  may  do.  The  objection  is,  that  the  members  of  the  Ma-
sonic society  are  not  made  amenable  to  justice  like  other  men.
It  is  not  that  every  Free  Mason  shall  be  condemned  because  he
is  a  Free  Mason;  but  that  the  order  screens  men  from  punish-
ment because  they  are  members  of  it.  No  matter  who  subverts
public  justice,  it  is  an  offence  which  deserves  reprehension  and
punishment.

But  it  may  be  asked,  what  have  the  order  done?

I  answer,  they  Jiave  justified  the  kidnappers  and  murderers
of  William  Morgan.

This  is  a  serious  charge;  but  it  is  believed  to  be  supported  by
the  best  evidence  the  nature  of  the  case  will  admit.    When  the

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  449

conduct  of  men  cannot  be  reconciled  with  their  innocence,  the
*  conclusion  is  that  they  are  guilty.

The  sense  of  right  and  wrong  is  impressed  by  the  Deity  him-
self upon  the  heart  of  man.  '  The  effect  of  this  impression  will
naturally  appear  at  the  recital  of  wrongs;  and  when  it  does  not,
the  conclusion  is  that  natural  feelings  are  suppressed

The  story  of  William  Morgan  is  the  most  tragical,  and  calcu-
lated the  most  effectually  to  harrow  up  all  our  feelings  and  excite
all  our  sensibilities;  and  even  to  impel  us  by  an  impuse  not  our
own,  to  seek  the  place  of  our  martyr's  sufferings  and  death,  and
there  avenge  this  most  foul  and  unnatural  murder.

But  has  the  story  had  that  effect  upon  those  belonging  to  the
Masonic  order?  Will  it  be  denied  that  as  often  as  it  has  been
related  in  the  presence  and  hearing  of  Free  Masons,  one  has  in-
quired, if  the  facts  stated  by  Morgan  in  his  book  were  true,  did
not  he  deserve  the  fate  he  was  supposed  to  have  suffered?  An-
other has  said,  he  is  gone  off  and  keeps  out  of  the  way  to  give
value  to  his  book,  and  will  return  when  his  fortune  is  made!
Others,  though  silent,  have  given  a  smile  of  approbation,  while
with  inverted  looks  the  countenance  of  all  have  indicated  mys-
tery and  concealment!  And  when  a  numerous  body  of  men,
both  separately  and  collectively,  can  suppress  the  strongest  na-
tural emotions,  is  it  not  fair  to  conclude  that  such  suppression  w
the  effect  of  design?  Thus  much  for  the  evidence  of  observa-
tion; and  for  the  correction  of  it,  I  appeal  to  the  most  superficial
observer.

But  the  evidence  against  Free  Masonry  does  not  rest  entirely
upon  the  unnatural  looks  and  actions  of  individuals  belonging  to
the  order,  when  Morgan's  case  is  mentioned.  There  is  another
fact  imputing  moral  guilt  to  the  order  itself,  unless  the  maxim
that  a  man  is  known  by  the  company  he  keeps,  can  be  contro-
verted. It  is  this:  that  three  persons  belonging  to  the  order  have
confessed  themselves  guilty,  and  admitted  they  were  concerned
in  the  abduction  of  William  Morgan.  We  have  occasionally
seen  notices  of  expulsion,  from  which  we  are  to  conclude  that  it
is  according  to  the  discipline  of  the  order  to  expel  for  some  of*
fences;  but  we  have  seen  no  notice  of  the  expulsion  of  hose
three  persons;  hence  we  are  to  conclude  that  the  abduction  of
William  Morgan  is  not  an  offenee  according  to  the  order  of  Free
Masonry!

It  is  not  my  object  here  to  dilate  upon  the  enormity  of  this
offence:  It  must  be  obvious  to  all,  that  the  right  of  personal  li-
berty is  of  all  others  the  most  invaluable;  and  if  the  fate  of
William  Morgan  had  been  less  tragical,  and  instead*  of  being  put
Oo2

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC


450  LIGHT  ON  MAsosmir.

to  death  he  had  obtained  his  liberty  after  a  Abort  interval,  and  bad
been  restored  to  his  family  and  friends;  yet  the  offence  would  re-
main; and  alt  those  accessory  to  it,  whether  before  or  after  the
fact,  must  be  considered  among  the  offenders.

Con  the  order  escape  from  this  conclusion;  and  if  (bey  cannot,
what  does  it  prove?  Surely  this,  that  the  malignant  pleasure  of
Free  Masons  is,  with  the  order  itself,  a  consideration  paramount
to  the  rights  of  individuals,  or  the  observance  of  the  laws:  and  are
we  not  only  to  countenance  in  the  midst  of  us  their  invisible  power,
but  the  unjust  and  cruel  exercise  of  it?

But  that  is  a  question  I  need  not  ask;  for  the  power  exists,  and
has  thus  far  been  exercised,  without  our  opposition;  and  it
remains  to  be  seen  whether  it  shall  continue  and  triumph  in  spite
of  it.  Although  the  aggregate  number  of  Free  Masons  bears  but
a  small  proportion  to  the  great  body  of  the  community,  yet  it  is  not
to  be  controverted  that  tney  enjoy  the  offices  of  honor  and  profit,
while  at  the  same  time  they  profess  to  take  no  part  »  pontics.
The  places  occupied  by  Free  Masons  in  all  parties,  show  how  their
professions  are  to  be  understood;  apparently  they  belong  to  no
party,  that  thereby  they  may  be  the  better  enabled  to  control  the
whole.  Hence  it  is  that  they  are  to  be  found  at  the  head  of  every
party;  that  whatever  party  prevails,  the  affairs  of  government  may
he  •conducted  by  Free  Masons;  which  would  not  be  the  case,  if
tfiey  were  known  to  belong  to  any  particular  party.  It  is  against
this  gigantic  p*woi\  with  all  its  trappings^  that  we  are  to  contend.
It  is  true,  we  are  neither  armed  nor  disciplined  for  the  battle;  but
let  us  not  despair;  we  have  with  us  the  moral  courage,  the  physical
power,  and  the  force  of  principle;  and  it  is  with  pleasure  that  I
add,  the  best  men  are  every  day  renouncing  Free  Masonry  and
rallying  around  our  standard.  With  such  aid,  although  the  con-
test may  be  long,  the  victory  must  be  certain.

Let  us  not  deceive  ourselves:  it  is  with  rank  and  fashion,  with
power  and  wealth,  that  we  have  to  contend;  and  in  such  a  contest
it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the  selfish,  the. sycophantic,  the  sla-
vish, will  ever  embark?  yet  the  cause  k  worthy  of  freemen  im-
pelled by  the  force  of  principle  and  the  sense  of  injury;  and  sueh
only  will  engage.  ^ ne  exclusive  privilege  of  individuals  with
the  prerogative  of  power,  has  held  millions  in  bondage.  Men  not
knowing  that  they  were  born  free,  and  possessed  of  certain  equal
and  unalienable  rights,  might  content  themselves  to  lingejr  out  a
miserable  existence  in  servitude  and  chains.  If  we  were  of  mat
degraded  and  degenerate  race,.  Free  Masonry  might  triumph  here
as  it  has  done  in  iJm  old  wortd  and  in  the  darkest  ages.  But  as
we  are  free  men,  with  the  gift  of  reaseu,  and  a  koowjedge  of  our

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


BIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  451

rights,  can  our  friends  expect,  or  our  enemies  require,  that  we
should  countenance  an  institution  founded  in  error?     But  the  ques-
'  tk>n  still  recurs,  is  it  so.

As  we  hold  the  affirmative,  let  us  advert  for  a  moment  to  the
mode  of  initiation,  and  the  manner  of  conferring  degrees,  both
of  which  have  now  become  public.

The'  candidate  presents  himself  blindfolded  and  naked,  with
the  cable-tow  about  his  neck,  without  any  previous  knowledge  of
what  he  is  to  do,  or  what  is  to  be  required  of  him;  and  in  this
helpless  condition  the  dreadful  oath  is  administered  and  taken.
If  the  candidate  should  falter  or  hesitate,  the  ruffians  on  each  side
of  him  holding  the  cable-tow  which  is  about  his  neck,  can  in  a
moment  tighten  the  cord  and  extinguish  him  and  his  complaints:
And  how  many  noble  spirits  preferring  death  to  degradation
have  been  thus  dispatched,  the  world  can  never  know!  Is  this
true?  If  it  is  not,  it  can  be  shown  to  be  false  by  disclosing  the
fact.  If  it  should  be  said  that  this  would  destroy  the  order,  by
revealing  the  mystery,  then  it  follows  that  the  secrets  of  Free
Masonry  were  with  the  order  itself  a  consideration  paramount  to
the  reputation  of  those  belonging  to  it.  If  then  they  can  live  by
Free  Masonry,  we  must  try  to  live  without  it,  and  judge  of  it,  as
we  do  of  other  things,  from  what  we  know.

It  is  not  to  be  questioned  that  worthy  men  have  thus  bydurets*
and  imprisonment  become  Free  Masons;  and  from  the  fact  that
many  have  withdrawn  themselves  and  for  years  declined  associat-
ing with  the  order,  it  is  evident  that  Free  Masonry  is  held  in  de-
rision by  many  and  the  better  part  of  those  belonging  to  the  or-
der. Hence  it  is  that  the  most  corrupt  institution  is  kept  up  and
continued  by  the  worst  of  men:  And  from  such  continuance,  what
is  to  be  expected?  Surely,  if  there  be  any  antidote  it  must  be
poison;  if  any  remedy  it  must  be  death.

For  the  violation  of  the  Masonic  oath,  the  most  dreadful  pun-
ishment is  invoked;  and  every  subsequent  degree  not  only  imposes
new  and  additional  obligations,  but  is  a  repetition  of  all  the  pre-
ceding ones.  Hence  it  is  that  the  compunctious  visitkigs  of  con-
science, if  any,  are  stifled  by  the  vile  oath  of  profanity  taken  by
every  member  of  the  order:  they  cannot  repent -because  they  dare
not  confess.  Whatever  crimes  are  perpetrated,  the  conclusion  is
and  must  be  by  the  perpetrators,  that  they  had  better  go  on  than
to  go  back.  Thus  poor  human  nature  is  perverted  and  left  with-
out the  power  of  repentance  or  hope  of  redemption.

If  I  am  right  in  the  view  I  have  taken  of  Free  Masonry,  it  is
wrong  in  principle  a&  welt  as  in  practice.  Yarious  other  v*sws
might  be  suggested,-  but  I  forbear.     If  I  amright,  enoughnasbeen

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


452  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

said;  if  I  am  wrong,  nothing  that  I  could  add  would  he  of  any
avail  But  I  cannot  close  these  remarks  without  adverting  to
those  of  my  friend  from  Genesee,  (Gen.  Allen,)  with  whom  I  have
so  long  and  so  pleasantly  travelled;  and  I  must  say  it  is  with  sin-
cere regret  that  I  differ  with  him  on  tins  occasion;  but  I  have  high
authority  for  saying  that  every  difference  of  opinion  is  not  a  differ-
ence of  principle.


PROCEEDINGS

Of  the  Adjourned  Convention  of  Seceding  Masons;  held  at  Le  Roy,  July  4, 182S.

At  an  adjourned  meeting  of  the  convention  of  Seceding  Ma-
sons, held  at  Le  Roy,  July  4,  1828.  Solomon  Southwick,
President,  and  David  Bernard,  Clerk.

On  motion,  it  was  resolved,  that  the  committee  appointed  to
draft  a  declaration  of  independence  from  the  Masonic  institution,
he  requested  to  report  A.  P.  Hascall,  from  the  said  committee,
then  reported  the  declaration.

On  motion,  it  was  unanimously  resolved,  that  the  declaration
be  adopted  and  signed.

DECLARATION.

When  men  attempt  to  dissolve  a  system  which  has  influenced
and  governed  a  part  of  community,  and  by  its  pretentions  to  anti-
quity, usefulness,  and  virtue,  would  demand  the  respect  of  all,  it
is  proper  to  submit  to  the  consideration  of  a  candid  and  impartial
world,  the  causes  which  impel  them  to  such  a  course.  We,  se~
coders  from  the  Masonic  institution,  availing  ourselves  of  our  na-
tural and  unalienable  rights  and  the  privileges  guaranteed  to  us.
by  our  constitution  freely  to  discuss  the  principles  of  our  govern-
ment and*laws,  and  to  expose  whatever  may  endanger  the  one  or
impede  the  due  administration  of  the  other,  do  offer  the  following
reasons  for  endeavoring  to  abolish  the  order  of  Free  Masonry y
and  destroy  its  influence  in  our  government

In  all  arbitrary  governments  free  inquiry  has  been  restricted
as  fatal  to  the  principles  upon  which  they  were  based.  In  all
ages  of  the  world  tyrants  have  found  it  necessary  to  shackle  the
minds  of  their  subjects,  to  enable  them  to  control  their  actions;
for  experience  ever  taught  that  the  free  mind  ever  exerts  a  moral
power  that  resists  all  attempts  to  enslave  it.  However  forms  of
government  heretofore  have  varied,  the  right  to  act  and  speak
without  a  controlling  power  has  never  been  permitted.  Our  an-
cestors who  imbibed  principles  of  civil  and  religious  liberty,  fled

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRy.  453

to  America  to  escape  persecution;  and  when  Britain  attempted  to
encroach  upon  the  free  exercise  of  those  principles,  our  fathers
hesitated  not  to  dissolve  their  oaths  of  allegiance  to  the  mother
country,  and  declare  themselves  free  and  independent;  and  exult-
ing millions  of  freemen  yet  bless  their  memories  for  the  deed.  A
new  theory  of  government  was  reduced  to  practice  in  the  forma-
tion of  the  American  republic.  It  involved  in  its  structure  prin-
ciples of  equal  rights  and  equal  privileges;  and  was  based  on  the
eternal  foundation  of  public  good.  It  protects  the  weak,  restrains
the  powerful,  and  extends  its  honors  and  emoluments  to  the  me-  -
ritorious  of  every  condition.  It  should  have  been  the  pride  of
every  citizen  to  preserve  this  noble  structure  in  all  its  beautiful
symmetry  and  proportions.  But  the  principle  of  self  aggrandize-
ment, the  desire  to  control  the  destinies  of  others,  and  luxuriate
in  their  spoils,  'unhappily  still  inhabits  the  human  breast.  Many
attempts  have  already  been  made  to  impair  the  freedom  of  our
institutions  and  subvert  our  government.  But  they  have  been
met  by  the  irresistible  power  of  public  opinion  and  indignation,
and  crushed.  In  the  mean  time  the  Masonic  society  has  been
silently  growing  among  us,  whose  principles  and  operations  are
calculated  to  subvert  and  destroy  the  great  and  important  princi-
ples of  the  commonwealth.  Before  and  during  the  revolutionary
struggle,  Masonry  was  but  little  known  and  practised  in  this
country.  It  was  lost  amid  the  changes  and  confusion  of  the  con-
flicting nations,  and  was  reserved  for  a  time  of  profound  peace,
to  wind  and  insinuate  itself  into  every  department  of  government,
and  influence  the  result  of  almost  every  proceeding.  Like  many
other  attempts  to  overturn  government  and  destroy  the  liberties  of
the  people,  it  has  chosen  a  time  when  the  suspicions  of  men  were
asleep;  and  with  a  noiseless  tread,  in  the  darkness  and  silence  of
the  night,  has  increased  its  strength  and  extended  its  power.  Not
yet  content  with  its  original  powers  and  influence,  it  has  of  late
received  the  aid  of  foreign  and  more  arbitrary  systems.  With  this
accumulation  of  strength,  it  arrived  at  that  formidable  crisis  when
it  bid  open  defiance  to  the  laws  of  our  country  in  the  abduction
and  murder  of  an  unoffending  citizen  of  the  republic.  So  wicked
was  this  transaction,  so  extensive  its  preparation,  and  so  openly
justified,  that  it  aroused  the  energies  of  an  insulted  people,  whose
exertions  have  opened  the  hidden  recesses  of  this  abode  of  dark-
ness and  mystery;  and  mankind  may  now  view  its  power,  its
wickedness,  and  folly.

That  it  is  opposed  to  the  genius  and  design  of  this  government,
the  spirit  and  precepts  of  our  holy  religion,  and  the  welfare  of  so*
ciety  generally,  will  appear  from  the  following  considerations:

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


454  LIGHT    ON  MASONRY.

It  exercises  jurisdiction  over  the  persons  and  lives  of  citizens
of  the  republic.

It  arrogates  to  itself  the  right  of  punishing  its  members  for  of-
fences unknown  to  the  laws  of  this  or  any  other  nation.

It  requires  the  concealment  of  crime,  and  protects  the  guflty
from  punishment.

It  encourages  the  commission  of  crime,  by  affording  to  the
guilty  facilities  of  escape.

It  affords  opportunites  for  the  corrupt  and  designing  to  form
plans  against  the  government,  and  the  lives  and  characters  of  in-
dividuals.

It  assumes  titles  and  dignities  incompatible  with  a  republican
form  of  government,  and  enjoins  an  obedience  to  them  derogatory
to  republican  principles.

It  destroys  all  principles  of  equality,  by  bestowing  favors  on
its  own  members  to  the  exclusion  of  others  equally  meritorious
and  deserving.

It  creates  odious  aristocracies  by  its  obligations  to  support  the
interests  of  its  members,  in  preference  to  others  of  equal  qualifi-
cations.

,  It  blasphemes  the  name,  and  attempts  a  personification  of  the
Great  Jehovah.

It  prostitutes  the  Sacred  Scriptures  to  unholy  purposes,  to  sub-
serve its  own  secular  and  trifling  concerns.

It  weakens  the  sanctions  of  morality  and  religion,  by  the  mul-
tiplication of  profane  oaths,  and  an  immoral  familiarity  with  reli-
gious forms  and  ceremonies.

It  discovers  in  its  ceremonies,  an  unholy  commingling  of  divine
truth  with  impious  human  inventions.

It  destroys  a  veneration  for  religion  and  religious  ordinances,
by  the  profane  use  of  religious  forms.

It  substitutes  the  self  righteousness  and  ceremonies  of  Masonry
for  the  vital  religion  and  ordinances  of  the  Gospel.

It  promotes  habits  of  idleness  and  intemperance,  by  its  mem-
bers neglecting  their  business  to  attend  its  meetings  and  drink
its  libations.

It  accumulates  funds  at  the  expense  of  indigent  persons,  and
to  the  distress  of  their  families,  too  often  to  be  dissipated  in  riot-
ing and  pleasure  and  its  senseless  ceremonies  and  exhibitions.

It  contracts  the  sympathies  of  the  human  heart  for  all  the  un-
fortunate, by  confining  its  charities  to  its  own  members;  and
promotes  the  interests  of  a  few  at  the  expense  of  the  many.

An  institution  thus  fraught  with  so  many  and  great  evils,  is
dangerous  to  our  government  and  the  safety  of  our  citizens,  and

Digitized  by  VjOOQl€


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.


545


is  unfit  to  exist  among  a  free  people:  We,  therefore,  believing  it
a  duty  We  owe  to  God,  our  country,'  and  to  posterity,  resolve  to
expose  its  mystery,  wickedness,  and  tendency,  to  public  view —
and  we  exhort  all  citizens  who  have  a  love  of  country,  and  a  ve-
neration for  its  laws,  a  spirit  of  our  holy  religion,  and  a  regard  for
the  welfare  of  mankind,  to  aid  us  in  the  cause  which  we  have
espoused — and  appealing  to  Almighty  God  for  the  rectitude  of
our  motives,  we  solemnly  absolve  ourselves  from  all  allegiance
to  the"  Masonic  institution,  and  declare  ourselves  free  and  inde-
pendent: and  in  support  of  these  resolutions,  our  government  and
laws,  and  the  safety  of  individuals,  against  the  usurpations  of  al!
secret  societies  and  open  force,  and  against  the  'vengeance*  of
the  Masonic  institution,  'with  a  firm  reliance  on  the  protection  of
Divine  Providence,  we  mutually  pledge  to  each  other,;  outlives,
our  fortunes,  and  our  sacred  honor.'   •  ^.v:/.v*'fcfc*'

July  4,  1828.  •    ^.  .^•T

Signers  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence  from  the  Masonic  Institution,  adopted
at  LeRoy,  July  4,  l%28.


Solomon  Southwick,
David  Bernard,
W.  W.  Phelps,
Isaac  B.  Barnum,

Cephas  A.  Smith,

J.  Van  Valkenburgh,
PkttS.  Beach,
Elam  Badger,
Joseph  Hart,
Kneeiand  Townsend,  jun.

Anthony  Cooley,

John  G.  Stearns,
Reuben  Winchell,

Augustus  P.  Hascall,

Noble  D.  Strong,

John  Hascall,

Robert  Earl,  jun.

James  Ballard,

Leonard  B.  Rose,
Timothy  C.  Strong,
WiBiam  Waggoner,
John  Aumock,

Herbert  A.  Read,

W.  RobinsoD, '


RESIDENCE,

Albany,
Warsaw,
Canandaigua,
Perrington,'


T    „  '     ^         C  Thrice  Illustrious

Le  Roy,  twenty-one  or  j  0rder  Qfge  Crogs


NO.  OFDBOB11S.

Four

Intimate  Secretary

three

.four

Thrice  Illustrious


Prattsburgh,

Stafford,

Cazenovia,

Albion,

Lewiston,

Le  Roy,

Paris,
Lockport,

LeRoy,

Auburn,

LeRoy,

Attica,

LeRoy,

Castile,
Albion,
Lebanon,
LeRoy,

LeRoy,

Springwater,


three

v*     vlhree
-'*:  -four*

>  •  .  jtj.  /■      three1;'. ,
(  Thrice  Ulustrioufe  y
I  Order  of  the  Cross  '  v
three
three

S  Thrice  Illustrious
Order  of  the  Cross
seven
(  Thrice  Illustrious
(  Order  of  the  Cross
one

!  Thrice  Illustrious
Order  of  the  Cross,
three
four
three
four
i  Thrice  Illustrious
>X)rder  of  the  Cross
*  three


y  Google


456

Jesse  Badcock,
Lemuel  Cook,
.fames  Gray,
Elijah  Gray,
William  Ho  we,
Samuel  Pierce,
Adam  Richmond,
George  W.  Harris,
Benjamin  Cooky,
John  Joslen,
A.  F.  Albright,
Fayette  Cross,
Elias  Cooley,
Olney  F.  Rice,
Warren  Kneetand,  -


Beebe,


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.


Bnrrol
Noah  B.I
Truman  J.  Wield,
Edward*  Giddia*,
Abram  Cherry,
Richard  Hollister,
Amos  E.  Hutcbins,
Henry  Conkling,
PascaU  D.  Webb,
Daniel  Rowley,
Jonathan  K.  Barlow,
Mills  ^verill,
Noah  Ingeisoll,
Chapman  Hawley,
\uren  Da  ball,

Frederick  C.  Famam.         s
Joel  Bradner,

ftqJJert  Shadders,  ■■

Jonathan  K.  Foster.
'•Setli  M.  Gates,
David  Reed,
Willard  Smithy
Solomon  Barker,,
Orson  Nichoson,
J.  K.  Brown,
Enos  Bachelder,
Stephen  Robinson,
Robert  McKely,
John  Law,
Isaac  S.  Fitch,
Hiram  Cornell,
Asa  Turner,
Samuel  Ledyard,
John  Smith,
Benjamin  F.  Welles,
Anson  Hinman,
Samuel  D.  Greene,
Chester  Coe,
Theodore  Hooker,


Springwater,

Two

Lewiston,

three

LeRoy,

three

LeRoy,

four

Gorham,

seven

Ridgeway,

three

LeRoy,

seven

Batavia,

three

Stafford,

three

Wheatland,

three

Wheatland,

three

Wheatland,

three

LeRoy,

three

Gorham,

three

Sempronius,

three

„.     ,  ,                         (  three  regular  and
Hinsdale,                      \      three8honorary

Clarendon,

seven

€[o\ington,

three

Codington,

four

Rochester,

seven

Rochester,

six

LeRfoy,

fourteen

LeRoy,    ^

three

Covington,

three

LeRoy,

three

six

Bethany,

seven

Bethany,

three

Albion,

three

Niagara  co.
Prattsburgh,

ten

Attica,

three

Barre,

three

Barre,

two

Batavia,
LeRoy,

three

three

Hopewell,

tliree

Adams,  Jefferson  co.

twelve

Gates,

three

Albion,  Orleans  co.

three

Barre,

seven

LeRoy,

three

Springwater,
Clarence,

three
two

LeRoy,

four

Jamestown,

Jamestown,  Chautauque  co.

Jamestown,  Chautauque  co.

Pultneyville,

three

Prattsburgh,

three

Pultncy,

Pike,  Allegany  co.

three

three

Batavia,

three

Bennington,

three

Duchess  co.

ten

Digitized  by  VjC

)OQle

Elijah  Nerthup,
Reuben  Sanborn,
Jarvis  Swift,
David  Snow,
John  Tomlinson,
Nathan  M.  Mann,
Nathan  Townsend,
Andrew  Couse,
Russel  Waters,
Phlegmoncy  Horton,
W.  J.  Edson,
David  C.  Miller,
Jafnes  Rolfe,
George  W.  Blodgett,,
Uriah  Slavton,
Martin  Flint,
Darius  Sprague,
Joseph  Cochran,
Orcutt  Hyde,
William  Hyde,
Phinehas  Smith,
Lund  Tarbox,

Hollis  Piatt,

Norman  Bently,


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY  .

PineJPlains,  Dutchess  co.
Painted  Post,
Auburn,
Covington,
Stafford,
Wales,  Erie  co.
Batavia,
Cazenovia,
Cazenovia,
Cazenovia,
Batavia,
Batavia,
Elba,
Le  Roy,
LeRoy,

Vermont,  C

Vermont,  v  •         «*,,

Vermont,
Vermont,
Vermont,
,  Vermont,  •#.•'..,

Vermont,


457

Five
seven
three
three
•three
seven
seven
three  .


two

one

three

two

three


LeRoy,
Guilford,


Thrice  Illustrious

Order  of  the  Cross

seven


The  convention  then  adjourned  until  four  o'clock,  P.  M.  to
meel  at  the  Presbyterian  meeting  house.

Met  according  to  adjournment:  Elder  Bernard  .addressejHhe
Throne  of  Grace.  Solomon  Southwick  then  dej^red  an  a<j4ress
in  pursuance  of  previous  appointment         v  -  ■'' "■■  /  '        .,    t*  >s  7$.

The  convention  then  adjourned  to  meet  at  the^me. j£bce  pg^
the  next  morning,  at  eight  o'clock;  at  wnicb  time  asid  pjace  W*
convention  was  opened  by  prayer.  , .  v        '■'  ,

A  number  of  communications  was  received  by  the  contention,
from  persons  residing  in  different  parteof  this  "State,  ancTalip w
the  states  of  Vermont,  Connecticut,  Perinsyftania,  New  Jersey,
and  Maryland,  stating  that  it  was  inconvenient  attending  at  this
season  of  the  year,  and  from  so  great  a  distance,  and  requesting
copies  of  the  new  declaration  of  independence,  and  other  pro-
ceedings, forwarded  to  them  for  their  sanction.  Delegates  from
ten  counties  in  this  state,  attended  the  convention  and  signed
the  declaration.  The  number  of  persons  attending  the  conven-
tion was  about  eight  thousand.

On  motion  it  was  then  resolved,  That  the  committee  of  fifteen,
-appointed  at  the  last  sitting  of  the  convention,  to  prepare  the  up-
per degrees  of  Masonry,  be  requested  to  report.

The  committee  then  reported  the  degrees  from  the  Master's
to  the  Royal  Arch,  and  including  the  Boyat  Arch,  which  wcro
Pp

»y  Google


Digitized  by'


468  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

read:  Whereupon,  it  was  resolved  by  the  Masons  presesi
who  had  received  these  several  degrees,  that  they  are  substan-
tially correct.  It  was  then  resolved  by  the  convention,  that  the
report  of  the  committee  be  accepted,  and  the  said  degrees  pub-
lished to  the  world.     [See  the  degrees  in  this  book. J

The  convention  then  adjourned  for  one  hour.

Met  pursuant  to  adjournment,  and  received  the  further  report
■of  the  committee  of  fifteen,  as  follows— The  degrees  of  knight-
hood, to  wit,  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross,  Knight  Templar,  Knight
of  Malta,  Knight  of  the  Christian  Mark  and  Guard  of  the  Con-
clave, Knight  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  and  the  order  of  Illustrious.
Most  Illustrious,  and  Thrice  Illustrious  Council  of  the  Knights
of  the  Holy  Cro^s.  They  were  then  read  and  resolved  by  the
knights  present,  numbers  of  whom  had  received)  these  several
degrees,  to  be  substantially  correct:     Whereupon  it  was

Resolved  by  the  convention,  That  the  degrees  be  published
to  the  world.     [See  the  degrees  in  this  book.]

Resolved,  That  Solomon  Southwick,  David  Bernard,  Richard
Hollister,  Willard  Smith,  Herbert  A.  Read,  John  Hascall,  and
Samuel  D.  Greene,  be  a  committee  to  prepare  a  preface  to,  and
superintend  the  publication  of,  the  degrees  adopted  by  this  con-
vention.

Miles  B.  Lampson,  Seth  M.  Gates,  and  A.  P.  Hascall,  were
then  appointed  a  committee  to  draft  resolutions  expressive  of  the
sentiments  of  this  convention.

*  The  committee  retired  a  short  time,  when  Mr.  Gates  from
spid  committee  reported  the  following:

lksolved,  That  however  beneficial  secret  societies  may  have
been  considered  in  the  dark  ages  of  the  world,  as  bonds  of  union
and  shields  of  protection  to  the  members  against  the  violence  of
the  times;  yet  in  this  enlightened  age  and  country,  where  the  pri-
vate rights  and  the  civil  liberty  of  our  citizens  are  guaranteed  by
a  free  constitution,  and  an  impartial  administration  of  justice,
they  became  not  only  useless  to  their  members,  but  dangerous  to
thegovernment.

Hesolved,  That  the  order  of  Free  Masonry  is  a  system  of
slavish  despotism,  calculated  to  break  down  the  pride  and  spirit
•f  freemen,  and  thus  render  them  fit  subjects  of  despotic  power.
Resolved,  That  whatever  may  be  our  predilections  for  the
prominent  candidates  for  the  presidency,  and  whatever  part  we
as  individuals  may  see  fit  to  take  in  national  politics,  we  consider
the  overthrow  and  destruction  of  the  Masonic  institution  as
wholly  disconnected  therewith,  and  of  vastly  paramount  impor-
tance—that this  convention  would  view  with  the1  most  undissem-

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRV.  459

bled  feelings  of  regret,  any  attempt  to  render  the  honest  indigna-
tion existing  against  the  institution  subservient  to  the  views  of
any  of  the  political  parties  of  the  day— that  we  unhesitatingly  dis-
claim all  intention  of  promoting  party  views  or  political  purposes.

Resolved^  Tnat  l^e  Masonic  obligations,  especially  thote  of
the  Knight  of  the  Christian  Mark  and  Guard  of  the  Conclave,
and  the  Knight-of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  are  of  the  most  blasphe-
mous nature;  and  we  cannot  but  deliver  our  sentiments  in  un-
qualified terms  against  them.

Resolved,  That  the  Committee  of  Publication  be  also  a  Central
Corresponding  Committee;  and  beauthorized  to  convoke  the  Con-
vention of  Seceding  Masons,  if  at  any  time  it  shall  be  deemed
expedient.  ■

Resolved  unanimously,  That  the  thanks  of  this  convention  be
presented  to  Solomon  Southwick,  for  the  masterly  and  eloquent
address  delivered  yesterday  by  appointmeqt  of  this  convention—
and  that  to  prevent  the  work  from  being  garbled  by  the  fraternity,
-or  its  agents,  he  be  requested  to  secure  a  copy  right  and  publish
the  same.

Resolved^  That  the  thanks  of  this  convention  be  tendered  to
the  president  and  secretary  thereof,  for  thef  assiduous  and  able
manner  in  which  they  have  performed  the  duties  devolving  upon
theni  during  the  sitting  of  the  convention.

The  sasm  being  severally  read  and  considered,  were  unani-
mously adopted — when  the  convention  adjotrrnetr»ffle  die.

Note.  The  artillery  of  the  fraternity,  has  been  unceasingly  discharged
'upon  the  members  of  this  convention.  *Mr.  Child,  the  editor  of  the  Albany
M  asonie  Record,  'the  only  hebdomadal  paper  devoted  to  the  cause  ol  Ma-
&onry  m  the/United  States,'  has  more  than  intimated  that  they  were  a  set
of  vagabond  book  Masons,  who  would  run  together  with  no  better  views
than  to  get  a  good  dinner  free  of  expense,  and  get  decently  drunk  to  boot,
l»y  renouncing  what  they  knew  nothing  about.  The  same  gentleman,  with
his*  usual  regard  for  truth,  politeness,  and  elegance  of  diction,  mentions  them
as  a  set  of  political  demagogues  assembled  to  make  or  adopt  a  mock  imita-
tion of  tho  original  declaration  of  independence,  The  day,  however,  has
Iiappily  passed  when  such  graceless  calumniators  canjgain  credence.

These  men  formed  a  convention,  which,  for  talents  and  respectability,  for
real  worth  and  standing  in  community,  is  rarely  equalled  in  conventional  or
deliberative  bodies.  There  are  of  those  whose  names  appear  above,  three
judges  of  county  courts,  seven  ministers  of  the  Gospel  in  Tegular  standing  in
their  respective  churches,  three  practising  attornies  at  law,  two  physicians,
and  four  editors  of  newspapers,  besides  several  justices  of  the  peace  and
jKrstmaSters.  They  are  scattered  through  the  western  part  of  the  state  of
J^few  York*  and  many  ol  thgm  are  extensively  known .  They  need  n  ot  even
this  feeble  tribute  of  respect  of  the  compiler,  to  establish  or  promulgate  then-
characters.  The  beneficial  effects  of  the  doings  of  that  convention  will  be
experienced  and  duly  appreciated,  when  their  calumniators  shall ^  quietly  re*
pone  with  the  institution  of  Free  Masonry  in  the  tortb  of  forgetfuiness.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


(460)


ORATION  OF  HERBERT  A.  BEAD,  ESQ,

Pronounced  at  Le  Roy,  July  4, 1838,  to  an  assembly  of  nearly  one  thousand  persons.

We  are  assembled  for  no  ordinary  purpose,  and  to  celebrate
no  common  event  in  the  history  of  the  world.     The  object  is  no
less  than  to  destroy  an  institution  which  has  secretly  fastened  it-
self upon  the  republic;  whose  principles  are  at  variance  with  the
first  and  unalienable  rights  of  man.     An  institution,  which,  under
the  garb  of  morality,  teaches  and  encourages  the  grossest  immo-
ralities.    An  institution  professing  to  be  the  handmaid  of  religion;
whose  ceremonies  are  blasphemies  and  impiety,  and  which  has  been
emphatically  the  school  of  infidelity.     An  institution  professing
to  teach  its  members  subjection  to  the  laws  of  our  country;  but
which  has  set  at  defiance  the  laws  both  of  God  and  of  man —
destroyed  the  sanctity  of  domestic  life — torn  asunder  the  tender
ties  of  humanity— in  a  word,  sacriltgiously  trampled  upon  the
dearest  rights  of  American  freemen;  and  to  conceal  its  own  im-
pious principles  and  blasphemous  ceremonies,  has  stained  its
kingly  robes  with  the  blood  of  a  free  citizen.     Such,  fellow  citi-
zens, is  the  object  of  otur  meeting.    The  event  we  celebrate  is
the  birthday  of  a  nation — the  first  dawn  of  the  polar  star  which
shall  guide  all  nations  to  the  harbor  of  pure  and  legitimate  free-
dom— the  redemption  of  a  patriotic  people  from  bondage:  an
event  unparalleled  in  the  history  of  the  world.    To  contemplate
the  conduct  of  a  brave  and  magnanimous  people,  who,  at  a  time
when  monarchy  and  despotism  were  the  only  governments  in
existence,  and  the  strong  arm  of  power  was  exerted  against  them—
in  defiance  of  all  the  powers  of  kings  and  emperors  threw  off  aft
allegiance  to  tyrants:  declaring  that  they  were,  and  of  right  ought
to  be,  free  and  independent;  and  sealed  the  declaration  with  their
blood;  and  thus,  upon  the  firm  and  immutable  basis  of  equal  rights,
established  a  free  government.    We  are  assembled  to  contem-
plate this  stupendous  work,  and  lay  the  foundation  for  the  eatij-e
overthrow  of  the  Masonic  institution.     Heretofore  the  object  has
been  merely  to  celebrate  it  as  a  day  in  which  our  fathers  eman-
cipated themselves  from  foreign  power:  but  we  this  day  have
the  twofold  purpose  of  reverting  back  to  that  period,  and  to  over-
throw all  internal  enemies,  that  we  may  in  very  deed  be  disen-
thralled and  redeemed  from  all  things  which  impede  the  grand
and  triumphant  march  of  liberty.    Who,  among  us,  whose  heart


y  Google


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  461

beat*  not  high  at  such  prospects?  Who  that  has  witnessed  the
surrounding  gloom  which  has  overspread  this  western  section,
but  now  rejoice  at  the  dispelling  of  the  clouds,  and  the  bright
prospect  before  us?  As  freemen  jealous  of  your  liberties,  re-
joice in  the  anticipation  of  that  day  when  the  institution  which
has  proudly  bid  defiance  to  the  public  opinion— which  has  exulte<T
in  its  own  damning  deeds,  and  insulted  the  majesty  of  the  laws,
shall  be  swept  from  our  land  and  leave  not  a  wreck  behind.  The
book  of  her  mysteries  will  be  opened — her  hidden  abominations
exposed! — her  profane  altars  will  be  overthrown — her  noisy  revels
will  no  longer  greet  our  ears— her  covers  will  be  opened  to  the
gaze  of  the  uninitiated :  for  her  iniquities  have  called  for  retribu-
tive justice*  The  voice  has  not  been  in  vain.  Freemen  have
asserted  their  dear  bought  rights,  and  Masonry  vanished  like  mist
before  the  sun.

A  brief  history  of  the  eventful  period  we  now  celebrate,  and
ai  the  characters  engaged  in  our  revolutionary  struggles,  may  not
be  unnecessary  to  nerve  our  arms  in  defence  of  those  principled
which  our  fathers  so  manfully  established  by  their  sufferings  and
privations.  They  were  men  stamped  with  the  principles  of  liberty
by  the  God  of  nature.  Driven  from  their  homes  and  their  land
of  nativity  by  those  who  should  have  been  their  protectors,  after
suffering  from  the.  hardships  of  a  long  tempestuous  voyage,  they
established  themselves  in  this  western  world  for  the  enjoyment
of  civil  and  religious  liberty,  the  natural  birthright  of  man.  Many
were  the  sufferings  and*great  the  privations  they  were  destined  to
experience;  but  men  who  for  the  enjoyment  of  rational  liberty  had
deserted  their  former,  residence,  and  broken  asunder  the  endear-
ing lies*  of  relationship,  were  not  to  be  driven  from  their  purpose,
nor  baffled  iu»their  attempts  by  such  trials..  They  saw  in  pros-
pective the  blessings  which  their  labors  would  purchase,  if  not
for  them,  for  future  generations.  This  supported  them  in  all  their
trials,  and  stimulated,  to. greater  exertions..  Their  labors  were-
crowned  with  success*  A  new  world  sprang  into  existence,  and
that  liberty  they  had  so  ardently  toiled  for,  richly  compensate^}
them  for  their  suffering.:  Such  characters  as  the  settlers  of  North
America,  are  worthy  our  highest  admiration.  Amidst  the  hard?
ships  and  sufferings  of  that  period,  they  were  not  unmindful  of
their  descendants  and  the  future  inhabitants  of  the  new  world.
While  struggling  against  the  rigor  of  a  new  climate,  engaged  in
repelling  the  attacks  of  their  savage  enemies,  they  laid  a  broad
and  deep  foundation  for  the  future  civil  and  religious  liberty  of
this  western  continent.  But  soon  the  colonies  had  new  difficult
ties  to  encounter.    After  the  savage  fires  were  extinguished,  an4

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


462  LI€HT   ON   MASONRY.

<he  war  whoop  had  ceased  to  arouse  them,  ami  after  subduing
the  wilderness,  agriculture,  manufactures,  and  eerftroeree,  steadily
advanced.  The  colonies  were  in  an  unparalleled  State  of  im-
provement, and  exhibited  a  determination  of  actual  independence.
The  suspicion  and  jealousy  of  the  mother  country 'was  aroused,
and  such  acts  were  enacted  as  tended  to  paralyze  the  efforts  ot
this  enterprising  country;  burdens  were  imposed,  tyrannical  laws
enforced,  and  a  cdurse  was  pursued  by  (he  mother  country  which
had  a  direct  tendency  to  bring  the  colonies  into  actual  depen-
dence upon  and  subjection  to  her  authority.  But  that  spirit  which
had  subdued  the  wilderness,  repelled  the  savage  foe,  which  had
in  fact  suffered  all  the  difficulties  of  the  new  settlement  for  the
enjoyment  of  civil  and  religious  liberty,  was  not  to  be  crushed,
even  in  infancy,  without  an  effort  for  preservation.  Although
not  all  the  actual  settlers  of  this  new  world,  yet  the  sufferings  of  *
their  fathers  were  fresh  in  their  memory,  and  they  exhibited  a  de-
termination not  to  disgrace  their  noble  sires.  Long  they  suffered
from  the  oppression  heaped  upon  them,  before  even  a  murmur  of
complaint  was  heard;  Encouraged  by  such  compliance,  new
acts  of  oppression  were  enacted,  and  the  old  ones  enforced  with
new  rigor.  Yet  still  such  was  the  deference  they  paid  to  Eng-
land, instead  of  repelling  it  with  force  and  asserting  their  rights
at  the  mouth  of  the  cannon,  a  remonstrance  against  those  ads,
and  a  petition  for' redress  of  grievance,  were  the  only  measures
pursued  by  the  Colonies.

Supposing  this  deference  to  be  servile  submission — that  in  their
destitute  situation,  without  arms,  without  an  army  or  a  revenue  to
raise  or  support  one,  they  were  incapable  of  resisting  their  supe-
rior force:  without  the  least  regard  for  the  welfare  of  thetr  Vawful
subjects,  the  mother  country  persevered  in  her  course,  and  at-
tempted to  subject  the  colonies  at  all  hazards  and  make  them
subservient  to  her  interest  atone.  In  this  they  reckoned  without
their  host.  The  spirit  of  liberty  had  not  forsaken  the  western
world.  Although  they  were  willing  to  be  dutiful  subjects,  they
were  unwilling  to  be  slaves.  The  toils,  sufferings,  privations,
and  conflicts  which  they  had  already  encountered  and  overcame,
were  not  forgotten;  neither  were  they  to  be  in  vain.  After  re-
monstrance and  petition  had  failed,  then  was  aroused  the  spirit
of  their  sires;  then  were  thejrwillmgto  hazard  their  all  in  defence
^f  that  freedom  which  they  had  so  anriensfy  sought  On  the
/memorable  4th  of  July,  1776,  appealing  to  the-  author  of  their
tfristence  and  the  God  of  armies  for  the  reetJtude  of  their  con-
duct; ihey  declared  themselves  free  and  independent;  pledging
<Seir  Hves,  their  fortunes,  and  their  saeredtoonorf  to  support  that

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


LIGHT    ON  MASONRY.  463

declaration.  What  an  eventful  period  was  that  when  men*  bear-
ing the  impress  of  the  heavenly  gift  of  liberty,  threw  off  all  alle-
giance to  the  mother  country,  declaring  the  most  powerful  nation
in  the  world,  in  war,  Atomies;  in  peace,  friends.  The  history  is
too  well  known  to  require  from  me  a  minute  detail.

A  colony  destitute  of  every  means  to  carry  on  a  warfare  with-
out an  army,  arms,  or  ammunition,  yet  trusting  to  the  righteousness
of  her  cause,  unfurls  the  banners  of  freedom  and  invites  her  vo-
taries to  rally  round  her  standard  and  be  free,  or  sacrifice  their
lives  in  the  conflict.  '  The  caH  was  not  in  vain :  the  angel  of
liberty  had  not  taken  his  flight  from  the  world.     The  patriotic  sons
erf  America  hear  the  call  and  leave  all  other  concerns  and  fly  to
the  battle-field.     The  conflict  for  independence  was  long  and
arduous;  but  liberty,  civil  and  religious,  was  the  reward  of  their
labors.     The  prouii  empire  who  refused  to  hear  the  remonstrance
of  her  children,  was  compelled  to  acknowledge  them  of  age  and
capable  of  governing  themselves.     The  conflict  over,  and  the
din  of  battle  no  more  heard  within  our  borders,  with  rapid  strides
America,  emerged  from  her  former  obscurity  and  took  her  stand
among  the  nations  of  the  earth.     Although  scattering  clouds  at
times  obscured  the  political  horizon,  they  were  soon  dispelled,and
liberty  with  its  cheering  rays  dispensed  its  blessings  upon  this
patriotic  people.      The  arts  and  sciences  dispensed  their  rich
blessings.      Manufactures  were  encouraged;  the  fruits  of  the
aoil  amply  repaid  the  husbandman  for  his  labors,  and  every
..sea  was  soon  visited  with  the  banner  of  the  United    States.
Her  settlements  were  extended,   and  the  wilderness  'budded
and  blossomed  like  the  rose;'  our  country  grew  in  strength  and
foretold  her  future  greatness.     England,  retaining  her  former  jea-
lousyr— justly  fearing  she  might  diminish  the  lustre  of  her  crown —
aaw  the  example  she  already  set  to  other  nations  to  throw  off  al*
legiance  to  sovereigns  and  be  free — basely  insulted  our  flag  and
infringed  upon  the  dearest  rights  of  Americans.     The  impress-
ment of  American  seamen,  into  the  service  of  a  foreign  power
was,  and  justly  too,,  considered  a  sufficient  cause  to  again  appeal
to  arms  for  *he  protection  of  our  privileges.     The  din  of  battle
again  resounded  through  our  land.     The  horrors  of  war  were
again  experienced;  but  die  proud  monarch  was  again  compelled
to  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  American  arms,  and  to  respect
<  the  American  flag*    The  honor  of  America  was  advanced  by  this
appeal  to  arms,  and  the  just  rights  of  the  United  States  was
recognized.    Our  star  spangled  banner  was  waved  in  triumph,
and  all  nations  of  the  world  compelled  to  respect  it    Peace  was
again  cestoied,  and  tke  visible  prosperity  of  the  republic  advanced
wthincreased  rapidity.


464  £1G*T  Oft   MASONfcY.

While  the  patriots  of  the  revolution  and  the  sages  of  America
were  resting  in  security,  proud  of  the  triumphant  march  of  free
principles  and  equal  rights,  supposing  the  free  institutions  of
America  were  fixed  upon  those  inimitable  principles  which  the
revolution  of  empires  could  never  effect,  a  secret  society  was
slowly,  but  with  a  steady  and  determined  step,  possessing  itself
with  all  the  power  and  danger  of  inonarchs*  Although  proves
bially  'jealous  of  their  liberty  and  ever  watchful  of  open- enemies
and  foreign  powers,  still  they  suffered  a  secret  combination  to
increase  in  strength,  numbers,  and  power,  until  it  had  become*  the
most  powerful  combination  in  the  world.  The'  Inquisition  of
Spain,  with  all  its  terrors  and  power,  possesses  less  means  to
carry  into  execution  its  designs.  Secret  societies  -of  different
kinds  have  at  various  periods  attempted  to  arise;  but  the  power-
ful voice  of  public  opinion  has  stopped  their  progress  on  the  very
threshold  of  their  existence.  A  society  composed  of  the  veterans
of  the  revolution,  whose  professed,  object  was  to  continue  those
offices  of  kindness  which  had  been  so  often  administered  in  then-
struggle  for  independence,  and -keep  in  remembrance  those  try-
ing scenes,  created  such  jealousy,  and  called  forth  the  energies
of  the  sages  to  such  an  extent,  that  the  society  soon  dwindled
away.  Although  public  opinion  was  so*  strong  as  to  stop  the  .
progress  of  such  a  society,  composed  of  members  who  had  been
tried  in  the  hour  of  adversity,  and  had  not  been  found  wanting —
men  of  sterling  integrity  and  unyielding  patriotism;  yet  the  Ma-
sonic institution  has  so  artfully  concealed  its  real  principles,  mat  >
it  has  extended  itself  over,  the  Union,  increased  its  members  to  an
alarming  number,  accumulated  funds  to  an  enormous  amount,
]H)ssessing  means  to  learn  its  enemies,  and  power  to  punish  them.
Although  the  production  ;of  a  foreign  power,  and  deriving  its  au-
thority from  foreign  lords,  still  the  American  republic  has  suffered
it  to  increase  to  its  present  gigantic  size,  until  they  openly  boast
of  possessing  sufficient  power  of  choosing  the  officers,  and
directing  the  government  of  the  United  States.  So  powerful
does  this  society  consider  itself,  that  its  members  mnblushingly
tell  the  citizens  of  America,  'You  have  a  secret  .society  existing
among  you  whose  power  and  influence  is  so  great  that  the  govern-
ment itself  cannot  put  it  down;  nay,  the  world  in  arms,  cannot
suppress  it'  This  is  no  picture  of  fancy;  neither  are  the  shades
too  highly  colored.  It  is  their  own  insulting  language  to  freemen,
openly  declared  and  published  to  theworldw  To  show  distinctly,
Vhat  they  conceive  to  he  the  power  and  influence  of  their  society,
permit  me  to  extract  from  a  public  address  delivered  by  one  of
their  devoted  subjects  on  one  of  their  festive  days.  After  de-
scribing its  pretended  origin  and  its  vast  increase  of  number,  hex*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON   MASOXAY.  465-

exclaims — 'What  is  Masonry  novel  It  is  powerful!  It  comprises
men  of  rank,  wealth,  office,  and  talent,  in  power  and  out  of  power,
and  that  in  almost  every  place  where  power  is  of  any  importance;
and  it  comprises  among  the  other  class  of  community  to  the  lowest,
in  large  numbers,  and  capable  of  being  directed  by  the  efforts  of
others,  so  as  to  have  the  force  of  concert  throughout  the  civilized
world.  They  are  distributed,  too,  with  the  means  of  knowing  each
other)  and  the  means  of  keeping  secret,  and  the  means  of  co-ope-
rating-^-in  the  desk,  in  the  legislative  hall,  on  the  bench,  in  every
gathering  of  men  of  business,  in  every  party  of  pleasure,  in  every
enterprise^  government,  in  every  domestic  circle,  in  peace  and
in  war,  among  its  enemies  and  friends,  in  one  place  as  well  as
another;  so  powerful  indeed  is  it  at  this  time,  that  it  fears  nothing
from  violence,  either  public  or  private;  for  it  has  every  me.ans  to
learn  it  in  season;  to  counteract,  defeat,  and  punish  it.  The
power  of  the  Pope  has  been  sometimes  friendly  and  sometimes
hostile*  Suppose  now,  the  opposition  of,  either  should  arouse
Masons  to  redress  its  grievances.  The  Jesuits  with  their  cun-
ning might  call  on  the  holy  brotherhood,  and  the  holy  brotherhood
on  the  holy  alliance,  and  they  might  all  come,  too,  and  in  vain.
For  it  is  too  late  to  talk  of  the  propriety  of  continuing  or  suppress-
ing Masonry,  after  the  time  to  do  so  has  gone  by;  so  good  or
bad  the  world  must  take  it  as  it  is.  Think  of  it,  laugh  at  it,  hate-
it,  or  despise  it,  still  it  is  not  only  what  I  have  told  you,  but  it  wilt
continue  to  be— -and  the  world  in  arms  cannot  stop  it — a  powerful
institution.'*

Such,  fellow  citizens,  is  the  description  of  the  influence  and
power  of  the  Masonic  institution,  by  one  of  its  orators,  and  pub-
lished to  a  public  of  freemen.  An  institution  whose  members
have  been  supported  and  protected  by  the  laws  of  this  republic,
until  it  assumes  its  present  enormous  power,  and  now  bids  de-
fiance to  die  government  which  has  fostered  them  in  its  bosom,
and  attempted  to  give  the  deadly  sting.  Shall  it  be  said  that  in
a  free  government  which  professes  to  distribute  justice  equally
upon  all,  whether  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  we  have  an  institution
which,  in  the  language  of  a  bravado,  boasts  that  its  strength  is  so
great  that  even  the  government  itself  is  unable  to  put  it  down;
that  it  is  too  late  to  talk  of  the  propriety  of  continuing  or  suppress-
ing Masonry;  so  good  or  bad  the  world  must  take  it  as  it  is?  Yes,
fellow  citizens,  we  have  an  institution  within  our  borders  and  in
the  midst  of  us,  composed  of  citizens  of  a  free  government,  which
proudly  boast  that  the' Jesuits  with  all  their  cunning)  the  Pope,  the

♦Oration  of  Brainwd,  before  Union  Lodge,  New  London,  Connecticut^
June  24, 1835.

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


466  LIGHT  ON    MASONRY.

combined  force  of  European  monarchy  all  concentrated;  nay,  the
world  in  anus,  cannot  stop  its  progress;  that  it  will  continue  to  be
what  it  now.  is,  a  powerful  institution,

Freemen  of  America!  have  you  been  faithful  guardians  of  your
liberties,  to  permit  this  institution  to  assume  such  powers?  Arc
you  now  faithful  sentinel**  and  will  you  allow  this  society  to  make
farther  progress!  This  boast  of  theirs  was  not  an  idle  tale,  told
to  amuse  a  few  fanatical  hearers,  hut  was  a  true  and  faithful  por-
trait of  the, power  Masons  actually  believed  their  institution  to
possess.  This  declaration  was  made  ami  published  to  the  world
in  1825,  when  it  was  unknown  their  force  would  require  concen-
tration to  possess  the  force  of  concert,  throughout  the  civilized
world,  to  their  proud  institution.  The.  disastrous  events  of  Sep-
tember, 1826,  show  conclusively  this  was  not  the  fancy  of  one
wild  brained  member,  but  the  opinion  of  the  whole  Masonic  bo-
dy. .  They  learned  its  enemy,  and  exercised  the  power  to  counter-
act, defeat,  and  punish  it  The  magazine  of  Niagara  tells  the
tale  of  their  punishment;  but  may  Heaven  avert  the  disastrous
event  of  their  counteracting  all  its  enemies.  A  brief  history  of
this  institution,  together  with  its  professed  objects,  and  a  delinea-
tion of  its  true  principles,  may  not  at  this  time  be  unappropriate.
To  deceive  its  votaries  and  Allure  the  unsuspecting  into  its  snares,
this  institution  attempts  to  trace  its  origin  to  the  earliest  period  of
existence;  that  it  was  the  gift  of  God,  to  man;  that  its  regular  or-
ganization w*»«Mectited  by  men  inspired  of  newtri  to  ameliorate
the  condition  of  man,  and  smooth  his  path  through  his  proba-
tionary existence.  Some  assert  it  to  be  the  handmaid  of  reugioq,
given  as  an  assistant  to  point  man  to  his  duty  here,  and  a  sure
way  of  gaining  admittance  to  the  abode  of  happiness,  or  Masoni-
cally  speaking,  to  the  Grand  Lodge  above.  They  have  heaped
a  mountain  of  pretensions  upon  it,  and  offer  no  proofs  Xo  support
their  assertions  but  Masonic  traditions,  which  are  too  absurd  to
be  listened  to  in  moments  of  reflection.  JVay,  s^o  absurd  are
many  of  their  traditional  histories,  that  the  greatest  devotee*  to
Masonry  has  been  compelled  in  his  public  addresses  to  pronounce
them  as  absurd,  contradictory,  and  ridiculous;  so  much  so,  that
the  candidate  can,  from:  that  Hory  Book  upon  which  she  requires
her  members  to  swear  allegiance,  prove  them  to  be  deceptions  of
the  basest  kind.  As  wettj  «ays.he,  might  wo  behevo  mat  the  sun
travels  round  the  .oarth -instead  of  tho  earth  round  the  sun,  as
to  believe  in  all  the  incongruities  which  are  taught  in  the  lodges,
[symbolic  degrees.]     Yet  so  success&Hy  has  she   trumpeted

*  See  Pallia's  Oration,  p.  43,  Sovereign  Inspector  General,

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON  M&60N&T.  46/

forth  her  own  praise,  so  completely  has  she  shrouded  herself  in
mystery,  that  a  majority  of  her  subjects  have  been  last  to  ascer-
tain her  real  origin;  and  for  that  very  reason  suppose  she  must
be  ancient;  and  have  claimed  as  her  supporters  the  kings  of  Is-
rael, the  prophets,  saints,  and  apostles,  for  no  other  possible  rea-
son than  Masonry  has  so  instructed  them.  Masonryj  it  is  true,
is  ancient,  as  the  laying  of  brick  and  stone  to  form  a  habitation  for
man;  but  the  supporters  of  speculative  Free  Masonry  despise  so
humble  an  origin  for  their  mistress,  and  assert  the  word  from
which  weir  institution  derives  its  name,  means  those  initiated  into
the  sacred  mysteries.*  The  true  history  of  Masonry  is  this: — A
society  of  honest  mechanics  was  formed  with  established  rules  to
govern  themselves  in  contracting  for  work,  and  also  for  governing
their  apprentices  and  journeymen,  Or  Fellow  Crafts.  Every  sym-
bol and  article  of  clothing  of  the  present  day  show  this  conclu-
sively. Whence  do  they  derive  the  origin  of  their  apron,  trowels,
plumblmes,  gavel,  &c.  if  not  from  operative  masons?  What  do
thousands  of  their  members  know  of  the  technical  terms  of  this
laboring  class  of  men,  such  as  the  entablature,  the  plinth,  the  die,
and  surbase?  In  the  mouth  of  operative  masons  .they  have  an  im-
portant meaning;  but  in  the  mouth  of  a  member  of  speculative
Free  Masonry  who  is  initiated  into  the  sacred  mystery,  they
mean  nothing.

In  the  years  1716  and  1717  an  attempt  was  successfully  made
to  convert  this  system  into  speculative  Free  Masonry;  and  when
at  length  many  of  different  trades  were  admitted,  they  raised  it
above  its  vulgar  origin  and  attempted  to  load  it  with  pretensions
of  honor  and  antiquity:  the  records  and  constitution  were  com-
mitted to  the  flames  that  they  might  not  give  a  lie  to  their  asser-
tions. Three  degrees  only  were  then  invented,  and  these  wero
in  1720  passed  into  the  different  nations  having  communication
With  Great  Britain.  At  this  time  her  historians  are  capable  of
giving  the  name  of  the  Grand  Master,  the  date  of  the  warrant  to
a  year,  and  the  place  where  it  was  sent.  Do  they  give  the  dates
of  warrants  or  the  operation  of  this  society  previous  to  mis?  They
are  as  silent  as  the  grave  from  the  days  of  king  Solomon  down  to
1717.  Could  they  not  have  given  the  history  with  the  same  ac-
curacy, previous?  The  first  introduction  of  Masonry  into  America
was  by  a  warrant  granted  by  the  Right  Honorable  and  Most  Wor-
shipful Anthony  Lord  Viscount  Montague,  Grand  Master,  &c*
dated  AprH  30, 1733;  and  the  firstlodge  ever  heid  in  America  wa?
hi  Boston,^hily,  1733.    This  lodge  granted  ten  warrants  for  other

*  Smith,  p.  35.    Hale's  Speculative  Mfcwnry,  p.  15.

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


468  LIGHT  Off  MlSOKftT.

*

lodges  in  different  parts  of  the  colonies.  Although  Masonic  his-
tory was  oarcroKto  give  the  days  in  which  the  lodges  met  in  after
veers,  yet  her  historians  give  no  account  of  her  progress  for  a  num-
ber of  years.  In  17S5  a  grant  was  given  by  another  individual
to  hold  a  lodge  in  the  same  place  of  the  former;  so  much  was  the
society  in  its  infancy  at  this  time  that  no  established  rule  or  or-
ganization was  formed,  and  an  infringement  was  here  made  upon
their  established  customs.  The  next  meeting  of  the  society
which  they  give  an  account  of  was  in  December,  1769vwhen,  the
historian  asserts,  was  celebrated  the  festival  of  the  Evangelist
in  due  form.  A  period  of  thirty-six  years  has  elapsed  since  the
formation  in  America  of  the  society  claiming  relationship  with  the
apostles,  ere  they  thought  of  commemorating  the  birthday  of  their
Christian  patron.  Tins  is  the  first  celebration  of  that  day,  within
my  knowledge,  on  record.  Little  or  no  mention  is  made  of  the
progress  of  light  until  1777,  when  a  new  lodge  was  formed.  la
so  little  repute  was  the  society  held  in  that  day,  that  it  &1I  into
disrepute:  once,  no  less  than  three  regular  formations,  are  men-
tioned. But  in  1783  a  committee  was  appointed  to  draft  resolu-
tions explanatory  of  the  power  and  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge.
Thus  we  find,  five  thousand  seven  hundred  and  thirty-three  years
after  its  pretended  existence,  a.  society  claiming  Solomon,  king  of
Israel,  for  their  Grand  Master— and  under  whose  patronage  a  re*
gular  organization  was  formed— a  society  which  they  pretend  has
continued  the  same  in  every  age;  whose  regular  or  constitutional
powers  were  not  de&neoV-ks  powers  were  now  established,  and
Masonry  slowly  extended  itself.

Until  the  nineteenth  century  Masonry  made  but  little  progress
in  America;  but  men  is  recorded  its  rapid  spread  over  the  United
States.  Not  a  village  could  make  its  appearance  in  4he  wilder-
ness, but  some  Mason  would  establish  a  lodge,  to  give  himself  and
brethren  an  undue  advantage  over  the  common  citizens.  Al-
though the  Masonic  historians  with  minuteness  relate  the  .particu-
lars of  the  formation  of  the  first  lodge  in  America,  giving  the  date
of  the  first  warrant  and  the  name  of  the  individual  granting  the
same,  with  all  his  Masonic  and  civil  titles,  he  gives  the  name  of
no  one  who  stands  as  godfather  to  a  chapter.  No  warrant  waa
ever  granted  by  any  power  to  hold  a  chapter  in  America.  The
Masonic  history  of  this  degree  in  mis  country  is  very  short  It
commences  \yy  saying,  'Previous  to  1797  no  Grand  Chapter  of
Hoyal  Arch  Masons  was  ever  organized  in  America:  previously
a  competent  number  of  companions  under  the  sanction  of  a  Mas-
ter's warrant,  exercised  the  right  of  Royal  Arch  Masons/

It  cannot  be  unknown  to  the  public  that  a  Master's  warrant

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC  .


I4GHT  Off  MASONRY  469

cannot  authorize  work  (as  Masons  say)  beyond  three  degrees.
Yet  a  number  of  men,  under  the  sanction  of  such  a  warrant,  exer-
cise the  authority  of  conferring  four  more  degrees  than  their  war-
rant authorizes.  Can  it  be  possible  that  degrees  founded  in  tfie
days  of  Solomon,  which  in  its  tradition  traces  events  whioh  ocr
curred  at  the  building  of  the  temple,  which  contains  important  se-
crets hid  from  the  world  for  the  period  of  .seven  hundred  years,
had  no  regular  form  of  government,  no  proper  manner  of  confer-
ring its  favors?  The  whole  truth  is,  these  degrees  are  an  inno-
vation on  what  Masons  call  ancient  Free  Masonry.  Its  intro-
duction called  forth  animadversions  from  the  warmest  supporter
of  Masonry.  The  first  formation,  I  believe,  was  of  Horodim
Chapter,  in  1787.  Mr.  Preston  in  his  first  editions  makes  no
mention  of  any  degrees  above  the  Master,  but  in  bis  later  he
mentions  the  formation  of  this  chapter,  and  expresses  fears  for
the  consequences  of  some  modern  innovations  in  Masonry .-~
Hutchinson's  Spirit  of  Free  Masonry,  published  in  1794,  treats
of  three  degrees  only;  Ahimon  Rezon,  published  in  London,
1764,  treats  of  three  degrees;  Jachin  and  Boaz,  published  in
1770,  gives  a  true  history  of  all  Masonry  then  in  existence,  but
is  silent  concerning  any  degrees  above  the  Master's.  The  book  of
constitutions  of  Massachusetts,  edition  of  1792,  which  professes
to  give  a  complete  history  of  Free  Masonry  both  in  England  and
Massachusetts,  makes  no  mention  of  any  degree  in  either  coun-
try above  the  lodge  of  Master  Masons;  Laurie's  history  of  Free
Masonry  gives  no  degree  above  the  Master's,  but  says  in  the
constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  that  all  ancient  St.
John  Masonry  is  contained  within  the  three  degrees;  Smith's  use
and  abuse  of  Masonry  declares  the  same  thing;  the  union  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England  with  the  dissenters,  ratified  in  London,
1803,  declares  all  ancient  Free  Masonry  contained  within  the
lodges  of  Master  Masons;  the  Free  Mason's  Library,  written
since,  declares  there  are  but  four  degrees  of  Masonry;  Mr.  Cole,
the  writer,  says,  'This  opinion  accords  not  only  with  the  senti-
ments of  the  oldest  but  best  informed  Masons  with  whom  I  have
conversed,  but  is  agreeable  to  written  and  printed  documents  in
my  i  possession.  The  following  degrees  which  have  been  manu-
factured within  a  few  years  past  are  mere  elucidatory  of  the  se-
cond, third,  and  fourth  degrees.'  He/then  enumerates  all  the
degrees  conferred  by  a  chapter.

At  the  time  these  authors  wrote*  Masonry  was  so  much  in  its
infancy  v  the  most  unblushing  writers  on  Masonry  dare  not  claim
the  degrees  conferred***  a  chapter  as  belonging  to  Free  Jlasonry;
but  as  they  bad  deceived  the  worlds  theo*gtn,  of,  the  three  de-

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


470  LIGHT  ON   MA80NRY.

grees,  tbetr  writers  soon  had  the  effrontery  to  claim  the  highest
degrees  as  ancient  We  soon  found  thera  enumerating  the  de-
grees of  Masonry  as  high  as  thirty-three,  and  in  1816  they  have
increased  as  high  a  forty-three,  and  at  this  day  they  attempt  t
claim  ninety-six  regular  degrees  in  Masonry,-  and  all  them  found-
ed in  the  days  of  Solomon;  and  some  of  them  go  hack  to  the
antideluTian  days  without  finding  any  mention  of  them  until  1786,
or  acknowledged  as  belonging  to  their  system  until  1797.  The
truth  is,  too  many  of  what  they  call  the  vulgar,  and  European  Prin-
ces, and  American  aristocrats,  could  not  meet  upon  a  level  with
the  vulgar  crowd;  and  in  later  days  the  managers  have  found  it
to  increase  the  Masonic  funds,  and  consequently,  their  own  in-
terest Such,  fellow  citizens,  is  the  brief  but  correct  history  of
Free  Masonry.

If  this  society  has  been  presumptuous  in  claiming  for  herself
antiquity,  no  less  effrontery  has  she  exhibited  in  her  professed
objects  and  avowed  privileges.  Jler  members  state  thai  the
principles  of  speculative  Free  Masonry  have  the  same  co-eternal
and  unshaken  foundation;  contain  and  inculcate  the  same  (ruth;
and  propose  the  same  ultimate  end  as  the  doctrines  of  Chris-
tianity taught  by  Divine  Revelation.  'The  pious  will  embrace
it  as  an  auxiliary  to  human  happiness  and  a  guide  to  a  blessed  ,
immortality.'  'Here  [that  is,  in  speculative  Free  Masonry]  we
view  the  coincidence  of  principle  and  design  between  the  Chris-
tian scheme  and  speculative  Free  Masonry,  with  that  pleasing
admiration  which  satisfies  inquiry,  and  clearly  proves  our  system
based  on  the  rock  of  eternal  ages.'  'Here  [in  a  lodge  room  J  we
are  taught  all  the  combined  and  unspeakable  excellencies  of  the
Omnipotent  Creator.  To  adore  that  Divinity  whose  goodness
and  mercy  are  so  astonishingly  displayed  in  the  salvation  of  man.'
'No  moral  character  is  regarded  by  the  Divine  Being  with  greater
complaisance  than  a  Mason.9  'Masonry  preaches  the  eternal
world  manifested  in  the  flesh.'  'Masonry  embraces  the  subject
matter  of  Divine  economy.'  'Masonry  presents  to  the  mind  the
co-equal  and  co-eternal  existence  of  the  adorable  Trinity.'  Such
are  the  principles  and  avowed  objects  of  Free  Masonry.  It  is
by  such  palpable  falsehoods  and  great  pretensions  she  has  allured
thousands  into  her  deceitful  snare.  If  such  are  indeed  its  prin-
ciples, who  would  not  be  a  Mason?  Who  would  not  belong  to  a
society  whose  members  are  regarded  by  the  Divine  Being  with
the  greatest  complacency?  It  is  with  such  pretensions  as  these
she  has  deceived  the  public  and  been  permitted  to  extend  hrir  do-
minions. So  powerful  have  been  her  bonds  and  such  influence
itas  she  exerted,  that  few  in  any  former  period  of  her  existence

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  ON   DUSONRt.  471

have>dared  to  deny  her  authority  or  lay  naked  her  hidden  enormi-
ties. An  opposition  to  Masonry  by  any  number  of  her  members
would  have  proved  their  inevitable  ruin.  She  arrogated  to  her-
self the  privilege  of  publishing  her  enemies  to  the  world  as  unwor-
thy and  vicious  vagabonds;  of  deranging  their  business;  and  her
influence  has  been  so  great  that  she  has  been,  able  to  do  it  effectu-
ally. Some  few  have  attempted  to  divulge  her  true  character— to
disrobe  the  harlot  and  expose  her  native  ugliness  to  the  common
gaze;  but  dearly  have  they  paid  for  their  temerity.  But  the  strong
bonds  which  bound  them  to  this  moloch  are  broken.  Men,  trust-
ing to  the  free  institutions  of  their  country  for  support,  have  dared
to  brave  Masonic  vengeance  and  expose  the  secret  enormities  of
this  dark  conspiracy  against  the  liberties  of  man;  she  has  filled
the  measures  of  her  iniquities;  her  crimes  are  of  a  scarlet  die;
they  have  aroused  insulted  freemen  to  investigate  her  principles;
she  must  pass  the  ordeal  of  public  opinion;  if  her  principles
are  compatible  with  our  free  institutions,  she  can  still  exist;  but
should  she  prove  to  be  a  hypocrite,  a  base  dissembler — if  in  her
secret  places  she  generates  the  principles  of  discord,  sanctions
the  crimes  of  her  votaries,  exercises  an  undue  influence  in  the
councils  of  the  nation,  she  must  fall,  and  receive  the  contempt  of
an  insulted  and  much  abused  public.

That  Free  Masonry  inculcates  such  principles  as  have  been
quoted,  the  most  csedulous  cannot  but  believe,  should  they  inves-
tigate one  single  moment.  The  same  authors  who  so  shame-
fully say  she  'is  in  body  ind  substance  the  whole  duty  of  man  as
a  moral  being,  and  its  precepts  equally  sacred  and  equally  pre-
cious with  Christianity;'  that  it  inculcates  the  deep  mysteries  of
the  Divine  Word,  in  whom  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwelt
bodily;'  say,  Hhe  wandering  Arab,  the  civilized  Chinese,  and  the
native  American;  the  rigid  observer  of  the  Mosaic  law,  the  fol-
lowers of  Mahomet,  and  professors  of  Christianity,  are  all  con-
nected by  the  mystic  union  in  one  indissoluble  band  of  affection.'
How  absurd  that  the  Jew  should  meet  in  good  fellowship  with  a
society,  which  teaches  that  in  Christ  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead
dwelt  bodily,  mat  the  wandering  Arab  should  unite  with  men  in
precepts  equally  sacred  and  precious  with  Christianity;  and  how
delighted  must  the  native, of  the  forest  be  with  all  these  Heavenly
principles  taught  in  the  Holy  Bible,  which  has  been  to  him  a
sealed  book,  whose  pages  of  inspiration  he  never  understood,  and
in  whose  precepts  he  never  was  instructed.  Masonry  becomes
all  things  to  all  men,  says  a  late  author.  'This  is  the  true  cha-
racter of  the  harlot:  she  loves  every  body  dearly,  and  him  with
whom  she  cohabits,  supremely;  she  also  reveres  the  Bible  m


y  Google


472  LIGHT  OS   MASONKV.

America,  the  Koran  in  Turkey/  and  the  Shaster  in  India,  a?
equally  worthy  of  acceptation,  and  revealing  the  whole  duty  of
man:  she  possesses  the  remarkable  quality  of  being  the  same
thing  and  its  opposite  to  any  extent  required.'  Instead  of  hearing
within  the  lodge  the  warning  voice  and  the  duty  of  man  explained,
often  is  heard  the  noisy  bacchanalian  revels,  occasioned  by  too
frequent  calls  from  labor  to  refreshment.  The  true  principles  of
Free  Masonry  are  not  found  in  her  Monitor,  neither,  are  they  pub-
lished by  her  orators.  These  are  prepared  for  the  public,  who
are  never  admitted  behind  the  scenes  to  view  the  actors  in  their
common  apparel.  They  consist  solely  in  her  senseless  ceremo-
nies and  unhallowed  obligations.  To  these,  then,  we  appeal.
Secret  societies  of  any  description  should  awaken  the  suspicion
of  freemen  living  under  a  government  whose  acts  are  open  to  the
scrutiny  of  all  its  subjects;  no  society,  however  limited  it  may  be,
should  be  suffered  to  be  regularly  organized  with  regular  and  sta-
ted meetings,  whose  objects  are  unknown.  Such  societies  are
not  the  product  of  republican  soil.  They  are  the  legitimate  off-
springs of  tyranny.  The  former  reign  of  darkness  and  despotism
were  effected  by  means  of  secret  societies.  To  secret  societies
can  be  distinctly  traced  the  conspiracies  which  have  convulsed
Europe.  When  a  society  becomes  so  regularly  organized  as  to
defy  the  scrutiny  of  government,  the  public  should  demand  an  in-
vestigation of  its  principles.  The  Masonic  society  has  become
regularly  organized,  possessing  one  grand  governing  power
which  extends  over  the  whole  United  States,  with  stated  periods
of  meeting;  has  elected  its  officers,  who  hold  them  for  seven
years;  and  its  real  object  is  unknown  to  the  public.  It  is  also
divided  into  smaller  governments  whose  authority  extends  over
every  part  of  the  state  in  which  the  same  is  held,  and  again  sub-
divided into  lesser  or  auxiliary  societies  who  exercise  authority
over  its  own  immediate  members,  but  all  subject  to  the  controll-
ing power  of  the  general  grand  society.  Thus  there  is  one
grand  connecting  link  existing  from  a  simple  lodge  to  a  Grand
Chapter,  Encampment  and  Consistory;  all  pursuing  one  grand  ob-
ject, and  that  object  unknown  to  all  but  those  initiated  into  their
sublime  mysteries.  The  members  of  this  society  are  found  in
every  important  station  in  the  Union.  In  the  legislative  hall,  on
the  bench,  in  all  the  executive  departments:  in  feet,  distributing
among  and  commingling  with  us  in  all  the  scenes  of  life,  and  all
of  them,  in  their  own  language,  'capable  of  being  directed  by  the
efforts  of  others.'  With  such  an  organization,,  its.  officers  regu-
larly chosen,  from  the  'Most  Puissant  Sovereign  Inspector  Gene-
ral/ 'Deputy  Sovereign  of  Sovereigns/  down  tothe  simple  'War*

Digitized  byVjC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  478

shipM  Master  and  Wardens,'  they  possess  to  an  alarming  degree
the  power  to  destroy  any  government,  however  pure  or  well  forti-
iied.  Although  a  small  minority,  yet  with  such  a  powerful  com-
bination, such  facilities  to  concert  its  plans  of  operation,  no  power
could  stop  the  progress  of  such  a  conspiracy.  In  their  own  lan-
guage, the  'Jesuits  with  all  their  cunning  might  call  on  the  Holy
Brotherhood,  and  the  Holy  Brotherhood  on  the  Holy  Alliance,  and
they  all  might  come  too,  and  in  vain,  for  the  world  in  arms  cannot
stop  it.'

Such  is  the  power  of  the  Masonic  institution,  unassisted  by
Other  means  than  the  regular  distribution  of  power.     But  the
danger  increases  ten  fold,  when,  in  addition  to  her  secret  meetings
sbe  binds  her  members  to  silence,  under  no.  less  penalty  than  an
ignominious  and  ~  inhuman  death,  to  for  ever  conceal  her  dark
conspiracies  from  the  world.     She  possesses  a  mystic  language
by  which  she  can  communicate  all  her  wants  and  make  known
her  objects,  unknown  to  and  un perceived  by  those  unacquainted
with  her  mysteries.     Whence  the  necessity  of  an  unknown  lan-
guage, hi  a  government  providing  for  all  tlfe  honest  wants  of  its
subjects?     Knaves  and  villains   only  need1  a  mystic  language.
Honest  men  need  them  not.     But  Masonry  possesses  them;  and
it  is  one  of  her  grand  principles  and  most  powerful  engine  to  car-
ry into  effect  her  secret  and  unwarrantable  acts.     Sbe  also
requires  her  subjects  to  swear  they  will  obey  all  regular  signs  or
summons,  given;  handed,  sent,  or  thrown  them  by  the  hand  of  a
brother,  or  from  the  body  of  a  lodge  or  chapter;  and  conform  to
all  her  rules  and  regulations:  should  she  require  her  summons
sent,  she  binds  her  members  to  perform  this  duty,  should  they  in
its  performance  have  to  do  it  bareheaded,  barefooted,  and  on
frosty  ground.     Thus  distributed,  and  possessing  such  powers,
no  government  can  be  safe,  should  they  arise  and  unite  their
strength  to  overthrow  it.     Should  her  plans  be  concerted  and
require  the  aid  of  her  subjects,  they  must  obey  all  her  summons,
no  matter  what  may  be  its  import,  and  arouse  the  energies  of  the
brethren  to  bring  them  to  the  field  of  battle,  or  act  as  occasion
might  require.     They  are  sworn  to  sound  the  alarm,  to  notify  all
should  they  do  it  barefoot  and  on  frosty  ground.     Provision  is
made  in  their  code  for  the  most  extreme  case  that  can  possibly
arise.     So  distributed  are  her  members  that  her  whole  force  can
receive  the  summons  and  concentrate  before  the  government  can
receive  the  alarm.     But  to  cap  the  climax  of  Masonic  govern-
ment, she  requires  her  subjects  to  solemnly  swear  to  conceal  the
secrets  of  a  companion,  murder  and  treason  not  excepted;     What
facilities  are  here  offered  to  the  ambitious!    What  safeguard  can.


474  LIGHT  Off   MASONRY.

avert  the  impending  tempest?  Without  the  least  danger,  a  mem-
ber of  this  infernal  institution  can  propose  to  citizens  of  this  free
government  schemes  of  treason,  should  he  do  it  with  a  charge  of
secrecy;  for  however  disposed  to  support  our  free  institution,  his
hearers  must  remain  for  ever  silent,  their  lips,  must  be  for  ever
hermectCaHy  sealed.  No  punishment  ean  be  awarded  to  so  dar-
ing villains,  should  they  corffide  the  secrets  only  to  worthy  com-
panions. No  government  was  ever  formed,  so  powerful  and
well  organized  for  plans  ot  operation.  Possessing  such  means,
well  may  she  bid  defiance  to  the  'world  in  arms!'

In  this  society  can  be  distinctly  traced  the  spirit  of  the  Ittumi-
ttati;  and  from  her  were  lighted  those  fire  brands  of  discord  which
•ravaged  France  in  her  revolution,  and  extinguished  all  rational
liberty.     What  security  can  we  possibly  possess  in  our  govern-
ment wkh  such  a  society?    (Should  she  be  suffered  to  increase  in
the  same  ratio  for  a  few  more  years  that  she  has  for  the  last  ten
or  fifteen,  from  her  dark  caverns  and  midnight  conclaves  would
issue  some  despotic  and  ambitious  t«3sar,  who,  with  wide  spread
desolation,  would  destroy  the  labor  of  our  fathers;  and  our  coun-
try, instead  of  the  land  of  liberty  and  happiness,  would  become  the
oppressed  land  of  Masonic  tyranny.     If  such  are  not  ber  objects,
^rhy  does  sbe  guard  herself  with  such  impenetrable  barriers?  Does
the  benign  Gospel,  whose  handmaid  she  styles  herself,  require
such  secrecy  and  such  impious  oaths?     Does  the  dispensation
*of  charity  require  such  regulations?     Does  the  propagation  of
•morality  require  such  aid?     No:  the  only  reason  for  her  shroud-
vig  herself  in  such  impenetrable  darkness  anaSmystery,  is  because
tier  'deeds  are  evil,  therefore  she  chooses  darkness  rather  than
light.'    The  only  satety  we  can  possess  consists  in  the  patriot-
ism of  her  leading  members,  and  this  has  been  the  great  bulwark
of  her  defence.     But  has  she  not  ambitious  aspirants  registered
4n  the  archives  of  her  'lodge?     Have  we  not  seen  the  man  who
lias  been  elected  to  the  second  office  in  the  gift  of  a  free  people,
attempt  the  overthrow  of  our  government?    What  security  then
is  this?    In  some  desperate  moment,  smarting  under  wounded
defeat,  some  powerful  and  ambitious  roan  may  survey  the  mate-
rials land;  concentrate  the  force  of  the  restitution  toofciain  the  ob-
ject of  his  ambition.     It  is  too  powerful  an  engine  to  be  ie&jn
•the  hands  of  any  man  or  set  of  merr;  and  our  own  safety,  onraJ-
f  legianee  to  our  eommon  country,  the  experience  of  fast  ages,  *B
unite  in  owi  loud  appeal  to  the  freemen  of  Amenea  for  the  total
igftBfliil*^^  Masonry.    fStwuid  our  reqwrtry,

however, escape  the  4*«mfog  dafa|er  of  ova^  ihiaee-

<5iety,;f*e  feculcates  those  ^  a  Wer  gn^wbkh  efeotualty

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  475

infringe  upon  our  dearest  rights  as  citizens  of  the  elective  fran-
chise.    By  requiring  her  members  to  swear  as  she  does  in  some
chapters,  to  'vote  for  a  companion  before  any  other  of  equal
qualifications;'  to  require  under  the  sanction  of  a  barbarous  oath,
to  always  'support  his  political  preferment  in  opposition  to  any
other;'  she  places  her  own  chosen  children  in  every  station  of  our
government;  and  they,  after  obtaining  complete  control  of  the
executive,  legislative,  and  judicial  departments,  must  and  will
dispense  their  patronage  upon  the  members  of  the  institution,
which  forms  a  complete  Masonic  government — a  government
within  a  government.     This  secret  influence-  exercised  in  our
elections  is  a -source  of  great  corruption,  and  attended  with  great
danger  to  the  government  itself.     The  firm  support,  the  main
pillar  of  a  republican  government,  is  the  free  choice  of  its  rulers
given  to  the  electors.     But  if  our  rulers  are  to  be  made  in  a  lodge
room,  and  all  the  brotherhood  bound  on  oath  to  support  such
candidates,  then  indeed  is  the  choice  taken  from  the  people,  and
eventually  the  overthrow  of  the  free  institutions  will  be  the  inevi-
table consequence.     When  her  obligations  require  her  subjects
to  assist  each  other  so  far  as  to  extricate  them  from  any  difficul-
ty, whether 'right  or  wrong,'  then  are  the  fountains  of  justice  pol-
luted, and  the  crime  becomes  sullied  by  Masonic  influence.     We
have  no  security  for  the  faithful  administration  of  justice,  while
such  obligations  are  administered  and  adhered  to.     A  felon  may
be  arraigned  for  an  offence  against  the  laws  of  his  country:  should
he  belong  to  this«ociety,  no  punishment  can  be  awarded  him  ade-
,  quate  to  his  crime.     Such  has  been  the  influence  of  Masonry
that  few  jurors  have  been  empanneled  without  finding  at  least
one  Mason  upon  it.     No  matter  if  a  Masonic  juror  has  taken  an
oath  a  'true  verdict  to  find,  according  to  evidence,'  he  has  taken
a  Masonic  obligation  paramount  to  his  civil  one,  and  of  much
more  horrid  import,  to  shield  the  culprit  whether  right  or  wrong;
but  should  this  fail  him,  he  gives  the  grand  hailing  sign  t6  the
executive,  and  the  sword  of  justice  is  averted.    Neither  have  we
any  security  for  the  impartial  administration  of  justice  between
map  and  man.  A.  Masonic  juror  is  bound  to  aid  a  brother  whether
right  or  wrong;  and  the  sanctity  of  a  witness'  oath  to  tell  the  'truth,
the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  hut  the  truth,'  is'lost  in  his  previous
oath  to  conceal  the  secrets  of  a  companion,  'murder  and  treason
not  we*pk4S    Such  obligations  have  a  direct  tendency  to  pro-
mote cranes  of  the  deepest  die.    It  emboldens  the  criminal  to
commit  greater  crimes  by  the  facilities  afforded  him  in  this  oath
*f  secrecy.    Few  persona  individually  commit  crimes  of  great
Magnitude;  and  fear  of  exposure  in  ordinary  cases  would  defer

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


476  LIGHT  ON  BUSONRY.

him  from  communicating  his  designs:  but  in  the  present  case  he
runs  no  risk.    Should  he  require  an  accomplice,  he  finds  a  Mas-
ter Mason*— he  confides  his  intended  crime  to  him;  with  perfect
knowledge  he  is  bound  by  an  oath  to  conceal  the  same,  should  it
be  less  than  murder  and  treason.     Should  it  exceed  these,  he
seeks  a  companion  Royal  Arch  Mason.     He  communicates  his
intended  purpose  to  him,  requires  his  aid:  perhaps  be  finds  a  com-
panion who  will  not  stoop  to  commit  such  acts;  he  readily  an-
swers, Do  as  you  choose,  but  recollect  you  are  bound  to  keep
the  secrets  of  a  companion,  'murder  and  treason  not  excepted.'
It  necessarily  familiarizes  the  young  noviciate  with  the  relation
of  the  most  horrid  crimes;  and  however  honest  he  may  be  when
first  caught  in  her  snares,  from  the  recital  of  actual  crimes,  he  is
impressed  with  a  belief  that  his  oath  of  secrecy  forbids  his  com-
,  municating  the  same.     It  emboldens  him  to  commit  crimes.     Is
it  uncharitahle  to  suppose  that  many  of  the  corruptions  which
have  been  committed  by  our  law  givers  have  been  done  by  the
members  of  this  society,  under  the  sanction  of  Masonic  obliga-
tions?    The  same  facilities  are  offered  for  her  subjects  to  effect
their  purposes  in  the  legislative  hall  as  in  the  commission  of
crime;  and  there  are  but  too  many  who  are  ready  to  accept  of  the
inducement*  she  holds  forth.     In  ordinary  cases,  the  offer  or  ac-
ceptance of  a  ;>ribe  would  be  attended  with  the  fear  of  detection;
but  in  this  case  there  is  none,  unless  some  members  should  con-
sider their  obligation  to  their  country  paramount  to  all  others.
An  account  of  this  kind  is  now  registered  on  the  journals  of  Con-
gress, when  a  bribe  was  offered  a  member  to  assist  in  some'
monied  concerns.     This  bribe  was  offered  under  the  sanction  of
Masonry.     The  words  were  as  follows: — *I  give  it  you  as  a  man
and  a  Mason,  and  hope  you  belong  to  that  society.'    If  one  case
can  be  found  where  the  exposition  was  made  because  the  person
was  not  a  Mason,  or  considered  his  duty  to  hie  country  of  more
consequence  than  that  to  Masonry,  have  we  not  reason  to  fear
that  too  many  of  the  mysterious  acts  of  our  lawgivers  springs
from  the  same  corrupt  source?     Too  much  facility  is  offered  for
bribery  and  corruption  in  so  important  a  branch. of  our  govern-
ment.     Fellow  citizens !  these  are  the  true  principles  of  Ma*
sonry  disrobed  of  all  her  pretensions.     Is  notu  society,  bound     .
by  such  ties  and  possessing  such  power,  which  has  exercised
such  influence,  of  great  danger  to  Our  republican  institutional
Are  you  not  bound  by  your  love  of  country,  and  by  the  blood  of
martyrs  who  fell  in  our  glorious  revolution,  to  take  decided  mea-
sures to  stop  the  progress,  and  entirely  overthrow  the  society  of
speculative  Free  Masonry!    Should  yoa  need  otbeT  facts  to

'Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRr.  477

stimulate  you  to  such  a  glorious  act,  review  the  bloody  scenes  of
September,  1826.  If  you  are  deaf  to  the  voice  of  reason,  let
those  transactions  added  to  the  conduct  of  this  society  since  that
period,  arouse  you  to  exterminate  this  hydra-headed  monster.
You  have  seen  the  crime  of  kidnapping,  arson,  and  murder,  com-
mitted by  members  of  this  society,  and  under  such  circumstances
as  leave  no  doubt  they  were  the  legitimate  productions  of  their
laws.  You  have  seen  the  public  press,  the  palladium  of  liberty,
silent  as  the  grave  on  these  important  subjects.  You  have  seen
those  guilty  of  such  acts  screened  from  punishment  through  Ma-
sonic influence.  You  have  seen  your  fellow  citizens  who  at-
tempted to.  investigate  this  transaction,  and  raised  their  voice
against  them,  visited  with  vindictive  and  malevolent  persecution
by  this  society.  All  this  you  have  seen;  and  are  you  not  prepared
to  act  on  such  an  occasion?  A  fearful  gloom  has  indeed  been
spread  around,  but  the  prospects  are  brightened.  Freemen  have
aroused  to  assert  their  rights.  They  have  indeed  boasted  that
the  government,  the  world  in  arms, is  unable  to  suppress  Masonry.
This  may  be  so;  but  public  opinion,  stronger  than  the  govern-
ment itself,  is  able  to  accomplish  this  glorious  work.  We  wish
not  to  array  the  world  in  arms  against  them.  It  must  be  a  blood-
less victory.  Their  principles  are  now  divulged.  This  day
commences  a  revelation  of  all  their  unhallowed  orgies.  Men,
trusting  to  the  protection  of  an  intelligent  community,  have  com-
menced, and  will  disclose  the  utmost  secrets  of  that  bloodstained
institution.  To  secure  victory,  it  is  necessary  that  these  revela-
tions be  promulgated  to  the  uttermost  bounds  of  our  country.  A
knowledge  of  the  facts  is  all  that  is  requisite  to  assert  the  rights
of  freemen.

Finally,  fellow  citizens,  in  view  of  all  that  you  have  seen,  in
view  of  the  scenes  of  violence  and  iniquity,  and  of  the  lawless
usurpation  of  your  rights,  which  have  passed  before  your  eyes  or
come  to  your  knowledge,  act  as  freemen;  fulfil  your  duties  as  the
possessors  of  this  soil,  which  was  once  drenched  with  the  blood  of
your  patriotic  sires.  Look  upon  the  remnant  of  this  invincible
band  now  before  you,  whose  hands,  once  nerved  with  almost  su-
perhuman strength,  are  now  trembling  with  age;  whose  heads,
now  whitened  with  years,  yet  blooming  with  honors,  are  fit  objects
of  your  veneration.  Look  upon  them,  and  read  in  their  wrinkled
brows,  as  well  as  in  the  history  of  their  bravery,  the  monition  to
act  as  becomes  their  offspring;  to  conduct  in  such  a  manner,
that  ere  their  bones  are  laid  by  the  side  of  their  compatriots,  they
may  behold  the  joyful  earnest  of  their  country's  greatness.  Re-
flect that  not  their  eyes  alone,  but  those  who  have  gone  before

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


478  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

them,  are  upon  you.  Go  to  your  homes;  behold  the  comparisons
of  your  bosoms  and  the  offspring  of  your  affections,  and  remem-
ber that  they  too  are  involved  in  the  welfare  of  our  land;  and  let  a
father's  care  and  a  husband's  love  inspire  your  devotion  to  your
country's  cause.  Thus  let  us  reflect — thus  let  us  act — and  heaven
will  bless  our  endeavors — shall  crown  our  land  with  blessing —
and  earth  shall  know  no  nobler  clime  than  ours.


ANTI-HAeOXlC  STATE  CONVENTION,

PROCEEDINGS

Of  the  Anti-Masonic  Jf.  F.  State  Convention,  held  at  Utica,  Aug.  4, 5,  andG,  1838.

At  a  convention  of  Anti-Masonic  delegates  from  the  different
counties  of  the  state,  held  at  the  Baptist  church  in  the  village  of
Utica,  on  the  4th  of  August,  1828,  prayer  by  Deacon  Jonathan
Olmstead,  the  following  proceedings  were  had:  The  Hon.  James
Hawks,  of  the  county  of  Otsego,  was  chosen  president,  and
Thomas  C.  Green,  of  Saratoga  county,  and  Seth  Abbey,  of  Jef-
ferson county,  were  chosen  secretaries.

The  resolutions  adopted  by  the  Le  Roy  convention  in  March
last  were  then  read.     The  following  resolutions  were  adopted:

1.  Resolved,  That  a  committee  of  five  be  appointed  to  draft
resolutions  expressive  of  the  sense  of  this  meeting  in  relation  to
Free  Masonry.

2.  Resolved,  That  a  committee  of  one  from  each  county  rep-
resented be  appointed  to  report  what  measures  ought  to  be  adopt-
ed to  counteract  the  influence  and  destroy  the  existence  of
Masonic  societies.

3.  Resolved,  That  a  committee  of  five  be  appointed  to  prepare
an  address  to  the  people  of  this  state.

On  the  first  resolution,  the  following  persons  were  appointed:
Theodore  F.  Talbot,  T.  Fitch,  J.  C.  Morris,  Alexander  Sheldon,
James  Dean.

On  the  second  resolution,  the  following  persons  were  appointed;
Samuel  Humphrey,  Henry  Parsoll,  jun.,  Laban  Hazeltine,  Rus-
sell Waters,  Thomas  C.  Love,  H.  A.  Read,  Alfred  Guthrie.
James  Percival,  Thomas  Beekman,  Timothy  Childs,  George  Da-
vis, Bates  Cooke,  A.  McAllister,  Calvin  Peck,  Nathan  Pierce,
Gideon  Hard,  William  Hawks,  William  Utter,  Thomas  C.  Green.
Ansel  Bascom,  Thomas  Lewis,  Israel  J.  Richardson,  Morris  F.
Sheppard.

On  the  third  resolution,  the  following  persons  were  appointed;


d  by  Google


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  479

Timothy  Child*,  John  C.  Morris,  Herbert  A.  Read,  Frederick
Whittlesey,  Bates  Cooke.

The  following  preamble  and  resolution  were  then  adopted:
Whereas  the  title  and  prospectus  of  a  book  entitled  'Light  on
Masonry.,  &c.  &c.'  compiled  by  David  Bernard,  has  been  read
to  this  convention;  and  entertaining  the  fullest  confidence  in  the
integrity,  zeal,  and  ability  of  the  compiler;  and  being  deeply  im-
pressed with  the  importance  of  the  proposed  publication  to  the
cause  of  truth  and  justice,  therefore

Resolved,  That  we  recommend  the  compiler  to  proceed  with-
out delay  in  the  publication  of  his  work;  and  we  recommend  it
to  the  attention  and  patronage  of  all  the  friends  of  truth  and  the
cause  of  civil  liberty  throughout  the  world.  The  convention  ad-
journed till  nine  o'clock  the  next  day.
4  Met  pursuant  to  adjournment.

The  reading  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree  being  called  for,  it  was
requested  that  Mr.  H.  A.  Read  perform  that  duty,  which  was  done
by  him  in  a  plain,  clear,  and  distinct  manner:  also  the  Knights
of  the  Christian  Mark  and  Guards  of  the  Conclave.

Mr.  Love,  as  chairman  for  the  second  resolution,  reported  as
follows:  which  report  was  adopted  by  the  convention.

The  committee  appointed  to  consider  and  report  what  measures
ought  to  be  adopted  to  counteract  the  influence  and  destroy  the
existence  of  Masonic  societies,  in  addition  to  the  measures
already  adopted,  report,

1.  That  it  is  expedient  to  recommend  to  the  people  of  the  se-
veral counties  of  this  state  to  establish  free  presses  in  their  re-
spective counties,  and  to  place  the  same  under  the  control  of
discreet  and  competent  persons  who  will  fearlessly  publish  the
whole  truth,  in  violation  to  the  principles,  obligations,  and  tendency
of  speculative  Masonry.

2.  That  it  is  expedient  to  appoint  an  Anti-Masonic  General
Committee  for  the  state  of  New  York,  to  whom  the  Anti-Ma-
sonic Central  Committees  for  the  several  counties  may  report
themselves.

3.  That  it  is  expedient  to  recommend  to  the  people  of  the  se-
veral counties  of  this  state,  who  have  already  appointed  a  Cen-
tral Committee,  to  appoint  such  and  report  themselves  to  the
General  Committee.

4.  That  it  is  expedient  to  recommend  to  the  people  of  the  se-
veral towns  of  this  state  to  raise  money  by  contribution,  and
transmit  the  same  through  their  respective  county  committees  to
the  General  Committees,  for  the  purpose  of  defraying  the  expense
that  has  already  been  incurred;  and  that  it  may  become  necessary


y  Google


480  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.

to  expend  in  the  publication  and  distribution  of  facts  and  docu*
ments  exposing  the  outrages  and  iniquities  of  the  Masonic  insti-
tution.

5.  Thai  it  is  expedient  to  petition  the  legislature  of  this  state  to
prohibit  the  use  or  administration  of  extra  judicial  oaths.

6.  That  it  is  expedient  for  this  convention  in  pursuit  of  the
good  objects  to  be  accomplished,  wholly  to  disregard  the  two  great
political  parties  that  at  this  time  distract  this  state  of  the  Union,
in  the  choice  of  candidates  for  office;  and  to  nominate  Anti-Ma-
sonic candidates  for  Governor  and  Lieutenant  Governor.

7.  That  it  is  expedient  to  publish  in  a  pamphlet  form  the  pro*
ceedings  of  this  convention,  together  with  such  disclosures  of  the
secret  ceremonies  and  blasphemous  rites  of  the  Masonic  institu-
tion, as  have  been  made  to  this  convention.

Resolved,  That  the  following  persons  compose  the  General
Central  Committee  of  tho  state  of  New  York: — Samuel  Works,
Harvey  Ely,  Frederick  F.  Backus,  Frederick  Whittlesey,  Thur-
low  Weed.

Resolved,  That  the  address  this  day  delivered  by  T.  ¥.  Talbot,
Esq.  be  published.

Adjourned  until  to-morrow,  at  eight  o'clock.

Met  pursuant  to  adjournment.

Resolved,  That  this  convention  nominate  Francis  Granger,
of  Ontario,  as  candidate  for  the  office  of  Governor  of  this  state;
and  John  Crary,  of  the  county  of  Washington,  for  the  office  of
Lieutenant  Governor  of  this  state.

Resolved,  That  the  General  Central  Committee  shall  have  au-
thority to  notify  the  meeting  of  a  state  Anti-Masonic  Convention,
to  meet  hereafter  at  such  time  and  place  as  the  committee  in  the
exercise  of  a  sound  discretion  shall  designate.

Resolved,  That  this  convention  recommend  the  publication  and
circulation  of  a  book  entitled  Free  Masonry,  by  a  Master  Ma-
son, &c.

Resolved,  That  the  thanks  of  the  convention  be  presented  to
the  Second  Baptist  Church  and  Society  of  Utica,  for  the  kind  and
generous  offer  of  the  house  of  public  worship  for  the  purpose  of
tiiis  convention.

Resolved,  That  the  thanks  of  tins  convention  be  presented  to
the  president,  for  the  able  and  impartial  manner  in  which  he  has
presided  over  the  deliberations  of  this  convention.

Resolved,  That  the  proceedings  of  this  convention  he  signcti
by  the  president  and  secretaries,  and  published  tinder  the  direc-
tion of  the  General  Central  Commitfec.


y  Google


LTOHT  ON  MA80NRY.  481

ItodiUhuimd  Addreuadotfedbythe  JbM-JUtftic  State  Ccnvtntiti,  held  at
,  UHeaontheAth, 5th>and Gth  August,  1828.

.  Rctolvedy  That  in  a  republican  government  the  existence  of
an  institution  exercising  a  secret  and  irresistible  control  oyer
poMtc  opinion,  in  dangerous  to  the  rjghts,  and  may  be  foul  to  the
liberties  of  the  people.

Rttokti,  That  it  b  the  right  and  the  duty  of  the  citizens  of
these  United  Siaiee  to  use  ell  lawful  means  to  annihilate  an  institu-
tion which  has  shown  itself  capable  of  contriving,  efieetmg,  audio
a  groat  degree  concealing  the  crimes  of  kidnapping  and  murder.

Jtamfoeig,  That  we  will  not  give  our  suffrages  to  any  member
of  the  Masonic  fraternity  who  adheres  to  the  institution,  or
acknowledges  the  binding  .force  of  their  wicked  and  blasphemous
obligations;  nor  in  any  manner  directly  or  indirectly  promote
their  election  to  any  office  or  place  of  public  trast

Booked,  That  those  members  of  the  institution  who  hare
courageously  broken  the  shackles  of  Masonry,  and  thus  restored
themselves  to  the  lull  enjoyment  of  the  eights  of  freemen,  have
set  anexample  highly  worthy  of  imitation,  and  have  entitled  them-
selves to  the  approbation  of  their  feUow  citk&eas.

Rtpjhed,  That  this  convention  fed  a  deep  sense  of  die  grati-
tude doe  to  those  resolute  men  who  have  torn  the  covering  from
Ifoee  Masonry,  and  exposed  hex  deformity  and  vileness.

Resolved,  That  the  control  which  Free  Masonry  has  hereto-
fore exerted,  and  still  does  exert,  over  the  liberty  of  the  press,  is
conclusive  proof  that  her  existence  and  influence  is  irreconcilable
with  the  full  possession  and  enjoy  ment  of  our  civil  rights.
*  Rcsohed,  That  the  power  which  for  nearly  two  years 4>aet
has  baffled  every  effort  to  discover  and  bring  to  justice  the  per-
petrators of  outrage  and  murder,  is  fearfully  and  alarmingly  great:
it  cannot  be  suffered  to  exist  without  the  utmost  danger  to  the
personal  safety  of  every  citizen;  and  must  be  destroyed,  or  it  will
destroy  the  government

Mr.  Whittlesey,  frotn  the  convnittee  appointed  for  that  purpose,
reported  the  folio  wing  address,  which  was  read  and  unanimously
adopted:

TO  THE  CITIZENS  Of  THE  STATE  OF  NEW  YORK.

Fellow  citizen* — The  principles  and  obligations  of  the  institu-
tion of  Free  Masonry  have,  for  more  than  a  year  past,  been  the
BQoject  of  deep  and  interesting  investigation  by  citizens  in  cer-
tain portions  of  the  state*  This  institution,  has  existed  in  this
country  ever  since  the  foundation  of  the  government.  Profess-
Rr
•


482  LIGHT   ON  MASOftKTV

ing  to  rapport  morality  and  religion,  to  aid  the  government,  and*
to  be  the  almoners  of  an  extended  system  of  charity,  it  was  suf-
fered to  gain  footing  on  our  soil;  With  these  high  pretensions  it
was  admirably  calculated  to  gam  proselytes.  The  seal  of  se-
crecy which  was  wisely  placed  upon  the  lips  of  the  uninitiated,
prevented  any  exposure  of  the  hollowness  of  these  pretensions
to  the  world;  and  the  piety,  the  public  reparation,  or  private  worth
of  every  novice,  were  made  to  add  to  the  character  of  an  institu-
tion which  he  had  ignorantly  joined.  With  the  rapid  and  mv-
paralleled  growth  of  our  country  this  institution  extended  itself,
and  its  numbers  increased.  The  young  and  thriving  settlements
of  the  west  have  been  made  the  threatre  of  its  extension*  and
not  a  village  in  our  fair  end  flourishing  country  1m  grown  intoany
kind  of  importance,  but  the  enterpri2e  of  the  brethren  of  the  mys-
tic tie  have  established  the  secret  empire  of  the  lodge  within  it.
They  have  endeavored  to  identify  themselves  as  much  as  possi-
ble with  every  thing  of  a  public  er  imposing  character.  *  At  the
foundations  of  our  public  buildings;  *t  the  commencement  of  our
great  projects  of  internal  improvement;  in  the  celebration  of  our
festal  days,  they  have  come  forth  with  flaunting  banners,  their
gilded  insignia,  their  pasteboard  Crowns,  and  mimic  mitres,  to
catch  the  breeze  of  popular  favor— to  impress  respect  for  tbrtr
almost  divine  character,  or  a  salutary  awe  *of  their  invisible
power.      t

The  Curiosity,  the  cupidity/the  vanity*  and  ambition  of  man,

have  added  to  their  numbets  new  and  numerous  votaries,  until

this  institution  has  spread  itself  throughout  our  whole  country;

has  established  a  lodge  in  every  village  and  town  in  our  wide  atfd

flourishing  state;  has  extended  itsramifications  into  every  shape

of  society;  and  has  interwoven  itself  in  all  our  institutions.     Its

adepts  may  be  found  in  the  executive  chair,  in  the  legislative

hall,  on  the  bench  of  justice,  in  every  civil  office  down  to  the

very  lowest  and  least  influential  knpwn  to  our  laws;  yea,  and

even  in  the  sacred  desk  and  among  those  who  minister  at  the  holy

altar.     Their  members  had  become  an  host;  their  influence  had

increased  to  a  boundless  extent;  and  in  the  wantonness  of  their

invisible  power  they  had  dared  to  boast  that  the  laws  were  too

weak,  that  the  government  was  too  feeble  to  check  them;  and

this  society,  so  strong  in  numbers,  so  boundless  in  influence,  and

..so  boastful  of  power,  and  bound  together  by  secret  ties  of  whose

nature  we  know  nothing;  hold  their  meetings  undercover  of  night,

and  in  this  freehand  guard  the  entrance  of  their  secret  cooclave*

with  naked  swords.     The  citizens  of  raese  Unhe^SJates  should

be  jealous  #f  their  Kberjies,.  for  they  were  bought  wHh  the  blood

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


L?€IIT   09  MASONRY.  483

of  their  fathers;  (and We  are  but  the  immediate  offspring  of  those
who  paid  so  dear  a  price;)  they  should  watch  every  insidious  en-
croachment upon  their  rights  in  whatever  covert  manner  they  are
assailed,  for  those-  rights  are  the  rich  legacy  from  sainted  sires
entrusted  to  us  to  hand  down  unimpaired  to  posterity.  And  they
are  wont  to  be  jealous  and  watchful  of  such  dear  privileges,  and
to  resist  promptly  and  firmly  every  encroachment,  whether  open
or  covert,  upon  their  rights;  and  it  is  surpassing  strange  that  an
institution  like  Free  Masonry,  whose  principles  are  unknown,
whose  obligations  are  secret,  and  whose  meetings  are  held  under
the  cover  of  darkness,  should  have  been  suffered  to  extend  itself
into  such  multiplied  ramifications  without  even  suspicion  or  in-
quiry. The  very  genius  and  spirit  of  our  government  are  essen-
tially opposed  to  the  existence  of  such  institutions.  Our  fellow
citizens  desire  to  see  every  thing  publicly  discussed,  and  openly
submitted  to  the  ordeal  of  public  opinion;  and  are  prone  to
suspect  that  when  all  is  not  open  ail  is  not  honest.

Other  secret  societies  after  a  brief  existence  have  been  frown-
ed into  disgrace  by  public  opinion;  but  the  Masonic  institution  has
grown  with  the  growth  of  our  country  until  it  has  become  so  wan-
ton in  its  strength  that  it  has  dared  to  set  at  defiance  every  effort
to  pull  it  down.  It  might  have  gone  on  to  this  day,  still  increas-
ing in  strength,  bad  they  not  ventured  to  inflict  the  penalties  of
their  secret  obligations  upon  the  person  of  a  citizen  of  our  coun-
try. The  history  of  the  outrage  upon  William  Morgan,  it  is  not
important  for  us  to  detail  at  length.  If  not  known  to  you  now,
it  may  be  found  duly  authenticated  in  the  documents  within  your
reach.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  in  September  1826,  he  was  seized
under  color  of  legal  process  at  Bata via,  carried  to  Canandaigua,
confined  in  jail,  released  by  a  pretended  friend,  seized  at  the  very
threshold  of  the  prison,  and  with  ruffian  violence  thrust  into  a
carriage  and  transported  by  relays  of  horses  to  the  frontiers  of  the
United  States,  and  confined  in  the  magazine  of  Fort  Niagara;
1  hat  he  was  there,  after  cool  and  mature  deliberation,  inhumanly
put  to  death.  Numerous  individuals,  and  all  of  them  Free  Ma-
sons, were  engaged  in  planning  this  outrage;  numbers  in  differ-
ent and  distant  lodges  were  concerned  and  aided  in  it.  'Men  of
respectability  and  character,  some  of  them  high  in  civil  and  mili-
tary office,  assisted  m  the  execution  of  this  plan;  and  the  outrage
and  murder  was  perpetrated  to  pay  the  penalty  of  the  Masonic
oath.  The  rumor  of  these  outrages  alarmed  the  free  citizens  of
the  west  A  freeman  had  been  torn  from  his  family  and  his  home.
The  liberties  of  the  country  has  been  violated  in  his  'person;
nnd  however  insignificant  that  individual  may  have  -been,  tljat


y  Google


494  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.

violation  must  be  atoned.  Investigations  and  inquiries  wore
metitQte4«MlUieakiafQUDdtii«taMe  whole  Mason*  fratemky
were  disturbed  The  characters  of  these  investigating  k,  wen
abased  awl  vilified;  their  nrotives  impugned;  and  vengeance  de-
nounced against  them.  Every  impediment  that  they  could  threw
in  the  way  of  investigation  was  done;  every  obstacle  which  inge-
nuity could  contrive  was  opposed  to  the  inquiry.  The  public
press  was  overawed;  its  editors  were  threatened  and  denounced
if  they  ventured  to  breathe  the  least  word  in  relation  to  those  out-
rages. This  course  shed  a  broad  and  fearful  light  upon  the  trans-
action; it  exposed  Masonry  in  its  true  colors,  and  taught  all  who
were  not  wilfully  blind  to  look  to  toe  institution  and  not  to  a
few  misguided  men,  as  the  authors  of  die  outrage,  and  to  bold
that  and  its  principles  responsible  for  it.

The  whole  matter  began  to  assume  a  new  complexion.  The
enormity  of  the  individual  outrage,  great  as  it  was,  began  to  be
overlooked  in  the  fearful  dangers  which  the  reflecting  began  to
see  were  concealed  beneath  the  mantle  of  secret  societies.  The
principles  of  an  institution  which  had  been  heretofore  thought  to
contain  something  toe  sacred  and  veoemted  to  be  lightly  ap-
proached, began  now  to  be  discussed  with  openness  and  boldness.
Its  dangerous  principles  began  now  to  be  commented  upon,  and
its  evil  tendency  pointed  out;  many  of  the  honest  and  virtuous  of
its  members*  emboldened  by  this  freedom  of  discussion,  made
further  disclosures  of  the  secret  obligations;  and  the  oatns  which
hound  the  higher  degrees  togeftet  war*  made  public  This  was
a  further  and  fearful  cause  of  alarm.  The  cStfeenslooked  about
them  and  shuddered  at  the  progress  of  that  dreadful  poison  which
had  so  nearly  approached  the  vitals  of  our  liberties.  Fellow  ei-
tisens,  we  owe  these  men  very  much  who  have  laid  open  this  in-
stitution in  its  bare  and  naked  deformity  to  the  gaae  of  the  world
The  truth  of  these  disclosures  has  beea  avouched  by  so  masy
names  whose  characters  are  above  reproach  for  private  worth
and  virtue,  end  whose  motires  a*e  above  suspicion*  that  on  this
subject  we  are  net  at  liberty  to  entertain  a  doubt  The  persecu-
tions and  vindictive  malice  with  whichthe  business*  the  prospects,
$he  reputations  and  cba*aoters  of  these  man  have  been  assailed,
S&mitb  other  evideftc*  if  «oAer  were  wanting,  -of  the  truth  of  the
obligation  which  mcukntes  the  'pointing  turn  out  to  the  world  as
an  unworthy  and  visions  vagabond,  by  opposing  bis  interest,  by
deranging  bis  burin***,  and  trnotaefrmg  his  character  after  him
wherever  be  may  go,  by  exposing  h'm  to  the  contempt  of  the
world  during  bis  whole  natural  life'  It  should  be  our  duty  to
see  that  these  denunoiations  mil  harmless.    These  obligations


y  Google


ttGHT  ON  MASOKBY.  485

arc  now  before  the  world;  and  the  whole  method  of  proceeding
in  the  higher  degrees  will  soon  be.  These  contain  the  principles
and  essence  of  Free  Masonry.  It  is  tothis  subject,  fellow  citi-
zens, we  wish  to  draw  your  attention.  This  is  not  a  common
occasion  or  a  common  topic.  We  have  enlisted  ourselves  in  sup-
port of  no  individual  and  of  no  political  party.  We  have  con-
vened to  take  measures  which  shall  secure  the  rights  of  citizens
sacred;  an  impartial  administration  of  the  laws;  and  a  due  rever-
ence for  religion.  We  honestly  conceive  the  spirit  of  Free  Ma-
sonry is  essentially  opposed  to  these;  and  we  wish  to  give  you
timely  warning  of  the  dangers.  It  cannot  he  necessary  to  go  into
a  detail  of  these  dangers  to  convince  you  that  they  are  real  and
not  imaginary.  It  would  require  but  slight  reasoning,  one  would
think,  to  convince  you  that  secret  societies  in  a  free  government  are
in  their  best  shape  useless,  if  not  positively  dangerous*  Bat  when-
you  are  told  that  the  obligations  which  Free  Afasons  take  upon
themselves  bind  them  'to  vote  for  a  companion  before  any  other
person  of  equal  qualifications;9  to  always  support  his  'military
fame  and  political  preferment  in  opposition  to  another;' to  aid
and  assist  a  brother  in  difficulty  so  far  as  to  extricate  him  from
the  same  'whether  he  be  right  or  wrong;'  to  keep  his  secrets  in.
all  cases  inviolably,  'murder  and  treason  not  excepted,**  and  this
under  the  denunciation  of  the  most  horrid  penalties  which  human
ingenuity  could  invent — you  need  no  argument  to  convince  your
reason  that  such  an  institution  is  at  war  with  the  very  genius  and
spirit  of  our  free  government;  that  it-is  hostile  to  aft  equal  rights;
that  it  is  a  barrier  to  the  impartial  administration  of  justice;  that
it  is  fa^al  to  the  blood-bought  liberty  which  has  descended  to  us
from  our  sainted  fathers*  How  easy  is  it  for  them  under  these
obligations  to  obtain  ^he  control  of  every  department  of  govern?
ment,  and  to  dispense  their  patronage  so  that  the  whole  constitut-
ed authorities  of  the  land,  from  the  president's  chair  to  the  con-
stable's staff,  shall  be  vested  in  these  brethren  of  the  mystic  tie?
and  will  they  discharge  their  official  duties  faithfully?  will  they
regard  their  oaths  to  support  the  constitution?  wHl  they  regard
their  oaths  of  office?  They  cannot  if  they  would:  they  are  bound
by  invisible  chains;  they  are  shackled  by  oaths  of  more  horrible  im-
port; with  sanctions  more  highly  penal  than  any  obligations  which
bind  a  man  to  his  country,  or  to  the  due  observance  of  her  laws.
And  what  security  have  we  for  the  impartial  administration  of  jus-
tice? The  ermine  of  the  bench  is  sullied  by  Masonic  contamina^
tion.  The  juror's  oath  is  but  a  rope  of  sand  in  comparison  with
his  obligation  to  extricate  a  brother  'whether  he  be  right  or
wrong, '    The  avenging  sword  of  justice  is  stayed  in  tjie  hands/  of

Rr2  ;

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


486  Wi*T  ^i  W30jr*3r»

tbe  execution*!*;  end  <&•  fwrcjoqppg  power,  in  *trict  consonance
with  thof*c/f  t  oath,  must  be  in^i^o^  to  »li%tcli  a  ^u^U  brother
ftwa  |be  punishment  due  bj  the  few*  jto  bis  copies.  The  wit-
ness, too,  who  layehitbcnd  upo*  the  Holy  E  vajagejist,  and  swears  T
in  the  presence  of  God  and  his  fellow  mer^  to  tell  tbe  truth,  the
whole-  trtttb>  wd  nothing  hut  the  truth,  cannot  apd  dace  not  dis-
close the  seosete  of  a  brother,  even  though  bis  h#pds  have  been
imbrued  in  hts-ewn  Other's  Mood,  or  pwdly  plotted  the  ruin  of
tbe  country  of  his  birth.  Fejlow  citizapg,  is  this,  .picture  over-
drawn?  haw  yon  no*  tinder  your  owp  oJ>seWation  seen  members
of  the  fraternity  elevated  to  office  ,in  a#  inexplicable  manner?
have  you  not  seen  the  course  of  justice  stayed  the  guilty  felon
escaped  by  mepns&r  which  y^u.  caonpt  account?  It  is  time  at
least  that  the  principle*  °f  Pw  Afow/P/  should  he  understood,
if  they  lend  to  the  *bove  results,  *s  they  strike  at  the  very  exist-
ence of  government,  at  tbe  very  foundation  of  our  rights,  and  at
theaneaitialadjiinisW^c/

The  institution  is  not  moro  hostile  to  government  aad  the
cause  of  justice,  than  it  is  apposed  to  morality  and  -religion.
That  institution  oannot  be  moral  which  encourages  a  criminal
confidence,  and  which  protects  by.  her  obligations  bad  men,,  and
inculcates  the  concealment  of  crime.  The  landmarks  between
virtue  and  vice  ore  thu« broken  down,  af>d  that  nice  delicate  mo-
ral sense  which  (distinguishes  a  virtuous  .man,  is  thus  in  a  great
measure  efface^

Free  Masonry  too  clause  connexion  with  the  iamiiy  of  the
Crqss,  as  a  handmaid*  §be  claims  the  Bible  a  principal  light  of
the  lodge,  placing  it  next  above  the  square  and  compass.  She
claims  to  be  a  gui4&  to  a  blesaediajwortality,  butseems  shocked
at  the  irnpataUon  of  subs&ntog  her  darkness  for  the  gospel
light.  Our  most  dangerous  fees^ra  those  who  are  clad  in  o\ir
ottcn  livery;  and  such  a  foe  is.  Free  Masonry  to  Christianity.  In
her  ceremoniea  she  personates  the  -deity,  seemingly  to  honor,
but  actually  to  mock  the  Moat  High.  She  plains  High  Priests
of  Jehovah  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchiaideck^io  contempt
of  the  Son  of  God,  ta  whom  alone, inspiration  applies  this  mys-
terious title.  She  clothes  her  officers  io  the  regejja  appointed  by
the  Most  High  for  the  house  of  Aaron,  exhibitiog  with  her
aprons  the  holy  garments  of  the  ancient  priestbopd,  the  ephod,
.the  breast  plate,  the  robe,  and  the  rnjtre  with  its  inscription,  Holi-
ness to  thkLo.ro.  She*  makes  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  the
Consecrated  uteosils^and  the  treasures  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  com-
mon among  the  emblems,  of  her  pretended  mysteries.  The  sa-
cred symbols,  of  man's  regeneration  through  the  Holy  Spirit— rof


/


.-r


y  Google


LIGHT   ON   M48OIIJIT.  f8?

Him  who  laid  down  bis  life  to  save  sifters — are  introduced  in  so*
lemn  ipoc^ery  $t  her  midnight  prgies.    She  c}aims  some  pf  the
apostles  to  have  been  patrons  of  her  mysteries;  and  celebrates
t^eir  adversaries.    She  lifts  up  her  voice  in  unhallowed  prayer
for  a  blessing  on  her  assemblies,  refusing  to  acknowledge  the
name  of  the  only  Mediator.     She  teaches  her  pupils  that  walk-
ing on  the  square,  jind  worthily  wearing  the  white  apron,  the  em-
blem of  innocence^they  shall  have  admission  jnto  the  grand  lodge
above.     She  teaches  to  circumscribe  our  passions  with  the  com-
pass; and  she  does  not,  like  ,t%istianity,  regard,  the  heart.    She
teaches  a  selfish  love  for  the  brethren  instead  of  an  enlarged  phi-
lanthrophy  to  the  human  race;  and  in  her  higher  degrees,  hatred
to  her  enemies  is  inculcated,  which  is  a  doctrine  not  of  Christ.
She  places  the  Koran  and  the  Shaster  upon  a  level  with  the  Bible;
but  most  of  all,  in  ail  her  ceremonies  ami  rights  slights  the  name
of  the,  kord  Jesus  Christ    Is  this  then  the  boasted  handmaid  of
religion?    This  institution  in  whose  rites  and  ceremonies  the  most
touching  and  sublime  portions  of  fye  Holy  Book  which  holds  out
to  us  the  promise  of  eternal  life,  are  represented  in  the  shape  of
a  miserable  theatrical  force,  ami  the  Almighty  God  and  his  holy
arjgels,  and  tjhe  spirits  of  the  blessed  made  perfect,  are  personified
by  weak  and  sinful  mortals?  where  the  touching  rites  of  our
blessed  religion  are  mocked  by  vain  men?  where  the  name  of  our
sanctified  Redeemer  is  omitted  or  introduced  in  an  irreverent
manner?  where  the  immortality  of  the  soul  is  only  alluded  to,  by
a  foul  libation  from  the  skull  of  a  traitor?  where  the  life  eternal  in
the  heavens  is  represented  as  one  grand  lodge,  and  the  Almighty
blasphemously  typified  as  the  Grand  Master  thereof ?    This  ■  is
surely  admirably  .calculated  to  cheapen;  religion,  and  to  teaeji  us
to  rely  upon  Masonry  instead  thereof;  or  that  all  religion  is  only
the  farce  which  their*  ceremonies  represent  it  to  be.     These  are
delusions,  and  it  is  time  they  were  dispelled.     We.  have  now  the
lights  upon  which  to  act     Masonry  stands  now  before  us  in  the
deformity  of  her  nakedness*..  $er  ridiculous  pretensions,  bet*
tinsel  prnamentsand  solemn  mmumery  are  now  duly  appreciated.
It  is  now  time  toarouse  ourselves,  and  give  a  check  to  the  spread
of  her  principles  before  she  becomes  too  powerful  for  restraint.
You  ask  what  is  to  be  d*me  with  all  the  power,  the  wealth,  the
talents,  and  the  influence  of  the  fraternity.     You  ask  how  can  we
successfully  resist  it.     There  is  one  engine,  anjd  one  only,  which
can  be  successfully  arrayed  against  her,  and  that  is  public  opinion.
Public  opinion  is  the  law  pf  this  land.     Government  exists  only
by  this  opinion.     Public  men  flourish  only  by  this  opinion;  public
measures  are  sustained  by  this  opinion.     We  are  not  yet  so  reduc*

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


488  LtGHT   Ofl    MASOtfBt.

cd  and  enslaved,  that  public  opinion  will  not  bear  down  every
thing  opposed  to  it.  It  is  like  the  resistless  wave  of  the  ocean,
and  will  sweep  away  every  barrier,  however  secured,  wWch  shaft
oppose  itself  to  it.  This  opinion  speaks  through  the  people;  it
speaks  in  their  meetings;  it  speaks  for  a  time  here;  it  speaks
through  the  press,  however  shackled  it  mav  be;  and  above  all,  it
speaks  through  the  ballot  boxes.  This  is  the  only  legitimate  and
effectual  expression  of  opinion  in  this  land:  these  are  the  instru-
ments by  which  the  people  correct  all  evils.  These  means  are
in  our  power,  and  they  are  the  only  constitutional  means  we  can
use.  It  is  idle  to  talk  About  any  other  expression  of  opinion  than
the  ballot  boxes.  Our  public  meetings,  our  resolutions,  oar  indig-
nant expressions  of  disapprobation,  will  be  only  ridiculed  and
mocked  at,  if  we  do  not  use  the  means  of  enforcing  it  which  me
Jaws  have  put  into  our  hands.  Do  you  startle  at  a  resolution
not  to  support  any  member  of  the  Masonic  fraternity  for  any
office  whatever?  Reflect  that  they  are  bound  'to  vote  for  a  bro-
ther before  any  other  person  of  equal  qualifications,'  andto  sup-
port his  'military  fame  and  political  preferment  in  opposition  to
another;'  that  with  them  We  have  riot  those  equal  rights  which  the
constitution  guarantees  to  us.  We  cannot  shut  our  eye3  to  the
fact  that  ambitious  and  designing  men  have  attached  themselves
to  this  institution  to  obtain  thereby  that  preferment  to  which  their
merits  might  not  attain  in  any  other  way.  Let  this  no  longer  be
a  passport  to  office,  and  the  institution  has  recetvedlts  death  blow,
and  it  will  finally  crumble  into  ruiqf  and  sink  into  objivion.

This  is  a  measure  which  takes  from  them  a  large  portion  of.
their  power,  their  influence,  and  their  consequence;  and  if  we  do
not  deceive  ourselves,  will  be  found  to  be  one  of  the  most  effec-
tive measures  for  the  .entire  destruction  of  the  order.  Does  this
measure  look  like  proscription!  Then  is  the  conduct  of  every
party  which  has  ever  existed  proscription,  and  all  party  politics
unjust  and  prescriptive.  If  it  is  considered  fair  and  honorable
to  shut  out  from  office  those  who  are  in  favor  or  opposed  to  us  in
any  particular  measures,  then  it  cannot  be  deemed  unfair  or  disT
honorable  to  attempt  to  shut  oat  from  office  those  who  are  sworn
to  assist  their  brethren,  to  vote  for  them  or  aid  them,  'whether
right  or  wrong,'  and  who  have  it  by  that  means  in  their  power  to
trample  upon  our  rights  and  to  impede  the  impartial  administra-
tion of  justice1.  Have  the  members  of  the  fraternity  enjoyed
our  highest  offices  so  long  that  they  can  claim  any  prescriptive
rigfct  to  them?  <>*  *s  & tn©  people  who  shall  say  whom  they  will
elevate  to  their  offices  of  honor  and  trust?  We  are  not,  however,
embarked  in  a  cause  which  seeks  the  elevation  of  one  man  or  the.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


WWf  On  «A8pfif*T.  4$&

depression  of  another.  Neither  is  it.  ^dividual*  with  whom  we
wv.  Our  battle,  i*  with  the  institution  and.  it*  pnnciplea;  and  we
should  rejoice  if  those*  wko-  wore  attached  to  it  would  come  out
from  among  them  and  abaodoe  the  imitation  which  we  hold
dangerous  to  our  hbertiea.

We  address  you,  fellow  citizen*,  as  a  body  intrusted  especially
to  devise  measures  for  the  destruction  of  this  order,  and  to  sug-
gest the  means  to  be  used  toefieetjta  entire  banishment  ftom  our
free  soil.  Among  the  most  efficient  means  are  free  presses.
We.  haw  seen,  known,  and  felt  how  the  press  has  been  shackled
and  overawed,  oay,  almost  literally  hound  in  servitude  totbe  will
and  wishes  of  Ibis  grasping  fraternity.  This  slavish  subserviency
of  the  presq  baa,  been  one  of  the  many  means  by  which  they  have
attempted  to  control  and  direct  public  opinion,  and  perpetuate  the
influence  of  their  dangerous  principles.  .  By  means  of  the  se-
cret and  invisible  influence  which  they  have  exercised  over  this
mighty  engine,  investigation  has  been  stifled,  and  the  spread  of
information  cheeked;  and,  worse  than  all,  falsehoods  the  most
gross  have  been  palmed  upon  the  public,  and  deceptions  the  most
base  have  been  practised  to  sustain  the  tottering  empire  of  their
falling  order.  This  evil  should  be  remedied,  and  those  faithless
sentinels  should  meet  their  punishment  in  the  just  indignation  of
an  insulted  and  deceived  community.  We  earnestly  advise  that
means  should  be  provided  in  every  portion  of  the  state,  for  the
communication  of  facts  and  correct  information  to  the  public.
It  certainly  cannot  be  dangerous  in  tfas  land  to  intrust  an  intelli-
gent people  with  a  knowledge  of  tacts  sufficient  to  enable  them  to
decide  with  judgment  upon  the  great  question  now  at  issue.  It
is  important  afeo  that  an  unity  of  action  as  well  as  community  of
feeling  should  be  established  among  the  friends  of  our  cause,
which  we  cannot  doubt  will  be  one  great  mean  in  effecting  the
object  we  are  desirous  of  accomplishing.  For  tins  purpose  we
have  deemed  it  advisable  to  erect  a  common  standard,  around
which  all  may  rally,  and  by  nominating  candidates  for  the  two
highest  offices  within  the  girl  of  the  electors  of  this  state,  to  ap-
peal to  them  to  aay  through  the  ballot  boxes  whether  they  will
sanction  an  institution  whose  principles  are  so  fatal  to  our  rights.
In  selecting  candidates  for  these  distinguished  stations,  it  was  all
important  that  those  should  he  taken  who  have  shown  by  their  acts
that  they  esteem  our  ceusemra  higher  and  holier  cause  than  any
of  die  mere  party  contests  of  the  day.  In  presenting  you  Fxak-
cis  GeABe&R,  ef  Ontario,  as  a  candidate  for  Governor,  and
Joiim  Ciumr,  of  Washington,  as  a  candidate  for  Lieutenant  Go-
vernor, we  think  we  have  selected  such  men.    Tbey  have  both

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


490  LIGHT  ON  MASON*?.

of  them,  fi*«  the  earliest  investigations  of  the  principles  of  Free
Masonry,  shown  themselves  the  friends  of  our  true  rights;  and
both  of  them  have  dared  to  stand  forth  fearlessly  and  boldly,  at  a
period  when  seen  a  course  was  attended  with  no-little  hazard,  the
champions  of  civil  liberty,  and  the  avowed  foes  of  secret  societies.
The  zeal,  ability,  arid  fearlessness  with  which  they  have  respec-
tively advocated  our  cause  in  the  halls  of  the  house  and  the  Senate
of  this  state,  should  embalm  jthem  in  our  hearts,  and  endear  them
to  our  memories.  Pebhc  sentiment  has  pointed  to  these  gentle-
men as  our  ablest  champions;  and  we  take  pride  in  presenting
them  to  you  as  candidates  for  your  suffrages,  to  fill  the  highest
offices  within  your  gift  as  citizens  of  this  state.  Go  to  the  polls
then,  fellow  citizens;  exercise  that  power  for  the  destruction  of  the
Masonic  institution  which  the  constitution  and  laws  have  put  into
your  hands;  and  in  the  performance  of  that  duty  remember  the
solemn  warning  of  the  father  of  our  country,  to  'beutxtre  of  all  sc+
eret  self  created  societies.9

James  Hattkes,  President.

ThomasC.Gbew,)  g  fe

,Seth  A.  Abbey,       )  w*nw»rwt


SPEECH  OF  T.  F.  TALBOT,  ESQ.

In  the  dhU-JVas&nk  NeurYork  Slate  Contention,  August  4,  5,  andG,  1828.

Mr.  Chairman— The  opinions  advanced  in  the  resolutions
which  I  have  offered  on  behalf  of  the  committee  appointed  to  pre-*
pare  them,  although  long  entertained  by  a  large  portion  of  our  fel-
low citizens,  may  still,  however,  seem  to  others  harsh  and  perhaps
not  well  founded.  It  becomes  me,  therefore,  to  lay  before  the
convention  some  of  the  reasons  which  have  conducted  our  minds
to  the  conclusions  we  have  formed.  A  due  respect  for  my  fellow
citizens  engaged  In  the  same  cause  to  which  I  have  devoted
much  of  my  time,  has  induced  me  to  present  these  reasons  in  a
more  formal  shape  than  is  usual,  that  I  may  not  be  supposed  to
advance  without  due  consideration,  die  crude  and  ill  digested  sug-
gestions of  a  heated  imagination;  and  that  what  shall  be  said  may
not  be  mistaken  or  misrepresented  without  the  power  to  correct  it.
It  is  not  yet  two  years  since  a  large  portion  of  our  state  was  sud-
denly aroused  from  the  peace  and  harmony  in  which  they  had  long
reposed,  by  the  high  handed  and  daring  outrages  of  a  body  of  men
whose  objects  and  motives  we  were  for  some  time  entirely  unable
to  ascertain.  It  was  readily  perceived  that  no  slight  cadse  nor
ordinary  inducements  could  have  so  entirely  subdued  that  reve*


y  Google


tJQHT  ON  jtASQHfct*  491

fence  for  the  laws  of  our  country,  which  had  heretofore  so  uni*
family  distinguished  our  countrymen..  .  To  discover  the  powerful
motives  which  impelled  them  on,  has  been  the  work  of  time  and
perseverance.  In  this,  as  in  most  other  cases,  the,  discovery  of
truth  has  been  slow  and  progressive.  Like  the  approach  of  day
to  the  traveller  on  the  mountain,  slight  indications  of  light  are  dis-
cerned long  before  objects  can  be  distinctly  seen — and  thus  it
should  be*  The  mind  requires  4irae  to  accommodate  its  powers
to  the  full  perception  of  new  and  unexpected  truths.  We  are
sometimes  mortified  and  surprised  at  our  own  dujness,  in  not
having  sooner  discerned  what  now  appears  sufficiently  plain  to
our  understanding;  and  we  can  with  difficulty  discover  the  reasons
why  we  have  so  long  been  ignorant,  when  the  means  of  knowledge
were  at  our  command.  "

.  But  if  the  discovery  of  truth  in  this  instance  has  been  slow,  it
has  at  last  been  complete  and  full.  Doubts  and  obscurities  have
vanished  like  the  mists  of  the  morning  before  the  rising  sun.
What  at  first  was  conjecture,  is  now  certainty.  Did  we  at  first
suspect  that  the  influence  of  Masonry  was  not  friendly  to  the  true
interests  of  our  country?  we  now  know  that  it  is  directly  hostile  to
to  our  dearest  rights.  Did  we  at  first  entertain  doubts  whether
the  existence  of  this  secret  association  was  compatible  with  our
republican  institutions?  we  now  know  that  where  it  flourishes  true
liberty  cannot  dweH.  Did  we  at  first  merely  fear  that  the  obli-
gations of  the  members  to  each  other  might  not  always  harmo-
nize with  their  obligations  to  their  fellow  citizens  at  large?  we  now
know  that  those  obligations  are  utterly  inconsistent  with  their  duty
to  themselves,  their  country,  and  their  God.  Did  we  at  first  sus-
pect that  the  claims  of  this  society  to  be  the  friends  of  truth  were
not  well  founded?  we  now  know  mat  she  is  the  fruitful  mother  of
delusion  and  of  error.  If  we  then  felt  reluctant  to  admit  her  pre-
tensions to  be  the  ^handmaid  of  Christianity;  we  now  know  that
her  votaries  (of  the  higher  order  at  least)  regard  not  the  precepts,
reverence  not  the  ordinances  of  Christianity,  and  blaspheme  the
God  whom  Christians  worship.  If  at  first  we  suspected  her  pu-
rify; we  now  know  that  she  is  filthy,  disgusting,  and  full  of  un-
soundness— stripped  by  her  own  votaries  of  all  her  borrowed
vestments  of  pretended  holiness,  she  at  last  stands  before  us  na-
ked and  exposed,  in  all  her  native  pollution  and  deformity.

Thus,  fellow  citizens,  reversing  the  order  of  nature,  and  the
hitherto  progress  of  knowledge,  we  trust  light  has  arisen  in  the
*west  which  shall  soon  spread  its  rays  over  our  whole  country.
A  fire  has  been  kindled,  which  shall  not  be  soon  extinguished,  but
^ill  .rapidly,  we  hope,  spread  through  the  fields  of  «rror,  delusion,

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


*9ft  I.16HT  OH  His****.

and  prejudk**  conawmg  the  turj4ttofMtu*otiic,folly,  and  pourmg
a  ftood  of  light  upon  the  dtak  recesses  of  the  lodge  rooms;  *xpesiag
the  mystery*  of  miqaify  which  itts  so  long  been  shrouded  in  night;
swwp^aw«ythei^^tt<5leBoffoUy,tfeehauilt«ofkBf*ies8,«^
drying  up  the^eurOes^Sr  mischief  totbc  weak  and  ignoraat^as
the  devouring  element,  when  it  rages  in  a  great  city,  is  often
6ei^eial,byco«mimih^thereceplaeles  of  vice,  the  hiding  places
of  crime,  aiw^rjiakfogway fbr  tlCe>  erection  of  useful  edifices  and
ooaifbrtable  dwellings,  ml,  fellow  oitiaetts,  these  good  effects
cannot  be  produced  without  yotfr  aid  and  perhaps  your  taiceasmg
olertions.  It  is  an  important  truth  which  ire  most  never  lose
sight  of,  that  our  civil  and  political  rights  and  privileges  can  he
preserved  unimpaired  only  by  constant  vigrtenee*  We  ewe  it  to
our  fathers,  and  shall  disgrace  their  memory  '€  we  do  not  try  aft
the  means  hi  our  power  to  transmit  those  tights  and  privileges
unimpaired  to  our  posterity.  It  will  be  in  vain  that  any  of  Ae
canspiratofB  bare  bean,  or  that  any  of  them  shall  be,  exposed  and
punished,  if  the  motives  which  actuated  them  stifl  continue  to
operate  in  full  force  upon  others.  It*fe  in  vein  that  we  have  as*
oertatoed  those  motives  to  be  corrupt,  if  they  ate  to  operate  unre-
sisted, and  are  not  counteracted  by  examining  and  exposing  their
,  pernicious  tendency.

But  our  civil  and  political  rights  lore  not  #w  ority  proper  objects
of  our  regard  and  watchfulness.  Dear  to  ns  as  they  are,  and
highly  as  we  do  and  ought  to  prize  them,  their  value  will  >e  di-
minished to  ourselves  and  ottr4>f&pring,  it  their  influeneenf  <*o*al
principles  shall  be  gradually  relaxed  and  finally  destroyed;  and
the  still  more  important  influence  of  Christianity  shall  be  <eemti-
,  nually  counteracted  by  constant  efforts  to  connect  its  institution
with  one  to  which  it  can  bear,  no  affinity  whatever— an  institution
which  counts  among  its  active  supporters  and  warmest  advocates,
a  large  number  of  men,  who,  both  bylheir  words  and  tberr  ac-
tions, not  only  manifest  *n  entire  disregard  of  the  injunctions  of
Christianity,  but  openly  deny  the  divinity  of  its  origin,  and.  make
a  mock  of  its  most  sacred  mysteries.

"Without  intending  to  occupy  your  time  by  unnecessary-details,
let  me  barely  say,  that  no  two  institutions  can  be  selected  whose
distinguishing  characters  are  so  entirely  dissimilar.  The  one  de-
lights in  parade  and  show;  the  Other  in  simplicity  and  retirement*
The  benefits  of  the  one  are  freely  offered  to  all  'without  money
and  without  price.9  From  the  advantages  of  the  ether,  (if  any
there  be,)  all  are  excluded  who  cannot  open  Tier { doors  by  keys  of
silver  or  gold.  One  drawing  eagerly  to-itself  4fee*poor  «nd  -dis-
pised  of  this  world;  the  other  courting  the  rich  and  the  great.  -One

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


*       LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  493

rigidly  excluding  the  most  amiable  part  of  our  species;  the  other
peculiarly  adapted  to  their  natural  sensibilities  and  best  feelings,
and  calculated  to  promote  their  importance  in  society,  their  com-
fort in  this  world,  and  their  happiness  in  eternity.  Away,  then,
with  this  and  all  other  vain  pretensions  and  idle  claims  of  Ma-
sonry to  our  regard  or  reverence.  The  more  tbev  are  examined
the  less  will  they  be  valued.  They  cannot  bear  the  test  of  truth;
they  shrink  from  it,  like  the  sensitive  plant  from  the  rude  touch  of
the  incautious  examiner,  and  when  exposed  to  its  fuU  influence,
wfll  wither  like  the  sickly  plants  when  first  brought  from  the  ob-
scure light  of  the  hothouse,  and  exposed  to  the  full  power  of  the
meridian  sun.

To  counteract  and  destroy  the  baneful  influence  so  opposed  to
morality  and  religion,  is  a  duty  not  less  sacred  than  to  preserve
our  civil  and  political  institutions  from  the  secret  attacks  which
we  believe  are  constantly  aimed  at  them.  Nor  let  it  be  said  that
these  apprehensions  are  unfounded;  that:  these;  fears  are  the  mere
chimeras  of  distempered  minds;  that  Masonrythas  no  means  of
injuring  our  rights  or  undermining  our  institutions.  It  is  most
manifest  that  the  influence  of  'this  association  has  already  been
extensively  exercised  in  our  county,  although  the  manner  of  its
operation  has  not  always  been  visible.  That  it  has  been  exerted
lor  the  purpose  of  giving  authority  and  consequence  to  men  who
were  not  fairly  entitled  to  them.  That  bad  men  have  from  this
source  found  support  and  countenance,  which  they  ought  not  to
enjoy,  and  could  not  receive,  »from  any  other  source.  That  the
influence  of  good  men  is  diminished,  and  their  attention  with-
drawn from  those  objects  most  worthy  of  regard.  That  by  pro-
moting, and  in  a  good  degree  requiring,  the  promiscuous  assem-
blage of  the  wicked  and  the  good,  the  profane  and  the  pious,  the
infidel  and  the  Christian,  the  profligate  and  moral,  the  sober  and
the  intemperate— it  is  calculated  to  weaken  the  influence  anfl
diminish  the  respect  which  is  due  to  virtue.  That  it  promotes
useless  expense  among  those  who  are  least  able  to  bear  it,  and
incites  to  vicious  excesses  by  the  seeming  necessity  of  assem-
blages at  the  houses  of  entertainment  That  it  erects  a  false
standard  of  excellence,  by  substituting  a  useless  knowledge  of
absurd  customs  and  ridiculous  legends,  for  true  wisdom  and
valuable  acquirements.  That  it  diverts  the  attention  of  its  vota*
ries  from  objects  of  real  and  permanent  utility,  by  placing  it  on
objects  too  frivolous  to  deserve  the  rapid,  of  reasonable  and  en-
lightened minds.  That  far  from  heing  the  handmaid  of  religion*
her  progress  is  impeded  by  it,  because  it  deludes  by  iu  sinipose*
morality;  diverts  me  tnind  from  c^animing  and  attending  to  the
Ss  .

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


194  light  on  ausoxar.      *

precepts  tad  sanctions  of  the  Divine  law;  and  because  in  troth  it
substitutes  the  words  of  man  for  the  words  of  God.  Nor  can  wc
now  entertain  **7  doubts  that  the  relative  obligations  which  Ma-
sonry  imposes  upon  its  members  are  inconsistent  with  the  obU-
ganons  of  roan  to  society  at  large,  to  their  country,  and  their
Creator.  That  their  alleged  duties  to  each  other  are  inconsistent
with  the  higher  duties  wmeh  they  owe  to  the  law3  of  their  comv
try,  and  the  obligations  of  charity  and  humanity  to  all  their  fel-
low creatures.  Let  me  add,  that  the  ^peculiar  structure  of  the
institution  qualifies  it  to  effectuate  designs  and  accomplish  plana,
such  as  to  its  members  may  seem  good,  however  hostile  those
designs  may  be  to  the  rights  of  others.

If  these  evils*  or  any  of  them,  may,  and  in  fact  do,  arise  from  thai
source,  it  will  be  readily  granted  that  while  the  fountain  remains
the  impure  streams  will  not  cease  to  flow  from  it.  That  while
the  corrupt  tree  is  permitted  to  grow,  it  will  continue  to  produce
corrupt  fruit  That  as  the  vigor  of  its  growth  is  increased,  its
mischievous  effects  wiU  be  more  extensively  felt,  If  even  one  of
these  evils  do  in  truth  originate  in  that  source,  its  pernicious  ten-
dency is  abundantly  evident.  The  woods  of  unerring  wisdom
have  assured  us,  that  the  same  spring  cannot  send  form  bitter  and
sweet  waters.

Let  it  not  be  urged,  that  imperfection  isthe  characteristic  of  all
human  institutions.  The  most  zealous  advocate  of  Masonry
has  not  dared  to  attempt  proving,  even  by  the  semblance  of  argu-
ment, that  she  can  claim  a  right  to  our  favor  or  regard,  by.  the
benefits  she  confers  on  mankind  at  large.  But,  say  they,  her  ex-
cellence is  concealed  from  vulgar,  eyes;  her  beauties  can  be  seen
only  by  the  initiated;  her  virtues  are  not  blazoned  forth  to  the
world:  all  these  are  hid  by  the  veil  of  secrecy.  They  are  indeed
secret.  'For  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  man-heard,  neither  hath  it
entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  imagine,  their  loud  assertions,
pompous  eulogtums,  and  swelling  declamations.  Bold  claims
are  indeed  made  on  her  behal£  But  the  rime  for  these  to  avail
her  has  passed  by.  Her  pretentions  will  be  brought  to  the  test
of  truth*  They  can  no  longer  escape  rigorous  investigation;
and  if  they  are  found  false,  they  will  be  pronounced  so,  by  the
intelligent  people  of  these  United  States.  It  may  be  mafter  of
just  pride  to  Americans,  that  it  has  been  reserved  for  them  to
destroy  the  influence  of  an  institution  which  has  continnaUv
boasted  of  its  ability  to  withstand  all  the  power  of  kings^-whicc
proudly  asserts  that  no  human  force  can  weaken  or  destroy  her.
Let  not  her  votaries  deceive  themselves  by  these  idle  supposi-
tions.   She  has  now  a  different  force  to  contend  with,     She  may

Digitized  by  GoOgle


LIGHT   ON  NASONRT.  49£

have  evaded  the  power  of  kings  by  taking  refuge  in  the  ignorance
of  their  subjects.  Her  vainglorious  boastings  may  have  im-
posed upon  those  who  had  no  means  of  investigating  their  truth,
and  no  interest  in  exposing' their  falsehood.  What  matters  it  to
the  poor  peasant  of  Germany)  who  fkercises  the  authority  by
•Which  he  is  not  protected,  but  oppressed.  He  has  no  hopes  of
avoiding  the  misery  which  he  endures,  if  indeed  his  moral  sus-
ceptibilities are  not  so  deadened  by  tyranny  that  he  feels  not  his
wretchedness.  What  interest  has  4he  ignorant  Serf  of  Russia  in
the  question,  whether  the  secret  recesses  of  the  lodge  can  be,  or
ever  are,  used  to  conceal  the  conspiracies  and  cabals  by  which
one  military  despot  is  strangled,  and  another  elevated  to  his  place.
He  is  still  to  remain  a  slave,  and,  like  the  beasts  of  the  field,  be
bought  and  sold  with  the  land  which  he  cultivates.  Why  should
the  oppressed  Spaniard  endeavor  to  expose  the  dark  designs  and
treasonable  projects  of  Free  Masonry.  They  may  sometimes
shield  him  from  the  power  of  a  detestable  tyrant,  or  save  him  for
a  time  from  the  torture  of  the  inquisition.

Shall  we  be  told  that  no  such  influence  is  claimed  or  can  be
exerted  by  Free  Masonry  in  America?  What  then  is  American
Free  Masonry?  For  what  purpose  have  tat)  thousand  lodges
been  organized  in* these  United  States?  To  what  use  is  their
vast  annual  income  applied?*  ______

Why  are  six  hundred  thousand  men  united  together  by  myste-
rious ties,  the  nature  of  which  are  studiously  concealed  from
their  countrymen.  Studiously  concealed,  did  I  say?  Nay,  they
are  concealed  at  the  peril  of  life  itself;  and  recent  events  have
proved  that  these  perils  are  by  no  means  imaginary.  But  Free
Masonry  vauntingly  points  us  to  the  names  of  distinguished  men
whom  she  has  enrolled  among  her  members.  It  is  so,  fellow
citizens.  And  are  all  these  lodges  organized  merely  for  the  pur-
pose of  private  charity?  Is  all  this  income  exhausted  in  deeds
of  benevolence?  Are  all  these  men  united  so  closely,  merely  to
promote  conviviality  and  provide  cheer?  Are  their  lives  subject
to  be  sacrificed  for  the  preservation  of  secrets  in  which  the  com-
munity at  large  have  nb  interest?  Have  the  great  men  of  our
country  sought  for  her  highest  honors,  merely  to  bear  a  part  in
her  gaudy  shows  and  pompous  processions?  Does  the  states-
man of  the  north  and  the  warrior  of  the  south  become  rival  can-
didates for  the  highest  office  that  Free  Masonry  can  bestow*

*  The  author  of  'Free  Masonry,'  lately  published  in  the  city  of  New  Vork,
who  is  a  Master  Mason,  computes  from  well  founded  datat  that  their  income
is  not  less  than  120,000  dollars  a  year,  this  volume  should  be  read  by  every
citizen  of  the  United  States  who  regards  the  welfare  of  his  country.


y  Google


A


496  LIGHT    ON   MASONRY.

merely  that  oae  may  wear  a  higher  cap  or  broader  sash  than  the
other?  Do  republicans  condescend  to  receive  the  empty  title  of
kings  and  high  priests,  illustrious  knights  and  princes,  for  do
purpose  but  to  gratify  a  corrupt  taste  for  insignificant  distinctions?
Are  all  these  the  mere  ptftrile  amusements  of  full  aged  children?
Is  it  for  mere  amusement  that  so  many  who  desire  to  enjoy  the
esteem  and  respect  of  their  countrymen— who  claim  and  obtain
the  offices  and  honors  she  has  to  bestow — bear  a  part  in  the  idle
))arades  of  Masonry — partake  of  her  profane  ceremonies,  and
load  their  conscience  with  her  blasphemous  obligations!  Bather
let  me  ask,  is  there  no  secret  and  well  organized  influence  which
can  readily  make  itself  felt  from  one  end  of  the  Union  to  the
other?  No  method  of  writing  to  effect  a  common  object,  by
means  which  will  not  bear  investigation.  No  secret  obligations
to  aid  one  another  in  projects  which  are  not  known  to  the  world.
No  plan  of  action  which  subjects  not  the  agent  to  that  responsi-
bility for  their  actions,  attached  to  all  who  are  not  initiated  into,
the  order.

It  is  our  doty  and  our  privilege  faithfully  to  examine  these
questions;  and  enough,  I  trust,  has  been  said  to  show  that  they  ape
the  grave  attention  of  intelligent  freemen.  It  may,  indeed,  be  true
that  correct  opinions  on  these  subjects  do  now  prevail  in  a  large
portion  of  our  state;  but  the  work  is  not  therefore  finished — our.
duty  is  not  therefore  performed.  We  are  bound  by  every  tie  that
connects  ns  with  our  country  and  our  fellow  citizens,  not  to  limit
our  exertions  to  the  district  we  dwell  in.  Such  selfishness  finds
no  place  in  the  breasts  of  freemen. .  If  our  own  minds  have  been
disenthralled  from  these  delusiohs^-if  light  has  arisen  upon  us —
we  cannot  contentedly  see  our  fellow  citizens  groping  in  dark-
ness. It  will,  I  trust,  be  our  delight  to  keep  alive  the  sacred
flame,  and  guard  it  cautiously,  as  the  Roman  vestals  watched  the
sacred  fire.  It  may  indeed  be  entering  upon  an  arduous  task,
and  to  accomplish  it  may  require  pattepce,  fortitude,  industry,
and  zeal.  Those  who  engage  in  it  must  be  prepared  to  encoun-
ter difficulties  not  now  foreseen.  Their  motives  may  and  pro-
bably will  be  misrepresented;  their  objects  misstated;  their  efforts
impugned;  but  in  the  end  they  will  reap  the  fruits  of  their  exer-
tions—secure the  applause  of  their  own  consciences,  and  the
commendation  of  the  good.  The  period  in  which  we  live  is  fa-
vorable to  the  discovery  of  truth,  and  unfriendly  to  the  endurance
of  error.  The  various  systems  of  superstition  and  delusion  seem
to  have  had  their  day;  their  influence  is  declining  rapidly,  and.
they  are  daily  giving  evidence  of  their  tendency  to  moral  dissolu-
tion.   Jbll  false  lights  are  fast  extinguishing  to  make  way  for.thev


y  Google


LIGHT  Off  MASOtfRV.  497

true  light  that  'light&th  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world.'
The  dark  clouds  of  superstition  and  ignorance  are  rolling  away.
The  clear  and  beautiful  atmosphere  of  religious  knowledge  is  oc-
cupying their  place;  and  the  w^rds  of  the  Saviour  himself  hath
assured  us,  that  'there  is  nothing  hidden  that  shall  not  be  re-
vealed.'

Let  it  not  be  said  that  in  promoting  these  investigations — in
attempting  to  dispel  this  moral  darkness— we  persecute  our  fellow
citizens.  It  is  not  so.  We  war  with  the  abominations  of  Ma-
sonry. We  will  not  that  an  authority  exists  among  us,  which
elevates  itself  above  the  laws  of  our  country;  which  can  with
impunity  trample  upon  those;  and  which  violates  without  remorse
the  principles  of  humanity.  We  mourn  over  the  delusion  which
prevails  in  the  minds  of  so  many  whom  we  regard  with  kindness
and  esteem.  We  long  to  see  them  freed  from  the  chains  of  dark*
ness  by  which  they  have  been  bound.  We  rejoice  that  they  shall
soon  be  free.  We  would  say  to  them  in  the  language  of  inspira-
tion, 'Gome  out  of  her,  that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sin.'
As  well  might  the  benighted  Indian  cry  oppression  against  the
humble  missionary  who  labors  to  infuse  into  his  mind  the  fight
of  the  gospel.  As  well  might  the  Hindoo  widow  cry  oppression,
because  she  is  urged  to  descend  from  the  funeral  pile  which  is  to
consume  the  body  of  her  deceased  husband.  As  well  might  the
deluded  worshipper  of  Juggernaut  cry  oppression,  because  he  is
withheld  from  being  mangled  under  the  bloody  wheels  of  the
idol  god.

We  may  indeed  offfehd  the  pride  of  some  who  have  chosen  to.
give  a  consequence  to  Free  Masonry  which  she  does  not  possess.
And  perhaps  the  Wash' of  shame  may  suffuse  the  cheeks  of  some
who  see  her  folly  and  hfer  nothingness  exposed.  But  the  emotion
will  be  salutary,  and  be  succeeded  by  self  congratulation  at  their
removal  from  a  sickly  delirium.

But,  fellow  citizensy  we  have  heard  much  of  excitement,  and
we  have  been  accused  of  keeping  up  an  excitement  in  relation  to
Masonry.  The  advocates  of  Masonry  who  reprobate  excitement
so  violently,  seem  to  have  forgotten  that  excitement  is  not  fana-
ticism. And  what  great  moral  benefit,  let  me  ask,  was  ever
conferred  upon  mankind  which  was  not  produced  by  excitement?
How  was  the  Christian  religion  itself  propagated  but  by  excite-'
ment?  Are  we  not  assured  in  the  volume  of  inspiration,  that  it
is  good  to  be  zealously  affected  in  a  good  cause?  What  but  ex-
citement to  ameliorate  the  condition  of  mankind  has  sent  the  mis-
sionary of  the  Cross  to  the  frozen  shores  of  Greenland  and  the
burning  sands  of  Africa?    What  but  excitement  has  roused  the*

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


408  wm?  QJf  JfcWBfM.

OUri#tian  world  &m  ft*  )ejhtrgy  *f  atfttetfee*  atfi  prated  $©©
to  send  Hip  Bibb  to  tfw  native**  that  rtBl  set  wvdarJkaejea,  tp  re-
joice their  tart*  witb  tte  gM  .mm  pf  artrafceg^r*©  tttasi  the
ioi^r  fcaptander  with  the  We***d  b^p^lbftt  bis  kmg  night  my
at  kiitead  ip  aaeflWgeoJt toy  ©f  *****  eftdiflg^pffi^sflm-tofyye
(he  roving  Indian  along  the  true  road  to  the  residence  e?  the
Vrreat  9pmt— to  revive  Ihe  wWwwl  heart  pf  ifce  f^opt  West  In-
die* slave,  an<}  teach  bio*  that  at  Jast  be  shall  to  free,  Wfcat
but  ejtciteaieflt  against  tyimaoy  anil  oppreesjpp  prompted  our
fathers  to  reajsfc  ft©  ejafltipas  «f  (?r*a£  Bri&afc,  to  lisqup  feeir
Uvea  Hi  the  eaofliet,  and  flaally  restore  on  liberty  or  death.

What}  shalU  free  eMraen  afftfeasp  U»ted  States,**  the  fell
vnieymwt  of  life  wd  Ubflrty,  to  seized  upon  19  epe&  day— t§m
firoffi  bis  wife  and  ^Uy-nparrjeal  in  aafcqly  tetamph  thjrpugb  pur
cpuatry— be  incajrectrafed  in  the  wry  adt&ee  which  was  erected
to  defend  the  liberty  of  hto'counti!)Mie  seeretfy  tried  and  secretly
executed,  without  even  the  fornw  of  Jaw. .  Shall  the  gaijry  par-
Ctejaatp**  in  these  Awl  «in*e#  justje  aa  in  the  atoeetermgneer  at
<m  rear  pef—rlaugh  at  pur  «ffo*ta  fc>  produce  legal  proof  of  their
gu&,  pad  defy  our  atteflipt  to  bring  than  before  tbeapuatry;  an4
iHaU  this  be  ©eased  by  in  eWence  teal  some,  should  cry  out  egejte-
ineat    $b*U  all  fee**  enormities  be  feirfj  a»d  distinctly  teaeed
to  the  dark  recesses,  of  the  lodge  rooroa-^ahall  we  knew,  from
testunpay  deJtveisd  ta^eurts  *jf  justice,  that  the  practicability  And
the  proper  aieans  of  sacrificing  live*  ajnd  destroying  the.  liberty  of
the  press,  were  coldly  discussed  in  Masonic  lodges,  and  delibe-
rately reeled  on--tbat  all  this  was  dpne  tp  prevent  br'w&ng
tjbe  inatHutiea  pf  Masegury  into  disgraee  by  publishing  a  true  ac-
count of  them.    And  *haU  np  e*piteiBjeat  arise  i»  out  bffeaajfc--
i*p  swelling  of  the  heart— ao  beavftag  of  the  fepsm    W<o  be  to
rtftr  eoNeftry  when  all  these  things  pan  tak*  place  without  befeg
followed  by  excitement.     Shall  wfteeeatl  these  rank  aprrua-
^iops  boil  and  bubble  io  this  dtldroo  of  ajwiimnaiiwsi  and  sfell
we  Wftke  ap  eflort  tp  ejtt«gi4wh  tbeirb

I  would  not,  sir,  \mm  X  suppospd  tlaat  I  adfoojate  hawb  or
severe  measles  tp  effept  eve«  this  ,holy  purpuse^  Nane  supb
see  juaUfiable-rr-apae  such  qu^ht  *P  he  ese4-rttpae  such  wfli  fee
*}&ed.  We  tmy  cpnfideatly asseit  &*t<Ptfr  C^Uew  ojtisiens  who
have  ea^sged  k  tins  investigation  eannpt  be  «ade  iwtruweptal
b  p&cUng  eny  unjust  me^surs«^>wftnl»  their  fcUow  citiuoos,
hpweirer  elevated  or  honble  easy  be  their  etston,  Their  pbject
baa  been  the  discpvery  and  the  pu Wicai wo  o/ tmtb;  ^ttd  %mh
discoweries Aave  cenvieeed  that  eeoret  asaoaWons «M^t  w*iQ
existiu  a  republic,  and  have  dimiw^hed  *heir  iTespeet  fiwr  the  ad-


U9UX  on  #Aso;iar,  40$

fcefl&nta  of  Btfsh  ftOoieAie*  these  flffiwris  have  necessarily  resulted
ftft»  their  causes*    N*  excitements  have  been  peed  to  produce
SMefe  49»wfiffPB»    They  have  tow  the  production*  of  fight  rea-
son detiberately  wwwmit    The  !>cts  &irly  pseaented  to  them,
they  felted  not  to  draw  from  them  legitimate  collusions;  apd
F*ee  Masonry  »uet  ftWdo  fte,  consequences*.    We  see  nothing
sacred  in  her  wbifth  sb<wM  exempt  her  few  these.    With  wwh
difficulty  ftfce  has  ftt  length  beep  taught  to  the  har  of  truth;  *nd
lejber pot  hope  to  wtarp  ftem  it  upttl  aU  her  pretensiops  to  ex-
c^UQnc^afld  aJl  h§r  QftpHhilitmp  far  crime*  have  been  thoroughly
instigated.    Nejtheff  tfcoaha|»eJe«fi  falsehoods  apd  §wol|en  ver-
biage of  St.  John's,  day  ©J&tors,  nor  the  pompous  eulpgipms  of
4«hoo&ejr  dedainjer a,  eaj  apy  longer  save  her.    Her  borrowed
plumes  will  he  phttWd  from  her  shameless  ftopj,  apd  her  silken
vostmonfe  «W*  *e  langer  eo*seal  her  impumties,    She  will  he
weighed  in  thfchaAep#e,a»d  if  fimnd  wanting  she  will  be  consigned
to  iueebed  de*trne&m.    Those  who  have  epdertakep  the  task
cannot  he  driven  from  it  by  fear  nor  by  fftprpr.    They  believe  the
inves*igatipn  to  be  connected  with  the  substantia!  good  of  their
cour&ry,  sad  they  will  net  recede;  they  have  put  their  hands  to
the  pkJw>  apd  thoy  will  not  look  back.     No  motive  of  selfinterest
prompted  them  to  action,  tad  pq  fear  pf  loss  will  deter  them  from
proceeding.    They  are  not  eeekeve  fcr  honors,  pr  o|Sces,  apd  no
fears  of  such  acenseiions  will  d*ter  them  fifom  inquiring  apd  deeid*
iag  for  Jhemeafcrea  how  for  tbo  influence  of  Free  Masonry  may
iiiaauaiify  their  feB  o*v  ctfjze»3  for  fuUHUng  the  duties  of  office-
how  far  a  secret  and  constant  intercourse  with  a  smpll  body  of
moo  distinguiehediroro  their  fellow  cogens  at  large  a&*  separate
society,  governed  by  separate  laws  apd  bound  to  each  other  by
peculiar  obligations,  nay,  and  of  necessity  will,  influence  their
rm&dsiatbo  distribution  of  official  favors,  or  warp  their  judgments
from  iheeti^hipatb  of  integrity.  How fer those seeretobligations
may  fetter  theif  minds  and  he  pammeunt  to  e?  inconsistent  with
their  known  obligations  to  their  country  in  general,  they  kaew  and
they  wjdl  remember  when  called  upon  to  give  their  suffrages;
•that  the  more  habit  of  frequent  and  intimate  intercourse  with  a
select  body  of  men  using  the  imposing,  however  abused,  name
of  brother,  is  not  without  its  influence  even  upon  strong  minds;
that  it  improperly  contracts  the  fiashiigs  of  the  heart  and  limits
the  extension  of  that  good  will  which  a  true  patriot  and  a  wise
statesman  wiU  deepen  to  fed  toward  iM  his  countrymen,  un-
fettered aad  unweetnuned  by  opposing  ipfpeneos.    I  repeat,  sir,
the  men  w*  whom  wo  act  in  this  matter  ate  not  m*ty  office
slackers.    We  can  point  with  pride  and  with  pleasure  to  the  great

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


500  LIGHT  ON  MASOKftT.

body  of  our  most  efficient  friends,  as  men  who  never  have  and
never  wii/  desire  office.  We  can  number  among  them  many
whose  elevation  of  mind  and  self  respect  have  never  permitted
them  to  use  the  ordinary  and  most  successful  methods  of  procu-
ring offices,  however  well  they  were  qualified  to  perform  their
duties;  who  will  not  sacrifice  their  independence  at  the  shrine  of
party,  though  they  are  willing  to  serve  their  country.

It  may  perhaps  be  expected  that  I  should,  in  the  course  of  my
remarks,  take  notice  of  an  attempt  made  by  some  of  those  venders
of  falsehoods  and  tools  of  party  who  disgrace  our  country,  to  cre-
ate an  impression  that  this  impulse,  which  has  roused  a  whole  com-
munity to  action,  can  be  used  for  mere  parry  purposes;  and  mat
an  eminent  statesman  had  made  an  attempt  to  buy  it  for  his  own
purposes.  I  cannot  consent  to  occupy  your  attention  by  a  serious
effort  to  refute  a  calumny  so  absurd  in  itself— so  contemptible  by
the  source  from  which  it  originated— -and  so  insulting  to  the  pa-
triotism, integrity,  and  understanding,  of  many  thousands  of  my
countrymen. ,  Be  it  known  to  those  who  have  made  the  assertion
and  those  who  have  pretended  to  repel  it,  that  the  freemen  who
have  been  influenced  by  this  excitement  can  neither  be-  bought  or
sold.  They  aim  not  to  elevate  one  man  or  depress  another — to
aid  one  political  party  or  injure  another.  They  have  higher  and
holier  objects  in  view,  from  which  they  cannot  be  terrified  or  di-
verted by  such  insignificant  accusations.  They  aim  to  rid  their
country  of  a  noxious  pestilence  which  walks  in  darkness  through
the  land — to  take  from  all  parties  the  power  to  wield  this  *Mack
engine  of  night' — to  dispel  the  moral  darkness  in  which  so  many
of  their  countrymen  have  so  long  groped — to  strike  off  the  base
chains  which  have  so  long  held  in  ignoble  bondage  the  minds  of
many  thousands  of  their  fellow  citizens,  and  restore  them  to  the
lull  enjoyment  of  those  privileges  purchased  by  the  blood  of  their
fathers— to  seize  this  many  headed  monster  by  the  throat,  drag  it
forth  from  the  murky  den  »  which'  she  has  so  long  concealed  her-
self, and  strangle  it  in  open  day  before  its  venom  had  been  scattered
over  the  land  to  corrupt  the  very  fountain  of  all1  that  is  good  and
valuable  in  out  civil  and  religious  institutions.  We  may  not  in-
deed live  to  see  4hese  objects  completely  effected;  but  they  are
worthy  to  employ  the  energies  of  every  generous  mind;  and  he
who  shall  assist  to  accomplish  them  wuTnot  have  lived,  without
-benefit  to  his  country.

But,  sir,  will  it  be  seriously  contended,  or  can  it  be  expected,  that
all  who  have  aided  to  lay  the  foundation  for  accomplishing  these
glorious  objects,  are  therefore  to  be  excluded  from  the  service  of
foeir  country?    By  what  means  shall  they  know  that  their  exejr#.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   JIASONIY.  501

t&biis  are  appreciated  and  favored  by  their  fellow  citizens?  How
shall  the  dishonest  or  deluded  advocates  of  this  system  of  error
and  deception  be  convinced  that  they  can  no  longer  uphold  it  with
impunity]  Do  you  expect  aid  from  the  timid,  the  selfish,  or  the
wilfully  ignorant?  Will  the  profane  altars  of  Free  Masonry  be
overthrown  by  the  hands  of  her  Genera)  Grand  High  Priest?
Think  you  that  those  who  have  contributed  to  erect  her  idle  tem-
ples will  themselves  assist  to  tumble  them  into  ruins?  Such  is
not  the  usual  course  of  action.  What  we  have  cherished  as  valua-
ble, we  are  unwilling  to  believe  has  at  last  become  worthless*
Even  the  useless  bauble  which  has  long  hung  about  us  we  reluc-
tantly part  with.

There  are  indeed  some,  and  not  a  few,  among  us,  whose  clear
perceptions  and  strong  minds  have  enabled  them  to  discover  their
true  situation— who  have  nobly  dared  to  be  free  and  to  throw  off
by  one  vigorous  effort  the  fetters  which  have  so  long  bound  them
to  an  institution  to  whose  iniquities  they  could  not  be  blind.  With
such  men  we  can  cheerfully  and  gladly  co-operate  in  the  good .
work  we  have  engaged  in.  We  feel  that  for  ourselves  and  our
country  we  owe  them  much,  and  we  shall  not  be  reluctant  to  dis-
charge the  debt  to  our  utmost  ability.  We  know,  in  part,  what
they  have  encountered,  and  how  they  have  overcome.

Away  then,  sir,  with  all  your  poor  attempts  to  deter  us  from  the
performance  of  the  sacred  duties  which  circumstances  have  im-
posed upon  us.  Let  not  our  opponents  amuse  themselves  with
such  hopes.  They  are  vain.  We  trust,  that  we  have  counted
the  cost,  and,  that  we  shall  not  shrink  from  the  consequences.
Our  cause  is  good:  we  will  not  abandon  it.  Our  motives  are  pure:
we  fear  not  to  have  them  investigated.  Let  us  be  united  and  we
shall  be  strong.  Let  us  be  prudent  and  firm  and  we  shall  be  suc-
cessful. May  He  who  has  the  hearts  of  us  all  in  his  hands,  guide
and  direct  us  in  all  our  deliberations,  and  so  control  all  our  exer-
tions, that  they  may  be  productive  of  lasting  benefits  to  our  be?*
teed  country.


y  Google


(502)


TBIAIi  OF  ELI  BRUCE  AND  OTHERS,

tt>R  A  CONSPIRACY  TO  KIDNAP  AND  CARRY  OFF  WM.  MORGAN.
[From  the  Ontario  Meetsnger.]

Tm  following  report  comprises  all  the  material  testimony  ta-
ken on  this  interesting  and  important  trial.  It  is  proper  to  state,
thf*  Willis  Turner  was  called  after  Mrs.  Hall  had  testified,  but
not  being  then  in  court,  other  witnesses  were  sworn  before  him;
and  that  his  testimony  has  been  introduced  next  to  her's  because
it  relates  to  the  same  part  of  the  case.

ONTARIO  GENERAL  SESSIONS— Aug.  20,  162&

Present,  Hon.  Nathaniel  W.  Howell,  Hon.  Chester  Loomi*,
Hon.  John  Price,  and  Hon.  Samuel  Bawson?  judges  of  the  county
courts  of  Ontara  county.

The  indictment  against  Eli  Bruce,  Orsamu*  Turner,  and  J  a-
rtd  Borrow,  for  a  conspiracy  to  kidnap  and  carry  away  William
Morgan  from  the  county  of  Ontario  to  parts  unknown,  was
brought  on  for  trial  at  the  opening  of  the  court  in  the  afternoon.
Counsel  for  the  people,  Daniel  Moeeley,  Esq.,  special  com-
missioner; Bowen  Whiting,  district  attorney  of  Ontario  county;
and  Charles  Butler,  Esq.

Counsel  for  the  defendants*  Hon.  Dudley  Marvin,  and  Mark
H.  Sibley,  Esq.,  of  Caaandaigua;  William  H.  Adams,  Esq.,  of
Lyons;  and  Vincent  Matthews,  endEbenezer  Griffin,  Esq.,  of
Rochester.

The  following  persons  were  sworn  as  jurors:*— Hiram  Anson,
Nathan  Cary,  Jasper  W.  Peet,  Levi  Smith,  Amasa  Spencer,
John  Stults,  Evert  Green,  Abraham  Dodge,  Henry  Lincoln,
Daniel  Short,  John  Peonal,  jun.,  and  Samuel  Reed.

Mr.  Whiting  having  opened  the  case  to  the  jury,  on  behalf  of
the  people,  the  following  testimony  was  introduced.

Israel  R.  Hall,  sworn. — The  witness  was  jailer  of  Ontario
county  in  1826.  He  knew  William  Morgan  who  was  committed
to  the  jail  of  said  county,  on  the  tenth  of  September,  in  that  year,
and  discharged  on  the  twelfth  of  the  same  month,  as  this  witness
has  been  informed.  Witness  was  absent  from  the  jail  at  the  time
°f  Morgan's  commitment  and  discharge*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGflT  ON  AU605B7.  50&

Jeffrey  Chtpwan,  sworn- — Witness  was  a  justice  of  the  peace
in  Canandaigua,  in.  September  1836.     On  the  morning  of  the
tenth  of  that  month,  it  being  Sunday,  Nicholas  6.  Chesebro
caste  to  the  witness'  bouse  and  requested  him  to  go  to  his  office.
He  did  so.     Chesebro  came  in  soon,  and  shortly  after  him,  Ebe-
nezer  C.  Ktngsley,  who  made  a  complaint  against  William  Mor-
gan lor  larceny;  Chesebro  stated  that  Morgan  hod  come  from
Batavia,  and  was,  at  that  time,  about  six  miles  west  of  Canandai-
gua.    Witness  issued  a  warrant  against  Morgan,  directed  to  the
sheriff  or  either  of  the  coostahles  of  Ontario  county,  or  to  Ni-
cholas G.  Chesebro,  one  of  the  coroners  thereof;  by  virtue  of
which  be  was  apprehended,  brought  before  witness  on  Monday
evening,  and  by  him  discharged  for  want  of  sufficient  proof  to
convict  him.    .Chesebro  then  requested  of  witness  a  warrant
against  Morgan*  on  a  demand  which  he  held  against  him  as  as-
signee of  Aaron  Ackley.    A  warrant  was  accordingly  issued,
Morgan  arrested*  judgment  entered  up  against  him  by  his  consent,
execution  thereon  taken  out  and  given  to  Holloway  Hayward,
then  being  a  constable  in  Caaandaigua.

Holloway  Haytoard,  swarn. — The  witness  was  a  constable  of
the  town  of  Canandaigua  in  1826.  He  received  the  warrant  is-
sued against  Morgan  on  the  charge  oC  larceny;  wont  to  Batavia
with  five  others,  of  whom  Chesebro  was  one,  arrested  Morgan  at
that  place,  brought  him  before  Mr.  Chipman  on  Monday,  was
present  during  a  part  of  his  examination,  received  the  execution
against  Morgan,  arrested  him  by  virtue  of  it,  and  committed  him
to  the  jail  of  Ontario  county,  between  eight  and  nine  o'clock  in  .
the  evening  of  the  eleventh  of  September.

Mary  W.  Hall)  sworn*— She  is  the  wife  of  the  jailer.  She  was
not  at  home  when  Morgan  was  committed;  but  came  home  on
Tuesday  the  twelfth  of  September,  and  found  him  in  jail.  Mr*
Hall  went  out  about  dark  on  |he  evening  of  that  day.  A  person
came  to  the  jail  and  inquired  for  Mr.  Hall;  she  told  him  he  had
gone  from  home.  The  person  then  wished  to  go  into  Morgan's  room,
which  she  refused.  He  then  asked  permission  to  have  a  private  _
conversation  with  Morgan,  which  was  also-  refused,  lie  then  in-  ~
sisted  on  paying  the  debt  for  which  he  was  imprisoned,  and  taking
him  away;  this  too  was  refused.  The  person  then  went  in  search
of  Mr.  Hal),  and  soon  returned  without  hading  him,  and  again
urged  witness  to  permit  him  to  pay  the  debt  and  take  Morgan
away;  to  which  she  would  not  consent.  He  then  asked  her  whether
she  would  discharge  him  if  Co).  Sawyer  would  say  it  was  right;
witness  did  not  say  she  would  or  would  not.  The  person  went
,  away  and  soon  came  back  *rith  CoJ.  Sawyer.    Chesebro  advised


y  Google


504  LIGHT  ON  MASONKV.

witness  to  let  Morgan  go.  Lawson  paid  the  amount  for  whifcb
Morgan  was  imprisoned,  which  was  a  little  more  than  three  dol-
lars. Stranger  went  to  the  door  and  whistled.  Witness  unlocked
the  door  of  Morgan's  room,  and  Lawson  went  in  and  led  Mor-
gan into  the  hall  of  the  jail  by  the  arm.  After  they  went  out  of  the
door,  and  before  it  was  shut,  she  heard  the  cry  of  murder.  She
went  to  the  door  and  saw  three  men  taking  Morgan  east;  he  was
struggling,  his  hat  fell  off,  and  one  of  them  took  it  up.  She  saw  ■
no  other  person  about  the  jaii  An  unknown  person  rapped  oa
the  well  curb,  and  a  carriage  soon  passed  by  the  jail  from  the  •
west  It  went  east,  and  shortly  returned,  driven  with  great  rapi-
dity. This  took  place  about  nine  in  the  evening  of  the  twelfth
of  September.     She  has  not  seen  Morgan  since.

WtUia  Turner,  sworn. — In  September  1826,  witness  lived  with
Mr.  Freeman  Atwater  in  the  street  on  which, the  jail  is  situated,  a
little  west  of  it,  and  on  the  same  side  of  the  road.  As  he  came
out  of  Atwater*s  gate  one  evening,  he  met  Chesebro  and  Sawyer
going  west.  Saw  Sawyer  pick  up  a  stick.  They  turned  about  and
went  to  the  west  corner  of  the  jail,  and  were  there  whispering  to-
gether. Witness  went  to  Mr.  Hall's  well,  which  is  in  the  street
a  little  west  of  the  jail,  for  water;  and  as  he  was  turning  the  wa-
ter into  his  pail  he  heard  the  cry  of  murder.  He  saw  three  men
coming  down  the  jail  steps  withtnerr  arms  locked.  Heard  the  cry
of  murder  once  while  they  were  coming  down  the  steps,  and  twice
after  they  had  left  them.  Mrs.  Hall  was  standing  in  the  door
Some  one,  he  believes  Chesebro, -stepped  the  mouth  of  the  man
who  cried  murder.  When  they  had  gone  a  little  distance  from  the
steps,  the  middle  man  of  the  three  appeared  to  hang  back;  his  hat
fell  off,  and  a  Mr.  Osborn  took  it  up  and  gave  it  to  Sawyer.  Asked
Sawyer  what  the  rumpus  was,  who -replied  that  a  man  had  been
arrested  for  debt' and  was  unwilling  to  go.  Saw  Sawyer  rap  or
the  well  curb.  Hubbard's  carriage<soon  drove  by  rapidly  to  the
dast,  with  Hubbard  driving;  the  horses  were  gray,  and  the  cur-
tains down.  The  carriage  went  a  little  beyond  the  pound,  east  of
the  jail,  and  turned  about.  A  man  was  put  in  by  four  others,
who  then  got  in,  and  the  carriage  drove  west  and  went  round  the
corner  of  die  tavern  then  kept  by  Mr.  Kingsley.  Witness  followed
the  men  as  they  went  east;  and  was  near  the  pound  when  they  got
into  the  carriage.  'It  turned  round  before  they  got  in.  As  the  car-
riage was  returning  west,  some  one  in  it  cried  out,  'Hubbard,
why  don't  you  drive  faster;  damn  you,  why  don't  you  drive  raster.*
Hubbard  then  cracked  his  whip.  Had  seen  Morgan,  but  did  not
know  whether  he  was  the  man  taken  from  the  ja}L  Did  not  know
those  who  carne  down  the  steps.    The  moom  shone  bright.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


UGH1*   ON   MASONRY.  505

Hiram  Hubbart,  sworn. — In  September,  1826,  the  witness
kept  a  livery  stable  in  Canandaigua.     He  was  applied  to  by  Mr.
Chauncey  H.  Coe  to  take  a  party  to  Rochester  on  the  twelfth. of
September,  and  was  paid  for  it  last  summer  or  fall  by  Mr,  Nicho-
las G.  Chesebro.     His  was  a  yellow  two-horse  carriage.     His
horses  were  gray.     They  were  at  the  barn  near  Mr.  Kingsley's
1  tavern,  west  of  the  jail.     About  the  time  he  was  ready,  some  per-
son on  the  side  walk,  then  and  now  unknown  to  the  witness,  told
him  to  go  on  the  Palmyra  road  when  he  was  ready,  for  the  party
had  gone  on.     This  was  the  only  direction  he  had  as  to  setting
out.     He  did  not  hear  a  rap  an  the  well  curb.     He  started  about
nine  o'clock  in  thoevening.     It  was  pleasant  and  the  moon  shone.
No  one  was  in  the  carriage  when  he  left  the  barn.     He  went  be-
yond the  jail  east  fifty  or  sixty  rods,  and  stopped  opposite  the
long  house.     His  party,  supposed  to  be  five  in  number,  there
opened  the  carriage  and  got  in.     He  heard  no  noise.     He  pre?
sumed  the  people'  in  the  road  were  his  party. ,  He  knew,  none  of
them  then,  nor  where  they  came  from,  and  has  not  known  them
since.     He  cannot  say  whether  he  saw  them  get  into  the  car-
riage.    He  was  not  very  particular  in  noticing  them.     After  the
party  had  got  in,  he  turned  round.     On  his  way  to  Rochester  he
first  stopped  at  Brace's,  six  miles  from  Canandaigua,  to  water;
the  people  had  not  gone  to  bed;  some  of  the  company  went  in;
he  don't  know  bitf  he  saw  them  by  candle  light;  he  don't  know
how  many  went  in.     He  stopped  again  at  Bacon's,  in  Victor,  or
at  the  house  beyond;  people  had  gone  to  bed.     Stopped  also  at
Mendon;  nobody  was  up.  Did  not  feed  his  horses  at  either  of  these
places.  He  stopped  at  Stone's,  in  Pittsford,  long  enough  to  water.
The  bar  keeper  was  up  waiting  the  return  of  some  young  men
belonging  to  the  house.   Don't  remember  whether  any  of  his  party
got  out  beyond  Brace's.  He  stopped  in  Rochester,  at  the  large  wa-
tering place  in  Main  street,  ten,  or  twelve  minutes;  it  was  just  at
twilight      Some  of  the  party  got  out  here,  but  he  don't  know
whether  any  went  from  the  carriage;  he  saw  no  one  of  them  then
that  he  knew,  and  has  seen  none  since  to  recognize  them.     The
party  desired  him  to  go  on  beyond  Rochester.     He  consented  to
go;  he  took  the  Lewiston  road.  On  arriving  at  Hanford's,  which
was  then  a  tavern,  one  of  the  party  got  out.     He  called  for  feed
for  his  horses,  but  got  none;  he  went  about  eighty  or  one  hundred
rods  beyond  the  house  and  stopped  near  a  place  of  woods.  It  was*
not  a  usual  stopping  place;  the  party  got  out  before  he  turned  his
carriage;  he  thinks  he  must  have  seen  them,  but  he  saw  no  one
that  he  knew,  and  has  seen  no  one  of  them  since.  He  don't  know
why  he  stopped  at  that  place,  but  presumes  his  party  told  him  to
Tt


506  .     LIGHT  OK   feftASOff&Y.

do  so.  Returning  he  stopped  at  Hartford's  and  endeavored  to
get  feed  hr  his  horses,  but  could  not  He  saw  two  or  three  carria-
ges going  out  of  Rochester  when  he  did,  which  turned  round  aad
went  back.  One  was  a  small  carriage;  its  color  he  cannot  re-
collect. After  he  had  turned  round  be  met  a  hack  with  two  hor-
ses, near  the  house;  thinks  it  was  green;  did  not  sjoe  it  stop,  nor
hear  it  hailed;  thinks  it  was  not  the  hack  he  saw  going  out  of
Rochester.  He  heard  nothing  from  his  party  about  carriages
coming  from  Rochester.  Knows  Mr,  Piatt,  who  kept  a  livery  sta-
ble in  Rochester,  but  not  his  carriages.  No  one  returned  in  his
carriage  to  Rochester  except  two  transient  persons  whom  he
took  in  on  the  road,  neither  of  whom  was  known  to  him.  An
unknown  man  on  horseback  passed  his  carrriage  between  Ca-
nandaigua  and  Rochester.

Ezra  Piatt,  sworn. — In  September,  1826,  the  witness  kept  a
livery  stable  at  Rochester;  He  is  a  Mason  and  a  member  of  *
Chapter.  A  lodge  had  previously  been  established  at  Lewiston.
A  Chapter  was  expected  to  be  installed  in  that  place,  and  the  Ro-
chester Chapter  had  been  authorized  to  install  it.  It  is  usual  for
the  Grand  Chapter  to  issue  to  suitable  persons  a  special  commis-
sion for  such  a  purpose.  The  first  officers  of  a  Chapter  would
be  proper  commissioners.  After  the  fact  of  the  Rochester  Chap-
ter having  received  a  commission  to  install  one  at'  Lewiston  had
been  for  some  time  known,  and  about  ten  days  before  the  instal-
lation, the  witness  was  aaked  if  he  could  furnish  carriages  to  take
the  commissioners  to  Lewiston;  and  he  said  that  he  couJd,  but
advised  that  he  should  take  the  stage.  He  stated  he  could  nqt
go  himself  by  reason  of  ill  health.  About  four  or  five  o'clock  in
the  morning  of  the  day,  or  day  but  one,  before  the  Lewiston  instal-
lation, some  person  called  at  his  front  door  and  said  he  wanted  a
carriage  to  go  to  Lewiston,  and  desired  it  might  be  sent  to  fins-
worth's,  where  the  company  was.  He  then  went  away  imme-
diately. The  witness  called  up  his  driver,  whose  name  was
Parker.  The  driver  had  been  in  witness'  employ  several  months,
but  left  him  a  month  or  two  afterwards  on  account  of  sore  eyes.
He  don't  know  where  he  lives  now.  The  carriage  was  sent
soon  after  it  was  called  for.  The  witness  did  not  see  it  start
He  had  two  carriages,  one  of  a  cinnamon  color,  or  yellow,  and
the  other  green.  He  thinks  Ithe  first  was  taken.  The  horses
were  black,  or  of  a  brown  bay  color.  They  were  gone  several
days.  He  supposed  the  carriage  was  for  the, commissioners,
and  had  no  intimation  that  Morgan  was  going  in  it.  He  did  no*
see  the  person  that  called  for  the  carriage,  and  has  never  been
able  to  ascertain  who  he  is.  The  only  charge  he  made  was  on  f  h'

D.gitizfed  by  Google  -#A!


.  A'-Jll/j


•in.


'  UOHT  ON  KASOHET.  507

paper  in  his  wallet,  in  these  words,  'Grand  Chapter  pro  tempore,
to  carriage  to  Lewiston.'  lie  supposed  the  carriage  was  for  the
Chapter,  and  expected  some  one,  in  its  behalf,  would  pay  him;  but
he  has  not  been  paid,  and  has  never  asked  any  person  to  pay  him.
He  has  heard  that  some  of  the  Chapter  went  in  a  steam  boat  to
Lewiston.  He  knows  Hiram,  Hubbard,  but  did  not  see  him  or
S  carriage  with  gray  horses  that  day.  He  let  to  George  Ketchum
a  carriage  and  horses  to  go  to  Batavia,  the  day  before  Morgan  went
to  that  place.  If  the  installation  was  the  fourteenth,  his  carriage
must  have  gone  the  eleventh,  or  twelfth.  It  was  not  engaged  on
Sunday  evening,  nor  any  thing  then  said  about  it.  Reuben  Leo-
nard kept  tavern  in  Rochester  at  that  time.  Don't  know  that  any
persons  were  at  Leonard's  in  relation  to  carriages  to  go  to  Lewis*
ton.  Was  not  there  himself.  He  knows  nothing  of  a  carriage
.and  horses  being  employed,  on  the  Friday  evening  previous,  to
go  to  Batavia.

Harry  QlmsUad,  sworn. — He  resided  at  Greece,  near  Hand-
ford's  landing,  in  September,  1826.  -  One  morning  of  that  month,
just  at  daylight,  he  saw  a  carriage  with  a  pair  of  gray  horses  in
the  road  south  of  Handford's.  The  horses  were  very  sweaty  and
appeared  to  be  much  fatigued.  The  curtains  of  the  carriage  were
drawn.  There  were  two  men  on  the  box.  He  did  not  know
either  of  them.  Does  not  know  how  far  it  went  beyond  Hand-
ford's.  About  fifteen  minutes  afterwards  he  saw  the  carriage
standing  under  Handford's  shed  opposite  his  house.  About  a&
hour  after  sunrise  he  saw  the  same  carriage  come  on  the  Ridge
road,  take  the  River  road,  and  proceed  towards  Rochester.  Its
curtains  were  up,  and  five  or  six  men  in  it.  He  was  standing  in
the  road.  He  saw  no  other  carriage  that  morning  coming  from
Rochester.  The  end  of  the  Ridge  road  is  a  few  rods  from  Hand-
ford's house.  .  A  person  passed  on  a  brown  mare,  whom  he  has
since  ascertained  to  be  Edward  Doyle.

Silas  Walker,  sworn. — Witness  lives  on  the  River  road,  directly
opposite  the  point  where  the  Ridge  road  intersects  it.  On  the
morning  of  the  twelfth  of  September,  1826,  while  talking  with
Mr.  Olmstead,  he  saw  a  yellow  carriage  with  gray  horses  pass  by/
When  it  returned  the  curtains  were  up,  and  three,  four,  or  five
persons  in  it,  one  of  whom  he  knew  to  be  Burrage  Smith.  A
person  on  Mr  Piatt's  brown  mare  was  forward  of  the  carriage.
He  saw  no  other  carriage  that  morning,  having  been  from  home
most  of  the  time.

Silo*  Walbridge,  sworn*— He  lived,  in  1826,  in  Clarkson,
about  fifteen  miles  from  the  River  road.  Near  the  time  of  the
races,  which  commenced  that  year  on  the  fourteenth  of  Sen

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


506  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

tember,  he  was  applied  to  by  a  gentleman  for  a  pair  of  horses  to
go  before  a  hack,  which  he  stated  would  arrive  between  eight  and
ten  o'clock  in  the  morning.  The  gentleman  said  he  did  not  want
a  driver.  Witness  at  first  declined  letting  his  horses  go  without  a
driver,  but  finally  consented,  harnessed  his  horses  about  eight
o'clock,  and  tied  them  under  his  sfeed.  The  hack  came  along  be-
tween eight  and  nine  o'clock,  and  when  it  approached  his  bouse
the  gentleman  went  along  by  the  side' of  it  and  had  some  conver-
sation with  the  driver  who  soon  drove  on.  He  then  said  he  did
not  want  the  horses.  A  person,  »iace  dead,  told  witness  what
was  to* take  place,  and  when  the  hack  came  in  sight,  pointed  .it
out  to  him.  The  hack  was  of  a  dark  color,  and  the  horses
dark  bay.

Surah  Wilder,  sworn. — The  witness  lived,  in  September,  1826,
with  Capt.  Isaac  Allen,  about  five  miles  east  from  Clarkson..
Allen  does  not  keep  tavern,  and  there  are  no  houses  near  bun.
About  the  eleventh  or  twelfth  of  September  in  that  year,  at  ten  or
eleven  o'clock  in  the  forenoon,  Mr.  ■      came  and  inquired

for  Capt.  Allen.     Did  not  know  where  he  was.     Mr.

went  hastily  in  pursuit  of  him,  hallooed  for  him,  soon  found  him,
and  returned  after  the  hack.  The  hack  came  up  before  the  house
in  about  fifteen  minutes.  It  was  brown,and  the  horses  were  brown;
the  curtains  were  down,  and  the  day  was  very  warm.  Did  not
know  the  driver.     Capt.  Allen's  horses  were  brought  up,  and

Capt.  Allen  and  Mr.  changed  tile  horses;  those  that

came  with  the  hack  were  put  in  Capt.  Allen's  bam.  The  hack
went  west,  and  Mr.  — — —  with  it,  and  returned  about  an  hour
before  sunset  the  next  day.  The  curtains  were  up.  and  no  one
in  it.  Capt.  Allen  had  gone  to  Clarkson  but  had  told  witness
where  the  horses  that  came  with  the  hack  the  preceding  day
might  be  found.  They  were  put  to  it  again,  and  the  hack  "returned
to  the  east.     Don't  know  who  was  with  it  when  it  returned.

William  Cooper,  sworn.— Witness  lives  in  Clarkson.  About
the  middle  of  September,  1826,  coming  from  the  west  he  passed
a  carriage  and  two  pair  of  horses  m  the  road  about  four  miles
west  of  Clarkson,  and  about  one  third  of  the  distance  from  Capt.
Allen's  to  Mr.  Spencer's.  It  was  between  eleven  and  twelve
o'clock  in  the  forenoon.  Does  not  recollect  the  day  of  the
month,  but  it  was  near  the  time  of  the  races  that  year.  They
were  then  training  horses  on  the  race  grounds.  He  cannot  say
whether  the  horses  were  attached  to  the  carriage  or  not;  they  ap-
peared to  be  changing  them.  A  man  on  the  box,  whom  he  had
never  seen  before,  was  holding  the  lines;  one  span  of  horses  was
Capt.  Allen's,  the  other  he  did  not  know.     The  weather  Was


y  Google


£TOHT   ON  HA80NSY.  ^509

very  warm,  and  the  curtains  of  the  carriage  were  town.  There
were  four  or  five  men  in  a  lot  south  of  the  Ridge  road  convening;
two  about  fifteen  rods  from  the  carriage,  the  others  nearer.  Two
j«f  them  ware  sitting,  the  others  standing.  Witness  knew  seve-
ral pf  the  men:  Capt.  Allen,  Mr.  Spencer,  and  Mr. .     He

afterwards  thought  that  another's  name  was  Augur,  but  is  not
positive  of  it.     The  carriage  did  not  start  while  he  saw  it.

Solomon  C.  Wright,  sworn.— He  kept  a  public  house  n  Nia-
gara county,  in  September,  1626.  His  house  is  on  the  north  side
of  the  Ridge  road,  at  the  point  of  its  intersection  by  the  Lock  port
road,  six  miles  east  of  Col.  Mollineux's,  and  three  and  a  half
miles  north  of  Lockport.  In  the  month  of  September  in  that
year,  on  the  day  before  the  installation  at  Lewistoo,  just  at  night,
a  two-horse  pleasure  carriage  or  hack  droye  under  his  shed,  and
afterwards  into  his  barn,  which  is  a  few  rods  farther  from  his  bouse.
The  barn  doors  are  usually  shut.  The  feeding  troughs  in  the
shed  were  broken  down,  and  the  carriage  was  driven .  into  the
bam  to  feed  the  horses^  and  they  ate  from  boxes  placed  before
them  on  the  floor  where  the  carriage  stood,  in  the  farther  end  of
the  barn.  Don't  know  whether  they  were  taken  from  the  car-
riage. The  horses  were  not  changed.  Did  not  see  those  who  came
in  the  carriage  get  out  or  in.  Don't  know  where  they  got  out,  %  nor
how  many  there  were.  Did  not  know  any  of  them  or  the  driver.
Has  never  seen  the  driver  since.  All  who  came  in  the  carriage,
including  the  driver,  took  supper  at  his  house,  and  each  paid  his
own  bill  to  him.  His  bar  keeper  was  gone,  and  he  tended  bar.
Was  in  the  bar  when  they  first  came  in,  and  saw  them  go  through
the  bar  room  to  supper,  The  driver  obtained  food  for  the  horses.
Witness  does  not  know  that  any  persons  came  in  the  carriage.
Did  not  see  the  door  open.  Don't  know  whether  the  curtains  were
down  or  not.  Don't  know  that  any  one  was  in  the  carriage  during
•upper.  Saw.no  one  go  to  the  carriage  during  supper,  and  did  not
go  himself.  He  once  went  into  the  barn  to  find  a  servant  while  the
carriage  was  there.  Neither  saw  nor  beard  any  person.  Passed
the  shed  in  going  to  the  barn.  There  were  horses  under  it  Jt  was
dark  when  they  finished  supper.  After  supper  tbey  proceeded
west  Did  not  see  them  get  into  the  carriage.  His  bouse,  shed,
and  barn,  are  on  the  same  side  of  the  road.  The  installation  was
talked  of.  Don't  know  how  many  went  in  the  carriage.  There
were  less  in  his  house  after  the  carriage  had  gon?  than  before.
Did  not  see  it  start.  Nothing  mysterious  about  it  that  attracted
particular  attention.  There  were  persons  at  bis  house  who  did  not
come  in  the  carriage.  He  did  not  know  them  or  their  business.
Isaac  ffawwett  came  to  witeeia'  wall  to  get  watt*  ahont  the  tu»*

Txa

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


510  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

the  carriage  came.  Had  no  conversation  with  him.  He  has  since
moved  to  Canada.  ,  Witness  knew  Eli  Bruce  at  that  time.  Did
not  see  him  at  his  house  that  evening.  He  knows  Elisha  Mather
did  not  see  him  that  night.  He  was  at  witness'  bouse  about  that
time.  Thinks  it  was  before.  Saw  him  the  next  day,  or  next  day  but
one.  The  next  day  a  carriage  passed  his  house  from  the  west  to
the  east.  Don't  know  whether  it  stopped,  nor  whether  it  was  the
same  that  was  at  his  house  the  preceding  night.  A  hack  stopped
at  his  house  the  next  day.    It  is  usual  for  carriages  to  stop  there.

William  MoUiiuw,  sworn. — In  .September,  1826,  witness
lived  in  Fleming,  Niagara  county,  on  the  Ridge  road,  at  a  point
where  it  is  intersected  by  the  road  from  Lockport;  a  little  more
than  twelve  miles  from  Lewihton,  six  from  Solomon  €.  TV  right's,
and  six  or  seven  from  Lockport.  On  the  night  before  or  the
night  after  the  installation,  about  twelve  o'cloc  k,  I  li  Bruce,  wha
4hen  lived  at  Lockport,  came  to  witness'  house  with  two  stran-
gers. Bruce  came  up  stairs  where  witness  was  in  bed,  and  said
some  of  his  friends  were  going  to  Lewiston,  and  asked  him  for  a
change'  of  horses.  Bruce  told  witness  that  they  should  be  used
carefully.  Witness  called  up  his  son,  and  after  consulting  with
turn  concluded  to  let  Bruce  have  his  horses.  Bruce  and  witness'
son  got  up  the  horses.  Does  not  know  from  what  place  the  car-
riage came,  nor  whether  Bruce  went  on  with  it.  One  of  Brace's
companions  stayed  over  night  at  witness'  house,  and  took  care
of  the  horses  that  were  with  the  carriage,  and  helped  change  them
when  it  returned.  Does  not  know  who  drove.  Bruce  spoke  of
Brown  as  the  driver.  The  horses  returned  the  next  morning  a
little  before  sunrise,  in  the  charge  of  Brown.  Ibe  carriage  was
large  and  of  a  dark  brown  or  black  color.  He  saw  no  persons
but  Bruce  and  the  two  strangers  that  came  with  him.  Can't  say
which  road  the  carriage  took  in  the  morning,  nor  how  many  were
in  it.  Did  not  see  Bruce  again  till  next  winter.  Brown  said
Bruce  would  pay  for  the  horses.  Witness  has  not  been  paid.
Has  an  account  with  Braces

Corydon  Fox,  sworn. — In  September,  1826,  the  witness  Jived
at  Lewiston,  with  Mr.  Barton,  in  the  capacity  of  a  stage, driver.
The  night  before  or  night  after  the  installation,  between  ten  and
twelve  o'clock,  Mr.  Qarton  ceiled  witness  up  and  told  him  to  get
his  hack  and  horses  ready  to  go  to  Youngstown.  When  he  was
ready  Bruce  got  on  the  box  with  him  and  directed  him  to  drive
anto  a  back  street  to  a  carriage  which  h#'found  standing  there
without  any  horses  attached  to  it  He  drove  by  the  carriage  ia
the  back  street  Some  persons  were  standing  near  it  One  or
*w©  gtt  Mt  «f  iti  and  after  they  and  Brace  had  got  in  his  hack.


LIGHT   ON  MA80NRY.  511

Bruce  told  him  to  drive  to  Col.  Ring's,  about  six  miles  distant.
He  would  have  noticed  violence  if  there  had  been  any,  but  he  saw
none.  Saw  nothing  brought  from  the  carriage  in  the  road  to  his
hack.  On  arriving  at  King's  he  stopped,  by  direction  of  Bruce,
who  got  out  and  called  to  King,  who  came  down  into  the  hall,
where  he  and  Bruce  conversed  together.  While  they  were  con-
versing, some  one  in  the  carriage  asked  for  water  in  a  whining
voice,  to  which  Bruce  answered,  'You  shall  have  some  in  a  mo-
ment.' King  and  Bruce  then  got  in,  and  he  drove  to  the  burying
ground,  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  from  King's,  and  half  a
mile  from  the  fort,  where  he  stopped,  by  Brace's  direction.  There
were  no  houses  near  The  party,  four  in  number,  got  out  and
proceeded  side  by  side  towards  the  fort,  and  witness,  by  Brace's
orders,  returned  to  Lewiston,  where  he  arrived  before  daylight.
The  witness  was  often  called  up  late  at  night,  and  frequently
drove  passengers  whom  he  did  not  know;  but  it  is  not  usual  to
take  up  a  party  in  the  back  street:  and  he  never  before  left  a  party
at  the  burying  ground,  which' is  not  an  ordinary  stopping  place.
The  next  day  he  saw  Bruce  at  the  Frontier  H«»use,  in  Lewiston.
Knows  not  what  became  of  the  carriage  in  the  road.  Saw  no-
thing unusual  in  the  manner  of  getting  in  and  out  of  his  hack.

The  witness  was  asked  whether  he  was  taken  into  the  lodge
soon  after  this  occurrence;  but  the  court  said  the  question  was
improper,  and  it  -was  not  answered.

Ebenezer  Petvy,  sworn.-1- Lives  in  Lewiston,  on  Back  or  Ridge
street.  On  the  night  following,  the  13th  of  September.  1826,
after  twelve  o'clock,  he  saw  a  person  harnessing  a  carriage  at
Barton's  stable;  Heard  it  rftart,  and  went  to  the  door.  Saw  a  car-
riage coming,  which  went  a  little  distance  beyond  another  stand-
ing in  the  street  without  horses,  and  stopped.  Two  men  were
on  the  box.  One  of  them  he  knew  to  be  Corydon  Fox,  and  the
other  he  recognized  at  an  examination  at  Lockport  about  two
months  afterwards,  and  ascertained  to  be  I  li  Bruce.  Witness
thought  something  strange  was  going  on  and  went  into  his  garden
near  his  house,  where  he  had  a  view  of  what  took  place  in  the
road.  Saw  a  man  go  from  the  box  of  the  carriage  which  had
driven  by,  to  the  one  standing  in  the  street,  and  opened  the  door.
Some  one  got  out  backwards  by  the  assistance  of  two  in  the  car-
riage. He  had  no  hat,  but  a  handkerchief  on  his  head,  and  ap-
peared intoxicated  and  helpless.  They  wept  to  Fox's  carriage
and  got  in.  The  man  he  supposed  to 'be  drunk  was  helped  in.
One  went  back  and  took  something  from  the1  carriage  they  had
left;  he  thinks  a  jug;  returned,  got  in,  they  drove  off,  and  he  saw
no  more  of  them.    Witness  saw  no  person  in  the  unhiraessed

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC\


3lJ  MOOT  OJI  *A«OffftT.

carnage,  the  cortams  being  down.    Said  nothing  about  what  he
had  semi  for  four  or  five  months.

[The  prosecution  then  called  Edward  Giddina,  hut  the  defend-
ant's counsel  objected  to  his  being  sworn  because  he  bad  no
religious  belief  whatever.  After  hearing  the  testimony  rapecttog
Us  religious  opinions,  and  the  arguments  of  counsel  on  both  sides,
lbs  court  unanimously  decided  that  he  was  not  a  competent  wit-
ness. The  evidence  in  relation  to  Mr.  Giddina  is  subjoined.  It
is  not  introduced  in  its  order  as  given  in  court,  because  it  has  no
direct  bearing  upon  the  main  question.]

Elisha  .Adams,  sworn. — He  lived  in  Porter,  Niagara  county,
in  1826,  about  two  miles  down  the  lake  from  the  village  of
Youngstown.  Hie  troops  left  the  fort  in  June,  except  one  old
soldier  who  died  there  soon  after  they  had  gone.  About  the  mid-
dle of  September  Giddina  went  to  York.  Was  absent  three  or
four  days,  and  witness  took  charge  of  the  ferry  and  his  house
during  his  absence.  Giddina*  house  was  on  the  fiat  below  the
fort,  twenty  or  thirty  rods  distant  from  it.  That  part  of  the  fort
nearest  to  his  house  is  the  magazine,  which  forms  part  of  the  wall.
There  were  ammunition,  quarter  master's  stores,  &c.  in  the  fort
He  weot  away  the  day  before  Giddins  came  home.  Was  frequently
at  the  fort  in  September.  Giddins  had  charge  of  the  fort  and  pub-
lic property  there.  Don't  know  where  the  key  of  the  magazine  was
while  Giddins  was  absent  Supposed  it  was  in  the  mess  house,
which  is  to  the  left  of  the  magazine  as  viewed  from  Giddins'
house.  Heard  no  one  in  the  magazine  while  tending  ferry.  Don't
know  ihat  any  one  was  there.  Heard,  about  the  time  of  Giddins'
return,  of  Morgan's  having  been  brought  there.  Never  hear  so
from  either  of  the  defendants.  Don't  know  that  food  or  drink  was
earned  to  the  magazine  while  Giddins  was  absent  Was  m  it  both
before  and  since  the  troops  left  the  fort  About  the  time  the  pub-
lic property  was  sold,  he  was  employed  to  put  things  in  order  at
the  fort.  Witness  went  to  Giddins'  house  at  his  request,  but  at
what  time  he  cannot  tell,  and  saw  there  Col.  King.  Dr.  Max-
well and  Obed  Smith  had  toothing  to  do  with  them.  Giddins  said
he  had  some  Work  for  him  to  do;  showed  it  to  him.  Went  home
without  doing  it,  having  no  tools  with  him.

John  Jackson,  sworn. — In  the  fall  of  1826  he  lived  in  Lock-
port  The  night  before  the  installation  he  stayed  at  Giddins',  his
brother  in  law.  Went  to  installation.  DoaH  know  whether  Gut
dins  went.  Before  going  to  the  installation  he  went  with  Giddina  to
the  magazine.  Twenty  or  thirty  minutes  previously  to  setting  ou%
Giddins  had  a  pistol.  Requested  witness  tolffeeit;  he  declined.
Did  »etM*  Giddins  lay  It  aside.    Did  not  eee  it  after  they  kft  the

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  513

house*  Giddins  carried  something  with  him.  Don't  know  what.
Witness  approached  within  about  two  rods  of  the  magazine.  Gid-
dins went  up  to  the  door.  Don't  know  whether  it  was  opened  by
Giddins  or  not.  Something  was  said  inside  of  the  door.  He  heard
a  man's  voice  not  uncommonly  loud,  and  supposed  a  man  was  in
the  magazine.  Don't  know  what  was  said,  nor  whether  he  heard
the  voice  before  or  after  Giddins  reached  the  door.  Thought  he
had  better  be  missing,  and  immediately  retreated..  Giddins  soon
followed  him.  Witness  started  in  ten  or  twelve  minutes  for  Lew-
iston.  Giddins  informed  witness  wb,ose  pistol  it  was  that  he
showed  him,  but  the  defendants'  counsel  objected  to  his  repeating
what  Giddins  had  told  him.  He  never  had  any  conversation  with
either  of  the  defendants  respecting  their  participation  in  the  ab-
duction of  Morgan.  ,

William  Hotckkiss,  sworn. — Three  or  four  days  after  the  in-
stallation, w*nt  to  the  fort  to  make  inquiries  respecting  a  man's
being  confined  there — found  out  nothing.  Did  not  go  to  the
magazine — nor  did  Giddins  while  witness  was  there.

TThe  testimony  on  the  part  of  the  people  closed  here.

Mr.  Whiting  stated  that  the  bill  against  Turner  and.  Darrow,
two  of  the  defendants,  had  been  found  on  the  testimony  of  Gid-
dins alone,  and  that  he  having  been  excluded,  the  prosecution  has
no  evidence  whatever  against  them.

Mr.  Adams  addressed  the  jury  in  behalf  of  Bruce,  and  Mr.
Mosley  for  the  people.  The  jury  retired  at  nine  o'clock  on
Friday  evening,  after  receiving  a  charge  from  his  honor  Judge
Howell;  and  having  been  absent  about  three  hours,  returned  a
verdict  of  guilty  against  Bruce,  and  not  guilty  in  favor  of
Turner  and  Darrow.

The  court  suspended  their  judgment  against  Bruce  in  order  to
take  the  advice  of  the  Supreme  Court  on  some  important  ques-
tions of  law  which  were  raised  during  the  trial.


y  Google


(514)


A  CANDID  APPMAL  TO  PROFESSORS  OF  RfiUCOOtf,

VFOH  TBB  SUBJECT  OF

SPECULATIVE  FREE  MASONRY.

Jf  ftaai^fl  B.  HoTcsacqr,  AnUm*  Eider  in  the  «w*  J*«rijtefi«n
Cfcre*  0/  Le  Hoy,  ^ftw  For*.

Tub  Christian  religion  has  ever  been  marked  for  its  plainaess
and  simplicity;  and  if  there  be  any  difference  in  the  degree  of  the
excellence  of  the  characteristics  which  are  attached  to  it,  the
comprehensiveness  of  the  doctrines  which  it  inculcates,  and  the
reasonableness  of  the  demands  which  it  makes  upe&  the  services
of  its  votaries,  bold  a  prominent  place  anWhg  these  characteris-
tics. The  church  which  is  founded  apon  this  religion  has,  in  ful-
filment of  prophecies  long  since  uttered  respecting  her,  been  called
to  pass  through  the  fires  of  persecution,  and  has  been  almost  over*
whelmed  by  the  billows  of  affliction;  to  which  truth  many  a  ran-
somed soul  that  now  mingles  with  the  glorified  throng  of  'the  just
made  perfect'  can  bear  testimony.  But  there  are  evils  to  wjiich
the  religion  of  the  gospel  is  subject  which  can  bear  no  compari-
son with  these/  For  these  outward  tribulations  can  affect  only
its  tf  amoral  condition,  and  they  ultimately  produce  good  rather
than  evil.  They  serve  as.  fuel  to  feed  the  flame  of  its  spirituality,
and  to  enliven  that  fire  which  is  to  purify  it  and  purge  h  from  the
dross  of  error  and  hypocrisy.  The  days  of  Z ion's  prosperity
are  the  days  of  her  danger;  and  when  foes  are  fewest  from  with-
out,  it  becomes  her  friends  to  watch  with  the  most  assiduous  care
over  her  purity,  and  to  guard  her  with  the  strictest  scrutiny  from
the  innovations  of  those  heresies  and  delusions  which,  if  foster-
ed, will  render  her  odious  to  God,  with  whom  all  other  foes,
whether  in  heaven,  on  earth,  or  in  hell,  are  not  to  be  compared.
Not  that  the  vigilance  of  her  members  alone  is  to  preserve  her
from  such  contaminations,  for  it  is  the  province  of  her  Guardian
above  to  preserve  her  internal  as  well  as  outward  prosperity,  and
speed  her  march  from  triumph  to  triumph,  until  all  the  glorious
things  that  are  spoken  in  her  behalf  shall  be  consummated.  But
it  is  the  privilege  as  well  as  the  duty  of  all  die  true  disciples  of
the  Cross,  to  endeavor  to  seek  out  and  unveilerery  latent inkmity
*hat  lurks  within  her  bosom  and  pollutes  her  ajfredness;  and  hap


y  Google


LIGHT   OV   MASOlfftY.  515

py  are  we  all,  if  this  privilege  of  co-operating  with  our  covenant
God  in  fulfilling  his  will,  be  ours.

It  is  not  my  present  design  to  comment  upon  all  the  evils  of
tiiis  description  which  at  the  present  day  exist  in  die  church,  and
claim  and  receive  admission  into  her  sanctuaries.  To  make  a
few  passing  remarks  upon  one  of  them,  which  has  long  lain  un-
molested within  her  embrace,  deadening  the  spiritual  vitality,  es-
tranging the  hearts  and  alienating  the  affection©  of  her  members,
is  the  business  to  which  I  have  now  assigned  myself.  This  evil
is  the  institution  of  speculative  Free  Ma$onry;  and  it  has  been  so
long  upheld  by  the  charities  and  the  countenance  of  professing
Christians,  that  to  undo  the  evils  which  it  has  hitherto  created,
and  is  still  creating,  in  the  religious  world,  will  require  no  ordinary
degree  of  Christian  exertion.  The  public  mind  is  already  some-
what awake  to  its  dangerous  tendency  upon  our  civil  liberties,
and  my  voice  has  been  mingled  with  .that  of  many  of  my  fellow
citizens  in  opposing  it  upon  patriotic  principles;  but  in  attempting
to  expose  its  gross  impiety,  I  am  well  a  ware  that  I  am  touching
another  and  more  delicate  chord  which  may  vibrate  in  tones  of
opposition  that  have  never  yet  been  awakened.  But  it  would  be
a  poor  fulfilment  of  the  duties  which,  as  a  patriot  and  a  professing
Christian,  I  owe  to  my  country  and  my  God,  were  I  to  confine
rny  feeble  energies  to  commenting  upon  the  anti- republicanism  of
Masonry,  when  I  have  so  much  reason  to  fear  that  it  is  wresting
from  very  many  of  my  fellow  creatures  their  inheritance  to  those
incorruptible  joys  which  shall  endure  When  earthly  dynasties  and
temporal  kingdoms  shall  be  for  ever  forgotten.  It  is  the  princi-
ples of  Masonry  alone  that  I  combat;  Tor  in  them  do  I  believe
the  great  evil  consists, *and  nothing  but  their  entire  eradication
.  can  arrest  its  fearful  progress.  The  rights  aid  benefits  they
confer  are  sordid  and  temporal  alone.  They  foster  crime,  feed  •
avarice,  and  promote  social  divisions  Beyend  the  grave  they
hold  forth  no  rational  hope,  nor  can  the  utmost  extent  of  their
power  impart  a  single  ray  of  peace  to  the  departing  soul.  If  any
of  it3  former  votaries  are  now  enjoying  the  rewards  of  the  blessed,
(and  such  I  trust  and  believe  there  are,)  it  can  only  be  accounted
for  upon  the  presumption  that  although  they  were  Masons  iit
name,  they  were  not  such  in  reality.  Masonry  itself  could  never
have  sped  their  course  thither,  nor  are  they  now  exalted  above
those  who  nev<>r  bowed  at  its  shrine  But  that  these  remarks
may  not  seem  rash  or  uncandid,  I  shall  subjoin  a  few  of  the  rea-
sons which  have  induced  me  to  believe  them  correct

•My  first  reason  why  I  consider  Masonry  as  warring  against  re-
ligion, is,  that  it  prostitutes  the  Holy  Scriptures  to'imboiy  purposes.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


516  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

Instead  of  receiving  them  as  the  simple  and  unadulterated  <mi»
of  our  counsel  and  rule  of  our  guide,'  it  has  mingled  them  with  a
mass  of  fables;  and  upon  this  impure  and  motley  collection  it
has  founded  a  series  of  ceremonies,  which,  to  say  the  least,  are
not  Divine  institutions,  and  no  others  should  claim  their  origin  and
their  warrant  from  mat  Holy  Word.  Of  this  character  is  the
building  of  Solomon's  temple,  and  the  fabled  story  of  the  death
of  Hiram  A  biff ;  and  upon  these  the  foundation  of  a  ceremony
amounting  in  line  to  the  discovery  of  an  all-important  word,  which
probably  was  never  articulated  until  long  after  Solomon  and  Hi-
ram were  laid  with  their  fathers,  and  the  fair  structure  they  had
reared  crumbled  to  ruins.  The  improbability  of  this  story  will
appear  from  the  circumstance  that  the  murderers  of  Hiram  Abiff
wished  to  obtain  the  Master's  word,  that  by  its  aid  they  might  ob-
tain employment  in  foreign  countries,  while  the  word  was  not.
known  abroad,  and  therefore  could  be  of  no  service  to  them  what-
ever. Abo  that  Solomon,  upon  finding  the  work  in  confusion,
then,  and  not  till  then,  remembered  thai  certain  men  had  appeared
before  hiin  and  confessed  themselves  conspirators  in  the  transac-
tion. Also  that  but  twelve  men  were  despatched  to  make  a  tho-
rough search  throughout  the  whole  land  of  Israel.  In  going  from
the  Master's  to  the  upper  degrees,  the  investigation  of  this  point
is  still  more  painful  to  the  feehngs  of  the  Christian.  In  the  Mark
Master's,  the  parable  of  the  laborers  in  the  vineyard  (See  Matthew
xx,  1 — 16)  is  coupled  with  the  story  of  the  rejection  of  a  sUme
presented  by  the  candidate  in  the  building  of  the  tempJe.  The
absurdity  of  this  will  be  apparent  to  every  sacred  chronolqger.
In  the  Most  Excellent  Master's  or  sixth  degree  we  find  to  our
astonishment  that  the  offering  of  sacrifices  and  oblations  are  not
yet  done  away,  although  our  only  Great  High  Priest  has  long  since
made  the  last  propitiatory  sacrifice,  and  has  left  his  word  that
none  other  are  now  well  pleasing  in  his  sight.  This  degree  is
chiefly  founded  upon  2d  Chronicles,  vii,  1—4;  and  in  imitation  of
the  solemnity  of  the  scene  there  described  the  incense  is  laid  be-
fore the  Lord;  but  no  fire  comes  down  from  heaven  to  consume
it,  nor  are  the  priests  unable  to  enter  the  room  because  it,  is  filled
with  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  In  the  Royal  Arch  degree,  the  wan-
ton levity  with  which  the  sacred  names  of  Jah,  Je/^oA,*and  Godf
are  introduced  and  used,  is  truly  trying -to  Christian  sensibility;
and  in  the  degrees  of  Knighthood,  where  the  interesting  scenes  of
the  New  Testament  are  burlesqued  with  the  same  thoughtlessness,
and  indecorum,  we  see  still  more  to  deplore  and  condemn*  It
ought  certainly  to  be  a  serious  question  with  every  devout  Chris-
tian, in  what  light  he  ought  to  view  this  prostration  of  the  original

Digitized  by  V±iOOQlC


1IGHT  ON  MASON*?*  $17

«d  holy  design  *f  lb©  Scriptures  of  his  salvation,  and  what  de>
^ree  of  crime  he  ought  to  affix  to  such  an  unholy  commingling
■of  Divine  truth  with  human  invention*

The  second  reason  that  I  shall  name  is  the  unchristian  nature
of  Masonic  oaths.    Upon  this  point  ray  remarks  will  be  very  few,
because  the  most,  if  not  all  of  those  who  will  read  this,  have  pe-
rused the  remarks  of  an  abler  pen  upon  the  same  Bubjeet.*    But
-I  cannot  forbear  appealing  to  the  conscience  of  every  Christian,
,  whether  in  the  nice  of  the  Divine  mandate  to  'hold  no  fellowship
with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness,'  he  can  swear  to  fulfil  the
desires  and  follow  the  leadings  of  those  whose  deeds  are,  for
olight  he  knows,  works  of  darkness  and  impiety.     And  though
his  Christian  brethren  may  tell  him  t»  the  contrary,  where,  I
would  ask,  is  his  warrant  to  take  their  declarations  upon  trusV
when  his  Spiritual  directory  inform*  him  that  he  needs  norther
'light  to  his  feet  and  lamp  to  bis  path9  than  that  'su^word  of
prophecy,'  in  taking  heed  to  whWi  hooves  well?    ^nat  authority
has  he  from  the  word  of  God  to  bind  himself^  co-operato  with
those  who  are  then  his  ass^i****?  <*  ma7  afterwards  become  so,
in. fulfilling  the  maao^jtsf  °^  ^*  Masonic  ruler,  and  keeping  all
the  secrets  of  his  br*<h*en,  murder  and  high  treason  alone  ex*
cepsed,  ^nd  not  eve? tnat  m  tne  upper  degrees?    But  if  the  pro-
missory part  of  ifee  obligations  are  inconsistent  with 'Christian
character  *0d  Christian  duty,  how  much  more  criminal  must  be
those  8pfcd  imprecations  which  constitute  their  penalty.    With
what  filings  of  abhorrence  should  we  view  a  legal  contract  where
lite  «*s  the  penalty  of  a  failure  hi  its  fulfilment;  or  would  a
church  be  fellowshipped  in  the  Christian  community,  whose  mem-
beis  were  required  to  covenant,  upon  pain  of  the  most  barbarous
and  inhuman  death  from  the  bands  of  their  brethren,  that  they
would  faithfully  observe  all  its  commands  and  ordinances?    Yet
the  moral  guilt,  in  these  cases,  as  heinous  as  it  would  be,  would
not  be  commensurate  with  the  crime  of  invoking  the  same  pe-
nalty, for  the  promisor's  failing  to  fulfil,  he  knows  not  what.    In
this  particular,  like  every  other,  the  higher  we  ascend  in  the  scale
of  Masonic  wisdom,  the  more  we  eee  that  is  inconsistent  with
gospel  piety,  as  well  as  degrading  to  humanitv.    The  imprecu-
tions  become  more  and  more  awful  as  the  candidate's  conscience
becomes  less  and  less  susceptible  of  their  horrors,  unlit  he  has
.  ihe  temerity  to  add  to  his  temporal  death,  thb  everlasting  pes.-
dition  ov  his  soulI     Let  every  Christian,  before  he  extends  his
charity  to  such  an  institution,  examine  whether  such  an  imprc/-


Rev.  John  &  Stearns.

Uu


y  Google


516  EIGHT  ON  BUSONHY.

cation  as  this  is  warranted  in  the  Holy  ScYipiures,  or  whether
God  can  smile  with  complacence  upon  the  administration  of  snob
oaths  as  claim  in  their  penalty  the  disposition  of 'the  life  thatnow
is,  and  that  which  is  to  come*'

My  third  reason  is  the  sacrilegious  nature  of  Masosi*  ceremo-
nies.   And  here  it  will  not  he  consistent  with  the  limits  to  which
I  most  confine  myself  te  follow  the  institution  4hionsjh  sM  its
senseless  mummeries,  and  point  out  their  bearing  «poo  the  Chris-
tian character ,  or  their  inconsisteocy  with  the  Chwtian  religion.
Suffice  it  to  say  that  they  are  all,  aswasbefose  remarked,  founded
in  part  u|wn  ScripUreecenes,  and  in  part  upon  ^old  wives' frbke.'
Witness  the  representation  of  God  in  the  burning  bush,  in  the
Royal  Arch  degree,  where*  frail  mortal  is  inade*o*epteeent.the
Immortal  Jehovah,  and  hv  his  presence  the  trembling  candidate
is  commanded  by  (his  wouti-be  deity,  'Put  .off  .thy  shoes  from
off  th>  (oat,  for  die  place  whereon  thou  ntandest  is  hdy^round;'
and  as  a  rt*»gn  why  he  sbouldMy  such  deforest  to  lib  assumed
divinity,  he  ato*,  *J  am  th»  Gen  v  mw  fatwbb,  mi  God  of
-Abraham,  thk  G*»  of  Isaac>  akot^b  God  4>f  Jacob;  Hcat
many  of  these  mortal  gods  weuM,  at  mo>  a  moment,  shrink  to
meet  the  Being  whom  «bey  attempt  *>  f*<*raatef  is  known  only
to  the  searcher  o|  all  hearts;   but  I  am  stfe  m  aayingl  that  the
number  of  Christian*  who  wouldihoose  such*  tkne  an*  place  to
exchange  worlds,  is  few  indeed.    The  same  remarks  wl  apply
to  the  ceremony  qf  three  tims$  three,  in  the  same  de^s^sirhere
the  most  solemn  appellation  by  which  the  Supreme  Aging  is
known,  -that  wortf  which  the  Jews  dared  not  to  speak  bit  with
the  deepest  reverence,  is  used  to  give  a  zest  to  one  of  tkewst
fulsome  ceremonies  in  the  <whole  catalogue.    In  the  degree*  of
Knighthood  the  candidate  is  brought  before  a  triangular  table,  w
which  is  laid  something  that  is  not  exposed  to  him,  and  the  who*
is-  covered  with  a  Mack  cloth.    He  then  drinks  four  libations  of
wine,  theikst  to  Solomon;  King  of  Israel,  the  second  to  Hiram
Abiff,  the  third  to  Hiram,  King  of  Tyre,  the  fourth  to  Simon  of
Cyrene,  who  was  compelled  to  bear  the  Saviour's  cress.    Pre-
vious to  drinking  <the  fifth,  theoloth  is  removed,  and  he  is  star  tied
by  the  sight  of  a  coffin,  upon  which  lies  a  humem  *h$B  and  tkigk
bone*.    After  eome  preliminary  ceremony,  among  which  is  a
mock  exhibition  of  the  Saviour  rising,  the  wine  for  mis  libation  is
presented  him  in  another  skull,  which  he  kneeling  taken  and  says,
'This  pure  wine  I  now  take  in  testimony  of  my  belief  in  the  mor-
tality of  the  body  and  immortality  of  the  soul;:  and  may  this  liba-
tion appear  as  a  witness  against  me,  both  here  and  hereafter;  and
as  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  were  laid  upon  the  head  of  the

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   OS   MASONKV.  519

Saviour,  so  may  all  the  sins  committed  by  the  person  whose  skull
this  once  was>  be  heaped  upon  my  head,  in  addition  to  my  own,
should  I  ever  knowingly  or  wilfully  violate  or  transgress  any  obli-
gation that  I  hare  heretofore  taken,  take  at  tins  time,  or  shall  at
any  future  period  take,  in  relation  to  any  degree  of  Masonry  or
order  of  Kaighthood. '    After  this,  the  candidate  still  kneeling,
(he  Sovereign  Master  pots  wine  upon  his  head  in  the  form  of
baptism,  and  says,  *I  now  dedicate  thee  to  the  service  of
God,  in  support  of  truth,  honor,  and  justice,  in  defence  of
innocent  virgins*  destitute  widows,  helpless  orphans,  and  the
Christian  religion.'    If  there  can  be  any  piety  in  scenes  like
these,  I  have  yet  to  learn  where  it  is  evinced,  or  to  entertain  en-
tirely different  notions  respecting  the  sacredness  of  the  gospel,
from  what  I  now  possess.     On  the  contrary,  I  see  much  that  is
calculated  to  excite  the1  abhorrence  of  all  who  have  a  holy  jea-
lousy for  the  sanctity  of  the  institutions  of  the  Christian  religion.
The  path  of  Christian  duty  is  given  so  plain  that  'the  wayfaring
man,"  though  a  fool,  need  not  err  therein;'  and  this  path  will  lead
to  all  the  needful  privileges  of  life,  and  to  ultimate  glory,  without
wandering  through  the  dark  mazes  of  Masonic  mysticism.     No
offering  of  incense,  no  adoration  of  a  pretended  deity  who  shows
his  naked  back  through  a  burning  bush,  no  invocation  of  tempo*
nil  and  eternal  wretchedness  over  a  skull  filled  with  wine,  and  in
a  style  at  which  humanity  revolts,  is  required  in  the  simple  woril
of  Divine  truth.     There  the  plain  system  of  moral  duty  is  given
in  aH  its  length  and  breadth;  and  let  the  man  who  adds  thereto
beware  lest  its  author  atid  unto  him  the  plagues  which  it  denoun-
ces against  such  a  sacritoge.

My  fourth  reason  for  denouncing  Masonry  is,  its  religious  as-
sumption of  titles  to  which  it  has  no  claim,  and  its  confounding
knight  errantry  with  Christianity.  The  objection  naturally  di-
vides itself  into  two  paragraphs.

1st.  With  regard  to  the  irreligious  assumption  of  titles,  we  find
but  little  to  condemn  until  we  arrive  to  the  third  or  Master's  de-
gree. To  the  appellation  of  'Worthy,'  which  I  believe  is  ail  that
is  claimed  before  this,  I  shall  not  at  this  time  demur.  Whether
it  is,  or  is  not,  in  most  cases  well  applied,  I  shall  not  take  it  upon
me  to  say,  my  present  business  being  with  the  principles  and  not
the  individual  members  of  the  Masonic  fraternity.  In  the  third
degree  we  find  ourselves  introduced  to  the  Worshipful  Master;
and  with  a  few  ignoble  exceptions,  it  is  upon  the  records  of  Ma-
sonry alone  that  we  find  so  bold  and  so  sacrilegious  an  assump-
tion. The  proud  king  of  Egypt,  the  splendid  ruler  of  Persia,
the  haughty  monarch  of  Babylon,  the  impious  Herod  of  Judfr

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


520  UOUT  ON  BEASONRV*

never  laid  th*»  claim  to  the  adulation  of  their  dependants;  nor  do
all  the  annals  of  Sacred  or  profane  history  furnish  a  correspond-
i  ng  example,  save  those  instances  where  men  arrogated  to  them-

.selves  saper*humanttj.  We*  read  indeed  <rt  those  who  worshipped

they  knew  not  what;  but  only  in  idolatrous  nations  do  we  find  that
children  of  mortality  are  esteemed  worthy  of  adoration.  From
the  word  of  God  we  have  the  most  indubitable  evidence  that  wor-
ship is  due  to  One  atone;  and  sure  I  am  that  no  true  Christian  will
attempt  to  compete  with  the  Sovereign  of  the  universe  for  the
praise  of  the  creatures  of  his  power.  Next  this  worm  of  the
dust  is  presented  to  us  as  hot  only  Worshipful,  but  Most  Excel-
lent; superlative  in  excellence,  without  a  superior,  without  apar-
allcl!  Well  may  we  tremble  for  the  purity  of  our  holy  religion
when  its  supporters  can  hear,  and  especially  can  receive,  soch
oxprcssions  of  unqualified  devotion,  without  a  blush  of  shame  for
the  utter  unworthiness  of  the  object  upon  whom  it  is  bestowed.
But  the  saddening  picture  ends  not  here.  Though  modesty  has
already  fled  from  the  exhibition,  and  Christianity  weeps  at  this
wanton  violation  of  her  sacredoess,  yet  we  have  only  to  turn  a
little  farther  to  behold  greater  evils  than  these.  Else  what  means
those  pomegranates  and  bonnets  and  robes  of  olden  time?  What
means  that  mitre  and  breast  plate  upon  which  is  inscribed,  'Holi-
ness to  the  Lord/  with  all  the  other  insignia  of  Jewish  High
Priesthood.  Yes,  it  is  even  so.  Though  the  blood  of  bulls  and
of  goats  is  no  longer  an  expiation  of  sin,  though  the  altars  of  sa-
crifice are  broken  down  and  the  Priesthood  abolished  by  the  great
sacrifice  of  the  last  High  Priest,  yet  here*  we  find  it  revived  with
threefold  pomp,  and  with  an  ostentation  which  Aaron  and  his  sons
never  displayed.  And  has  the  ministration  of  Jesus,  our  Great
High  Priest,  who  foreVer  abolished  the  order,  become  insufficient
» o  accomplish  the  great  object  for  which  it  was  designed]  Trem-
ble, Christian,  lest  thou  'limit  the  Holy  One  of  Israel/  by  giving
io  another  that  High  Priesthood  which  is  for  ever  done  away.
Upon  this  point,  like  every  other  I  have  touched  upon,  I  have
only  given  two  or  three  instances  as  specimens  of  the  whole.  I
know  not  but  there  may  be  some  who  will  attempt  an  apology
for  the  assuming  of  such  sacred  titles,  but  for  myself  I  can  con-
ceive of  none.  If  one  was  smitten  with  a  most  signal  judgment
from  the  hand  of  the  Almighty  for  even  listening  with  compla-
cency to  the  responce  of  the  multitude  to  his  words,  llt  is  the
voice  of  a  God,'  what  must  be  the  measure  of  their  guilt  who
bear  these  titles  which  are  little  less  assuming  in  name,  and
perhaps  none  in  reality.

2d.  With  regard  to  its  confounding  knight  errantry  with  Chris-
Digitized  by  VjC


ti*ni|5f J  need  say  but  y«y  few  words,  la  the  degree*  of  Knight-  »
hood  the  gayiour  is  for  the  first  time  brought  into  view,  and  re-
ference is  often  inane  to  his  life,  su^eriags,  and  death;  indeed
scene*  jtakan  from  the  New  Teatejteee*  form  tijei*  most  prominent
feature*.  Heice  its  pretentions  to  Christianity  are  not  to  be
called  ia  question,  a^d  i  an*  apt  awa*e  that  they  have  ever  been
denied,  ,  Us  ai&ajty  tp  &e  ctovalrous  spirit  of  knight  errantry  fc
equally  ob  w0u#«  as.  the-  protection  of  females  at  the  hazard  of  life
and  UmJte,  and  upon  the  penalty  of  ^eu*pai?al  death  and  eternal
perdition* %ms  a^onspicaoMs  part  of  the  obligations.  There  is
no  MapWy  nor  impropriety  in  risking  life  to  protect  the  weak  and
defenceless,  a/id  it  is  eertainiy  anitable  that  the  fair  part  of  crea-
tion should  receive  such  protection  irem  'the  sterner  sex;'  but
that  chivalrous  gallantry  upon  which  the  ancient,  and  I  may  add,
the  modern  fcnights  built  their  renown,  was  far  from  being  a  kind-
ness to  the  objects  of  its  professed  care;  a*ad  no  true  Christian
could,  wisV.tovseeit  identified  with  the  religion  he  professes,
or- claiming  patronage  Item  that  holy  name-whereby  he4s  called.
My  fifjtfe  reason  is  thai  Masonry  is  oowidered  as  a  saving  in-
ftUjtujtioA„and  makes  a  religion  of  the  performance  of.  outward
duties.    This  reason  also  divides  itself  into  two  parts.

1st  It  is  regarded  as  a  saving  institution.     No  where  in  their
whole  catalogue  of  duties.  enjoined,or  doctrines  ineukated,is  there
the  least  reference  to  any  thing  but  the  observance  of  Masonic
rules  as  necessary  to  a  preparation  for  eternal  glory;  nor  is  there
any  other  way  or  any  other  hope  of  salvation  held  forth  to  the
trembling  sinner,  but  that  which  leads  through  the  Lodge,  the
Chapter,  and  the  Encampment..  In  accordance  with  this,  the
Almighty  is  styled  the  Great  Architect  of  the  universe  and  the  .
Grand  Master  above;  and  the  abode  of  the  blessed  is  denominated
the  Grand  Lodge  aoove^and:  the  attainment  of  its  joys  is  often  .
spoken  of  as  the  perfection  of  Masonic  wisdom,     Hence  it  is
evident  that  whatever  may  be  the  external  professions  of  its
naejnbers,  Us  true  principles,  when  divested  of  that  ostentatious
shoAV  of  gospel  religion  which  gives  the  genius  of  Masonry  its
semblance  to  an  ^angei  of  light,'  do  recognise  'no  other  way  given
under  heaven,  among  men,  whereby  any  can  be  saved,'  but  that
which  is  displayed  within  the  pale  of  the  Masonic  church,  and  em-
braced by  Masonic  charity.     The  Grand  Lodge  above,  accord-
ing to  their  doctrine*  is  designed  for  the  eventual  reward  of
worthy  Iretivren;  hence  the  expulsion  of  a  brother  from  the  lodge
on  account  of  unworthy  and  unroasonic  conduct,  implies  a  de-
claration of  his  un  worthiness  of  that  glorious  reward;  and  hence
jt  amounts,  in  reality,  to  a  religious  excommunication.     To  de^
TIu2


5^2  light  on  M&8DH»r.

tide  respecting *•  P**4?  or  ***&*&*£  «H  thi«,  we  need  only  re-
fer to  the  perfect  taw  of  God,  and  see  whether  the  Lord  of  Glory
tras  choseo  the  appellation  of  Grand  M&sitr  of  a  Masonic  society
to  magnify  his  honor,  or  whether  the  celestial  paradise  is  nothing
mere  than  a  Lodge  of  worth/  Masdne.  No  stfeh  representa-
tions of  the  character  or  name-of  the  Almighty  are  there  made;
*I  AM,'  is  his  name,  and  the  redeemed  will  sunt  up  his  character
and  his  most  glorious  title  in  'JbUduu^jbrthehoRvGovOunivo-
tbht  rcigntth!9  Nor  are  the  gates  of  me  New  Jerusalem
warded  by  'a  tyler  with  a  drawn  swordY  ner  do  the  pillars  of
Jachin  and  Boaz,  the  square  and  compass,  the  level,  theptemb
line,  or  the  gavel,  adorn  the  celestial  city.  In  all  things,  but
above  alt,  in  regard  to  the  way  of  salvation  and  the  true  character
of  the  God  he  worships,  does  it  become  the  Christian  to  take-
heed  how  he  believes.

2d.  It  makes  a  religion  of  the  performance  of  outward  duties.
It  is  already  shown  that  it  is  regarded  as  a  means.of  salvation,
and  hence  the  inference  is  ptain  that  it  makes  a  rehgiooof  sope-
thing.  The  question  then*  arises,  is  it  of  free  and  undeserved
grace,  or  the  performance  of  external  duties?  It  is  not  to  be  de-
nied that  after  arriving  to  the  degrees  of  Knighthood,  (to  which
very  few  arrive,)  we  find  the  Saviour  introduced,  and  his  sufferings
and  death  typified,  or  rather  burlesqued.  Rut&e  is  not  exhibited
as  the  vicarious  sacrifice  for  sin.  Else  why  is  not  the  entire  de-
pravity of  the  human  heart,  and  the  utter  helplessness  of  human
nature,  made  the  first  lesson  of  Masonic  instruction  and  the  foun-
dation of  the  Tfrhole  system!  Why  is  the  Mason  made  to  fulfil
the  duties  of  the  Entered  Apprentice,  the  FeUow  Craft,  the  Mas-
ter Mason,  the  Mark  Master,  the  Past  Master,  the  Most  Excel-
lent Master,  and  finally  to  tread  through  the  rough  way'  of  the
Royal  Arch,  before  he  is  permitted  to  hear  the  glad  tidings  ef
salvation  through  the  Redeemer?  And  ever*  then,  why  is  he  not
taught  that  lesson  of  deep  humility  and  of  his  native  and  entire
thraldom  to  sin,  without  which  be  needs  no-  such  redeeming
sacrifice?  Why  is  he  not  made  to  deplore  those  sins  which  were
visited  upon  the  head  of  the  Saviour,  'tn  sackcloth  and  ashe^'m-
stead  of  carelessly  reciting  the  interesting  truth  over  a  stain*  bone
filled  with  pure  wine?  These  are  important  questions  in  decid-
ing upon  the  nature  of  the  Masonic  religion;  and  a  moment's
reflection  upon  them  cannot  fail  to  convince  every  candid  mind
that  it  is  not  founded  upon  the  doctrine  of  grace;  hence,  I  need
offer  no  further  proof  that  it  is  of  works.  The  inconsistency  of
this  with  the  Scriptures  is  a  truth  which  is,  or  ought  to  be,  familiar
«^th  every  Christian.    That  entire  dependence  upon  the  Saviour,

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   W  MAIONRT.  5*3

woicb^xcluxtes  all  boasting  and  gives  alj  glory  to  that  grace  whith
begins  the  work;of  sanctification/and  forwards  it  until  'the  top-
most etone  is  brought  in  with  shouting,  crying  grace,  grace  unto
#,  finds  no  place  in  this  self-sufficing  system;  but  it  is  allied  to
Ami  spirit  which  the  Chaldean  king  evinced  when  in  the  fulness
of  his  pride  be  said,  'Is  not  this  great  Babylon  that  I  have
build'

My  sixth  reason  is,  that  the  institution  is  blasphemous.  In
proof  of  this  I  shall  only  extract  a  diploma  which  has  recently
met  my  eyes,  and  which  is  here  given  correct,  toor&for  wordy  the
signature  alone  excepted.

,  *Jlhno  C'r,  sen  Covt.  896.
C  F  ")  'the

U^         JH  C         (  ANCIENT  council  of  the  trinity,  .

*     J  8  .        0    C  f  BT  THEIR  SUCCESSORS

■*f  A    OB  ,\  -  IN  THE.  PNITED  STATES  or  AMERICA.

1  St.  Alwrt— To  every  Knight  Companion  of  the  Holy  and
Thrice  IUaatrtooa  Gimr  of  the  Cross:  Be  it  known  unto
you,  that,  with  regard  4o  unquestionable  vouchers,  we  have  con-
firmed the  induction  of  the  Knight  Templar  Mason  into  the
Councils  of  the  said  otder  of  Koighthood,  and  herein  do  war-
rant him  as  a  worthy  and  Illustrious  Companion  thereof:  and
hoping  and  confiding  that  ho  will  ever  so  demean  himself  as  to
conduct  to  th*  glory  of  L  H.  S.,  the  Most  Holy  and  Almighty
God,  and  the  honor  of  his  mark,  we  do  recommend  and  submit
him  to  the  confidence  o£  ail  those  throughout  the  world  who  can
truly  and  deservedly  say,  'I  am  a  Christian;'  and  that  no  unwar-
rantable benefits  shaU  arise  from  this  diploma,  we  charge  all
concerned,  cautiously  and  prudently  to  mark  the  bearer  on  the
mystic  letters  therein^contatned,  and  to  regard  only  the  result,  in
its  application  and  privileges.  <

'  Done  in  Council  at  Le  Roy,  in  the  county  of  Genesee  and
state  of  Now  York  of  these  U.  £•  A;,  August  1st,  1827.

.   •>      ■  'Sir < ,

Sovereign  Prefect,
'CoMMENDATK>N3  <SlR  — ,

Sir  Knights  Companions. '  &H  Prefect.

I  did  not  see  the  above  document  until  after  I  had  finished  the
preceding  reasons;  and  although  front  many  things  there  related
I  felt  perfectly  satisfied  of  the  blasphemous  nature  of  the  institu-
tion, yet  had  I  not  perused  this  degree  of  the  'Ancient  Council
of  thr  Trinity,  by  their  successors  in  the  United  States  ofJlme-
rkif  I  should  hot  have  made  against  it  this  direct  and  heavy^.

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


o24  UQMT  *N   MAIQlf&r.

charge  of  teAsramr.  Aad  I  cm  iurtdi?  say  nfei&er  I  jun
gratified  wftfe  th»-e«po««i««f ^uckdaibgtmdiafwua  preaucne-
tion,  since  it  does  reatty  Mart;  or  whether  I  could  We wished
that  my  Christian  friatris  «igfct'be  spared  fiora  ^e*tmldf  con-
templating this  awful  wklndbess.  At  «li  ©seats,  itsfongytge  is
plain  and  aneqwvooal,  4B>d  eweay  heart  «posftfiasa4iof  teae  Chris-
tian  sensibility,  will  shudder  at  its  repetition.  Let  these  succes-
sors of  the  *  Ancient  Council  of  la*  Trinity'  shear  ros  their  order
from  the  TrinueGod  to  tssae^leestee  »  hisjuime^aadlheajnor
until  then,  will  I  acknowledge  theialsitj  ofwy^haffe-
In  addition  to  the  charge  of  blasphemy  which  thw  laocnmsat
most  abundantly  substantiates,  I  might,  had  I  seen  k  in  season,
have  brought  it  forward  in  support  of  some  of  the  declarations
before  made,  particularly  m  support  of  the  charge  made  in  the
first  part  of  my  fifth  reason  for  considering  the  institution  of  Ma-
sonry as  opposed  to  the  Christian  religion.  It  will  be  noticed
that  the  bearer  is  recommended  and  submitted  Ho  the  confidence
of  all  those  tbrougfco«tthe*wof  W  who  sen  truly  mad  tes&yedly
say,  (J  ama  Gkrirtkm.9  It  will  not  be  denied  that  J&agenry,
with  respect  to  the  privileges  it  confers  upon  its  jnaiabejs,  is
entirely  a  selfish  tattitutioii,  andohat  Masonic  jaweipawndatians,
diplomas,  &c.  **e  designed  to  avail  the  feaaser  among  &s  hfelh-
ren  only,  and  cannot  be  considered  as  axWressed  ^o  any  others.
The  one  before  us  is  addressed  to  evtry  tindividmd  who  can  Umltj
and  deservedly  say,  *I  am  a  Christian,'  while  iToaa  its  very  oatore
it  can  be  addressed  to 'none  but  brethren  of  <  the  order.  Hence
the  inference  is  plain,  that  nam  otktt*  l<^tr*ky  mi  destwtil/y
say,  «I  am  a  Christian.'  '  But  upon  trik  point,  as  well  as  all
the  others,  1  consider  the  proof  as  having  been  sufficiently  posi-
tive; and  1  cannot  but  behove  that  those  to  whose  consciences
these  remarks  are  addressed,  will  acknowledge  the  roAsoaaing  to
be  conclusive.

1  have  now  dene,  for  tins -time,  with  my  reasons  for  regarding
the  Masonic  institution  as  1 4o,  upon  religious  principles,  Those
I  have  mentioned,  although  some  of  the  most  prominent,  are
very  far  from  being  all  that  have  influenced  my  belief  respecting
it.  But  I  do  not  wish  to  burden  the  subject  with  any  thing  more
than  is  necessary  to  exhibit  it  in  its  true  and  unadorned  light,
believing  that  sucban  exhibition,  in,Us.simp4est&rm,.will  be  suf-
ficient for  my  Christian  brethren,  for  rwhose  benefit  these  remarks
are  especially  designed.  For  the  same  reason  1  have  avoided
all  unnecessary  comment  upon  the  reasons  mentioned,  and  have
satisfied  myself  by  simply  laying  down  the  propositions  and  then
establishing  their  correctness.    If  those  to  whom  my  appeal  is

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT  OK  MASONRY.  52&

wade  are  indeed  what  their  professions  indicate,  it  will  not  be
necessary  for  me  to  meet  them  upon  the  ground  that  I  should
such  as  are  disposed  to  quibble  and  prevaricate.  The  unsophis-
ticated truth  is  all  that  they  ought  to  require,  and  I  submit  it  to
their  Christian  candor  whether  such  is  not  here  given.

Before  taking  leave  of  this  part  of  the  subject,  I  ought,  per-
haps, to  anticipate  an  inquiry  respecting  the  correctness  of  my
extracts  from  the  upper  degrees  which  have  never  been  publish*
ed.  For  the  entire  satisfaction  of  all  who  may  have  the  least
misgivings  on  this  point,  I  will  add,  in  addition  to  my  solemn
declaration,  that  from  the  most  unquestionable  evidence  /  do
know  tkem-to  be  true,  I  believe  I  can  satisfy  any  candid  inquirer
who  will  communicate  to  me  his  incredulity,  that  I  do  indeed
possess  tins  knowledge.

It  may  now  be  proper  to  introduce  a  few  words  in  answer  to
the  objection.  'If  the  institution  of  Masonry  be  so  awfully  wick-
ed, why  are  so  many  good  men  connected  with  it?'  Should  such
a  remark  be  introduced  as  a  conclusive  evidence  of  the  purity  of
Masonry,  I  should  not  feel  myself  obligated  to  pay  any  regard  to
it;  for  no  point  can  be  more  selfcevident  than  that  the  virtue  of
the  members  of  any  society  cannot  be  conchtsive  proof  that  its
principles  are  equally  virtuous.  But  if  it  be  offered  as  circum-
sfogttdft  evidence  against  the  correctness  of  my  remarks,  I  admit
its  plausibility  and  notice  it  accordingly.  The  institution  of  Ma-
sonry, though  fraught  with  absurdities  which  falsify  its  preten-
sions to  antiquity,  does  nevertheless  evince  in  its  design  and
establishment  no  ordinary  degree  of  cunning  and  witchery.  With
respect  to  the  means  by  which  good  men  are  allured  into  it,
nothing  need  be  said,  its  external  professions  and  ostentatious
display  of  piety  being  notorious.  Upon  the  first  induction  of  the
candidate,  he  finds  to  his  disappointment,  that  he  has  made  no
remarkable  discovery,  but  the  good  still  lies  before  him.  He
sees  some  things  to  condemn,  but  is  disposed  to  believe  that
when  he  shall  attain  the  great  object  of  his  search,  these  apparent
improprieties  may  be  reconciled  with  his  ideas*  of  propriety;  and
on  the  whole,  an  impetus  is  given  to  his  curiosity.  In  the  third
degree  he  finds  still  more  to  disgust  his  feelings,  but  having
already  advanced  to  the  dimensions  of  his  mantle  of  charity,  ho
is  the  more  ready  to  widen  it  still  farther.  But  here  he  finds
himself  no  nearer  the  object  of  bis  wish,  while  the  thing  is  so
devised  that  his  curiosity  Is  vastly  increased.  Thus  onward  from
degree  to  degree  until  the  last,  which  is  attained  by  very  few,
(probably  not  one  in  two  thousand,)  whose  perseverance  in  at*
taining  this  summit  of  Masonic  greatness  evinces  that  they  have

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


£26  LIGHT  OH   MASON&T.

made  Masoorf  their  great  concern;  and  they  doubtless  find  suffi-
cient charms  in  the  honors  which  attend  their  attornment,  todeter
them  from  ioforming  the  deluded  aspirants  for  dial  station  that
their  labors  aad  expense  will  end  in  mere  nothing;  or  ebe  they
have  too  much  shame  to  confess  the  firuitlessness  of  their  tedious
labors.    But  by  far  the  greater  part  of  Christians  become  dis-
gusted long  before  this,  and  are  contented  to  leave  the  wisdom
of  Masonry  to  those  who  choose  to  search  for  it,  and  for  them-
selves to  seek  that  which  cometh  from  above,  and  rest  satisfied
with  the  simple  knowledge  of  'Christ  and  htm  crucified/    There
may  be  other  causes  which  hire  Christians  into  this  abode  of
darkness,  but  the  above  is  certainly  a  vary  probable  one,  and  it
accords  with  the  experience  of  some  whom  I  esteem  for  their
apparent  piety.    The  reason  why  those  who  have  become  dis-
gusted with  the  institution  have  not  until  recently  exposed  its
abominations,  is  doubtless  their  apprehensions  respecting  the
result;  and  after  taking  a  Masonic  oath  and  learning  the  nature
of  Masonic  principles,  k  is  not  to  be  wondered  that  they  should
tear  Masonic  *vuffGBAKC£.'

The  foregoing  objection  is  the  only  one  which  I  anticipate  to
my  remarks;  and  having  endeavored  to  answer  it,  I  shall  dismiss
the  argumentative  part  of  this  subject    As  my  address  is  to  the
candid  inquirer  for  truth,  I  have  endeavored  to  manifest  aif  appro-
priate coolness  and  candor.    My  investigation  has  been  confined
to  the  principles  of  the  institution  alone;  and  all  reference  to  bad
members  or  Masonic  outrages  has  been  studiously  avoided.
These  things  might  have  added  to  the  force  of  many  of  my  argu-
ments; but  I  chose  rather  to  expose  the  corruptions- of  the  foun-
tain, that  others  might  be  spared  the  trouble  of  phik>sop\ufl\ng
upon  the  impurity  of  streams.     I  have  aimed  to  give  a  fair  por-
trait of  Masonry  itself,  and  without  visiting  upon  its  head  the  sins
of  its  devotees,  to  display  it  in  its  unclad  moral  deformity,  that
no  Christian  reader  who  may  be  beguiled  by  its  external  embel-
lishments to  worship  at  its  idolatrous  shrine,  may  hereafter  charge
his  sad  delusion  to  my  account     And  in  domg  this  I  am  con-
scious of  entire  purity  of  motives.     Had  I  looked  no  farther  for*
ward  than  the  many  frowns  which  I  shall  doubtless  receive  from
those  who  are  esteemed  good  and  great,  I  should  probably  never
have  raised  my  warning  voice  against  the  dark  catalogue  of  Ma-
sonic impieties.    But  I  remember  that  the  time  is  short  in  which
I  shall  be  awed  by  the  frowns  or  nattered  by  the  smiles  of  the
good  and  the  great  of  this  world,  and  that  at is  expiration  their
bed  will  be  as  narrow  and  as  low  as  mine.    I  recollect  also  that
it  is  the  mandate  of  him  whom  we  are  forewamed  to  fear, c la  the

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


fclGHT   OS  MASONRt.  &2i

morning  sow  thy  seed,  and  in  the  evening  withhold  not  thy  hand,9
and  after  the  performance  of  this  duty  to  commit  the  event  and
the  consequences  to  him  'who  is  a  faithful  keeper.9  And  while
I  call  for  the  candid  and  impartial  attention  of  every  reader  to
this  momentous  subject,  I  would  impress  upon  his  mind  also  the
same  great  truth,  that  in  deciding  upon  it  he  is  acting  for  eternity.
If  the  order  of  Masonry  be  indeed  so  blasphemous  against  the
God  of  Heaven,  and  so  destructive  to  the  immortal  soul,  let  him
beware  of  smiling  with  complacency  upon  an  institution  which
lies  beneath  the  frowns  of  the  Almighty;  and  since  he  has  the
unerring  declaration  of  Him  'who  cannot  lie,'  that  'he  will  not  give
his  glory  to  another,  nor  his  worship  to  graven  images,9  let  him
not,  upon  the  peril  of  his  soul,  dare  to  worship  a  mortal  or  ascribe
Divinity  to  a  worm  of  the  dust.


THE  TWO  GREAT  QUESTIONS  ANSWEREU.

If  the  Masonic  institution  be  so  great  on  etil,wky  hme  good  men  united  with,
mid  continued  to  countenance  it  solongf  and,

Are  Masons  justifiable  in  breaking  their  Masonic  oaths,  and  publishing  the  ft*
crets  of  4he  order  to  the  world?

By  Be&i&h  B.  Hotchkin.

Part  I.  If  the  Masonic  institution  be  so  great  an  evil,  why  have
^ood  men  united  with,  and  continued  to  countenance  it  so  long?

The  above  question  is  based  upon  the  supposition  that  the
Masonic  institution  is  charged  with  being  a  great  evil  It  also
supposes  that  it  has  attracted  the  favorable  attention  of  good  men
who  have  united  with  it,  and  some  of  whom  still  continue  its  sup-
porters* Both  of  these  positions  are  matters  of  so  common  re-
mark, that  little  more  need  be  said  man  that  they  are  facts  granted
by  all.  In  attempting  to  answer  one  of  the  chief  objections  against
the  charge  entertained  in  the  first,  I,  of  course,  stand  committed
-among  the  oppbsers  of  Masonry.  But  I  trust  that  I  shall  ever
exercise  a  mildness  and  forbearance,  and  address  myself  to  the
taart  rather  than  the  passions  of  men,  both  at  this  time,  and  when-
ever else  I  shall  have  occasion  to  remark  upon  the  subject.  But
*o  the  matter  before  us.

It  is  an  unsafe  rule  to  make  the  general  virtue  of  the  members
«pf  any  association  the  test  of  its  merits,  although  it  is  not  to  be
denied  that  it  may  be  a  circumstance  in  its  favor.  But  are  Ma-
sons really  willing  that  the  question  should  be  tried  upon  this
ground?— that  the  institution  should  be  judged  by  the  qualities  ***

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


£28  MGBT  OK  MASOKTC

its  members  as  a  whole?  For  if  they  flee  to  this  resort,  they  cer-
tainly cannot  expect  us  to  set  aside  any  whom  they  hold  in  good
fellowship;  they  cannot  place  before  us  the  good,  the  great,  the
profound,  the  erudite,  and  the  exemplary,  and  say  these  are  the
materials  of  our  fair  fabric,  while  the  mixtdmnltitude^\ht'm^iou&,
the  ignoble,  the  superficial,  the  ignorant,  and  the  licentious,  are
for  a  brief  moment,  disclaimed,  to  be  again  received  with  open
arms  when  the  ordeal  shall  have  been  passed.  Unless  I  am
much  mistaken,  the  welkin  has  already  rung  with  loud  complaints
of  the  institution's  having  been  condemned  for  the  acts  of  war
members,  and  that  must  be  a  poor  rule  which  is  unequal  in  its  ap-
plication to  different  sides  of  the  same  subject.  For  the  sake  of
the  order,  then,  as  well  as  our  own,  be  it  repeated,  thai  it  is  un-
safe to  make  the  general  virtue  of  the  members  of  any  associa-
tion the  test  of  its  merits.  True,  we  do  not  'gather  grapes  from
thorns,  nor  figs  from  thistles,9  but  we  frequently  see  men  ofhonesi
hearts  and  exemplary  lives  ensnared  in  toils  laid  by  some  evil
hand;  and,  what  is  still  more  to  be  deplored,  we  sometimes  dis-
cover the  show  of  virtue  where  there  is  a  heart  of  guile.  I  will
not,  therefore,  condemn  the  institution  for  the  waywardness  of
some  of  its  devotees,  nor  will  I  laud  it  for  the  praiseworthy  qual'i-
t  ies  of  others.  I  judge  Masonry,  not  Masons;  let  the  principles  of
the  institution  determine  its  moral  worth  or  profligacy,  and  as  for
the  members,  abstracted  therefrom,  'honor  to  wham  honor  is  due.

However,  as  the  question  noticed  at  the  head  of  this  article  has
been,  and  doubtless  will  continue  to  be,  pressed  hard  and  display-
ed in  triumph  upon  the  banner  whose  streaming  colors  wave  above
'the  outer  wall,'  it  may  perhaps  be  worth  tbe  while  to  gwe  it  «.
passing  notice.

Why,  then,  have  good  men  united  with  the  institution?

It  is  one  of  the  most  prominent  characteristic*  of  themmd,  to
be  dissatisfied  with  its  present  condition,  unsatmted  with  know-
ledge, and  incessantly  upon  the  alert  for  new  food  for  its  propea*
isties.  Its  quality  determines  the  .nature  of  the  object  of  i&ana*
bition.  If  vicious,  it  will  devise  new  plots  of  wickedness;  if  sor-
did, it  searches  for  some  new  and  hitherto  untrodden  -road  to
wealth;  if  virtuous,  it  studies  the  most  effectual  afetbod  ef  pat-
ting its  noble  principles  into  active  operation;  if  heavenly  minded,
''its  'being's  end  and  aim'  is  to  learn  how  it  may  roost  rapid Vy  grow
in  grace  and  ripen  for  the  frwtion  of  its  hopes— ^Uw  general  as-
sembly of  the  church  of  the  first  horn'— the  New  Jerusalem  and
the  society  of  those  who  dwell  therein.  The  good  man  is,  in
some  degree,  aware  that  many  unholy  feelings  Jjold  their  sway  over
him,  he  earnestly  desires  deliverance  tberefrfcn,  and  siezes  with

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


I  LIGHT    ON   MASONRY.  529

•avidity  upon  whatever  bids  fair  to  speed  his  conquest  over  his  dir-
rest  foes,  'the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,'  While  pondering
in  sadness  upon  his  present  infirmities,  and  looking  for  somewhat
to  infuse  vigor  into  his  spiritual  strength,  his  attention  is  arrested
by  an  institution  claiming  to  be  the  handmaid  of  the  religion  he
professes — to  point  out  new  beauties  in  the  God  he  adores — beau-
lies  too  vived  for  the  gaze  of  the  unenlightened  eye — to  open  the
avenues  and  direct  the  pilgrim  steps  of  the  novitiate  to  a  sub-
limer  field  for  benevolence  and  a  more  refined  state  of  morality;
and  displaying  over  its  portals  a  wily  allurement  for  a  heart  like
his— 'faith, .hope,  charity.'  Already  hungering  for  a  repast
like  that  promised  in  such  a  bill  of  fare,  forgetting  for  the  moment
the  history  of  our  mother  Eye,  which  is  set  forth  as  a  timely
warning  to  all  her  offspring,  and  perhaps,  too,  unmindful  of  the
monition  to  seek  counsel  from  above,  he  looks  wistfully;  he  sees
among  the  inmates  some  with  whom  he  has  erst  taken  sweet
counsel  and  walked  to  the  house  of  God  in  company;  and  though
commingled  in  the  same  group  are  those  whom  his  soul  abhors,
yet  there  he  may  peradventure  approach,  conciliate,  and  reform
them;  and  full  of  brilliant  expectations,  and  keenly  set  for  new
auad  richer  consolations,  he  enters,  he  bows  before  the  altar  reared
within,  and  immolates  himself  in  the  strange  abode.  Now  is  he
grappled  to  the  car  of  that  deity  he  had  thought  to  clasp  with  un-
impelled  and  fond  adoration;  instead  of  the  live  coal  from  God's
own  altar,  the  seal  of  silence  is  put  upon  his  lips,  and  however
sickening  his  thraldom  may  be  to  his  heart,  it  is  only  in  the  si-
lence of  his  closet  he  dare  say,  cWo  is  me,  for  I  am  a  man  of
\ra<0ean  lips,  and  my  dwelling  has  been  in  the  tents  of  Kedar,  and
among  the  children  of  Meshec.,

Why  have  good  men,  after  having  had  an  opportunity  to  dis-
cover the  nature  of  the  institution,  continued  their  connexion
with  it?  Various  circumstances  may  have  contributed  t#  pro-
duce such  a  result;  some  may  have  been  swayed  by  one  influ-
ence, others  by  another,  and  others  still  by  the  combination  of  a
p^rt  or  all  that  do  exist.  The  great  objection  that  by  some  is
made  against  Masonry  is  that  it  is  frivolous  and  obscene.  Such
is  doubtless  the  case,  and,  although  it  is  reprehensible,  yet,  in  our
estimation,  it  comes  far,  very  far,  short  of  the  extent  of  the  evils
embodied  in  that  society.  Still,  however,  as  the  faults  of  greater
magnitude  are  so  warily  arranged  that,  at  the  first  view,  they
do  not  strike  the  mind  so  forcibly  as  those  of  the  lesser  kind,  it
is  not  to  be  wondered  that  the  first  impression  of  the  new  made
votary  should  be  formed  by  the  frivolity,  &c,  of  the  scenes  which
transpire  before  him,  rather  than  by  the  deeper  laid,  but  more
Ww

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


530  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

crying  sins;  and  experience  proves  that  men  are  prone  to  make
up  their  judgment  from  first  impressions,  and  evei  afterwards  to
rest  satisfied  therewith,  unless  some  extraordinary  circumstance
should    perchance    warn  them    to  renew    their  examination.
The  novitiate  is  awake  to  a  sense  of  the  foolishness  of  many
things  that  he  beholds  in  this  his  new  sphere,  and  could  wish
that  they  were  not  there;  but  the  natural  aversion  of  the  heart  to
being  taken  in  error,  the  boasted  renown  that  is  emblazoned  on
the  escutcheons  of  the  order,  and  the  retribution  that  is  held  ta
terrorem  over  the  head  of  the  disquiet  member,  one  or  all  prey
like  a  canker  upon  his  resolution,  and  induce  him  to  content
himself  with  the  solecism  that  the  institution  is  trivial  in  its  nature,
and  therefore  unworthy  of  the  labor  of  a  careful  examination.
Hence  he  deems  it  wise,  so  far  as  personal  considerations  are  con-
cerned, to  continue  a  nominal  patron  of  the  society,  without
taking  any  active  part  except  on  days  of  festivals,  funerals,  &c;
at  the  same  time  contriving  to  compute  with  his  better  judgment
by  his  Masonic  laxity.     There  is  a  still  more  crafty  feature  of
the  institution,  which  has  led  on  another  class  from  one  step  to
another,  until  they  have  advanced  well  nigh  to  the  summit  of  Ma-
sonic knowledge.     Masonry  pretends  to  teach  some  new. and
valuable  science.     A  thirst  for  knowledge  has  induced  many  to
swallow  the  bait;  and  the  degrees  are  so  constructed,  that  each
orife  foils  their  expectation,  but,  at  the  same  time,  sharpens  their
appetite  for  the  promised  feast  which  is  ever  held  before  them,
inviting  th  em  onward.     They  pursue  until  they  become  convinced
that  they  are  chasing  an  illusion;  they  turn  to  retrace  their  steps,
but  now,  for  the  first  time,  they  bethink  themselves  of  the  vnws,
which,  in  the  ardor  of  their  curiosity,  they  heedlessly  made,  nor
do  they  forget  that  a  penalty  was  annexed  thereto.    They  see
that  they  are  in  fault,  and  that  it  would  have  been  better  for  them
to  have  been  satisfied,  at  the  first,  with  the  simple  knowledge  of
'Christ  and  him  crucified.'  Ofthese,some  continue  their  heart-
less attachment  to  the  order  on  account  of  a  mistaken  apprehension
of  the  nature  of  their  obligations;  others,  half  convinced  of  their
nullity,  neglect  to  attend  to  the  'customs  and  usages' prescribed
for  them,  and  become  the  silent,  but  hearty  enemies  of  the  institu-
tion.    I  can  conceive  of  another  reason  which  may  induce  the
Christian  to  continue  his  connexion  with  the  fraternity,  viz.  a
feeling  of  ihame  which  prevents  him  from  publishing  openly  (or
by  a  silent  renunciation,  virtually)  his  folly  and  delusion  to  the
world.     I  say,  I  can  conceive  of  such  a  reason;  but  I  dismiss  it
without  any  further  remark,  hoping  and  trusting  that  the  wortfi
does  not  furnish  a  solitary  case  in  which  it  is  applicable*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.  531

And  I  dismiss  this  subject  by  commending  one  simple,  but  im-
portant question  to  the  reflection  of  those  whom  I  have  thus  far
patiently  heard  and  answered,  viz.  If  the  Masonic  institution  be
pure  in  its  principles  and  congenial  to  the  nature  of  our  holy  re-
ligion, why  do  so  many  men  of  sound  judgment,  and  whose  piety
has  never  been  questioned,  renounce  and  denounce  it?

Part  II.  Are  Masons  justifiable  in  breaking  their  Masonic
oaths,  and  publishing  the  secrets  of  the  order  to  the  world?

The   Masonic  institution  has  long  stood  the  pride  and  glory
of  its  followers,  the  wonder  of  the  curious,  and  the  admiration  of
the  superficial  observer.     The  curtain  of  mystery  which  has  been
thrown  around  its  sanctum  sanctorum,  the  drawn  sword  which
lias  warned  the  unbidden  to  beware  that  they  enter  not  therein,
and  the  seal  of  everlasting  secrecy  that  has  been  put  upon  the  lips
of  its  members,  that  its  principles  and  the  practices  of  its  secret
conclaves  might  never  meet  the  scrutiny  of  the  world,  have  only
served  to  render  it  more  imposing.     Its  novitiates,  from  the  mo-
ment they  crossed  its  threshold,  seemed  bound  by  a  magic  spell.
The  witchery  of  gold,  the  splendor  of  courtly  favor,  the  threats  of
punishment,  the  monitions  of  conscience,  and  the  most  abject
profligacy  of  principle,  were  alike  unable  to  break  their  bonds,  or
draw  from  them  a  single  developement     Was  this  steadfastness
a  virtue?     If  their  cherished  secrets  were  immaculate  in  then:
nature,  it  might  not  have  been  an  offence  of  the  grossest  kind,
although  the  established  principles  of  general  benevolence  forbid
us  to  commend  aught  that  excludes  any  one  from  participating  in
what  is  calculated  to  promote  temporal  enjoyment,  or  fit  the  soul
for  heaven.     If  otherwise,  no  sanctity  or  grandeur  which  the  pat-
ronage of  the  good  and  the  great  may  have  attached  to  it,  should
for  a  moment  deter  us  from  answering,  No.

But  that  strange  enchantment  is  now  broken;  that  spell  is  dis-
solved; the  acta,  the  principles  of  Masonry  have  ceased  to  be
secrets;  the  veil  of  mystery  is  rent  in  twain,  not  by  the  ruthless
hands  of  a  stranger,  but  by  those  who  have  been  cherished  in-
mates, who  have  bowed  before  its  altar,  and  paid  their  vows  at
its  shrine.  For  this  act  the  unprivileged  commonalty  have  spon-
taneously given  them  their  thanks,  and  lauded  their  patriotism.
For  this  act,  many  of  their  brethren  have  heaped  the  stores  of
their  wrath  upon  their  heads,  and  ascribed  to  them  guilt  of
the  deepest  dye.  Here,  then,  are  conflicting  opinions— not  a
difference  of  feeling  with  regard  to  non-essentials,  but  senti-
ments as  widely  distant  as  the  east  from  the  west — not  touching
matters  of  trivial  moment,  but  involving  consequences  of  un-

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


532  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

speakable  importance.     Who,  then,  is  right,  and  who  wrong?
Or  in  other  words,

Are  Masons  justifiable  in  breaking  their  obligations,  and  pub-
lishing the  secrets  of  the  order  to  the  world?  And,  first  of  all,
be  it  remarked  that  the  truth  of  their  expositions  is  a  settled
preliminary.  I  am  not  under  the  necessity  of  asking  any  one  to
grant  me  that  point;  it  is  gratuitously  done  in  the  very  charge
made  against  the  offending  members,  and  which  i-s  now  under
consideration.

It  appears  that  Masons  have  sworn,  under  the  most  horrid
penalties,  to  perform  a  variety  of  duties,  and  to  keep  certain
secrets.      It   is  an    established   and    undisputed   principle  in
moral  philosophy,  that  promissory  oaths  are  not  binding,  unless
the  promise  itself  is  so.     A  promise  is  generally  deemed,  and
perhaps  actually  is,  more  sacred,  and  the  breach  thereof  a  more
glaring  crime,  when  it  has  been  sealed  by  an  oath;  but  it  cannot
change  its  nature  or  render  it  valid,  when  it  would  otherwise
be  unlawful.     So  that  the  case  rests  entirely  upon  the  claims  of
the  promise  to  fulfilment     Promises  are  not  binding  where  the
performance  is  unlawful.     The  Mason  swears  to  conform  to  all
the  customs  and  usages  of  the  order;  and  of  the  nature  of  these
he  must  be  entirely  ignorant  at  the  time,  as  he  cannot  be  entrusted
with  them  until  he  has  made  tins  oath.     Without  waiting  to  in-
quire into  the  nature  of  these  customs  and  usages,  I  will  here
ask  whether  such  a  transaction  as  this  can  commend  itself  to
the  judgment  of  any  reflecting  man?  whether  an  obligation  of  un-
qualified observance,  and  adoption  of  rules  and  principles  yet  to
he  unfolded,  can  be  other  than  nugatory?     They  may,  perhaps,
embrace  nothing  that  is  nefarious,  but  in  that  case  they  must  be
the  opposite,  and  consequently  among  the  common  obligations
0f  life — obligations  which  the  receiver  was  ever  most  sacredly
bound  to  fulfil,  and  hence,  in  fulfilling  them,  is  only  discharging
a  common  duty,  without  rendering  any  credit  to  the  interference
of  Masonry  in  the  matter;  and  she   would  doubtless   be  clear
enough  of  sharing  any  part  of  the  blame,  in  case  of  the  profliga-
cy of  her  follower.     If  Masonry  enforced  all  that  is  pure  in  mo-
rality—all  that  is  lovely  in  virtue — all  that  is  holy  in  religion — no
man  could  dispute  the  obligations  of  her  followers  to  conform  to
her  regulations  in  the  practice  of  these  virtues;  but  what  consti-
tutes tWs  obligation?  and  when  was  it  first  laid  upon  him  in  its  full
strength?  and  what  is  his  duty  in  the  case,  more  than  that  of  the
man  who  never  knelt  and  laid  the  offering  of  his  services  upon  the
altar  of  midnight  sacrifice?

But  if  the  circumstances  under  which  the  Mason  received  hts

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


UGBf   ON   MASONRY.  533

obligation  nullify,  how  much  mort  completely  does  its  nature
absolve  him  from  all  obligation  to  fulfil  it.  The  reader  will  not
here  interrupt  me  with  the  inquiry,  'What,  is  this  its  nature?'  He,
has,  doubtless,  ere  this  perused  it,  and  he  would  rather  avoid  than
court  so  horrid  a  recital  here.  Respecting  its  import,  let  every
man  be  his  own  umpire;  I  wish  not  to  judge  for  any  one.  At
present,  I  can  only  say  that  the  violators  have  honestly  judged  it
unlawful  to  conform  to  them.  They,  after  a  careful  examination
of  the  subject,  in  all  its  bearings,  have  come  to  the  conclusion
that  a  strict  adherence  to  Masonry  would  involve  them  in  legal  or
moral  transgression;  and  if  such  be  the  case,  every  patriotic  or
moral  principle  warns  them  to  absolve  themselves  from  so  unna-
tural an  allegiance.  I  do  not  mean  by  such  a  remark,  that  their
private  opinions  constitute  the  propriety  of  such  a  course,  but
from  all  circumstances,  I  give  credence  to  the  correctness  of  their
views,  and  draw  the  conclusion  accordingly.

Promises  are  not  binding,  when  a  fulfilment  of  them  would
constitute  a  breach  of  prior  and  lawful  engagements:  so  says
the  learned  Dr.  Paley,  and  so  say  we  all.  I  should  be  paying
but  a  sorry  compliment  to  my  fellow  citizens,  were  I  to  spend  a
moment  in  proving  that  they  are  under  the  most  sacred  obligations
to  support  the  institutions  of  the  country  whose  fostering  care
they  enjoy.  If  there  be  aught  in  Masonry  which  comes  in  com-
petition with  our  common  duty  to  the  regulations  and  laws  of  the
land,  then  no  promise  of  fealty  to  its  mandates  can  cancel  the
prior  engagement.  Seceding  Masons  judge  that  such  is  the  fact,
and  have  acted  under  the  influence  of  that  opinion.  If  their  views
respecting  the  tendency  of  the  laws  of  the  order  be  correct,  then
their  conduct,  so  far  from  being  censurable,  is  worthy  of  all
praise.

Promises  are  not  binding,  which  are  obtained  by  means  of
misrepresentation  on  the  part  of  the  promisee.  I  promise  a  man
my  vote  on  his  professing  himself  favorable  to  the  passage  of  an
act  which  I  have  much  at  heart;  but  before  the  day  of  election  I
discover  that  he  was  insincere,  and  will,  if  elected,  oppose  such
an  act.  He  obtained  my  promise  fraudulently,  and  I  am  cer-
tainly under  no  obligation  to  fulfil  it.  The  Mason  is  assured,
previous  to  taking  his  oath,  that  it  will  not  interfere  with  his  reli-
gion, or  his  duty  to  his  country.  Whenever  he  becomes  satisfied
that  such  is  not  the  case — that  this  assurance  was  only  an  allure-
ment to  entrap  him  and  secure  his  devotion  to  an  extra-legal  or
irreligious  power,  then  so  far  from  being  bound  by  a  promise  thus
extorted  from  him,  it  is  his  privilege,  his  most  sacred  duty,  to
disentangle  himself  from  the  evil  snare  into  which  he  has  fallen.

Ww2

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


534  LIGHT    Off    MASONRV.

and  to  denoooce  the  lawless  power  which  cast  upon  his  neck  the
iron  yoke  of  its  unnatural  thraldom.

This  subject  might  furnish  a  theme  for  more  remarks,  and
perhaps  more  to  the  purpose;  but  I  have  not  set  myself  down  to
write  a  book,  but  to  record  a  few  of  the  most  prominent  arguments
in  defence  of  the  course  which  has  met  with  so  free  and  unme-
rited censure.  For  those  that  have  been  brought  forward,  I  am
indebted  to  others;  indeed  they  are  nothing  more  than  long  estab-
lished and  indisputable  principles  applied  to  the  case  before  us;
and  as  fast  as  the  public  shall  be  made  acquainted  with  facts  that
are  before  the  world,  they  will  be  better  enabled  to  judge  of  the
appropriateness  of  the  application.  1  ask  them  not  to  take  any
of  my  conclusions  upon  trust;  I  would  rather  that  they  would
stay  their  decision,  until  they  shall  be  in  possession  of  all  the
information  they  need  to  enable  them  to  form  their  judgment
Truth,  not  my  simple  assertions,  but  disrobed  and  unadorned
truth,  fresh  from  the  fountain,  has  been  given  to  the  world —
genuine  Masonry  has  been  presented  to  their  view,  let  them
read  that,  and  then  judge  whether  I  am  guiltless  in  attempting  to
open  the  door  and  bid  the  inmates  of  the  dark  abodes  oi'  mysti-
cism flee,  and  yet  bear  off  the  triumphs  of  honor  and  the  meed  of
their  fellow  freemen's  praise  with  their  escape.  But  let  no  man
say  that,  in  attempting  to  render  Masonic  oaths  void,  I  am  intro-
ducing a  dangerous  precedent,  breaking  asunder  the  bonds  which,
in  this  depraved  world,  hold  men  to  fidelity,  hurling  contempt  at
the  sacredncss  of  that  'which  confirmeth  all  things,'  and  'with  one
tell  swoop,'  razing  one  of  the  surest  safeguards  of  our  peace,  and
disannuls  g  pledges  of  whatever  name  or  nature.  Such  a  charge,
if  made,  I  shall  throw  back  upon  the  institution  that  first  estranged
the  hearts  of  our  citizens  from  their  duty.  My  object  is  to  re-
store, not  to  devastate;  to  build  up  what  has  been  laid  waste;  to
arrest  the  ruthless  hand  of  the  spoiler;  and  to  re-stake  the  land*
marks  that  have  been  removed.


y  Google


(535)


SIXTEENTH  DEGREE,

OR

PRINCE   OF   JERUSALEM.

Prerogatives  of  the  Princes. — Princes  of  Jerusalem  have  a  right  to  inspect
all  lodges  or  councils  of  an  inferior  degree,  and  can  revoke  and  annul  all  the
work  done  in  such  councils  or  lodges,  if  the  same  shall  be  inconsistent  with
the  regulations  of  Masonry.

In  countries  where  there  are  no  Grand  Lodges,  they  have  power  to  confer
the  blue  degrees.  They  are  the  supreme  judges  of  all  transactions  in  the
lower  degrees;,  and  no  appeal  can  be  made  to  the  Supreme  Council  of  the
thirty-third  degree,  untd  an  opinion  has  been  given  by  the  Grand  Council  of
Princes  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  result  of  their  opinion  has  been  made  known.

A  Prince  of  Jerusalem  who  visits  an  inferior  lodge «  r  council,  ought  to  pre-
sent himself  in  the  dres?  and  ornament*  of  this  degree.  When  his  approach
is  announced,  the  pn  siding  officer  must  send  a  Prince  of  Jerusalem  to  exa-
mine him,  and  if  he  reports  irt  his  favor,  the  arch  of  steel  is  to  be  foinied,  and
he  is  conducted  beneath  it  to  his  seat  on  the  left  of  the  presiding  officer.
An  entry  of  his  name  and  rank  is  made  on  the  records,  that  he  may  hence-
forward receive  our  honors  without  any  examination.

Five  Princes  are  necessary  to  form  a  Grand  Council.

Duties  of  Princes.— They  are  carefully  to  obseive  the  rules  of  justice  and
good  order,  and  to  maintain  irreproachable  lives.  If  guilty  of  unmasonic
conduct,  they  are  to  be  punished  at  the  discretion  of  the  Grand  Council.
Expulsions  are  to  be  notiii<  d  to  the  Grand  Council  of  the  thirty-third  degree,
and  to  all  inferior  Masonic  bodies  within  the  district.

If  a  Prince  solicits  a  vote  at  an  election,  he  is  to  be  punished  with  perpetual
exclusion.

The  annual  election  is  to  take  place  on  the  twenty-third  day  of  theJewish
month  Adar.     The  meetings  of  the  Councils  are  termed  Conventions^*

Jtyartmentt  used  tn  this  degree. — There  are  two  apartments,  connected  by  a
long  narrow  passage.  The  western  represents  the  court  of  Zerubbabel,  at
Jerusalem.  The  hangings  are  yellow.  Over  the  throne  is  a  yellow  canopy.
On  a  triangular  pedestal  before  the  throne,  are  placed  a  naked  sword,  an  ar-
row of  justice,  a  balance,  and  a  shield  on  which  is  an  equdateral  triangle,  a
sceptre,  a  chandelier  of  five  branches,  which  are  all  lighted  in  the  latter  part
of  the  ceremony  of  reception.  The  eastern  apartment  represents  the  cabinet
of  Dariua.  It  is  hung  with  red;  the  canopy  is  red*  Before  the  throne  is  a
small  square  pedestal;  and  in  it  a  drawn  sword,  a  sceptre,  paper,  pen*,  &e-
The  Craef  Minister  of  State  sits  near  Darius.

tycm  of  the  Qfmd  Counetf.— The  first  officer  ia  styled  'Most  EouitaMe
Prince,'  and  is  on  the  throne.  The  Senior  Warden  and  Junior  Warden  are
styled  4Moet  Enlightened;' seated  in  the  west.  The  other  officers  and  tna
members  we  eiylod  «Vanant  Princes.'


y  Google


536  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

Dress. — The  'Most  Equitable'  wean  a  yellow  robe  and  turban.  The  apron
<s  red;  on  it  are  painted  the  temple,  a  square,  a  buckler,  a  triangle,  and  a
hand:  the  flap  is  yellow;  on  it  a  balance,  and  the  letters  D.  Z.  [Darius  and
ZerubbabeL]  Gloves  are  red.  Sash  is  yellow,  edged  with  gold,  embroidered
by  a  balance,  a  hand,  a  poniard,  five  stars,  and  two  crowns— it  is  worn  from
right  to' left

Jewel.— A  golden  medal;  on  one  side  a  hand  holding  a  balance  in  equili-
bria; on  the  other  a  two  edged  sword,  with  five  stars  around  the  point,  and
the  letters  D.  Z.
Jtartn. — The  alarm  is  three  and  two.  (!!!!!)

Opening. — The  'Most  Equitable'  strikes  one,  and  says,  'Valiant  Grand
Master  of  Ceremonies,  what  is  the  first  business  of  a  Grand  Council  of  Princes
of  Jerusalem?  Grand  Master  of  Ceremonies.  To  see  that  the  guards  are  at
their  proper  stations.  M.  E.  Attend  to  that  duty  and  inform,  &c.  G.M.C
It  is  done,  Most  Equitable.7  M.  E.  strikes  two;  the  Junior  Warden  rises.
M.  E.  'Valiant  Junior  Warden,  what  is  our  next  business?  J.  W.  To  see
that  all  present  are  Princes  of  Jerusalem.  M.  E.  Attend  to  that  duty.  J.  W.
We  are  all  princes  of  Jerusalem.  M.  E.  (striking  thrice)  Valiant  Senior
Warden,  what  is  the  hour?  8.  W.  The  rising  of  the  sun.  M.  E.  What  duty
remains  to  be  done?  S.  W.  To  arrange  the  Princes  in  two  columns,  for  the
proper  discharge  of  their  duties.  M.  E.  Attend  to  that  duty.  S.  W.  Most
Equitable,  it  is  done.  M.  E.  Valiant  Junior  and  Seinor  Wardens,  inform
your  respective  columns  that  I  am  about  to  open  this  Grand  Council  of  Prin-
ces of  Jerusalem,  by  thru  and  two.  (That  is  done. )  M.  E.  Attention,  Valiant
Princes!  (The  signs  are  given;  the  Most  Eauitable  strikes  three  and  too:
this  is  repeated  by  the  Wardens.)  M.  E.  I  declare  this  Grand  Council  duly
opened  and  in  order  for  business.'

Reception.— The  candidate  being  hoodwinked,  ia  led  by  the  Master  af
Ceremonies  to  the  door—  the  alarm  is  given— the  doar  is  opened  without  any
ceremony,  and  the  candidate  is  led  to  the  east,  and  thus  addressed: — Most
Equitable.  *What  is  your  desire?  Candidate.  I  come  to  prefer  the  complaints
of  the  people  of  Israel  against  the  Samaritans,  who  have  refused  topuy  the
tribute  imposed  on  them  for  defraying  the  expense  of  the  sacrifices  offered  to
God  in  the  temple.  M.  E.  (who  represents  Zerubbabel)  I  have  no  power
over  the  Samaritans;  they  are  subject  to  king  Darius,  who  is  at  Babylon;
it  is  to  him  that  such  complaints  must  be  preferred;  but  as  we  are  al\  inter-
ested in  this  thing,  I  win  arm  you,  and  cause  you  to  be  accompanied  by  four
Knights,  that  you  may  more  easily  surmount  any  difficulty  which  may  present
itself  in  your  journey  to  *he  court  of  the  king  of  Persia.'  The  ban'  age  is  now
reiqpVM?  from  the  eyes  of  the  candidate;  he  is  armed  with  a  sword  and  buck-
ler, and  decorated  as  a  Knight  of  the  East.  The  four  Knights  who  accom-
pany him  are  armed  in  a  similar  manner.  They  commence  their  journey,
and  are-  attacked  hv  come  armed  ruffians,  whom  they  repulse.  Th^y  arrive
at  the  door  of  the  cabinet  of  Darius.  The  candidate  enters  with  one  of  the
Knights,  and  thus  addresses  the  king: — "Miyhty  king!  the  Samaritans  refuse
to  pay  the  tribute  imposed  on  them  by  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia,  for  defraying
the  expenses  of  the  sacrifices  which  are  offered  in  the  temple  which  we  have
rebuilt:  the  people  of  Israel  entreat  that  yon  wil]  compel  the  Samaritans  to
perform  their  duty.  Darius.  Tour  request  is  just  and  equitable;  I  order  that
the  Samaritans  shall  immediately  pay  the  tribute  imposed  on  them.  My
Chief  Minister  shall  deliver  to  you  mv  decree  for  this  purpose.  Go  in  peace!'
The  candidate  retires;  the  Chief  Minister  follows,  and  delivers  the  decree  ta
him.  After  surmounting  various  obstacles,  candidate  is  met  on  his  return  by
the  Knights  with  lighted  torches,  and  is  thus  conducted  with  triumph  into  the
presence  of  Zerubbabel,  and  says: — <I  deliver  to  you  the  decree  of  Darius,
king  of  Persia,  which  we  have  obtained  after  defeating  our  enemies,  and  ea-

D.gitized  by  G00gle
-  M


LIGHT  ON  MASONRY.  537

countering  many  dangers  in  our  journey.'    Most  Equitable  reads  the  decree
as  follow*: — *We  Danus,  ♦Rngof  Kings!'  willing  to  fevor  and  protect  our
people  at  Jerusalem,  after  the  example  of  our  illustrious  predecessor,  king
Cyrus,  do  will  and  ordain,  that  the  Samaritans,  against  whom  complaints
have  been  made,  shall  punctually  pay  the  tribute  money  which  they  owe  for
the  sacrifices  of  the  temple — otherwise  they  shall  receive  the  punishment  due
to  their  disobedience.     Given  at  Shushan,  the  palace,  tins  fourth  day  of  the
second  month,  in  the  year  3534,  and  of  our  reign  the  third,  under  the  seal  of
our  faithful  Darius,     [t,.  s.}»    M.  E.  'The  people  of  Jerusalem  are  under  the
greatest  obligations  to  you  for  the  zeal  and  courage  displayed  by  you  in  sur-
mounting the  obstacles  which  you  encountered  in  your  journey;  as  a  reward
we  shall  confer  on  you  the  mysteries  of  the  degree  of  Prince  of  Jerusalem.
Are  you  willing  to  take  an  obligation,  binding  you  to  an  exact  observance  of
our  raws,  and  a  careful  conceaknent  of  our  mysteries?  Cand.  I  am.  M.  E.
Kneel  before  the  altar  for  that  purpose.'

Obligation, — I,  A.  B.,  do  solemnly  promise  and  swear  in  the  presence  of  Al-
mighty God,  the  Great  Architect  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  of  these  Valiant
Princes  of  Jerusalem,  that  I  will  never  reveal  the  mysteries  of  the  degree  oi
Prince  of  Jerusalem  to  any  one  of  an  inferior  degree,  or  to  any  other  person
whatever.  I  promise  and  swear,  as  a  Prince  of  Jerusalem,  to  do  justice  to
my  brethren,  and  not  to  rule  them  tyrannically,  but  in  love.  I  promise  and
swear  that  I  will  never,  by  word/frMeed,  attack  the  honor  of  any  Prince  of
Jerusalem;  and  that  I  wiH  not  assist  in  conferring  this  degree  except  in  a
lawful  Grand  Council  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem.  All  this  I  promise  and  swear,
under  the  penalty  of  being  stripped  naked,  and  having  my  heart  pierced  with
a  poniard.  So  help  me  God.     Amen!  Amen!  Amen!

The  Most  Equitable  raises  the  candidate,  and  gives  him  the  signs,  tokens,
and  words.

First  sign, r-.    First  token, — .    Second  token, .

Pass  word,  — .     Sacred  Word, .

The  March, — •.     Steps  on ■ — .

Age. — The  age  of  a  Prince  of  Jerusalem  is .

Most  Equitable.  «I  now  appoint  and  constitute  you,  with  your  feur  compa-
nions, Princes  and  Governors  of  Jerusalem,  that  you  may  render  justice  to  all
the  people.  I  decorate  you  with  a  yellow  sash,  to  which  is  attached  a  gold  me-
dal. Tue  'balance'  on  it  is  to  admonish  you  to  make  equity  and  justice  your
guides.  The  'hand  of  justice'  is  a  mark  of  your  authority  over  the  people.
The  'emblems'  of  the  'apron'  with  which  I  now  invest  you,  have  reference  to
the  works  and  virtues  of  Masons,  and  to  your  duty  in  the  high  office  with
which  you  are  invested.  As  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  you  will  assemble  in  two
chambers  of  the  temple.     Be  just,  merciful,  and  wise.1

LECTURE.

Question.  Are  you  a  Prince  of  Jerusalem?  Answer.  I  know  the  road  to
Babylon.  Q.  What  were  you  formerly?  A.  A  Knight  of  the  East.  Q.  How
did  you  arrive  at  the  dignity  of  a  Prince  of  Jerusalem?  A.  By  the  favor  ot
Zerubbabel,  and  the  courage  which  I  manifested  in  many  conflicts.  Q.
Where  did  the  Prince  of  Jerusalem  travel?  A.  From  Jerusalem  to  Babylon.
Q  Why?  A.  The  Samaritans  having  refused  to  pay  the  tribute  imposed  on
them  for  defraying  the  expense  of  the  sacrifices  ottered  to  God  in  the  temple,
an  embassy  was  despatched  to  Babyion,  to  obtain  justice  of  king  Danug.
Q.  How  many  Knights  constituted  this  embassy?  A.  Five.  Q.  Did  they
encounter  any  difficulty  in  their  journey?  A.  They  did.  The  Samaritans
against  whom  they  were  to  prefer  a  complaint,  armed  themselves  and  attacked
the  ambassadors,  but  were  defeated.  Q.  What  did  they  obtain  from  Darius?
\.  A  decree  orderingthe  Samaritans  to  pay  the  tribute,  or  suffer  punishme^


y  Google


o3S  LIGHT  ON   MASONJftY.

Q.  How  were  the  embassadors  received  on  their  re  torn  to  Jerusalem?  A.  A?
some  distance  from  the  city  they  were  met  by  the  people,  who  accompanied
them  to  the  temple,  singing  songs  of  joy.  On  reaching  the  temple  and  mak-
ing their  report,  and  presenting  the  decree  of  Darius,  they  were  constituted
Princes  of  Jerusalem.  Q.  How  were  they  habited  as  Princes  of  Jerusalem?
A.  In  cloth  of  cold.  Q.  What  were  their  decorations?  A.  A  yellow  sash
trimmed  with  gold  from  right  to  left;  to  which  was  attached  a 'golden  medal,7
on  which  was  was  engraved  a  'balance,' a  'sword,'  'five  stars,'  and  the  letter?
'D.  Z.'  Q.  What  is  signified  by  the  five  stars  on  the  sash?  A.  They  axe
emblematic  of  the  five  Knights  who  journeyed  from  Jerusalem  to  Babylon.
Q.  What  is  the  age  of  a  Prince  of  Jerusalem?    A-  Five  times  fifteen.

Close . — Most  Equitable.  'Most  Enlightened  Junior  and  Senior  Wardens,
announce  to  your  respective  columns  that  I  am  about  to  close  this  Grand
Council  by  five  times  fifteen.1  Each  Warden  strikes  Jive;  all  rise  and  the  notice
is  given.  M.  E.  'Attention,  Princes  of  Jerusalem!  (The  signs  are  given.
The  Mort  Equitable  strikes  five  times  fifteen,  which  is  repeated  by  the  War-
dens. )    Be  just,  merciful,  and  wise!  1  declare  this  Grand  Council  duly  closed.'


THIRTY-SECONfl  DEGREE,

OR

PRINCE  OF  THE  ROYAL  SECRET.*

The  assembly  of  Princes  is  termed  a  '  Consistory. »

Officers. — The  first  officer  represents  Frederick  II.  king  of  Prussia;  he  i>
styled  'Sovereign  of  Sovereigns,'  'Grand  Prince/  Illustrious  Commander  in
Chief.'  The  two  next  officers  are  styled  'Lieutenant  Commanders.'  The
fourth  officer  is  the  'Minister  of  State,'  who  acts  as  the  orator.  The  fifth
officer  is  the  'Grand  Chancellor.'  Then  the  'Grand  Secretary;'  the  'Grand
Treasurer;'  the  'Grand  Captain  of  the  Guards;'  a  'Standard  Rearer;'  a
'Grand  Master  Architect;'  and  two  'Tylers.'

Place  of  meeting. — This  is  to  be  a  building  at  least  two  stories  in  height,
situated  on  elevated  .ground,  in  the  open  country.     Three  apartments  on  the

*  It  will  be  recollected,  that  in  calling  this  the  thirty-second  degree,  the
degrees  conferred  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter  and  Grana  Encampment,  with
those  of  the  Thrice  Illustrious  Order  of  the  Holy  Cross,  are  not  numbered.

The  ostensible  object  of  this  degree  is  the  invasion  of  the  Holy  Land,  and
its  deliverance  from  the  infidels.  This  is  to  be  eflbc'-*  u-  —:^n  a-  n"  fhr  Ma-
sons, ancient  and  modern,  under  one  commander,  and  directing  them  'en
masse1  upon  the  Mahometans,  who  have  wickedly  established  themselves  in
that  sacred  region.  Hence  the  complexion  of  this  degree  is  military-  The
draft  or  carpet  contains  the  plan  of  the  camp  of  this  'Masonic  arm?!'  The
watchwords  are  to  serve  the  purposes  of  countersigns.  It  is  believed  that
the  ceremonies  of  initiation  have  never  been  committed  to  writing,  or  prac-
ticed in  North  America;  hence,  though  many  have  received  the  obligation,
words,  si^na,  &c.  fonhally,  they  remain  like  the  rest  of  the  world  ignorant  of
the  peculiar  rights  of  the  degree.  It  may  be  proper  to  apprise  the  reader  that
this  degree,  which  is  now  numbered  as  the  thirty-second,  was  fifty  years  agp
(or  less)  the  twenty-fifth.     All  those  degrees  which  intervene  between  the

K H,  or  Kadosh,  and  this  degree,  have  been  interpolated,  and  probably

*  manufactured  within  that  period.


y  Google


*


LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.  539

second  floor  are  necessary  in  this  degree.  In  the  first  of  these  the  Guards
are  stationed.  The  second  is  used  as  a  preparation  room.  The  third  is  oc-
cupied by  the  members  of  the  Consistory.  This  last  apartment  i8  hung  with
black,  sprinkled  with  tears,  'death's  heads,'  'cross  bones,'  and  'skeletons.'
The  throne  is  in  the  east,  elevated  by  seven  steps.  On  the  throne  is  the  chair
of  state,  lined  with  Mack  satin,  flamed  with  red.  Before  the  chair  is  a  tabic
covered  with  black  satin,  strewed  with  tears.  On  this  cloth,  in  front,  is  a
'death's  head'  and  'cross  bones;'  over  the  'death's  head'  is  the  letter  I;  and
under  the  'cross  bones'  is  the  letter  M.  On  the  table  is  placed  a  naked  sword,
a  buckler,  a  sceptre,  a  balance,  and  a  book  containing  the  statutes  of  the
order.  In  the  west  is  placed  another  table  covered  with  crimson,  bordered
with  black,  and  strewed  with  tears-,  on  the  front  of  this  cloth  are  the  letters
N.  K.  M.  K.  in  gold.

Dress  and  stations  of  officers.-r-The  'Sovereign  of  Sovereigns'  is  dressed  in
royal  robes,  and  seated  in  the  chair  of  state.  The  Lieutenant  Commanders
dressed  like  the  modern  princes  of  Europe,  and  seated  at  the  table  in  the
west;  their  swords  are  crossed  on  the  table.  The  Minister  of  State  is  placed
at  the  Sovereign's  right  hand.  The  Grand  Chancellor  stands  on  the  left  hand
of  the  Sovereign.  Next  to  the  Minister  of  State  is  placed  the  Grand  Secre-
tary. Next  to  the  Grand  Chancellor  is  placed  the  Grand  Treasurer.  Below
the  last  named  officers  are  placed  on  one  side  the  Standard  Bearer,  the  Grand
Master  Architect,  and  the  Captain  of  the  Guards.  Below  these  officers  are
placed  six  members  dressed  in  red,  without  aprons,  wearing  the  jewel  of  the
order,  suspended  on  the  breast  by  a  black  rjbbon.

Collar  of  the  order. — The  collar  is  black,  and  edged  with
silver.    On  its  point  is  embroidered  in  red,  a  teutonic  cross,

On  the  middle  of  the  cross  is  a  double  headed  eagle  in  silver.   The

collar  is  lined  with  scarlet,  on  which  is  embroidered  a  black  teutonic  cross.
Around  the  waist  is  girded  a  black  sash,  embroidered  with  silver.    The  cross
is  embroidered  on  that  part  of  the  girdle  which  is  in  front.
Jewel. — The  jewel  is  a  golden  teutonic  cross.

Q^uaUficaUons  of  candidate.— The  candidate  who  receives  this  degree  must
be  faithfully  examined  in  that  of  'Kadosh,'  previous  to  admission.  The  Mas-
ter of  Ceremonies  will  acquaint  him  with  the  'pass  word,'  which  he  is  to  give
to  the  Lieutenant  Commander.  The  Master  of  Ceremonies  will  then  lead
him  to  the  'Sovereign  of  Sovereignsi'

Opening  and  closing.— -The  Sovereign  of  Sovereign  says,  'Sal  ia?.'  The
Lieutenants  reply,  Woni.'*  They  then  together  say,  'Tengu.'  All  give  the
sign.  The  Sovereign  of  Sovereigns  say 6:— Let  us  imitate  our  Grand  Master
Jacques  DeMolay,  Hiram  Abiff,*  who  to  the  last  placed  all  his  hopes  in  the
Great  Architect  of  the  universe;  and  pronounced  the  following  words  just  as
he  passed  from  this  transient  life  into  eternal  bliss: — 'Spes  mea  in  Deo  est,'
(My  hope  is  in  God.)

Description  of  the  carpet  representing  the  camp. — On  the  carpet  is  drawn  an
'enneagen,'  in  which  is  inscribed  a  pentagon;  within  this  is  an  equilateral  trian-
gle, and  in  the  triangle  a  circle.  Between  the  heptagon  and  pentagon,  upon
the  sides  of  the  latter,  are  placed  the  standards  of  the  five  Standard  Bearers,
and  the  pavilions  inscribed  by  the  letters  T.  E.  N.  G.  U.  The  emblems  on
the  standard  T.  are  the  'ark  of  the  covenant,'  an  'olive  tree,'  and  a  'lighted
candlestick,'  on  each  side.  The  ground  color  of  this  standard  is  purple.  On
the  ark  is  written  the  motto  TLaus  Deo.'  The  standard  E.  bears  a  golden
lion  holding  in  his  mouth  a  'golden  key;'  wearing  around  his  neck  a  gol-
den collar,  on  which  is  engraved  '515.'    The  ground  is  azure*;  the  motto  'Ad  /

*  In  the  sublime  degrees  Hiram  Abiff  is  considered  merely  as  •»  aBcgorical     /
personage.  -    ,

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


340


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.


majorem  Dei  gfooam.'  On  the  standard  N.  is  an  'inflamed  heart'  in  red,  with
two  wings,  surrounded  by  a  laurel  crown.  The  ground  is  white.  The  flag
G.  bears  a  doable  headed  eagle,  crowned,  holding  a  sword  in  his  right  claw,
and  in  his  left  a  bloody  heart.  Ground  is  sea  green.  The  flag  U.  has  an  ox,
sable,  (black,}  on  a  golden  ground.  On  the  sides  of  the  enneagen  are  nine
tents,  and  on  its  angles  nine  pendants,  each  belonging  to  its  appropriate  tent.
The  pendants  are  distinguished  by  numerals,  and  the.  tents  by  the  letters
I.  N.  O.  N.  X.  1.  L.  A.  S.,  disposed  fron>  right  to  left  These  tents  sig
mfy  the  different  grades  of  Masonry.    Thus;


Tents.

S.

V.
L.


X.


Names  of  Tents.

Malachi,

Zerubbabel,
Neamiah,

Hobben  or Johaben

Peleg,
Joiada,


N.
I.


Aholiab,

Joshua,
Ezra,


pendants.


White,  spotted  with  red,  1

Light  green,     r
Red,

Black  and  red,

Black,

Red  and  black  in  lozenges,'


Red  and  green,
Green,


Represents,

Knights  ofRoseCroix
Kts.  of  East  &  West
and  Pr*s  oFJentfm.

Knights  of  the  East.

Grand  Elect,  Perfect,
and  SublhneMasons

Sublime  Elect,  and
Elect  of  Fifteen.

Elect  of  Nine,  or  Gr.
Master  Architect.

Provost  and  Judges.

Intendant  ofthe  buil-
dings and  Intimate
Secretary.

Perfect  Master,

Master,  Fellow  Craft,


(I  andEnterMAppren.

The  equilateral  triangle  in  the  middle  represents  the  centre  of  the  army,
and  shows  where  the  Knights  of  Malta  are  to  be  placed  who  have  been  ad-
mitted  to  our  mysteries,  and  have  proved  themselves  faithful  guardians.
They  are  to  be  joined  with  the  Knights  of  Kadosh.  The  corps  in  the  centre
is  to  be  commanded  by  five  Princes,  who  command  jointly  or  in  rotation  ac-
cording to  their  degrees,  and  receive  their  drders  immediately  from  the  •Sove-
reign of  Sovereigns.  These  live  Princes  must  place  their  standards  in  the  five
angles  of  the  pentagon,  as  above  described.  These  Princes,  who  are.Stan-
dard  Bearers,  have  the  following  names,  viz.


Standard.


TV  --.--•»  •■  BezaleeL,

E,  ^. ^  Aholiab,

N; --  Mahazen,

G.  -  -  -  -  --»•■»  Garimont,

U. Amariah.


t  -    Nantes.


The  heptagon  points  out  the  Encampment  destined  for  the  Princes  of  Li-
banus,  Jerusalem,  &c.;  and  these  are  to  receive  their  orders  from  the  five
Princes.    The  enneagen  shows  the  general  order  of  Masons  of  all  degrees.

Instructions  for  the  reunion  of  the  brethren,  Knights,  Princes,  and  Com-
•  manders,of  the  Royal  Secret  or  Kadosh,  which  really  signifies,  'Holy  brttiureu
of  all  degree*  separated.  >

Frederick  III.  king  of  Prussia,  Grand  Master  and  Commander  in  Chief,  So-
vereign of  Sovereigns,  with  an  army  composed  ofthe  Knight?,  Princes  of  the
White  and  Black  Eagle,  including  Prussian,  English,  and  French \  likewise,
joined  by  the  Knights  Adepts  of  the  Sun,  Princes  of  Libanus.or  the  Royal
Axe,  the  Knights  of  the  Rose  Croix  or  St.  Andrew,  Knights  of  the  East  and
wGst,  the  Princes  of  Jerusalem,  Knights  of  the  East,  or  Sword,  the  Grand


d  by  Google


WGHT   ON   MASONRY.


541


Elect,  Perfect,  and  Sublime  Masons,  the  Knights  of  the  Royal  Arch,  (ninth
Arch,)  Sublime  Knights  Elected,  &c.  &c.

The  hour  for  the  departure  or  march  of  the  army  is  the  fifth  after  the  set-
ting of  the  sun;  and  is  to  be  made  known  by  the  tiring  of  five  great  guns  in
the  following  order  (0) — (0  0  0  0) — that  is»,  with  an  interval  between  the  first
and  second.  The  first  rendezvous  is  to  be  the  port  of  Naples— from  Naples
to  the  port  of  Rhodes— from  Rhodes  to  Cyprus  and  Malta,  whence  the  whole
naval  force  of  all  nations  is  to  assemble.  The  second  rendezvous  is  to  be  at
Cyprus,  &c.  The  third  rendezvous  is  to  be  at  Jerusalem,  where  they  will  be
joined  by  our  faithful  guardians.  The  watchwords  for  every  day  of  the  week
are  as  follows;  and  they  are  not  to  be  changed  but  by  express  order  from  the
king  of  Prussia:

Protectors  of  Masonry.


Sunday

Monday  -  -
Tuesday  -  -
Wednesday
Thursday  *  -

Friday

Saturday  --

Sign.


Cyrus,

Darius,

Xerxes,

Alexander,

Philadelphus,

Herod,

Hezakiah.


Answer.


Prophets.
Ezekiel,
Daniel,
Habakkuk,
Zephaniah,
Haggai,
Zechariah,
Malachi,


Sacred  words.    One  says  *

;'  both  then  repeat  the  word,  '-


>io


which   the  other   replica  *-

Pass  words.  * ,'  * ,'  which  signifies  'separated;'  '•  , _,

which  signifies,  'reunited ;» *  «  ,'  '■  ■■  ,'  S  *  ,'  which  signifies,  Ho
avenge;'  Each  then  letters  the  word  *  ■»  ;'  which  signifies,  'Omnipotent*.
Charge  addressed  to  the  candidate. — My  dear  brother;  The  Saracens  having
taken  possession  of  the  Holy  Land,  those  who  were  engaged  in  the  Crusades
not  being  able  to  expel  them,  >agreed  with  Godfrey  DeBouillon,  the  con-
ductor and  chief  of  the  Crusaders,  to  veil  the  mysteries  of  religion  under  em*
blems  by  which  they  would  be  able  to  maintain  the  devotion  of  the  soldier,
and  protect  themselves  from  the  incursion  of  those  who  were  their  enemies,
after  the  example  of  the  Scriptures,  the  styleof  which  is  figurative.  Those  zeal-
ous brethren  chose  Solomon's  temple  for  their  model.  This  building  has  strong
allusions  to  the  Christian  church.  Sine©  that  period  they  (Masons)  have  been
known  by  the  name  of  Master  Architect;  and  they  have  employed  themselves
in  improving  the  law  of  that  admirable  Master.  From  hence  it  appears  that
the  mvsteries  of  the  craft  are  the  mysteries  of  religion.  Those  brethren  were
careful  not  to  entrust  this  important  secret  to  any  whose  discretion  they  had
not  proved.  For  this  reason  they  invented  different  degrees  to  try  those  who
entered  among  them;  and  only  gave  them  symbolic  secrets  without  explana-
tion to  prevent  treachery,  and  to  make  themselves  known  only  to  each  other.
For  this  purpose  it  was  resolved  to  use  different  signs,  words,  and  tokens,  in
every  degree,  by  which  they  would  be  secured  against  cowans  and  Saracens.
The  different  degrees  were  fixed  first  to  the  number  of  seven  by  the  exam-
ple o£  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  universe,  who;built  all  things  in  six  days  and
rested  on  the  seventh.  This  is  distinguished  by  the  seven  points  of  recep-
tion in  the  Master's  degree.  Enoch  employed  six  days  to  construct  the  arches,
and  on  the  seventh,  having  deposited  the  secret  treasure  in  the  lowest  arcb,
was  translated  to  the  abodes  of  the  blessed.  Solomon  employed  six  years  in
oonstructinjj  his  temple;  and  celebrated  its  dedication  on  the  seventh,  with  all
the  solemnity  worthy  of  the  Divinity  himself.  This  sacred  edifice  we  choose
to  make  the  basis  of  figurative  Masonry.  In  the  first  degree  are  three  sym-
bols to  be  appUed.  First,  The  first  of  the  creation,  which  was  only  chaos,  is
figured  by  the  candidate's  coming  out  of  the  black  chamber,  neither  naket
nor  clothed,  depwed,  &c.;  and  his  suffering  the  painful  trial  at  his  reception,
Xx


y  Google


542  LIGHT   ON   MASOflfRY*

&C  The  candidate  sees  nothing  before  he  is  brought  to  light;  and  his  powers
of  imagination  relative  to  what  he  is  to  go  through  are  suspended,  which  al-
ludes to  the  figure  of  the  creation  of  that  vast  luminous  body  confused  among
the  other  parts  of  creation  before  it  was  extracted  from  darkness  and  fixed
by  the  Almighty  fiat.  Secondly,  The  candidate  approaches  thefootstool  of
the  Master,  ana  there  renounces  all  cowans;  he  promises  to  subdue  his  pas-
sions, by  which  means  he  is  united  to  virtue,  and  by  his  regularity  oC  nfe  de-
monstrates what  he  proposes.  This  is  figured  to  him  by  *e  steps  that  he
takes  in  approaching  the  altar;  the  symbolic  meaning  of  which  is  the  separa-
tion of  the  firmament  from  the  earth  and  water  on  the  second  day  of  creation.
(The  charge  proceeds  by.  giving  a  figurative  interpretation  of  the  ceremonies,
&c  of  the  first  and  second  part  of  the  third  degree,  which  I  pass  oyer  as  un-
interesting to  my  readers,  and  commence  with  an  interpretation  which  will  be
as  novel  to  the  Craft  of  the  lower  grades  as  to  the  Cowns.*)

In  the  Master's  degree  is  represented  the  assassination  of  Hiram  by  false
brethren.  This  ought  to  put  us  in  mind  of  the  fate  of  Adam,  occasioned  by
perverseness  in  his  disobeying  his  great  and  awful  Creator.  The  symbolic
mystery  of  the  deajh  of  Hiram  AbirTrepresents  to  us  that  of  the  Messiah;  for
the  three  blows  which  were  given  to  Hiram  Abiff  at  the  three  gates  of  tho
temple  alludes  to  the  three  points  of  condemnation  against  Christ,  at  the
High  Priest's,  Caiphas,  ,Herod,  and  Pilate.  It  was  from  the  last  that  he  was
lecfto  that  most  violent  and  excruciating  death.  The  said  three  Wows  with
the  square,  guage,  and  gavel,  are  symbols  of  the  blow  on  the  cheek,  the  fla-
gellation, and  the  crown  of  thorns,  The  brethren  assembled  around  the  tomb
of  Hiram,  is  a  representation  of  the  disciples  lamenting  the  death  of  Christ
on  the  cross.  The  Master's  word,  which  is  said  to  be  lost,  since  the  death ot
Hiram  Abiff)  is  the  same  that  Christ  pronounced  on  the  cross,  and  which  the
Jews  did  not  comprehend,  'Eli,  Eli,  lama  sabachthani,'  'My  God,  my  God,  why
hast  thou  forsaken  me!  'have  pity  on  and  forgive  my  enemies*— Instead  of
which  words  are  substituted,  M.  B.  N.,  (Mac-be-nac,)  which  in  Arabian  sig-
nifies. The  son  of  the  widow  is  dead.'  The  false  brethren  represent  Judas
Iseanot,  who  sold  Christ  The  red  collar  worn  by  the  Grand  feleet,  Perfect,
and  Sublime  Masons,  calls  to  remembrance  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  sprig  of
acassiais  the  figure  of  the  cross,  because  of  this  wood  was  the  cross  made.
The  captivity  of  the  Grand  Elect,  and  Sublime  Masons,  (i.  e.  by  the  Chal-
deans,) shows  us  the  persecution  of  the  Christian  religion  under  the  Banian
emperors,  and'  its  liberty  under  Constantine  the  Great.  It  also  calls  to  our
remembrance  the  persecution  of  the  Templars,  and  the  situation  of  Jacques
DeMolay,  who,  lying  in  irons  nearly  seven  years,  at  the  end  of  which  out
worthy  Grand  Master  was  burnt  alive  with  his  four  companions,  on  the
eleventh  of  March,  1314,  creating  pity  and  tears  in  the  people,  who  *aw  **"?
die  with  firmness  and  heroic  constancy,  sealing  his  innocence  with  his  Wood.
My  dear  brother,  in  passing  to  the  degree  of  Perfect  Master,  in  which  jou
shed  tears  at  the  tomh  of  Hiram  Abiff,  and  in  some  other  degrees,  h*8"0'
your  heart  been  led  to  revenge?  has  not  the  crime  of  Jubelurn  Akirop  been
represented  in  the  most  hideous  light?  Would  it  be  unjust  to  conipanf  the
conduct  of  Philip  the  Fair  to  his;  and  the  infamous  accusers  of  the  Templars,
to  the  two  ruffians  who  were  accomplices  with  Akirop?  Do  they  not  ™dle
in  your  heart  an  equal  aversion?  The  different  stages  you  liave  treveHed,
and  the  time  you  have  taken  in  learning  these  historical  events,  no  doubt,  wm
lea  6  you  to  make  the  proper  applications;  and  by  the  degree  of  Master  Elect

*.  I  have  consulted  a  number  of  authors  and  many  Masons  of  high  rank  to
learn  the  origin  and  definite  meaning  of  this  word;  but  k**e  obtained  no  sa-
fiafactory  information  on  the  subject.  However,  from  me  manner  which  »,
is  used,  I  should  suppose  t^at  it  referred  to  the  'non-initiated,*

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC  ^


LIGHT  ON   MASONRY.  54&

omd  Kadosh,  you  are  properly  disposed  to  fulfil  all  your  engagements,  and
to  bear  an  implacable  hatred  to  the  Knights  of  Malta,  *  and  to  avenge  the  death
of  Jacques  DeMolay.  Your  extensive  acquaintance  with  symbolic  Masonry,
which  you  Have  attained  by  your  discretion,  leaves  you  nothing  more  to  de-
sire here.  You  see,  my  dear  Drother,  how,  and  by  whom,  Masonry  has  come
to  us.  You  are  to  endeavor  by  every  just  means  to  regain  our  rights,  and  to
remember  that  we  are  joined  by  a  society  of  men,  whose  courage,  merit;  and
good  conduct,  hold  out  to  us  that  rank  that  birth  alone  gave  to  our  ances-
tors. You  are  now  on  the  same  level  with  them.  Avoid  every  evil  by  care-
fully keeping  ybur  obligations,  and  carefully  conceal  from  the  vulgar  what  you
are,  and  wait  that  happy  moment  when  we  all  shall  be  reunited  under  the
same  Sovereign  in  the  mansions  of  eternal  bliss.  Let  us  imitate  the  example
of  our  Grand  Master,  Jacques  DeMolay,  who  to  the  end  put  his  hope  in  God,
and  at  his  last  dying  moments  ended  his  life  saying,  'Spes  mea  in  Deo  est!'

Obligation. — I  do,  of  my  omti  free  will  and  accord,  in  the  presence  of  the
Grand  Architect  of  the  universe,  and  this  Consistory  of  Sovereign  Princes  of
the  Royal  Secret,  or  Knights  of  St.  Andrew,  faithful  guardians  of  the  faithful
treasure;  most  solemnly  vow  and  swear,  under  all  the  different  penalties  of
ray  former  obligations,  that  I  will  never  directly  or  indirectly  reveal  or  make
known  to  any  person  or  persons  whatsoever,  any  or  the  least  part  of  this
Uoyal  degree,  unless  to  one  duly  qualified  in  the  body  of  a  regularly  consti-
tuted Consistory  of  the  same,  him  or  them  whom  I  shall  find  such  after  strict
and  due  trial.  I  furthermore  vow  and  swear,  under  the  above  penalties,  to
always  abide  and  regulate  myself  agreeably  to  the  statutes  and  regulations
now  before  me;  and  when  in  a  Consistory  to  behave  and  demean  myself  as
one  worthy  of  being  honored  with  so  high  a  degree,  that  no  part  of  my  con-
duct may  in  the  least  reflect  discredit  on  thi3  Royal  Consistory,  or  disgrace*
myself.  So  may  God  maintain  me  in  equity  and  justice!  Amen!  Amen!
Amen!  Amen!  Amen!


THIRTY-THIRD  DEGREE,

OR.

SOVEREIGN  GRAND  INSPECTOR  GENERAL*

The  number  of  inspectors  in  a  kingdom  or  republic  is  not  to  exceed  nine.
They  claim  jurisdiction  over  all  the  ineffable  and  sublime  degrees,  and  in  rea-
lity form  an  aristocratic  body>  with  power  to  appoint  their  own  successors,  and
act  as  Sovereigns  of  Masonry.'

Decorations  of  the  place  of  meeting. — The  hangings  are  purple,  embroidered
with  'skeletons,' 'death's  heads,'  and 'cross  bones.'  Before  the  canopy  is  a
transparent  delta,  (equilateral  triangle. )  In  the  middle  of  the  room  is  a  grand
triangular  pedestal,  near  which  is  seen  a  skeleton  holding  in  his  left  hand  the
standard  of  the  order,  and  in  his  right  hand  a  poniard  in  the  attitude  of  strik-
ing. Abqve  the  door  or  place*  of  entrance  is  the  motto  of  the  order,  'Deus
meumque  jus.'  In  the  east  is  a  chandelier  of  five  branches;  in  tho  south
one  of  two  branches;  in  the  west  one  of  three;  and  in  the  north  a  single  one.

Officers  and  titles.— The  assembly  is  termed  'Supreme  Council.'  Thafirst
officer 'Thrice  Puissant  Sovereign  Grand  Master.'  He  represents  Frederick  II.

♦The  reader  must  not  suppose  that  the  Masonic  Knights  of  Malta  are  here
intended;  the  reference  is  to  tho  ancient  order  of  that  name,  which,  wv
the  order  of  Templars  was  suppressed,  received  their  estates.


yGqogle


544  LIGHT  ON   MASONRY,

The  second  officer  is  termed  'Sovereign  Lieutenant  Commander.'  Besides
these  there  is  a  .'Treasurer  of  the  Holy  Empire;'  an  Illustrious  Grand  Secre-
tary of  the  Holy  Empire;1  an  'Illustrious  Master  of  the  Ceremonies;,  and  an
'Illustrious  Captain  of  the  Guards' — in  all  seven  officers.

Dress. — The  Thrice  Puissant  Sovereign  wears  a  crimson  satin  robe,  bor-
dered with  white — a  crown  on  his  head,  and  a  sword  in  his  hand.  The
1  Jeutenant  Commander  wears  a  ducal^crown.

Sash.— The  sash  is  black,  edged  with  gold,  from  left  to  right;  at  the  bottom
a  rose  of  red,  white,  and  green.  On  the  part  crossing  the  breast  is  a  delta  with
rays  traversed  by  a  poniard,  and  in  the  midst  the  figure  '33.*

Jewel. — A  black  double  headed  eagle  holding  a  sword.  His  beak,  daws,
and  the  sword,  are  of  gold.

Signs.— First  sign,  • .'   Second  sign,  « .'  Alarm.— JYw,  tkrtt,

one,  two.

Sacred  words.     ' ,»  * ,'  « ,'  < ;>  signifying,  'Who  is

like  unto  thee  among  the  mighty,  O  Lord."

Pass  words.— Ques.  'D y.»    Ans.  «H— i.'    Ques.  'F c.'

Ans.  'D c.»

[The  Grand  Inspectors  for  the  United  States  of  America;  issued  and  pub-
lished on  the  4th  day  of  December,  1802,  a  circular,  from  which  the  following
extracts  arc  made:]

CIRCULAR

THROUGHOUT  THE  TWO  HEMISPHERES.

Vniversi  terrarum  orbis  drthitectonis  per  Gloriam  Ingentis,

DEUS  MEUMQUE  JUS.

ORDO  AB  CHAO.

From  the  cast  of  the  Grand  and  Supreme  Council  of  the  Most  Puissant
Sovereigns,  Grand  Inspectors  General,  under  the  celestial  canopy  of  the
Zenith,  which  answers  to  the  32d  degree,  45  minutes,  N.  L.

To  our  Illustrious,  Most  Valiant,  and  Sublime  Princes  of  the  Boyal  Secret,

Knights  of  K H,  Illustrious  Princes  and  Knights,  Grand,  Ineflkble,  and

Sublime,  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  of  all  degrees,  ancient  and  modern,  over
the  two  hemispheres.

To  all  whom  these  letters  shall  come:

HEALTH,  STABILITY,  AND  POWER.

At  a  meeting  of  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors  General  in  Supreme  Council
of  the  thirty-third  degree,  duly  and  lawfully  established  ana  congregated,
held  at  the  Grand  Council  chamber,  on  the  14th  day  of  the  seventh  month,
called  Tisri,  5563,  Arino.  Lucis,  5802,  and  of  the  Christian  erathelOth  day  ot
October,  1802:

UNION,  CONTENTMENT,  WISDOM.

The  Grand  Commander  informed  the  Inspectors  that  they  were  convened
for  the  purpose  of  taking  into  consideration  the  propriety  of  addressing  cir-
cular letters  to  the  different  Symbolic  Grand  Lodges,  and  Sublime  Grand
Lofees  and  Councils  throughout  the  two  hemispheres,  explanatory  of  the
subhme  degrees  of  Masonry  and  their  establishment  in  South  Carolina.
when  a  resolution  to*  that  effect  was  immediately  adopted,  and  a  committee
consisting  of  the  illustrious  brethren  Dr.  Frederick  Dalcho,  Dr.  Isaac  Auld
and  Emanuel  De  La  Motta,  Esq.,  Grand  Inspectors  General,  was  appoints
to  draft  and  submit  such  letter  to  the  Council  at  their  next  meeting.

Digitized  by  CjOOQIC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRY.


545


At  a  meeting  of  the  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors  General,  in  Supreme
Council  of  the  thirty-third  degree,  &c.  &c.  on  the  10th  day  of  the  eighth
month,  called  Chislen,  5563,  A.  I*  5802,  and  of  the  Christian  era  this  4th
day  of  December,  1802,  the  committee  to  whom  was  referred  the  foregoing
resolve,  respectfully  submitted,  &c  &c.

*************

The,  names  of  the  Masonic  degrees  are  as  follows,  viz:
1st  degree  called  Entered  Apprentice,  )


>  Given  in  the  Symbolic  Lodge.


Given  in  the  Sublime  Grand
Lodge.


2d  »  "  Fellow  Craft,

3d  "  "  Master  Mason.

4th  "  "  Secret  Master,

5th  "  w  Perfect  Master,

6th  "  "  Intimate  Secretary,

7th  "  "  Provost  and  Judge,

8th  "  »  Intendant  of  the  Building,

9th  »  »  Elected' Knights  of  Nine,

10th  »  »  Illustrious  Elected  of  Ffteen,

11th  »  »  Sublime  Knight  Elected,

12th  »  »  Grand  Master  Architect,

13th"  »  Royal  Arch,  [Knightsrof  the
Ninth  Arch,]

14th  "  »  Perfection*

15th  "  "  Knight  of  the  East,    )  Given  by  the  Princes  of  Jerusalem,

16th  "  "  Prince  of  Jerusalem.)      which  is  a  governing  council.

17th  »  »  Knight  of  the  East  and  West,              ^

18th  r  "  Sovereign  Prince  of  Rose  Croix  de
1             HeredoH,

19th  »  »  Grand  Pontiff

20th  "  »  Grand  Master  of  all  Symbolic  Lodges,

21st  »  "  Patriarch  Noachite,  or  Chevalier  Prus-
sian,

22d  "  "  Prince  of  Libanus,

23d  "  "  Chief  of  the  Tabernacle,

24th  »  n  Prince  of  the  Tabernacle,

25th  "  »  Prince  of  Mercy,

26th  »  »  Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent,

27th  "  "  Commander  of  the  Temple,

28th  "  »  Knight  of  the  Sun,

29th  »  »  Knight  of  St.  Andrew,

30th  *  •»  K H,  [Holy,]

31st  "  "  Grand  Inq.  Commander,

32d  "  "  Sublime  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret,
Prince  of  Masons,

33d  "  "  Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors  General;

Officers  appointed  tor  life.  J

«»        *        *        #        *        •        •        •        »        •        *

Charleston,  South  Carolina,  the  10th  day  of  the  eighth  month,  called  Chis-
leuy-5563,  A.  L.  5802,  and  of  the  Christian  era  this  4th  day  of  December,  1802.

FREDERICK  DALCHO.
K H,  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector  General  of  the  thirty-third,  and  Lieu-
tenant Grand  Commander  in  the  United  States  of  America.

ISAAC  AULD.

K H,  P.  R,  S.,  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector  General  of  the  thirty^hird.

'  6  *  E.  DE  LA  MOTTA.

K H,  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector  General  of  the  thirty-third,  and  IUV

Jiionj  Treasurer  General  of  the  H.  empire.

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


Given  by  the  Coun-
cil of  Grand  In-
spectors, who  are
Sovereigns  of  Ma-
sonrv.


546  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.


List  of  Masonic  degrees  conferred  in  France  in  the  year  1796,  according  to  the

work  entitled  iMagonnerie  Adonhvrannque:
1st  decree  called  Apprenti  ....  Apprentice,     )
3d        "       "      Compagnon,  -  -  Fellow  Craft,  >  Symbolic  degrees.

3d        "       "      Maitre, Master.  )

4th       "       "      Maitre  Parfaite, Perfect  Master,

5th       "        u      Elu  des  Neuf,  - Elect  of  Nine,

6th       u       "      Elu  de  Perignan, Elect  of  Perignan,

7th       "        "      Petit  Architect, -,  Sub  Architect,

8th        "        "      Grand  Architect, Grand  Architect,

9th        "        "      Maitre  Ecossois, Scotch  Master,

10th      "        "      Chevalier  de  ('Orient,  -  -  Knight  of  the  East,
11th      "        "      Chevalier  de  Rose  Croix,- Knight  of  the  Rose  Cross,
12th      "        "      ChevaherPrussien, ----Prussian  Knight.


IAst  of  degrees  acknowledged  and  conferred  under  the  sanction  of  the  Grand  Orient
of  Prance,  in  the  year  1804.

1st  degree  called  Apprenti,      }

2d  "  "  Compagnon,  >  Symbolic  degrees.

3d  "  "  Maitre.          )

4th  "  "  Elu  Secret, Secret  Elect.

5th  "  "  Grand  Elu  Ecossois, Grand  Scotch  Elect.

6th  •  "  "  Chevalier  de  l'Opent,  -  -  Knight  of  the  East.                    *

7th  '•  "  Rose  Croix,  - Rosy  Cross*                           "J


y  Google


(547y


ISTORY  OF  FREE  MASONRY;

Being  the  substance  of  remarks  made  in  the  State  Convention,  at  Albany,  and
reduced  to  form  for  the  MXuMasonic  Review  and  Monthly  Magazine.

By  Henry  Dana  Ward,  A.  M.

The  early  history  of  Free  Masonry,  like  that  of  Rome,  is  involved  in  obscu-
rity. The  conquerors  of  the  world  were  not  satisfied  with  the  plain  truth  of
their,  national  origin.  To  have  sprung  from  a  band  of  lawless  marauders,
stained  the  pride  of  the  Caesars.  They  taught  that  the  'Eternal  City*  was
founded  and  first  ruled  by  the  son  of  Mars,  whose  name  was  Romulus:  who
was  taken  to  the  gods  in  a  tempest  of  lightning,  and  became  Ju&rinus,  the  pa-
tron saint  of  the  heathen  city,  and  one  of  the  chief  gods  of  Rome.  This  was
lolly,  and  sonorous,  and  might  be  unexceptionable  were  it  true.

Our  modern  power,  which  seeks  with  Roman  ambition  to  lord  it  over  the
whole  habitable  earth,  also  styles  itself  eternal^  as  did  Rome;  deduces  its  ori-
gin from  heaven;  claims  an  inspired  man  for  its  lawgiver,  and  some  mighty
thing  in  the  nature  of  the  philsopher's  stone  for  its  secret — all  which  is  equally
credible,  and  as  well  attested,  as  that  Romulus  was  nursed  by  a  wolf,  or  Ju-
piter was  a  god  that  could  save.  And  these  Masonic  fables  are  likewise  told
to  cover  the  meanness  of  Free  Masonry's  origin:  for  she  too  sprung  from  a
confederacy  of  lawless  plunderers;  and  it  mortifies  the  pride  of  the  High
Priests,  it  tops  the  vanity  of  the  Grand  Masters,  and  it  makes  the  Puissant  So-
vereigns of  Free  Masonry  to  tremble  for  the  security  of  their  thrones,  to  be
told  that  their  boasted  order  sprung  from  the  mire  of  the  Rosicrucians,  and
spread  abroad  over  the  face  or  the  earth,  from  the  licentious  cupidity  of  its
speculative  fathers;  tfyat  Free  Masonry  originated  within  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury among  men  who  sold  Masonic  charters  for  an  appearance  of  mystery,
but  in  truth,  for  money.

Stone  masons,  in  common  with  ninety-one  other  trades  and  crafts,  in  the
city  of  London,  have  been  in  the  habit,  for  centuries,  of  meeting  in  club  for  the
purpose  of  improving  in  the  elements  of  their  business,  and  of  architecture.
Each  craft  has  its  public  hall,  its  admission  fee,  its  coat  of  arms,  and  its  charity
fund.  The  companies  are  given  by  name,  in  the  order  of  their  rank,  in  Rees'
Cyclopedia,  art.  Company.  And  out  of  eighteen  only  whose  form  of  govern-
ment is  particularly  mentioned,  sixteen  are  governed  by  a  Master,  two  War-
dens, ana  a  various  number  of  assistants.  So  Free  Mason  lodges  are  governed;
and  the  titles  Worshipful,  and  Most  Worshipful,  now  peculiar  to  Free  Masonry,
were  common  to  gentlemen  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  as
Esquire,  and  Honorable,  are  at  the  present  day.

The  Lord  Mayor  of  London,  at  his  election,  makes  himself  free,  that  is,  be-
comes a  member  of  one  of  the  twelve  principal  societies,  (if  he  were  not  a
member  of  one  of  them  before:)  for  these  twelve,'  says  the  Cyclopedia,  'are
not  only  the  oldest  but  the  richest;  many  of  them  having  had  the  honor ^of
kings  and  princes  to  be  their  members;  and  the  apartments  of  their  halls  be-
ing fit  to  entertain  a  monarch.'  But  Masons  are  not  among  *be  twelve  first,
Olieir  rank  isHall^  No,  31,  in  Basjnghall  street;  charter,  A  D.  1677,  in  the-
reign  of  CharJesII.

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


548  LIGHT  ON   BIASONRV.

Some  of  these  companies  meet  by  prescriptive  right  The  oldest  charter
is  that  of  the  P»  fish  Clerks',  A.  D.  1233,  in  the  reign  of  Henry  HL  The  Ba-
kers', A.  D.  130  7,  Edward  II.  Five  others  were  chartered  in  the  fourteenth
century;  eighteen  in  the  fifteenth  century;  twelve  in  the  sixteenth  century;
forty,  and  among  them  the  stone  masons,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  tnd  some
in  the  eighteenth  century.  Masonic  historians  claim  the  men  for  FreeMasons,
against  whom  a  statute  was  passed  in  the  25th  year  of  the  reign  of  Ed-
ward III.;  and  again,  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VI.,  forbidding  than  to
assemble  in.  congregations  and  chapters.  (See  Free  Masonry's  Lftrcr%
p.  S5.  Har  die's  Monitor,  p.  20.  Laurie's  History  of  Masonry,  p.  94.  Ency-
dopt&Oy  Brittanica,  art  Masonry,  sec  62.  et  alias.)  Now  Edward  III.
dealt  with  Englishmen  of  that  day,  as  George  III.  would  have  dealt  with
Americans  in  his  day — as  if  they  were  his  slaves.  A  plague  had  swept  away
a  fearful  portion  of  the  English  population;  and  the  scarcity  of  laborers  caus-
ed all  classes  of  mechanics  to  demand  an  increase  of  wages.  Edward  had
several  castles  and  magnificent  edifices  in  building;  and  to  make  bis  money
hold  out,  must  coxipel  the  masons  and  mechanics  to  work  at  the  old  rates.
To  effect  this,  he  issued  an  ordinance,  and  enforced  it  by  his  sherifls,  who
returned  masons  for  the  king's  buildings,  as  they  are  wbnt  to  return  juror's  for
t  he  king's  courts.  This  was  equally  agreeable  to  the  lords  of  Partinent  as  to
himself;  and  accordingly  ty  was  enacted,  A.  D.  1350,  that  *as  servants  un-
willing after  the  pestilence  to  serve  without  taking  excessive  wages,  had  been
required  to  serve  in  their  accustomed  places  at  the  rate  they  had  received  in
the  20th  year  of  Edward  III.;  and  as  it  is  given  the  king  to  understand,
in  this  present  parliment,  that  the  servants  have  paid  no  regard  te  the  said
ordinance,  but  to  their  ease  do  withdraw  from  the  service  of  great  men  and
others,  unless  they  have  livery  and  wages  to  the  double  or  trible  of  that  they
were  wont  to  take  in  the  said  20th  year,  and  before,  to  the  great  damage
of  the  great  men,  &c;  be  ordained  and  established  the  things  underwritten.

Chap.  1.  Fixes  the  day  and  year  wages  of  farm  servants.

Chap.  2.  Fixes  the  prico  of  threshing  all  sorts  of  grain,  by  the  quarter.

Chap.  3.  Prescribes  the  wages  of  several  sorts  of  artificers,  and  laborers,-
among  whom  'carpenters  and  masons'  are  particularly  specified.

Chap.  4.  Requires  artificers  to  make  oath  that  they  will  use  their  crafts,  as
they  had  done  in  the  20th  year  of  the  same  Edward  HI.

See  Rufiheats  English  Statutes,  vol  l,p.  251.

Seventy-four  years  after  the  enactment  of  this  statute,  which  plainly  is  ap-
plicable only  to  handicraftsmen  and  servants,  Henry  VI,,  m  *parnnient1  at
Westminster,  ordained  that  no  confederacies  and  congregations  shall  be  made
by  masons  in  their  general  chapters  and  assemblies,  whereby  the  good  course
and  effects  of  the  statute  of  laborers  (25th  Edward  III.)  are  violated  and  bro-
ken in  subversion  of  law;  and  if  any  be  they  that  cause  such  chapters  and
congregations  to  be  assembled  and  holdefl,  shall  be  adjudged  fdons;(  Cbtfa.
3  Just.  p.  99.)     %

The  common  pretence  of  Free  Masons,  that  thesestatutes  were/eveffed  par-
ticularlv  against  their  mystic  order,  by  the  ignorance  of  bigoted  priests,  be-
cause the  secret  was  not  betrayed  in  the  office  of  auricular  confession,  is  too
shallow  after  once  reading  the  statutes,  to  cover  the  nakedness  of  the  febe»
hood,  or  to  conceal  the  evident  duplicity  of  its  first  publishers.  But  one  thing
thesestatutes  conclusively  show,  with  the  aid  of  the  Masonie  historians,  viz.
That  in  the  reign  of  Edward  III.  and  Henry  VI.  there  were  no  Free  Masons
in  England,  but  stone  masons,  who  met  in  general  chapters,  and  assemblies,
not  to  cultivate  the  knowledge  of  a  wonderful  mystery,  fart  toimpedethe  exe-
cution of  the  laws,  and  to  violate  the  statutes  of  their  country.
.  With  this  view  faithful  history  concurs.  That  a  society,  claiming  thegflo-
nea  of  Free  Masonry,  should  have  existed  for  ages  unnoticed  by  any  write**

v  Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


,  LIGHT   OH  MASONRY.  549

noble  or  contemptible,  foolish  or  learned,  is  wholly  iucrecjible  and  unworthy
of  belief.  To  say  nothing  of  former  centuries,  but  confining  our  attention
to  the  three  last,  the  Puritans  and  the  Presbyterians,  the  Cabalists  and  the
Bosicrucians,  the  Gypsies  and  the  Necromancers,  the  Alchymiats  and  the
Jesuits,  are  liberally  and  often  noticed  by  various  authors;  but  Free  Masonry
has  not  so  much  as  a  name  until  the  eighteenth  century,  when  it  is  frequently
descanted  upon,  with  an  interest  and  copiousness  increasing  to  this  day.  To
a  sound  historical  scholar,  this  fact  alone  is. enough  to  overset  the  cob  house
of  Masonic  pretentions  to  antiquity,  a  fact  which  cannot  be  controverted,
except  by  miserable  shifts  not  worth  our  notice.  In  the  books  of  an  earlier
date,  we  read  of  the  fraternitas  latkomorum,  or  company  of  brick  layers;  but
it  requires  not  a  lawyer  to  discern  that  these  are  the  men  against  whom  the
statute  of  laborers  was  directed,  in  the  25th  year  of  Edward,  III.,  and
are  not  the  men  who  have  at  this  day  in  their  lodges  the  language  of  Eden,
and  the  mysteries  of  the  antedeluvian  world.  This  is  irresistible  truth;  and
X  challenge  any  man  to  turn  its  edge,  or  to  break  its  point,  or  to  show  one
particle  of  evidence  to  the  contrary,  except  it  proceed  from  the  vainglorious
boastings  of  the  mystic  order  itself,  which  is  not  evidence,  the  witness  being
confessedly  interested,  and  now  stand  publicly  convicted  of  shameless  du-
plicity, and  of  atrocious  falsehood  in  its  book  of  constitutions,  and  its  autho-
rized publications.  Of  the  same  tenor  is  the  fact  that  Papacy  and  Free
Masonry  cannot  dwell  together  in  peace;  but  we  hear  not  a  word  6f  their
disagreement  until  the  eighteenth  century.  Certainly  Papacy  is  older  than
one  hundred  years;  and  if  Free  Masonry  be  much  above  that,  how  did  it
previously  escape  a  conflict  which  has  never  ceased  since  first  it  com-
menced, AD.  1730  to  1740?  The  canons  of  the  church  require  full
and  free  confession  to  the  priests  from  every  good  Catholic.  The  oaths
of  Free  Masonry  require  absolute  secrecy  upon  the  transactions  of  the
brethren,  and  of  the  lodge  room,  from  every  good  Mason.  Now,  these
canons  and  oaths  nowhere  abide  together  without  discord,  and  a  depri-
vation of  church  privileges,  and  they  could  never  harmonize  for  one
moment.  Therefore  he  time  when  they  first  fell  out  and  contradicted
each  other,  must  have  been  near  the  beginning  of  one  or  both  of  them.
That  time  is  determined  by  the  Pope's  bulls*  A.  D.  1738,  and  1739.
Wring  and  twist  you  may,  brother  Mason,  but  there  is  no  escape;  the
elate  is  correctly  stated — seventeen  hundred  and  thirty-  eight.  (See  Law-
rie*8  History  of  Masonry ,  p.  122.     Ency.  Britt.sxt.  Masonry,  lasted.)

What  has  been  said  is  proof,  not  only  that  the  account  which  Free
Masonry  gives  of  itself  is  erroneous,  but  is.  grossly  erroneous;  not  only
that  the  order  was  hot  organized  by  Solomon,  and  patronized  by  St.
John,  but  that  it  had  no  existence  in  the  days  of  Edward  III.  and  of
Henry  VI.  of  England.  The  question  becomes  interesting:  Whence
did  it  originate?  and  who  first  promulgated  its  falsehoods?

The  Rosicrucian  mania  sprung  up  in  Germany,  A,  D.  1610,  nearly.
This  puff  of  indefinable  extravagance  originated  from  the  writings  of

Andrea,  a  German,  who  amused  himself  with  tales  of  spiritual

wonder,  and  of  mystical  glory,  as  a  literary  hoax,  in  the  style  of  Baron
Munchausen's  wonderful  adventures,  in  his  memoirs.  The  visionary
minds  of  that  day  took  Andrea's  work  in  earnest.  They  claimed  for
the  Rosy  Cross  philosophy  in  general*  whatever  is  now  particularly
claimed  for  Free  Masonry — a  heavenly  origin,  a  magic  influence,  a  won-
derful secret,  and  unbounded  excellence.  The  universal  medicine  and
the  philosopher's  stone,  were  gravely  professed  for  the  glory  of  its
mystical  laboratory;  and  to  so  great  a  pitch  of  extravagance  did  its  vair

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


55t)  LIGHT   ON  MASONED

professors  inn,  that  modern  Free  Masons  are  sober  men  in  the  compuv
son.  This  folly  was  greatly  admired  in  England,  by  some  men  of  a
strange  fancy,  and  of  great  learning;  and  by  others  publicly  professing
the  black  art  Among  the  former,  the  name  of  Elian  Jthmde,  the  anti-
quary, stands  conspicuous;  and  among  the  latter,  William  JUUy,  the
astrologer;  snd  somewhere  between  them  is  Robert  Fludd.  This  Ash-
mole  is  greatly  accounted  of  as  a  brother,  by  Masonic  historians;  and  is
the  first  accepted  Mason,  claimed  by  Professor  Robison.  (See  Proofi
of  a  Conspiracy  t )  Ashmole  himself  says,  'I  was  elected  in  Mason's  hall,
BasingbaU  street,  A.  D'.  1646.'  (See  Bio&%  Britt.)  This  is  the  hall  of
the  Stone  Mason's  Company,  London;  chartered  A.  D.  1677,  thirty-one
years  after  Ashmole's  admission  into  its  livery,  and  remaining  to  this
day,  as  it  ever  has  been,  in  the  possession  of  Stone  Mason*,  a  company
distinct  from,  and  independent  of,  the  modern  Free  Masons;  and  it  is
evident  that  Ashmole  was  only  made  free  of  the  Mason's  company,  as
his  friend  Lilly  was  mule  free  of  the  Salter's  company;  and  as  the  Lord
Mayor  is  usually  made  free  of  some  one  of  the  twelve  principal  compa-
nies of  tradesmen  or  mechanics,  in  the  city  of  London;  and  that  Ash-
mole was  not  initiated,  passed,  and  raised  to  the  sublime  degree  of  a
Master  Mason,  as  in  a  modern  lodge  of  Free  Masons.  Therefore  the
record  must  be  -wrong  which  makes  Ashmole  a  Free  Alason  of  the
modern  type.  But  Ashmole  was  made/ree  of  the  Mason's  company;
and  was  a  Rosicrucian,  and  a  famous  zealot  for  the  philosopher's  stone,
which,  in  his  own  words,  'is  to  convert  the  basest  metals  into  perfect
gold  and  silver,  and  flints  into  rubies,  sapphires,  emeralds,  and  dia-
monds.' He  further  treats  copiously  upon  'the  vegetable,  magi-
cal, and  angelic  stones,  with  which  Adam  and  the  fathers  before  the
flood,  with  Abraham,  Moses,  and  Solomon,  doubtless  wrought  many
wonders;  yet  the  utmost  of  their  virtues  they  never  understood/  (Bioj.
Britt%)  This  Mr.  Ashmole  is  honorably  mentioned  in  the  biographical
dictionaries,  and  was  a  very  learned  man.  He  wrote  a  tremendous  folio
history  of  the  order  of  the  Garter;  and  founded  the  celebrated  museum
at  Oxford.  It  is  an  undeniable  fact,  that  the  conceited  mystery  of  the
Rosicrucians,  and  their  vainglorious  pretences  to  every  thing  good,
and  great,  and  magical,  or  holy,  are  united  with  the  emblems  and
working,  tools  of  a  handicraft  mason;  the  trowel  and  level,  square  and
compasses,  and  leather  apron,  to  form  this  lying  wonder  of  the  nine-
teenth century,  commonly  called  Free  Masonry.  This  union  did  not
take  place  in  one  day,  nor  until  the  false  philosophy  of  the  Rosicrucians
fell  into  merited  disgrace,  and  the  sect  run  out.  Ashmole  died  A.  D.
1692,  and  with  him  the  last  of  the  Rosy  Cross  philosophers;  but  the
spirit  of  this  order,  after  lingering  a  few  years  among  men  of  less  note,
passed  by  a  species  of  metempsychosis  into  a  new  body,  the  company
of  handicraft  Masons,  with  whom  it  first  appears  in  the  early  part  of  the
eighteenth  century.

At  the  time  of  Ashmole's  death,  Sir  Christopher  Wren  was  at  the
head  of  the  English  architects;  holding  the  office  of  a  Deputy  Surveyor
of  the  king's  buildings.  In  1698,  he  was  made  by  William  III.  Sur-
veyor General  of  the  public  works;  and  in  1714  to  3T18,  for  political
considerations,  he  was  removed  from  office  by  George  I.  All  Masonic
historians  call  Wren,  Deputy  Grand  Master,  at  the  time  when  he  was
Deputy  Surveyor;  and  Grand  Master  of  the  Free  Masons,  at  the  time
when  he  was  Surveyor  General  to  the  throne.    But  in  doing  this  they

■     Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


LIGHT   ON  MASONRT.  551

make  a  very  short  rope  to  hang  themselves;  for  by  their  own  showing,
the  first  Grand  Lodge  was  formed  A.  D,  1717.  Then  how  could  Wren,
be  Grand  Master,  A  D.  1698,  nineteen  years  before  there  was  a  Grand
Lodge?  (See  any  Masonic  history  of  the  year  1717,  Preston,  Dermott,
Laiprie,  et;alias.)

Daring  this  period,  the  Rosicrucian  pretentions  were  seeking,  like  a
troubled  spirit,  for  some  resting  place.  The  age  was  one' of  the  most
extravagant  speculation;  and  moved  by  a  strange  desire  of  fame,  and
money,  and  conviviality,  four  companies  of  stone  masons,  who  were
left  of  those  Who  had  been  associated  in  buiJding  the  proud  edifices  of
London,  after  the  fire  of  1666,  met,  the  lodge  that  had  worked  on  St,
Paul's  church  being  at  the  head,  and  formed  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Lon-
don, in  February,  and  elected  their  officers  June  24,  A.  D.  1717.
With  a  view  to  fill  up  their  ranks  and  to  increase  their  importance,  they
voted  to  accept  men  of  other  trades  and  professions,  as  members  of  the
society.  (See  Preston,  Lavorie,  Hardie,  Tannehill,  et  alias;  and  par-
ticularly the  Ahiman  Rezon,  of  Lawrence  Dermott,  quoted  in  the  4th  No.
of  the  Anti-Masonic  Review,  and  Monthly  Magazine.

Three  years  they  struggled,  accommodating  the  Rosicrucian  preten-
sions to  the  emblems  of  a  handicraft  Mason;  and  then,  in  1720,  burnt
their  papers  for  the  benefit  of  the  mystery.  (See  each  of  the  above
writers.)  They  give  out  that  this  bonfire  was  made  'by  tome  too  scru-
pulous brethren,9  who  feared  that  the  secrets  of  Masonry  would  be  ex-
posed in  the  Book  of  Constitutions  about  to  be  published.  But  the
stnoke  of  that  fire  was  not  thick  enough  to  envelope  the  origin  of  their
mystic  order  in  impenetrable  obscurity.  No  doubt  they  hoped  by  burn-
ing their  pretended  parchments  to  destroy  all  evidence  disproving  their
claim  to  immemorial  customs,  and  to  imprescriptible  rights;  which
claim  was  in  a  course  of  preparation  for  the  public,  in  the  dreaded  Book
.  of  Constitutions.

After  three  years  more  the  dreaded  volume  came  forth  from  the
hands  of  Anderson,  and  Desagvilliers,  or  Desaguliers,  and  blowed  the
first  strain  of  Masonic  vainglory,  and  unearthly  mystery,  which  is  heard
from  any  book,  or  printed  treatise!  Andersonz.nA.  DesaguiUiers,  a  Scotch-
man and  a  Frenchman,  in  London,  were  the  men  who  first  published  to
the  world  the  high  pretensions  of  Free  Masonry — men  of  a  low  charac-
ter and  of  a  base  spirit;  whose  book  of  constitutions  of  Masonry,  was
ushered  from  the  press,  A.  D.  1723,  and  is  hardly  older  than  our  grand-
fathers! For  the  mean  repute  of  the  men  and  of  their  works,  see
Profs  Robisoris  Proofs  of  a  Conspiracy,  p.p.  19  and  20,  N.York  edition;
and  Latorie,  p.  92.  This  volume  of  mock  constitutions  is  the  basis  of
all  Masonic  history;  and  its  delusive  statements  have  been  servilely
copied,  and  greatly  magnified,  until  the  mystic  wonder  has  grown  be-
yond the  size  and  power  of  the  fabled  monsters  of  antiquity.

Now  the  false  spirit  of  the  Rosy  Cross  philosophy  was  fairly  embodied
with  the  emblems  of  a  mechanics'  society,  and  was  brought  forth  by
the  Book  of  Constitutions  in  the  form  of  Free  Masonry.  From  the  time
of  its  birth  the  lying  wonder  began  to  run  to  and  fro  in  the  earth  wher-
ever British  commerce  could  convey  it;  and  charters  for  holding  Ma-
sonic lodges,  were  every  where  sold  at  a  cash  price,  and  an  annual  sti-
pend by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  London.  To  that  Grand  Lodge  the  in-
habitants of  most  part  of  continental  Europe,  of  the  East  and  West
r-}  indies,  of  Africa,  and  of  America,  paid  an  annual  tribute  for  the  right  to

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


552  LIGHT   ON   MASONRY.

confer  the  three  degrees  of  Morgan9 9  Masonry  1  The  date,  and  the
Grand  Master  who  issued  the  warrant,  are  carefully  recorded  in  Pres-
ton, Smith,  Lawrie,  Tannehill,  and  others,  for  holding  lodges  in  all
quarters  of  the  earth,  A.  D.  1729,  Free  Masonry  was  first  introduced
into  the  East  Indies;  1730  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  was  formed;
1731  a  patent  was  sent  from  England  to  erect  a  lodge  at  the  Hag-ue;
1733  Free  Masonry  established  itself  in  North  America,  at  Boston;
1736  at  Cape  Coast,  in  Africa,  and  at  Geneva,  in  Europe;  in  Scotland
the  sane  year  the  first  Grand  Master  was  elected;  and  so  the  triple
headed  monster  went  round  the  world,  while  in  its  teen*.

The  higher  degrees  began  to  be  added  in  France;  the  first  notice  of
them  is  near  A. D.  1740,  in  connexions  with  the  enthusiastic  and  learned
chevalier  Ramtay.  (See  Robum's  Proof t  of  a  Conspiracy.)  They  were
received  and  modified  under  the  hand  of  Frederick  of  Prussia,  and  by
the  school  of  Voltaire  were  introduced  from  France  into  the  United
States,  through  the  channel  of  Jews,  A.  D.  1760,  and  afterward.  (See
the  grand  circular  of  the  Sublime  Sovereigns  of  Masonry,  ji%  M.  Re-
view, No.  4.)  They  first  appear  in  a  distinct  shape  in  the  United  States
A.  D.  1796,  and  1797;  and  already,  in  thirty  years,  the  Grand  High
Priests,  and  Most  Excellent  Kings,  and  General  Grand  Commander*  of
the  Order  are  as  plenty  as  blackberries,  and  are  in  their  own  estimation
superior  as  an  order  to  the  legal  authorities  of  the  country.

The  unlawful  seizure,  the  violent  abduction,  and  the  felonious  mur-
der, of  Capt.  William  Morgan,  for  publishing  the  pretended  mysteries
of  the  order  A.  D.  1826,  brings  both  the  life  and  the  history,  with  the
n  flue  nee  of  Free  Masonry  in  this  country,  suddenly  to  an  end*


Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


APPEKDIX.

NO.  1.  '

Gtnesee  County,  )      Lucinda  Morgan,  aged  twenty-three,  the
gs:  j  wife  of  William  Morgan,  of  Batavia,  in  said

county,  being  duly  sworn,  deposeth  and  saith — that  on  Monday
last,  about,  or  a  short  time  beforej  sunrise,,  her  said  husband  left  his
house,  and  went  into  the  street  of  the  village:  that  finding  he  did  not
come  home  to  his  breakfast  as  usual,  she  made  inquiries  for  him,
and  was  told  thai  he  had  been  forcibly  taken  away  by  six  men,
and  put  into  a  carriage  and  taken  to  Canandaigua.     That  during
the  whole  of  Monday  she  remained  in  ignorance  of  which  way  he
had  been  taken,  or  who  had  taken  him,  excepting  by  loose  informa-
tion, that  an  officer  from  Canandaigua  had  taken  him.     That  on
Tuesday  morning  soon  after  breakfast  she  sent  for  William  R-
Thompson,  the  sheriff,  and  requested  to  know  of  him  if  he  knew
on  what  pretext  her  husband  had  been  taken  away.     Said  Thomp-
son told  her  he  understood  he  had  been  taken  under  a  charge  of
having  stolen  a  shirt  and  cravat,  and  that  he  presumed  it  was  mere-
ly a  pretext  to  get  him  away,  or  carry  him  away;  that  thereupoa
this  deponen;  asked  him  if  he  thought  Mr.  Morgan  could  be  got
back,  or  brought  back,  if  she  gave  up  to  the  Masons  the  papers  she
had  in  possession;  said  Thompson  answered  that  he  thought  it
was  very  likely  that  Mr.  Morgan  would  be  brought  back  if  she
would  give  them  up;  but  he  would  not  obligate  himself,  or  under-
take to  say  that  he  should  be  brought  back.     That  thereupon  said
Thompson  proposed  that  this  deponent  should  go  to  Canandaigua,
and  take  the  papers,  and  give  them  to  Morgan,  or  to  them,  or
give  them  up;  and  deponent  agreed  to  go  and  take  the  papers  ac-
cordingly.    Thompson  then  asked  this  deponent  if  there  was  any
person  or  friend  whom  she  would  like  to  have  go  with  her.     She
mentioned  Mr.  Gibbs,  (meaning  Horace  Gibbs,)  and  asked  if  it
would  do  for  him  to  go;  said  Thompson  said  it  would  not  do  for
himto  go,  as  he  was  not  a  Mason,  and  added,  it  would  not  do  for
any  person  to  Carry  her  there  but  a  Mason.     She  asked  him  twice
if  Mr.  Gibbs  was  not  a  Mason,  and  he  said  he  was  not,  and  then
asked  deponent  if  she  was  acquainted  with  Mr.  Foilett;  deponent
said  she  was  not.     Thompson  said  he  was  a  nice  man,  and  a  gen-
tleman with  whom  she  could  safely  trust  herself.     Said  Thompson
departed,  and  soon  returned,  and  told  deponent  that  Mr.  Follet

Digitized  by  VjOOQLC

*  n  I  t^tm^mmtm


H  APPENDIX.

was  not  willing  to  go,  unless  she  would  let  him  (Follet,)  and  Mr.
Ketcbum  see  the  papers;  he  did  not  want  to  go  on  a  Tom  fool's  er-
rand. This  deponent  then  objected  to  the  papers  being  seen  by
them;  Thompson  then  said  it  was  useless;  he  should  do  no  more,
and  he  could  not  send  her  out  there  unless  they  could  seethe  papers.
Deponent  then,  with  great  "reluctance,  finally  consented  to  let  them
see  tbe  papers,  if  they  would  take  her  to  see  her  husband.  This
second  visit  lasted  about  20  minutes,  during  which  time  Thompson
mged  tbe  deponent  to  let  the  papers  be  Seen.  Deponent  told  him
she  was  afraid  they  would  take  the  papers  away  from  her,  if  she
let  them  see  them.  Thompson  said  they  would  not.  She  offered
to  let  Mr.  Thompson  see  the  papers;  he  said  that  would  not  an-
swer, they  would  not  take  his  word.  Thompson  then  told  her  he
would  go  to  Humphrey's  and  stay  until  she  had  got  the  papers,  and
she  must  then  make  a  sign  to  htm  when  she  was  ready.  Accord-
ingly, a  short  time  afterwards  she  made  a  sign  to  Mr.  Thompson,
then  standing  on  Humphrey's  stoop,  and  immediately  after,  he,
with  Mr.  Follett,  tad  Mr.  Ketchum,  came  to  her  apartment,  when
Thompson  introduced  Follett1  and  Ketcbum,  and  said  they  had
come  to  see  the  papers,  which  this  deponent  then  handed  to  them.
They  all  looked  at  them  a  short  time,  and  Thompson  then  asked
ber  if  she  was  ready  to  go,  saying,  Mr.  Follett  was  ready  to  take
her.  Follett  then  said  he  would  go  home  with  the  papers,  and
look  them  over,  and  told  Ketchum  to  stop  for  him  at  his  gate.
Accordingly,  about  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  Tuesday,  depo-
nent started  with  said  Follett  and  Keichum  in  a  small  wagon,  and
proceeded  10  Stafford,  where  they  stopped  at  a  house,  where  she
was  conducted  into  a  back  room,  into  which  Follett  and  Ketchum
came,  and  were  joined  by  one  Daniel  Johns,  and  by  James  Gan-
son;  all  of  whom  immediatety  proceeded  to  examine  the  papers
with  much  earnestness,  and  held  much  low  conversation  with
themselves  in  under  voices.  Ganson  appeared  to  speak  the  most.
One  of  them  then  asked  Johns  (f  those  were  the  papers  that  were  in
the  office  when  he  was  there.  Johns  answered  there  was  one  de-
gree back,  and  then  took  a  piece  of  paper,  and  folding  it  up,  said
the  papers  that  were  back  were  fielded  so.  They  then  field  consid-
erable more  conversation  in  voices  too  low  to  be  heard.  FoHett  then
turned  to  deponent,  and  told  her  he  did  not  see  that  he  could  go
with  her;  that  Mr.  Ketchum  was  going  to  Rochester,  and  would
be  willing  to  take  her  to  Canandaigua  to  see  Mr.  Morgan;  said  be
was  not  much  acquainted  with  him,  (Ketchum,)  but  took  him  to  be
a  gentleman, — and  Ketchum  then  said  be  eaHed  himself  a  gentle-
man, and  she  need  not  be  afraid  to  trust  herself  with  him.  Ketch-
um then  took  the  papers,  and  tied  therii  op  kt  bis  pocket  handker-
chief, and  took  them  with  him  into  Ule  wagon  In  which  tbey.rodr

Digitized  by  LjOOQIC


APPENDIX.  Ill

Johns  thea  got  into  the  wagon,  and  rode  to  Le  Roy,  when  he  got
out,  and  bid  Ketchuiu  good-bye,  saying,  I  hope  I  shall  see  you  day
after  to-morrow.     They  then  proceeded  to  Avon,  and  staid  all
night.     The  next  day  they  again  started  for  Canandaigua,  when
Ketchum  put  the  papers  into  this  deponent's  trunk.     They  arrived
at  Canandaigua  about  twelve,  at  noon,  and  stopped  at  a  tavern  at
the  corner  of  the  main  street*     After  being  there  some  time,  this
deponent  asked  Ketchum  if  he  had  heard  of  Mr.  Morgan.   Ketchum
said   he  had  not;  that  the  Masons  could  not  talk  to  him;  he  could
not   see  them;  they  seemed  jealous  of  him;  thought  him  a  friend
of  Mr.  Morgan,  -and  was  afraid  he  had  come  to  get  him  away
from  that  place.    Then  asked  her  where  the  papers  were;  he  took
them,  and  said  he  would  go  and  make  further  inquiries  for  Mr.
Morgan;  and  if  he  could  find  him,  or  where  he  was,  or  where  they
had  taken  him,  he  would  let  her  know  all  he  could  find  out.    This
was  about  dinner  time.     He  returned  again  a  short  time  before
night,  and  told  her  be  had  heard  Mr.  Morgan  had  been  there;  had
been  tried  for  stealing  a  shirt,  and  cleared,  had  been  then  put  in
jail  for  a  debt'of  two  dollars;  and  that  Tuesday  night  a  man  had
come,  from  Pennsylvania,  who  said  he  had  a  warrant  against  him
for  a  debt  he  owed  there)  that  he,  the  man,  had  paid  the  two  dol-
lars, and  had  taken  him  away  in  a  private  carriage  on  Tuesday
night,  and  he  had  no  doubt  he  was  gone;  and  asked  this  deponent
when  she  would  go  home  again.     The  deponent  then  expressed
her  anxiety  to  return  speedily  on  account  of  having  left  her  child
of  two  year's  old,  and  having  with  her  a  baby  of  two  months  old.
Ketchum  then  went  out,  as  he  said,  to  take  a  passage  in  the  stage,
and  returned  after  candle  light.     This  deponent  was  then  walking
the  room  in  great  distress,  and  in  tears.     She  asked  him  if  he  could
hear  nothing  of  Mr.  Morgan.     He  then  seemed  to  pity  deponent,
and  told  her  not  to  be  uneasy,  and  after  looking  at  her  a  short  time,
told  her  to  come  and  sit  down  by  him,  and  asked  her  if  she  would
feel  any  better  if  he  told  ber  what  he  knew.     Being  answered  yes,,
he  then  said  that  Mr.  Morgan  would  not  be  killed — that  he  would
be  kept  concealed  until  they  could  get  the  rest  of  the  papers.     She
asked  him  if  bat  papers  were  back.     He  said  there  was  some  sheets
on  the  Mark  Master's  degree  back;  and  they  wanted  also  to  get
the  printed  sheets  that  Miller  had  printed  on  the  three  degrees.    He
then  said  he  wanted  to  take  the*  papers  he  had  received  from  this
deponent  to  Rochester,  and  he  thought  through  the  means  of  them
he  could  find  out  where  Mr.  Morgan  was;  it  was  a  secret  where
he  was.     Said  he  had  paid  her  passage,  and  then  gave  ber  two
dollars  to  bear  her  expenses  home.     He  then  wrote  his  name  with
a  pencil  on  a  scrap  of  paper,  hereto  annexed,  as  follows:  'George
Ketchum,  Rochester,'  and  promised  to  write  to  her  if  he  could  hear

Digitized  b^  VjOOQlC


IV  APPENDIX.

of  Mr.  Morgan:  he  then  told  her  if  she  would,  by  any  means,  get
hold  of  the  papers  that  Miller  had,  or  find  out  where  they  were
deposited,  so  that  be  could  get  hold  of  them,  he  would  give  her  #25
out  of  his  own  pocket,  and  he  had  no  doubt  the  lodge  would  give
her  one  hundred  if  she  could  get  what  Miller  had  now.    Deponent
told  him  she  would  not  try  to  get  the  papers  that  Miller  had,  and
-would  take  no  money,  and  would  not  let  him  have  the  papers  she
had  deJitered  to  him,  but  on  condition  he  would  try  and  find  out
where  Mr.  Morgan  was,  and  let  her  see  him.     He  then  repeated
his  promise  to  try  and  find  out,  and  said  he  would  write  to  her  as
soon  as  he  got  to  Rochester,  and  urged  her  to  write  to  bkn  imme-
diately on  her  return,  and  let  him  know  about  the  papers,  and
-what  the  people  were  doing  generally  in  Batavia,  and  whether  they
were  making  a  great  rumpus  about  Mr.  Morgan.    Deponent  then
•expressed  her  fears,  that  if  she  did  give  him  any  information  about
the  papers,  he  would  not  keep  his  promise  about  letting  her  see  himr
out  would  keep  him  concealed  until  they  got  all  the  papers,  and
Anally  kill  him.     Ketchum  then  said,  'I  promise  before  my  God
that  I  will  not  deceive  you,  but  will  do  all  I  can  to  find  out  where
iie  is,  and  let  you  see  him.    I  have  no  doubt  when  I  get  back  to
Rochester  I  can  find  out  more,  and  I  think  I  can  find  out  where  he
is.'     He  then  again  urged  her  to  find  out  where  the  papers  were,
and  let  him  know.     In  the  course  of  his  conversation  he  said,  that
if  Mr.  Morgan  had  managed  rightly  he  could  have  made  a  million
of  dollars,  if  the  work  had  been  published.     Ketchum  then  depart-
ed for  Rochester,  leaving  this  deponent  at  the  tavern— she,  the
same  day,  started  for  Batavia.     The  papers  taken  away  by  the  said
Ketchum  were  numerous,  and  formed  a  very  large  bundle — they
were  written  in  the  hand  writing  of  her  husband,  excepting  a  few,,
which  were  written  by  a  person  who  sometimes  assisted  her  hus-
band by  copying,  or  taking  down,  as  he  dictated  to  him.    The  de-
ponent further  says  she  has  no  knowledge  of  the  place  where  her
husband  now  is,  or  what  is  his  situation,  and  feels  the  most  anxious,
fears  for  his  life — that  she  was  born  in  Virginia,  and  is  a  stranger,
without  any  intimate  friends  or  relations  in  this  country,  and  is  left
with  two  infant  children,  without  any  money,  except  What  is  left
of  that  given  to  her  by  said  Ketchum,  and  has  no  properly  nor  any
means  of  supporting  herself  and  her  children,  her  constitution  being
very  feeble,  and  her  health  being  bad  most  of  the  time.

L.  Morgan.
Sworn  the  twenty-second  day  of  September.  1826,  before  me>

Daniel  H.  Chandler,  J.  P%


d  by  Google


APPENMX*  V

NO.  2.

State  of  New  York,  Ontario)     Maey  W.  Hall,  of  Canandai-
County,  88.  ••-  y   gua,  in  said  county,  being  duly

sworn,  deposeth  and  saith— that  she  is  the  wife  of  Israel  R.  Hall,
keeper  of  the  common  jail  of  said  county;  that  she,  this  deponenf,
the  said  keeper,  her  husband,  and  family,  reside  in  the  jail  of  said
county;  that  she,  this  deponent,  and  her  husband,  had  been  absent,
and  returned  home  on  the  twelfth  of  September  instant,  in  the
afternoop;  that  in  the  early  part  of  the  evening  of  the  said   twelfth
day  of  September,  her  husband  went  out  from  the  jail;  that  soon
after  her  husband  left  the  jail,  and  about  seven  o'clock  in  the  eve-
ning, or  a  little  past,  a  man  who,  afterwards  and  during  the  same
evening  said  his  name  was  Lawson,  called  at  the  jail  and  inquired
for  Mr.  Hall,  the  keeper,  and  she,  this  deponent,  informed  the  said
Lawson  that  Mr.  Hall  was  not  at  home,  and  that  she  did  not  know
where  he  was;  that  the  said  Lawson  then  said  that  he  wanted  to
see  Morgan,  alluding,  as  this  deponent  supposed,  to  a  man  in  pris-
on by  the  name  of  William  Morgan;  that  this  deponent  then  went
to  the  door  of  the  room  in  which  the  said  Morgan  was  confined;
that  the  said  Lawson  requested  to  go  into  the  room  where  Morgan
was,  but  this  deponent  told  him  he  could  not,  for  it  was  against  the
rules  of  the  prisoa;  that  the  said  Lawson  said  he  wished  to  have  a
few  moments  private  conversation  with  Morgan,  but  this  deponent
told  Lawson  he  could  not  say  any  thing  to  Morgan  but  what  this
deponent  should  hear;  that  the  said  Lawson  then  spoke  to  Morgan
through  the  grates  of  the  door,  and  said  he  wished  to  have  some
private  conversation  with  him,  the  said  Morgan,  but  this  woman,
alluding  to  this  deponent,  would  not  let  him;  that  this  deponent
then  said  to  Lawson,  who  be  you?  do  you  live  in  the  village?  to
which  the  said  Lawson  made  no  reply,  but  the  said  Morgan  said
he  is  a  neighbor;  that  the  said  Lawson  told  Morgan  he  had  come  to-
pay  the  debt  for  which  the  said  Morgan  was  committed;  and  Law-
son  asked  Morgan  if  he  would  go  home  with  him;  to  which  Morgan
answered,  yes;  that  Lawson  then  said,  when  Mr.  Hall,  meaning
the  said  keeper,  came  in,  he  (Lawson)  would  satisfy  the  execution,
and  take  him,  the  said  Morgan,  out,  and  carry  him  home;  that
the  said  Morgan  answered  it  was  no  matter  about  it  that  night;  he
could  wait  till  morning;  that  Lawson  said  no,  he  would  rather  take
him,  the  said  Morgan,  out,  and  carry  him  home  with  him  that  night,
for  he  had  been  running  all  day  for  him,  and  he  was  so  tired  he
could  hardly  stand  on  his  feet;  that  the  said  Lawson  then  went
away,  and  said  he  would  look  for  Mr.  Hall,  the  said  keeper;  that
in  about  half  an  hour  the  said  Lawson  returned,  and  said  he  had
been  to  the  hotel,  conference  room,  and  every  other  place  in  which,
be  thought  he  should  be  Hkely  to  find  Mr.  Hall,  but  he  could  not
1*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


yi  APfBlfMX.

find  him;  that  the  said  Lawson  then  requested  that  this  deponent
should  receive  the  amount  of  the  execution  oa  which  Morgan  was
committed,  and  discharge  him;  hot  this  deponent  refese*  to  do  this,
and  told  Lawson  she  did  not  know  the  amount;  that  Lawson  told
her  it  was  a  small  sum,  and  he  (Lawson)  woukl  leave  fore  dollars,
which  he  knew  was  more  than  sadfeient;  that  this  deponent  then
told  Lawson  that  she,  this  deponent,  bad  understood  that  Morgan
was  a  rogae,  and  that  she  did  not  tike  to  liberate  a  rogue;  that  she,
this  deponent,  understood  great  pains  had  been  taken  to  secure  Mor-
gan, and  that  the  public  or  individuals  were  interested  in  having
Jum  kept  secure;  that  what  she  (this  deponent)  should  do  would  he
considered  the  same  as  if  it  had  been  done  by  her  husband,  the  said
.keeper;  and  if  she  (this  deponent)  should  discharge  Morgan,  she
was  afraid  her  husband  would  be  blamed;  that  Lawson  said  no,
Mr.  Hall  would  not  be  blamed,  and  represented  to  this  deponent
that  Mr.  Hall  understood  it  perfectly,  and  if  he  was  at  home
would  discharge  Morgan;  and  further,  he,  Lawson,  said  he  would
pledge  himself  that  Mr.  Hall  should  hot  be  injured  or  blamed;  gnat
he,  Lawson,  would  pledge  himself  to  the  amount  of  fifty  or  an
hundred  dollars  that  Mr.  Hall  should  not  be  injured  if  this  depo-
nent would  discharge  Morgan;  but  this  deponent  refused,  and  told
Lawson  she  valued  public  opinion  more  than  money;  that  Lawson
then  asked  this  deponent  if  she  would  discharge  Morgan  if  Col.
Sawyer  (meaning,  as  this  deponent  supposes,  one  Edward  Sawyer,
of  Canandaigua  aforesaid)  would  say  she  could  safely  do  k,  and
that  it  would  be  right,  or  if  he  would  pledge  himself  that  Mr  all
should  not  be  injnred,  or  would  run  no  risk  in  discharging  Morgan;
that  she,  this  deponent,  answered  that  she  did  not  know  Col.  Saw-
yer any  better  than  see  did  him,  (Lawson,)  and  that  Col.  Sawyer
was  not  plaintiff  in  the  execution  upon  which  Morgan  was  commit-
ted, and  that  he,  Col.  Sawyer,  had  nothing  to  do  with  h;  that,
however,  Lawson  then  went  away,  and  said  he  woaid  go  and  see
Col.  Sawyer;  that  Lawson  then  went  away,  and  was  gone  but  a
few  minutes  when  he  (Lawson)  returned,  and  Col.  Sawyer  with  him;
that  Col.  Sawyer  requested  that  this  deponent  would  discharge  .
Morgan,  and  said  there  could  be  no  kind  of  risk  in  doing  so;  that
Mr.  Hall  should  not  be  injured;  that  Lawson  would  pay  the  debt^
and  there  could  be  no  harm  in  discharging  the  prisoner  when  that
was  done;  that  this  deponent  said  she  did  not  wish  to  keeps  man  in
jail  who  ought  to  be  let  out,  but  she  did  not  wish  to  liberate  a  rogue,
as  she  understood  Morgan  was  one;  that  nearly  the  same  conver-
sation again  took  place  as  had  before  passed  between  this  deponent
and  Lawson;  that  Col.  Sawyer  and  Lawson  appeared  to  be  offend-
ed; that  this  deponent  would  not  discharge  Morgan;  that  Lawson
said  the  debt  for  which  Morgan  was  committed  was  assigned  to

*  Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


APPENDIX.  Vli

Chesebro;  (meaning,  as  this  deponent  supposed,  and  afterwards
learned,  Nicholas  6.  Chesebro)  that  Lawson  said  to  Sawyer,  Met  us
go  and  find  Chesebro;'  that  they  both  went  to  the  door,  and  this
deponent  also,  and  saw  two  men  a  few  rods  from  the  jail  coming
towards  it;  that  this  deponent  observed  that,  perhaps,  one  of  them
might  be  Mr.  Hall,  upon  which  Lawson  went  towards  them,'  and
directly  one  of  the  said  men  came  to  the  door  of  the  jail  where  this
deponent  and  CoL  Sawyer  were  standing;  that  this  deponent  asked
if  it   was  Mr.  Chesebro,  to  which  the  man  answered  yes;  and  this
deponent  immediately  recognised  him  to  be  the  said  Nicholas  G.
Chesebro;  that  this  deponent  said  to  Chesebro,  there  is  a  man  in
jail  that  these  men  (meaning  Lawson  and  Col.  Sawyer)  want  me  to
liberate,  and  they  say  you  are  interested,  or  that  you  have  bought
the  debt;  that  Chesebro  said  let  him  go;  these  men  will  pay  the  ex-
ecution; I  don't  want  to  see  him;  I  have  no  demands  upon  him;  that
this  deponent  in  the  early  part  of  the  evening,  and  before  Mr.  Hall
left  the  jail,  had  observed  Mr.  Hall  and  Chesebro  in  low  conversa-
tion, and  supposed  that  probably  it  was  understood  between  them:
she,  this  deponent,  then  consented  to  receive  the  amount  of  the  ex-
ecution, and  discharge  Morgan;  that  during  the  evening  a  man  had
been  to  the  jail  with  Lawson;  that  Lawson  called  Foster,  but  un-
known to  this  deponent;  that  Lawson,  after  this,  deponent  consented
to  receive  the  amount  of  the  execution,  and  discharge  Morgan,
paid  to  this  deponent  the  said  amount  of  execution,  or  laid  it  on  the
table;  that  then  this  deponent  took  the  keys  and  was  going  to  liber-
ate Morgan;  that  Lawson  spoke  to  this  deponent  and  said,  'wait,
,  and  I  will  go  with  you;'  that  Lawson  then  stepped  to  the  door  and
whistled,  and  then  followed  this  deponent;  that  when  they  came  to
the  outer  door  «f  the  prison,  Lawson  said  to  this  deponent,  'you
need  not  fasten  this  door  afterro^  bat  this  deponent  said  she  should,
for  there  were  other  prisoners  in  the  room;  that  this  deponent  and
Lawson  went  into  the  hall  adjoining  the  room  where  Morgan  was,
and  Lawson  spoke  in  a  low  voice  to  Morgan  through  the  grates,
'get  yourself  ready  to  go  with  me— dress  yourself  quick:*  that  Mor-
gan was  soon  ready,  and  this  deponent  let  him  ont,  and  Lawson
took  Morgan  by  the  arm  and  went  out  of  the  prison  to  the  outer
door;  that  while  this  deponent  was  fastening  the  prison  door  she
heard,  at  or  near  the  outer  door  of  the  jail  a  most  distressing  cry  of
murder;  that  this  deponent  ran  to  the  door,  and  saw  Lawson  and
the  man  that  he  called  Foster,  one  on  each  side  of  Morgan,  having
hold  of  Morgan's  arms;  that  Morgan  continued  to  scream  or  cry  in
the  most  distressing  manner,  at  the  same  time  struggling  with  all
his  strength,  apparently,  to  get  loose  from  Lawson  and  Foster;
that  the  cry  of  Morgan  continued  till  his  voice  appeared  to  be  sup-
pressed by  something  pot  over  his  month;  that  duringthetime  that


y  Google


viii  APPENDIX.

Morgan  was  struggling*  and  crying  murder,  the  said  Col.  Sawyer,
and  the  said  Cbesebro,  were  standing  at  a  short  distance  from  the
jail  door,  near  the  well,  and  in  full  view  and  hearing  of  all  that
passed,  but  offered  no  assistance  to  Morgan,  nor  did  they  attempt
to  release  him  from  Lawson  and  Foster;  but  one  of  them  struck
with  a  stick  a  violent  blow  upon  the  well  curb,  or  a  tub,  standing
near;  that  soon  after  this  deponent  saw  a  carriage  pass  the  jail  in
the  direction  that  Larson  and  Foster  took  Morgan;  that  the  eve-
ning was  quite  light  in  consequence  of  its  being  about  the  fall  of
the  moon;  that  she,  this  deponent,  could  distinguish  from  the  jail
door  the  horses  in  the  carriage  which  passed  to  be  gray;  that  this
deponent  supposed  the  striking  upon  the  well  curb,  or  tub,  by
Chesebro  or  Col.  Sawyer,  was  a  signal  for  the  carriage  to  come,  as
it  came  immediately  after:  that  when  the  carriage  passed,  Lawson
and  Foster  could  not  have  got  but  a  few  rods  with  Morgan;  that  im-
mediately after  the  striking  upon  the  well  curb,  or  tub,  Col.  Sawyer,
and,  as  this  deponent  thinks,  Chesebro  also,  passed  the  jail  door  in
the  direction  that  Lawson  and  Foster  took  Morgan,  but  not  appar-
ently to  render  Morgan  any  assistance  towards  being  released  from
Lawson  and  Foster;  but  Col.  Sawyer,  however,  picked  up  Morgan's
hat,  which  had  fallen  off  in  the  struggle;  that  when  Morgan  was
taken  from  the  jail  it  was  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  or  a
little  past:  that  this  deponent  has  since  been  informed  that  Lawson
lives  about  two  or  three  miles  from  the  jail;  that  this  deponent  has
never  seen  Morgan  since  he  was  taken  from  the  jail  as  aforesaid,
and  knows  nothing  about  where  he  was  taken  to,  or  where  he  now
is,  and  further  saith  not.  Mary  W.  Hall.

Subscribed  and  sworn  to,  this  twenty-third  day  of  September,
182G,  before  me,  Jeffrey  Chipman,  J.  P»

State  of  IVe>/>  York,     7         NO.  3.

Ontario  County,  ss.  $  Daniel  Tallmadge,  being  duly  sworn,
deposeth  and  saith— that  he  now  is,  and  on  the  eleventh  day  of  Sep-
tember instant,  was,  a  prisoner  in  the  jail  of  said  county,  atCanan-
daigua;  that  on  the  evening  of  the  said  eleventh  day  of  September,
a  man,  whose  name  this  deponent  learned  was  William  Morgan,
was  committed  to  said  jail,  and  put  into  the  room  with  this  depo-
nent; that  during  the  following  day  Morgan  asked  this  deponent
whether  Mr.  Hall,  the  jailer,  was  a  Mason,  and  said  if  he  was,  he
(Morgan)  would  fare  hard,  as  he  was  suspected  of  an  intention  to
reveal  the  secrets  of  Masonry;  that  early  in  the  evening  of  the  same
day,  being  the  twelfth,  Mrs.  Hall,  the  wife  of  the  said  jailer,  togeth-
er with  a  man  whose  name  this  deponent  understood  to  be  Lawson,
came  to  the  door  of  the  prison  room,  in  which  this  deponent  and
Morgan  were;  that  Lawson  said  he  came  to  pay  the  debt  on  which

Digitized  byVjOOQlC


APPENDIX.  IX

Morgan  was  committed,  and  let  him  out;  to  which  Morgan  con-
sented; that  after  Lawson  went  away,  as  this  deponent  understood,
to  find  Mr.  Hall,  the  jailer.  Morgan  said  to  this  deponent,  if  that
man^  (Lawson)  was  a  traitor  to  him,  (Morgan)  he  would  not  give
much  for  his  life;  that  Morgan  had  some  doubts  about  trusting
himself  with  Lawson,  but  upon  the  whole  concluded  he  would;  that
some  time  after,  during  the  same  evening,  Lawson  came  again  to
the  room  where  this  deponent  and  Morgan  were,  and  Mrs.  Hall,
the  wife  of  the  jailer,  let  Morgan  out,  and  Lawson  went  out  with
Morgan;  that  in  a  moment  after,  this  deponent  heard  a  cry  of  mur-
der, which  appeared  to  be  near  or  at  the  outer  door  of  the  jail;  that
the  said  cry  of  murder,  was  repeated  two  of  three  times  till  it  ap-
peared to  be  suppressed,  and  further  this  deponent  saith  not.

.    ,  Daniel  Tallmadge.

Subscribed  and  sworn  to,  this  twenty-third  day  of  September,
1&$6>  before  me,  Jeffrey  Chipman,  J.  P.

State  of  New  York,     >         NO.  4.

Ontario  County ,  w.  $  Martha  Davis,  wife  of  Nathan  Davis,  of
Canandaigua,  in  said  county,  being  duly  sworn,  deposeth  and  saith
— that  she  resides  nearly  opposite  the  jail,  in  Canandaigua;  that  on
the  evening  of  the  twelfth  day  of  September,  instant,  she,  this  de-
ponent, saw  a  number  of  men  walking,  standing,  and  sitting  in  the
street,  and  by  the  fence  by  the  side  of  the  street,  about  and  near  the
jail;  that  this  deponent  could  recognise  but  three  of  the  men,  to  wit:
Col.  Edward  Sawyer,  Nicholas  G.  Chesebro,  and  Chauncey  Coe,
all  of  Canandaigua  aforesaid;  that  at  one  time  this  deponent  was
out  at  the  door,  and  spoke  to  said  Chesebro,  but  he  made  no  an-
swer; that  there  were  in  all  about  eight  or  ten  men;  that  they  seemed
to  be  consulting  together  in  an  under  tone,  as  this  deponent  thought,
and  she  expressed  her  fears  to  her  husband  that  something  was  go-
ing on  about  the  jail  which  was  not  right;  that  about  nine  o'clock  in
the  evening  this  deponent  heard  the  fastenings  of  the  prison  doors,
as  she  frequently  does  when  the  doors  are  opened;  that  at  the  same
time  this  deponent  discovered  two  men  near  the  jail  door,  and  also,
two  men  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  street  from  the  jail,  and  but  a
little  distance  from  the  house  of  this  deponent;  that  immediately
after,  this  deponent  heard  a  cry  of  murder  near  the  jail  door,  and
discovered  men  apparently  in  a  scuffle;  that  at  the  same  time  she
heard  a  violent  rap  apparently  upon  the  well  curb,  near  the  jail  door,
and  one  of  the  men  who  were  seated  near  the  house  of  this  deponent
immediately  ran  past  the  house  of  this  deponent,  and  in  a  direction
from  the  place  from  which  the  cry  of  murder  proceeded;  that  the  cry
of  murder  seemed  to  be  suppressed  as  by  a  hand,  or  something
similar,  upon  the  mouth,  which  appeared  at  times  to  be  partly  r*~

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


X  APPENDIX.

moved  in  the  struggle,  and  then  this  deponent  could  bear  an  ina*-
ticulate  sound,  indicating  great  distress;  that  immediately  after  the
rap  upon  the  well  curb,  this  deponent  discovered  a  carnage,  which
she  supposed  to  be  the  carriage  of  Mr.  Hubbard,  who  keeps  horses
and  carriages  to  let,  with  two  grey  horses,  coming  down  the  street
very  rapidly,  but  could  not  discover  any  one  in  the  carriage*,  that
the  carriage  passed  the  house  of  this  deponent  towards  the  place
where  this  deponent  had  heard  the  last  cries  of  distress,  as  aforesaid;
that  the  carriage  was  gone  a  few  minutes,  and  then  returned  n'ah
men  in  it,  and  passed  back  again  by  the  house  of  this  deponent;  and
further  this  deponent  saith  not.  Martha  Davis.

.  Subscribed  and  sworn  to,  this  twenty-third  day  of  September,
t826,  before  we,  Jeffrey  Chipman,  J.  P.

State  of  New  York,     \         NO.  5.

Ontario  County,  s&  £  Lasira  I.  Osborn,  daughter  of  Seth  Os-
born,  of  Canandaigua,  in  said  comity,  aged  about  twenty-four  years,
being  duly  sworn,  deposeth  and  sakh — that  on  the  evening  of  die
twelfth  of  September,  instant,  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evenrog,she,
this  deponent,  was  in  the  chamber  of  her  father's  house,  which  is
but  a  few  feet  from  the  jail  in  Canandaigua;  that  this  deponent
heard  some  bustle  about  tbe*houae,  apparently  near  the  jail  door;
that  this  deponent  then  heard  a  cry  of  murder,  apparently  about  in
front  of  her  father's  house,  in  the  street,  and  but  a  few  feet  from  the
house;  that  the  distinct  cry  of  murder,  which  this  deponent  first
heard,  was  soon  suppressed  into  an  inarticulate  sound  of  distress,
and  soon  ceased;  that  just  before  the  time  that  this  deponent  heard
the  said  cry  of  murder,  she  heard  some  one  whistle,  and  then,  or  soon
after,  a  loud  rap  upon  the  well  curb,  as  this  deponent  suppo^M*
it  appeared  to  be  at  the  well,  a  few  rods  from  the  jail  door;  that
this  deponent  then  heard  a  carriage  pass  in  the  street;  that  this
deponent  soon  after  came  down  from  the  chamber,  and  a  carriage
passed  the  other  way,  having  two  grey  horses  before  the  carriage;
and  further  this  deponent  saith  not.  Lassira  I.  Osiorn.

Subscribed  and  sworn  to,  this  twenty-third  day  of  September*
1 826,  before  me,  Jeffrey  Chipman,  J.  "•


State  of  New  York,      )  NO.  6.

Ontario  County,  ss  J  Sbth  Osbobn,  of  Canandaigua,  **  S?H'
county,  being  duly  sworn,  deposeth  and  saith-*- that  on  *•  evening
of  the  twelfth  of  September,  instant,  about  nine  o'clock,  or  between
nine  and  ten  o'clock,  he,  this  deponent,  Went  to  *«  aoor.  * bis
house,  which  is  near  thejail  in  Canandaigua;  that  *e  sawsome  men
a  few  rods  from  his  door;  that  one  of  the  men  a#«ed  to  be  partly
down  and  struggling,  and  making  a  ratntnois^trf  distresr,  that  this

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC     •


APM&NWX-  XI

depottent  went  towards  the  men,  one  of  whom  was  a  little  behind
the  rest,  and  this  deponent  asked  him  what  was  the  matter?  to
which  the  man,  whom  this  deponent  understood  and  believes  to
have  been  Col  Sawyer,  of  Canandaigua,  aforesaid,  answered,
'nothing,  only  a  man  has  been  let  out  of  jail,  and  been  taken  on  a
warrant,  and  is  going  to  ^e  tried,  or  to  have  his  trial,'  upon  which
this  deponent  went  back  into  his  house,  and  further  sahh  not.

Seth  Osborn.
Subscribed  and  sworn  to,  this  ttoenty-tkird  day  of  September,
1 826,  before  me,  Jeffrey  Chipman,  J.  P.

Genesee  County,  *  NO,  7.

ss.  J  Timothy  Fitch,  of  Batavia,  in  said  coun-

ty, being  duly  sworn,  deposeth  and  saith— that  on  the  twenty-third
day  of  September  instant,  b*',  th<s  deponent,  wa  at  Canandaigua,
and  saw  Hiram  Hubbard,  and  this  deponent  asked  Hubbard  if  he
knew  any  thing  about  William  Morgan  being  taken  away  from
Canandaigua,  and  Hubbard  said,  he  did  not,  but  on  the  evening
that  it  was  said  Morgan  was  taken  away,  he,  Hubbard,  was  applied
to,  to  carry  some  men  to  Rochester,  and  he  agreed  to  go  with  his
Carriage,  as  he  did  frequently;  but  he  did  not  know  who  applied  to
him  on  this  occasion;  that  he  expected  they  would  get  into  his  car-
riage at  Mr.  Kingsley's  tavern,  in  Canandaigua;  but  in  the  evening,
about  nine  o'clock,  a  man  whom  he  did  not  know,  came  to  him,
and  said  the  party  had  gone  down  the  road  towards  Palmyra,  and
wished  him  to  come  along,  and  they  would  get  into  the  carriage
when  he  overtook  them;  that  he,  Hubbard,  then  drove  down  the
road  as  he  was  requested,  passed  the  jail  a  few  rods,  until  he  saw
some  men  in  the  road,  who  told  him  to  stop,  and  five  or  six  men
got  into  the  carriage,  but  he  did  not  know  one  of  them;  that  they
then  told  him  to  turn  about  and  go  to  Rochester,  which  he  did  tfbat
he  stopped  twice  on  the  road,  and  passed  through  Rochester  about
day  light,  and  continued  on  to  Hanford's  Landing,  about  three
miles  below  Rochester,  where  the  men  said  they  wanted  to  take  a
vessel;  that  he  then  left  them,  and  returned  home  to  Canandaigua;
that  he  did  not  know  one  of  the  men  whom  he  carried,  though  he
saw  them  on  the  road  when  they  stopped,  and  also  when  they  got
out  of  the  carriage  at  Hanford's  Landing;  that  he  had  never  been
paid  any  thing  for  going  with  said  party  to  Hanford's  Landing;
and  did  not  know  who  to  look  to  for  pay;  that  one  of  the  men
said  to  him  he  would  see  him  another  day  and  pay  {nm,  but  he
did  not  know  who  it  was,  nor  had  he  ever  seen  him  since,  or  any
one  of  the  party;  that  he,  Hubbard,  kept  a  livery  stable,  and
horses4and  carriages,  and  frequently  carried  people  to  different  pla-
ces.   And  this  deponent  further'saith,  that  be  asked  Hubbard  to

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


XU  APPENDIX.

make  affidavit  of  what  be  had  said,  but  Hubbard  said  he  had  rather
not,  and  finally  declined.  And  this  deponent  further  saith,  that  die
place  described  by  Hubbard  where  betook  the  party  into  his  car-
riage, wag  but  a  few  rodg  from  the  jail,  and  near  the  place  where
Mrs.  Hall  and  Mrs.  Osborn  deposed  they  saw  Morgan  last,  on  the
evening  he  was  taken  from  the  jail,  and  further  saith  not.

Timothy  Fitch.
Subscribed  and  sworn  to,  this  twenty-ninth  day  of  September,
1826,  before  me9  C.  Carpenter,  J.  P.


NO.  8.

ONTARIO   OYER  AND   TERMINER.

Nicholas  G.  CussbboO      Nicholas  G.  Chesebro,  being  da-
Edward  Sawyer,  Loton  I  \y  swarn>   deposeth  and  saith-4hat
Lawson,  John  Sheldon,  Vsjnce  tne  finding  of  the  indictment  in
o  *  l^e  aDOve  entitled  cause,  and  in  the

The  People. j  course  of  last  week,  this  deponent  has

been  served  w  ith  a  capias  ad  respondendum,  issued  out  of  toe  Su-
preme Court,  of  the  state  of  New  York,  at  the  suit  of  William  Mor-
gan, for  assault  and  battery,  and  false  imprisonment,  to  the  damage
to  the  said  William  Morgan,  of  ten  thousand  dollars;  and  this  de-
ponent has  been  held  to  bail  in  virtue  of  said  writ,  and  an  allow-
ance of  bail  thereon  endorsed,  for  fifteen  hundred  dollars;  that  this
deponent  doth  verily  believe  that  the  said  capias  was  issued  against
this  deponent,  as  the  commencement  of  a  suit  by  the  said  William
Morgan  against  this  deponent,  for  his  private  damages  sustained,
by  reason  of  the  facts  disclosed  in' the  indictment,  in  the  abore  en-
titled cause;  and  this  deponent  further  saith,  that  he  saw  the  said
William  Morgan  in  the  office  of  J.  Chipman,  Esq.  a  justice  of  the
peace,  in  the  village  of  Canandaigua,  on  the  evening  of  the  11th
Sept.  last,  during  his  examination  before  the  said  justice,  and  that
he  has  not  seen  him  since  that  time:— this  deponent  knew  that  it
was  intended  to  release  the  said  Morgan  from  jail,  and  was  inform-
ed, and  verily  believed,  that  the  said  Morgan  had  consented  to  go
away;  and  that  the  only  object  of  this  deponent,  in  assisting  to  get
said  Morgan  out  of  jail,  was  to  keep  him  from  falling  into  the
hands,  or  under  the  influence  of  one,  David  C.  Miller,  of  Batavia;
that  he,  this  deponent,  had  been  informed,  and  believed,  that  said
William  Morgan  was  compiling  a  book  on  the  subject  of  Masonry,
at  the  instigation,  or  with  the  concurrence,  of  said  Miller,  who  was
to  print  the  same,  with  a  view  to  pecuniary  profit,  in  which  book
the  said  Morgan  pretended  to  disclose  secrets  which  he  averred
that  he  had  most  solemnly  engaged  never  to  reveal;  that  deeming
such  publication  calculated  to  degrade  the  institution  of  Masonry,
«nd  to  bring  disgrace  on  the  members  thereof,  this  deponent  was

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


A^PKNDtXt  »     xiii

desirous  to  remove  tne  said  Morgan  to  tome  place  beyond  the
reach  of  the  said  Miller,  where  his  friends  and  acquaintance  might
endeavor  to  convince  him  of  the  impropriety  of  his  conduct,  and
prevent  the  consequence  before  mentioned.  That  this  deponent  was
not  concerned,  directly  or  indirectly,  hi  using  any  force  in  the  re-
moval of  the  said  Morgan  from  the  said  jail;  and  that  he  has  had
no  concern  whatever,  in  any  transactions  concerning  the  said  Mor-
gan since  that  lime.  That  all  be  knows  of  said  removal  is,  that  he
has  been  informed  that  the  said  Morgan  was  carried  into  the  coun-
ty of  Monroe;  and  that  this  deponent  does  not  know  where  said
Morgan  new  is.  And  this  deponent  further  saith,  that  he  is  some-
what in  debt,  has  but  little  property,  a  family  to  provide  for,  and
feels,  in  common  with  bis  fellow  citizens,  the  pressure  of  the  times:
And  further  saith  not.

N.  G.  Chesmrq.
Sworn  thU  fifth  day  of  January,  1827,  before  me,

Ralph  Lbstbr,  Clerk  of  Ontario  County.

Ontario  Cowdy,  >  NO.  9.

at.  )  Coward  Sawyer,  of  Canandaigua,  one  of  the

above  named  defendants,  being  duly  sworn,  deposes  and  says,  that  be
never  to  his  knowledge  saw  William  Morgan,  mentioned  in  the  indict-
ment  in  this  cause,  until  the  evening  of  the  eleventh  day  of  September
last  past,  when  he  saw  him  at  the  office  of  Jeffrey  Chipman,  Esq.
in  the  village  of  Canandaigua,  under  examination?  on  a  complaint
against  him,as  this  deponent  was  informed,  for  larceny.  And  this  de-
ponent further  says,  that  he  had  no  knowledge  or  intimation,  in  any
manner  whatever,  that  any  person  or  persons  were  to  go  for  the  said
Morgan,  or  that  they  had  gone  for  the  said  Morgan,  to  bring  him
to  Canandaigua,  until  he  was  informed  that  he  was  at  the  office  of
the  said  Chipman  on  the  said  examination.     And  this  deponent
further  says,  that  he  took  no  part,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  in
the  said  examination,  or  in  any  subsequent  proceedings  by  which
the  said  Morgan  was  committed,  as  this  deponent  has  been  inform-
ed, to  the  jail  of  Ontario  county,    And  this  deponent  further  says,
that  he  had  no  knowledge  or  intimation  of  any  design  or  intention
to  liberate  or  remove  the  said  Morgan  from  the  said  jail  in  any
manner  whatever,  until  the  evening  of  the  twelfth  day  of  Septem-
ber last,  when  Loton  Lawson  met  this  deponent  in  the  street  near
the  dwelling  of  this  deponent,  and  informed  this  deponent  that
Morgan  had  agreed  to  go  away  with  him*  and  that  be  was  about
to  be  discharged  from  the  jail,  and  would  voluntarily  leave  the
place  with  the  said  Lawson.    And  some  time  after  that,  in  tfie
course  of  the  same  evening,  the  said  tawson  called  oo  this  depo-
nent and  informed  him  that  he  had  been  to  the  jail*  and  that  Mr
2

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


XJy  APPENDIX.

Hall,  the  jailer,  was  not  at  home;  and  that  Mrs.  Hall  was  no!  at*
qoainted  with  him,  Lawson,  and  was  not  willing  to  let  Morgan
go  on  his  application;  that  he  bad  asked  her  if  she  would  dis-
charge him  provided  this  deponent  would  come  to  the  jail  and  say
it  was  proper;  and  that  she  said  on  that  condition  she  would  let
him  go.  And  the  said  Lawson  requested  this  deponent  to  goto  the
jail  for  tfett  purpose.  And  this  deponent  believing  the  statement  of
the  said  Lawson  to  be  true,  did  accompany  him  to  the  jail  for  the
purpose  above  expressed,  and  for  no  other,  and  at  the  jail  stated
to  Mrs.  HaH  that  in  his  opinion  there  would  be  no  harm  in  dis-
charging Morgan,  provided  the  debt  for  which  he  was  committed
was  paid.  And  this  deponent  further  says,  that  he  verily  believed
that  the  sard  Morgan  was  voluntarily  going  a  Way  wUh  Lawson.
And  this  deponent  had  no  knowledge  or  intimation  of  any  design  or
intention  on  the  part  of  any  one  to  use  any  force  or  violence  in
carrying  away  Morgan;  nor  should  this  deponent  have  gone  to  the
jail  aforesaid  except  on  the  solicitation  above  mentioned.  And  this
deponent  further  says,  that  when  Morgan  came  to  the  outer  door
of  the  jail,  and  had  descended  the  steps,  to  the  great  surprise  of
this  deponent,  he,  Morgan,  as  appeared  from  his  exclamations,
made  resistance,  and  was  taken  down  the  street  east  from  the  jail;
but  what  kind  of  resistance  he  made,  or  what  force  was  used  to
compel  him  to  go,  this  deponent  does  not  know,  for  he  was  not
near  enough  to  Morgan  at  anytime  after  he  came  out  Of  the  jail  to
see  or  know  what  was  done  to  him.  But  this  deponent  freely  and
without  any  reserve  acknowledges  that  he  was  near  enough  to  hear
the  noise,  and  might  have  interfered  to  endeavor  to  prevent  any
abuse  of  Morgan;  and  that  be  did  follow  at  a  distance  of  some  rods
behind  Morgan  and  the  persons  with  him*  until  the  carriage  came
up,  and  he,  Morgan,  and  the  persons  with  him,  got  into  the  car-
riage. And  this  deponent  then  verily  believed,  and  still  does  believe,
that  Morgan  get  into  the  carriage  without  any  force  whatever.  And
this  deponent  was  at  no  time  nearer  than  within  several  rods  of
Morgan  on  that  evening  before  he  got  into  the  carriage.  And  this
deponent  further  says,  that  this  omission  to  interfere  and  aswst
Morgan,  was  the  first  and  only  act  or  omission  of  this  deponent  fn
which  he  is  conscious  of  having  been  guilty  of  any  criminal  or  im-
jiroper  conduct,  or  participation  in  the  matters  contained  in  the
indictment  in  this  case.  And  this  deponent  says,  that  he  was  taken
wholly  by  surprise,  and  had  no  time  for  reflection;  that  he  did  not
expect,  and  had  no  reason  to  expect,  any  such  occurrence;  and  he
did  sincerely  and  deeply  regret  that  he  had  been  guilty  of  any  such
improper  conduct  as  soon  as  he  saw  what  had  been  done;  and  he
still  does  with  deep  and  unfeigned  regret  acknowledge  and  lament
*be  part  which  he  so  took  in  said  transaction.    And  this  deponent

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


1

APPENDIX.  Jtv

farther  says,  that  at  the  time  aforesaid  he  understood  and  believed
tbat  Morgan  was  voluntarily  going  away  with  Lawsen  to  soma
place  in  this  or  the  adjoining  county,  but  to  what  place  he  did  not
know,  for  the  purpose  of  being  oat  of  the  reach  and  influence  of
David  C.  Miller,  who,  as  this  deponeut  was  informed,  was  engag-
ed with  said  Morgan  in  publishing  a  book,  which,  as  this  deponent
considered,  would  be  calculated  to  bring  the  institutions  of  Masonry
.  into  disrepute,  by  professing  to  reveal  secrets  which  he  was  bound
by  solemn  obligations  not  to  disclose.  And  this  deponent  was  desi-
rous to  prevent  the  publication  of  such  book,  provided  Morgan  could
be  persuaded  to  keep  out  ef  the  way  of  said  Miller,  and  not  to  per-
mit iiimself  to  be  influenced  by  him  or  his  friends;  and  it  was  with
this  view,  aad  no  other,  that  this  deponent  was  desirous  to  have  Mor-
gan depart  withLawson.  A  nd  this  deponent  further  says,  that  be  has
never  seen  Morgan,  since  he  got  into,  the  carriage  as  aforesaid;  nor
dees  he  know  where  he  is  at  present;  nor  has  he  known  any  thing
of  him  since  the  time  he  so  got  into  the  carriage.  And  this  de-
ponent further  says,  that  in  going  down  the  street,  after  Mor-
gan and  those  with  him  had  passed  from  the  jail,  helmet  a  man
who  was,  as  he  supposed,  a  Mr.  Osborn,  who  asked  this  deponent
what  was  the  matter;  to  which  this  deponent  replied,  that  a  man
had  been  released  from  jail,  and  he  believed  they  had  another,  pre-
cept for  him,  or  words  to  that  effect.  And  this  deponent  also  picked
up  a  hat  which  he  found  in  the  street  there.;  And  this  deponent
further  says,  that  the  foregoing  is  a  true  and  impartial  account  of
all  the  participation  of  this  deponent  in  the  matters  contained  in
the  said  indictment,  and  of  the  motives  which  influenced  him  in
the  same,  according  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge  and  belief..

And  this  deponent  further  says,  that  an  action  of  assault  and
battery  and  false  imprisonment  has  been  commenced  in  the  Su-
preme Court  of  the  state  of  New  York,  in  the  name  of  William
Morgan,  plaintiff,  against  this  deponent.  And  this  deponent  ha*
been  arrested  on  a  capias  issued  in  the  same,  in  which  the  dama-
ges are  laid  at  ten  thousand  dollars,  and  on  which  this  deponent  is
held  to  bail  in  the  sum  of  fifteen  hundred  dollars,  by  order  of  judge
Birdsall.

And  this  deponent  further  says,  that  he  has  a  family  of  four  chil-
dren, and  is  in  moderate  circumstances  as  to  property;  and  the  situ-
ation of  his  pecuniary  affairs  is  such  as  to  require  his  constant  and
unremitted  attention  to  business  to  meet  the  engagements  and  re-
sponsibilities into  which  he  has  entered.

And  this  deponent  further  says,  that  he  never  knew,  nor  has  he
any  reason  to  believe,,  that  the  said  John  Sneldoo,  the  above  nam*
ed  defendant,  had  any  part  or  concern  whatever,  either  directly
or  indirectly,  in  any  of  "the  transactions  above  referred  to.  And  this


vn

dtpommt  baa  been  ^mBQmmtoA  with  ike  said  JolmSWdoato
several  years.    A**  iwther  t  b«  ctepe^t  says  at*.

Edwabb  $Awr*n.
£bom  ouT  mtarited  tfu  wthday  of  JswHorf,  A  D.  182?,
Igfere  me,  IUlm  Lmtib,  Clerk  of  Ontario  County.

flMorto&m**?  NO.  10.

0.  \  Loton  Lawson,  being  duly  sworn,  top  that

ae  law  aokiu>wledge  of  any  agency  or  participation  by  John  SbeU
doo  to  the  matter  or  acts  charged  in  the  foregoing  entitled  iote-
jpaat|  diet  be  sever  had  any  conversation  with  him  in  rektioa
thereto  before  said  Sheldon  was  arretted  on  said  charge;  that  be
doe*  not  knew,  or  believe,  that  said  John  Sheldon  was  at  Batwia
in  the  aaoath  of  September  last.  Lo/roa  Lawso*.

Sworn  tkittixthday  ofJaauaty,  1827,  before  me,

Jhcmsv  Chifman,  Commissioner,  fcc


NO.  11.

The  following  is  the  address  of  judge  Throop,  upon  his  sen*
tendng  the  prisonem:    .

You  have  been  convicted  of  a  daring,  wicked,  and  presumptuous
crime  each  an  one  as  we  did  hope  would  nut,  in  our  day,  bate
polluted  this  land.  Yon  have  robbed  the  state  of  a  citizen;  a  citi-
zen of  his  liberty;  a  wife  of  bcr  husband;  and  a  family  of  helpless
ohHdreo  of  thee*uieornmotsaadprotee*i^  And

whether  the  unfortunate  victim  of  your  rage  has  been  immoJated,
or  is  in  the  land  of  the  living,  we  are  ignorant,  and  even/off  <tonet
pretend  to  know.  It  is  admitted  in  this  case,  and  stand*  proved,
that  Morgan  was,  by  a  hypocritical  pretence  of  friendship  wd
charity— and  that,  too,  in  the  imposing  shape  of  pecuniary  relief  to
a  distressed  and  poverty  bound  prboner— beguiled  to  entrust  nitttielf
to  one  of  your  dumber,  who  seized  htm,  as  soon  as  a  con/federate
arrived  to  his  aid,  almost  at  his  prison  door,  and  hi  the  night  thee
harried  him  into  a  carriage,  and  forcibly  transported  him  out  of
the  state.  Bet,  great  as  are  the  individual  wrongs  which  you  have
inflicted  on  these  helpless  and  wretched  human  beings,  they  are  not
the  heaviest  part  of  your  crime.  You  have  disturbed  nV  public
peace;  you  have  dared  to  raise  your  parracidal  arms  agafost  the
laws  and  constitution  of  your  government;  you  have  assumed  a
power  which  is  incompatible  with  a  due  subordination  to  thelatfs
and  public  authority  of  your  state.  He  was  a  citizen,  under  the
protection  of  oar  laws;  you  Were  citizens,  and  owed  obedience  to
them.  What  hardihood  and  wickedness  then  prompted  you  to
«teai  your  hearts  against  the  daims  of  humanity,  and  to  dare  set  at
defiance  those  laws  to  nWch  you  owed  submission,  and  which  cap-
Digitized  byVjOOQlC


APPENDIX,  XYii

tott  safer  a  citizen's  liberty  to  be  restrained  with  impunity,  without
violating  its  duties  of  protection  assured  to  every  individual  under
the  social  compact?  Will  you  plead  ignorance?  Some  of  you,  at
least,  have  bad  the  advantage  of  education,  and  moral  instruction,
and  hold  respectable  and  responsible  stations  in  society;  and  all  of
you  have  learned  what  every  school  boy  in  this  happy  land,  this
free  and  intelligent  community,  knows:  that  the  unrestrained  enjoy-
ment of  fife,  liberty,  and  property,  is  guaranteed  to  every  indivi-
dual living  obediently  under  our  laws.  Our  constitution  shows  it;
and  the  declaration  of  our  independence  declares,  that  the  unmo-
lested enjoyment  of  liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness,  are  the
unalienable  rights  of  man.  So  sacred  do  we  hold  personal  liberty,
that  even  the  impressment  of  a  seaman  from  one  of  our  ships,  has
been  considered  a  sufficient  cause  for  national  war:  man  here  is
not  like  men  in  other  countries,  a  submissive  vassal,  but  every  citi-
zen is  a  sovereign;  and  I  am  happy  to  say  that  here  he  possesses
that  intelligence  and  high  sense  of  feeling  which  befits  his  elevated
station.  Our  laws  will  resent  such  attacks  as  you  have  made  upon
their  sovereignty.  Your  conduct  has  created,  in  the  people  of  this
section  of  the  country,  a  strong  feeling  of  virtuous  indignation.
The  court  rejoices  to  witness  it— to  be  made  sure  that  a  citizen's
person  cannot  be  invaded  by  lawless  violence,  without  its  being  felt
by  every  individual  in  the  community.  It  is  a  blessed  spirit,  and
we  do  hope  that  it  will  not  subside;  that  it  will  be  accompanied  by
a  ceaseless  vigilance  and  untiring  activity,  until  every  actor  in  this
profligate  conspiracy  is  bunted  from  his  hiding  place  and  brought
before  the  tribunals  of  the  country  to  receive  the  punishment  me-
rited by  his  crime.  We  think  that  we  see  in  this  public  sensation,
the  spirit  which  brought  us  into  existence  as  a  nation,  and  a  pledge
that  our  rights  and  liberties  are  destined  to  endure.  But  this  is  not
all;  your  offence  was  not  the  result  of  passion  suddenly  excited,
nor  the  deed  of  one  individual.  It  was  preconcerted,  deliberated
upon,  and  carried  into  effect,  by  the  dictates  of  the  secret  council*
and  conclave  of  many  actors.  It  takes  its  deepest  hues  of  guilt
from  a  conspiracy— a  crime  most  dreaded,  from  the  depravity  of
heart  it  evinces,  the  power  for  unlawful  purposes  which  it  combines,
and  from  its  ability  to  defy  the  power  of  the  law,  and  ultimate  dan-
ger to  the  public  peace.  Hence  it  is,  that  the  crime  is  considered
full,  when  the  wicked  purpose  is  proved  to  have  been  formed;  and
the  subsequent  carrying  into  effect  the  object  of  the  conspiracy,
does  not,  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  elevate  the  degree  of  the  crime.

The  legislature  have  net  seen  fit,  perhaps,  from  the  supposed
improbability  that  the  crime  would  be  attempted,  to  make  your  of-
fence a  felony.  Its  grade  and  punishment  has  been  left  to  the
provisions  of  the  common  law,  which  treats  it  as  a  misdemeanor,

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


rott  1PPENWX.

and  punishes  H  with  foe  and  iraprisnmwnt  in  bftvmmi  j&
The  court  are  of  opinion  thai  your  liberty  ought  totenade  to  an-
swer for  the  kuerty  of  Morgan:  his  person  was  restrain  by  force;
and  the  court,  in  me  exercise  of  its  lawful  powers,  oughuotto  be
more  tender  of /our  liberty,  than  you,  ia  the  pleotitade  olttwless
force,  were  of  *ie»

With  Kg*"!  to  you,  Lamson-~It  appeared,  in  proof;  tint  jou
was  an  adtve  ageut  in  this  affair,  you  vent  forward  and;  took  this
man  foot  the  jail,  and  delivered  him  over  to  those  who  stood  wk
\ag  u*h  a  carriage  to  receive  him.  Whether  you  accompab'wi
that  carriago  or  not,  is  not  in  proof.  Bui  in  your  excusatory  aft-
davit  you  say  nothing  about  it,  leaving  it  to  fair  inference  that  you
did  accompany  him  in  that  carriage.  There  is  nothing,  either  w
your  affidavit,  or  your  proof  to  the  court,  which  does  ajuch  to  miti-
gate your  offence,  except  so  far  as  they  show  that  your  poverty  \m
not  been  accompanied  by  idleness,  and  your  character  has  not  bees
stained  by  other  transgressions.  Under  all  the  circumstances  of
your  case,  the  court  feel  it  their  duty  to  sentence  you  to  twoyeaw
imprisonment  in  the  common  jail  of  this  county.

As  to  you,  CAeseoro— It  appears,  by  your  affidavit,  thatyw  «
not  lay  your  hands  upon  this  man,  to  carry  into  effect  the  conafV
racy;  and  it  appears  by  unquestionable  proof  that  you  didnotleayc
this  village  with  the  carriage.  But  you  admit,  at  least  tacitly,  in
your  affidavit,  that  you  were  one  of  the  conspirators;  and  your  lan-
guage to  the  jailer,  when  he  called  upon  you  the  next  day  to  ac-
count for  your  conduct,  and  warned  you  that  the  public  *ow*de-
mand  an  explanation,  showed  an  unsubdued  spirit.  &■**?:
satisfactorily  proved  to  as  that  you  are  a  thriving  mecl^^**
you  have  a  respectable  standing  in  the  community;  and  »Pto"r
period  of  this  transaction  yoar  character  for  industry,  honesty,  qm-
et  and  moral  deportment,  was  without  reproach.  Under  tbe  ofr
cumstances  of  your  case,  the  court  sentence,  you  to  one  year  im-
prisonment in  the  common  jail  of  this  county*

As  te  you,  Savyer— Your  affidavit,  which,  from  the  uniform
good  character  you  have  proved,  we  fully  believAtobe  {^•■JJJ
that  you  had  no  knowledge  of  this  conspiracy,  and  tooxnoacB;p
part  in  it*    But  your  accompanying  Lawson,  at  his  request, » '
jail,  to  inform  the  jailer's  wife  that  she  would  be  safe  in  re
the  amount  of  Morgan's  debt  from  Lawson  and  letW  *™J£
with  the  other  circumstances,  were  sufficient  to  have  co
you,  if  you  had  stood  trial;  and  you  acted  wisely  in  pleading  g  J-
You  state  that  you  had  no  idea  that  he  was  under  restraint,  onu
you  saw  him  enter  the  carriage,  a  short  distance  from  you,  *
you  did  not  suspect  that  he  was  forced  into  it,  until,  in  the  piogr»
of  your  walk,  yffl  picked  up  his  hat;  that  you  were  then  surprise

Digitized  by  LiOOQ  iC


AFffBNDIX*  XlX

and  confounded,  and  did  not  therefore  give  the  alarm;  but  you  spent
the  rest  of  the  evening  at  a  public  house,  and  gave  no  intimation  of
what  yo»  bad  seen.  This,  then,  was  your  oflence:— You  should
have  given  the  alarm;  you  should  raised  the  hue  and  cry,  and  en*
deavored  to  effect  a  rescue.  You,  however,  expressed  in  your  affi-
davit, and  have  always,  evinced,  a  feeling  of  remorse.  The  court,
therefore,  sentence  you  to  one  month  imprisonment  in  the  common
jail  of  this  county.

As  to  you,  Sheldon — Ton  denied  any  participation  in  the  con-
spiracy, and  put  yourself  upon  trial.  As  to  all  the  acts  proved
against  you,  there  was  mystery;  and  I  doubt  whether  you  were  the
man.  You  were  at  the  time  confined  on  the  limits  of  the  jail — you
were  most  strongly  identified  in  an  appearance  at  Batavia;  and  al-
though your  proof  of  an  alibi  was  not  complete,  there  was  much
in  it  to  shake  our  faith  in  the  fact  that  you  were  the  mysterious
stranger  whom  the  witness  saw,  Your  confessions  of  guilt,  bow-
ever,  were  clear  and  indisputable,  and  fully  warranted  the  verdict;
and  the  only  explanation  of  them  you  offered  was  the  ungracious
one,  that  your  confessions  were  the  vainglorious  boastings  of  a
drunkard  and  a  liar.  Taking  all  things  into  consideration,  the
court  have  adjudged  you  to  three  months  imprisonment  in  the  com*
mon  jail  of  the  county.

NO.  12.

To  the  Public. — On  the  11th  day  of  September,  William
Morgan,  a  native  of  Virginia,  who  had  for  about  three  years  past
resided  in  this  village,  was  under  pretext  of  a  justice's  warrant
hurried  from  his  home  and  family  and  carried  to  Canandaigua.
The  same  night  he  was  examined  on  the  charge  of  petit  larceny,
and  discharged  by  the  justice.  One  of  the  persons  who  took
him  away  Immediately  obtained  a  warrant  against  him,  in  a  oivil
suit,  for  an  alleged  debt  of  two  dollars,  on  which  he  was  com-
mitted to  the  jail  of  Ontario  county.  On  the  night  of  the  12th  of
September  he  was  released  by  a  person  pretending  to  be  his
friend;  but  directly  in  front  of  the  jail,  notwithstanding  his  cries
or  murder,  he  was  gagged  and  secured  and  put  into  a  carriage,  and
after  travelling  all  night,  he  was  left  (as  the  driver  of  the  carriage
says)  at  Hanford's  landing,  about  sunrise  on  the  13th;  since
which  he  has  not  been  heard  of.  His  distressed  wife  and  two
infant  children  are  left  dependent  on  charity  for  their  sustenance.
The  circumstances  of  the  transaction  have  given  rise  to  the  most
violent  fears  that  he  has  been  murdered.  It  is  however  hoped
by  his  wife  and  friends,  that  he  may  be  now  kept  concealed  and
imprisoned  in  Canada.    All  persons  who  are  willing  to  serve  Art)

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


XX  APrBNDIX-

cause  of  humanity,  and  assist  to  remove  the  distressing  appre-
hensions of  his  unfortunate  wife,  are  earnestly  requested  to  com-
municate to  one  of  the  committee  named  below,  directed  to  this
place,  any  facts  or  circumstances  which  have  come  to  their  know-
ledge, and  are  calculated  to  lead  to  the  discovery  of  his  present
situation,  or  the  particulars  of  his  fate,  if  be  has  been  murdered*  •
Batavia,  October  4,  1826.
T.  F.  Talbot,


D.  E.  Evans,
T.  Cary,
Wm.  Keyes,
Wm.  Davis,


Jon.  Lay,
T.  Fitch,
L.  D.  Prindle,

E.  SoUTHWORTH,

Jas.  P.  Smith,


N.  B.  It  is  hoped  that  printers  throughout  the  state,  in  Canada,  and  else-
where, will  give  the  above  a  few  insertions,  and  thus  serve  the  cause  of  jus*
tice  and  humanity.


State  of  New  York,      \      NO.  13.

Genesee  County,  88.  J  John  K.  Larkin,  of  the  town  of  By-
ron, in  said  county,  being  duly  sworn,  deposeth  and  saith,  that  ou
the  morning  that  William  Morgan  was  carried  off  from  the  village
of  Batavia,  he,  this  deponent,  went  to  Andrew  Adams  to  borrow
a  saddle;  before  the  said  deponent  had  got  far  off,  said  Adams
called  to  him  and  said  he  must  have  his  sadde,  for  he,  Adams,
was  notified  to  attend  a  special  meeting  of  the  Masons  at  Le  Roy,
at  10  o'clock,  same  morning — Adams  also  understood  to  be  a
Free  Mason.  And  this  deponent  asked  Dr.  Taylor  what  the
fuss  was;  to  which  Dr.  Taylor  replied,  they,  the  Masons,  had
orders  from  the  Grand  Lodge  to  notify  a  special  meeting.  And
this  deponent  further  saith  not.  John  K.  Larkin.

Subscribed  and  sworn  to  this  ninth  day  of  March,  1§27,  before
me,  Ajidrew.Dibble,  J.  P.

State  of  New  York,     *         (copy.)

Genesee  County,  ss.  J  John  Southworth  and  Luther  Wil-
der, of  the  town  of  Byron,  in  said  county,  being  duly  sworn,
depose  and  say,  that  some  time  after  the  abduction  of  William
Morgan  from  the  village  of  Batavia,  in  the  month  of  September
last,  they,  the  deponents,  with  others,  had  a  conversation  with
Dr.  Samuel  Toggart  of  said  town,  (who  is  reputed  and  understood
to  be  a  Free  Mason,)  about  the  carrying  off  said  Morgan;  in  which
Dr.  Taggart  said  there  had  been  a  rumpus  at  Batavia;  that  Mor-
gan was  taken  away;  and  Miller's  office  (meaning  as  the  depo-
nents understood,  the  printing  office  of  David  C.  Miller,  a  printer,
"•*  Batavia)  had  been  set  on  fire:   and  on  some  person  present

Digitized  by  VjC


AP*1«D1X.  XX&

**y?Dg  he  bad  not  heard  any  thing  of  the  affirir,  Dr.  Taggftrt  said
hehadknownUfor  aletogthoftime.  Dtf.  Tttggart  further  stated
that  he  should  not  tie  afraid  ;o  bet  a  thousand  dollars  that  Mor-
gan was  not  in  the  land  of  the  living:  that  he  had  taken  a  voyage
on  lake  Ontario  without  float  or  boat,  and  would  never  be  seen
again  by  any  human  being.    And  further  saith  not

John  Southworth,
Luther  Wilder.
Subscribed  and  sworn  to,  this  ninth  day  of  March,  1827,  before  me4

Andrew  Dibbxe,  J.  P«

State  of  New  York,     %       (copy.)

Genesee  County,  ss.  )  Elias  Wilder,  of  the  town  of  Elba,  ia
said  county,  being  duly  sworn,  deposeth  and  saith,  that  about  two
or  three  weeks  before  William  Morgan  was  carried  from  Bata-
via,  he,  this  deponent,  had  a  conversation  with  one  Cyrus  Grout,
(whom*  this  deponent  understands  and  verily  believes  to  be  a  Free
Mason,)  on  the  subject  of  said  Morgan's  attempt  to  publish  the
secrets  of  Masonry;  and  that  the  said  Cyrus  Grout  told  this  de*
ponent  that  the  Masons  had  sent  tome  Grand  Lodge  for  instruc-
tions, and  when  they  got  word  from  them,  (meaning  said  Grand
Lodge,  as  this  deponent  understood,)  there  would  be  something
done.  And  this  deponent  further  saith,  that  after  the  abduction
of  said  Morgan,  he,  this  deponent,  had  another  conversation  with
said  Cyrus  Grout,  and  others,  on  the  subject  of  what  had  become
of  said  Morgan;  and  Grout  said  he,  Morgan,  was  gone  a  fishing
on  the  Niagara  rivet  of  lake  Ontario.    And  farther  saith  not.

Elias  Wilder.
Subscribed  and  sworn  to,  this  ninih  day  of  March,  1827,  before  me,,

'  Andrew  Dibble,  J,  P.

V  ii  i  ■  ■

(xenesee  County,  I  NO.  14*

at*  f  Lyman  D.  Prindle,  being  duly  sworn,  saith,

that  on  the  4th  day  of  October  last  he  met  with  James  Ganson
at  Rochester,  who  beckoned  to  him  to  come  to  him,  Ganson;  he
entered  into  conversation  with  him,  this  deponent,  relating  to  the
disturbances  at  Batavia,  about  the  taking  away  of  William  Mor-
gan. This  deponent  expressed  his  opinion  that  he  could  have
rescued  Morgan  if  he  had  known  it  Ganson  said,  &Let  me  tell
you,  you  know  nothing  about  it  Suppose  there  had  been  carriages
ready  at  every  road  (leading  into  Caaaadaigua  ready  to  receive
Morgan,  in  case  he  had  been  pursued  he  could  have  been  shifted;
and  let  me  tell  you  it  was  the  case;  or  let  me  tell  you  it  is  likely
that  was  the  ease.  Let  me  tell  you,  if  you  could  hang,  draw,  apd

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


XXU  APFBND1X.

quarter,;  or  gibbet  the  Masons,  (them  thai  has  a  hand  in  it,)  it
would  not  fetch  Morgan  hack.  He  is  not  dead;  but  he  ia  put
where  he  will  stay  put  until  God  Almighty  calls  for  him/  And
further  saith  not  Lyman  D.  Pusdljs.

Sworn  the  eleventh  day  of  October,  1826,  before  me,

C.  CARPWTEa,3.?.


NO.  15.

LETTER  FROM  GEORGE  KETCHUM   TO  MRS.  MORGAN.

'Rochester,  September  14>  18K.

'.Vr».  Jtforgaa— Make  yourself  contented:  I  have  learned  your  husband
is  well,  but  cannot  learn  where  or  which  war  he  went:  when  I  can  learn,!
will  give  you  the  earliest  information.  Be  faithful  to  what  1  said  to  yon,  airf
you  will  find  friends:  keep  your  own  council,  and  communicate  to  me  through
the  postoffice.  When  I  write  to  you  it  will  he  handed  to  you  by  the  person
I  deliver  it  to — you  must  not  pass  a  word  with  him;  but  write  all  theinfonm-
tion  you  can  obtain  by  following  what  I  advised.  If  you  want  money,  write
to  me,  and  I  will  send  it.  Commit  this  to  the  flames  as  soon  as  yon  read  it

Tour  friend,        ■  — ■ — *

*You  have  the  name  on  a  small  paper  I  gave  you.'

N.  B.  A  line  was  run  through  the  postscript  as  above,  but  the  words  are
perfectly  legible.


Geheeee  County,  I  NO.  16.

S3.  }  Jqrn  Mann,  of  Buffalo,  blacksmith  by  trade,

cleposeth  aad  saith,  that  in  the  latter  part  of  August  last,  or  early
in  September,  and  very  shortly  before  he  heard  that  an  attempt
had  been  made  to  burn  the  printing  office  of  David  C.  Miller*  ut
Batavra*  he  was  riding  with  one  Richard  Howard,  of  Buflkio,*
book  binder,  who  then  worked  with  Mr.  Hashing;  aad  in  the
course  of  the  ride  he,  said  Howard,  asked  deponent  to  purchase
or  procure  a  keg  of  spirits  of  turpentine,  (as  he  thinks,)  saying  he
wanted  to  switch  Miller's  office  with  it,  avowing  at  the  same  time
his  object  to  be  to  destroy  the  building  for  the  purpose  of  sup-
pressing a  publication,  which  he  said  Morgan  and  Miller  were  a-
bout  making,  relating  to  Free  Masonry.  This  deponent  declined
to  assist  in  the  act,  intimating  to  him  (as  he  believes)  thathahad
no  money  to  do  it  with.  After  he  heard  that  such  attempt  had
been  made  on  the  office  of  Miller,  said  Howard  told  thjs*  depo-
nent that  he  had,  with  others  who  aided  and  assisted  him,  at-
tempted to  burn  said  office— that  he  had  called  at  a  store  west  of
Bataviaand  bought  a  broom  or  brush  to  spread  the  turpentine
with,  and  with  his  dark  lanthorn  had  set  fire  to  it;  that  the  fire
was  lighted  up,  and  he  ran  off;  that  some  person  ran  after  him,
and  he  supposed  was  about  to  overtake  him,  when  he  turned  and}
dashed  his  dark  lanthorn  into  his  face,  which  stopped  the  pursuit
That  upon  reflection  since  he  concluded  that  it  was  a  friend  whq

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


APPENDIX*  Xxiit

ran  after  him,  but  had  never  found  out  He  believed  then,  and
still  does  believe,  that  said  Howard's  object  was  to  implicate  him
in  the  transaction.  John  Mann.

Sworn  the  twenty-first  day  of  February,  1827,  before  me,

Wm.  H.  Tisdale,  First  Judge  of  Genesee.

State  ofKew  York,      \      NO.  17.

Genesee  County,  m.'  J  Thomas  G.  Grekn,  late  of  the  town  of
Henrietta,  in  the  county  of -Monroe,  and  state  aforesaid,  carpen-
ter, being  duly  sworn,  deposeth  and  saith,  that  during  the  summer
and  until  November  in  the  fall  of  the  year  1826,  this  deponent
resided  in  the  village  of  Buffalo.  Sometime  between  the  twen-
tieth day  of  August  and  the  seventh  day  of  September  last,  he,  this
deponent,  was  requested  fcy  Richard  Howard  of  Buffalo,  afore-
said, to  attend  the  lodge  of  Free  Masons  in  that  place;  but
Howard  did  not  state  to  this  deponent  for  what  purpose  the  lodge
was  requested  to  meet — said  there  would  be  but  a  few  there.  In
the  evening  this  deponent  started  to  go  to  the  lodge,  and  on  the
way  fell  in  with  said  Howard  and  went  to  the  lodge  with  him.
After  the  lodge  was  organized  and  had  proceeded  to  business,  it
being  then  understood  that  William  Morgan  and  David  C.  Miller,
of  Batavia,  were  about  to  publish  at  that  place  a  book  purporting
to  be  a  disclosure  of  Masonic  secrets.  This  deponent  was  in
the  chair  and  presided  for  the  time.  Howard  proposed  that
something  should  be  done  to  prevent  the  publication  of  said  book.
B.  Wilcox,  of  Buffalo,  who  was  present,  opposed  the  use  of  any
rash  or  violent  means  for  that  purpose.  Wilcox  wished  to  know
what  measures  it  was  intended  should  be  adopted.  Howard  pro-
posed that  he  and  one  other  person,  not  now  recollected  by  this
deponent,  should  be  a  committee  to  attend  to  the  business;  and
that  they  should  be  left  to  use  such  measures  as  they  should  think
proper,  so  that  the  book  should  be  suppressed*  Wilcox  proposed
that  they  should  be  restricted  from  the  use  of  any  violent  mea-
sures; and  it  was  so  concluded  at  that  time  that  no  rash  or  violent
measures  should  be  used  to  suppress  the  book.

A  short  time  afterwards  Howard  requested  that  mis  deponent
should  go  to  the  lodge  room  with  him  that  evening— mat  a  few
were  to  meet  there.  In  the  evening  this  deponent  started  to  go  to
the  lodge  room,  and  on  the  way  fell  in  with  Howard,  but  did  not
go  to  the  lodge  room.  They  walked  together  as  far  as  the  Frank-
lin House,  thence  to  the  terrace  back  of  the  village,  where  How-
ard and  this  deponent  had  the  following  conversation:— Howard
asked  this  deponent  if  he  was  willing  to  aid  him  in  suppressing
the  book  above  alluded  to.    This  deponent  said  he  was-wtUmg

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


xxiv    *  A*ptattf«.

to  assist  as  fir  as  was  reasonable  and  proper,  or  according  to
what  was  proposed  by  Wilcox.    Howard  said  he  wanted  a  decW
stve  answer  one  way  or  the  other— he  wanted  to  know  whether  he,
this  deponent,  was  for  them,  die  Masons,  as  this  deponent  sup-
posed, or  against  them.     This  deponent  said  he  was  for  mem,
and  was  willing  to  aid  in  suppressing  the  hook  if  it  were  to  pro-
mote the  interests  of  the  Masonic  institution;  and  asked  Howard
what  jrftn  he  intended  to  pursue*    Howard  said  they  intended  to
go  to  Batavia  and  get  the  papers;  which  mis  deponent  understood
to  mean  the  manuscript  papers  of  the  hook;  and  they  were  to  get
tbem  peaceably  if  they  could — if  not,  by  force;  and  if  they  could
not  get  mem  without,  they  would  take  Morgan  and  Miller,  and
carry  them  off  too.    This  deponent  finally  consented  to  join  the
party  and  go  to  Batavia,  for  the  purpose  of  getting  the  papers  as
aforesaid.    The  time  for  this  expedition  was  not  agreed  upon  at
this  time;  but  Howard  afterwards  informed  mis  deponent  that  it
was  arranged  to  be  in  Batavia  for  the  above  purpose  on  the  Fri-
day evening  following,  being  the  eighth  day  of  September  last.
This  deponent  does  not  recollect  now  many  were  going  from
Buffalo.    This  deponent  accordingly  got  into  the  stage  at  Buf-
falo on  Thursday  evening,  the  seventh  of  September,  for  Batavia,
and  arrived  in  Batavia  on  Friday  morning.    During  the  day  this
deponent  remained  in  and  about  Batavia,  but  conversed  with
none  on  the  subject  of  his  being  at  that  place,  except  James
B.  Towsley,  to  whom  he  communicated  the  plan  of  attacking
Miller's  office.     In  the  early  part  of  the  evening  this  deponent
was  informed  that  Towsley  had  told  George  W,  Harris  of  th<*
contemplated  attack  npon  Miller's  office;  and  that  this  deponent
was  the  author  of  this  information.    This  threw  many  obstruc-
tions in  the  way  of  the  expedition,  and  was  a  principal  cause  of
its  total  failure;  and  for  which  Howard  blamed  this  deponent.    In
the  evening  a  number  of  men  were  assembled  in  the  village  of
Batavia — how  many  this  deponent  cannot  say— there  might  have
been  forty  or  fifty,  and  perhaps  more;  but  they  were  mostly  stran-
gers to  this  deponent;  nor  did  he  know  where  they  came  from.
This  deponent  understood  from  some  of  them  that  it  was  expected
that  there  would  have  been  twenty-five  from  fort  George  and  its
vicinity;  but,  as  he  understood,  they  did  not  come*     Eight  or  ten
were  put  under  the  immediate  direction  of  this  deponent,  and  the
remainder  were  in  different  parts  of  the  village,  and  directed  by
different  persons.     The  whole  party  did  not  gc£  into  the  village
till  nearly  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  Saturday;  and  they  re-
mained about  two  hours  and  till  the  western  stage  came  in,  when
the  whole  company  dispersed  in  different  dwcfuwV   This  was

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


APPENDIX.  XXV

about  four  o'clock  in  the  morning.  During  the  time  they  were  in
the  village  no  attack  was  made  upon  Miller's  office.  It  was  under-
stood that  Miller  and  Morgan,  in  consequence  of  the  information
communicated  to  them  by  way  of  Towsley,  had  been  alarmed,  and
were  on  the  watch;  which  caused  so*iae  consultation  and  consequent
delay,  until  the  stage  came  in.  When  the  party  dispersed,  this  de-
ponent made  his  best  way  to  Buffalo— went  west  to  the  brick  tavern,
about  fourteen  miles;  thence  south  to  what  is  called  the  south  Pem-
broke road,  and  pursued  his  way  to  Monroe's  tavern,  about  five
miles  from  Buffalo.  At  this  place  this  deponent  saw  Col.  Joseph
Shaw,  who  spoke  to  this  deponent,  and  asked  him  what  he  was
doing  there?  This  deponent  then  took  Shaw  one  side  and  requested
that  be  would  not  call  him,  this  deponent,  by  name  again,  or  men-
tion to  any  one  that  he  had  seen  him  at  that  place;  for  he,  this  de-
ponent, had  been  in  a  bad  scrape,  and  wished  him  not  to  speak  of
it.  Shaw  asked  this  deponent  what  it  was;  but  this  deponent  re-
fused to  tell  him,  but  said  he  would  at  some  future  time,  and  that
Shaw  would  hear  about  it.  From  this  place  this  deponent  went  to
Buffalo,  where  he  arrived  the  same  evening.  And  this  deponent
further  saith,  that  he  has  never  been  personally  concerned  other-
wise than  above  stated,  in  any'mcasures  to  suppress  the  publication
of  the  book,  or  for  the  carrying  away  or  disposing  of  Morgan.  And
further  saith  not.  Thomas  G.  Green.

Subscribed  and  sioorn  to,  this  sixteenth  day  of  July,  L827?
before  me,  C.  Carpenter,

One  ofthe  Justices  of  the  Peace  in  and  for  Genesee  Co.


Niagara  County,  )  NO.   19.

ss.  $  David  Maxwell,  being  sworn,  saith  that  in

the  night  of  the  thirteenth  day  of  September  last  he  was  at
home  attending  to  the  keeping  of  the  turnpike  gate  on  the  Ridge
road,  so  called,  about  nineteen  miles  distant  from  Lewiston.
About  eleven  o'clock,  P.  M.  he  was  sitting  in  the  toll  house  and
heard  a  carriage  pass  through  the  gate  very  slowly;  and  upon
opening  the  door  he  saw  Jeremiah  Brown,  of  Ridgeway,  standing
directly  in  front  of  the  door,  and  saw  the  carriage  standing  in
the  road,  about  three  rods  west  of  the  house.  He,  Brown,  had
a  shilling  in  his  hand,  which  he  handed  to  him,  being  the  exact
amount  ofthe  toll  on  the  carriage.  Deponent  said,  'How  do  yoo
do,  captain  Brown?'  he  made  no  answer  and  turned  away  quickly
and  went  towards  the  carriage.  Deponent  called  to  him  quite
loudly,  and  said,  'What  is  the  matter?'  Brown  answered,  'Nothing/
Deponent  took  notice  of  the  carriage  because  he  had  never  known
Brown  to  have  any  thing  to  do  with  a  coach  before;  and  it  struck
Jjim  as  a  thing  out  of  the  usual  course.    He  thinks  the  curtains  were

Digitized  by  VjOOQI^


XXVI  APPENDIX.  '

closed.  Brown  joined  the  carriage;  bot  whether  he  got  into  it,  or
got  on  the  driver's  seat,  deponent  cannot  say.  The  carriage  drove
off  quickly,  when  deponent  entered  into  the  house:  himself  and  bis
wife  bad  a  conversation,  and  expressed  to  each  other  their  wonder
as  to  the  course  that  should  take  captain  Brown  west  wkh  a  coach
so  late  at  night.  He,  Brown,  is  a  farmer,  in  good  circumstances,
residing  about  thirteen  miles  east  of  the  gate,  and  well  known  to  de-
ponent and  his  wife,  and  passing  the  gate  frequently,  and  newer  to
the  knowledge  and  recollection  of  deponent  with  any  other  car-
riage than  a  common  two-horse  farm  wagon.  They  eventual
concluded  that  he  perhaps  had  gone  on  to  Lewiston  to  an  install*
tion.  The  next  morning  before  breakfast,  and  not  fepfrom  sun-
rise, the  same  carriage,  as  he  thinks,  arrived  at  the  gate,  driven  by
a  person  he  did  not  then  know.  The  middle  curtains  were  then  up,
and  deponent  distinctly  saw  the  said  Jeremiah  Brown  sitting  on  the
back  seat  of  the  carriage,  appearing  to  be  asleep  and  leaning  back;
he  saw  no  other  person  in  the  carriage.  Deponent  said  to  the  dri-
ver, 'How  far  did  you  go  out;  did  you  go  to  Lewiston?7  He  hesi-
tated a  little  and  said,  'No,  we  did  not  go  to  Lewiston.'  The  de-
ponent and  his  wife  then  observed  to  each  other,  that  they  had  not
gone  to  the  installation.  Deponent  took  notice  that  the  coach  was
a  chocolate  color;  it  appeared  to  be  a  back  carriage  that  had  been
much  used.  David  Maxwell,

Sioorn  the  twenty-second  day  of  March,  1&27,  before  me,

Daniel  Seaman,  J.  P.

Niagara  County,  >  NO.  20.

88  $  Paul  Mosher,  of  Lewiston,  in  said  county,

being  duly  sworn,  doth  on  his  oath  declare  that  previous  to  the
month  of  December  last  past  this  deponent  had  been  in  the  em-
ploy of  the  stage  proprietors  at  Lewiston,  (his  special  business  be-
ing to  regulate  and  superintend  the  arrival  and  departure  of  the
stages,)  for  more  than  one  year.  That  while  in  such  employ,  on  the
morning  of  the  fourteenth  day  of  September  last,  (about  fear  o'clock,
A.  M.,)  one  of  the  drivers  informed  him  that  he  had  just  returned  from
Youngstown.  This  driver  was  Corydon  Fox,  who  further  stated  that
Samuel  Barton,  one  of  the  stage  proprietors,  had  called  him  up  some-
time that  night,  and  directed  him  to  get  up  a  carriage  and  drive  it  to
Youngstown.  Fox  also  stated  that  Eli  Bruce,  (sheriff  of  Niagara
county,)  or  as  he  called  him,  Bruce,  came  with  Mr.  Barton,  when
he  was  called  up— that  after  the  getting  the  carriage  ready,  Bruce
told  nim  (Fox)  to  drive  round  to  a  back  street.  He  did  so,  and
found  a  carriage  in  the  street  without  horses — that  there  was  some-
thing curious  about  it;  he  thought  there  was  a  man  in  the  carriage
who  was  gagged  and  bound.  That  there  were  two  persons  whocawe

Digitized  byVjOOQlC

. AJ


APPENDIX.  XXVII

out  of  the  carriage  standing  in  the  street;  and  both,  with  Bruce,  got
into  the  one  he  was  driving.  Bruce  told  him  to  go  or  drive  en:  he
was  directed  to  stop  at  the  residence  of  Col.  King.  He  halted  ac-
cordingly in  front  of  the  door  or  house  at  Youngstown.  Bruce  got
out  and  called  up  King.  Bruce  and  King  both  got  into  the  car-
riage. That  he  heard  a  man  in  the  carriage  call  for  water,  and  Bruce
said  he  should  have  some;  he  also  thought  he  heard  King  say,  'Mor-
gan, are  you  hew.'  That  he  (Fox)  was  directed  to  drive  on;  and
when  about  half  way  from  Youngstown  to  the  fort,  Bruce  told  him
to  stop:  he  did  so,  and  they  all  got  out,  and  he  returned  to  Lewis-
ton,  Fox  has  more  recently  stated  that  it  was  near  the  grave  yard
where  he  stopped.  This  deponent  thinking  it  strange  that  passen-
gers should  leave  the  carriage  distant  from  a  house,  in  the  nigbt,was
led  to  inquire  of  a  Mason  present  (this  deponent  being  also  one)
the  reason  of  iu  he  answered  that  be  believed  it  was  Morgan.  The
deponent  inquired  of  another  Mason,  and  was  told  it  was  Morgan,
for  Bruce  told  him  so.  In  the  forenoon  of  the  same  day  (14th
September)  the  deponent  saw' Bruce  and  asked  why  he  was  so  im-
prudent as  to  have  th^e  driver  be  did,  for  he  was  not  a  Mason;  to
which  Bruce  replied  that  Sam  (meaning  Samuel  Barton)  was  more
in  the  fault  than  himself,  for  he  told  him  to  send  a  Mason.  The  de-
ponent then  asked  Bruce  if  he  actually  had  Morgan;  he  said  he  had.
And  the  conversation  ended  here.  Samuel  Barton  asked  this  depo-
nent the  same  day  if  Fox  mistrusted  Morgan  was  in  the  carriage:
the  deponent  told  him  that  Fox  was  telling  about  the  village  the
circumstances  of  his  having  driven  the  carriage,  &c;  which  led  this
deponent  to  believe  and  probably  would  others,  that  it  was  Mor-
gan Barton  then  told  the  deponent  to  go  and  say  to  Fox  that  if  he
knew  any  thing  to  keep  it  to  himself  and  hold  his  tongue,  or  be
would  discharge  him;  and  further  stated  that  there  must  be  another
man  smuggled  away  to  blind  that  transaction;  he  further  said  that
the  deponent  being  a  Mason,  was  the  man  who  ought  to  have  b#en
sent  as  driver,  but  being  called  up  in  the  night  in  a  hurry,  he  did
not  think  In  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day  said  Barton  came  to
the  deponent,  and  directed  him  to  borrow  a  saddle  and  bridle  and

Sut  them  on  a  horse  as  soon  as  possible,  and  hitch  it  by  another
orse  standing  under  the  shed,  pointing  that  way,  and  which  horse
appeared  as  if  he  had  been  rode  fast;  he  added  that  he  had  heard
from  the  fort,  and  must  send  a  man  down,  for  he  was  afraid  there
would  be  trouble  yet.  He  did  as  directed,  and  the  two  horses  were
rode  off  soon  after;  the  one  put  there  by  this  deponent,  by  a  Mason
resident  in  Lewiston;  the  other  by  a  person  not  known  to  this  depo-
nent. Next  morning  the  deponent  asked  said  Barton  if  there  was
any  trouble  at  the  fort;  to  which  he  replied,  <I  guess  it  is  still
enough.'    Fox,  the  driver  before  mentioned,  within,  say  three  or

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


f


XXV1U  APPENDIX.

four  weeks  afterwards,  joined  the  lodge  in  Lewiston,  at  a  special
meetiog  called  for  tbat  purpose;  and  on  being  solicited  so  to  do  by
a  Mason  who  was  sent  to  Fox  to  induce  him  to  join,  and  who,  pur-
suant to  instructions,  told  Fox  that  if  he  wanted  funds,  meaning  for
bis  admittance,  he  should  have  them.  This  deponent  further  saitu,
th^t  in  relating  the  above  facts  and  circumstances  which  he  heard
from  several  individuals  at  different  tiroes  and  places,  he  has  not
pretended  to  give  the  exact  words  in  all  cases;  but  verily  believes
the  substance  is  truly  and  correctly  set  forth.  And  further  saith  not

.     Paul  Mosher.
Subscribed  and  sworn  to,  at  Youngstaum,  Niagara  County,  tk
iwenty-second  of  March,  1827,  before  me,  A.  G  Hinman,  J.  P.

State  of  New  York,       >         NO.  21.

Niagara  County,  ss.  $  Josiaii  Tryon,  of  said  couuty,  being
swon<,  saith,  that  on  the  evening  of  the  fourteenth  of  September
last  past  he  attended  a  dance  or  ball  at  Lewiston,  there  having  been
on  that  day  a  considerable  collection  of  ladies  and  genjlemen  at
Lewiston  on  the  occasion,  of  what  was  called  the  installation  of  a
chapter,(so  called.)  That  at  the  same  ball  were  present  a  Mr. Ed-
win Scrantom,  a  friend  of  deponent's,  who  wished  to  Wave
town  in  time  to  get  on  board  of  the  steam  boat  for  York,  U  C:
and  to  induce  him  to  remain  at  the  ball,  this  deponent  had  promis-
ed to  take  him  there:  as  soon  as  the  ball  closed,  he  would  start  right
off  with  him  to*Youngstown,  that  he  might  be  in  time  for  the  boat.
Accordingly  he  started  from  Lewiston  with  his  friend  in  a  one  hone
wagon.  That  the  night  was  clear,  and  the  moon  was  remarkably
bright.  That  about  two  miles  from  Lewiston,  he  met  five  men  walk-
ing towards  Lewiston,  of  whom  he  then  distinctly  recognized  and
believed  to  be  Timothy  Shaw,Samuel  Chubbuck,  and  GeneralPark-
hurst  Whitney,  who  keeps  what  it  is  called  the  Eagle  Hotel,  at  the
Falls  of  Niagara;  and  he  has  since  been  informed,  and  has  ascer-
tained to  his  own  perfect  satisfaction,  that  the  other  two  were  James
L.  Barton,  of  Black  Rock,  and  Noah  Beach,  of  Lewiston.  It  was,
as  he  thinks,  between  the  hours  of  three  and  four  of  the  clock,  in
the  morning  of  the  fifteenth  of  said  September.  The  deponent
drew  up  his  horse,  and  said  to  one  of  them  who  were  a  little  behind
the  rest,  *  What  are  you  here  this  time  of  night  forV—ot  words  to
that  purport.  He  answered,  as  I  think,  iWe  have  had  a  set  down
at  Youngstown'—md  passed  on.  That  this  deponent  mentioned
the  circumstances  to  others  in  the  village  of  Lewiston,  and  the  story
soon  enlarged  by  report,  so  as  to  implicate  the  above  named  men
in  the  extraordinary  disappearance  of  William  Morgan.  And
three  of  them  have  had  conversation  with  him  in  relation  thereto;
and  one  of  them  requested  him  to  correct  erroneous  reports  of  what

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


APPENDIX.  XXh

he  had  said.    But  in  none  of  those  conversations  did  either  of  them  ,
attempt  to  say  where  they  had  spent  the  night,  or  how  it  happened  \       \
that  they  were  on  their  way  to  Lewiston  en  foot  «t  thai  time  of  the  \

morning.     He  further  says,  that  all  of  the  said  men  are  men  hav-  \

ing  families,  and  following  business  with  ordinary  regularity,  and    <        \
of  ordinary  good  habits.     He  further  says,  that  according  to  his  re* '  \

collection  and  belief,  none  of  the  above  named  persons  have  given
to  him  any  explanation  of  the  above  circumstances.

JOSIAH  TRYON.

Sworn  the  twenty-second  day  of  March,  1 827,  6«/#re  me,

A.  G.  HlNMAN,  J.   P.


Niagara  County,   >  NO  23.

89.  }  I,  A.  G.  Hinman,  one  of  the  justices  of  the

peace,  of  said  county,  do  hereby  certify,  that  on  the  29th  of  last
December,  compliant  was  made  on  oath  before  me,  setting  forth  in
substance  that  there  was  full  cause  to  suspect  that  Eli  Bruce,  sheriff
of  the  said  county,  had,  on  or  about  the  thirteenth  or  fourteenth  of
last  September,  forcibly  and  without  due  process  of  law,  held  Wil-
liam Morgan  in  duress  for  some  time,  within  the  said  county,  and
had  secretly  and  illegally  conveyed  him  thence  to  parts  unknown.
Whereupon  I  issued  a  warrant  against  the  said  Eli  Bruce,  who  was
brought  before  me,  for  examination,  on  the  thirtieth  of  said  Decem-
ber \nd  I  do  further  certify  that  the  information  taken  on  such
examination  was  substantially  as  follows,  to  wit,  that  the  said  Eli
Bruce  cam*  to  Mollineux's  tavern,  about  twelve  miles  east  of  Lew-
iston, on  the  Ridge  road,  on  the  night  of  the  thirteenth  of  said  Sep-
tember, at  about  ten  or  eleven  o'clock,  in  a  back  or  coach,  the  cur-
tains of  which  were  closed  quite  around  He  Went  in  and  inq  ed
for  the  landlord,  who  was  in  bed;  was  shown  into  his  room;  after-
wards called  up  the  landlord's  son,  who  was  also  in  bed,  and  re-
quested him  to  put  a  pair  of  horses  before  his  carriage,  to  r-U*re
those  that  came  with  it,  to  go  as  far  as  Lewiston;  which  was  done.
The  son  asked  if  he  should  drive;  Bruce  replied  he  had  a  driver
who  whs  a  careful  man,  pointing  to  a  man  whom  the  witnesss  knew
to  be  Jeremiah  Brown.  Bruce  was  also  asked  by  a  hired  girl,  what
the  matter  was;  he  answered,  you  cannot  know  at  present.  He
soon  left  there  with  the  carriage,  driven  by  Brown  towards  Lewis-
ton.  At  Lewiston  the  same  night,  but  the  hour  not  ascertained,
the  said  Bruce  went  with  Samuel  Barton,  a  stage  proprietor,  to  the
stage  office  to  ascertain  what  driver  could  be  had  to  go  to  Youngs-
town.  On  being  informed  by  Joshua  Fairbanks  who  slept  there,  «hat
none  hut  Fox  was  there,  Fox  waa  called  up  and  directed  to  harness
a  carriage,  whith  he  did,  and  drove  up  to  the  Frontier  House,  where
said  Bruce  got  in,  and  ordered  the  carriage  driven  to  a  back  street.
3*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


XX*  APPENDIX.

On  arriving  there,  in  front  of  said  Barton's  dwelling  house,  a  car-
riage was  found  in  the  street  without  any  horses  attached  to  it,  and
two  men,  either  one  or  both  pf  whom  were  in  it,  got  out,  and  went
into  the  other:  one  was  helped  in  by  the  arm— nothiag  was  said.
When,  together  with  said  Bruce,  being  seated,  the  driver  las  order-
ed by  Bruce  to  drive  to  Youngstown.  Witness  heard  no  Malver-
sation from  the  passengers  that  be  could  distinguish.  On  arriving
at  Ytwjugstown,  Bruce  directed  him  to  stop  in  front  oi  Col.  King's
'  house  in  Youngstown.  He  did  so,  and  Bruce  got  out  and  called  up
Col.  King;  went  in,  and  in  a  lew  minutes,  say  fifteen,  came  out, to-
gether with  King,  and  both  got  into  the  carriage,  when  Bruce  t#ld
the  driver  to  go  on.  W  bile  at  this  house  the  driver  heard  a  strange
kind  of  sound  frpm  one  of  the  persons  in  the  carriage,  which  he
thought  was  a  call  for  walei,  though  he  could  not  say  that  the  arti-
culation was  sufficiently  distinct  to  be  understood;  Bruce  answered
he  should  have  some  presently — none  was,  however,  given  or
brought.  The  carriage  proceeded  to  within  a  short  distance  of
Fort  Niagara,  near  the  grave  yard,  when  the  driver  was, directed  to
stop,  and  the  persons  within,  four  in  number,  he  thought,got out-
one  was  assisted  as  before — and  they  proceeded  off  from  the  side
of  the  carriage,  closely  together,  towards  the  lort.  Bruce  told  the
driver  to  go  back;  and  he  immediately  returned.  The  nejt  morn-
:ng  (the  fourteenth)  the  said  Eli  Bruce  being  at  Lewiston,  be  was
asked  it  he  went  to  Youngstown  the  night  before;  he  said  he  did.
He  was  then  nsked  if  he  took  Morgan  down;  he  replied  he  did,  and
observed  that  Sam.,  meaning  said  Barton,  was  very  imprudent  in
sending  Fox — that  he  told  him  his  business,  and  that  lie  had  not
ought  to  have  s>  nt  any  hut  a  Mason.

There  were  rive  witnesses  sworn,  whose  testimony  is  included  ia
the  above  statement.  iNo  attempt  was  made  to  impeach  either  of
them,  nor  was  there  any  evidence  offered  on  the  part  of  Mr  Bruce.

As-  there  was  no  proof  adduced  on  this  examination,  that  a  Wil-
liam Morgan  had  been  forcibly  seized  and  carried  away  from  Ca*
nandaigua,  or  elsewhere;  nor  that  force,  violence,  or  restraint,  had
been  exercised  upon  the  person  of  any  individual  in  the  carriage,
the  said  Bruce  was  discharged.

Given  under  my  hand,  at  Youngstown,  in  the  said  county,  tk
twenfy-frstday  of  March,  182?Y  A.  (?.  HiJum^S*  p-

State  of  Keto  York,  }  NCfc  24.
ityfayorp,  Countess*  £  YYijuhaj*  Tjsrw,  of  $agwa,  pmvince
of  Upper  Caeada,  druggfe^  being,  dnjj  sworn*  <M»  ***«£  and
**y*  that  in  tfe.moptfi  of  September ^.Octet^st  that  deponent
was,  io  ill  health  aj^cortfrtcjdl  t&  Ms  4n*lttft  fttMMrt-to*
somelitpq.  ThatabrntfthMm^n^^

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


APPEtfDIX.  XXXi

him  that  a  man  had  engaged,  in  some  part  of  the  state  of  New
York,  in  publishing  a  book  concerning  Masonry,  or  disclosing  the
secrets  of  Masonry,  or  words  to  that  effect.  This  deponent  does  not
recollect  the  name  mentioned  at  this  time  by  his  informant,  but  has
now  no  doubt  that  it  related  to  the  abduction  of  William  Morgan,
fhis  deponent  was  further  informed  at  the  same  time,  by  the  same
person,  that  the  person  so  taken  and  carried  away  had  been  killed,
and  sunk  in  lake  Ontario.  This  deponent's  informant  was  of  the
fraternity  of  Free  Masons,  as  is  also  this  deponent,  which  this  de-
pooent  believes  was  the  reason  why  this  story  was  related  to  him.
That  this  deponent  at  the  time  disbelieved  the  facts  related,  and  told
his  informant  that  it  could  not  be  possible,  but  was  assured  it  was
a  fact,  and  said  be  (the  informant)  would  relate  more  about  it  at
another  time.  Some  few  weeks  afterwards,  when  this  deoonent
was  recovering,  the  same  informant  added,  or  further  related,  that
Morgan  had  been  brought  to  Fort  Niagara,  or  to  the  other  side  of
the  river  opposite  this,  (meaning  the  town  of  Niagara,)  and  was
there  put  to  death.  This  deponent  again  expressed  doubts  of  the
truth  of  the  relation,  and  expressed  himself  in  warm  terms  of  dis-
approbation, denying  the  right  of  the  society  of  Masons,  or  any
members  of  the  fraternity,  to  commit  such  a  deed.  The  relator
was,  however,  oi  a  different  opinion,  and  said  it  was  right.

Some  time  in  the  month  of  December  last,  this  deponent  was
furthei  informed  by  another  member  of  the  society  aforesaid,  who
also  resides  in  the  same  town  with  this  deponent,  that  Morgan  had
been  taken  at  Batavia,  was  brought  to  Fort  Niagara,  and  from
thence  to  the  town  of  Niagara,  and  was  taken  before  another  Ma-
son of  the  same  plare — that  the  Mason?  in  Canada  refused  to  re-
ceive,Morgan,or  to  have  any  thing  to  do  with  him — and  that  Morgan
was  returned  to  Fort  Niagara — that  after.  Morgan  was  tried  by  some
sort  of  a  council,  or  tribunal,  which  sentenced  him  to  death — that
be  was  executed  by  having  his  throat  rut;  his  tongue  was  torn  out,
and  buried  in  the  sands  of  the  lakes  or  lake;  and  that  his  body  was
also  sunk  in  the  lake  or  deep  water  opposite,  off,  from,  or  near  the
fort;  which  is  as  near  the  substance  of  what  was  said  as  this  depo-
nent can  recollect.  The  relator  further  added  that  Morgan  did  not
know  where  he  was— that  he  was  blinded — that  the  boat  was  rowed
about  the  river  for  the  purpose  of  deranging  the  man— -that  while
at  Fort  Niagara,  Morgan  asked  permission  of  a  Bible,  and  a  short
time  in  the  light,  in  order  that  he  might  peruse  it.  This  deponent
asked  what  was  the  result  of  the  request;  to  which  the  relator  added,
that  he  was  soon  despatched.  This  deponent  asked  how  those  who
had  been  engaged  in  the  afiw  felt  about  it;  the  relator  observed
that  they  felt,  bad*  and  some  had  expressed  so  much  contrition  as  to
$ay;thatr  thty  wouWAtvegivtnafttW'  were  worth  if  the  affair  brJ

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


XXJU1  APPENDIX.

not  happened,  or  if  Morgan  could  be  produced  again.   And  this
deponent  farther  saith,  that  the  relator  added  that  one  of  the  per-
sons concerned  was  s\tk  and  delirious  in  consequence  of  it,  and
had  to  have  watches,  according  to  the  best  belief  of  this  deponent.
Further,  the  relator  stated  that  those  engaged  at  Canandaigaa,tnd
there  indicted,  were  to  be  kept  harmless  by  the  General  Gran<J
Chapter  of  the  state  of  New  York;  and  that  all  expense  requisite  to
pay  any  fines  that  might  be  imposed  was  to  be  defrayed  by  the
said  chapter;  and  that  the  actors  in  the  affair  of  the  abduction  of
Morgas  so  acted  in  obedience  to  the  order,  (or  by  the  consent  or
knowledge,)  or  directions,  of  the  said  Grand  Chapter.    The  relator
also  stated  that  it  was  the  intention  of  those  who  had  Morgan  to
have  taken  Miller  also.     This  deponent,  at  the  time  he  heard  the
last  relation,  did  believe  the  substantial  part  of  it,  and  still  does  most
firmly  believe  it.

This  deponent  farther  saith,  that  another  member  of  the  Masonic
society  also  related  the  same  facts  substantially,  and  said  be  dewed
his  information  from  a  gentleman  of  Buffalo,  (a  Mason,)  now  de-
ceased. This  latter  part  if  intended  to  be  restricted  to  the  fact  of
the  death  of  Morgan,  and  the  place  of  depositing  the  body.  This
deponent  further  saith,  that  the  foregoing  was  prepared  and  signed
(though  not  sworn  to)  some  time  since.  Subsequent  to  that  period
further  information  has  been  received  by  this  deponent,  which  has  in-
duced him  to  believe  that  the  manner  of  putting  Morgan  to  death  was
different  from  the  relation  of  Stocking.  William  Terkt.

Sworn  before  me,  at  Niagara,  Upper  Canada,  this  twentieth  day
of  March,  1827,  J.  B.  Clench,  J.  P.

Genesee  County,  I  NO  25.

at.  (  John  Mann,  being  sworn,  deposeth  and  saith,

that  about  the  time  that  he  heard  and  understood  that  William
Morgan  had  been  taken  away  from  Batavia,  he  had  a  conversation
with  Richard  Howard,  of  Buffalo,  bookbinder,  (who  works,  or  did
work,  with  Mr.  H^skins,)  who  then  informed  this  deponent  that
Morgan  was  confined  in  Fort  Niagara.  And  he  believes,  in  the
same  conversation  with  said  Howard,  he  informed  him  that  fire
persons  had  drawn  lots  to  see  who  it  would  fall  upon  to  execute
the  laws  of  Masonry  opon  Morgan:  that  the  lot  fell  upon  him  #*
seemed  much  distressed,  and  clasped  his  hands  together  and  ex-
claimed, My  God!  must  it  be  done!  or  some  words  to  that  effect.
He  appeared  to  be  under  an  impression  that  his  Masonic  obliga-
tions placed  him  under  a  necessity  of  submitting  to  do  an  act  which
seemed  abhorrent  to  his  natural  feelings  In  subsequent  conversa-
tions said  Howard  gave  this  deponent  to  understand  that  the  exe-
cution bad  been  performed,  but  said  nothing  mote  as  to  his  own

Digitized  by  LiOOQ  IC  '


APPENDIX.  XXXiil

agency  in  the  transaction.  This  deponent  further  saith,  that  until
within  a  few  days  past  his  mind  has  been  very  unsettled  as  to  the
course  which  he  ou,ght  to  have  pursued  in  relation  to  the  communi-
cations so  made  to  him;  and  he  has  been  operated  upon  in  some
degree  by  fears  for  his  personal  safety,  and  doubts  as  to  the  extent
of  his  obligations  to  observe  secrecy  in  respect  to  the  statements  so
communicated  to  him.  That  a  few  days  ago  he  held  a  consultation
with  a  friend,  as  to  the  general  duties  of  a  person  so  situated;  and
he  at  last  determined  to  communicate  the  facts  to  some  person  who
might  feel  bound  to  act  upon  them  as  public  good  should  seem  to
require.  John  Mann.

Sworn,  the  twenty -first  day  of February ,  1827>  before  me,
William  H.  Tisdale,  First  Judge  of  Genesee.

Niagara  County,  )  NO.  26.

ss  $  Edward  Giddins,  of  the  county  aforesaid,

being  duly  sworn,  saith,  that  he  has  resided  at  Fort  Niagara  from
the  year  eighteen  hundred  and  fifteen  till  the  present  time,  with  the
exception  of  about  eight  months.  That  fr^m  the  year  sixteen  to  the
year  twenty ,  this  deponent  had  charge  of  the  building,  called  the
magazine,  the  greater  part  of  the  time.  That  when  the  United  States'
troops  left  the  fort  in  the  month  of  May  last,  this  deponent  again
took  charge  of  the  building,  and  continued  so  in  charge  until  about
the  first  of  August,  when  he  gave  up  the  keys  to  Col.  E.  Jewett,
who  yet  retains  the  care  of  it.  This  building  stands  on  the  southerly
side  of  the  fort — is  built  of  stone,  about  the  height  of  a  common  two
story  building,  and  measures  about  fifty  by  thirty  feet  on  the  ground
-^is  arched  over — the  side  and  end  walls  are  about  four  feet  thick —
the  wall  over  the  top  is  about  eight  feet  thick,  and  is  considered  bomb
proof— covered  with  a  shingle  roof.  There  is  but  one  door,  around
which  there  is  a  small  entry,  to  which  there  is  a  door  also.  There
are  no  windows  or  apertures  in  the  walls,  except  a  small  ventilator
for  the  admission  of  air,  and  one  small  window  in  each  end  about
ten  feet  from  the  ground— they  are  usually  kept  dosed,  and  locked
on  the  outside  with  a  padlock — these  shutters  are  made  of  plank,
covered  with  sheet  iron — the  floor  is  laid  with  plank,  pinned  to  the  '
sleepers  with  wood  pins.  That  at  the  time  certain  persons  were
at  the  fort  in  January  last,  Col.  Jewett  being  unwell,  this  deponent
was  requested  to  visit  the  magazine,  which  they  wished  to  examine.
That  on  entering  and  examining  the  said  building,  one  of  the  floor
planks,  supposed  to  be  one  and  an  half  inches  thick,  was  observed
by  some  of  the  committee  to  have  been  newly  broken,  directly  on
one  of  the  sleepers,  and  about  six  feet  from  one  end;  and  this  de-
ponent was  inquired  of  by  some  of  the  committee  how  that  plank
became  broken.  This  deponent  told  them  he  did  not  know:  far-
Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


XJFJUV  APPENDIX.

ther,  be  has  dmt  bo  recollection  of  its  being  broken  when  he  gave
op  the  keys,  and  believes  k  was  net.  This  deponent  has  also  been
inquired  of  whether  a  loose  door,  which  the  committee  saw  in  the
building,  tieJonged  there,  or  was  there,  when  he  gave  up  possession;
to  which  this  deponent  answered  that  it  did  not  belong  to  the  build-
ing, nor  did  he  recollect  of  its  being  there  at  the  time  he  surrendered
the  key.  farther,  whether  it  has  be**n  usual  to  admit  any  liquid
within  the  building;  to  which  this  deponent  answered  that  he  never
admitted  any  while  he  bad  charge,  nor  was  it  usual,  so  far  as  his
knowledge  extends;  and  he  should  suppose  it  one  of  the  last  thing*
to  be  admitted  to  such  a  place  The  chief  aim  ought  to  be  to  keep
it  dry;  the  utmost  care  has  always  been  taken,  and  the  key  of  the
building  only  intrusted  with  particular  persons.  On  entering  the
building  it  has  been  usual  to  remove  or  leave  the  shoes  at  the  door,
or  else  draw  on  woollen  sacks  over  them.  There  is,  nearly  in  the
middle  of  the  floor,  frame  pieces  upon  which  to  lay  fixed  ammu-
nition. The  usual  arrangement  of  the  boxes,  kegs,  &c.  contain  ng
powder,  is  to  place  them  round  the  building  on  the  floor,  so  far  dis-
tant from  the  wall  as  to  prevent  them  contracting  dampness,  say
from  one  to  two  feet,  unless  empty,  when  they  are  set  next  the  wall.

Edwa&d  Giddim.
Subscribed  and  tworn  to,  at  Porter,  in  the  county  ofNtagM,
fie  nineteenth  day  of  March,  1 827,  before  me,    A .  G.  Hinman.

NO.  27.

NUgara,  U.  C.  March  3, 1827.

Gentlemen — On  my  return  from  my  parliamentary  duties  at  York,  I  ob-
served in  the  Albany  Observer  a  letter  dated  'Lewiston,  N.  Y.  January  12,
1827/  in  which  I  perceived  some  indirect. allusions  to  the  name  of  W*****,
a  member  of  Parliament,'  to  whose  house,  it  is  stated,  a  WiHiam  Morgan,  of
Batavia,  was  brought,  'blindfolded  and  tied/

Now,  gentlemen,  I  beg  leave  to  declare  through  the  medium  of  your  pa-
per, to  your  readers  and  to  the  world  at  large,  that  no  such  occurrence  ever
took  place— that  on  the  night  of  the  14th  of  September,  1826,  nor  at  any
other  time,  was  Morgan  in  my  house  to  my  knowledge.  And  I  further  «•
clare  the  said  Morgan  is  to  me  an  utter  stranger,  except  as  to  report;  and  1
never  exchanged  a  word  with  the  man  in  my  life,  and  would  not  know  him
from  the  greatest  stranger  in  existence.  *

In  justice  to  my  own  reputation,  as  well  as  to' that  of  my  family  and  friends,
I  hereby  most  solemnly  assert  the  whole  statement  to  be  utterly  false  and
unfounded.  And  further,  that  I  never  conversed  with  the  brother  of  ******
(Stocking,)  of  Buffalo,  on  the  affair  of  Morgan,  as  to  his  abduction,  tiU  after
the  appearance  of  the  letters  alluded  to  m  that  paper,  when  I  called  on  ban
for  that  purpose;  and  he  then  most  explicitly  declared  that  be  had  never
given  me  as  his  author  to  Dr.  ******,  and  admitted  that  I  never  had  the
slightest  conversation  with  him  on  the  subject  previous.  I  could  add  to  tm
foregoing  declarations  and  assertions,  my  own  affidavit,  if  necessary,  as  well
as  that  of  my  family,  consisting  of  three  persons,  and  a  worthy  and  respecta-
ble gentferaan  and  lady  who  siept  that  night  at  my  house.  I  cannot  reftaw
irom  expressing  my  belief;  before  I  close  this  letter,  that  tttaliw,  ewy,  aiw

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


APPENDIX.  XXJfcV

foul  revenge,  are  at  the  bottom  of  the  heart  of  him,  whoever  he  may  be,  that
would  thus  villainously  attempt  to  assassinate  the  character  of  any  man  in
society.  I  mean  to  cast  no  reflection  on  the  characters  of  the  gentlemen
who  termed  the  committee  of  vigilance,  but  on  him  to-  whom  it  justly  be-
longs. Jte&  from  declarations  made  even  on  the  bed  of  death,  that  he,  the
DFm  ******,  would  be  revenged  of  me,  for  agisting  to  destroy  a  den  of  rogues  and
comer*,  with  tohom  he  was  implicated,  has  been  his  only  inducement  thus  to  do.

As,  gentlemen,  I  am  the  only  member  of  Parliament  residing  in  Niagara
whose  name  commences  with  the  letter  M.,  I  have  come  to#  the  conclusion
that  I  am  particularly  referred  to;  and  beg  you  will  insert  in  your  paper  this
refutation  of  the  infamous  and  fpul  charges.

I  am,  with  respect,  your  obedient  servant,

Edw.  JVPBride,  M.  P.  P.


NO.  29.

First  Proclamation  of  the  Governor.
De  Witt  Clinton,  Governor  of  the  state  of  New  York,  to  state  officers
and  ministers  of  justice  in  the  said  state,  and  particularly  in
Lt*  S.       the  county  of  Genesee  and  the  neighboring  counties:  Greeting.
Whereas  information,  under  oath,  has  been  transmitted  to  me
by  Theodore  F.Talbot,  Esq.  and  other  citizens  of  the  county  of  Genesee,  acting
as  a  committee  in  behalf  of  the  people  of  that  county,  representing  that  divers
outrages  and  oppressions  have  been  committed  on  the  rights  of  persons  re-
siding in  the  village  of  Batavia;  and  that  disturbances  nave  ensued  which
are  injurious,  and  may  prove  destructive  to  peace  and  good  order  in  that

rirter:— Now,  therefore,  I  enjoin  it  upon  you,  and  each  of  you,  to  pursue
proper  and  efficient  measures  for  the  apprehension  of  the  offenders,  and
the  prevention  of  future  outrages.  And  I  do  also  request  the  good  citizens
of  this  state  to  co-operate  with  the  civil  authorities  in  maintaining  the  ascen-
dancy of  law  and  good  order.

Second  Proclamation  of  the  Governor.
Whereas,  it  has  been  represented  to  me  that  William  Morgan,  who  was
unlawfully  conveyed  from  the  jail  of  the  county  of  Ontario  sometime  in  the
month  of  September  last,  has  not  been  found;  and  that  it  might  have  a  bene-
tical  effect  in  restoring  him  to  his  family,  and  in  promoting  the  detection  and
punishment  of  the  perpetrators  of  this  violent  outrage,  if,  in  addition  to  the
proceedings  heretofore  adopted  by  me,  a  proclamation  Was  issued  offering  a
specific  reward  for  these  purposes: — Now,  therefore,  in  order  that  the  offen-
ders may  be  brought  to  condign  punishment,  and  the  violated  majesty  of  the
laws  thereby  effectually  vindicated,  I  do  hereby  offer,  in  addition  to  the  as-
surances of  compensation  heretofore  given,  a  reward  of  three  hundred  dollars
for  the  discovery  of  the  offenders,  and  a  reward  of  one  hundred  dollars  for
the  discovery  of  any  and  every  one  of  them — to  be  paid  on  conviction;  and
also  a  further  reward  of  two  lamdred  dollars  for  authentic  information  of  the
place  where  the  said  William  Morgan  has  been  conveyed.  And  I  do  enjoin  it
upon  all  sheriffs,  magistrates,  and  other  officers  and  ministers  of  justice,  to
be  vigilant  and  active  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties  on  this  occasion.

In  witness  whereof,  I  have  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  the
L.  S.       privy  seal,  at  the  city  of  Albany,  this  26th  day  of  October,  Anno
Domini  1826.  De  Witt  Clinton.

Third  Proclamation  of  the  Governor,
Whereas,  the  measures  adopted  for  the  discovery  of  JfiUiam  Mor gan,
after  his  unlawful  abduction  from  Canandaigua  in  September  last,  have  not
teen  attended  with  success;  and  whereas  many  of  the  good  citizens  of  th*

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


^pr-


XXXVI  APPENDIX.


state  are  under  an  impression,  from  the  lapse  of  time  and  other  circumstan-
ce*, thai  he  has  been  murdered: — Now,  therefore,  to  the  end  that,  if  Jiving,
he  may  be  restored  to  his  family;  and  if  murdered,  that  the  perpetrators  may
be  brought  to  condign  punishment,  I  have  thought  fit  to  issue  this  proclama-
tion, promising  a  reward  of  one  thousano  dollars  for  the  discovery  of  the
said  William  Morgan,  if  alive;  and,  if  murdered,  a  reward  of  two  thousand
dollars  for  the  discovery  of  the  offender  or  offenders:  to  be  paid  on  convic-
tion and  on  the  certiiicate  of  the  attorney  general,  or  officer  prosecuting  on
the  part  of  the^state,  that  the  person  or  persons  claiming  the  said  last  men-
tioned reward  *is  or  are  justly  entitled  to  the  same,  under  this  proclamation.
And  I  further  promise  a  free  pardon,  so  far  as  I  am  authorized  under  tta
constitution  of  this  state,  to  any  accomplice  or  co-operator  who  shall  make*.
full  discovery  of  the  offender  or  offenders.     And  1  do  enjoin  it  upon  all  offi-
cers and  ministers  of  justice,  and  all  other  persons,  to  be  vigilant  and  active
in  bringing  to  justice  the  perpetrators  of  a  crime  so  abhorrent  to  humanity.
a  .id  so  derogatory  from  the  ascendency  of  law  and  good  order.

Iw  witness  whereof,  I  have  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  the
L.  8.        privy  seal,  at  the  city  of  Albany,  this  19th  day  of  March,  Anno
Domini  1827.  "  De  Witt  Clinton.


NO.  30.  [Referred  to  in  page  21.]
The  only  passenger  who  went  in  the  stage  from  Rochester  to  Lewiston,  on
t  he  13th  ot  September,  1 826,  the  day,  of  course,  after  Morgan  was  taken  away
from  Canandaigua,  and  the  day  on  which  he  was  carried  from  Rochester  to
Lewiston,  was  a  reverend  clergyman  of  Rochester,  who  officiated  in  some  ca-
pacity at  the  Lewiston  installation  on  the  14th.  The  stage  stopped  at  Mur-
« lock's  tavern,  near  the  residence  of  Brown.  A  boy  was  immediately  despatch-
ed on  horseback  with  a  note  from  this  gentleman  to  Brown,  and  a  request  that
he  would  come  without  any  delay  on  the  same  horse  which  the  boy  had  ridden.
Brown  came  accordingly,  and  had  a  private  interview  with  the  reverend  gentle-
man. This  was  but  a  short  time  before  he  brought  his  horses  to  the  same
tavern,  where  he  fed  them,  and  waited  for  the  carriage.


At  Buffalo,  a  man,  high  in  office,  declared  that  he  was  astonished  that  Mil-
ler had  been  permitted  to  go  so  far  in  printing  the  book;  and  that  if  Morgan,
should  come  there,  there  were  twenty  men  who  would  take  his  life  in  less
than  half  an  hour.

In  Attica,  a  former  member  of  the  legislature  declared  as  follows: — 'If  they
are  publishing  the  true  secrets  of  Masonry,  I  should  not  think  the  lives  of
half  a.  dozen  such  men  as  Morgan  and  Miller  of  any  consequence  in  sup-
pressing the  work.'

In  Le  Roy,  a  physician,  formerly  sheriff  of  the  county,  declared  at  a  public  ta-
ble, 'That  the  book  should  be  suppressed  if  it  cost  every  one  of  them  their  lives.'

In  Batavia,  a  person  holding  a  respectable  office  declared  to  another  offi-
cer—'That  Miller's  office  would  not  stand  there  long.'

A  justice  of  the  peace  in  Le  Roy  saioV-lf  he  could  catch  Morgan  on  the
bridge  in  the  night  he  would  find  the  bottom  of  that  mill  pond.'

A  judge  of  the  county  court  of  Genesee  said — 'That  whatever  Morgan's
fate  might  have  been,  he  deserved  it — he  had  forfeited  his  life.'

A  high  priest  of  the  order  at  Le  Roy  said — 'That  Morgan  deserved  deatli —
he  hoped  ne  had  received  it — a  common  death  was  too  good  for  him.*

A  justice  of  the  peace  in  Middlebury,  a  sober,  respectable  man,  said  pub-
licly—'That  a  man  had  a  right  to  pledge  his  life;'  and  then  observed  to  those
who  answered  hinj—'YVhat  can  you  do?  what  can  a  rat  do  with  a  liont  wha
are  your  judges?  who  are  your  eherifis?  and  who  will  be  your  jurymen?1

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC


*  '  ■  *■


V  ■  '  «P«I  *  ^


•-   f


y  Google


I"  J       '  *»*


'


V


.  . . ;

fiy


»


?;<*i*$f>


^fi.zr


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


I


.  •'.  "  *•


fl  •


*


Digitized  by  VjOOQLC  .


:


A


3   2044   024   149   42S


THE  BORROWER  WILL  BE  CHARGED
AN  OVERDUE  FEE  IF  THIS  BOOK  IS  NOT
RETURNED  TO  THE  LIBRARY  ON  OR
BEFORE  THE  LAST  DATE  STAMPED
BELOW.  NON-RECEIPT  OF  OVERDUE
NOTICES  DOES  NOT  EXEMPT  THE
BORROWER  FROM  OVERDUE  FEES.


J    NOV  1  Affitj


*+*+±*+****l


wit016

B0OK0UE


■
