An Introduction to the Study of Experimental Medicine (Claude Bernard (Henry Copley Greene, trans.), 1927)
==========================================================
The milieu interieur and the experimental method; physiology's founding manifesto. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (b21270557).

AN 

Introduction  to 
the  Study  of 

EXPERIMENTAL 
MEDICINE 


CLAUDE  BERNARD 

It  was  said  of  Claude  Bernard,  "He  is  not  merely  a  physiologist,  he  is  physiol- 
ogy." His  IntToduction  to  the  Study  of  Experimental  Medicine,  first  published 
in  1865,  has  remained  a  classic,  and,  more  than  that,  a  classic  which  is  still  read. 


An 

Introduction  to  the  Study 

of 

Experimental  Medicine 

BY  CLAUDE  BERNARD 

"Claude  Bernard's  Introduction  to  the  Study  oj 
Experimental  Medicine,  first  published  in  1865, 
is  a  classic  of  the  philosophy  of  science.  ...  Its 
title  may  have  misled  readers  into  expecting  a 
technical  treatise  on  physiology;  it  is  in  fact  an 
essay  on  method  not  unworthy  to  be  classed  with 
that  of  Descartes.  We  shall  not  find  here  the 
pretensions  to  system,  arrangement,  and  thorough- 
ness of  more   elaborate   treatises   on  scientific 
method.  Here  everything  is  said  directly,  simply, 
without  pretentiousness  or  pseudo-profundity;  we 
can  almost  hear  the  harpsichord  playing  in  the 
background.  But  there  is  nothing  forced  or  con- 
trived in  this  elegance;  every  page  is  informed 
with  the  judgment  and  educated  memory  of  a 
superb  experimenter.  We  seem  to  be  always  in 
the  presence  of  a  person,  meditating  upon  a 
lifetime's  experience  of  creative  research."  {Max 
Black,  Professor  of  Philosophy  at  Cornell  Uni 
rersity. ) 

The  Introduction  is  more  than  a  classic;  it  is 
a  classic  which  is  still  read.  It  is  io  fact  among 
the  One  Hundred  Great  Books  which  comprise 
the  basic  curriculum  of  St.  John's  College. 

For  many  readers  the  most  interesting  and 
valuable  part  of  the  Introduction  will  always  be 
Bernard's  descriptions  of  the  successive  steps  of 
each  of  his  principal  discoveries  and  his  con- 
sequent deduction  of  the  way  in  which  the  mind 
of  a  scientist  goes  to  work  upon  a  problem. 

Bernard  is  the  founder  of  experimental  medi 
cine,  i.e.,  the  artificial  production  of  disease  by 
means  of  chemical  and  physical  manipulation. 
His  research  in  physiology,  which  is  the  founda- 
tion of  scientific  medicine  and  the  most  inipor 
tant  part  of  biology,  has  immortalized  his  name 
Said  a  foreign  scientist,  "Claude  Bernard  is  not 
merely  a  physiologist,  he  is  physiology." 


3 


^^CKEFELim 


Presented  to  the  Library  by 

  Pr.....Margpl.^.s  


IN5Tr-^     ■  :  OF  NEUROLOGY, 
TH.     -  ATlONAL  HOSPITAL. 

LONDON. 

WC5N  3 EG. 


AN  INTRODUCTION 

TO  THE  STUDY  OF 

EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


J 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2014 


https://archive.org/details/b21270557 


AN  INTRODUCTION 

TO  THE  STUDY  OF 

EXPEKIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


BY 

CLAUDE  BERNARD 


iN,i*T'TUTE  OF  MEURQLOGY, 
THS  NATIOr4AL  HSSFITAL. 
QUEEN  SQUAim, 

TRANSLATED  BY  LO|-iDOf^, 

HENRY  COPLEY  GREENE,  A.M.  WC IN  SEO] 

WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY 

LAWRENCE  J.  HENDERSON 

PROFESSOR  OF  BIOLOGICAL  CHEMISTRY,  HARVARD  UNIVERSITY 


HENRY  SCHUMAN,  INC. 
19  4  9 


All  rights  reserved 


COPYRIGHT,  1927 

by  Henry  Schuman,  Inc. 


R0GKEFEL1.IR  i^'EOICAL  LIBRARY 

If^STiTUi!-;  Of  'TiJ^OlOGY 
THE  NATjO^,'A!  HOSPITAL 
QUE  FN  oQUAI^!   LU'-;V'K,  WC1N  ?8Q 


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


-..  — «W~-  —  — .  .^Ifcilt^    ^n-g  1— ■   


INTRODUCTION 


The  discoverer  of  natural  knowledge  stands  apart  in  the  modern 
woild,  an  obscure  and  slightly  mysterious  figure.  By  the  abstract 
character  of  his  researches  his  individuality  is  obliterated;  by  the 
rational  form  of  his  conclusions  his  method  is  concealed ;  and  at  best 
he  can  be  known  only  through  an  effort  of  the  imagination.  This  is 
perhaps  inevitable.  But  the  unfortunate  effects  are  enhanced  by 
convention  which  to-day  prescribes  a  formal,  rigorous  and  impersonal 
style  in  the  composition  of  scientific  literature.  Thus  while  it  is  no 
more  difficult  to  know  Galileo  and  Harvey  than  Cervantes  and  Milton 
through  their  writings,  or  to  perceive  their  habits  and  methods  of 
work,  psychological  criticism  will  often  seek  in  vain  the  personality 
and  the  behavior  of  the  person  behind  the  modern  scientific  printed 
page.  Yet  whoever  fails  to  understand  the  great  investigator  can 
never  know  what  science  really  is. 

Such  knowledge  is  not  taught  in  the  schools.  Even  more  than  the 
scientific  memoir,  the  treatise  and  the  lecture  are  formal,  logical, 
systematic;  thus  truly  intelligible  and  living  only  to  the  initiated. 
As  much  as  possible  science  is  made  to  resemble  the  world  which 
it  describes,  in  that  all  vestiges  of  its  fallible  and  imaginative  human 
origin  are  removed.  Since  the  publication  of  Euclid's  immortal 
textbook  this  has  been  the  universal  and  approved  usage.  Little 
doubt  should  remain  that  it  is  the  best.  But  then  the  burden  must 
fall  upon  the  student  of  initiating  himself  into  mysteries  which  no 
one  will  explain  to  him. 

What  he  lacks  is  understanding  of  the  art  of  research  and  of  the 
inevitable  conditions  and  limitations  of  scientific  discovery,  an  under- 
standing, in  short,  of  the  behavior  of  the  man  of  genius,  not  a  ration- 
alized discussion  of  scientific  method.  The  latter  may  be  sought 
in  many  learned  works  and  in  the  teachings  of  academic  philos- 
ophers; a  good  account  of  the  former  is  far  to  seek.  It  is,  there- 
fore, not  the  least  of  the  merits  of  Claude  Bernard's  An  Introduction 
to  the  Study  of  Experimental  Medicine  that  we  have  here  an  honest 
and  successful  analysis  of  himself  at  work  by  one  of  the  most  intelli- 


vi 


INTRODUCTION 


gent  of  modem  scientists,  a  man  of  genius  and  a  great  physiologist. 
This  work  lays  bare,  sO'  far  as  that  is  possible,  what  others  have 
concealed. 

With  due  regard  to  such  analysis  and  logical  formulation  as 
are  indispensable  for  intelligibility  of  exposition,  Claude  Bernard 
has  avoided  a  'posteriori  rationalization  as  he  has  a  priori  dogmatism. 
Thus  it  is  possible  to  perceive  his  scientific  method  as  the  habit  of 
the  man.  His  life  is  spent  in  putting  questions  to  nature.  These 
questions  are  the  measure  of  his  originality.  He  cannot  tell  how 
they  arise,  but  the  experimental  idea  seems  to  him  a  presentiment 
of  the  nature  of  things.  Such  ideas  are,  at  any  rate,  the  only  fer- 
tilizing factor  in  research ;  without  them  scientific  method  is  sterile, 
and  great  discoveries  are  those  which  have  given  rise  to  the  most 
luminous  ideas. 

The  experiment,  accordingly,  is  always  undertaken  in  view  of  a 
preconceived  idea,  but  it  matters  not  whether  this  idea  is  vague  or 
clearly  defined,  for  it  is  but  the  question,  vague  or  otherwise,  which 
he  puts  to  nature.  Now,  when  nature  replies,  he  holds  his  peace, 
takes  note  of  the  answer,  listens  to  the  end  and  submits  to  the 
decision.  In  short,  the  experiment  is  always  devised  with  the  help 
of  a  working  hypothesis;  the  resulting  observation  is  always  made 
without  preconceived  idea.  Such  habits  are  not  too  easily  formed, 
for  man  is  by  nature  proud  and  inclined  to  metaphysics,  but  the 
practice  of  experimentation  will  cure  these  faults. 

Claude  Bernard  is  at  pains  to  point  out  that  even  so  modest  an 
abstract  description  of  method  does  violence,  for  the  sake  of  clearness, 
to  the  complexity  of  human  behavior.  Beyond  this  his  method  is 
the  curt  of  experimentation,  an  art  which  rests  upon  a  perfect  and 
habitual  familiarity  with  the  objects  that  he  studies  and  with  the 
details  of  his  experimental  procedure. 

The  chapters  in  which  all  this  is  developed  are  pervaded  by  a 
spirit  of  honesty,  simplicity  and  modesty,  the  mark  of  a  great  in- 
vestigator. It  is  not  difficult  while  reading  them  to  see  the  man  at 
work,  full  of  ideas,  a  marvelous  observer,  marking  and  taking  note 
even  of  that  for  which  he  is  not  looking,  always  doubting,  but  serenely 
and  without  scepticism,  guarding  himself  from  his  hypothesis  and 
even  from  the  unconfirmed  observation,  yet  ever  confident  in  the 
determinism  of  nature  and  therefore  in  the  possibility  of  rational 
knowledge. 


INTRODUCTION 


vii 


The  subject  of  his  investigations  was  physiology,  in  the  broadest 
and  in  the  most  modern  sense,  physiology  conceived  as  the  predestined 
foundation  of  scientific  medicine  and  as  the  most  important  part  of 
biology.  Thus  his  science  was  seen  by  Claude  Bernard  with  clear 
but  prophetic  vision,  for  he  lived  almost  a  half  century  before  his 
time.  He  perceived  that  physiology  rests  securely  upon  the  physico- 
chemical  sciences,  because  all  that  these  sciences  bring  to  light  is  true 
of  organic  as  of  inorganic  phenomena.  Also  there  is  nothing  but 
the  difficulty  of  the  task  to  hinder  the  reduction  of  physiological 
processes  to  physical  and  chemical  phenomena.  And  yet  this  cannot 
be  the  last  word,  for  physiology  is  more  than  bio-physics  and  bio- 
chemistry, biology  more  than  applied  physical  science.  He  has  him- 
self, elsewhere,  put  the  case  as  follows: 

"Admitting  that  vital  phenomena  rest  upon  physico-chemical 
activities,  which  is  the  truth,  the  essence  of  the  problem  is'  not 
thereby  cleared  up ;  for  it  is  no  chance  encounter  of  physico-chemical 
phenomena  which  constructs  each  being  according  to  a  pre-existing 
plan,  and  produces  the  admirable  subordination  and  the  harmonious 
concert  of  organic  activity. 

"There  is  an  arrangement  in  the  living  being,  a  kind  of  regu- 
lated activity,  which  must  never  be  neglected,  because  it  is  in  truth 
the  most  striking  characteristic  of  living  beings.  .  .  . 

"Vital  phenomena  possess  indeed  their  rigorously  determined 
physico-chemical  conditions,  but,  at  the  same  time,  they  subordinate 
themselves  and  succeed  one  another  in  a  pattern  and  according  to  a 
law  which  pre-exist;  they  repeat  themselves  with  order,  regularity, 
constancy,  and  they  harmonize  in  such  manner  as  to  bring  about 
the  organization  and  growth  of  the  individual,  animal  or  plant. 

"It  is  as  if  there  existed  a  pre-established  design  of  each  organ- 
ism and  of  each  organ  such  that,  though  considered  separately,  each 
physiological  process  is  dependent  upon  the  general  forces  of  nature, 
yet  taken  in  relation  with  the  other  physiological  processes,  it  reveals 
a  special  bond  and  seems  directed  by  some  invisible  guide  in  the 
path  which  it  follows  and  toward  the  position  which  it  occupies. 

"The  simplest  reflection  reveals  a  primary  quality,  a  quid  pro- 
prium  of  the  living  being,  in  this  pre-established  organic  harmony."  * 


*  Legons  sur  les  Phenomenes  de  la  Vie  Commune  aux  Animaiix  et  aux  Vegi- 
taiLX.    Paris,  1878,  Vol.  1,  p.  50. 


viii 


INTRODUCTION 


I  know  of  no  other  statement  of  the  case  since  Aristotle's  which 
seems  to  me  to  present  so  well  a  biologist's  philosophy. 

It  must  not  be  expected,  however,  to  find  in  the  work  of  Claude 
Bernard  a  system  of  biological  philosophy.  He  sets  forth  his  views 
on  the  philosophy  and  the  method  of  science,  and  they  are  really  his 
views,  the  very  convictions  that  he  carries  with  him  into  the  labora- 
tory. But  they  are  not  a  clear  system  of  philosophy,  nor  a  rational 
and  logical  scientific  method,  which  neither  he  nor  anyone  else  can 
believe  in  as  he  goes  about  his  daily  work.  Hence,  like  everybody's 
real  beliefs,  they  shade  off  into  vague,  more  or  less  inconsistent, 
more  or  less  doubtful  opinions.    This  is  reality  itself. 

The  theory  of  organism  is  more  than  a  philosophical  generaliza- 
tion ;  it  is  a  part  of  the  working  equipment  of  the  physiologist,  ful- 
filling a  purpose  not  unlike  that  of  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics 
in  the  physical  sciences.  It  has  been  more  or  less  clearly  understood 
and  employed  from  the  earliest  times,  and  Claude  Bernard  did  but 
perfect  it.  The  theory  of  the  constancy  of  the  internal  environment, 
a  related  theory,  we  ow^e  almost  wholly  to  Claude  Bernard  himself. 
There  is  no  better  illustration  of  his  penetrating  intelligence.  A  few 
scattered  observations  on  the  composition  of  blood  sufiiced  to  justify, 
in  his  opinion,  the  assertion  that  the  constancy  of  the  internal  envi- 
ronment {milieu  interieur)  is  the  condition  of  free  and  independent 
life.^  A  large  part  of  the  physiological  research  of  the  last  two 
decades  may  fairly  be  regarded  as  a  verification  and  illustration  of 
this  theory,  which,  as  Claude  Bernard  perceived,  serves  to  interpret 
many  of  the  most  important  physiological  and  pathological  processes. 
It  was  this  theory  too  that  led  him  to  a  clear  conception  of  general 
physiology,  which  he  regarded  as  the  fundamental  biological  science. 

General  physiology,  according  to  him,  includes  the  study  of  the 
physico-chemical  properties  of  the  environment  of  the  cell,  a  similar 
study  of  the  cell  itself,  beyond  this  of  the  physico-chemical  relations 
between  cell  and  environment,  and,  generally,  of  the  phenomena 
common  to  animals  and  plants.  This  science,  of  which  he  is  the 
founder,  was  destined  to  remain  undeveloped  until  long  after  his 
death.    To-day,  with  the  aid  of  a  physical  chemistry  unknown  to  the 

*  This  should  not  be  thought  of  as  absolute  constancy,  and  it  should  be  under- 
stood that  variations  in  the  properties  of  the  internal  environment  may  be  both 
cyclical  and  adaptive,  that  is  functional,  but  in  general  may  not  be  random  and 
functionless.  Claude  Bernard's  principle  is  the  first  approximation  which  suffices 
until  the  siibject  has  been  broadly  developed. 


1 


INTRODUCTION 


ix 


contemporaries  of  Claude  Bernard,  it  is  fulfilling  tbe  promise  which 
he  alone  could  clearly  see.  He  never  had  a  more  luminous  presenti- 
ment of  the  nature  of  things  than  this  vision  of  the  future  foundations 
of  biology. 

No  man  is  a  true  prophet  otherwise  than  through  the  possession 
of  such  intimate  knowledge  of  a  subject  that  he  is  able  to  say,  "Thus 
matters  must  develop."  Such  was  Claude  Bernard's  prophecy  of  the 
future  of  his  own  science.  His  understanding  of  physiology  had 
become  so  perfect  that  the  future  could  not  be  wholly  doubtful.  He 
knew  where  the  path  must  lead,  and  it  is  this  that  makes  his  book 
so  amazingly  modern.  In  other  respects  he  is  only  a  highly  intelli- 
gent man  of  the  third  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Accord- 
ingly his  treatment  of  some  subjects,  such  as  mathematics  and  physics, 
is  a  little  old-fashioned,  especially  on  the  logical  side.  In  general 
such  defects  are  not  only  slight,  but  also  unimportant  from  the 
medical  standpoint.  But  his  discussion  of  statistics  could  hardly  be 
written  to-day.  There  are  indeed  those,  though  few  in  number,  who 
will  agree  with  his  criticisms.  But,  when  he  wrote,  the  influence 
of  Galton  had  not  been  exerted  and  nobody  realized  that  statistics 
afford  a  method,  at  once  powerful,  elegant  and  exact,  of  describing 
a  class  of  objects  as  a  class. 

Physiology,  as  defined  and  understood  in  this  book,  with  general 
physiology  as  its  foundation,  is  the  essential  medical  science.  Medi- 
cine has  passed  through  the  empirical,  the  systematic,  the  nosological 
and  the  morphological  stages  and  has  entered  upon  the  experimental 
stage.  Thus  it  has  finally  become  physiological,  for  physiology  is  the 
larger  part  of  experimental  medicine.  Such  is  the  principal  thesis 
of  the  present  work,  which  ought  not  to  be  obscured  by  the  con- 
sideration of  incidental  topics,  no  matter  how  intrinsically  important 
they  may  be. 

This  opinion,  to  be  sure,  does  not  yet  meet  with  universal  ap- 
proval, and  yet  I  believe  that  it  has  been  at  length  fully  confirmed 
by  the  experience  of  the  twentieth  century.  Nevertheless,  the  con- 
firmation was  long  delayed  by  the  emergence  of  the  bacteriological 
stage  in  the  evolution  of  medicine.  Unforeseen  by  Claude  Bernard, 
this  was  the  result  of  the  discoveries  of  his  contemporary,  Pasteur. 

To-day,  looking  backward,  we  see  how  it  was  that  bacteriological 
researches  for  a  long  time  took  the  first  place  which  Claude  Bernard 
believed  to  be  already  assured  to  those  of  his  own  science.  When 


z 


INTEODUCTION 


Pasteur  began  the  study  of  micro-organisms  a  great  gap  existed  in 
our  knowledge  of  the  organic  cycle  and  of  natural  history.  His  work 
and  that  of  his  successors  filled  this  gap,  completed  our  present  theory 
of  the  cycle  of  life  and  established  the  natural  history  of  infectious 
diseases,  of  fermentations  and  of  the  soil.  This  was  perhaps  the 
most  rapid  advance  of  descriptive  knowledge  in  the  history  of  science. 
For  the  moment  the  researches  of  physiologists  were  overshadowed 
and  the  work  of  the  young  men  diverted  into  the  new  fields.  In  time 
bacteriology  grew  into  a  fully  developed  science,  perfected  its 
methods,  exploited  its  domain,  and  then,  the  most  pressing  work 
well  done,  resigned  its  leadership  of  the  medical  sciences. 

Meanwhile  a  profound  influence  was  exerted  on  what  Professor 
Whitehead  has  called  the  intellectual  climate.  Claude  Bernard's 
outlook  may  be  described  as  biological  and  philosophical,  and  such 
a  point  of  view  seems  necessary  for  the  understanding  of  the  deeper 
problems  of  medicine.  Pasteur,  however,  always  retained  the  chem- 
ist's outlook,  and  in  him  the  will  was  more  important  than  the  reflec- 
tive intellect.  His  successors  have  taken  a  position  hardly  more 
biological  and,  probably  of  necessity,  have  had  little  interest  in 
rational  theory.  Such  a  climate  is  unfavorable  to  the  growth  of 
experimental  medicine  and  especially  of  general  physiology,  for 
both  are  biological  and  rational. 

This  had  been  vaguely  understood  as  early  as  the  times  of  Galileo, 
of  Borelli,  and  of  Malpighi,  when  the  minds  of  men  were  still  fresh 
and  not  yet  enslaved  by  specialism.  But  even  Claude  Bernard,  be- 
cause he  still  lacked  the  aid  of  modern  physical  chemistry,  hardly 
appreciated  the  possibilities,  very  limited  but  very  important,  of  the 
applications  of  the  fully  developed  method  of  rational  physical 
science,  when  guided  and  duly  restrained  by  the  judgment  of  a  true 
physiologist,  in  the  study  of  the  ultimate  phenomena  of  life. 

In  default  of  the  physico-chemical  foundations,  during  a  period 
when  bacteriology  was  the  dominant  influence  in  medical  science, 
and  next  to  it,  perhaps,  the  highly  specialized  science  of  organic 
chemistry,  when  the  prevailing  activity  was  somewhat  unintellectual, 
physiology  continued  in  the  old  paths.  Not  until  after  the  turn  of 
the  century  did  the  movement  which  Claude  Bernard  had  foreseen 
make  itself  felt.  To-day  it  is  well  established  and  should  be  generally 
recognized.  The  result  has  already  been  a  remarkable  increase  of 
experimental  investigation  and  of  rational  theorizing  in  the  clinic. 


INTRODUCTION 


xi 


For  the  first  time  mathematics,  physics,  chemistry  and  physical 
chemistry,  as  aids  to  physiology,  have  passed  into  the  hospitals.  I 
believe  that,  for  the  reasons  which  Claude  Bernard  has  explained, 
this  will  long  remain  the  way  of  medical  progress  and  that  we  have 
now  definitely  entered  upon  the  epoch  of  experimental  medicine. 

All  progress  entails  evils  and  few  experimenters  can  understand 
as  Claude  Bernard  did  the  phenomena  of  life  and  the  philosophy 
of  the  organism.  For  these  reasons,  and  for  others  not  so  good,  the 
growth  of  experimental  medicine  gives  rise  to  criticism,  as  it  did  a 
half  century  ago.  Experienced  physicians,  practised  in  the  art  of 
medicine  and  rightly  believing  that  medicine  is  still  and  must  always 
be  an  art,  but  also  uncomfortable  and  suspicious  through  ignorance 
of  the  new  development,  are  not  lacking  to  unite  with  this  opposition. 
So  far  as  grounds  for  complaint  exist  they  are  due  to  the  absence  of 
that  high  intelligence  and  skill  of  the  experimenter  which  are  neces- 
sary to  understand  and  to  solve  the  complex  problems  of  physiology. 
Here  one  can  only  plead  the  palliating  circumstance  that  all  human 
endeavor  suffers  from  the  same  weaknesses.  On  the  other  hand,  pre- 
vailing criticism  of  scientific  medicine  itself,  no  less  than  the  earlier 
criticism  of  the  nineteenth  century,  finds  conclusive  answer  in  this 
book. 

Medicine  is  but  a  part  of  human  biology  and  the  study  of  human 
inheritance,  constitution,  intelligence  and  behavior,  of  adaptation 
to  new  conditions  of  life,  and  of  a  host  of  other  subjects,  far  tran- 
scends the  boundaries  of  medicine.  But  everywhere  throughout  this 
vast  field  physiology  has  the  same  importance  as  in  the  narrower  field 
of  medicine.  Thus  the  Introduction  may  serve  as  a  guide  not 
only  for  those  who  are  beginning  the  study  of  medicine,  but  for 
many  others  as  well. 

The  sciences  are  not  equal,  nor  do  they  preserve  their  rank  un- 
changed as  civilization  moves  on.  During  nearly  a  quarter  of  a 
millennium  mechanics  led  all  the  others  in  intellectual  interest  and 
in  influence  upon  European  civilization.  It  will  seem  to  many  not 
too  bold  a  prophecy,  for  the  reasons  that  Claude  Bernard  has  set 
forth,  to  look  forward  to  a  century  in  which  physiology  shall  take  a 
similar  place.  I  venture  to  believe  that  that  position  will  be  reached 
when  the  experimental  method  has  made  possible  a  rational  science  of 
organism. 

The  physiological  researches  of  Claude  Bernard  have  immor- 


INTKODUCTION 


talized  his  name,  but  the  present  work  and  his  other  general  writings 
have  hardly  attracted  the  attention  which  they  deserve  or  exerted 
the  influence  of  which  they  are  capable.  This  is  probably  due  both 
to  the  conflicting  influence  of  bacteriology,  organic  chemistry  and 
other  sciences  and,  not  less,  to  his  own  clearness  of  vision.  That 
which  he  saw  as  the  future  of  physiology  remained  for  many  decades 
hidden  from  others  and  so  his  writings  were  only  half  understood. 
Even  general  physiology  is  still  hardly  aware  of  the  program  which 
he  set  forth  and  which  it  has  been  unwittingly  carrying  out.  There 
is,  however,  one  well  known  instance  of  his  influence  exerted  farther 
afield.  As  the  idea  of  Balzac's  Comedie  Humaine  was  suggested  by 
the  biology  of  the  early  nineteenth  century,  so  the  naturalism  of 
Zola  was  suggested  by  the  works  of  Claude  Bernard.  Perhaps  the 
result  will  not  be  thought  worthy  of  the  cause.  Yet  the  instance  is 
significant  of  the  wide  bearing  of  an  interpretation  of  life  which 
may  be  seen  to  be  peculiarly  well  suited  to  the  present  conditions  of 
the  political  and  social  as  well  as  of  the  natural  sciences. 

Among  great  men,  Claude  Bernard  should  be  counted  fortunate 
in  that  he  has  not  become  a  mythical  figure.  Unlike  Pasteur,  whose 
discoveries  are  hardly  more  remarkable,  though  their  immediate  in- 
fluence has  been  immeasurably  greater,  and  whose  horizon  was  incon- 
testably  less  broad,  he  remains  a  plain  man,  highly  distinguished  no 
doubt,  but  not  obscured  by  the  growth  of  a  legend. 

It  is  possible  not  only  to  see  him  at  work,  but  even  to  discover 
his  purposes  and  his  feelings.  The  desire  to  relieve  suffering  and 
a  sense  of  duty  are  clearly  apparent,  and  one  may  read  between  the 
lines  the  enduring  satisfaction  that  he  felt  in  the  society  of  younger 
men  who  owed  to  him  more  than  they  could  ever  repay.  But  weightier 
still  are  the  contentment  which  comes  from  work  well  done,  the  sense 
of  the  value  of  science  for  its  own  sake,  insatiable  curiosity  and,  above 
all,  the  pleasure  of  masterly  performance  and  of  the  chase.  These 
are  the  effective  forces  which  move  the  scientist.  The  first  condition 
for  the  progress  of  science  is  to  bring  them  into  play. 


October  11,  1926 


L.  J.  Henderson". 


CLAUDE  BERNAED 


Claude  Bernaed,  born  July  12,  1813,  at  Saint  Jnlien  near 
Villefranche,^  came  to  Paris  in  1832,  with  almost  no  paraphernalia 
except  a  tragedy  which  had  never  been  acted,  and  a  farce-comedy 
which  had  had  some  success  at  a  small  theatre  in  Lyons.  He  showed 
these  first  attempts  to  Saint-Marc  Girardin  who  was  temporarily  tak- 
ing Guizot's  place  at  the  Sorbonne.  Girardin  advised  him  to  learn  a 
profession  to  live  by,  and  to  write  poetry  in  his  spare  time :  certainly 
he  had  no  idea  that  standing  before  him  was  a  future  colleague  in 
the  French  Academy.  Young  Claude  Berna,rd  followed  this  sensible 
advice  and  entered  the  school  of  medicine. 

Though  he  received  his  appointment  as  hospital  interne  in  1839, 
he  was  anything  but  a  brilliant  pupil.  His  comrades  did  not  suspect 
what  lay  hidden  behind  the  huge  forehead  of  this  silent  student  who 
paid  so  little  attention  to  his  professors'  teaching,  that  they  easily 
condemned  his  meditative  calm  as  mere  laziness.  Survivors  remem- 
ber and  often  describe  that  revelation,  his  publications  on  gastric 
sugar,  the  chorda  tympani,  the  pneumogastric  nerve  and  the  spinal 
nerve,  which  suddenly  revealed  to  the  scientific  world  a  sagacious  and 
ingenious  experimenter  of  rare  operative  skill. 

Magendie's  teaching  brought  this  revolution  about.  As  soon  as 
Claude  Bernard  set  foot  in  the  laboratory  of  the  College  de  France, 
his  path  was  marked  out.  The  celebrated  physiologist's  daring 
though  somewhat  disorderly  experimentation,  his  pitiless  criticism, 
the  scepticism  that  included  even  his  own  discoveries,  made  a  deep 
and,  so  to  speak,  creative  impression  on  the  young  man's  mind.  But 
the  pupil  was  so  much  more  powerful  than  his  master  that  he  took 
from  his  teaching  only  its  virtues  of  independence,  and  succeeded  in 
keeping  doubt  within  scientific  bounds.  To  deep  disdain  for  plaus- 
ible explanations  in  which  alluring  chimeras  are  concealed,  he  easily 
added  respect  for  the  facts  gathered  in  tradition,  sincere  belief  when 
face  to  face  with  the  unexpected  which  is  often  pregnant  with  dis- 
covery, respect  for  searching  hypotheses  and  coordinating  theories, 
*  Department  of  the  Rhone. 

xiii 


xiv 


CLAUDE  BERNAED 


without  ever  attributing  to  them  independent  authority  or  power. 
Finally  what  distinguished  him  especially  from  Magendie,  and  gave 
him  his  wholly  individual  character,  was  love  of  certainty, — that 
deep  feeling  for  law,  that  immovable  confidence  that, — if  the  condi- 
tions in  which  vital  phenomena  come  to  pass  are  infinitely  many, 
complex  and  hard  to  grasp,  assemble  and  master  experimentally, — 
they  are  none  the  less  surely  and  fixedly  linked  to  phenomena 
without  any  possibility  of  a  quid  divinum  being  invoked  to  explain 
the  seemingly  spontaneous  irregularities  which  they  present. 

This  is  the  main  point  where  Claude  Bernard  showed  his  superi- 
ority, from  the  first  moments  of  his  scientific  life.  The  pupil  of 
Magendie,  the  sceptic,  introduced  determinism  into  the  realm  of 
physiology.  Thanks  to  him,  the  scientific  method,  respect  for  whose 
laws  leads  to  certainty  in  the  sciences  of  dead  matter,  assumed  equal 
authority  in  the  sciences  of  living  beings.  Sciences  are  not  of  two 
kinds,  the  first  proud  and  confident,  the  rest  timid  and  hesitant ;  the 
first  sure  of  commanding  and  of  being  obeyed  in  experiments,  the 
rest  always  in  fear  of  an  influence  unknown  in  essence,  force  and 
goal. 

It  required  no  small  effort  to  banish  this  menacing  unknown 
from  the  field  of  physiology.  The  most  celebrated  of  French  physi- 
ologists, Bichat,  had  given  it  asylum,  and  everyone  after  him  had 
thought  it  necessary  to  reckon  with  this  capricious  force,  with  these 
vital  functions,  whose  role  was  to  resist  the  universal  laws  of  matter, 
which  thus  made  all  acts  performed  by  living  beings  a  series  of 
miracles.  Of  course  Magendie  was  not  the  man  to  let  himself  be 
frightened  by  this  ghost;  but  he  systematically  and  artificially  sim- 
plified facts  so  that  he  only  partly  mastered  them ;  or  else  the  multi- 
plicity of  conditions  governing  vital  phenomena  took  away  all  his 
theoretical  confidence  in  the  result.  Now,  without  results  there  can 
be  no  science.  I  must  repeat  that  Claude  Bernard,  therefore,  proved 
himself,  almost  from  the  outset,  superior  to  both  Magendie  and 
Bichat,  since  he  felt  not  only  the  endless  multiplicity  of  unknown 
data  in  physiology,  but  also  their  subordination  to  the  general  laws 
of  matter  and  their  obedience  to  the  experimental  method. 

Physiology  could  therefore  extend  its  roots  into  the  solid  earth 
where  its  older  sisters,  physics  and  chemistry,  are  settled.  The  com- 
plexity of  the  problems  made  it  essential,  however,  to  set  forth  the 
rules  of  the  experimental  method  in  special  formulae  with  a  view  to 


CLAUDE  BERNAKD 


XV 


the  intellectual  and  manual  methods  which  are  especially  adapted 
to  physiology.  Through  the  whole  first  phase  of  his  scientific  life, 
Claude  Bernard  was  haunted  by  this  task.  But  the  fascination  of 
his  laboratory  and  the  hunt  for  discoveries  so  completely  absorbed 
his  time  that  he  could  demonstrate  the  experimental  method  only 
as  Diogenes  demonstrated  motion. 

And  never  was  hunt  for  discoveries  more  fruitful.  In  twenty 
years,  Claude  Bernard  found  more  dominating  facts,  not  only  than 
the  few  French  physiologists  working  beside  him,  but  than  all  the 
physiologists  in  the  world.  The  activity  of  different  glands  and 
particularly  of  the  pancreas,  animal  glycogenesis,  experimental  pro- 
duction of  diabetes,  the  existence  of  the  vasomotor  nerves  and  the 
theory  of  animal  heat,  the  influence  of  poisons,  studied  in  themselves 
and  as  a  means  of  analyzing  physiological  phenomena,  the  endless 
number  of  fresh  facts,  keen  deductions  and  ingenious  and  suggestive 
insights,  contained  not  only  in  his  special  memoirs  but  in  the  four- 
teen volumes,  from  his  Lessons  in  Experimental  Physiology  Applied 
to  Medicime  (1885-1886)  to  his  Lessons  on  Diabetes  and  Animal 
Glycogenesis  (1877),  in  which  he  collected  each  year  the  results  of 
his  investigations  and  a  summary  of  his  courses, — these  things  gave 
him  the  position  of  a  master  unquestioningly  accepted  in  France  and 
abroad. 

In  official  life  he  also  attained  the  highest  rank.  In  1854,  a 
chair  of  general  physiology  was  founded  for  him  at  the  Sorbonne, 
which  in  1868  he  surrendered,  with  beautiful  magnanimity  and 
grace,  to  his  pupil,  Paul  Bert.  In  1858  he  took  Magendie's  place 
in  the  chair  of  medicine  at  the  College  de  France.  Member  of 
the  Academy  of  Sciences  in  1854,  he  was  called  in  1868  to  take  Flou- 
rens'  seat  in  the  French  Academy.  Finally  in  1869,  by  special  de- 
cree, he  entered  the  Senate;  and  he  was  almost  the  only  member  of 
that  assembly  whom  no  one  ever  thought  of  reproaching  for  a  nomi- 
nation which  to  him  was  so  strange  a  surprise. 

A  few  years  before  these  unexpected  literary  and  political  honors 
thus  sought  him  out  in  his  laboratory,  a  serious  event  occurred  in  his 
life.  A  long  and  severe  disease,  during  which  he  and  his  friends 
despaired  of  a  favorable  outcome,  condemned  him  to  physical  inac- 
tivity. He  had  to  leave  his  laboratory,  and  Paris  too;  he  had  to 
ask  of  his  birthplace,  once  more  and  not  in  vain,  the  gift  of  life  and 
health.    Long  months  of  isolation  and  rest  gave  back  all  his  liberty 


xvi 


CLAUDE  BEKNAED 


of  mind.  For  the  first  time,  lie  had  leisure  for  meditation  and  for 
setting  in  order,  on  paper,  the  results  of  his  solitary  reflections.  A 
short  preface,  which  was  already  in  proof  and  which  was  to  have 
preceded  a  sort  of  treatise  on  operative  physiology  which  remains 
unfinished,  grew,  by  successive  additions,  to  the  size  of  a  pamphlet, 
then  of  a  book  which  saw  the  light  in  1865. 

The  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Experimental  Medicine  struck 
cultivated  minds  with  admiration  and  astonishment.  Here  physi- 
ologists were  happy  to  find,  reduced  to  precise  formulse,  set  in  order 
with  marvellous  art,  and  lighted  by  examples  which  themselves  were 
like  so  many  intellectual  experiments, — here  they  were  happy  to  find 
the  rules  of  the  experimental  method,  watching,  seizing  and,  in  spite 
of  its  struggles,  mastering  that  organic  Proteus  of  the  deceitful 
metamorphoses.  Men  less  taken  up  with  professional  difficulties 
were  struck  by  the  magnitude  of  the  problems  studied,  by  the  clarity 
of  exposition,  the  ease  and  good  faith  with  which  they  were  either 
solved  or  proved  insoluble.  Even  the  style  attracted  great  attention ; 
its  original  flavor  took  even  the  French  Academy's  fancy :  "You  have 
created  a  style,"  said  the  severe  Monsieur  Patin,  in  his  speech  of 
welcome.  And  it  was  true.  But  how  surprised  the  venerable  critic 
would  have  been  if  he  had  read  the  earlier  books  in  which  Claude 
Bernard  contented  himself  with  enumerating  his  laboratory  impres- 
sions in  a  narrative  that  is  often  scarcely  well  ordered.  The  eminent 
but  naive  master  was  never  haunted  by  care  for  stage  effect ;  his  style, 
whether  spoken  or  written,  is  the  equivalent  of  his  ideas.  In  epi- 
sodical narrative,  he  is  often  dragging  and  confused;  but  when  a 
hard  problem  presents  itself,  when  his  thought  is  forced  to  fall  back 
as  if  to  conquer  an  obstacle  or  make  a  bound,  then  he  concentrates, 
purifies  and  accentuates  himself  in  definite  formulas  and  often  in 
verbal  imagery. 

As  he  was  in  his  books,  so  was  Claude  Bernard  in  his  courses  and 
his  conversation.  His  was  not  a  docile  thought,  speaking  every 
language  and  playing  every  role;  and  he  never  disciplined  it  to  any 
conventions  of  profession  or  of  social  custom.  If  it  escaped  him,  he 
followed  it  without  rebellion,  leaving  his  speech  drooping,  his  lecture 
in  confusion,  while  he  listened  to  what  it  softly  said  to  him.  But 
if  it  grew  interested  in  the  immediate  subject,  then  the  professor  or 
conversationalist,  a  moment  ago  so  difficult  and  diffuse,  awoke  living, 
inventive,  clear,  eloquent,  with  surprising  and  sudden  changes,  and 


CLAUDE  BERNAKD 


xvii 


always  with  both  characteristics  of  true  genius,  ease  and  good 
faith. 

And  no  one  possessed  them  in  higher  degree.  That  ease  in  rais- 
ing himself  to  high  summits,  in  acting  in  the  midst  of  trying  difficul- 
ties, especially  struck  readers  of  his  admirable  articles  in  the  Revue 
des  Deux  Mondes.  What  the  poet  said  of  the  goddess  could  be  said  of 
him :  incesm  patuit.  After  reading  these  articles,  an  eminent  man 
said  to  me  one  day:  "He  does  not  make  me  merely  think  I  under- 
stand, as  you  all  do ;  he  makes  me  really  understand.''  And  in  fact 
he  did  understand.  Claude  Bernard  carried  this  ease  from  his 
physiological  method  into  the  philosophic  realm.  No  one  ever  made 
discoveries  more  simply,  more  naively.  To  that  first  phase  of  hunt- 
ing ideas,  which  consists,  as  Helvetius  said,  in  seeing  and  starting  the 
quarry,  he  brought  a  sureness  of  vision,  an  astounding  penetration. 
Most  scientific  searchers  are  a  kind  of  somnambulist  who  see  only 
what  they  are  looking  for  and  what  is  on  the  track  of  their  ideas;; 
their  eyes  are  fixed  on  a  point;  and  they  fail  to  perceive  not  only 
what  happens  aside  from  that  point,  but  even  what  appears  there 
unforeseen.  In  one  of  his  pupil's  phrases,  Claude  Bernard  seemed  to 
have  eyes  all  around  his  head.  In  the  course  of  an  experiment, 
students  were  stupefied  when  they  saw  him  point  out  quite  evident 
phenomena  which  no  one  but  himself  had  seen.  He  discovered  as 
others  breathed. 

With  ease,  good  faith.  That  was  his  ruling  characteristic.  He 
never  swerved  from  the  deep  sincerity  of  a  man  of  science  who  must 
seek  truth  for  its  own  sake  and  for  the  truths  which  follow  from  it, 
without  concerning  himself  with  the  distant  or  indirect  conclusions 
which  lawyer-like  men,  with  a  cause  to  defend,  try  to  draw  from  it. 
ISTo  one  was  ever  more  passive  in  deduction,  or  described  deductions 
with  more  candid  sincerity.  This  is  why  supporters  of  different 
theses  could  use,  and  still  can  use,  his  writings,  turn  and  turn  about. 
When  he  expounds  the  cerebral  determinism  of  intellectual  activity, 
the  materialists  count  him  as  their  own;  when  he  declares  that 
thought  and  the  brain  are  in  the  same  relation  as  time  and  a  clock, 
the  spiritualists  try  to  enlist  him.  In  reality,  he  is  just  a  physi- 
ologist handing  over  fresh  facts  to  rejuvenate  the  speculator's  endless 
wrangling. 

In  the  narrower  realm  of  physiology  and  medicine  his  admirable 
good  faith  explains  the  seeming  contradiction  between  his  scientific 


xviii 


CLAUDE  BERNAED 


faith  and  his  practical  incredulity.  He  always  had  this  double  feel- 
ing in  the  highest  degree, — that  if  medicine  is  to  be  sure  of  itself, 
it  must  have  physiology  as  its  necessary  base,  and  that  our  present- 
day  physiology  is  still  far  from  supplying  us  with  any  practical  cer- 
tainty. He  felt  the  full  importance  of  his  own  discoveries  as  founda- 
tions for  the  medical  edifice,  but  he  did  not  share  the  illusions  of 
those  whose  eagerness  to  transfer  them  to  the  realm  of  clinical  or 
therapeutic  applications  often  made  him  smile.  The  feeling  for 
distances,  which  would  have  discouraged  less  valiant  men,  moved 
him  not  at  all.  For  strength  and  perseverance,  he  did  not  need  the 
intoxication  of  illusions.  So  he,  who  taught  that  medicine  is  or  should 
be  a  science,  showed  himself  thoroughly  sceptical  about  physicians; 
and  when  he  talked  of  them,  the  shade  of  Sganarelle  ^  always  seemed 
to  pass  before  him. 

The  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Experimental  Medicine  marks 
a  fresh  phase  in  the  life  of  Claude  Bernard.  From  this  period  date 
the  philosophic  writings  which  opened  the  French  Academy's  doors 
to  him.  Of  this  period,  too,  are  the  books  ^  in  which  grouping  facts 
takes  precedence  over  noting  details,  and  in  which  he  returns  to 
his  earlier  discoveries  and  strives  to  bring  his  subsidiary  work  to  the 
precision  and  perfection  which  present-day  science  permits. 

This  does  not  mean  that  he  turned  completely  away  from  those 
regions  of  the  unknown  where  he  had  formerly  reaped  such  rich 
harvests.  His  latest  work  on  the  fundamental  identity  of  the  prop- 
erties of  tissues  and  of  elementary  functions  in  the  animal  and  vege- 
table kingdoms,  on  anesthesia  of  the  lower  vegetables  by  chloroform 
or  ether,  and  on  the  general  action  of  toxic  substances,  shows  that 
the  creative  spirit  was  still  alive  in  him. 

Fresh  discoveries  were  this  year  to  have  furnished  another  proof 
of  his  fertile  activity.  He  confided  this  in  part  to  his  friends  and 
pupils;  and  from  the  few  words  which  escaped  him,  we  may  appar- 
ently conclude  that  the  investigations  which  he  carried  out  during 
his  last  vacation  were  to  throw  unexpected  light  on  the  theory  of  fer- 
mentation. This  important  work,  of  which  he  said,  only  four  days 
ago,  "What  a  pity ;  it  would  have  been  good  to  finish  it !"  is  lost  to 
science. 

*  In  Le  M4decin  malgri  lui  by  Molifere. 

*  Recherches  8ur  lea  propriites  des  ti»8us  viv<mt8.  Lecon»  de  pathologie  ea- 
perimentale,  etc. 


CLAUDE  BEKNARD 


xix 


On  December  31  he  was  stricken  in  the  laboratory  of  the  Col- 
lege de  France ;  shivering  and  fever  soon  came  on,  and  special  phe- 
nomena indicating  inflammation  of  the  kidneys.  Nothing  could 
stop  the  advance  of  a  disease  whose  every  progress  he  followed. 
Without  any  illusions  about  the  fatal  catastrophe,  he  observed  with 
calm  eyes,  and  with  a  smile  denied  his  scientific  family's  pious  lies. 
He  was  one  of  those  whose  gaze  is  undismayed  by  the  unknown. 

Personal  feeling  must  be  silent  in  this  immense  mourning  of 
science,  and  yet,  the  loss  of  a  great  man  is  not  all  that  moistens  the 
eyes  of  those  about  his  coffin:  such  kindliness,  such  simplicity  of 
soul,  such  naive  generosity  were  united  in  his  genius.  One's  hand 
trembles  in  trying  to  sketch  a  few  traits  of  this  great  and  noble 
character. 

Nothing  in  his  pure  and  harmonious  life  was  turned  aside  from 
its  chief  aim.  Enamored  of  literature,  art  and  philosophy,  Claude 
Bernard  as  a  physiologist  lost  nothing  by  these  noble  passions;  on 
the  contrary,  they  all  helped  in  developing  the  science  with  which 
he  identified  himself,  and  of  which  he  is  the  highest  and  most  com- 
plete embodiment.  He  was  a  physiologist  such  as  no  man  had  been 
before  him.  "Claude  Bernard,''  said  a  foreign  scientist,  "is  not 
merely  a  physiologist,  he  is  physiology." 

His  very  death  seems  to  mark  a  new  era  in  science.  For  the 
first  time  in  our  country,  a  man  of  science  will  receive  those  pub- 
lic honors  hitherto  reserved  for  political  and  military  celebrities. 
The  cabinet  honored  itself  yesterday  in  asking  parliament,  which 
unanimously  agreed  to  celebrate  at  state  expense  the  solemn  obse- 
quies of  the  master  who  is  no  more.  And  one  phrase  of  Gam- 
betta,  speaking  in  the  name  of  the  Budget  Commission,  sums  up  all 
that  we  have  said :  "The  light,  which  has  just  been  extinguished,  can- 
not be  replaced." 

Paul  Bebt. 

Paris,  February  12,  1878. 


CONTENTS 


PAOB 


Author's  Preface   1 

PAKT  ONE 
EXPERIMENTAL  EEASONING 

CHAPTBR 

I.  Observation  and  Experiment   5 

II.  The  a  Priori  Idea  and  Doubt  in  Experimental  Reason- 
ing  27 

PART  TWO 

EXPERIMENTATION  WITH  LIVING  BEINGS 

I.  Experimental  Considerations  Common  to  Living  Things 

AND  Inorganic  Bodies  59 

II.  Experimental  Considerations  Peculiar  to  Living  Beings  87 


PART  THREE 
APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  EXPERIMENTAL  METHOD 


TO  THE  STUDY  OF  VITAL  PHENOMENA 

I.  Examples  of  Experimental  Physiological  Investiga- 
tion 151 

II.  Examples  of  Experimental  Physiological  Criticisim  .  172 

III.  Investigation  and  Criticism  as  Applied  to  Experimen- 

tal Medicine  190 

IV.  Philosophic  Obstacles  Encountered  by  Experimental 

Medicine  196 


AN  INTRODUCTION 

TO  THE  STUDY  OF 

EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 
OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 

To  Conserve  Health  aj^d  to  Cube  Disease  :  Medicine  is  still 
pursuing  a  scientific  solution  of  this  problem,  which  has  confronted 
it  from  the  first.  ^  The  present  state  of  medical  practice  suggests 
that  a  solution  is  still  far  to  seek.  During  its  advance  through  the 
centuries,  however,  medicine  has  always  been  driven  into  action  and 
from  numberless  ventures  in  the  realm  of  empiricism  has  gained 
useful  information.  Though  furrowed  and  overturned  by  all  manner 
of  systems  so  evanescent  that,  one  by  one,  they  have  disappeared, 
it  has  none  the  less  carried  on  research,  acquired  ideas  and  piled  up 
precious  materials  which  in  due  time  will  find  their  place  and  mean- 
ing in  scientific  medicine.  To-day,  thanks  to  the  great  development 
and  powerful  support  of  the  physico-chemical  sciences,  study  of  the 
phenomena  of  life,  both  normal  and  pathological,  has  made  progress 
which  continues  with  surprising  rapidity. 

It  is  therefore  clear  to  all  unprejudiced  minds  that  medicine  is 
turning  toward  its  permanent  scientific  path.  By  the  very  nature 
of  its  evolutionary  advance,  it  is  little  by  little  abandoning  the  region 
of  systems,  to  assume  a  more  and  more  analytic  form,  and  thus 
gradually  to  join  in  the  method  of  investigation  common  to  the 
experimental  sciences. 

In  order  to  embrace  the  medical  problem  as  a  whole,  experi- 
mental medicine  must  include  three  basic  parts :  physiology,  pathol- 
ogy and  therapeutics.  Knowledge  of  causes  of  the  phenomena 
of  life  in  the  normal  state,  i.e.,  physiology,  will  teach  us  to  maintain 
normal  conditions  of  life  and  to  conserve  health.  Knowledge  of 
diseases  and  of  their  determining  causes,  i.e.,  pathology,  will  lead 
us,  on  the  one  hand,  to  prevent  the  development  of  morbid  conditions, 

*See  Coura  de  pathologic  expirimentale  {Medical  Times,  1859-1860). — Legon 
d'ouverture  du  cours  de  mSdecine  du  ColUge  de  France:  Sur  la  midecine  ex- 
p4rimentale  (Gazette  medicale.  Paris,  April  15,  1864; — Revue  des  cours  scien- 
tifiques.    Paris,  Dec.  31,  1864.) 


2 


AN  mTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


and,  on  the  other,  to  fight  their  results  with  medical  agents,  i.e.,  to 
cure  the  diseases. 

In  the  empirical  period  of  medicine,  which  must  doubtless  still 
be  greatly  prolonged,  physiology  and  therapeutics  could  advance 
separately;  for  as  neither  of  them  was  well  established,  they  were 
not  called  upon  mutually  to  support  each  other  in  medical  prac-, 
tice.  But  this  cannot  be  so  when  medicine  becomes  scientific:  it 
must  then  be  founded  on  physiology.  Since  science  can  be  estab- 
lished only  by  the  comparative  method,  knowledge  of  pathological 
or  abnormal  conditions  cannot  be  gained  without  previous  knowl- 
edge of  normal  states,  just  as  the  therapeutic  action  of  abnormal 
agents,  or  medicines,  on  the  organism  cannot  be  scientifically  under- 
stood without  first  studying  the  physiological  action  of  the  normal 
agents  which  maintain  the  phenomena  of  life. 

But  scientific  medicine,  like  the  other  sciences,  can  be  estab- 
lished only  by  experimental  means,  i.e.,  by  direct  and  rigorous  ap- 
plication of  reasoning  to  the  facts  furnished  us  by  observation  and 
experiment.  Considered  in  itself,  the  experimental  method  is  noth- 
ing but  reasoning  by  whose  help  we  methodically  submit  our  ideas 
to  experience, — the  experience  of  facts. 

Reasoning  is  always  the  same,  whether  in  the  sciences  that  study 
living  beings  or  in  those  concerned  with  inorganic  bodies.  But  each 
kind  of  science  presents  different  phenomena  and  complexities  and 
difficulties  of  investigation  peculiarly  its  own.  As  we  shall  later 
see,  this  makes  the  principles  of  experimentation  incomparably 
harder  to  apply  to  medicine  and  the  phenomena  of  living  bodies 
than  to  physics  and  the  phenomena  of  inorganic  bodies. 

Reasoning  will  always  be  correct  when  applied  to  accurate  notions 
and  precise  facts;  but  it  can  lead  only  to  error  when  the  notions  or 
facts  on  which  it  rests  were  originally  tainted  with  error  or  inac^ 
curacy.  That  is  why  experimentation,  or  the  art  of  securing  rigorous 
and  well-defined  experiments,  is  the  practical  basis  and,  in  a  way, 
the  executive  branch  of  the  experimental  method  as  applied  to  medi- 
cine. If  we  mean  to  build  up  the  biological  sciences,  and  to  study 
fruitfully  the  complex  phenomena  which  occur  in  living  beings, 
whether  in  the  physiological  or  the  pathological  state,  we  must  first 
of  all  lay  down  principles  of  experimentation,  and  then  apply  them 
to  physiology,  pathology  and  therapeutics.  Experimentation  is  un- 
deniably harder  in  medicine  than  in  any  other  science ;  but  for  that 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


3 


very  reason,  it  was  never  so  necessary,  and  indeed  so  indispensable. 
The  more  complex  the  science,  the  more  essential  is  it,  in  fact,  to 
establish  a  good  experimental  standard,  so  as  to  secure  comparable 
facts,  free  from  sources  of  error.  Nothing,  I  believe,  is  to-day  so 
important  to  the  progress  of  medicine. 

To  be  worthy  of  the  name,  an  experimenter  must  be  at  once 
theorist  and  practitioner.  While  he  must  completely  master  the  art  of 
establishing  experimental  facts,  which  are  the  materials  of  science, 
he  must  also  clearly  understand  the  scientific  principles  which 
guide  his  reasoning  through  the  varied  experimental  study  of  natural 
phenomena.  We  cannot  separate  these  two  things:  head  and  hand. 
An  able  hand,  without  a  head  to  direct  it,  is  a  blind  tool ;  the  head 
is  powerless  without  its  executive  hand. 

The  principles  of  experimental  medicine  will  be  explained  in 
this  work  from  the  triple  point  of  view  of  physiology,  pathology  and 
medicine.  But  before  going  into  general  considerations  and  special 
descriptions  of  the  operative  procedure  proper  to  each  of  these  divi- 
sions, I  deem  it  useful  to  give  a  few  explanations  in  this  introduction 
in  relation  to  the  theoretic  and  philosophic  side  of  the  method  which 
this  book,  after  all,  treats  merely  on  its  practical  side. 

The  ideas  which  we  shall  here  set  forth  are  certainly  by  no 
means  new ;  the  experimental  method  and  experimentation  were  long 
ago  introduced  into  the  physico-chemical  sciences,  which  owe  them  all 
their  brilliancy.  At  different  periods,  eminent  men  have  treated 
questions  of  method  in  the  sciences;  and  in  our  own  day  Monsieur 
Chevreul,  in  all  his  works,  is  explaining  very  important  ideas  on 
the  philosophy  of  experimental  science.  We  shall  therefore  make  no 
claim  to  philosophy.  Our  single  aim  is,  and  has  always  been,  to 
help  make  the  well-known  principles  of  the  experimental  method 
pervade  medical  science.  That  is  why  we  shall  here  recapitulate 
these  principles,  specially  pointing  out  the  precautions  to  be  taken 
in  their  application,  because  of  the  very  special  complexity  of  the 
phenomena  of  life.  We  shall  consider  these  difficulties,  first  in  the 
use  of  experimental  reasoning,  and  then  in  the  practice  of  experi- 
mentation. 


PAET  ONE 


EXPERIMENTAL  REASONING 

CHAPTER  I 

OBSERVATION  AND  EXPERIMENT 

Only  within  very  narrow  boundaries  can  man  observe  the  phe- 
nomena which  surround  him;  most  of  them  naturally  escape  his 
senses,  and  mere  observation  is  not  enough.  To  extend  his  knowl- 
edge, he  has  had  to  increase  the  power  of  his  organs  by  means  of 
special  appliances;  at  the  same  time  he  has  equipped  himself  with 
various  instruments  enabling  him  to  penetrate  inside  of  bodies,  to 
dissociate  them  and  to  study  their  hidden  parts.  A  necessary  order 
may  thus  be  established  among  the  different  processes  of  investiga- 
tion or  research,  whether  simple  or  complex :  the  first  apply  to  those 
objects  easiest  to  examine,  for  which  our  senses  suffice;  the  second 
bring  within  our  observation,  by  various  means,  objects  and  phenom- 
ena which  would  otherwise  remain  unknown  to  us  forever,  because 
in  their  natural  state  they  are  beyond  our  range.  Investigation,  now 
simple,  again  equipped  and  perfected,  is  therefore  destined  to  make 
us  discover  and  note  the  more  or  less  hidden  phenomena  which  sur- 
round us. 

But  man  does  not  limit  himself  to  seeing ;  he  thinks  and  insists  on 
learning  the  meaning  of  the  phenomena  whose  existence  has  been 
revealed  to  him  by  observation.  So  he  reasons,  compares  facts,  puts 
questions  to  them,  and  by  the  answers  which  he  extracts,  tests  one 
by  another.  This  sort  of  control,  by  means  of  reasoning  and  facts, 
is  what  constitutes  experiment,  properly  speaking;  and  it  is  the 
only  process  that  we  have  for  teaching  ourselves  about  the  nature 
of  things  outside  us. 

In  the  philosophic  sense,  observation  shows,  and  experiment 
teaches.  This  first  distinction  will  serve  as  our  starting  point  in 
examining  the  different  definitions  of  observation  and  experiment 
devised  by  philosophers  and  physicians. 

5 


6 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


I.    Various  Definitions  of  Obseevation  and  Experiment 

Men  sometimes  seem  to  confuse  experiment  with  observation. 
Bacon  appears  to  combine  them  when  be  says:  "Observation  and 
experiment  for  gathering  material,  induction  and  deduction  for 
elaborating  it :  tbese  are  our  only  good  intellectual  tools." 

Physicians  and  physiologists,  like  most  men  of  science,  distin- 
guish observation  from  experiment,  but  do  not  entirely  agree  in  defin- 
ing the  two  terms. 

Zimmermann  ^  expresses  himself  as  follows :  "An  experiment  dif- 
fers from  an  observation  in  this,  that  knowledge  gained  through 
observation  seems  to  appear  of  itself,  while  that  which  an  experiment 
brings  us  is  the  fruit  of  an  effort  that  we  make,  with  the  object  of 
knowing  whether  something  exists  or  does  not  exist." 

This  definition  embodies  a  rather  generally  accepted  opinion. 
According  to  this  definition,  observation  would  be  noting  objects  or 
phenomena,  as  nature  usually  presents  them,  while  experiment  would 
be  noting  phenomena  created  or  defined  by  the  experimenter.  We 
should  set  up  a  sort  of  contrast,  in  this  way,  between  observers  and 
experimenters :  the  first  being  passive  in  the  appearance  of  phenom- 
ena; the  second,  on  the  other  hand,  taking  a  direct  and  active  part 
in  producing  them.  Cuvier  expressed  the  same  thought  in  saying: 
"The  observer  listens  to  nature;  the  experimenter  questions  and 
forces  her  to  unveil  herself." 

At  first  sight,  and  considering  things  in  a  general  way,  this  dis^ 
tinction  between  the  experimenter's  activity  and  the  observer's  pas- 
sivity seems  plain  and  easy  to  establish.  But  as  soon  as  we  come 
down  to  experimental  practice  we  find  that,  in  many  instances,  the 
separation  is  very  hard  to  make,  and  that  it  sometimes  even  involves 
obscurity.  This  comes,  it  seems  to  me,  from  confusing  the  art  of 
investigation,  which  seeks  and  establishes  facts,  with  the  art  of  reason- 
ing, which  works  them  up  logically  in  the  search  for  truth.  Now  in 
investigation  there  may  be  activity,  at  once  of  the  mind  and  of  the 
senses,  whether  in  making  observations  or  in  making  experiments. 

Indeed,  if  we  chose  to  admit  that  observation  is  characterized  by 
this  alone,  that  men  of  science  note  phenomena  which  nature  pro- 
duces spontaneously  and  without  interference  by  them,  still  we  could 

*  Zimmermann,  Traiti  sur  Vexp^rience  en  mMecine,  Paris,  1774.  Vol.  I, 
p.  45. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


7 


not  conclude  that  the  mind,  like  the  hand,  always  remains  inactive 
in  observation ;  and  we  should  be  led  to  distin^ish  under  this  head 
two  kinds  of  observations,  some  passive,  others  active.  I  assume,  for 
instance,  what  often  occurs, — that  some  endemic  disease  appears  in 
a  region  and  presents  itself  to  a  physician's  observation.  Here  is  a 
spontaneous  or  passive  observation  which  the  physician  makes  by 
chance  and  without  being  led  to  it  by  any  preconceived  idea.  But 
after  observing  the  first  case,  if  the  physician  has  an  idea  that  the 
appearance  of  this  disease  may  well  be  related  to  certain  special  me- 
teorological or  hygienic  circumstances,  he  takes  a  journey  to 
other  regions  where  the  same  disease  prevails,  to  see  whether  it 
develops  under  the  same  conditions.  This  second  observation,  made 
in  view  of  a  preconceived  idea  of  the  nature  and  cause  of  the  disease, 
is  what  we  must  obviously  call  an  induced  or  active  observation.  I 
should  say  as  much  of  an  astronomer  who,  in  watching  the  sky,  dis- 
covers a  planet  passing,  by  chance,  before  his  telescope ;  in  this  case 
he  makes  a  fortuitous  or  passive  observation,  i.e.,  without  a  precon- 
ceived idea.  But,  if  the  astronomer,  after  noting  the  aberrations  of 
a  planet,  goes  on  to  make  observations,  to  seek  a  reason  for  them, 
then  I  should  say  that  he  makes  active  observations,  i.e.,  observations 
produced  by  a  preconceived  idea  of  the  cause  of  the  aberration.  We 
might  multiply  instances  of  this  kind  ad  infinitum,  to  prove  that,  in 
noting  natural  phenomena  that  present  themselves,  the  mind  is  now 
passive,  now  active, — which  means,  in  other  words,  that  observations 
are  made,  now  without  a  preconceived  idea  and  by  chance,  and  again 
with  a  preconceived  idea,  i.e.,  with  intention  to  verify  the  accuracy 
of  a  mental  conception. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  concede,  as  we  said  above,  that  experi- 
ment is  characterized  by  this  alone,  that  men  of  science  note  phe- 
nomena which  they  have  produced  artificially  and  which  would  not 
naturally  have  presented  themselves,  even  then  we  could  not  find 
that  the  experimenter's  hand  always  actively  interfered  to  bring 
about  the  appearance  of  these  phenomena.  In  certain  cases  indeed 
we  have  seen  accidents  where  nature  acted  for  him ;  and  here  again, 
from  the  point  of  view  of  manual  intervention,  we  shall  be  forced  to 
distinguish  between  active  experiments  and  passive  experiments. 
Let  me  assume  that  a  physiologist  wishes  to  study  digestion  and  to 
learn  what  happens  in  a  living  animal's  stomach;  he  will  divide 
the  walls  of  the  abdomen  and  stomach  according  to  known  operative 


8 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


rules  and  will  establish  what  is  called  a  gastric  fistula.  The  physi- 
ologist will  certainly  think  that  he  has  made  an  experiment,  because 
he  has  interfered  actively  to  make  phenomena  appear  which  did  not 
present  themselves  naturally  to  his  eyes.  But  now,  let  me  ask,  did 
Dr.  W.  Beaumont  make  an  experiment  when  he  came  across  that 
young  Canadian  hunter  who  had  received  a  point-blank  gun-shot 
in  the  left  hypochondria,  and  who  had  a  wide  fistula  of  the  stomach 
in  the  scar,  through  which  one  could  look  inside  that  organ?  Dr. 
Beaumont  took  this  man  into  his  service  and  was  able  to  study  the 
phenomena  of  gastric  digestion  de  vim  for  several  years,  as  he  shows 
in  the  interesting  journal  which  he  has  given  us  on  this  subject.^  In 
the  first  case,  the  physiologist  acted  on  the  preconceived  idea  of 
studying  digestive  phenomena  and  made  an  active  experiment.  In 
the  second  case,  an  accident  produced  a  fistula  of  the  stomach,  and  it 
presented  itself  fortuitously  to  Dr.  Beaumont.  According  to  our 
definition,  he  made  a  passive  experiment.  These  examples  therefore 
prove  that,  in  verifying  the  phenomena  called  experiments,  the  experi- 
menter's manual  activity  does  not  always  come  in,  since  it  happens 
that  the  phenomena,  as  we  have  seen,  may  present  themselves  as 
fortuitous  or  passive  observations. 

But  certain  physiologists  and  physicians  characterize  observation 
and  experiment  somewhat  differently.  For  them,  observation  con- 
sists in  noting  everything  normal  and  regular.  It  matters  little 
whether  the  investigator  has  produced  the  appearance  of  the  phe^ 
nomena  himself  or  by  another's  hands  or  by  accident;  he  considers 
them  without  disturbing  them  in  their  natural  state  and  so  mak6s  an 
observation.  Thus,  according  to  these  authors,  observations  were 
made  in  both  examples  of  gastric  fistula  cited  above,  because  in  both 
cases  we  had  under  our  eyes  digestive  phenomena  in  their  natural 
state.  The  fistula  served  only  for  seeing  better  and  making  observa- 
tions under  the  most  favorable  conditions. 

Experiment,  according  to  the  same  physiologists,  implies,  on  the 
contrary,  the  idea  of  a  variation  or  disturbance  that  an  investigatoi: 
brings  into  the  conditions  of  natural  phenomena.  This  definition 
corresponds,  in  fact,  to  a  large  group  of  experiments  made  in  physi- 
ology, which  might  be  called  experiments  by  destruction.  This  form 
of  experimenting,  which  goes  back  to  Galen,  is  the  simplest;  it 

■W.  Beaumont,  Experiments  and  Observations  on  the  Oastrio  Juice  and  on 
Physiological  Digestion.    Boston,  1834. 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


9 


should  suggest  itself  to  the  minds  of  anatomists  wishing  to  learn, 
in  the  living  subject,  the  use  of  parts  that  they  have  isolated  by  dis- 
section in  the  cadaver.  To  do  this,  we  suppress  an  organ  in  the 
living  subject,  by  a  section  or  ablation ;  and  from  the  disturbance  pro- 
duced in  the  whole  organism  or  in  a  special  function,  we  deduce  the 
function  of  the  missing  organ.  This  essentially  analytic,  experimen- 
tal method  is  put  in  practice  every  day  in  physiology.  For  instance, 
anatomy  had  taught  us  that  two  principal  nerves  diverge  in  the  face : 
the  facial  (seventh  cranial)  and  the  trigeminal  (fifth  cranial)  ;  to 
learn  their  functions,  they  were  cut,  one  at  a  time.  The  result  showed 
that  section  of  the  facial  nerve  brings  about  loss  of  movement,  and 
section  of  the  trigeminal,  loss  of  sensation,  from  which  it  was  con- 
cluded that  the  facial  is  the  motor  nerve  of  the  face,  and  the  tri- 
geminal the  sensory  nerve. 

We  said  that,  in  studying  digestion  by  means  of  a  fistula,  we 
merely  make  an  observation,  according  to  the  definition  which  we 
are  examining.  But  after  we  have  established  the  fistula,  if  we 
go  on  to  cut  the  nerves  of  the  stomach,  in  order  to  se^e  the  changes 
which  result  in  the  digestive  function,  then,  according  to  the  same 
way  of  thinking,  we  make  an  experiment,  because  we  seek  to  learn 
the  function  of  a  part  from  the  disturbance  which  its  suppression  in- 
volves. And  this  may  be  summed  up  by  saying  that  in  experimenta- 
tion we  make  judgments  by  comparing  two  facts,  one  normal,  the 
other  abnormal. 

This  definition  of  experiment  necessarily  assumes  that  experi- 
menters must  be  able  to  touch  the  body  on  which  they  wish  to  act, 
whether  by  destroying  it  or  by  altering  it,  so  as  to  learn  the  part 
which  it  plays  in  the  phenomena  of  nature.  As  we  shall  later  see, 
it  is  on  this  very  possibility  of  acting,  or  not  acting,  on  a  body  that 
the  distinction  will  exclusively  rest  between  sciences  called  sciences 
of  observation  and  sciences  called  experimental. 

But  if  the  definition  of  experiment  which  we  have  just  given  dif- 
fers from  the  definition  examined  in  the  first  place  in  that  it  admits 
that  we  make  an  experiment  only  when  we  can  vary  or  can  dissociate 
phenomena  by  a  kind  of  analysis,  still  it  resembles  the  first  in  that  it 
also  always  assumes  an  intentional  activity  on  the  experimenter's 
part,  in  producing  a  disturbance  of  the  phenomena.  Now  it  will 
be  easy  to  show  that  the  operator's  intentional  action  can  often  be 
replaced  by  an  accident.    Here  too,  as  in  the  first  definition,  we 


10 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


might  distinguish  between  disturbances  occurring  intentionally  and 
disturbances  occurring  spontaneously  or  unintentionally.  Indeed 
taking  again  the  example  in  which  a  physiologist  cuts  the  facial 
nerve  to  learn  its  function,  I  assume  that  a  ball,  a  sabre  cut  or  a 
splinter  of  stone,  has  cut  or  destroyed  the  facial  nerve;  there  will 
result  fortuitously  a  paralysis  of  movement,  i.e.,  a  disturbance,  ex- 
actly the  same  as  that  which  the  physiologist  caused  intentionally. 

It  is  the  same  in  the  case  of  numberless  pathological  lesions  which 
are  real  experiments,  by  which  physicians  and  physiologists  profit, 
without  any  purpose  on  their  part  to  produce  the  lesions,  which 
result  from  disease.  I  emphasize  this  idea  now,  because  it  will  be 
useful  to  us  later,  to  prove  that  medicine  includes  real  experiments 
which  are  spontaneous,  and  not  produced  by  physicians.^ 

I  will  make  one  more  remark  by  way  of  conclusion.  If  indeed 
we  characterize  experiment  by  a  variation  or  disturbance  brought  into 
a  phenomenon,  it  is  only  in  so  far  as  we  imply  that  the  disturbance 
must  be  compared  with  the  normal  state.  As  experiments  indeed  are 
only  judgments,  they  necessarily  require  comparison  between  two 
things;  and  the  intentional  or  active  element  in  an  experiment 
is  really  the  comparison  which  the  mind  intends  to  make.  Now, 
whether  the  alteration  is  produced  by  accident  or  otherwise,  the 
experimenter's  mind  compares  none  the  less.  It  is  therefore  un- 
necessary to  regard  as  a  disturbance  one  of  the  facts  to  be  compared, 
especially  as  there  is  nothing  disturbed  or  abnormal  in  nature ;  every- 
thing happens  according  to  laws  which  are  absolute,  i.e.,  always 
normal  and  determined.  Effects  vary  with  the  conditions  which 
bring  them  to  pass,  but  laws  do  not  vary.  Physiological  and  patho- 
logical states  are  ruled  by  the  same  forces ;  they  differ  only  because  of 
the  special  conditions  under  which  the  vital  laws  manifest  themselves. 

II.  Gaining  Experience  and  Relying  on  Observation  Is  Differ- 
ent FROM  Making  Experiments  and  Making  Observations 

The  general  objection  which  I  make  to  the  preceding  definitions 

is  that  they  give  words  too  narrow  a  meaning,  by  taking  account  of 

only  the  art  of  investigation,  instead  of  considering  observation  and 

experiment  at  the  same  time  as  the  two  opposite  extremes  of  experi- 

'Lallemand,  Propositions  de  pathologic  tendant  d  iclairer  plusfieurs  points 
de  physiologie.    Thesis.    Paris,  1818.    2nd  edition,  1824. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


11 


mental  reasoning.  So  we  find  these  definitions  lacking  in  clearness 
and  generality.  To  give  the  definition  its  full  usefulness  and  value, 
therefore,  I  think  that  we  must  distinguish  what  pertains  to  the 
method  of  investigation,  used  to  gather  facts,  from  the  characteristics 
of  the  intellectual  method,  which  utilizes  facts  and  makes  them  at 
once  the  support  and  the  criterion  of  the  experimental  method. 

In  French  the  word  experience  in  the  singular  means,  in  general 
and  in  the  abstract,  the  knowledge  gained  in  the  practice  of  life. 
When  we  apply  to  a  physician  the  word  experience  in  the  singular, 
it  means  the  information  which  he  has  gained  in  the  practice  of  medi- 
cine. It  is  the  same  with  the  other  professions;  and  it  is  in  this 
sense  that  we  say  that  a  man  has  gained  experience,  or  that  he  has 
experience.  Subsequently  the  word  experience  (experiment)  in  the 
concrete  was  extended  to  cover  the  facts  which  give  us  experimental 
information  about  things. 

The  word  observation  in  the  singular,  in  its  general  and  abstract 
use,  means  noting  a  fact  accurately  with  the  help  of  appropriate 
studies  and  means  of  investigation.  In  the  concrete  the  word  ob- 
servation has  been  extended  to  cover  the  facts  noted;  and  it  is  in 
this  sense  that  we  speak  of  medical  observations,  astronomical 
observations,  etc. 

Speaking  concretely,  when  we  say  "making  experiments  or  mak- 
ing observations,"  we  mean  that  we  devote  ourselves  to  investigation 
and  to  research,  that  we  make  attempts  and  trials  in  order  to  gain 
facts  from  which  the  mind,  through  reasoning,  may  draw  knowledge 
or  instruction. 

Speaking  in  the  abstract,  when  we  say  "relying  on  observation 
and  gaining  experience,"  we  mean  that  observation  is  the  mind's  sup- 
port in  reasoning,  and  experience  the  mind's  support  in  deciding,  or 
still  better,  the  fruit  of  exact  reasoning  applied  to  the  interpretation 
of  facts.  It  follows  from  this  that  we  can  gain  experience  without 
making  experiments,  solely  by  reasoning  appropriately  about  well- 
established  facts,  just  as  we  can  make  experiments  and  observations 
without  gaining  experience,  if  we  limit  ourselves  to  noting  facts. 

Observation,  then,  is  what  shows  facts;  experiment  is  what 
teaches  about  facts  and  gives  experience  in  relation  to  anything. 
But  as  this  teaching  can  come  through  comparison  and  judgment 
only,  i.e.,  by  sequence  of  reasoning,  it  follows  that  man  alone  is  ca- 
pable of  gaining  experience  and  perfecting  himself  by  it. 


12 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


"Experience,"  says  Goethe,  "disciplines  man  every  day."  But 
this  is  because  man  reasons  accurately  and  experimentally  about  what 
he  observes ;  otherwise  he  could  not  correct  himself.  The  insane,  who 
have  lost  their  reason,  no  longer  learn  from  experience;  they  no 
longer  reason  experimentally.  Experience,  then,  is  the  privilege 
of  reason.  "Only  man  may  verify  his  thoughts  and  set  them  in 
order;  only  man  may  correct,  rectify,  improve,  perfect  and  so 
make  himself  every  day  more  skilful,  wise  and  fortunate.  Finally 
for  man  alone  does  the  art  exist,  that  supreme  art  of  which  the  most 
vaunted  arts  are  mere  tools  and  raw  material:  the  art  of  reason, 
reasoning."  * 

In  experimental  medicine,  we  shall  use  the  word  experience  in 
the  same  general  sense  in  which  it  is  still  everywhere  used.  Men 
of  science  learn  every  day  from  experience ;  by  experience  they  con- 
stantly correct  their  scientific  ideas,  their  theories;  rectify  them, 
bring  them  into  harmony  with  more  and  more  facts,  and  so  come 
nearer  and  nearer  to  the  truth. 

We  can  learn, — i.e.,  gain  experience  of  our  surroundings, — in 
two  ways,  empirically  and  experimentally.  First  there  is  a  sort  of 
teaching  or  unconscious  and  empirical  experience,  which  we  get  from 
dealing  with  separate  objects.  But  the  knowledge  which  we  gain  in 
this  way  is  also  accompanied  necessarily  by  vague  experimental 
reasoning  which  we  carry  on  quite  unawares,  and  in  consequence  of 
which  we  bring  together  facts  to  make  a  judgment  about  them.  Ex- 
perience, then,  may  be  gained  by  empirical  and  unconscious  reason- 
ing; but  the  obscure  and  spontaneous  movement  of  the  mind  has 
been  raised  by  men  of  science  into  a  clear  and  reasoned  method, 
which  therefore  proceeds  consciously  and  more  swiftly  toward  a 
definite  goal.  Such  is  the  experimental  method  in  the  sciences  by 
which  experience  is  always  gained  by  virtue  of  precise  reasoning 
based  on  an  idea  born  of  observation  and  controlled  by  experiment. 
In  all  experimental  knowledge,  indeed,  there  are  three  phases;  an 
observation  made,  a  comparison  established  and  a  judgment  ren- 
dered. By  the  experimental  method,  we  simply  make  a  judgment 
on  the  facts  around  us,  by  help  of  a  criterion  which  is  itself  just 
another  fact  so  arranged  as  to  control  the  judgment  and  to  afford 
experience.  Taken  in  this  general  sense,  experience  is  the  one 
source  of  human  knowledge.    The  mind  in  itself  has  only  the  feeling 

*  Laromigui^re,  Diacours  sur  Videntite:  (Euvres.    Vol.  I,  p.  329. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


13 


of  a  necessary  relation  between  things :  it  can  know  the  form  of  that 
relation  only  by  experience. 

Two  things  must,  therefore,  be  considered  in  the  experimental 
method:  (1)  The  art  of  getting  accurate  facts  by  means  of  rigorous 
investigation;  (2)  the  art  of  working  them  up  by  means  of  experi- 
mental reasoning,  so  as  to  deduce  knowledge  of  the  law  of  phe- 
nomena. We  said  that  experimental  reasoning  always  and  neces- 
sarily deals  with  two  facts  at  a  time :  observation,  used  as  a  starting 
point ;  experiment,  used  as  conclusion  or  control.  Tn  reasoning,  how- 
ever, we  can  distinguish  between  actual  observation  and  experiment 
only,  as  it  were,  by  logical  abstraction  and  because  of  the  position  in 
which  they  stand. 

But  outside  of  experimental  reasoning,  observation  and  experi- 
ment no  longer  exist  in  this  abstract  sense;  there  are  only  concrete 
facts  in  each,  to  be  got  by  precise  and  rigorous  methods  of  investiga- 
tion. We  shall  see,  further  on,  that  the  investigator  himself  must  be 
analyzed  into  observer  and  experimenter;  not  according  to  whether 
he  is  active  or  passive  in  producing  phenomena,  but  according  to 
whether  he  acts  on  them  or  not,  to  make  himself  their  master. 

III.  The  Investigator;  Scientific  Research 

The  art  of  investigation  is  the  cornerstone  of  all  the  experimental 
sciences.  If  the  facts  used  as  a  basis  for  reasoning  are  ill-estab- 
lished or  erroneous,  everything  will  crumble  or  be  falsified;  and 
it  is  thus  that  errors  in  scientific  theories  most  often  originate  in 
errors  of  fact. 

In  investigation,  considered  as  the  art  of  experimental  research, 
we  find  only  facts  brought  to  light  by  investigators  and  noted  as 
rigorously  as  possible  with  the  help  of  the  most  suitable  means. 
There  is  no  further  occasion  here  to  distinguish  observers  from  ex- 
perimenters by  the  character  of  the  processes  of  investigation  used. 
In  the  last  section  I  showed  that  the  definitions  and  distinctions 
which  men  have  tried  to  set  up  on  the  basis  of  the  investigator's 
activity  or  passivity  cannot  be  sustained.  Observers  and  experi- 
menters, indeed,  are  investigators  seeking  to  note  facts  to  the  best  of 
their  ability,  using  more  or  less  complicated  means  for  this  purpose 
according  to  the  complexity  of  the  phenomena  that  they  study. 
Both  need  the  same  manual  and  intellectual  activity,  the  same 


14 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


dexterity,  tiie  same  spirit  of  invention,  to  create  and  perfect  the 
different  pieces  of  apparatus  or  instruments  for  investigation  which, 
for  the  most  part,  they  have  in  common.  Every  science  has  its  own 
kind  of  investigation  and  its  equipment  of  special  instruments  and 
methods.  This,  after  all,  is  plain  enough,  since  every  science  is 
characterized  by  the  nature  of  its  probleriis  and  by  the  variety  of  the 
phenomena  that  it  studies.  Medical  investigation  is  the  most  com- 
plicated of  all:  it  includes  all  the  methods  proper  to  anatomical, 
physiological  and  therapeutic  research,  and,  as  it  develops,  it  also  bor- 
rows from  chemistry  and  physics  many  means  of  research  which 
become  powerful  allies.  In  the  experimental  sciences  all  progress  is 
measured  by  improvement  in  the  means  of  investigation.  The  whole 
future  of  experimental  medicine  depends  on  creating  a  method  of 
research  which  may  be  applied  fruitfully  to  the  study  of  vital  phe- 
nomena, whether  in  a  normal  or  abnormal  state.  I  shall  not  here 
dwell  on  the  necessity  of  such  a  method  of  investigation  in  experi- 
mental medicine,  and  I  shall  not  even  attempt  to  enumerate  the 
difficulties.  I  shall  limit  myself  to  saying  that  my  whole  scientific 
life  is  devoted  to  contributing  my  share  to  the  immense  work  which 
modern  science  will  have  the  glory  of  having  understood,  and  the 
merit  of  having  begun,  while  leaving  to  future  ages  the  task  of  con- 
tinuing and  finally  establishing  it.  The  two  volumes  which  will 
form  my  work  on  the  Principles  of  Experimental  Medicine  will  be 
devoted  solely  to  elaborating  the  methods  of  experimental  investiga- 
tion applied  to  physiology,  pathology  and  therapeutics.  But  as  no 
one  man  can  consider  all  aspects  of  medical  investigation,  I  shall 
limit  myself  further  in  this  vast  subject,  by  dealing  especially  with 
systematization  of  the  methods  of  zoological  vivisection.  It  can- 
not be  gainsaid  that  this  is  the  most  delicate  and  difficult  branch 
of  biological  investigation ;  but  I  deem  it  the  most  fruitful  and  per- 
haps the  most  immediately  useful  for  the  advancement  of  experi- 
mental medicine. 

In  scientific  investigation,  minutiae  of  method  are  of  the  highest 
importance.  The  happy  choice  of  an  animal,  an  instrument  con- 
structed in  some  special  way,  one  reagent  used  instead  of  another, 
may  often  suffice  to  solve  the  most  abstract  and  lofty  questions. 
Every  time  that  a  new  and  reliable  means  of  experimental  analysis 
makes  its  appearance,  we  invariably  see  science  make  progress  in 
the  questions  to  which  this  means  of  analysis  can  be  applied.  On 


OP  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


15 


the  contrary,  a  bad  method  or  defective  processes  of  research  may 
cause  the  gravest  errors,  and  may  retard  science  by  leading  it  astray. 
In  a  word,  the  greatest  scientific  truths  are  rooted  in  details  of 
experimental  investigation  which  form,  as  it  were,  the  soil  in  which 
these  truths  develop. 

One  must  be  brought  up  in  laboratories  and  live  in  them,  to 
appreciate  the  full  importance  of  all  the  details  of  procedure  in 
investigation,  which  are  so  often  neglected  or  despised  by  the  false 
men  of  science  calling  themselves  generalizers.  Yet  we  shall  reach 
really  fruitful  and  luminous  generalizations  about  vital  phenomena 
only  in  so  far  as  we  ourselves  experiment  and,  in  hospitals,  amphi- 
theatres, or  laboratories,  stir  the  fetid  or  throbbing  ground  of  life. 
It  has  somewhere  been  said  that  true  science  is  like  a  flowering  and 
delectable  plateau  which  can  be  attained  only  after  climbing  craggy 
steeps  and  scratching  one's  legs  against  branches  and  brushwood.  If 
a  comparison  were  required  to  express  my  idea  of  the  science  of  life,  I 
should  say  that  it  is  a  superb  and  dazzlingly  lighted  hall  which  may  be 
reached  only  by  passing  through  a  long  and  ghastly  kitchen. 

IV.  Obseevers  and  Experimenters;  the  Sciences  of  Observa- 
tion AND  OF  Experiment 

We  have  just  seen  that,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  art  of  in- 
vestigation, observation  and  experiment  should  be  considered  only 
as  facts  brought  out  by  investigators,  and  we  have  added  that  methods 
of  investigation  do  not  differentiate  the  men  who  observe  from  the 
men  who  experiment.  Wliere  then,  you  will  ask,  is  the  difference 
between  observers  and  experimenters  ?  It  is  here :  we  give  the  name 
observer  to  the  man  who  applies  methods  of  investigation,  whether 
simple  or  complex,  to  the  study  of  phenomena  which  he  does  not 
vary  and  which  he  therefore  gathers  as  nature  offers  them.  We 
give  the  name  experimenter  to  the  man  who  applies  methods  of  in- 
vestigation, whether  simple  or  complex,  so  as  to  make  natural  phe- 
nomena vary,  or  so  as  to  alter  them  with  some  purpose  or  other, 
and  to  make  them  present  themselves  in  circumstances  or  conditions 
in  which  nature  does  not  show  them.  In  this  sense,  observation  ia 
investigation  of  a  natural  phenomenon,  and  experiment  is  investiga- 
tion of  a  phenomenon  altered  by  the  investigator.  We  shall  see  that 
this  distinction,  apparently  quite  external  and  depending  simply  on  a 


16 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


definition  of  words,  still  supplies  the  one  meaning  with  which  to 
grasp  the  important  difference  separating  sciences  of  observation 
from  sciences  of  experimentation  or  experimental  sciences.  We 
said,  in  an  earlier  paragxaph,  that  the  words  observation  and  experi- 
ment, taken  in  an  abstract  sense,  mean,  the  first,  purely  and  simply 
noting  a  fact,  the  second,  testing  an  idea  by  a  fact  But  if  we 
consider  observation  merely  in  this  abstract  sense,  we  cannot  deduce 
from  it  any  science  of  observation.  By  simply  noting  facts,  we  can 
never  succeed  in  establishing  a  science.  Pile  up  facts  or  observations 
as  we  may,  we  shall  be  none  the  wiser.  To  leam,  we  must  neces- 
sarily reason  about  what  we  have  observed,  compare  the  facts  and 
judge  them  by  other  facts  used  as  controls.  But  one  observation  may 
serve  as  control  for  another  observation,  so  that  a  science  of  obser- 
vation is  simply  a  science  made  up  of  observations,  i.e.,  a  science  in 
which  we  reason  about  facts  observed  in  their  natural  state,  as  we 
have  already  defined  them.  An  experimental  science,  or  science  of 
experimentation,  is  a  science  made  up  of  experiments,  i.e.,  one  in 
which  we  reason  on  experimental  facts  found  in  conditions  created 
and  determined  by  the  experimenter  himself. 

Certain  sciences,  like  astronomy,  will  always  remain  sciences  of 
observation,  because  the  phenomena  studied  are  outside  our  sphere  of 
action ;  but  terrestrial  sciences  may  be,  at  once,  sciences  of  observation 
and  experimental  sciences.  Let  me  add  that  all  these  sciences  begin 
as  sciences  of  pure  observation;  only  as  we  go  into  the  analysis 
of  phenomena  do  they  become  experimental,  because  the  observer, 
turning  experimenter,  invents  methods  of  investigation  to  penetrate 
bodies  and  vary  the  conditions  of  phenomena.  Experimentation 
is  only  utilizing  methods  of  investigation  peculiar  to  experi- 
menters. 

Now  experimental  reasoning  is  absolutely  the  same,  whether  in 
sciences  of  observation  or  in  experimental  sciences.  We  find  the 
same  judgment  by  comparison  based  on  two  facts,  one  used  as  start- 
ing point,  the  other  as  conclusion,  of  our  reasoning.  Only  in  the 
sciences  of  observation,  the  two  facts  are  always  observations ;  while 
in  the  experimental  sciences,  the  two  facts  may  be  taken  exclusively 
from  experimentation,  or  at  the  same  time  from  experimentation  and 
from  observation,  according  to  the  special  case  and  according  to  how 
deeply  we  go  into  experimental  analysis.  A  physician  observing  a  dis- 
ease in  different  circumstances,  reasoning  about  the  influence  of  these 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


17 


circumstances,  and  deducing  consequences  which  are  controlled  by 
other  observations, — this  physician  reasons  experimentally,  even 
though  he  makes  no  experiments.  But  if  he  wishes  to  go  further, 
and  to  know  the  inner  mechanism  of  the  disease,  he  will  have  to  deal 
with  hidden  phenomena,  and  so  he  will  experiment ;  but  he  will  still 
reason  in  the  same  way. 

A  naturalist  observing  animals  in  all  the  conditions  necessary  to 
their  existence,  and  deducing  from  these  observations  consequences 
verified  and  controlled  by  other  observations, — such  a  naturalist  uses 
the  experimental  method  even  though  he  performs  no  experiments, 
properly  speaking.  But  if  he  has  to  go  on  to  observe  phenomena 
inside  the  stomach,  he  is  forced  to  invent  more  or  less  complex  meth- 
ods of  experimentation  in  order  to  look  inside  a  cavity  hidden 
from  sight.  His  experimental  reasoning,  nevertheless,  is  the  same; 
Reaumur  and  Spallanzani  alike  apply  the  experimental  method  when 
making  their  observations  of  natural  history  or  their  experiments 
with  digestion.  When  Pascal  made  a  barometric  observation  at  the 
bottom  of  the  Tour  Saint  Jacques,  and  later  took  another  at  the  top 
of  the  tower,  we  must  admit  that  he  performed  an  experiment;  yet 
here  were  simply  two  comparative  observations  of  air  pressure  car- 
ried out  in  view  of  the  preconceived  idea  that  this  pressure  should 
vary  according  to  height.  On  the  other  hand,  when  Jenner,^  in 
observing  a  cuckoo  on  a  tree,  used  a  spy-glass  so  as  not  to  frighten  it, 
he  made  a  mere  observation,  because  he  did  not  compare  this  cuckoo 
with  a  previous  cuckoo,  to  deduce  a  conclusion  from  the  observation 
and  to  form  a  judgment  about  it.  In  the  same  way  an  astronomer 
first  makes  observations  and  then  reasons  about  them  to  deduce  a 
system  of  ideas  which  he  controls  by  observations  made  in  conditions 
suited  to  his  purpose.  The  astronomer  reasons  like  an  experimenter, 
because  the  experience  which  he  gains  implies  judgment  throughout 
and  comparison  between  two  facts  bound  together  in  the  mind  by  an 
idea. 

However,  as  we  have  said  already,  we  must  clearly  differentiate 
astronomers  from  the  men  of  science  concerned  with  terrestrial  sci- 
ence, in  that  astronomers  limit  themselves  perforce  to  observation, 
as  they  cannot  go  into  the  skies  to  experiment  on  the  planets.  In 
this  power  of  the  investigator  to  act  on  phenomena,  precisely  here 

•  Jenner,  On  the  natural  history  of  the  cuckoo.  {Philosophical  Transactions, 
1788,  Chap.  XVI,  p.  432.) 


18 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


is  the  difference  separating  the  so-called  sciences  of  experimentation 
from  those  of  observation. 

Laplace  considers  astronomy  a  science  of  observation,  because 
we  can  only  observe  the  movements  of  the  planets ;  we  cannot  reach 
them,  indeed,  to  alter  their  course  and  to  experiment  v^^ith  them. 
^^On  earth,"  said  Laplace,  "we  make  phenomena  vary  by  experi- 
ments ;  in  the  sky,  we  carefully  define  all  the  phenomena  presented  to 
us  by  celestial  motion."  ^  Certain  physicians  call  medicine  a  sci- 
ence of  observations,  because  they  wrongly  think  that  experimenta- 
tion is  inapplicable  to  it. 

Fundamentally,  all  sciences  reason  in  the  same  way  and  aim  at  the 
same  object.  They  all  try  to  reach  knowledge  of  the  law  of  phe- 
nomena, so  as  to  foresee,  vary  or  master  phenomena.  Astrono- 
mers foretell  the  movements  of  the  stars;  they  deduce  from  them  a 
quantity  of  practical  ideas;  but  they  cannot  alter  celestial  phenom- 
ena by  experimentation  as  do  chemists  and  physicists  the  phenomena 
of  their  sciences. 

If  then,  from  the  point  of  view  of  philosophic  method,  there 
is  no  essential  difference  between  sciences  of  observation  and  sciences 
of  experimentation,  still  there  is  a  real  one  from  the  point  of  view 
of  the  practical  consequences,  which  man  deduces  from  them,  and  the 
power  which  he  gains  by  their  means.  In  sciences  of  observation, 
man  observes  and  reasons  expeiimentally,  but  he  does  not  experi- 
ment; and  in  this  sense  we  might  say  that  a  science  of  observation 
is  a  passive  science.  In  sciences  of  experimentation,  man  observes, 
but  in  addition  he  acts  on  matter,  analyzes  its  properties  and  to  his 
own  advantage  brings  about  the  appearance  of  phenomena  which 
doubtless  always  occur  according  to  natural  laws,  but  in  conditions 
which  nature  often  has  not  yet  achieved.  With  the  help  of  these 
active  experimental  sciences,  man  becomes  an  inventor  of  phenom- 
ena, a  real  foreman  of  creation;  and  under  this  head  we  cannot 
set  limits  to  the  power  that  he  may  gain  over  nature  through  future 
progress  in  the  experimental  sciences. 

The  question  remains  whether  medicine  should  continue  a  science 
of  observation  or  become  an  experimental  science.  Medicine  must 
doubtless  begin  as  simple  clinical  observation.  Then,  since  the 
human  organism  is  in  itself  a  harmonious  unit,  a  little  world  (micro- 
cosm) contained  in  the  great  world  (macrocosm),  men  have  actually 

•Laplace.    Systime  du  monde.    Chap.  II. 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


19 


maintained  that  life  is  indivisible  and  that  we  should  limit  our- 
selves to  observing  the  phenomena  presented  to  us  as  a  whole  by  liv- 
ing organisms,  whether  well  or  sick,  and  should  content  ourselves 
with  reasoning  on  the  facts  observed.  But  if  we  admit  that  we  must 
so  limit  ourselves,  and  if  we  posit  as  a  principle  that  medicine  is 
only  a  passive  science  of  observation,  then  physicians  should  no  more 
touch  the  human  body  than  astronomers  touch  the  planets.  Hence, 
normal  and  pathological  anatomy,  vivisection  applied  to  physiology, 
pathology  and  therapeutics, — all  would  become  completely  useless. 
Medicine  so  conceived  can  lead  only  to  prognosis  and  to  hygienic 
prescriptions  of  doubtful  utility;  it  is  the  negation  of  active  medi- 
cine, i.e.,  of  real  and  scientific  therapeutics. 

This  is  by  no  means  the  place  to  begin  examining  so  important 
a  definition  as  that  of  experimental  medicine.  I  propose  to  treat 
this  question  later  with  all  necessary  amplification.  I  shall  limit 
myself  here  to  saying  that  I  think  that  medicine  is  destined  to  be 
an  experimental  and  progressive  science;  and  precisely  because  of 
my  conviction  in  this  respect,  I  am  putting  together  this  work 
with  the  object  of  contributing  my  share  toward  encouraging  the 
development  of  scientific  and  experimental  medicine. 


V.  Experiment  Is  Fundamentally  Only  Induced  Observation 

Despite  the  important  difference,  which  we  have  just  pointed  out, 
between  the  so-called  sciences  of  observation  and  of  experimentation, 
observers  and  experimenters  still  have  the  common  and  immediate 
object,  in  their  investigations,  of  establishing  and  noting  facts  and 
phenomena  as  rigorously  as  possible,  and  with  the  help  of  the  most 
appropriate  means ;  they  behave  exactly  as  if  they  were  dealing  with 
two  ordinary  observations.  In  both  cases,  indeed,  a  fact  is  simply 
noted ;  the  only  difference  is  this, — as  the  fact  which  an  experimenter 
must  verify  does  not  present  itself  to  him  naturally,  he  must  make 
it  appear,  i.e.,  induce  it,  for  a  special  reason  and  with  a  definite  ob- 
ject. Hence  we  may  say  that  an  experiment  is  fundamentally  just  an 
observation  induced  with  some  object  or  other.  In  the  experimental 
method,  search  for  facts,  i.e.,  investigation,  is  always  accompanied  by 
reasoning,  so  that  experimenters  usually  make  an  experiment  to 
control  or  verify  the  value  of  an  experimental  idea.    Hence,  in  this 


20 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


case,  the  experiment  is  an  observation  induced  with  the  object  of 
control. 

Still,  to  complete  our  definition  and  to  extend  it  to  the  sciences 
of  observation,  it  is  worth  recalling  here  that,  to  verify  an  idea,  it 
is  not  always  absolutely  necessary  to  make  an  experiment  or  an  obser- 
vation ourselves.  We  shall  have  recourse  to  experimentation  per- 
force only  when  the  observation  to  be  induced  is  not  already  pre- 
pared in  nature.  But  if  an  observation  has  already  been  made, 
either  naturally  or  accidentally,  or  even  by  another  investigator,  then 
we  may  take  it  ready  made,  and  produce  it  simply  to  serve  as  verifica- 
tion of  the  experimental  idea.  And  this  may  be  summed  up  again 
by  saying  that,  in  this  case,  the  experiment  is  just  an  observation 
produced  for  the  purpose  of  control.  It  follows  that,  to  reason  ex- 
perimentally,, we  must  usually  have  an  idea  and  afterwards  induce  or 
produce  facts,  i.e.,  observations,  to  control  our  preconceived  idea. 

We  shall  examine  later  the  importance  of  preconceived  experi- 
mental ideas;  let  it  suffice  us  now  to  say  that  the  idea,  by  virtue  of 
which  we  undertake  an  experiment,  may  be  more  or  less  clearly 
defined,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  subject  and  according  to  the 
state  of  perfection  of  the  science  in  which  we  are  experimenting. 
Indeed  the  guiding  idea  of  an  experiment  should  include  everything 
already  known  about  the  subject,  so  as  to  direct  our  search  more 
surely  toward  problems  whose  solution  may  be  fruitful  in  the  ad- 
vancement of  science.  In  established  sciences,  like  physics  and 
chemistry,  experimental  ideas  are  deduced  in  logical  sequence  from 
ruling  theories,  and  are  submitted  with  a  clearly  defined  meaning  to 
the  control  of  experiment ;  but  in  the  case  of  a.  science  in  its  infancy, 
like  medicine,  where  complex  and  obscure  questions  are  still  to  be 
studied,  experimental  ideas  do  not  always  emerge  from  rather  vague 
conceptions.  What  then  must  be  done?  Must  we  abstain  and  wait 
for  observations  to  present  themselves  spontaneously  and  so  bring 
us  clearer  ideas?  We  might  often  wait  long  and  even  in  vain;  in 
any  case  we  gain  by  experimenting.  But  in  this  instance  we  can 
guide  ourselves  only  by  a  kind  of  intuition,  as  we  catch  sight  of  prob- 
abilities; and  if  the  subject  is  entirely  dark  and  unexplored,  physi- 
ologists should  not  be  afraid  even  to  act  somewhat  at  random,  so  as 
to  try, — permit  me  the  common  expression, — fishing  in  troubled 
waters.  This  amounts  to  saying  that,  in  the  midst  of  the  functional 
disturbances  which  they  produce,  they  may  hope  to  see  some  unex- 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


21 


pected  phenomena  emerge  which  may  give  direction  to  their  re- 
search. Such  groping  experiments,  which  are  very  common  in  physi- 
ology and  therapeutics  because  of  the  complex  and  backward  state 
of  these  sciences,  may  be  called  experiments  to  see,  because  they  are 
intended  to  make  a  first  observation  emerge,  unforeseen  and  unde- 
termined in  advance,  but  whose  appearance  may  suggest  an  experi- 
mental idea  and  open  a  path  for  research. 

There  are  instances,  then,  in  which  we  experiment  without  hav- 
ing a  probable  idea  to  verify.  However,  experimentation  in  this 
instance  is  none  the  less  intended  to  induce  an  observation,  only  it 
induces  it  with  a  view  to  finding  an  idea  which  shall  point  out  a  later 
path  to  follow  in  investigation.  We  may  therefore  say  that  the  ex- 
periment is  then  an  observation  induced  with  the  object  of  bringing 
to  birth  an  idea. 

To  sum  up,  the  investigator  seeks  and  concludes ;  he  includes  both 
observations  and  experiments,  he  pursues  the  discovery  of  new  ideas, 
even  while  seeking  facts  from  which  to  draw  a  conclusion,  or  an 
experiment  calculated  to  control  other  ideas. 

In  a  general  and  abstract  sense,  an  experimenter,  then,  is  a  man 
who  produces  or  induces,  in  definite  conditions,  observed  facts,  to 
derive  from  them  the  instruction  which  he  wishes, — that  is,  experi- 
ence. An  observer  is  a  man  who  gathers  observed  facts  and  who 
decides  whether  they  have  been  ascertained  by  the  help  of  appro- 
priate means.  Thus  it  is  that  experimenters  must  at  the  same  time 
be  good  observers,  and  that  in  the  experimental  method,  experiment 
and  observation  always  advance  side  by  side. 

VI.    In    ExPERIMENTAIi    REASONING,    EXPERIMENTERS    ArE  I^OT 

Separate  from  Observers 

Men  of  science  who  mean  to  embrace  the  principles  of  the  ex- 
perimental method  as  a  whole,  must  fulfill  two  classes  of  conditions 
and  must  possess  two  qualities  of  mind  which  are  indispensable  if 
they  are  to  reach  their  goal  and  succeed  in  the  discovery  of  truth. 
First,  they  must  have  ideas  which  they  submit  to  the  control  of 
facts ;  but  at  the  same  time  they  must  make  sure  that  the  facts  which 
serve  as  starting  point  or  as  control  for  the  idea  are  correct  and 
well  established ;  they  must  be  at  once  observers  and  experimenters. 

Observers,  we  said,  purely  and  simply  not©  the  phenomena  before 


22 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


their  eyes.  They  must  be  anxious  only  to  forearm  themselves  against 
errors  of  observation  which  might  make  them  incompletely  see  or 
poorly  define  a  phenomenon.  To  this  end  they  use  every  instrument 
which  may  help  make  their  observations  more  complete.  Observers, 
then,  must  be  photographers  of  phenomena ;  their  observations  must 
accurately  represent  nature.  We  must  observe  without  any  pre- 
conceived idea;  the  observer's  mind  must  be  passive,  that  is,  must 
hold  its  peace;  it  listens  to  nature  and  writes  at  nature's  dictation. 

But  when  a  fact  is  once  noted  and  a  phenomenon  well  observed, 
reasoning  intervenes,  and  the  experimenter  steps  forward  to  interpret 
the  phenomenon. 

An  experimenter,  as  we  have  already  said,  is  a  man  inspired  by 
a  more  or  less  probable  but  anticipated  interpretation  of  observed 
phenomena,  to  devise  experiments  which,  in  the  logical  order  of 
his  anticipations,  shall  bring  results  serving  as  controls  for  his 
hypothesis  or  preconceived  idea.  To  do  this,  an  exp>erimenter  re- 
flects, tries  out,  gropes,  compares,  contrives,  so  as  to  find  the  experi- 
mental conditions  best  suited  to  gain  the  end  which  he  sets  before 
him.  Of  necessity  we  experiment  with  a  preconceived  idea.  An 
experimenter's  mind  must  be  active,  i.e.,  must  question  nature,  and 
put  all  manner  of  queries  to  it  according  to  the  various  hypotheses 
which  suggest  themselves. 

But  when  the  conditions  of  an  experiment  are  once  established 
and  worked  up  according  to  the  mind's  preconceived  idea,  an 
induced  or  premeditated  observation  will,  as  we  said,  result. 
Phenomena  then  appear  which  the  experimenter  has  caused,  but  which 
must  now  be  noted,  so  as  to  learn  next  how  to  use  them  to  control 
the  experimental  idea  which  brought  them  to  birth.  !Now,  from 
the  moment  when  the  result  of  an  experiment  appears,  the  experi- 
menter is  confronted  with  a  real  observation  which  he  has  induced 
and  must  note,  like  any  other  observation,  without  any  preconceived 
idea.  The  experimenter  must  now  disappear  or  rather  change  him- 
self instantly  into  an  observer;  and  it  is  only  after  he  has  noted  the 
results  of  the  experiment  exactly,  like  those  of  an  ordinary  observa- 
tion, that  his  mind  will  come  back,  to  reason,  compare  and  decide 
whether  his  experimental  hypothesis  is  verified  or  disproved  by  these 
very  results.  To  maintain  the  comparison  suggested  above,  I  may 
say  that  our  experimenter  puts  questions  to  nature ;  but  that,  as  soon 
as  she  speaks,  he  must  hold  his  peace ;  he  must  note  her  answer,  hear 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


23 


her  out  and  in  every  case  accept  her  decision.  It  has  been  said  that 
the  experimenter  must  force  nature  to  unveil  herself.  Yes,  the  ex- 
perimenter doubtless  forces  nature  to  unveil  herself  by  attacking  her 
with  all  manner  of  questions;  he  must  never  ansv^er  for  her  nor 
listen  partially  to  her  answers  by  taking,  from  the  results  of  an  ex- 
periment, only  those  which  support  or  confirm  his  hypothesis.  We 
shall  see  later  that  this  is  one  of  the  great  stumbling  blocks  of  the 
experimental  method.  An  experimenter,  who  clings  to  his  precon- 
ceived idea  and  notes  the  results  of  his  experiment  only  from 
this  point  of  view,  falls  inevitably  into  error,  because  he  fails 
to  note  what  he  has  not  foreseen  and  so  makes  a  partial  observation. 
An  experimenter  must  not  hold  to  his  idea,  except  as  a  means  of 
inviting  an  answer  from  nature.  But  he  must  submit  his  idea  to 
nature  and  be  ready  to  abandon,  to  alter  or  to  supplant  it,  in  ac- 
cordance with  what  he  learns  from  observing  the  phenomena  which, 
he  has  induced. 

Two  operations  must  therefore  be  considered  in  any  experiment. 
The  first  consists  in  premeditating  and  bringing  to  pass  the  condi- 
tions of  the  experiment;  the  second  consists  in  noting  the  results  of 
the  experiment.  It  is  impossible  to  devise  an  experiment  without  a 
preconceived  idea ;  devising  an  experiment,  we  said,  is  putting  a 
question ;  we  never  conceive  a  question  without  an  idea  which  invites 
an  answer.  I  consider  it,  therefore,  an  absolute  principle  that  ex- 
periments must  always  be  devised  in  view  of  a  preconceived  idea,  no 
matter  if  the  idea  be  not  very  clear  nor  very  well  defined.  As  for 
noting  the  results  of  the  experiment,  which  is  itself  only  an  induced 
observation,  I  posit  it  similarly  as  a  principle  that  we  must  here,  aB 
always,  observe  without  a  preconceived  idea. 

In  the  experimenter,  we  might  also  differentiate  and  separate 
the  man  who  preconceives  and  devises  an  experiment  from  the 
man  who  carries  it  out  or  notes  its  results.  In  the  former,  it  is  the 
scientific  investigator's  mind  that  acts;  in  the  latter,  it  is  the  senses 
that  observe  and  note.  What  I  am  setting  forth  is  most  strikingly 
proved  in  the  case  of  Francois  Huber.^  Though  blind,  this  great 
naturalist  left  us  admirable  experiments  which  he  conceived  and 
afterward  had  carried  out  by  his  serving  man,  who,  for  his  part,  had 
not  a  single  scientific  idea.    So  Huber  was  the  directing  mind  that 

'  Francois  Huber,  'Nouvelles  Observations  sur  les  Aheilles,  2nd  edition,  ex- 
panded by  hi^  son,  Pierre  Huber,  Geneva,  1814. 


24 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


devised  the  experiment ;  but  he  was  forced  to  borrow  anotber's  senses. 
The  serving  man  stood  for  tbe  passive  senses,  obedient  to  tbe  mind 
in  carrying  out  an  experiment  devised  in  tbe  ligbt  of  a  preconceived 
idea. 

People  wbo  condemn  tbe  use  of  bypotbeses  and  of  preconceived 
ideas  in  tbe  experimental  method  make  tbe  mistake  of  confusing  in- 
vention of  an  experiment  with  noting  its  results.  We  may  truly 
say  that  tbe  results  of  an  experiment  must  be  noted  by  a  mind 
stripped  of  bypotbeses  and  preconceived  ideas.  But  we  must  beware 
of  proscribing  the  use  of  bypotbeses  and  of  ideas  wben  devising  ex- 
periments or  imagining  means  of  observation.  On  tbe  contrary,  as 
we  shall  soon  see,  we  must  give  free  rein  to  our  imagination;  tbe 
idea  is  tbe  essence  of  all  reasoning  and  all  invention.  All  progress 
depends  on  tbat.  It  cannot  be  smothered  or  driven  away  on  tbe 
pretence  tbat  it  may  do  barm ;  it  must  only  be  regulated  and  given 
a  criterion,  wbich  is  quite  anotber  matter. 

Tbe  true  scientist  is  one  wbose  work  includes  both  experi- 
mental tbeory  and  experimental  practice.  (1)  He  notes  a  fact; 
(2)  a  propos  of  tbis  fact,  an  idea  is  bom  in  bis  mind;  (3)  in  tbe 
ligbt  of  tbis  idea,  be  reasons,  devises  an  experiment,  imagines  and 
brings  to  pass  its  material  conditions ;  (4)  from  tbis  experiment,  new 
phenomena  result  wbicb  must  be  observed,  and  so  on  and  so  forth. 
Tbe  mind  of  a  scientist  is  always  placed,  as  it  were,  between  two 
observations:  one  wbicb  serves  as  starting  point  for  reasoning,  and 
tbe  other  wbicb  serves  as  conclusion. 

To  make  myself  clearer,  I  bave  endeavored  to  separate  tbe  dif- 
ferent operations  of  experimental  reasoning.  But  wben  it  all  takes 
place  at  tbe  same  time  in  tbe  bead  of  a  scientist,  abandoning  bim- 
self  to  investigation  in  a  science  as  vague  as  medicine  still  is, 
tben  tbe  results  of  observation  are  so  entangled  witb  tbe  bases  of 
experiment  tbat  it  would  be  alike  impossible  and  useless  to  try  to  dis- 
sociate, from  their  inextricable  mingling,  eacb  one  of  these  terms. 
It  is  enougb  to  remember  tbe  principle  that  an  a  priori  idea,  or  better, 
an  bypotbesis,  is  a  stimulus  to  experiment,  and  tbat  we  must  let  our- 
selves go  witb  it  freely,  provided  tbat  we  observe  tbe  results  of  our 
experiment  rigorously  and  fully.  If  an  bypotbesis  is  not  verified 
and  disappears,  tbe  facts  wbicb  it  bas  enabled  us  to  find  are  none  tbe 
less  acquired  as  indestructible  materials  for  science. 

Observers  and  experimenters,  tben,  correspond  to  different  phases 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


25 


of  experimental  research.  The  observer  does  not  reason,  he  notes; 
the  experimenter,  on  the  other  hand,  reasons  and  grounds  himself 
on  acquired  facts,  to  imagine  and  induce  rationally  other  facts.  But 
though  in  theory  and  abstractly  we  may  differentiate  observers  from 
experimenters,  it  seems  impossible  to  separate  them  in  practice,  since 
we  see  that  one  and  the  same  investigator,  perforce,  is  alternately 
observer  and  experimenter. 

Things  happen  constantly,  indeed,  in  this  way  when  a  single  man 
of  science  discovers  and  explains  a  whole  scientific  question  un- 
aided. But  it  more  often  happens  in  the  evolution  of  science,  that 
different  parts  of  experimental  reasoning  are  shared  by  several  men. 
Some  of  these,  both  in  medicine  and  in  natural  history,  merely  gather 
and  assemble  observations;  others  manage  to  formulate  more  or  less 
ingenious  and  more  or  less  probable  hypotheses  based  on  these  obser- 
vations; then  others  come  in  to  create  conditions  favoring  the  birth 
of  an  experiment  to  control  these  hypotheses;  finally  others  apply 
themselves  more  especially  to  generalizing  and  systematizing  the 
results  obtained  by  the  different  observers  and  experimenters.  This 
parceling  out  of  the  experimental  domain  is  useful,  because  each 
one  of  its  various  parts  is  all  the  better  cultivated.  In  fact  we  can 
easily  conceive  that,  in  certain  sciences,  the  means  of  observation  and 
experimentation  are  such  specialized  instruments  that  their  manage- 
ment and  use  require  a  certain  manual  dexterity  or  the  sharpening 
of  certain  senses.  But  while  I  accept  specialization  in  the  practice, 
I  reject  it  utterly  in  the  theory  of  science.  I  believe,  indeed,  that 
making  generalization  one's  specialty  is  anti-philosophic  and  anti- 
scientific,  in  spite  of  what  has  been  proclaimed  by  a  modern  philo- 
sophic school  which  piques  itself  on  its  scientific  basis. 

Experimental  science,  however,  cannot  advance  on  a  single  side 
of  the  method  taken  separately;  it  goes  ahead  only  by  the  union  of 
all  parts  of  the  method  converging  toward  a  common  goal.  Men 
who  gather  observations  are  useful  only  because  their  observations 
are  afterward  introduced  into  experimental  reasoning;  in  other 
words,  endless  accumulation  of  observations  leads  nowhere.  Men,  who 
formulate  hypotheses  a  propos  of  observations  gathered  by  others,  are 
useful  only  in  so  far  as  men  seek  to  verify  these  hypotheses  by  ex- 
perimenting; else  these  hypotheses,  unverified  or  unverifiable  by 
experiment,  would  engender  nothing  but  systems  and  would  bring 
us  back  to  scholasticism.   Men  who  experiment,  despite  all  their  dex- 


26         THE  STUDY  OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


terity,  cannot  solve  problems  unless  they  are  inspired  by  a  fortunate 
hypothesis  based  on  accurate  and  well-made  observations.  Finally 
men  who  generalize  can  make  lasting  theories  only  in  so  far  as  they 
themselves  learn  all  the  scientific  details  that  these  theories  are 
intended  to  represent.  Scientific  generalization  must  proceed  from 
particular  facts  to  principles ;  and  principles  are  the  more  stable  as 
they  rest  on  deeper  details,  just  as  a  stake  is  the  firmer,  the  farther  it 
is  driven  into  the  ground. 

We  see,  then,  that  the  elements  of  the  scientific  method  are  inter- 
related. Facts  are  necessary  materials;  but  their  working  up  by 
experimental  reasoning,  i.e.,  by  theory,  is  what  establishes  and  really 
builds  up  science.  Ideas,  given  form  by  facts,  embody  science.  A 
scientific  hypothesis  is  merely  a  scientific  idea,  preconceived  or  pre- 
visioned.  A  theory  is  merely  a  scientific  idea  controlled  by  experi- 
ment. Reasoning  merely  gives  a  form  to  our  ideas,  so  that  every- 
thing, first  and  last,  leads  back  to  an  idea.  The  idea  is  what  estab- 
lishes, as  we  shall  see,  the  starting  point  or  the  primum  movens  of 
all  scientific  reasoning,  and  it  is  also  the  goal  in  the  mind's  aspiration 
toward  the  unknown. 


CHAPTER  II 


THE  A  PEIORI  IDEA  AND  DOUBT  IN  EXPERIMENTAL 

REASONING 

Everyone  first  works  out  his  own  ideas  about  what  he  sees  and 
is  inclined  to  interpret  natural  phenomena  by  anticipation  before 
knowing  them  through  experience.  This  tendency  is  spontaneous; 
a  preconceived  idea  always  has  been  and  always  will  be  the  first  flight 
of  an  investigating  mind.  But  the  object  of  the  experimental  method 
is  to  transform  this  a  priori  conception,  based  on  an  intuition  or  a 
vague  feeling  about  the  nature  of  things,  into  an  a  posteriori  inter- 
pretation founded  on  the  experimental  study  of  phenomena.  This 
is  why  the  experimental  method  is  also  called  the  a  posteriori  method. 

Man  is  by  nature  metaphysical  and  proud.  He  has  gone  so  far 
as  to  think  that  the  idealistic  creations  of  his  mind,  which  correspond 
to  his  feelings,  also  represent  reality.  Hence  it  follows  that  the 
experimental  method  is  by  no  means  primitive  or  natural  to  man, 
and  that  only  after  lengthy  wanderings  in  theological  and  scholastic 
discussion  has  he  recognized  at  last  the  sterility  of  his  efforts  in 
this  direction.  At  this  point  man  becomes  aware  that  he  cannot 
dictate  laws  to  nature,  because  he  does  not  contain  within  himself 
the  knowledge  and  criterion  of  external  things,  and  he  understands 
that  to  find  truth  he  must,  on  the  contrary,  study  natural  laws  and 
submit  his  ideas,  if  not  his  reason,  to  experience,  that  is,  to  the 
criterion  of  facts.  Yet  for  all  that,  the  method  of  work  of  the  human 
mind  is  not  changed  at  bottoni.  The  metaphysician,  the  scholastic, 
and  the  experimenter  all  work  with  an  a  priori  idea.  The  differ- 
ence is  that  the  scholastic  imposes  his  idea  as  an  absolute  truth  which 
he  has  found,  and  from  which  he  then  deduces  consequences  by  logic 
alone.  The  more  modest  experimenter,  on  the  other  hand,  states  an 
idea  as  a  question,  as  an  interpretative,  more  or  less  probable  anticipa- 
tion of  nature,  from  which  he  logically  deduces  consequences  which, 
moment  by  moment,  he  confronts  with  reality  by  means  of  experi- 
ment. He  advances,  thus,  from  partial  to  more  general  truths,  but 
without  ever  daring  to  assert  that  he  has  grasped  the  absolute  truth. 

27 


28 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


Indeed  if  we  held  it  at  any  point  whatever,  we  should  have  it  every- 
where ;  for  the  absolute  leaves  nothing  outside  itself. 

An  experimental  idea,  then,  is  also  an  a  priori  idea,  but  it  is  an 
idea  that  presents  itself  in  the  form  of  an  hypothesis  the  consequences 
of  which  must  be  submitted  to  the  criterion  of  experiment,  so  that 
its  value  may  be  tested.  The  experimenter's  mind  differs  from  the 
metaphysician's  or  the  scholastic's  in  its  modesty,  because  experiment 
makes  him,  moment  by  moment,  conscious  of  both  his  relative  and 
his  absolute  ignorance.  In  teaching  man,  experimental  science  re- 
sults in  lessening  his  pride  more  and  more  by  proving  to  him  every- 
day that  primary  causes,  like  the  objective  reality  of  things,  will  be 
hidden  from  him  forever  and  that  he  can  know  onlv  relations. 
Here  is,  indeed,  the  one  goal  of  all  the  sciences,  as  we  shall  see  fur- 
ther on. 

The  human  mind  has  at  different  periods  of  its  evolution  passed 
successively  through  feeling,  reason  and  experiment.  First,  feeling 
alone,  imposing  itself  on  reason,  created  the  truths  of  faith  or  the- 
ology. Reason  or  philosophy,  the  mind's  next  mistress,  brought  to 
birth  scholasticism.  At  last,  experiment,  or  the  study  of  natural 
phenomena,  taught  man  that  the  truths  of  the  outer  world  are  to  be 
found  ready  formulated  neither  in  feeling  nor  in  reason.  These  are 
indispensable  merely  as  guides;  but  to  attain  external  truths  we 
must  of  necessity  go  down  into  the  objective  reality  of  things  where 
they  lie  hidden  in  their  phenomenal  form. 

Thus,  in  the  natural  progress  of  things,  appeared  the  experimental 
method  which  includes  everything  and  which,  as  we  shall  soon  see, 
leans  successively  on  the  three  divisions  of  that  unchangeable  tripod ; 
sentiment,  reason  and  experiment.  In  the  search  for  truth  by 
means  of  this  method,  feeling  always  takes  the  lead,  it  begets  the 
a  priori  idea  or  intuition ;  reason  or  reasoning  develops  the  idea  and 
deduces  its  logical  consequences.  But  if  feeling  must  be  clarified  by 
the  light  of  reason,  reason  in  turn  must  be  guided  by  experiment. 

I.  Experimental  Truths  Are  Objective  or  External 

The  experimental  method  is  concerned  only  with  the  search  for 
objective  truths,  not  with  any  search  for  subjective  truths. 

As  there  are  two  kinds  of  functions  in  man's  body,  the  first,  con- 
scious functions,  the  rest  not,  so  in  his  mind  there  are  two  kinds  of 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


29 


truths  or  notions,  some  conscious,  inner  or  subjective,  the  others 
unconscious,  outer  or  objective.  Subjective  truths  are  those  flowing 
from  principles  of  which  the  mind  is  conscious,  and  which  bring  it 
the  sensation  of  absolute  and  necessary  evidence.  The  greatest 
truths,  indeed,  are  at  bottom  simply  a  feeling  in  our  mind;  that  is 
what  Descartes  meant  by  his  famous  aphorism. 

We  said,  on  the  other  hand,  that  man  would  never  know  either 
the  primary  cause,  nor  the  essence  of  things.  Hence  truth  never 
shows  itself  to  his  mind  except  in  the  form  of  a  connection  or  of  a 
necessary  and  absolute  relation.  But  this  connection  may  be  abso- 
lute only  in  so  far  as  its  conditions  are  siniple  and  subjective,  that 
is,  when  the  mind  is  aware  of  knowing  them  all.  Mathematics  em- 
bodies the  relations  of  things  in  conditions  of  ideal  simplicity.  It 
follows  that  these  principles  or  relations,  once  found,  are  accepted  by 
the  mind  as  absolute  truths,  i.e.,  truths  independent  of  reality.  We 
see  now  that  all  logical  deductions  in  a  piece  of  mathematical  reason- 
ing are  just  as  certain  as  their  principle,  and  that  they  do  not  require 
verification  by  experiment.  That  would  be  trying  to  place  the  senses 
above  reason ;  and  it  would  be  absurd  to  seek  to  prove  what  is  abso- 
lutely true  for  the  mind  and  what  it  could  not  conceive  otherwise. 

But  when  man  stops  working  with  subjective  relations,  the  condi- 
tions of  which  his  mind  has  created,  and  tries  to  learn  about  the 
objective  relations  of  nature  which  he  has  not  created,  then  at  once 
the  inner  and  conscious  criterion  fails  him.  He  is,  of  course,  still 
aware  that  in  the  objective  or  outer  world  truth  consists,  in  the  same 
way,  of  necessary  relations ;  but  he  lacks  knowledge  of  the  conditions 
of  these  relations.  Only  if  he  had  created  these  conditions,  indeed, 
could  he  possess  absolute  knowledge  of  them  and  absolute  under- 
standing. 

Still  man  must  believe  that  the  objective  relations  between 
phenomena  of  the  outer  world  might  attain  the  certainty  of  subjective 
truths  if  they  were  reduced  to  a  state  of  simplicity  that  his  mind  could 
completely  grasp.  Thus,  in  the  study  of  the  simplest  of  natural 
phenomena,  experimental  science  has  laid  hold  on  certain  relations 
which  appear  absolute.  Such  are  the  propositions  which  serve  as 
principles  in  theoretical  mechanics  and  in  some  branches  of  mathe- 
matical physics.  In  these  sciences,  indeed,  we  reason  by  logical 
deduction  which  we  do  not  submit  to  experiment,  because  we  admit, 
as  in  mathematics,  that  the  principle  being  true  the  deductions  are 


30  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


true  also.  Still,  there  is  a  wide  difference  to  note  in  this  respect, 
that  the  starting  point  here  is  no  longer  a  subjective  and  conscious 
truth,  but  an  objective  and  unconscious  truth,  borrowed  from  obser- 
vation or  experiment.  Now  this  truth  is  never  more  than  relative 
to  the  number  of  experiments  and  observations  that  have  been  made. 
Even  if  no  observation  has  so  far  disproved  the  truth  in  question, 
still  the  mind  does  not  therefore  imagine  that  things  cannot  happen 
otherwise;  so  that  it  is  only  by  hypothesis  that  we  admit  the 
principle  as  absolute.  That  is  why  the  application  of  mathematical 
analysis  to  natural  phenomena,  even  very  simple  ones,  may  have 
its  dangers  if  experimental  verification  is.  entirely  rejected.  In  this 
case,  mathematical  analysis  becomes  a  blind  instrument,  if  we  do  not 
from  time  to  time  retemper  it  in  the  furnace  of  experiment.  I  here 
express  a  thought  uttered  by  many  great  mathematicians  and  great 
physicists ;  and  in  order  to  recall  one  of  the  most  authoritative  opin- 
ions in  this  field,  I  will  cite  what  my  learned  associate  and  friend, 
J.  Bertrand,  wrote  on  this  subject  in  his  fine  tribute  to  Senarmont: 
^'For  the  physicist,  geometry  should  be  only  a  powerful  ally:  when 
it  has  pushed  its  principles  to  their  last  consequences,  it  can  do  no 
more,  and  the  uncertainty  of  the  starting  point  can  only  be  in- 
creased by  the  blind  logic  of  analysis,  if  experiment  at  each  step  does 
not  serve  as  compass  and  ruler."  ^ 

Theoretical  mechanics  and  mathematical  physics  make  the  connec- 
tion then  between  mathematics  proper  and  the  experimental  sciences. 
They  include  the  simplest  cases.  But  as  soon  as  we  go  into  physics 
and  chemistry,  and  especially  biology,  the  phenomena  are  complicated 
by  so  many  relations  that  the  principles,  embodied  in  theories  to 
which  we  have  been  able  to  rise,  are  only  provisional  and  are  so 
hypothetical  that  our  deductions,  even  though  very  logical,  are  abso- 
lutely uncertain  and  can  in  no  case  dispense  with  experimental 
verification. 

In  short,  man  may  relate  all  his  reasonings  to  two  criteria:  the 
one,  inner  and  conscious,  is  sure  and  absolute;  the  other,  outer  and 
unconscious,  is  experimental  and  relative. 

When  we  reason  about  outer  objects,  but  consider  them  in  their 
relation  to  ourselves  according  to  the  pleasure  or  displeasure  which 
they  occasion  us  in  proportion  to  their  utility  or  their  disadvantages, 

*  J.  Bertrand,  Eloge  de  M.  Senarmont,  address  given  at  the  sixth  annual 
public  meeting  of  the  8oci4t4  de  seoours  des  amis  des  sciences. 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


31 


we  still  possess  an  inner  criterion  in  our  sensations.  So,  when  we 
reason  about  our  own  actions,  we  again  have  a  sure  guide,  because 
we  are  conscious  of  what  we  are  thinking  and  of  what  we  are  feeling. 
But  if  we  wish  to  judge  the  actions  of  another  man  and  to  know 
the  motives  which  make  him  act,  then  it  is  quite  different.  Doubt- 
less we  see  before  our  eyes  the  man's  movements  and  the  acts  which, 
we  are  sure,  are  expressions  of  his  feeling  and  his  will.  What  is 
more,  we  also  admit  that  there  is  a  necessary  relation  between  actions 
and  their  cause ;  but  what  is  this  cause  ?  We  do  not  feel  it  ourselves, 
we  are  not  aware  of  it  as  in  our  own  case ;  we  are  therefore  forced 
to  interpret  and  imagine  it  from  the  movements  that  we  see  and  the 
words  that  we  hear.  So  we  must  verify  the  man's  acts,  one  by  an- 
other; we  consider  how  he  behaves  in  such  and  such  circumstances, 
and  in  short,  we  turn  to  the  experimental  method.  In  like  manner, 
when  a  man  of  science  considers  the  natural  phenomena  which 
surround  him  and  which  he  wishes  to  know  in  themselves  and  in 
their  complex  mutual  relations  of  causation,  every  inner  criterion 
fails  him,  and  he  is  forced  to  invoke  experiment  to  verify  the  sup- 
positions and  the  reasonings  that  he  is  making  about  them.  Experi- 
ment, then,  according  to  Goethe's  expression,  becomes  the  one  medi- 
ator between  the  objective  and  the  subjective,^  that  is  to  say,  between 
the  man  of  science  and  the  phenomena  which  surround  him. 

Experimental  reasoning  is  the  only  reasoning  that  naturalists 
and  physicians  can  use  in  seeking  the  truth  and  approaching  it  as 
nearly  as  possible.  Indeed,  in  its  very  character  as  an  outer  and 
unconscious  criterion,  experiment  gives  only  relative  truth,  without 
being  able  to  prove  to  the  mind  that  it  knows  truth  absolutely. 

An  experimenter  facing  natural  phenomena  is  like  a  spectator 
watching  a  dumb  show.  He  is  in  some  sort  the  examining  magistrate 
for  nature ;  only  instead  of  grappling  with  men  who  seek  to  deceive 
him  by  lying  confessions  or  false  witness,  he  is  dealing  with  natural 
phenomena  which  for  him  are  persons  whose  language  and  customs 
he  does  not  know,  persons  living  in  the  midst  of  circumstances  un- 
known to  him,  yet  persons  whose  designs  he  wishes  to  learn.  For 
this  purpose  he  uses  all  the  means  within  his  power.  He  observes 
their  actions,  their  gait,  their  behavior,  and  he  seeks  to  disengage 
their  cause  by  means  of  various  attempts,  called  experiments.  He 

*  Goethe,  CEuvres  d'histoire  naturelle,  translation  by  M.  Ch.  Martins,  Intro- 
duction, p.  1. 


32 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


uses  every  imaginable  artifice,  and,  as  the  popular  expression  goes, 
he  often  makes  a  false  plea  in  order  to  learn  the  truth.  In  all  this, 
the  experimenter  reasons  necessarily  according  to  his  own  character 
and  lends  to  nature  his  own  ideas.  He  makes  suppositions  about 
the  cause  of  actions  taking  place  before  his  eyes ;  and  to  learn  whether 
the  hypothesis  which  serves  as  groundwork  for  his  interpretation  is 
correct,  he  takes  measures  to  make  facts  appear  which  in  the  realm 
of  logic  may  be  either  the  confirmation  or  the  negation  of  the  idea 
which  he  has  conceived.  Now,  I  repeat,  only  this  logical  verification 
can  teach  him  and  give  him  experience.  The  naturalist  observing 
animals  whose  behavior  and  habits  he  wishes  to  know,  the  physiol- 
ogist and  the  physician  wishing  to  study  the  hidden  functions  of  liv- 
ing bodies,  the  physicist  and  the  chemist  defining  the  phenomena  of 
inert  matter, — they  are  all  in  the  same  situation;  they  have  mani- 
festations before  them  which  they  can  interpret  only  with  the  help 
of  the  experimental  criterion,  the  only  one  which  we  need  to  consider 
here. 


II.  Intuition  or  Feeling  Begets  the  Experimental  Idea 

We  said  above  that  the  experimental  method  rests  successively  on 
feeling,  reason  and  experiment. 

Feeling  gives  rise  to  the  experimental  idea  or  hypothesis,  i.e., 
the  previsioned  interpretation  of  natural  phenomena.  The  whole 
experimental  enterprise  comes  from  the  idea,  for  this  it  is  which 
induces  experiment.  Reason  or  reasoning  serves  only  to  deduce  the 
consequences  of  this  idea  and  to  submit  them  to  experiment. 

An  anticipative  idea  or  an  hypothesis  is,  then,  the  necessary 
starting  point  for  all  experimental  reasoning.  Without  it,  we  could 
not  make  any  investigation  at  all  nor  learn  anything;  we  could  only 
pile  up  sterile  observations.  If  w^e  experimented  without  a  pre- 
conceived idea,  we  should  move  at  random,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  as 
we  have  said  elsewhere,  if  we  observed  with  preconceived  ideas,  we 
should  make  bad  observations  and  should  risk  taking  our  mental 
conceptions  for  reality. 

Experimental  ideas  are  by  no  means  innate.  They  do  not  arise 
spontaneously;  they  must  have  an  outer  occasion  or  stimulant,  as 
is  the  case  in  all  physiological  functions.  To  have  our  first  idea  of 
things,  we  must  see  those  things;  to  have  an  idea  about  a  natural 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


33 


phenomenon,  we  must,  first  of  all,  observe  it.  The  mind  of  man 
cannot  conceive  an  effect  without  a  cause,  so  that  the  sight  of  a 
phenomenon  always  awakens  an  idea  of  causation.  All  human  knowl- 
edge is  limited  to  working  back  from  observed  effects  to  their  cause. 
Following  an  observation,  an  idea  connected  with  the  cause  of  the 
observed  phenomenon  presents  itself  to  the  mind.  We  then  inject 
this  anticipative  idea  into  a  train  of  reasoning,  by  virtue  of  which 
we  make  experiments  to  control  it. 

Experimental  ideas,  as  we  shall  later  see,  may  arise  either 
a  'priori  of  a  fact  observed  by  chance  or  following  some  experimental 
venture  or  as  corollaries  of  an  accepted  theory.  For  the  moment, 
we  may  merely  note  that  the  experimental  idea  is  by  no  means  arbi- 
trary or  purely  imaginative;  it  must  always  have  a  support  in  ob- 
served reality,  that  is  to  say,  in  nature.  The  experimental  hypoth- 
esis, in  short,  must  always  be  based  on  prior  observation.  An- 
other essential  of  any  hypothesis  is  that  it  must  be  as  probable  as 
may  be  and  must  be  experimentally  verifiable.  Indeed  if  we  made 
an  hypothesis  which  experiment  could  not  verify,  in  that  very  act 
we  should  leave  the  experimental  method  to  fall  into  the  errors  of 
the  scholastics  and  makers  of  systems. 

A  propos  of  a  given  observation,  no  rules  can  be  given  for  bring- 
ing to  birth  in  the  brain  a  correct  and  fertile  idea  that  may  be  a  sort 
of  intuitive  anticipation  of  successful  research.  The  idea  once  set 
forth,  we  can  only  explain  how  to  submit  it  to  the  definite  pre- 
cepts and  precise  rules  of  logic  from  which  no  experimenter  may 
depart;  but  its  appearance  is  wholly  spontaneous,  and  its  nature 
is  wholly  individual.  A  particular  feeling,  a  quid  proprium  con- 
stitutes the  originality,  the  inventiveness,  or  the  genius  of  each  man. 
A  new  idea  appears  as  a  new  or  unexpected  relation  which  the  mind 
perceives  among  things.  All  intellects  doubtless  resemble  each  other, 
and  in  all  men  similar  ideas  may  arise  in  the  presence  of  certain 
simple  relations  between  things,  which  everyone  can  grasp.  But 
like  the  senses,  intellects  do  not  all  have  the  same  power  or  the  same 
acuteness ;  and  subtle  and  delicate  relations  exist  which  can  be  felt, 
grasped  and  unveiled  only  by  minds  more  perceptive,  better  endowed, 
or  placed  in  intellectual  surroundings  which  predispose  them 
favorably. 

If  facts  necessarily  gave  birth  to  ideas,  every  new  fact  ought 
to  beget  a  new  idea.    True,  this  is  what  most  often  takes  place ;  for 


34  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


new  facts  exist,  the  character  of  which  makes  the  same  new  idea  come 
to  all  men,  placed  in  the  same  circumstances  as  respects  previous  in- 
formation. But  facts  also  exist  which  mean  nothing  to  most  minds, 
while  they  are  full  of  light  for  others.  It  even  happens  that  a  fact 
or  an  observation  stays  a  very  long  time  under  the  eyes  of  a  man 
of  science  without  in  any  way  inspiring  him;  then  suddenly  there 
comes  a  ray  of  light,  and  the  mind  interprets  the  fact  quite  dif- 
ferently and  finds  for  it  wholly  new  relations.  The  new  idea  ap- 
pears, then,  with  the  rapidity  of  lightning,  as  a  kind  of  sudden  reve- 
lation; which  surely  proves  that  in  this  case  the  discovery  inheres 
in  a  feeling  about  things  which  is  not  only  individual,  but  which  is 
even  connected  with  a  transient  condition  of  the  mind.  The  experi- 
mental method,  then,  cannot  give  new  and  fruitful  ideas  to  men  who 
have  none;  it  can  serve  only  to  guide  the  ideas  of  men  who  have 
them,  to  direct'  their  ideas  and  to  develop  them  so  as  to  get  the  best 
possible  results.  The  idea  is  a  seed;  the  method  is  the  earth  fur- 
nishing the  conditions  in  which  it  may  develop,  flourish  and  give 
the  best  of  fruit  according  to  its  nature.  But  as  only  what  has  been 
sown  in  the  ground  will  ever  grow  in  it,  so  nothing  will  be  developed 
by  the  experimental  method  except  the  ideas  submitted  to  it.  The 
method  itself  gives  birth  to  nothing.  Certain  philosophers  have 
made  the  mistake  of  according  too  much  power  to  method  along 
these  lines. 

The  experimental  idea  is  the  result  of  a  sort  of  presentiment  of 
the  mind  which  thinks  things  will  happen  in  a  certain  way.  In  this 
connection  we  may  say  that  we  have  in  our  minds  an  intuition  or  feel- 
ing as  to  the  laws  of  nature,  but  we  do  not  know  their  form.  We 
can  learn  it  only  from  experiment. 

Men  with  a  presentiment  of  new  truths  are  rare  in  all  the  sci- 
ences ;  most  men  develop  and  follow  the  ideas  of  a  few  others.  Those 
who  make  discoveries  are  the  promoters  of  new  and  fruitful  ideas. 
We  usually  give  the  name  of  discovery  to  recognition  of  a  new  fact ; 
but  I  think  that  the  idea  connected  with  the  discovered  fact  is 
what  really  constitutes  the  discovery.  Facts  are  neither  great  nor 
small  in  themselves.  A  great  discovery  is  a  fact  whose  appearance  in 
science  gives  rise  to  shining  ideas,  whose  light  dispels  many  obscuri- 
ties and  shows  us  new  paths.  There  are  other  facts  which,  though 
new,  teach  us  but  little ;  they  are  therefore  small  discoveries.  Finally, 
there  are  new  facts  which,  though  well  observed,  teach  nothing  to  any- 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


35 


one;  they  remain,  for  tlie  moment,  detaclied  and  sterile  in  science; 
they  are  what  we  may  call  raw  facts  or  crude  facts. 

Discovery,  then,  is  a  new  idea  emerging  in  connection  with  a 
fact  found  by  chance  or  otherwise.    Consequently,  there  can  be  no 
method  for  making  discoveries,  because  philosophic  theories  can  no 
more  give  inventive  spirit  and  aptness  of  mind  to  men,  who  do  not 
possess  them,  than  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  acoustics  or  optics  can 
give  a  correct  ear  or  good  sight  to  men  deprived  of  them  by  nature. 
But  good  methods  can  teach  us  to  develop  and  use  to  better  purpose 
the  faculties  with  which  nature  has  endowed  us,  while  poor  methods 
may  prevent  us  from  turning  them  to  good  account.    Thus  the  genius 
of  inventiveness,  so  precious  in  the  sciences,  may  be  diminished  or 
even  smothered  by  a  poor  method,  while  a  good  method  may  increase 
and  develop  it.    In  short,  a  good  method  promotes  scientific  devel- 
opment and  forewarns  men  of  science  against  those  numberless 
sources  of  error  which  they  meet  in  the  search  for  truth;  this  is 
the  only  possible  object  of  the  experimental  method.    In  biological 
science,  the  role  of  method  is  even  more  important  than  in  other 
sciences,  because  of  the  immense  complexity  of  the  phenomena  and 
the  countless  sources  of  error  which  complexity  brings  into  experi- 
mentation.    Yet  even  from  the  biological  point  of  view,  we  can- 
not claim  to  treat  the  experimental  method  completely  here ; 
we  must  limit  ourselves  to  giving  a  few  general  principles  for  the 
guidance  of  minds  applying  themselves  to  research  in  experimental 
medicine. 


III.  Experimenters  Must  Doubt,  Avoid  Fixed  Ideas,  and 
Always  Keep  Their  Freedom  of  Mind 

The  first  condition  to  be  fulfilled  by  men  of  science,  applying 
themselves  to  the  investigation  of  natural  phenomena,  is  to  maintain 
absolute  freedom  of  mind,  based  on  philosophic  doubt.  Yet  we  must 
not  be  in  the  least  sceptical ;  we  must  believe  in  science,  i.e.,  in  deter- 
minism; we  must  believe  in  a  complete  and  necessary  relation  be^ 
tween  things,  among  the  phenomena  proper  to  living  beings  as  well 
as  in  all  others;  but  at  the  same  time  we  must  be  thoroughly  con- 
vinced that  we  know  this  relation  only  in  a  more  or  less  approximate 
way,  and  that  the  theories  we  hold  are  far  from  embodying  change- 
less truths.    When  we  propound  a  general  theory  in  our  sciences, 


36 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


we  are  sure  only  that,  literally  speaking,  all  such  theories  are  false. 
They  are  only  partial  and  provisional  truths  which  are  necessary  to 
us,  as  steps  on  which  we  rest,  so  as  to  go  on  with  investigation ;  they 
embody  only  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  and  consequently 
they  must  change  with  the  growth  of  science,  and  all  the  more  often 
when  sciences  are  less  advanced  in  their  evolution.  On  the  other 
hand,  our  ideas  come  to  us,  as  we  said,  in  view  of  facts  which  have 
been  previously  observed  and  which  we  interpret  afterward.  Now 
countless  sources  of  error  may  slip  into  our  observations,  and  in 
spite  of  all  our  attention  and  sagacity,  we  are  never  sure  of  having 
seen  everything,  because  our  means  of  observation  are  often  too 
imperfect.  The  result  of  all  this  is,  then,  that  if  reasoning  guides  us 
in  experimental  science,  it  does  not  necessarily  force  its  deductions 
upon  us.  Our  mind  can  always  remain  free  to  accept  or  to  dispute 
these  deductions.  If  an  idea  presents  itself  to  us,  we  must  not  reject 
it  simply  because  it  does  not  agree  with  the  logical  deductions  of  a 
reigning  theory.  We  may  follow  our  feelings  and  our  idea  and  give 
free  rein  to  our  imagination,  as  long  as  all  our  ideas  are  mere  pre- 
texts for  devising  new  experiments  that  may  supply  us  with  con- 
vincing or  unexpected  and  fertile  facts. 

The  freedom  which  experimenters  maintain  is  founded,  as  I 
said,  on  philosophic  doubt.  Indeed,  we  must  be  aware  of  the  un- 
certainty of  our  reasonings  on  account  of  the  obscurity  of  their 
starting  point.  The  starting  point,  fundamentally,  always  rests  on 
hypotheses  or  theories  more  or  less  imperfect,  according  to  the  state 
of  development  of  the  sciences.  In  biology,  and  especially  in  medi- 
cine, theories  are  so  precarious  that  the  experimenter  maintains 
almost  all  his  freedom.  In  chemistry  and  physics  the  facts  are 
simpler,  the  sciences  are  more  advanced,  the  theories  more  secure, 
and  the  experimenter  must  take  more  account  of  them  and  allow 
greater  importance  to  the  deductions  of  experimental  reasoning  based 
on  them.  But  still  he  must  never  accept  these  theories  at  their  face 
value.  In  our  day,  we  have  seen  great  physicists  make  discoveries 
of  the  first  rank  by  means  of  experiments  devised  in  a  way  that  lacked 
all  logical  relation  to  admitted  theories.  Astronomers  have  enough 
confidence  in  the  principles  of  their  science  to  build  up  mathematical 
theories  with  them,  but  that  does  not  prevent  them  from  testing  and 
verifying  them  by  direct  observations ;  this  very  precept,  as  we  have 
seen,  must  not  be  neglected  in  theoretical  mechanics.   But  in  mathe- 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


37 


matics,  when  we  start  from  an  axiom  or  principle  whose  truth  is 
absolutely  necessary  and  conscious,  freedom  no  longer  exists ;  truths 
once  established  are  immutable.  Geometricians  are  not  free  to  ques- 
tion whether  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  are  or  are  not  equal  to  two 
right  angles ;  consequently  they  are  not  free  to  reject  the  logical 
consequences  deduced  from  this  principle. 

If  a  doctor  imagined  that  his  reasoning  had  the  value  of  a  mathe- 
matician's, he  would  be  utterly  in  error  and  would  be  led  into  the 
most  unsound  conclusions.  This  is  unluckily  what  has  happened 
and  still  happens  to  the  men  whom  I  shall  call  systematizers.  These 
men  start,  in  fact,  from  an  idea  which  is  based  more  or  less  on  ob- 
servation, and  which  they  regard  as  an  absolute  truth.  They  then 
reason  logically  and  without  experimenting,  and  from  deduction  to 
deduction  they  succeed  in  building  a  system  which  is  logical,  but 
which  has  no  sort  of  scientific  reality.  Superficial  persons  often  let 
themselves  be  dazzled  by  this  appearance  of  logic;  and  discussions 
worthy  of  ancient  scholasticism  are  thus  sometimes  renewed  in  our 
day.  The  excessive  faith  in  reasoning,  which  leads  physiologists 
to  a  false  simplification  of  things,  comes,  on  the  one  hand,  from  igno- 
rance of  the  science  of  which  they  speak,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  from 
lack  of  a  feeling  for  the  complexity  of  natural  phenomena.  That  is 
why  we  sometimes  see  pure  mathematicians,  with  very  great  minds 
too,  fall  into  mistakes  of  this  kind ;  they  simplify  too  much  and  rea- 
son about  phenomena  as  they  construct  them  in  their  minds,  but  not 
as  they  exist  in  nature. 

The  great  experimental  principle,  then,  is  doubt,  that  philosophic 
doubt  which  leaves  to  the  mind  its  freedom  and  initiative,  and  from 
which  the  virtues  most  valuable  to  investigators  in  physiology  and 
medicine  are  derived.  We  must  trust  our  observations  or  our  the- 
ories only  after  experimental  verification.  If  we  trust  too  much, 
the  mind  becomes  bound  and  cramped  by  the  results  of  its  own  rea- 
soning; it  no  longer  has  freedom  of  action,  and  so  lacks  the  power 
to  break  away  from  that  blind  faith  in  theories  which  is  only  scien- 
tific superstition. 

It  has  often  been  said  that,  to  make  discoveries,  one  must  be 
ignorant.  This  opinion,  mistaken  in  itself,  nevertheless  conceals  a 
truth.  It  means  that  it  is  better  to  know  nothing  than  to  keep  in 
mind  fixed  ideas  based  on  theories  whose  confirmation  we  constantly 
seek,  neglecting  meanwhile  everything  that  fails  to  agree  with  them. 


38  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


Nothing  could  be  worse  than  this  state  of  mind;  it  is  the  very 
opposite  of  inventiveness.  Indeed  a  discovery  is  generally  an  un- 
foreseen relation  not  included  in  theory,  for  otherwise  it  would  be 
foreseen.  In  this  respect,  indeed,  an  uneducated  man,  knowing 
nothing  of  theory,  would  be  in  a  better  attitude  of  mind;  theory 
would  not  embarrass  him  and  would  not  prevent  him  from  seeing  new 
facts  unperceived  by  a  man  preoccupied  with  an  exclusive  theory. 
But  let  us  hasten  to  say  that  we  certainly  do  not  mean  to  raise  igno- 
rance into  a  principle.  The  better  educated  we  are  and  the  more  ac- 
quired information  we  have,  the  better  prepared  shall  we  find  our 
minds  for  making  great  and  fruitful  discoveries.  Only  we  must 
keep  our  freedom  of  mind,  as  we  said  above,  and  must  believe  that 
in  nature  what  is  absurd,  according  to  our  theories,  is  not  always 
impossible. 

Men  who  have  excessive  faith  in  their  theories  or  ideas  are  not 
only  ill  prepared  for  making  discoveries;  they  also  make  very  poor 
observations.  Of  necessity,  they  observe  with  a  preconceived  idea, 
and  when  they  devise  an  experiment,  they  can  see,  in  its  results, 
only  a  confirmation  of  their  theory.  In  this  way  they  distort  obser- 
vation and  often  neglect  very  important  facts  because  they  do  not 
further  their  aim.  This  is  what  made  us  say  elsewhere  that  we  must 
never  make  experiments  to  confirm  our  ideas,  but  simply  to  control 
them ;  ^  which  means,  in  other  terms,  that  one  must  accept  the  results 
of  experiments  as  they  come,  with  all  their  unexpectedness  and 
irregularity. 

But  it  happens  further  quite  naturally  that  men  who  believe  too 
firmly  in  their  theories,  do  not  believe  enough  in  the  theories  of 
others.  So  the  dominant  idea  of  these  despisers  of  their  fellows» 
is  to  find  others'  theories  faulty  and  to  try  to  contradict  them.  The 
difficulty,  for  science,  is  still  the  same.  They  make  experiments 
only  to  destroy  a  theory,  instead  of  to  seek  the  truth.  At  the  same 
time,  they  make  poor  observations,  because  they  choose  among  the 
results  of  their  experiments  only  what  suits  their  object,  neglecting 
whatever  is  unrela;ted  to  it,  and  carefully  setting  aside  everything 
which  might  tend  toward  the  idea  they  wish  to  combat.  By  these 
two  opposite  roads,  men  are  thus  led  to  the  same  result,  that  is,  to 
falsify  science  and  the  facts. 

•  Claude  Bernard,  LeQons  sur  lea  propriet6s  et  les  alterations  desf  Uquides  de 
Vorganisme.    Paris,  1859,  Premiere  legon. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


39 


Accordingly,  we  must  disregard  our  own  opinion  quite  as  much 
as  the  opinion  of  others,  when  faced  hy  the  decisions  of  experience. 
If  men  discuss  and  experiment,  as  we  have  just  said,  to  prove  a 
preconceived  idea  in  spite  of  everything,  they  no  longer  have  free- 
dom of  mind,  and  they  no  longer  search  for  truth.  Theirs  is  a 
narrow  science,  mingled  with  personal  vanity  or  the  diverse  passions 
of  man.  Pride,  however,  should  have  nothing  to  do  with  all  these 
vain  disputes.  When  two  physiologists  or  two  doctors  quarrel,  each 
to  maintain  his  own  ideas  or  theories,  in  the  midst  of  their  contra- 
dictory arguments,  only  one  thing  is  absolutely  certain :  that  both 
theories  are  insufficient,  and  neither  of  them  corresponds  to  the 
truth.  The  truly  scientific  spirit,  then,  should  make  us  modest 
and  kindly.  We  really  know  very  little,  and  we  are  all  fallible  when 
facing  the  immense  difficulties  presented  by  investigation  of  natural 
phenomena.  The  best  thing,  then,  for  us  to  do  is  to  unite  our  efforts, 
instead  of  dividing  them  and  nullifying  them  by  personal  disputes. 
In  a  word,  the  man  of  science  wishing  to  find  truth  must  keep  his 
mind  free  and  calm,  and  if  it  be  possible,  never  have  his  eye  bedewed, 
as  Bacon  says,  by  human  passions. 

In  scientific  education,  it  is  very  important  to  differentiate,  as 
we  shall  do  later,  between  determinism  which  is  the  absolute  prin- 
ciple of  science,  and  theories  which  are  only  relative  principles  to 
which  we  should  assign  but  temporary  value  in  the  search  for  truth. 
In  a  word,  we  must  not  teach  theories  as  dogmas  or  articles  of  faith. 
By  exaggerated  belief  in  theories,  we  should  give  a  false  idea  of 
science;  we  should  overload  and  enslave  the  mind,  by  taking  away 
its  freedom,  smothering  its  originality  and  infecting  it  with  the 
taste  for  systems. 

The  theories  which  embody  our  scientific  ideas  as  a  whole  are, 
of  course,  indispensable  as  representations  of  science.  They  should 
also  serve  as  a  basis  for  new  ideas.  But  as  these  theories  and  ideas 
are  by  no  means  immutable  truth,  one  must  always  be  ready  to 
abandon  them,  to  alter  them  or  to  exchange  them  as  soon  as  they 
cease  to  represent  the  truth.  In  a  word,  we  must  alter  theory  to 
adapt  it  to  nature,  but  not  nature  to  adapt  it  to  theory. 

To  sum  up,  two  things  must  be  considered  in  experimental  science : 
method  and  idea.  The  object  of  method  is  to  direct  the  idea  which 
arises  in  the  interpretation  of  natural  phenomena  and  in  the  search 
for  truth.    The  idea  must  always  remain  independent,  and  we  must 


40 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


no  more  chain  it  with  scientific  beliefs  than  with  philosophic  or 
religious  beliefs ;  we  must  be  bold  and  free  in  setting  forth  our 
ideas,  must  follow  our  feeling,  and  must  on  no  account  linger  too 
long  in  childish  fear  of  contradicting  theories.  If  we  are  thoroughly 
steeped  in  the  principles  of  the  experimental  method,  we  have  noth- 
ing to  fear;  for,  as  long  as  the  idea  is  correct,  we  gO'  on  developing 
it ;  when  it  is  wrong,  experimentation  is  there  to  set  it  right.  We 
must  be  able,  then,  to  attack  questions  even  at  the  risk  of  going  wrong. 
We  do  science  better  service,  as  has  been  said,  by  mistakes  than  by 
confusion,  which  means  that  we  must  fearlessly  push  ideas  to  their 
full  development,  provided  that  we  regulate  them  and  are  always 
careful  to  judge  them  by  experiment.  The  idea,  in  a  word,  is  the 
motive  of  all  reasoning,  in  science  as  elsewhere.  But  everywhere 
the  idea  must  be  submitted  to  a  criterion.  In  science  the  criterion 
is  the  experimental  method  or  experiment;  this  criterion  is  indis- 
pensable, and  we  must  apply  it  to  our  own  ideas  as  well  as  to  those 
of  others. 

IV.  The  Independent  Character  of  the  Experimental  Method 

From  all  that  has  so  far  been  said,  it  follows  necessarily,  that 
no  man's  opinion,  formulated  in  a  theory  or  otherwise,  may  be 
deemed  to  represent  the  whole  truth  in  the  sciences.  It  is  a  guide, 
a  light,  but  not  an  absolute  authority.  The  revolution  which  the 
experimental  method  has  effected  in  the  sciences  is  this:  it  has  put 
a  scientific  criterion  in  the  place  of  personal  authority. 

The  experimental  method  is  characterized  by  being  dependent 
only  on  itself,  because  it  includes  within  itself  its  criterion, — experi- 
ence. It  recognizes  no  authority  other  than  that  of  facts  and  is 
free  from  personal  authority.  When  Descartes  said  that  we  must 
trust  only  to  evidence  or  to  what  is  sufficiently  proved,  he  meant 
that  we  must  no  longer  defer  to  authority,  as  scholasticism  did,  but 
must  rely  only  on  facts  firmly  established  by  experience. 

The  result  of  this  is  that  when  we  have  put  forward  an  idea  or 
a  theory  in  science,  our  object  must  not  be  to  preserve  it  by  seeking 
everything  that  may  support  it  and  setting  aside  everything  that 
may  weaken  it.  On  the  contrary,  we  ought  to  examine  with  the 
greatest  care  the  facts  which  apparently  would  overthrow  it,  be- 
cause real  progress  always  consists  in  exchanging  an  old  theory 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


41 


which  includes  fewer  facts  for  a  new  one  which  includes  more.  This 
proves  that  we  have  advanced,  for  in  science  the  best  precept  is  to 
alter  and  exchange  our  ideas  as  fast  as  science  moves  ahead.  Our 
ideas  are  only  intellectual  instruments  which  we  use  to  break 
into  phenomena;  we  must  change  them  when  they  have  served 
their  purpose,  as  we  change  a  blunt  lancet  that  we  have  used  long 
enough. 

The  ideas  and  theories  of  our  predecessors  must  be  preserved 
only  in  so  far  as  they  represent  the  present  state  of  science,  but  they 
are  obviously  destined  to  change,  unless  we  admit  that  science  is 
to  make  no  further  progress,  and  that  is  impossible.  In  this  con- 
nection, we  should  perhaps  make  a  distinction  between  mathematical 
sciences  and  experimental  sciences.  As  mathematical  truths  are 
immutable  and  absolute,  the  science  of  mathematics  grows  by  sim-r 
pie  successive  juxtaposition  of  all  acquired  truths.  As  truths  in 
the  experimental  sciences,  on  the  contrary,  are  only  relative,  these 
sciences  can  move  forward  only  by  revolution  and  by  recasting  old 
truths  in  a  new  scientific  form. 

In  the  experimental  sciences,  a  mistaken  respect  for  personal 
authority  would  be  superstition  and  would  form  a  real  obstacle  to  the 
progress  of  science:  at  the  same  time,  it  would  be  contrary  to  the 
examples  given  us  by  the  great  men  of  all  time.  Great  men,  indeed, 
are  precisely  those  who  bring  with  them  new  ideas  and  destroy  errors. 
They  do  not,  therefore,  respect  the  authority  of  their  own  predeces- 
sors, and  they  do  not  expect  us  to  treat  them  otherwise. 

This  non-submission  to  authority,  which  the  experimental  method 
regards  as  a  fundamental  precept,  is  by  no  means  out  of  harmony 
with  the  respect  and  admiration  which  we  bear  to  the  great  men 
preceding  us,  to  whom  we  owe  the  discoveries  at  the  base  of  the 
sciences  of  to-day.* 

In  the  experimental  sciences,  great  men  are  never  the  pro- 
moters of  absolute  and  immutable  truths.  Each  great  man  belongs 
to  his  time  and  can  come  only  at  his  proper  moment,  in  the  sense 
that  there  is  a  necessary  and  ordered  sequence  in  the  appearance 
of  scientific  discoveries.  Great  men  may  be  compared  to  torches 
shining  at  long  intervals,  to  guide  the  advance  of  science.  They 
light  up  their  time,  either  by  discovering  unexpected  and  fertile 

*  Claude  Bernard,  Cours  de  medecine  ea^perimentale,  legon  d'ouverture 
{Gazette  m4d.,  April  15,  1864.) 


42 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


phenomena  which  open  np  new  paths  and  reveal  unknown  horizons, 
or  by  generalizing  acquired  scientific  facts  and  disclosing  truths 
which  their  predecessors  had  not  perceived.  If  each  great  man  makes 
the  science  which  he  vitalizes  take  a  long  step  forward,  he  never  pre- 
sumes to  fix  its  final  boundaries,  and  he  is  necessarily  destined  to  be 
outdistanced  and  left  behind  by  the  progress  of  successive  genera- 
tions. Great  men  have  been  compared  to  giants  upon  whose  shoul- 
ders pygmies  have  climbed,  who  nevertheless  see  further  than  they. 
This  simply  means  that  science  makes  progress  subsequently  to  the 
appearance  of  great  men,  and  precisely  because  of  their  influence. 
The  result  is  that  their  successors  know  many  more  scientific  facts 
than  the  great  men  themselves  had  in  their  day.  But  a  great  man 
is,  none  the  less,  still  a  great  man,  that  is  to  say, — a  giant. 

There  are,  indeed,  two  sides  to  science  in  evolution:  on  the  one 
hand,  what  is  acquired  already,  and  on  the  other  hand,  what  remains 
to  be  acquired.  In  the  already  acquired,  all  men  are  more  or  less 
equal,  and  the  great  cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  rest.  Medio- 
cre men  often  have  the  most  acquired  knowledge.  It  is  in  the  darker 
regions  of  science  that  great  men  are  recognized;  they  are  marked 
by  ideas  which  light  up  phenomena  hitherto  obscure  and  carry  science 
forward. 

To  sum  up,  the  experimental  method  draws  from  within  itself  an 
impersonal  authority  which  dominates  science.  It  forces  this  au- 
thority even  on  great  men,  instead  of  seeking,  like  the  scholastics, 
to  prove  from  texts  that  they  are  infallible  and  that  they  have  seen, 
said  or  thought  everything  discovered  after  them.  Every  period 
has  its  own  sum  total  of  errors  and  of  truths.  Certain  mistakes  are, 
in  a  sense,  inherent  in  their  period,  so  that  only  the  subsequent  prog- 
ress of  science  can  reveal  them.  The  progress  of  the  experimental 
method  consists  in  this, — that  the  sum  of  truths  grows  larger  in  pro- 
portion as  the  sum  of  error  grows  less.  But  each  one  of  these  par- 
ticular truths  is  added  to  the  rest  to  establish  more  general  truths. 
In  this  fusion,  the  names  of  promoters  of  science  disappear  little 
by  little,  and  the  further  science  advances,  the  more  it  takes  an  im- 
personal form  and  detaches  itself  from  the  past.  To  avoid  a  mistake 
which  has  sometimes  been  committed,  I  hasten  to  add  that  I  mean  to 
speak  here  of  the  evolution  of  science  only.  In  art  and  letters,  per- 
sonality dominates  everything.  There  we  are  concerned  with  a  spon- 
taneous creation  of  the  mind,  that  has  nothing  in  common  with  the 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


43 


noting  of  natural  phenomena,  in  which  the  mind  must  create  nothing. 
The  past  keeps  all  its  worth  in  the  creations  of  art  and  letters ;  each 
individuality  remains  changeless  in  time  and  cannot  be  mistaken 
for  another.  A  contemporary  poet  has  characterized  this  sense  of 
the  personality  of  art  and  of  the  impe]*sonality  of  science  in  these 
words, — "Art  is  myself ;  science  is  ourselves." 

The  experimental  method  is  the  scientific  method  which  pro- 
claims the  freedom  of  the  mind  and  of  thought.  It  not  only  shakes 
off  the  philosophical  and  theological  yoke ;  it  does  not  even  accept  any 
personal  scientific  authority.  This  is  by  no  means  pride  and  boast- 
fulness ;  experimenters,  on  the  contrary,  show  their  humility  in 
rejecting  personal  authority,  for  they  doubt  their  own  knowledge 
also  and  submit  the  authority  of  man  to  the  authority  of  experience 
and  of  the  laws  of  nature. 

Physics  and  chemistry,  as  established  sciences,  offer  us  the 
independence  and  impersonality  which  the  experimental  method 
demands.  But  medicine  is  still  in  the  shades  of  empiricism  and 
suffers  the  consequences  of  its  backward  condition.  We  see  it  still 
more  or  less  mingled  with  religion  and  with  the  supernatural. 
Superstitution  and  the  marvellous  play  a  great  part  in  it.  Sorcerers, 
somnambulists,  healers  by  virtue  of  some  gift  from  Heaven,  are  held 
as  the  equals  of  physicians.  Medical  personality  is  placed  above 
science  by  physicians  themselves;  they  seek  their  authority  in  tradi- 
tion, in  doctrines  or  in  medical  tact.  This  state  of  affairs  is  the 
clearest  of  proofs  that  the  experimental  method  has  by  no  means 
come  into  its  own  in  medicine. 

The  experimental  method,  the  free  thinker's  method,  seeks  only 
scientific  truth.  Feeling,  from  which  everything  emanates,  must 
keep  its  complete  spontaneity  and  all  its  freedom  for  putting  forth 
experimental  ideas ;  reason  also  must  preserve  that  freedom  to 
doubt,  which  forces  it  always  to  submit  ideas  to  the  test  of  experi- 
ment. Just  as,  in  other  human  actions,  feeling  releases  an  act  by 
putting  forth  the  idea  which  gives  a  motive  to  action,  so  in  the 
experimental  method  feeling  takes  the  initiative  through  the  idea. 
Feeling  alone  guides  the  mind  and  constitutes  the  yrimum  movens 
of  science.  Genius  is  revealed  in  a  delicate  feeling  which  correctly 
foresees  the  laws  of  natural  phenomena ;  but  this  we  must  never  for- 
get, that  correctness  of  feeling  and  fertility  of  idea  can  be  established 
and  proved  only  by  experiment. 


44 


AN  IXTRODUCTIOX  TO  THE  STUDY 


Y.  Inductiox  and  Deductiox  in  Expeei:\iextai.  Eeasoxing 

"We  have  so  far  dealt  with  the  influence  of  the  experimental  idea. 
Let  us  now  consider  how  the  method,  while  always  forcing  upon  rea- 
son the  dubitative  form,  may  guide  it  more  safely  in  the  search  for 
truth. 

We  said  elsewhere  that  experimental  reasoning  is  practised  on 
observed  phenomena,  or  observations ;  but  it  is  really  applied  only  to 
the  ideas  which  the  phenomena  have  aroused  in  our  mind.  The 
essence  of  experimental  reasoning,  then,  will  always  be  an  idea  which 
we  introduce  into  a  piece  of  experimental  reasoning  in  order  to  sub- 
mit it  to  the  criterion  of  facts,  i.e.,  to  experiment. 

There  are  two  forms  of  reasoning:  first,  the  investigating  or  in- 
terroorative  form  used  by  men  who  do  not  know  and  who  wish  to 
learn;  secondly,  the  demonstrating  or  affirmative  form  employed  by 
men  who  know  or  think  they  know,  and  who  wish  to  teach  others. 

Philosophers  seem  to  have  differentiated  these  two  forms  of  rea- 
soning under  the  names  of  inductive  reasoning  and  deductive  rea- 
soning. They  also  accept  two  scientific  methods:  the  inductive 
method  or  induction,  proper  to  the  experimental  physical  sciences, 
and  the  deductive  method  or  deduction,  belonging  more  particularly 
to  the  mathematical  sciences. 

It  follows  that  the  one  special  form  of  experimental  reasoning 
with  which  we  must  deal  here  is  induction. 

Induction  has  been  defined  as  the  process  of  moving  from  the 
particular  to  the  general,  while  deduction  is  the  reverse  process  mov- 
ing from  the  general  to  the  particular.  I  certainly  shall  not  presume 
to  engage  in  a  philosophic  discussion  which  would  here  be  out  of 
place  and  beyond  my  competence;  only  in  my  capacity  as  experi- 
menter I  shall  content  myself  with  saying  that  it  seems  to  me  very 
difficult,  in  practice,  to  justify  this  distinction  and  clearly  to  separate 
induction  from  deduction.  If  the  experimenter's  mind  usually  pro- 
ceeds by  starting  from  particular  observations  and  going  back  to 
principles,  to  laws,  or  to  general  propositions,  it  also  necessarily 
proceeds  from  the  same  general  propositions  or  laws  and  reaches 
particular  facts  which  it  deduces  logically  from  these  principles. 
Only,  when  a  principle  is  not  absolutely  certain,  we  must  always 
make  a  temporary  deduction  requiring  experimental  verification.  All 
the  seeming  varieties  of  reasoning  depend  merely  on  the  nature  of 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


45 


the  subject  treated  and  on  its  greater  or  less  complexity.  But  in  all 
these  cases,  the  human  mind  always  works  in  the  same  way,  with 
syllogisms ;  it  cannot  behave  otherwise. 

Just  as  man  goes  forward,  in  the  natural  movement  of  his  body, 
only  by  putting  one  foot  in  front  of  the  other,  so  in  the  natural 
movement  of  his  mind,  man  goes  forward  only  by  putting  one  idea 
in  front  of  another.  In  other  words,  the  mind,  like  the  body,  needs 
a  primary  point  of  support.  The  body's  point  of  support  is  the 
ground  which  the  foot  feels;  the  mind's  point  of  support  is  the 
known,  that  is,  a  truth  or  a  principle  of  which  the  mind  is  aware. 
Man  can  learn  nothing  except  by  going  from  the  known  to  the  un- 
known ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  as  science  is  not  infused  into  man  at 
birth,  and  as  he  knows  only  what  he  learns,  we  seem  to  be  in  a 
vicious  circle,  where  man  is  condemned  to  inability  to  learn  any- 
thing. He  would  be  so,  in  fact,  if  his  reason  did  not  include  a 
feeling  for  relations  and  for  determinism,  which  are  the  criteria 
of  truth ;  but  in  no  case  can  he  gain  this  truth  or  approach  it,  except 
through  reasoning  and  experience. 

It  would  be  incorrect  to  say  that  deduction  pertains  only  to 
mathematics  and  induction  to  the  other  sciences  exclusively.  Both 
forms  of  reasoning,  investigating  (inductive)  and  demonstrating 
(deductive),  pertain  to  all  possible  sciences,  because  in  all  the  sci- 
ences there  are  things  that  we  do  not  know  and  other  things  that  we 
know  or  think  we  know. 

When  mathematicians  study  subjects  unfamiliar  to  them,  they  use 
induction,  like  physicists,  chemists  or  physiologists.  To  prove  this 
point,  I  need  only  cite  the  words  of  a  great  mathematician. 

Thus  Euler  expresses  himself  in  a  memoir  entitled:  De  induc- 
tione  ad  plenam  certitudinem  evehenda: 

''Notum  est  plerumque  numerum  proprietates  primum  per  solam 
inductionem  observatas,  quas  deinceps  geometrae  solidis  demon- 
strationibus  confirmare  elaboraverunt ;  quo  negotio  in  primis  Fer- 
matius  summo  studio  et  satis  felici  successu  fuit  occupatus."  ^ 

The  principles  or  theories  which  serve  as  foundations  for  a  sci- 
ence, whatever  it  may  be,  have  not  fallen  from  the  sky;  they  were 
necessarily  reached  by  investigation,  inductive  or  interrogative  rea- 
soning, as  we  may  choose  to  call  it.    It  was  first  necessary  to  observe 

*  Euler,  Acta  academiae  scientiarum  imperialis  PetropoUtanae,  pro  anno 
MDCCLXXX,  pars  posterior,  p.  38,  Par.  1. 


46  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


something  which  happened  within  ourselves  or  outside  of  us.  From 
the  experimental  point  of  view  there  are  ideas,  in  the  sciences,  which 
we  call  a  priori,  because  they  are  a  starting  point  for  experimental 
reasoning  (see  page  27  and  the  following  pages),  but  from  the 
point  of  view  of  ideogenesis  they  are  really  a  posteriori  ideas.  In 
a  word,  induction  must  have  been  the  primitive,  general  form  of  rea- 
soning; and  the  ideas  which  philosophers  and  men  of  science  con- 
stantly take  for  a  priori  ideas  are  at  bottom  really  a  posteriori  ideas. 

Mathematicians  and  naturalists  are  alike  when  going  in  search 
of  principles.  Both  use  induction,  make  hypotheses,  and  experiment, 
that  is  to  say,  make  attempts  to  verify  the  accuracy  of  their  ideas. 
But  when  mathematicians  and  naturalists  reach  their  principles, 
then  they  part  company.  Indeed,  as  I  have  already  said  elsewhere, 
the  mathematician's  principle  is  absolute,  because  it  is  not  applicable 
to  objective  reality  just  as  it  is,  but  to  relations  between  things  con- 
sidered in  extremely  simple  conditions  which  the  mathematician 
chooses  and,  in  some  sort,  creates  in  his  mind.  Now,  as  he  is  thus 
sure  that  he  need  not  introduce  into  his  reasoning  other  conditions 
than  those  which  he  has  defined,  the  principle  remains  absolute, 
conscious,  adequate  for  the  mind,  and  his  logical  deduction  is  equally 
certain  and  absolute :  he  no  longer  requires  experimental  verifica- 
tions; logic  is  enough. 

A  naturalist  is  in  a  very  different  position ;  the  general  proposi- 
tion which  he  has  reached,  or  the  principle  on  which  he  relies,  is  rela- 
tive and  provisional,  because  it  embodies  complex  relations  which 
he  is  never  sure  that  he  can  know.  Hence,  his  principle  is  uncer- 
tain, since  it  is  unconscious  and  inadequate  for  the  mind;  hence, 
deductions,  though  quite  logical,  always  remain  doubtful,  and  so  he 
must  necesarily  appeal  to  experiment  to  verify  the  conclusion  of  his 
deductive  reasoning.  The  difference  between  mathematicians  and 
naturalists  is  capital  in  respect  to  the  certainty  of  their  principles 
and  of  the  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  them ;  but  the  mechanism 
of  deductive  reasoning  is  exactly  the  same  for  both.  Both  start 
from  a  proposition;  only  the  mathematician  says:  Given  this  start- 
ing point,  such  and  such  a  particular  case  necessarily  results.  The 
naturalist  says :  If  this  starting  point  is  correct,  such  and  such  a 
particular  case  will  follow  as  a  consequence. 

When  starting  from  a  principle,  the  mathematician  and  tlie 
naturalist,  therefore,  both  use  deduction.    Both  reason  by  making  a 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


47 


syllogism;  only,  for  the  naturalist  the  conclusion  of  the  syllogism 
is  doubtful  and  requires  verification,  because  its  principle  is  uncon- 
scious.^ Such  experimental  or  dubitative  reasoning  is  the  only  kind 
that  we  can  use  when  reasoning  about  natural  phenomena;  if  we 
wished  to  suppress  doubt  and  if  we  dispensed  with  experiment,  we 
should  no  longer  have  any  criterion  by  which  to  know  whether  we 
were  in  the  wrong  or  in  the  right,  because,  I  repeat,  the  principle  is 
unconscious,  and  one  must  therefore  appeal  to  our  senses. 

From  all  this  I  should  conclude  that  induction  and  deduction  be- 
long to  all  the  sciences.  I  do  not  believe  that  induction  and  deduc- 
tion are  really  two  forms  of  reasoning  essentially  distinct.  By 
nature  man  has  the  feeling  or  idea  of  a  principle  that  rules  partic- 
ular cases.  He  always  proceeds  instinctively  from  a  principle,  ac- 
quired or  invented  by  hypothesis;  but  he  can  never  go  forward  in 
reasoning  otherwise  than  by  syllogism,  that  is,  by  proceeding  from 
the  general  to  the  particular. 

In  physiology,  a  given  organ  always  works  through  one  and  the 
same  mechanism ;  only,  when  the  phenomenon  occurs  under  different 
conditions  or  in  a  different  environment,  the  function  takes  on  a 
different  aspect ;  but  fundamentally  its  character  remains  the  same. 
In  my  opinion  there  is  only  one  way  of  reasoning  for  the  mind,  just 
as  there  is  only  one  way  of  walking  for  the  body.  But  when  a  man 
goes  ahead  on  solid  flat  ground,  by  a  straight  road  whose  whole  ex- 
tent he  knows  and  sees,  he  advances  toward  his  goal  at  an  assured 
and  rapid  pace.  On  the  contrary,  when  a  man  follows  a  winding 
road  in  the  dark  and  over  unknown  hilly  ground,  he  dreads  preci- 
pices and  goes  forward  cautiously,  step  by  step.  Before  taking  a 
second  step,  he  must  make  sure  that  he  has  placed  his  first  foot  on 
a  spot  that  is  firm,  then  go  forward  in  the  same  way  verifying  ex- 
perimentally, moment  by  moment,  the  solidity  of  the  ground,  and 
always  changing  the  direction  of  his  advance  according  to  what  he 
encounters.  Such  is  the  experimenter  who  must  never  go  beyond 
fact  in  his  searching,  lest  he  risk  losing  his  way.  In  the  two  pre- 
ceding examples  the  man  goes  forward  over  different  ground  and 
in  varied  surroundings,  but  he  goes  forward  none  the  less  by  the 
same  physiological  method.  In  the  same  way,  when  an  experimenter 
simply  deduces  relations  from  definite  phenomena  by  means  of  known 

•i.e.,  Not  a  postulate  and  not  exclusively  an  affair  of  the  mind.  Translator's 
note. 


48  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


and  established  principles,  his  reasoning  develops  in  a  secure  and 
necessary  way,  while,  if  he  finds  himself  in  the  midst  of  complex 
relations  and  with  the  support  only  of  vague,  provisional  prin- 
ciples, the  same  experimenter  must  then  go  forward  cautiously  and 
must  submit  to  experiment  each  one  of  the  ideas  which  he  successively 
puts  forward.  But,  in  both  these  cases,  the  mind  still  reasons  in 
the  same  way  and  by  the  same  physiological  method,  only  it  starts 
from  a  more  or  less  binding  principle. 

When  any  sort  of  phenomenon  strikes  us  in  nature,  we  work  out 
our  idea  of  the  cause  determining  it.  Man  in  his  primal  ignorance 
imagined  divinities  connected  with  each  phenomenon.  To-day  men  of 
science  acknowledge  forces  or  laws :  it  is  they  that  govern  phenomena. 
An  idea  that  comes  to  us  at  the  sight  of  a  phenomenon  is  called 
a  'priori.  Now  we  shall  later  easily  show  that  this  a  priori  idea,  which 
rises  in  us  a  propos  of  a  special  fact,  always  contains  implicitly  and, 
in  some  sort,  without  our  knowledge,  a  principle  to  which  we  tend  to 
refer  the  special  fact,  so  that  when  we  think  that  we  are  moving 
from  a  special  case  to  a  principle,  i.e.,  making  an  induction,  we 
are  really  making  a  deduction;  only  the  experimenter  guides  him- 
self by  an  assumed  or  provisional  principle  which  he  alters  moment 
by  moment,  because  he  is  searching  in  almost  total  darkness.  In 
proportion  as  we  gather  facts,  our  principles  become  more  and  more 
general  and  more  secure;  so  we  gain  the  certainty  that  we  deduce. 
But  nevertheless,  in  the  experimental  sciences,  our  principle  must 
always  remain  provisional,  because  we  are  never  certain  that  it  in- 
cludes only  the  facts  and  conditions  of  which  we  are  aware.  In 
short,  our  deductions  are  always  hypothetical  until  verified  experi- 
mentally. An  experimenter,  therefore,  can  never  be  in  the  posi- 
tion of  the  mathematician,  precisely  because  experimental  reasoning, 
by  its  very  nature,  is  always  dubitative.  If  we  wish,  we  can  call  the 
experimenter's  dubitative  reasoning  induction,  and  the  mathemati- 
cian's afiirmative  reasoning  deduction ;  but  the  distinction  will  then 
apply  to  the  certainty  or  uncertainty  of  our  starting  point  in  reason- 
ing, not  to  the  way  in  which  we  reason. 


VI.  Doubt  in  Experimental  Reasoning 


I  will  summarize  the  preceding  paragraph  by  saying  that  there 
seems  to  me  to  be  only  one  form  of  reasoning :  deduction  by  syllogism. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


49 


The  mind,  even  if  it  wished,  could  not  reason  otherwise,  and  if  this 
were  the  place  for  it,  I  might  try  to  support  my  proposition  by 
physiological  arguments.  But  to  find  scientific  truth,  we,  after  all, 
have  little  need  to  know  how  our  mind  reasons;  it  is  enough  to  let 
it  reason  naturally,  and  in  that  case  it  will  always  start  from  a 
principle  to  reach  a  conclusion.  All  we  need  do  here  is  to  insist 
on  a  precept  which  will  always  forearm  the  mind  against  the  count- 
less sources  of  error  that  may  be  met  in  applying  the  experimental 
method. 

This  general  precept,  one  of  the  foundations  of  the  experimental 
method,  is  doubt:  it  is  expressed  by  saying  that  the  conclusion  of 
our  reasoning  must  always  remain  dubitative  when  the  starting  point 
or  the  principle  is  not  an  absolute  truth.  We  have  seen  that  there 
is  no  absolute  truth  apart  from  mathematical  principles;  in  all  nat- 
ural phenomena  the  principles  from  which  we  start,  like  the  conclu- 
sions which  we  reach,  embody  only  relative  truths.  The  experi- 
menter's stumbling  block,  then,  consists  in  thinking  that  he  knows 
what  he  does  not  know,  and  in  taking  for  absolute,  truths  that  are 
only  relative.  Hence,  the  unique  and  fundamental  rule  of  scien- 
tific investigation  is  reduced  to  doubt,  as  great  philosophers,  moreover, 
have  already  proclaimed. 

Experimental  reasoning  is  precisely  the  reverse  of  scholastic 
reasoning.  Scholasticism  must  always  have  a  fixed  and  indubitable 
starting  point;  and,  unable  to  find  it  either  in  outer  things  or  in 
reason,  it  borrows  it  from  some  irrational  source,  such  as  revela- 
tion, tradition,  a  conventional  or  an  arbitrary  authority.  The 
starting  point  once  settled,  scholastics  or  systematizers  deduce  logi- 
cally all  the  consequences,  even  invoking  as  arguments  observation  or 
experience  of  facts  when  they  are  favorable ;  the  one  condition  is  that 
the  starting  point  shall  remain  immutable  and  shall  not  vary  with 
their  experiences  and  observations,  but  on  the  contrary  that  facts  shall 
be  so  interpreted  as  to  adapt  themselves  to  it.  Experimenters,  on 
the  contrary,  never  accept  an  immutable  starting  point ;  their  prin- 
ciple is  a  postulate,  all  of  whose  consequences  they  logically  deduce, 
but  without  ever  considering  it  absolute  or  beyond  the  reach  of  ex- 
periment. The  chemists'  elements  are  elements  only  until  proof  to 
the  contrary.  All  the  theories  which  serve  as  starting  points  for 
physicists,  chemists,  and  with  still  more  reason  physiologists,  are 
true  only  until  facts  are  discovered  which  they  do  not  include,  or 


50 


AN  INTRODUCTTOX  TO  THE  STUDY 


which  contradict  them.  When  these  contradictory  facts  are  shown 
to  be  firmly  established,  far  from  stiffening  themselves  against  ex- 
perience, like  the  scholastics  or  systematizers,  experimenters,  on 
the  contrary,  hasten  to  safeguard  their  starting  point,  to  modify  their 
theory,  because  they  know  that  this  is  the  only  way  to  go  forward  and 
to  make  progress  in  science.  Experimenters,  then,  always  doubt 
even  their  starting  point ;  of  necessity  they  keep  a  supple  and  modest 
mind  and  accept  contradiction,  on  the  one  condition  that  it  be  proved. 
Scholastics  or  systematizers  never  question  their  starting  point,  to 
which  they  seek  to  refer  everything;  they  have  a  proud  and  intol- 
erant mind  and  do  not  accept  contradiction,  since  they  do  not  admit 
that  their  starting  point  may  change.  Men  of  system  are  also  dis^ 
tinguished  from  men  of  experimental  science  by  the  fact  that 
the  first  impose  their  idea,  while  the  second  always  give  it  just 
for  what  it  is  worth.  Finally,  another  essential  characteristic,  which 
differentiates  experimental  reasoning  from  scholastic  reasoning,  is 
the  fertility  of  the  one  and  the  sterility  of  the  other.  The 
scholastic  who  believes  himself  in  possession  of  absolute  certainty 
comes  to  naught ;  this  can  easily  be  understood,  since  by  his  absolute 
principle,  he  puts  himself  outside  of  nature,  in  which  everything  is 
relative.  The  experimenter,  on  the  contrary,  who  always  doubts 
and  who  does  not  believe  that  he  possesses  absolute  certainty  about 
anything,  succeeds  in  mastering  the  phenomena  that  surround  him 
and  in  extending  his  power  over  nature.  Man  can  do,  then,  more 
than  he  knows;  and  true  experimental  science  gives  him  power  only 
in  showing  him  his  ignorance.  Possessing  absolute  truth  matters 
little  to  the  man  of  science,  so  long  as  he  is  certain  about  the  rela- 
tions of  phenomena  to  one  another.  Indeed,  our  mind  is  so  limited 
that  we  can  know  neither  the  beginning  nor  the  end  of  things;  but 
we  can  grasp  the  middle,  i.e.,  what  surrounds  us  closely. 

Systematic  or  scholastic  reasoning  is  natural  to  inexperienced, 
proud  minds;  it  is  only  by  thorough  experimental  study  of  nature 
that  we  succeed  in  acquiring  the  experimenter's  doubting  mind. 
That  takes  a  long  time ;  of  those  who  think  they  are  following  the 
experimental  path  in  physiology  and  in  medicine,  many,  as  we  shall 
see  later,  are  still  scholastics.  As  for  me,  I  am  convinced  that  only 
study  of  nature  can  give  scholars  a  true  perception  of  science.  Phi- 
losophy, which  I  consider  an  excellent  gymnastic  for  the  mind,  has 
systematic  and  scholastic  tendencies  in  spite  of  itself,  which  would 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


51 


be  harmful  to  men  of  science  properly  so-called.  After  all,  no 
method  can  replace  that  study  of  nature  which  makes  true  men  of 
science:  without  that  study,  all  that  philosophers  have  said  and  all 
that  I  myself  have  repeated  after  them  in  this  introduction  would 
remain  inapplicable  and  sterile. 

I  do  not  think,  therefore,  as  I  said  above,  that  it  is  very  profitable 
for  men  of  science  to  discuss  definitions  of  induction  and  of  deduc- 
tion, nor,  for  that  matter,  the  question  whether  we  advance  by  one 
or  the  other  of  these  so-called  processes  of  mind.  Baconian  induc- 
tion, however,  has  become  famous  and  has  been  made  the  founda- 
tion of  all  scientific  philosophy.  Bacon  was  a  great  genius,  and 
his  great  restoration  of  the  sciences  is  sublime  as  an  idea;  we  are 
captivated  and  carried  along  in  spite  of  ourselves,  in  reading  the 
Novum  Organum  and  the  Augmentum  Scientiarum.  We  are  fas- 
cinated by  a  medley  of  scientific  gleams,  clothed  in  the  loftieist  of 
poetic  forms.  Bacon  felt  the  sterility  of  scholasticism ;  he  well  under- 
stood and  foresaw  the  importance  of  experiment  for  the  future  of 
the  sciences.  Yet  Bacon  was  not  a  man  of  science,  and  he  did  not 
understand  the  mechanism  of  the  experimental  method.  To  prove 
this,  it  would  be  enough  to  cite  the  hapless  attempts  which  he  made. 
Bacon  advises  us  to  fly  from  hypotheses  and  theories;  we  have 
seen,  however,  that  they  are  auxiliaries  of  the  method,  indispensable 
as  scaffolding  is  necessary  in  building  a  house.  Bacon,  as  is  always 
the  case,  had  extravagant  admirers  and  detractors.  Without  taking 
one  side  or  the  other,  I  will  say  that,  while  recognizing  Bacon^s 
genius,  I  believe  no  more  than  J.  de  Maistre  ^  that  he  endowed  the 
human  intellect  with  a  new  instrument,  and  it  seems  to  me,  as  to 
M.  de  Eemusat,^  that  induction  does  not  differ  from  the  syllogism. 
Moreover,  I  believe  that  great  experimenters  appeared  before  all 
precepts  of  experimentation,  as  great  orators  preceded  all  treatises 
on  rhetoric.  Consequently,  even  in  speaking  of  Bacon,  it  does  not 
seem  to  me  permissible  to  say  he  invented  the  experimental  method, 
that  method  which  Galileo  and  Torricelli  so  admirably  practised 
and  which  Bacon  never  could  use. 

When  Descartes      starts  from  universal  doubt  and  repudiates 

*  Bacon,  (Euvres,  edition,  Francois  Riaux,  Introduction,  p.  30. 

•  J.  de  Maistre,  Examen  de  la  philosophie  de  Bacon. 

•M.  de  Remusat,  Bacon,  sa  vie,  son  temps  et  sa  philosophie,  1857. 
Descartes,  Discoura  sur  la  m^thode. 


52 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


authority,  he  gives  much  more  practical  precepts  for  the  experimenter 
than  those  that  Bacon  gives  for  induction.  We  have  seen,  indeed, 
that  only  doubt  promotes  experiment  ;  it  is  doubt,  finally^  which 
determines  the  form  of  experimental  reasoning. 

In  connection  v^ith  medicine  and  the  physiological  sciences,  how- 
ever, it  is  important  to  determine  at  what  point  to  apply  doubt,  so 
as  to  distinguish  it  from  scepticism,  and  to  show  how  scientific  doubt 
becomes  an  element  of  the  greatest  certainty.  The  sceptic  disbe- 
lieves in  science  and  believes  in  himself ;  he  believes  enough  in  him- 
self to  dare  deny  science  and  to  assert  that  it  is  not  subject  to  definite, 
fixed  laws.  The  doubter  is  a  true  man  of  science;  he  doubts  only 
himself  and  his  interpretations,  but  he  believes  in  science;  in  the 
experimental  sciences,  he  even  accepts  a  criterion  or  absolute  scien- 
tific principled  This  principle  is  the  determinism  of  phenomena, 
which  is  as  absolute  in  the  phenomena  of  living  bodies  as  in  those 
of  inorganic  matter,  as  we  shall  later  assert  (page  65). 

Finally,  in  concluding  this  section,  we  may  say  that  in  all  experi- 
mental reasoning  there  are  two  possibilities:  either  the  experi- 
menter's hypothesis  will  be  disproved  or  it  will  be  proved  by  ex- 
periment. When  experiment  disproves  his  preconceived  idea,  the 
experimenter  must  discard  or  modify  it.  But  even  when  experi- 
ment fully  proves  his  preconceived  idea,  the  experimenter  must  still 
doubt;  for  since  he  is  dealing  with  an  unconscious  truth,  his  reason 
still  demands  a  counterproof. 

VII.  The  Principle  of  the  Experimental  Criterion 

We  have  just  said  that  one  must  doubt,  but  by  no  means  be 
sceptical.  A  sceptic,  indeed,  who  believes  nothing,  no  longer  has  a 
foundation  on  which  to  establish  his  criterion,  and  consequently  he 
finds  it  impossible  to  build  up  a  science ;  the  sterility  of  his  unhappy 
mind  results  at  once  from  the  error  of  his  perception  and  from  the 
imperfection  of  his  reason.  After  having  posited  the  principle  that 
investigators  must  doubt,  we  added  that  doubt  will  apply  only  to 
the  soundness  of  their  opinions,  or  of  their  ideas  as  experimenters, 
or  to  the  value  of  their  means  of  investigation,  as  observers,  but 
never  to  determinism,  the  very  principle  of  experimental  science. 
Let  us  return  in  a  few  words  to  this  fundamental  point. 

Experimenters  must  doubt  their  intuition,  i.e.,  the  a  priori  idea 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


53 


or  the  theory  which  serves  as  their  starting  point;  this  is  why  it  is 
an  absolute  principle  always  to  submit  one's  idea  to  the  experimental 
criterion  so  as  to  test  its  value.  But  just  what  is  the  foundation  of 
this  experimental  criterion?  This  question  may  seem  superfluous, 
after  having  repeatedly  said  that  facts  judge  the  idea  and  give  us 
experience.  Facts  alone  are  real,  it  is  said;  and  we  must  leave 
the  matter  to  them,  wholly  and  exclusively.  Again,  it  is  a  fact,  a 
sheer  fact,  men  often  repeat;  there  is  no  use  in  discussing,  we  must 
accept  it.  Of  course  I  admit  that  facts  are  the  only  realities  that 
can  give  form  to  the  experimental  idea  and  at  the  same  time  serve 
as  its  control ;  but  this  is  on  condition  that  reason  accepts  them.  I 
think  that  blind  belief  in  fact,  which  dares  to  silence  reason,  is  as 
dangerous  to  the  experimental  sciences  as  the  beliefs  of  feeling  or  of 
faith  which  also  force  silence  on  reason.  In  a  word,  in  the  experi- 
mental method  as  in  everything  else,  the  only  real  criterion  is  reason. 

A  fact  is  nothing  in  itself,  it  has  value  only  through  the  idea 
connected  with  it  or  through  the  proof  it  supplies.  We  have  said 
elsewhere  that,  when  one  calls  a  new  fact  a  discovery,  the  fact  itself 
is  not  the  discovery,  but  rather  the  new  idea  derived  from  it ;  in  the 
same  way,  when  a  fact  proves  anything,  the  fact  does  not  itself  give 
the  proof,  but  only  the  rational  relation  which  it  establishes  between 
the  phenomenon  and  its  cause.  This  relation  is  the  scientific  truth 
which  we  now  must  discuss  further. 

Let  us  recall  how  we  characterized  mathematical  truths  and  ex- 
perimental truths.  Mathematical  truths,  once  acquired,  we  said, 
are  conscious  and  absolute  truths,  because  the  ideal  conditions  in 
which  they  exist  are  also  conscious  and  known  by  us  in  an  absolute 
way.  Experimental  truths,  on  the  contrary,  are  unconscious  and 
relative,  because  the  real  conditions  on  which  they  exist  are  un^ 
conscious  and  can  be  known  by  us  only  in  their  relation  to  the  pres- 
ent state  of  our  science.  But  if  the  experimental  truths,  which  serve 
as  foundation  for  our  reasoning,  are  so  wrapped  up  in  the  complex 
reality  of  natural  phenomena  that  they  appear  to  us  only  in  shreds, 
these  experimental  truths  rest,  none  the  less,  on  principles  that  are 
absolute  because,  like  those  of  mathematical  truths,  they  speak  to 
our  consciousness  and  our  reason.  Indeed  the  absolute  principle  of 
experimental  science  is  conscious  and  necessary  determinism  in  the 
conditions  of  phenomena.  So  that,  given  no  matter  what  natural 
phenomenon,  experimenters  can  never  acknowledge  variation  in  the 


54  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


embodiment  of  this  phenomenon,  unless  new  conditions  have  at  the 
same  time  occurred  in  its  coming  to  pass;  what  is  more,  they  have 
an  a  'priori  certainty,  that  these  variations  are  determined  by  rig- 
orous, mathematical  relations.  Experiment  only  shows  us  the  form 
of  phenomena ;  but  the  relation  of  a  phenomenon  to  a  definite  cause 
is  necessary  and  independent  of  experiment ;  it  is  necessarily  mathe- 
matical and  absolute.  Thus  we  see  that  the  principle  of  the  cri- 
terion in  experimental  sciences  is  fundamentally  identical  with  that 
of  the  mathematical  sciences,  since  in  each  case  the  principle  is  ex- 
pressed by  a  necessary  and  absolute  relation  between  things.  Only  in 
the  experimental  sciences  these  relations  are  surrounded  by  numerous, 
complex  and  infinitely  varied  phenomena  which  hide  them  from  our 
sight.  With  the  help  of  experiment,  we  analyze,  we  dissociate  these 
phenomena,  in  order  to  reduce  them  to  more  and  more  simple  rela- 
tions and  conditions.  In  this  way  we  try  to  lay  hold  on  scientific 
truth,  i.e.,  find  the  law  that  shall  give  us  the  key  to  all  variations  of 
the  phenomena.  Thus  experimental  analysis  is  our  only  means  of 
going  in  search  of  truth  in  the  natural  sciences,  and  the  absolute 
determinism  of  phenomena,  of  which  we  are  conscious  a  'priori,  is 
the  only  criterion  or  principle  which  directs  and  supports  us.  In 
spite  of  our  eiforts,  we  are  still  very  far  from  this  absolute  truth; 
and  it  is  probable,  especially  in  the  biological  sciences,  that  it  will 
never  be  given  us  to  see  it  in  its  nakedness.  But  this  need  not  dis- 
courage us,  for  we  are  constantly  nearing  it ;  and  moreover,  with  the 
help  of  our  experiments,  we  grasp  relations  between  phenomena 
which,  though  partial  and  relative,  allow  us  more  and  more  tO'  ex- 
tend our  power  over  nature. 

It  follows  from  the  above  that,  if  a  phenomenon,  in  an  experiment, 
had  such  a  contradictory  appearance  that  it  did  not  necessarily  con- 
nect itself  with  determinate  causes,  then  reason  should  reject  the  fact 
as  non-scientific.  We  should  wait  or  by  direct  experiments  seek 
the  source  of  error  which  may  have  slipped  into  the  observation. 
Indeed,  there  must  be  error  or  insufiiciency  in  the  observation; 
for  to  accept  a  fact  without  a  cause,  that  is,  indeterminate  in  its 
necessary  conditions,  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  negation  of 
science.  So  that,  in  the  presence  of  such  a  fact,  men  of  science  must 
never  hesitate;  they  must  believe  in  science  and  doubt  their  means 
of  investigation.  They  will,  therefore,  perfect  their  means  of  obser- 
vation and  will  make  every  effort  to  get  out  of  the  darkness ;  but  they 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


55 


will  never  deny  the  absolute  determinism  of  the  phenomena;  be- 
cause it  is  precisely  the  recognition  of  determinism  that  character- 
izes true  men  of  science. 

In  medicine,  we  are  often  confronted  with  poorly  observed  and 
indefinite  facts  which  form  actual  obstacles  to  science,  in  that 
men  always  bring  them  up,  saying :  it  is  a  fact,  it  must  be  accepted. 
Kational  science  based,  as  we  have  said,  on  a  necessary  determinism, 
must  never  repudiate  an  accurate  and  well-observed  fact ;  but  on 
the  same  principle,  it  ought  not  to  encumber  itself  with  apparent 
facts  collected  without  precision,  and  possessing  no  kind  of  meaning, 
which  are  used  as  a  double-edged  weapon  to  support  or  disprove  the 
most  diverse  opinions.  In  short,  science  rejects  the  indeterminate; 
and  in  medicine,  when  we  begin  to  base  our  opinions  on  medical  tact, 
on  inspiration,  or  on  more  or  less  vague  intuition  about  things,  we 
are  outside  of  science  and  offer  an  example  of  that  fanciful  medi- 
cine which  may  involve  the  greatest  dangers,  by  surrendering  the 
health  and  life  of  the  sick  to  the  whims  of  an  inspired  ignoramus. 
True  science  teaches  us  to  doubt  and,  in  ignorance,  to  refrain. 

VIII.  Proof  and  Counterproof 

We  said  above  that  experimenters,  who  see  their  ideas  confirmed 
by  an  experiment,  should  still  doubt  and  require  a  counterproof. 
Indeed,  proof  that  a  given  condition  always  precedes  or  accom- 
panies a  phenomenon  does  not  warrant  concluding  with  certainty  that 
a  given  condition  is  the  immediate  cause  of  that  phenomenon.  It 
must  still  be  established  that,  when  this  condition  is  removed,  the 
phenomenon  will  no  longer  appear.  If  we  limited  ourselves  to  the 
proof  of  presence  alone,  we  might  fall  into  error  at  any  moment 
and  believe  in  relations  of  cause  and  effect  where  there  was  nothing 
but  simple  coincidence.  As  we  shall  later  see,  coincidences  form  one 
of  the  most  dangerous  stumbling  blocks  encountered  by  experimental 
scientists  in  complex  sciences  like  biology.  It  is  the  post  hoc,  ergo 
propter  hoc  of  the  doctors,  into  which  we  may  very  easily  let  ourselves 
be  led,  especially  if  the  result  of  an  experiment  or  an  observation 
supports  a  preconceived  idea. 

Counterproof,  then,  is  a  necessary  and  essential  characteristic 
of  the  conclusion  of  experimental  reasoning.  It  is  the  expression 
of  philosophic  doubt  carried  as  far  as  possible.    Counterproof  de- 


56 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


cides  whether  the  relation  of  cause  to  effect,  which  we  seek  in  phe- 
nomena, has  been  found.  To  do  this,  it  removes  the  accepted  cause, 
to  see  if  the  effect  persists,  relying  on  that  old  and  absolutely  true 
adage:  suhlata  causa,  tollitur  ejfectus.  This  is  what  we  still  call 
the  experimentum  crucis. 

We  must  not  confuse  a  counterexperiment  or  counterproof  with 
what  has  been  called  comparative  experiment.  As  we  shall  later 
see,  this  is  only  a  comparative  observation  resorted  to,  in  complex 
circumstances,  to  simplify  phenomena  and  to  forearm  oneself  against 
unforeseen  sources  of  error;  counterproof,  on  the  contrary,  is  a 
counterjudgment  dealing  directly  with  the  experimental  conclu- 
sion and  forming  one  of  its  necessary  terms.  Indeed,  proof,  in 
science,  never  establishes  certainty  without  counterproof.  Analysis 
can  be  absolutely  proved  only  when  the  synthesis,  which  demonstrates 
it,  provides  the  counterproof  or  counterexperiment.  Similarly  a 
synthesis  made  at  the  outset  should  be  demonstrated  later  by  analy- 
sis. Feeling  for  this  necessary,  experimental  counterproof  con- 
stitutes the  scientific  feeling  par  excellence.  It  is  familiar  to  physi- 
cists and  chemists;  but  it  is  far  from  being  as  well  understood  by 
physicians.  In  most  cases,  when  we  see  two  phenomena  in  physiol- 
ogy or  medicine  going  together  and  following  one  another  in  a  con- 
stant order,  we  think  we  may  conclude  that  the  first  is  the  cause 
of  the  second.  This  would  be  a  false  judgment  in  very  many  cases ; 
statistical  tables  of  presence  or  of  absence  never  establish  experi- 
mental demonstrations.  In  complex  sciences  like  medicine,  we  must 
at  the  same  time  make  use  of  comparative  experiment  and  of  counter- 
proof.  Some  physicians  fear  and  avoid  counterproof;  as  soon  as 
they  make  observations  in  the  direction  of  their  ideas,  they  refuse  to 
look  for  contradictory  facts,  for  fear  of  seeing  their  hypothesis 
vanish.  We  have  already  said  that  this  is  a  very  poor  spirit;  if  we 
mean  to  find  truth,  we  can  solidly  settle  our  ideas  only  by  trying  to 
destroy  our  own  conclusions  by  counterexperiments.  Now  the  only 
proof  that  one  phenomenon  plays  the  part  of  cause  in  relation  to 
another  is  by  removing  the  first,  to  stop  the  second. 

I  shall  not  further  emphasize  this  principle  of  the  experimental 
method  at  this  point,  because  I  shall  later  take  the  opportunity  to 
return  to  it,  giving  special  examples  which  will  explain  my  thought. 
Let  me  summarize  by  saying  that  experimenters  should  always  push 
their  investigation  to  the  point  of  counterproof;  without  that,  their 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


57 


experimental  reasoning  would  not  be  complete.  Counterproof  estab- 
lishes the  necessary  determinism  of  phenomena;  and  thus  alone  can 
satisfy  reason  to  which,  as  we  have  said,  we  must  always  bring  back 
any  true  scientific  criterion. 

Experimental  reasoning,  whose  different  terms  we  have  examined 
in  the  preceding  section,  sets  itself  the  same  goal  in  all  the  sciences. 
Experimenters  try  to  reach  determinism ;  with  the  help  of  reasoning 
and  of  experiment  they  try  to  connect  natural  phenomena  with  their 
necessary  conditions  or,  in  other  words,  with  their  immediate  causes. 
By  this  means,  they  reach  the  law  which  enables  them  to  master 
phenomena.  All  natural  philosophy  is  summarized  in  knowing  the 
law  of  phenomena.  The  whole  experimental  problem  may  be  re- 
duced to  foreseeing  and  directing  phenomena.  But  this  double 
goal  can  be  attained,  in  living  bodies,  only  by  certain  special  prin- 
ciples of  experimentation  which  we  must  point  out  in  the  following 
chapters. 


{ 

I 


PART  TWO 


EXPERIMENTATION  WITH  LIVING  BEINGS 

CHAPTER  I 

EXPERIMENTAL  CONSIDERATIONS  COMMON  TO 
LIVING  THINGS  AND  INORGANIC  BODIES 

1.   The  Spontaneity  of  Living  Beings  Is  no  Obstacle  to  the 

Use  of  Experimentation 

The  spontaneity  enjoyed  by  beings  endowed  with  life  has 
been  one  of  the  principal  objections  urged  against  the  use  of  experi- 
mentation in  biological  studies.  Every  living  being  indeed  appears 
to  us  provided  with  a  kind  of  inner  force,  which  presides  over  mani- 
festations of  life  more  and  more  independent  of  general  cosmic  in- 
fluence in  proportion  as  the  being  rises  higher  in  the  scale  of  organi- 
zation. In  the  higher  animals  and  in  man,  for  instance,  this  vital 
force  seems  to  result  in  withdrawing  the  living  being  from  general 
physico-chemical  influences  and  thus  making  the  experimental  ap- 
proach very  difiicult. 

Inorganic  bodies  offer  no  parallel;  whatever  their  nature,  they 
are  all  devoid  of  spontaneity.  As  the  manifestation  of  their  prop- 
erties is  therefore  absolutely  bound  up  in  the  physico-chemical  con- 
ditions surrounding  them  and  forming  their  environment,  it  follows 
that  the  experimenter  can  reach  them  and  alter  them  at  will. 

On  the  other  hand,  all  the  phenomena  of  a  living  body  are  in 
such  reciprocal  harmony  one  with  another  that  it  seems  impossible 
to  separate  any  part  without  at  once  disturbing  the  whole  organ- 
ism. Especially  in  higher  animals,  their  more  acute  sensitiveness 
brings  with  it  still  more  notable  reactions  and  disturbances. 

Many  physicians  and  speculative  physiologists,  with  certain 
anatomists  and  naturalists,  employ  these  various  arguments  to  attack 
experimentation  on  living  beings.  They  assume  a  vital  force  in 
opposition  to  physico-chemical  forces,  dominating  all  the  phenomena 

59 


60 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


of  life,  subjecting  them  to  entirely  separate  laws,  and  making  the 
organism  an  organized  whole  which  the  experimenter  may  not 
touch  without  destroying  the  quality  of  life  itself.  They  even  go 
so  far  as  to  say  that  inorganic  bodies  and  living  bodies  differ  radically 
from  this  point  of  view,  so  that  experimentation  is  applicable  to  the 
former  and  not  to  the  latter.  Cuvier,  who  shares  this  opinion  and 
thinks  that  physiology  should  be  a  science  of  observation  and  of  de- 
ductive anatomy,  expresses  himself  thus:  "All  parts  of  a  living  body 
are  interrelated ;  they  can  act  only  in  so  far  as  they  act  all  together ; 
trying  to  separate  one  from  the  whole  means  transferring  it  to  the 
realm  of  dead  substances;  it  means  entirely  changing  its  essence." 

If  the  above  objections  were  well  founded,  we  should  either  have 
to  recognize  that  determinism  is  impossible  in  the  phenomena  of 
life,  and  this  would  be  simply  denying  biological  science ;  or  else  we 
should  have  to  acknowledge  that  vital  force  must  be  studied  by 
special  methods,  and  that  the  science  of  life  must  rest  on  different 
principles  from  the  science  of  inorganic  bodies.  These  ideas,  which 
were  current  in  other  times,  are  now  gradually  disappearing;  but 
it  is  essential  to  extirpate  their  very  last  spawn,  because  the  so-called 
vitalistic  ideas  still  remaining  in  certain  minds  are  really  an  obstacle 
to  the  progress  of  experimental  science. 

I  propose,  therefore,  to  prove  that  the  science  of  vital  phenomena 
must  have  the  same  foundations  as  the  science  of  the  phenomena  of 
inorganic  bodies,  and  that  there  is  no  difference  in  this  respect  be- 
tween the  principles  of  biological  science  and  those  of  physico-chem- 
ical science.  Indeed,  as  we  have  already  said,  the  goal  which  the 
experimental  method  sets  itself  is  everywhere  the  same ;  it.  consists 
in  connecting  natural  phenomena  with  their  necessary  conditions  or 
with  their  immediate  causes.  In  biology,  since  these  conditions  are 
known,  physiologists  can  guide  the  manifestation  of  vital  phenomena 
as  physicists  guide  the  natural  phenomena,  the  laws  of  which  they 
have  discovered ;  but  in  doing  so,  experimenters  do  not  act  on  life. 

Yet  there  is  absolute  determinism  in  all  the  sciences,  because 
every  phenomenon  being  necessarily  linked  with  physico-chemical 
conditions,  men  of  science  can  alter  them  to  master  the  phenomenon, 
i.e.,  to  prevent  or  to  promote  its  appearing.  As  to  this,  there  is 
absolutely  no  question  in  the  case  of  inorganic  bodies.  I  mean  to 
prove  that  it  is  the  same  with  living  bodies,  and  that  for  them  also 
determinism  exists. 


OF  EXPEKIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


61 


II.  Manifestation  of  Pkopeeties  of  Living  Bodies  Is  Con- 
nected WITH  THE  Existence  of  Certain  Physico-Chemical 
Phenomena  Which  Regulate  Their  Appearance 

The  manifestation  of  properties  of  inorganic  bodies  is  connected 
with  surrounding  conditions  of  temperature  and  moisture  by  means 
of  which  the  experimenter  can  directly  govern  mineral  phenomena. 
Living  bodies  at  first  sight  do  not  seem  capable  of  being  thus 
influenced  by  neighboring  physico-chemical  conditions;  but  that  is 
merely  a  delusion  depending  on  the  animal  having  and  maintaining 
within  himself  the  conditions  of  warmth  and  moisture  necessary  to 
the  appearance  of  vital  phenomena.  The  result  is  that  an  inert  body, 
obedient  to  cosmic  conditions,  is  linked  with  all  their  variations, 
while  a  living  body  on  the  contrary  remains  independent  and  free 
in  its  manifestations ;  it  seems  animated  by  an  inner  force  that  rules 
all  its  acts  and  liberates  it  from  the  influence  of  surrounding  physico- 
chemical  variations  and  disturbances.  This  quite  different  aspect 
of  the  manifestations  of  living  bodies  as  compared  with  the  behavior 
of  inorganic  bodies  has  led  the  psysiologists,  called  vitalists,  to  at- 
tribute to  the  former  a  vital  force  ceaselessly  at  war  with  physico- 
chemical  forces  and  neutralizing  their  destructive  action  on  the  living 
organism.  According  to  this  view,  the  manifestations  of  life  are 
determined  by  spontaneous  action  of  this  special  vital  force,  instead  of 
being,  like  the  manifestations  of  inorganic  bodies,  the  necessary  re- 
sults of  conditions  or  of  the  physico-chemical  influences  of  a  surround- 
ing environment.  But  if  we  consider  it,  we  shall  soon  see  that  the 
spontaneity  of  living  bodies  is  simply  an  appearance  and  the 
result  of  a  certain  mechanism  in  completely  determined  environ- 
ments; so  that  it  will  be  easy,  after  all,  to  prove  that  the  behavior 
of  living  bodies,  as  well  as  the  behavior  of  inorganic  bodies,  is  domi- 
nated by  a  necessary  determinism  linking  them  with  conditions  of  a 
purely  physico-chemical  order. 

Let  us  note,  first  of  all,  that  this  kind  of  independence  of  living 
beings  in  the  cosmic  environment  appears  only  in  complex  higher 
animals.  Inferior  beings,  such  as  the  infusoria,  reduced  to  an  ele- 
mentary organism,  have  no  real  independence.  These  creatures 
exhibit  the  vital  properties  with  which  they  are  endowed,  only  under 
the  influence  of  external  moisture,  light  or  warmth,  and  as  soon 
as  one  or  more  of  these  conditions  happens  to  fail,  the  vital  manifes- 


62 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


tation  ceases,  because  the  parallel  physico-chemical  phenomenon  has 
stopped.  In  vegetables  the  manifestation  of  vital  phenomena  is  linked 
in  the  same  way  with  conditions  of  warmth,  moisture  and  light  in  the 
surrounding  environment.  It  is  the  same  again  with  cold-blooded 
animals;  the  phenomena  of  life  are  benumbed  or  stimulated  accord- 
ing to  the  same  conditions.  Now  the  influences  producing  or  re- 
tarding vital  manifestations  in  living  beings  are  exactly  the  same 
as  those  which  produce,  accelerate  or  retard  manifestations  of  physr 
ico-chemical  phenomena  in  inorganic  bodies,  so  that  instead  of  fol- 
lowing the  example  of  the  vitalists  in  seeing  a  kind  of  opposition 
or  incompatibility  between  the  conditions  of  vital  manifestations  and 
the  conditions  of  physico-chemical  manifestations,  we  must  note,  on 
the  contrary,  in  these  two  orders  of  phenomena  a  complete  parallelism 
and  a  direct  and  necessary  relation.  Only  in  warm-blooded  animals 
do  the  conditions  of  the  organism  and  those  of  the  surrounding  en- 
vironment seem  to  be  independent;  in  these  animals  indeed  the 
manifestation  of  vital  phenomena  no  longer  suffers  the  alternations 
and  variations  that  the  cosmic  conditions  display;  and  an  inner 
force  seems  to  join  combat  with  these  influences  and  in  spite  of  them 
to  maintain  the  vital  forces  in  equilibrium.  But  fundamentally  it  is 
nothing  of  the  sort;  and  the  semblance  depends  simply  on  the  fact 
that,  by  the  more  complete  protective  mechanism  which  we  shall  have 
occasion  to  study,  the  warm-blooded  animaFs  internal  environment 
comes  less  easily  into  equilibrium  with  the  external  cosmic  environ- 
ment. External  influences,  therefore,  bring  about  changes  and  dis- 
turbances in  the  intensity  of  organic  functions  only  in  so  far  as  the 
protective  system  of  the  organism's  internal  environment  becomes 
insufficient  in  given  conditions. 


III.  Physiological  Phenomena  in  the  Higher  Animals  Take 
Place  in  Perfected  Internal  Organic  Environments  En- 
dowed WITH  Constant  Physico-Chemical  Properties 

Thoroughly  to  understand  the  application  of  experimentation  to 
living  beings,  it  is  of  the  first  importance  to  reach  a  definite  judgment 
on  the  ideas  which  we  are  now  explaining.  When  we  examine  a 
higher,  i.e.,  a  complex  living  organism,  and  see  it  fulfill  its  different 
functions  in  the  general  cosmic  environment  common  to  all  the  phe- 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


63 


nomena  of  nature,  it  seems  to  a  certain  extent  independent  of  this 
environment.  But  this  appearance  results  simply  from  our  deluding 
ourselves  about  the  simplicity  of  vital  phenomena.  The  external  phe- 
nomena vrhich  v^e  perceive  in  the  living  being  are  fundamentally  very 
complex;  they  are  the  resultant  of  a  host  of  intimate  properties  of 
organic  units  whose  manifestations  are  linked  together  with  the 
physico-chemical  conditions  of  the  internal  environment  in  which 
they  are  immersed.  In  our  explanations  we  suppress  this  inner  en- 
vironment and  see  only  the  outer  environment  before  our  eyes. 
But  the  real  explanation  of  vital  phenomena  rests  on  study  and 
knowledge  of  the  extremely  tenuous  and  delicate  particles  which 
form  the  organic  units  of  the  body.  This  idea,  long  ago  set  forth  in 
biology  by  great  physiologists,  seems  more  and  more  true  in  propor- 
tion as  the  science  of  the  organization  of  living  beings  makes  progress. 
We  must,  moreover,  learn  that  the  intimate  particles  of  an  organ- 
ism exhibit  their  vital  activity  only  through  a  necessary  physico- 
chemical  relation  with  immediate  environments  which  we  must  also 
study  and  know.  Otherwise,  if  we  limit  ourselves  to  the  survey  of 
total  phenomena  visible  from  without,  we  may  falsely  believe  that  a 
force  in  living  beings  violates  the  physico-chemical  laws  of  the  gen- 
eral cosmic  environment,  just  as  an  untaught  man  might  believe  that 
some  special  force  in  a  machine,  rising  in  the  air  or  running  along  the 
ground,  violated  the  laws  of  gravitation.  'NoWy  a  living  organism  is 
nothing  but  a  wonderful  machine  endowed  with  the  most  marvellous 
properties  and  set  going  by  means  of  the  most  complex  and  delicate 
mechanism.  There  are  no  forces  opposed  and  struggling  one  with 
another ;  in  nature  there  can  be  only  order  and  disorder,  harmony  or 
discord. 

In  experimentation  on  inorganic  bodies,  we  need  take  account  of 
only  one  environment,  the  external  cosmic  environment ;  while  in  the 
higher  living  animals,  at  least  two  environments  must  be  considered, 
the  external  or  extra-organic  environment  and  the  internal  or  intra- 
organic environment.  In  my  course  on  physiology  at  the  Faculty  of 
Sciences,  I  explain  each  year  these  ideas  on  organic  environment, — 
new  ideas  which  I  regard  as  fundamental  in  general  physiology ;  they 
are  also  necessarily  fundamental  in  general  pathology,  and  the  same 
thoughts  will  guide  us  in  adapting  experimentation  to  living  beings, 
For,  as  I  have  said  elsewhere,  the  great  difficulties  that  we  meet  in 
experimentally  determining  vital  phenomena  and  in  applying  suit- 


64 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


able  means  to  altering  them  are  caused  by  the  complexity  involved  in 
the  existence  of  an  internal  organic  environment.'^ 

Physicists  and  chemists  experimenting  on  inert  bodies  need  con- 
sider only  the  external  environment;  by  means  of  the  thermometer, 
barometer  and  other  instruments  used  in  recording  and  measuring  the 
properties  of  the  external  environment,  they  can  always  set  them- 
selves in  equivalent  conditions.  For  physiologists  these  instruments 
no  longer  suffice;  and  yet  the  internal  environment  is  just  the  place 
where  they  should  use  them.  Indeed,  the  internal  environment  of 
living  beings  is  always  in  direct  relation  with  the  normal  or  patho- 
logical vital  manifestations  of  organic  units.  In  proportion  as  we 
ascend  the  scale  of  living  beings,  the  organism  grows  more  complex, 
the  organic  units  become  more  delicate  and  require  a  more  perfected 
internal  environment.  The  circulating  liquids,  the  blood  serum  and 
the  intra-organic  fluids  all  constitute  the  internal  environment. 

In  living  beings  the  internal  environment,  which  is  a  true  product 
of  the  organism,  preserves  the  necessary  relations  of  exchange  and 
equilibrium  with  the  external  cosmic  environment ;  but  in  proportion 
as  the  organism  grows  more  perfect,  the  organic  environment  becomes 
specialized  and  more  and  more  isolated,  as  it  were,  from  the  sur- 
rounding environment.  In  vegetables  and  in  cold-blooded  animals, 
as  we  have  said,  this  isolation  is  less  complete  than  in  warm-blooded 
animals ;  in  the  latter  the  blood  serum  maintains  an  almost  fixed  and 
constant  temperature  and  composition.  But  these  differing  condi- 
tions do  not  constitute  differences  of  nature  in  different  living  beings ; 
they  are  merely  improvements  in  the  isolating  and  protecting  mech- 
anisms of  their  environment.  Vital  manifestations  in  animals  vary 
only  because  the  physico-chemical  conditions  of  their  internal  envi- 
ronments vary ;  thus  a  mammal,  whose  blood  has  been  chilled  either 
by  natural  hibernation  or  by  certain  lesions  of  the  nervous  system, 
closely  resembles  a  really  cold-blooded  animal  in  the  properties  of 
its  tissues. 

To  sum  up,  from  what  has  been  said  we  can  gain  an  idea  of  the 
enormous  complexity  of  vital  phenomena  and  of  the  almost  insuper- 
able difficulties  which  their  accurate  determination  opposes  to  physi- 
ologists forced  to  carry  on  experimentation  in  the  internal  or  organic 

*  Claude  Bernard,  Legons  sur  la  physiologie  et  la  pathologie  du  systime 
nerveux.  Legon  d'oiwerture,  Dec.  17,  1856.  Paris,  1858,  Vol.  I. — Cours  de  patho- 
logie experimentale.    {The  Medical  Times,  1860.) 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  ]\IEDICINE 


65 


environments.  These  obstacles,  however,  cannot  terrify  us  if  we  are 
thoroughly  convinced  that  we  are  on  the  right  road.  Absolute  de- 
terminism exists  indeed  in  every  vital  phenomenon ;  hence  biological 
science  exists  also;  and  consequently  the  studies  to  which  we  are 
devoting  ourselves  will  not  all  be  useless.  General  physiology  is  the 
basic  biological  science  toward  which  all  others  converge.  Its  prob- 
lem is  to  determine  the  elementary  condition  of  vital  phenomena. 
Pathology  and  therapeutics  also  rest  on  this  common  foundation. 
By  normal  activity  of  its  organic  units,  life  exhibits  a  state  of  health ; 
by  abnormal  manifestation  of  the  same  units,  diseases  are  character- 
ized ;  and  finally  through  the  organic  environment  modified  by  means 
of  certain  toxic  or  medicinal  substances,  therapeutics  enables  us  to 
act  on  the  organic  units.  To  succeed  in  solving  these  various  prob- 
lems, we  must,  as  it  were,  analyze  the  organism,  as  we  take  apart  a 
machine  to  review  and  study  all  its  works ;  that  is  to  say,  before  suc- 
ceeding in  experimenting  on  smaller  units  we  must  first  experiment 
on  the  machinery  and  on  the  organs.  We  must,  therefore,  have  re- 
course to  analytic  study  of  the  successive  phenomena  of  life,  and  must 
make  use  of  the  same  experimental  method  which  physicists  and 
chemists  employ  in  analyzing  the  phenomena  of  inorganic  bodies. 
The  difficulties  which  result  from  the  complexity  of  the  phenomena 
of  living  bodies  arise  solely  in  applying  experimentation ;  for  funda- 
mentally the  object  and  principles  of  the  method  are  always  exactly 
the  same. 

IV.   The  Aim  of  Experimentation  Is  the  Same  in  Study  of 
Phenomena  of  Living  Bodies  as  in  Study  of  Phenomena 

OF  Inorganic  Bodies 

If  the  physicist  and  the  physiologist  differ  in  this,  that  one  busies 
himself  with  phenomena  taking  place  in  inorganic  matter,  and  the 
other  with  phenomena  occurring  in  living  matter,  still  they  do  not 
differ  in  the  object  which  they  mean  to  attain.  Indeed,  they  both 
set  themselves  a  common  object,  viz.,  getting  back  to  the  immediate 
cause  of  the  phenomena  which  they  are  studying. 

Now,  what  we  call  the  immediate  cause  of  a  phenomenon  is  noth- 
ing but  the  physical  and  material  condition  in  which  it  exists  or  ap- 
pears. The  object  of  the  experimental  method  or  the  limit  of  every 
scientific  research  is  therefore  the  same  for  living  bodies  as  for  inor- 
ganic bodies;  it  consists  in  finding  the  relations  which  connect  any 


66 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


phenomenon  with  its  immediate  cause,  or  putting  it  differently,  it 
consists  in  defining  the  conditions  necessary  to  the  appearance  of  the 
phenomenon.  Indeed,  when  an  experimenter  succeeds  in  learning  the 
necessary  conditions  of  a  phenomenon,  he  is,  in  some  sense,  its 
master ;  he  can  predict  its  course  and  its  appearance,  he  can  promote 
or  prevent  it  at  will.  An  experimenter's  object,  then,  is  reached; 
through  science,  he  has  extended  his  power  over  a  natural  phe- 
nomenon. 

We  shall  therefore  define  physiology  thus :  the  science  whose  object 
it  is  to  study  the  phenomena  of  living  beings  and  to  determine  the  ma- 
terial conditions  in  which  they  appear.  Only  by  the  analytic  or  ex- 
perimental method  can  we  attain  the  determination  of  the  conditions 
of  phenomena,  in  living  bodies  as  well  as  in  inorganic  bodies;  for 
we  reason  in  identically  the  same  way  in  experimenting  in  all  the 
sciences. 

For  physiological  experimenters,  neither  spiritualism  nor  mate- 
rialism can  exist.  These  words  belong  to  a  philosophy  which  has 
grown  old ;  they  will  fall  into  disuse  through  the  progress  of  science. 
We  shall  never  know  either  spirit  or  matter;  and  if  this  were  the 
proper  place  I  should  easily  show  that  on  one  side,  as  on  the  other, 
we  quickly  fall  into  scientific  negations.  The  conclusion  is  that  all 
such  considerations  are  idle  and  useless.  It  is  our  sole  concern  to 
study  phenomena,  to  learn  their  material  conditions  and  manifesta- 
tions, and  to  determine  the  laws  of  those  manifestations. 

First  causes  are  outside  the  realm  of  science ;  they  forever  escape 
us  in  the  sciences  of  living  as  well  as  in  those  of  inorganic  bodies. 
The  experimental  method  necessarily  turns  aside  from  the  chimerical 
search  for  a  vital  principle;  vital  force  exists  no  more  than  mineral 
force  exists,  or,  if  you  like,  one  exists  quite  as  much  as  the  other. 
The  word,  force,  is  merely  an  abstraction  which  we  use  for  linguistic 
convenience.  For  mechanics,  force  is  the  relation  of  a  movement 
to  its  cause.  For  physicists,  chemists  and  physiologists,  it  is  fun- 
damentally the  same.  As  the  essence  of  things  must  always  remain 
unknown,  we  can  learn  only  relations,  and  phenomena  are  merely 
the  results  of  relations.  The  properties  of  living  bodies  are  revealed 
only  through  reciprocal  organic  relations.  A  salivary  gland,  for  in- 
stance, exists  only  because  it  is  in  relation  with  the  digestive  system, 
and  because  its  histological  units  are  in  certain  relations  one  with 
another  and  with  the  blood.    Destroy  these  relations  by  isolating  the 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  ]\IEDICINE 


67 


units  of  the  organism,  one  from  another  in  thought,  and  the  salivary- 
gland  simply  ceases  to  be. 

A  scientific  law  gives  us  the  numerical  relation  of  an  effect  to  its 
cause,  and  that  is  the  goal  at  which  science  stops.  When  we  have  the 
law  of  a  phenomenon,  we  not  only  know  absolutely  the  conditions 
determining  its  existence,  but  we  also  have  the  relations  applying 
to  all  its  variations,  so  that  we  can  predict  modifications  of  the  phe- 
nomenon in  any  given  circumstances. 

As  a  corollary  to  the  above  we  must  add  that  neither  physiologists 
nor  physicians  need  imagine  it  their  task  to  seek  the  cause  of  life  or 
the  essence  of  disease.  That  would  be  entirely  wasting  one's  time 
in  pursuing  a  phantom.  The  words,  life,  death,  health,  disease, 
have  no  objective  reality.  We  must  imitate  the  physicists  in  this 
matter  and  say,  as  Newton  said  of  gravitation :  '^Bodies  fall  with 
an  accelerated  motion  whose  law  we  know :  that  is  a  fact,  that  is 
reality.  But  the  first  cause  which  makes  these  bodies  fall  is  utterly 
unknown.  To  picture  the  phenomenon  to  our  minds,  we  may  say 
that  the  bodies  fall  as  if  there  were  a  force  of  attraction  toward  the 
centre  of  the  earth,  quasi  esset  attractio.  But  the  force  of  attraction 
does  not  exist,  we  do  not  see  it ;  it  is  merely  a  word  used  to  abbreviate 
speech.''  When  a  physiologist  calls  in  vital  force  or  life,  he  does  not 
see  it ;  he  merely  pronounces  a  word ;  only  the  vital  phenomenon  ex- 
ists, with  its  material  conditions;  that  is  the  one  thing  that  he  can 
study  and  know. 

To  sum  up,  the  object  of  science  is  everywhere  the  same :  to  learn 
the  material  conditions  of  phenomena.  But  though  this  goal  is  the 
same  in  the  physico-chemical  and  in  biological  sciences,  it  is  much 
harder  to  reach  in  the  latter  because  of  the  mobility  and  complexity 
of  the  phenomena  which  we  meet. 

V.   The  Necessary  Conditions  of  Natural  Phenomena  Are 
Absolutely  Determined  in  Living  Bodies  as  Well 
AS  IN  Inorganic  Bodies 

We  must  acknowledge  as  an  experimental  axiom  that  in  living 
beings  as  well  as  in  inorganic  bodies  the  necessary  conditions  of  every 
phenomenon  are  absolutely  determined.  That  is  to  say,  in  other 
terms,  that  when  once  the  conditions  of  a  phenomenon  are  known  and 
fulfilled,  the  phenomenon  must  always  and  necessarily  be  reproduced 


68 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


at  the  will  of  the  experimenter.  Negation  of  this  proposition  would 
be  nothing  less  than  negation  of  science  itself.  Indeed,  as  science 
is  simply  the  determinate  and  the  determinable,  we  must  perforce 
accept  as  an  axiom  that,  in  identical  conditions,  all  phenomena  are 
identical  and  that,  as  soon  as  conditions  are  no  longer  the  same,  the 
phenomena  cease  to  be  identical.  This  principle  is  absolute  in  the 
phenomena  of  inorganic  bodies  as  well  as  in  those  of  living  beings, 
and  the  influence  of  life,  whatever  view  of  it  we  take,  can  nowise 
alter  it.  As  we  have  said,  what  we  call  vital  force  is  a  first  cause 
analogous  to  all  other  first  causes,  in  this  sense,  that  it  is  utterly 
unknown.  It  matters  little  whether  or  not  we  admit  that  this  force 
differs  essentially  from  the  forces  presiding  over  manifestations  of 
the  phenomena  of  inorganic  bodies,  the  vital  phenomena  which  it 
governs  must  still  be  determinable ;  for  the  force  would  otherwise  be 
blind  and  lawless,  and  that  is  impossible.  The  conclusion  is  that 
the  phenomena  of  life  have  their  special  law  because  there  is  rigorous 
determinism  in  the  various  circumstances  constituting  conditions 
necessary  to  their  existence  or  to  their  manifestations ;  and  that  is  the 
same  thing.  Now  in  the  phenomena  of  living  bodies  as  in  those  of 
inorganic  bodies,  it  is  only  through  experimentation,  as  I  have  al- 
ready often  repeated,  that  we  can  attain  knowledge  of  the  condi- 
tions which  govern  these  phenomena  and  so  enable  us  to  master  them. 

Everything  so  far  said  may  seem  elementary  to  men  cultivating 
the  physico-chemical  sciences.  But  among  naturalists  and  especially 
among  physicians,  we  find  men  who,  in  the  name  of  what  they  call 
vitalism,  express  most  erroneous  ideas  on  the  subject  which  concerns 
us.  They  believe  that  study  of  the  phenomena  of  living  matter  can 
have  no  relation  to  study  of  the  phenomena  of  inorganic  matter.  They 
look  on  life  as  a  mysterious  supernatural  influence  which  acts  arbi- 
trarily by  freeing  itself  wholly  from  determinism,  and  they  brand 
as  materialists  all  who  attempt  to  reconcile  vital  phenomena  with 
definite  organic  and  physico-chemical  conditions.  These  false  ideas 
are  not  easy  to  uproot  when  once  established  in  the  mind ;  only  the 
progress  of  science  can  dispel  them.  But  vitalistic  ideas,  taken  in 
the  sense  which  we  have  just  indicated,  are  just  a  kind  of  medical 
superstition, — a  belief  in  the  supernatural.  Now,  in  medicine,  belief 
in  occult  causes,  whether  it  is  called  vitalism  or  is  otherwise  named, 
encourages  ignorance  and  gives  birth  to  a  sort  of  unintentional  quack- 
ery ;  that  is  to  say,  the  belief  in  an  inborn,  indefinable  science.  Con- 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


69 


fidence  in  absolute  determinism  in  the  phenomena  of  life  leads,  on 
the  contrary,  to  real  science,  and  gives  the  modesty  which  comes  from 
the  consciousness  of  our  little  learning  and  the  difficulty  of  science. 
This  feeling  incites  us,  in  turn,  to  work  toward  knowledge;  and  to 
this  feeling  alone,  science  in  the  end  owes  all  its  progress. 

I  should  agree  with  the  vitalists  if  they  would  simply  recognize 
that  living  beings  exhibit  phenomena  peculiar  to  themselves  and  un- 
known in  inorganic  nature.  I  admit,  indeed,  that  manifestations  of 
life  cannot  be  wholly  elucidated  by  the  physico-chemical  phenomena 
known  in  inorganic  nature.  I  shall  later  explain  my  view  of  the  part 
played  in  biology  by  physico-chemical  sciences;  I  will  here  simply 
say  that  if  vital  phenomena  differ  from  those  of  inorganic  bodies  in 
complexity  and  appearance,  this  difference  obtains  only  by  virtue  of 
determined  or  determinable  conditions  proper  to  themselves.  So  if 
the  sciences  of  life  must  differ  from  all  others  in  explanation  and  in 
special  laws,  they  are  not  set  apart  by  scientific  method.  Biology 
must  borrow  the  experimental  method  of  physico-chemical  sciences, 
but  keep  its  special  phenomena  and  its  own  laws. 

In  living  bodies,  as  in  inorganic  bodies,  laws  are  immutable,  and 
the  phenomena  governed  by  these  laws  are  bound  to  the  conditions 
on  which  they  exist,  by  a  necessary  and  absolute  determinism.  I 
use  the  word  determinism  here  as  more  appropriate  than  the  word 
fatalism,  which  sometimes  serves  to  express  the  same  idea.  Determin- 
ism in  the  conditions  of  vital  phenomena  should  be  one  of  the  axioms 
of  experimenting  physicians.  If  they  are  thoroughly  imbued  with 
the  truth  of  this  principle,  they  will  exclude  all  supernatural  inter- 
vention from  their  explanations ;  they  will  have  unshaken  faith  in  the 
idea  that  fixed  laws  govern  biological  science;  and  at  the  same  time 
they  will  have  a  reliable  criterion  for  judging  the  often  variable  and 
contradictory  appearance  of  vital  phenomena.  Indeed,  starting  with 
the  principle  that  immutable  laws  exist,  experimenters  will  be  con- 
vinced that  phenomena  can  never  be  mutually  contradictory,  if  they 
are  observed  in  the  same  conditions ;  and  if  they  show  variations,  they 
will  know  that  this  is  necessarily  so  because  of  the  intervention  or  in- 
terference of  other  conditions  which  alter  or  mask  phenomena.  There 
will  be  occasion  thenceforth  to  try  to  learn  the  conditions  of  these 
variations,  for  there  can  be  no  effect  without  a  cause.  Determinism 
thus  becomes  the  foundation  of  all  scientific  progress  and  criticism. 
If  we  find  disconcerting  or  even  contradictory  results  in  performing 


70 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


an  experiment,  we  must  never  acknowledge  exceptions  or  contradic- 
tions as  real.  That  would  be  unscientific.  We  must  simply  and  nec- 
essarily decide  that  conditions  in  the  phenomena  are  different, 
whether  or  not  we  can  explain  them  at  the  time. 

I  assert  that  the  word  exception  is  unscientific;  and  as  soon  as 
laws  are  known,  no  exception  indeed  can  exist,  and  this  expression, 
like  so  many  others,  merely  enables  us  to  speak  of  things  whose  causa- 
tion we  do  not  know.  Every  day  we  hear  physicians  use  the  words : 
ordinarily,  more  often,  generally,  or  else  express  themselves  numer- 
ically by  saying,  for  instance :  nine  times  out  of  ten,  things  happen  in 
this  way.  I  have  heard  old  practitioners  say  that  the  words  ^'always" 
and  "never"  should  be  crossed  out  of  medicine.  I  condemn  neither 
these  restrictions  nor  the  use  of  these  locutions  if  they  are  used  as 
empirical  approximations  about  the  appearances  of  phenomena  when 
we  are  still  more  or  less  ignorant  of  the  exact  conditions  in  which 
they  exist.  But  certain  physicians  seem  to  reason  as  if  exceptions 
were  necessary ;  they  seem  to  believe  that  a  vital  force  exists  which 
can  arbitrarily  prevent  things  from  always  happening  alike ;  so  that 
exceptions  would  result  directly  from  the  action  of  mysterious  vital 
force.  Now  this  cannot  be  the  case ;  what  we  now  call  an  exception 
is  a  phenomenon,  one  or  more  of  whose  conditions  are  unknown ;  if 
the  conditions  of  the  phenomena  of  which  we  speak  were  known  and 
determined,  there  would  be  no  further  exceptions,  medicine  would 
be  as  free  from  them  as  is  any  other  science.  For  instance,  we  might 
formerly  say  that  sometimes  the  itch  was  cured  and  sometimes  not; 
but  now  that  we  attack  the  cause  of  this  disease,  we  cure  it  always. 
Formerly  it  might  be  said  that  a  lesion  of  the  nerves  brought  on 
paralysis,  now  of  feeling,  and  again  of  motion;  but  now  we  know 
that  cutting  the  anterior  spinal  nerve  paralyzes  motion  only.  Motor 
paralysis  occurs  consistently  and  always,  because  its  condition  has 
been  accurately  determined  by  experimenters. 

The  certainty  with  which  phenomena  are  determined  should  also 
be,  as  we  have  said,  the  foundation  of  experimental  criticism,  whether 
applied  to  one's  self  or  to  others.  A  phenomenon,  indeed,  always  ap- 
pears in  the  same  way  if  conditions  are  similar;  the  phenomenon 
never  fails  if  the  conditions  are  present,  just  as  it  does  fail  to  appear 
if  the  conditions  are  absent.  Thus  an  experimenter  who  has  made 
an  experiment,  in  conditions  which  he  believes  were  determined,  may 
happen  not  to  get  the  same  results  in  a  new  series  of  investigations 


OF  EXPERIMEXTAL  MEDICINE 


71 


as  in  his  first  observation;  in  repeating  the  experiment,  with  fresh 
precautions,  it  may  happen  again  that,  instead  of  his  first  result,  he 
may  encounter  a  wholly  different  one.  In  such  a  situation,  what  is 
to  be  done  ?  Should  we  acknowledge  that  the  facts  are  indetermi- 
nable ?  Certainly  not,  since  that  cannot  be.  We  must  simply  acknowl- 
edge that  experimental  conditions,  which  we  believed  to  be  known,  are 
not  known.  We  must  more  closely  study,  search  out  and  define  the 
experimental  conditions,  for  the  facts  cannot  be  contradictory  one 
to  another;  they  can  only  be  indeterminate.  Facts  never  exclude 
one  another,  they  are  simply  explained  by  differences  in  the  condi- 
tions in  which  they  are  born.  So  an  experimenter  can  never  deny 
a  fact  that  he  has  seen  and  observed,  merely  because  he  cannot  redis- 
cover it.  In  the  third  part  of  this  introduction,  we  shall  cite  in- 
stances in  which  the  principles  of  experimental  criticism  which  we 
have  just  suggested,  are  put  in  practice. 

VI.   To  Have  Determinism  for  Phenomena^  in  Biological  as  in 
Physico-Chemical  Sciences,  We  Must  Reduce  the 
Phenomena  to  Experimental  Conditions  as 
Definite  and  Simple  as  Possible 

As  a  natural  phenomenon  is  only  the  expression  of  ratios  and 
relations  and  connections,  at  least  two  bodies  are  necessary  to  its 
appearance.  So  we  must  always  consider,  first,  a  body  which  reacts 
or  which  manifests  the  phenomenon;  second,  another  body  which 
acts  and  plays  the  part  of  environment  in  relation  to  the  first.  It  is 
impossible  to  imagine  a  body  wholly  isolated  in  nature;  it  would 
no  longer  be  real,  because  there  would  be  no  relation  to  manifest  its 
existence. 

In  phenomenal  relations,  as  nature  presents  them  to  us,  more  or 
less  complexity  always  prevails.  In  this  respect  mineral  phenomena 
are  much  less  complex  than  vital  phenomena ;  this  is  why  the  sciences 
dealing  with  inorganic  bodies  have  succeeded  in  establishing  them- 
selves more  quickly.  In  living  bodies,  the  complexity  of  phenomena 
is  immense,  and  what  is  more,  the  mobility  accompanying  vital  char- 
acteristics makes  them  much  harder  to  grasp  and  to  define. 

The  properties  of  living  matter  can  be  learned  only  through  their 
relation  to  the  properties  of  inorganic  matter;  it  follows  that  the 
biological  sciences  must  have  as  their  necessary  foundation  the 


72 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


physico-chemical  sciences  from  which  they  borrow  their  means  of 
analysis  and  their  methods  of  investigation.  Such  are  the  neces- 
sary reasons  for  the  secondary  and  backward  evolution  of  the  sci- 
ences concerned  with  the  phenomena  of  life.  But  though  the  com- 
plexity of  vital  phenomena  creates  great  obstacles,  we  must  not  be 
appalled,  for,  as  we  have  already  said,  unless  we  deny  the  possi- 
bility of  biological  science,  the  principles  of  science  are  everywhere 
the  same.  So  we  may  be  sure  that  we  are  on  the  right  road  and 
that  in  time  we  shall  reach  the  scientific  result  that  we  are  seeking, 
that  is  to  say,  determinism  in  the  phenomena  of  living  beings. 

We  can  reach  knowledge  of  definite  elementary  conditions  of  phe- 
nomena only  by  one  road,  viz.,  by  experimental  analysis.  Analysis 
dissociates  all  the  complex  phenomena  successively  into  more  and 
more  simple  phenomena,  until  they  are  reduced,  if  possible,  to  just 
two  elementary  conditions.  Experimental  science,  in  fact,  considers 
in  a  phenomenon  only  the  definite  conditions  necessary  to  produce 
it.  Physicists  try  to  picture  these  conditions  to  themselves,  more 
or  less  ideally  in  mechanics  or  mathematical  physics.  Chemists  suc- 
cessively analyze  complex  matters;  and  in  thus  reaching  either  ele- 
ments or  definite  substances  (individual  compounds  or  chemical  spe- 
cies), they  attain  the  elementary  or  irreducible  conditions  of  phe- 
nomena. In  the  same  way,  biologists  should  analyze  complex  organ- 
isms and  reduce  the  phenomena  of  life  to  conditions  that  cannot  be 
analyzed  in  the  present  state  of  science. 

Experimental  physiology  and  medicine  have  no  other  goal.  When 
faced  by  complex  questions,  physiologists  and  physicians,  as  well 
as  physicists  and  chemists,  should  divide  the  total  problem  into  sim- 
pler and  simpler  and  more  and  more  clearly  defined  partial  pr6b- 
lems.  They  will  thus  reduce  phenomena  to  their  simplest  possible 
material  conditions  and  make  application  of  the  experimental  method 
easier  and  more  certain.  All  the  analytic  sciences  divide  problems, 
in  order  to  experiment  better.  By  following  this  path,  physicists 
and  chemists  have  succeeded  in  reducing  what  seemed  the  most 
complex  phenomena  to  simple  properties  connected  with  well-defined 
mineral  species.  By  following  the  same  analytic  path,  physiologists 
should  succeed  in  reducing  all  the  vital  manifestations  of  a  complex 
organism  to  the  play  of  certain  organs,  and  the  action  of  these  organs 
to  the  properties  of  well-defined  tissues  or  organic  units.  Anatomico- 
physiological  experimental  analysis,  which  dates  from  Galen,  has  just 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


73 


this  meaning,  and  histology,  in  pursuing  the  same  problem  to-day,  is 
naturally  coming  closer  and  closer  to  the  goal. 

Though  we  can  succeed  in  separating  living  tissues  into  chemical 
elements  or  bodies,  still  these  elementary  chemical  bodies  are  not 
elements  for  physiologists.  In  this  respect  biologists  are  more  like 
physicists  than  chemists,  for  they  seek  to  determine  the  properties 
of  bodies  and  are  much  less  preoccupied  with  their  elementary  com- 
position. In  the  present  state  of  the  science,  it  would  be  impos- 
sible to  establish  any  relation  between  the  vital  properties  of  bodies 
and  their  chemical  composition ;  because  tissues  and  organs  endowed 
with  the  most  diverse  properties  are  at  times  indistinguishable  from 
the  point  of  view  of  their  elementary  chemical  composition.  Chem- 
istry is  most  useful  to  physiologists  in  giving  them  means  of  sepa- 
rating and  studying  individual  compounds,  true  organic  products 
which  play  important  parts  in  the  phenomena  of  life. 

Organic  individual  compounds,  though  well  defined  in  their 
properties,  are  still  not  active  elements  in  physiological  phenomena ; 
like  mineral  matter,  they  are,  as  it  were,  only  passive  elements  in 
the  organism.  For  physiologists,  the  truly  active  elements  are  what 
we  call  anatomical  or  histological  units.  Like  the  organic  indi- 
vidual compounds,  these  are  not  chemically  simple;  but  physiologi- 
cally considered,  they  are  as  simplified  as  possible  in  that  their  vital 
properties  are  the  simplest  that  we  know, — vital  properties  which 
vanish  when  we  happen  to  destroy  this  elementary  organized  part. 
However,  all  ideas  of  ours  about  these  elements  are  limited  by  the 
present  state  of  our  knowledge ;  for  there  can  be  no  question  that 
these  histological  units,  in  the  condition  of  cells  and  fibres,  are  still 
complex.  That  is  why  certain  naturalists  refuse  to  give  them  the 
names  of  elements  and  propose  to  call  them  elementary  organisms. 
This  appellation  is  in  fact  more  appropriate ;  w^e  can  perfectly  well 
picture  to  ourselves  a  complex  organism  made  up  of  a  quantity  of 
distinct  elementary  organisms,  uniting,  joining  and  grouping  to- 
gether in  various  ways,  to  give  birth  first  to  the  different  tissues  of 
the  body,  then  to  its  various  organs;  anatomical  mechanisms  are 
themselves  only  assemblages  of  organs  which  present  endlessly  varied 
combinations  in  living  beings.  When  we  come  to  analyze  the  com- 
ple:?:  manifestations  of  any  organism,  we  should  therefore  separate 
the  complex  phenomena  and  reduce  them  to  a  certain  number  of 
simple  properties  belonging  to  elementary  organisms;  then  syn- 


74 


AN  INTEODUCTIOX  TO  THE  STUDY 


thetically  reconstruct  the  total  organism  in  thought,  by  reuniting  and 
ordering  the  elementary  organisms,  considered  at  first  separately, 
then  in  their  reciprocal  relations. 

When  physicians,  chemists  or  physiologists,  by  successive  experi- 
mental analyses,  succeed  in  determining  the  irreducible  element  of 
a  phenomenon  in  the  present  state  of  their  science,  the  scientific  prob- 
lem is  simplified,  but  its  nature  is  not  changed  thereby ;  and  men  of 
science  are  no  nearer  to  absolute  knowledge  of  the  essence  of  things. 
^Nevertheless,  they  have  gained  what  it  is  truly  important  to  obtain, 
to  wit,  knowledge  of  the  necessary  conditions  of  the  phenomenon  and 
determination  of  the  definite  relation  existing  between  a  body  mani- 
festing its  properties  and  the  immediate  cause  of  this  manifestation. 
The  object  of  analysis,  in  biological  as  in  physico-chemical  science, 
is,  after  all,  to  determine  and,  as  far  as  possible,  to  isolate  the  condi- 
tions governing  the  occurrence  of  each  phenomenon.  We  can  act  on 
the  phenomena  of  nature  only  by  reproducing  the  natural  conditions 
in  which  they  exist ;  and  we  act  the  more  easily  on  these  conditions 
in  proportion  as  they  have  first  been  better  analyzed  and  reduced 
to  a  greater  state  of  simplicity.  Real  science  exists,  then,  only 
from  the  moment  when  a  phenomenon  is  accurately  defined  as  to  its 
nature  and  rigorously  determined  in  relation  to  its  material  condi- 
tions, that  is,  when  its  law  is  known.  Before  that,  we  have  only 
groping  and  empiricism. 


VII.    In  Living  Bodies,  Just  as  in  Inorganic  Bodies,  the 
Existence  of  Phenomena  Is  Always  Doubly  Conditioned 

The  most  superficial  examination  of  what  goes  on  around  us 
shows  that  all  natural  phenomena  result  from  the  reaction  of  bodies 
one  against  another.  There  always  come  under  consideration  the 
hody,  in  which  the  phenomenon  takes  place,  and  the  outward  circum- 
stance or  the  environment  which  determines  or  invites  the  body  to 
exhibit  its  properties.  The  conjunction  of  these  conditions  is  essen- 
tial to  the  appearance  of  the  phenomenon.  If  we  suppress  the 
environment,  the  phenomenon  disappears,  just  as  if  the  body  had 
been  taken  away.  The  phenomena  of  life,  as  well  as  those  of  inor- 
ganic bodies,  are  thus  doubly  conditioned.  On  the  one  hand,  we 
have  the  organism  in  which  vital  phenomena  come  to  pass;  on  the 
other  hand,  the  cosmic  environment  in  which  living  bodies,  like  inor- 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


75 


ganic  bodies,  find  the  conditions  essential  to  the  appearance  of  their 
phenomena.  The  conditions  necessary  to  life  are  found  neither  in 
the  organism  nor  in  the  outer  environment,  but  in  both  at  once. 
Indeed,  if  we  suppress  or  disturb  the  organism,  life  ceases,  even 
though  the  environment  remains  intact;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
take  away  or  vitiate  the  environment,  life  just  as  completely  disap- 
pears, even  though  the  organism  has  not  been  destroyed. 

Thus  phenomena  appear  as  results  of  contact  or  relation  of  a 
body  with  its  environment.  Indeed,  if  we  absolutely  isolate  a  body 
in  our  thought,  w^e  annihilate  it  in  so  doing;  and  if,  on  the  con- 
trary, we  multiply  its  relations  with  the  outer  world,  we  multiply 
its  properties. 

Phenomena,  then,  are  definite  relations  of  bodies;  we  always 
conceive  these  relations  as  resulting  from  forces  outside  of  matter, 
because  we  cannot  absolutely  localize  them  in  a  single  body.  For 
physicists,  universal  attraction  is  only  an  abstract  idea;  manifesta- 
tion of  this  force  requires  the  presence  of  two  bodies;  if  only  one 
body  is  present,  we  can  no  longer  conceive  of  attraction.  For  ex- 
ample, electricity  results  from  the  action  of  copper  and  zinc  in  cer- 
tain chemical  conditions;  but  if  we  suppress  the  interrelation  of 
bodies,  electricity, — an  abstraction  without  existence  in  itself, — 
ceases  to  appear.  In  the  same  way,  life  results  from  contact  of  the 
organism  with  its  environment;  we  can  no  more  understand  it 
through  the  organism  alone  than  through  the  environment  alone.  It 
is  therefore  a  similar  abstraction,  that  is  to  say,  a  force  which  appears 
as  if  it  were  outside  of  matter. 

But  however  the  mind  conceives  the  forces  of  nature,  that  can- 
not alter  an  experimenter's  conduct  in  any  respect.  For  him  the 
problem  reduces  itself  solely  to  determining  the  material  conditions 
in  which  a  phenomenon  appears.  These  conditions  once  known, 
he  can  then  master  the  phenomenon ;  by  supplying  or  not  supplying 
them,  he  can  make  the  phenomenon  appear  or  disappear  at  will. 
Thus  physicists  and  chemists  exert  their  power  over  inorganic  bodies ; 
thus  physiologists  gain  empire  over  vital  phenomena.  Living  bodies, 
however,  seem  at  first  sight  to  elude  the  experimenter's  action.  We 
see  the  higher  organisms  uniformly  exhibit  their  vital  phenomena, 
in  spite  of  variations  in  the  surrounding  cosmic  environment,  and 
from  another  angle  we  see  life  extinguished  in  an  organism  after  a 
certain  length  of  time  without  being  able  to  find  reasons  in  the 


76 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


external  environment  for  this  extinction.  But,  as  we  have  already 
said,  there  is  an  illusion  here,  resulting  from  incomplete  and  super- 
ficial analysis  of  the  conditions  of  vital  phenomena.  Ancient  sci- 
ence was  able  to  conceive  only  the  outer  environment ;  but  to  establish 
the  science  of  experimental  biology,  we  must  also  conceive  an  inner 
environment.  I  believe  I  was  the  first  to  express  this  idea  clearly 
and  to  insist  on  it,  the  better  to  explain  the  application  of  experi- 
mentation to  living  beings.  Since  the  outer  environment,  on  the 
other  hand,  infiltrates  into  the  inner  environment,  knowing  the  latter 
teaches  us  the  former's  every  influence.  Only  by  passing  into  the 
inner,  can  the  influence  of  the  outer  environment  reach  us,  whence 
it  follows  that  knowing  the  outer  environment  cannot  teach  us  the 
actions  born  in,  and  proper  to,  the  inner  environment.  The  general 
cosmic  environment  is  common  to  living  and  to  inorganic  bodies; 
but  the  inner  environment  created  by  an  organism  is  special  to  each 
living  being.  Now,  here  is  the  true  physiological  environment ;  this 
it  is  which  physiologists  and  physicians  should  study  and  know,  for 
by  its  means  they  can  act  on  the  histological  units  which  are  the 
only  effective  agents  in  vital  phenomena.  Nevertheless,  though  so 
deeply  seated,  these  units  are  in  communication  with  the  outer  world ; 
they  still  live  in  the  conditions  of  the  outer  environment  perfected 
and  regulated  by  the  play  of  the  organism.  The  organism  is  merely 
a  living  machine  so  constructed  that,  on  the  one  hand,  the  outer  en- 
vironment is  in  free  communication  with  the  inner  organic  environ- 
ment, and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  organic  units  have  protective  func- 
tions, to  place  in  reserve  the  materials  of  life  and  uninterruptedly 
to  maintain  the  humidity,  warmth  and  other  conditions  essential  to 
vital  activity.  Sickness  and  death  are  merely  a  dislocation  or  dis- 
turbance of  the  mechanism  which  regulates  the  contact  of  vital 
stimulants  with  organic  units.  In  a  word,  vital  phenomena  are 
the  result  of  contact  between  the  organic  units  of  the  body  with 
the  inner  physiological  environment;  this  is  the  pivot  of  all  ex- 
perimental medicine.  Physiologists  and  physicians  gain  mastery 
over  the  phenomena  of  life  by  learning  which  conditions,  in  this 
inner  environment,  are  normal  and  which  abnormal,  for  the  appear- 
ance of  vital  activity  in  the  organic  units ;  for  apart  from  complexity 
of  conditions,  phenomena  exhibiting  life,  like  physico-chemical  phe- 
nomena, result  from  contact  between  an  active  body  and  the  environ- 
ment in  which  it  acts. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


77 


VIII.   In  Biological  as  in  Physico-Chemical  Science,  Deter- 
minism Is  Possible,  Because  Matter  in  Living  as  in  In- 
organic Bodies  Can  Possess  No  Spontaneity 

To  sum  up,  the  study  of  life  includes  two  things:  (1)  Study  of 
the  properties  of  organized  units;  (2)  study  of  the  organic  environ- 
ment, i.e.,  study  of  the  conditions  which  this  environment  must  fulfill 
to  permit  the  appearance  of  vital  activities.  Physiology,  pathology 
and  therapeutics  rest  on  this  double  knowledge;  apart  from  this, 
neither  medical  science  nor  any  truly  scientific  or  effectual  thera- 
peutics exists. 

In  living  organisms  it  is  convenient  to  distinguish  between  three 
kinds  of  definite  bodies:  first,  chemical  elements;  second,  organic 
and  inorganic  individual  compounds;  third,  organized  anatomical 
units.  Of  about  70  elements  known  to  chemistry  to-day,  only  16 
are  found  in  that  most  complex  of  organisms,  the  organism  of  man. 
But  these  16  elements  combine  with  one  another  to  form  the  various 
liquid,  solid  and  gaseous  substances  of  the  organism.  Oxygen  and 
nitrogen,  however,  are  merely  dissolved  in  the  organic  fluids ;  and  in 
living  beings,  seem  to  act  as  elements.  The  inorganic  individual 
compounds  (earthy  salts,  phosphates,  chlorides,  sulphates,  etc.)  are 
essential  constituents  in  the  composition  of  living  bodies,  but  are 
taken  ready-made  directly  from  the  outer  world.  Organic  individual 
compounds  are  also  constituents  of  living  bodies,  but  by  no  means 
borrowed  from  the  outer  world;  they  are  made  by  the  vegetable 
or  animal  organism;  among  such  substances  are  starch,  sugar,  fat, 
albumen,  etc.,  etc.  When  extracted  from  the  body,  they  preserve 
their  properties  because  they  are  not  alive ;  they  are  organic  products, 
but  not  organized.  Anatomical  units  stand  alone  as  organized  liv- 
ing parts.  These  parts  are  irritable  and,  under  the  influence  of 
various  stimulants,  exhibit  properties  exclusively  characteristic  of 
living  beings.  They  live  and  nourish  themselves,  and  their  nourish- 
ment creates  and  preserves  their  properties,  which  means  that  they 
cannot  be  cut  off  from  the  organism  without  more  or  less  rapidly 
losing  their  vitality. 

Though  very  different  from  one  another  in  respect  to  their  func- 
tions in  the  organism,  these  three  classes  of  bodies  all  show  physico- 
chemical  reactions  under  the  influence  of  the  outer  stimuli, — ^warmth, 
light,  electricity;  but  living  parts  also  have  the  power  of  being  irri- 


78 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


table,  i.e.,  reacting  under  the  influence  of  certain  stimuli  in  a  way 
specially  characteristic  of  living  tissues,  such  as  muscular  contrac- 
tion, nervous  transmission,  glandular  secretion,  etc.  But  whatever 
the  variety  presented  by  the  three  classes  of  phenomena,  whether  the 
reaction  be  physico-chemical  or  vital,  it  is  never  in  any  way  spon- 
taneous. The  phenomenon  always  results  from  the  influence  exerted 
on  the  reacting  body  by  a  physico-chemical  stimulant  outside  itself. 

Every  definite  substance,  whether  inorganic,  organic  or  organ- 
ized, is  autonomous;  that  is  to  say,  it  has  characteristic  properties 
and  exhibits  independent  action.    Nevertheless,  each  one  of  these 
bodies  is  inert,  that  is,  it  is  incapable  of  putting  itself  into  action; 
to  do  this,  it  must  always  enter  into  relation  with  another  body,  from 
which  it  receives  a  stimulus.    Thus  every  mineral  body  in  the  cosmic 
environment  is  stable;  it  changes  its  state  only  when  the  circum- 
stances in  which  it  is  placed  are  rather  seriously  changed,  either 
naturally  or  through  experimental  interference.    In  any  organic 
environment,  the  substances  created  by  animals  and  vegetables  are 
much  more  changeable  and  less  stable,  but  still  they  are  inert  and 
exhibit  their  properties  only  as  they  are  influenced  by  agents  out- 
side themselves.    Finally,  anatomical  units  themselves,  which  are 
the  most  changeable  and  unstable  of  substances,  are  still  inert,  that 
is,  they  never  break  into  vital  activity  unless  some  foreign  influence 
invites  them.    A  muscle-fibre,  for  instance,  has  the  vital  property 
peculiar  to  itself  of  contracting,  but  this  living  fibre  is  inert  in 
the  sense  that  if  nothing  changes  in  its  environmental  or  its  inner 
conditions,  it  cannot  bring  its  functions  into  play,  and  it  will  not 
contract.    For  the  muscular  fibre  to  contract,  a  change  must  neces- 
sarily be  produced  in  it,  by  its  coming  into  relation  with  a  stimula- 
tion from  without,  which  may  come  either  from  the  blood  or  from 
a  nerve.    We  may  say  as  much  of  all  the  histological  units,  nerve 
units,  blood  units,  etc.    Different  living  units  thus  play  the  part  of 
stimuli,  one  in  relation  to  another ;  and  the  functional  manifestations 
of  an  organism  are  merely  the  expression  of  their  harmonious  recipro- 
cal relations.    The  histological  units  react  either  separately  or  one 
against  another  by  means  of  vital  properties  which  are  themselves  in 
necessary  connection  with  surrounding  physico-chemical  conditions; 
and  this  relation  is  so  intimate  that  we  may  say  the  intensity  of 
physico-chemical  phenomena  taking  place  in  an  organism  may  be 
used  to  measure  the  intensity  of  its  vital  phenomena.  Therefore, 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


79 


as  has  already  been  said,  we  must  not  set  up  an  antagonism  between 
vital  phenomena  and  physico-chemical  phenomena,  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, we  must  note  the  complete  and  necessary  parallelism  between 
the  two  classes  of  phenomena.  To  sum  up,  living  matter  is  no  more 
able  than  inorganic  matter  to  get  into  activity  or  movement  by 
itself.  Every  change  in  matter  implies  intervention  of  a  new  rela- 
tion, i.e.,  an  outside  condition  or  influence.  The  role  of  men  of 
science  is  to  try  to  define  and  determine  the  material  conditions  pro- 
ducing the  appearance  of  each  phenomenon.  These  conditions  once 
known,  experimenters  master  the  phenomenon  in  this  sense,  that  they 
can  give  movement  to  matter,  or  take  it  away,  at  pleasure. 

What  we  have  just  said  is  equally  true  for  the  phenomena  of 
living  bodies  and  the  phenomena  of  inorganic  bodies.  Only  in  the 
case  of  the  complex  higher  organisms,  physiologists  and  physicians 
must  study  the  stimuli  of  vital  phenomena,  not  in  the  relations  of 
the  whole  organism  with  the  general  cosmic  environment,  but  rather 
in  the  organic  conditions  of  the  inner  environment.  Considered  in 
the  general  cosmic  environment,  the  functions  of  man  and  of  the 
higher  animals  seem  to  us,  indeed,  free  and  independent  of  the 
physico-chemical  conditions  of  the  environment,  because  its  actual 
stimuli  are  found  in  an  inner,  organic,  liquid  environment.  What 
we  see  from  the  outside  is  merely  the  result  of  physico-chemical 
stimuli  from  the  inner  environment ;  that  is  where  physiologists  must 
build  up  the  real  determinism  of  vital  functions. 

Living  machines  are  therefore  created  and  constructed  in  such 
a  way  that,  in  perfecting  themselves,  they  become  freer  and  freer  in 
the  general  cosmic  environment.  But  the  most  absolute  determine 
ism  still  obtains,  none  the  less,  in  the  inner  environment  which  is 
separated  more  and  more  from  the  outer  cosmic  environment,  by  rea- 
son of  the  same  organic  development.  A  living  machine  keeps  up 
its  movement  because  the  inner  mechanism  of  the  organism,  by  acts 
and  forces  ceaselessly  renewed,  repairs  the  losses  involved  in  the 
exercise  of  its  functions.  Machines  created  by  the  intelligence  of 
man,  though  infinitely  coarser,  are  built  in  just  this  fashion.  A 
steam  engine's  activity  is  independent  of  outer  physico-chemical  con- 
ditions, since  the  machine  goes  on  working  through  cold,  heat,  dry- 
ness and  moisture.  But  physicists  going  down  into  the  inner  envi- 
ronment of  the  machine,  find  that  this  independence  is  only  apparent, 
and  that  the  movement  of  its  every  inner  gear  is  determined  by  phys- 


80 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


ical  conditions  whose  law  they  know.  As  for  physiologists,  if  they  can 
go  down  into  the  inner  environment  of  a  living  machine,  they  find 
likewise  absolute  determinism  that  must  become  the  real  founda- 
tion of  the  science  of  living  bodies. 

IX.   The  Limits  of  Our  Knowledge  Are  the  Same  m  the 
Phenomena  of  Living  Bodies  and  in  the  Phenomena 

OF  Inorganic  Bodies 

The  nature  of  our  mind  leads  us  to  seek  the  essence  or  the  why 
of  things.  Thus  we  aim  beyond  the  goal  that  it  is  given  us  to  reach ; 
for  experience  soon  teaches  us  that  we  cannot  get  beyond  the  how, 
i.e.,  beyond  the  immediate  cause  or  the  necessary  conditions  of  phe- 
nomena. In  this  respect  the  limits  of  our  knowledge  are  the  same 
in  biological  as  in  physico-chemical  sciences. 

When,  by  successive  analyses,  we  find  the  immediate  cause  deter- 
mining the  circumstances  in  which  a  phenomenon  presents  itself,  we 
reach  a  scientific  goal  beyond  which  we  cannot  pass.  When  we  know 
that  water,  with  all  its  properties,  results  from  combining  oxygen  and 
hydrogen  in  certain  proportions,  we  know  everything  we  can  know 
about  it;  and  that  corresponds  to  the  how  and  not  to  the  why  of 
things.  We  know  how  water  can  be  made;  but  why  does  the  com- 
bination of  one  volume  of  oxygen  with  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  pro- 
duce water?  We  have  no  idea.  In  medicine  it  is  equally  absurd 
to  concern  one's  self  with  the  question  "why."  Yet  physicians  ask 
it  often.  It  was  probably  to  make  fun  of  this  tendency,  which  re- 
sults from  lack  of  the  sense  of  limits  to  our  learning,  that  Moliere 
put  the  following  answer  into  the  mouth  of  his  candidate  for  the 
medical  degTee.  Asked  why  opium  puts  people  to  sleep,  he  answered : 
''Quia  est  in  eo  virtus  dormitiva,  cujus  est  natura  sensus  assoupire/' 
This  answer  seems  ludicrous  and  absurd ;  yet  no  other  answer  could 
be  made.  In  the  same  way,  if  we  wished  to  answer  the  question: 
"Why  does  hydrogen,  in  combining  with  oxygen,  produce  water?" 
we  should  have  to  answer:  "Because  hydrogen  has  the  quality  of 
being  able  to  beget  water."  Only  the  question  "why,"  then,  is  really 
absurd,  because  it  necessarily  involves  a  naive  or  ridiculous  answer. 
So  we  had  better  recognize  that  we  do  not  know ;  and  that  the  limits 
of  our  knowledge  are  precisely  here. 

In  physiology,  if  we  prove,  for  instance,  that  carbon  monoxide 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


81 


is  deadly  when  uniting  more  firmly  than  oxygen  with  the  hemoglobin, 
we  know  all  that  we  can  know  about  the  cause  of  death.  Experience 
teaches  us  that  a  part  of  the  mechanism  of  life  is  lacking;  oxygen 
can  no  longer  enter  the  organism,  because  it  cannot  displace  the 
carbon  monoxide  in  its  union  with  the  hemoglobin.  But  why  has 
carbon  monoxide  more  affinity  than  oxygen  for  this  substance? 
Why  is  entrance  of  oxygen  into  the  organism  necessary  to  life  ? 
Here  is  the  limit  of  our  knowledge  in  our  present  state  of  learning ; 
and  even  assuming  that  we  succeed  in  further  advancing  our  experi- 
mental analysis,  we  shall  reach  a  blind  cause  at  which  we  shall  be 
forced  to  stop,  without  finding  the  primal  reason  for  things. 

Let  us  add  that,  when  the  relative  determinism  of  a  phenomenon 
is  established,  our  scientific  goal  is  reached.  Experimental  analysis 
of  the  conditions  of  the  phenomenon,  when  pushed  still  further,  gives 
us  fresh  information,  but  really  teaches  us  nothing  about  the  nature 
of  the  phenomenon  originally  determined.  The  conditions  necessary 
to  a  phenomenon  teach  us  nothing  about  its  nature.  When  we  know 
that  physical  and  chemical  contact  between  the  blood  and  the  cere- 
bral nerve  cells  is  necessary  to  the  production  of  intellectual  phe- 
nomena, that  points  to  conditions,  but  it  cannot  teach  us  anything 
about  the  primary  nature  of  intelligence.  Similarly,  when  we  know 
that  friction  and  that  chemical  action  produce  electricity,  we  are 
still  ignorant  of  the  primary  nature  of  electricity. 

We  must  therefore,  in  my  opinion,  stop  differentiating  the  phe- 
nomena of  living  bodies  from  those  of  inorganic  bodies,  by  a  dis- 
tinction based  on  our  own  ability  to  know  the  nature  of  the  former 
and  our  inability  to  know  that  of  the  latter.  The  truth  is  that  the 
nature  or  very  essence  of  phenomena,  whether  vital  or  mineral,  will 
always  remain  unknown.  The  essence  of  the  simplest  mineral  phe- 
nomenon is  as  completely  unknown  to  chemists  and  physicists  to-day 
as  is  the  essence  of  intellectual  phenomena  or  of  any  other  vital 
phenomenon  to  physiologists.  That,  moreover,  is  easy  to  apprehend ; 
knowledge  of  the  inmost  nature  or  the  absolute,  in  the  simplest 
phenomenon,  would  demand  knowledge  of  the  whole  universe;  for 
every  phenomenon  of  the  universe  is  evidently  a  sort  of  radiation 
from  that  universe  to  whose  harmony  it  contributes.  In  living 
bodies  absolute  truth  would  be  still  harder  to  attain ;  because,  besides 
implying  knowledge  of  the  universe  outside  a  living  body,  it  would 
also  demand  complete  knowledge  of  the  organism  which,  as  we  have 


82 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


long  been  saying,  is  a  little  world  (microcosm)  in  the  great  universe 
(macrocosm).  Absolute  knowledge  could,  therefore,  leave  nothing 
outside  itself;  and  only  on  condition  of  knowing  everything  could 
man  be  granted  its  attainment.  Man  behaves  as  if  he  were  destined 
to  reach  this  absolute  knowledge;  and  the  incessant  why  which  he 
puts  to  nature  proves  it.  Indeed,  this  hope,  constantly  disappointed, 
constantly  reborn,  sustains  and  always  will  sustain  successive  gen- 
erations in  the  passionate  search  for  truth. 

Our  feelings  lead  us  at  first  to  believe  that  absolute  truth  must 
lie  within  our  realm ;  but  study  takes  from  us,  little  by  little,  these 
chimerical  conceits.  Science  has  just  the  privilege  of  teaching  us 
what  we  do  not  know,  by  replacing  feeling  with  reason  and  experi- 
ence and  clearly  showing  us  the  present  boundaries  of  our  knowl- 
edge. But  by  a  marvellous  compensation,  science,  in  humbling  our 
pride,  proportionately  increases  our  power.  Men  of  science  who 
carry  experimental  analysis  to  the  point  of  relatively  determining  a 
phenomenon  doubtless  see  clearly  their  own  ignorance  of  the  phe- 
nomenon in  its  primary  cause;  but  they  have  become  its  master; 
the  instrument  at  work  is  unknown,  but  they  can  use  it.  This  is 
true  of  all  experimental  sciences  in  which  we  can  reach  only  rela- 
tive or  partial  truths  and  know  phenomena  only  in  their  necessary 
conditions.  But  this  knowledge  is  enough  to  broaden  our  power 
over  nature.  Though  we  do  not  know  the  essence  of  phenomena,  we 
can  produce  or  prevent  their  appearance,  because  we  can  regulate 
their  physico-chemical  conditions.  We  do  not  know  the  essence  of 
fire,  of  electricity,  of  light,  and  still  we  regulate  their  phenomena 
to  our  own  advantage.  We  know  absolutely  nothing  of  the  essence 
even  of  life;  but  we  shall  nevertheless  regulate  vital  phenomena  as 
soon  as  we  know  enough  of  their  necessary  conditions.  Only  in  liv- 
ing bodies  these  conditions  are  much  more  complex  and  more  diffi- 
cult to  grasp  than  in  inorganic  bodies;  that  is  the  whole  difference. 

To  sum  up,  if  our  feeling  constantly  puts  the  question  why,  our 
reason  shows  us  that  only  the  question  how  is  within  our  range; 
for  the  moment,  then,  only  the  question  how  concerns  men  of  science 
and  experimenters.  If  we  cannot  know  why  opium  and  its  alka- 
loids put  us  to  sleep,  we  can  learn  the  mechanism  of  sleep  and  know 
how  opium  or  its  ingredients  puts  us  to  sleep;  for  sleep  takes  place 
only  because  an  active  substance  enters  into  contact  with  certain 
organic  substances  which  it  changes.    Learning  these  changes  will 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


83 


give  us  the  means  of  producing  or  preventing  sleep,  and  we  shall  be 
able  to  act  on  the  phenomenon  and  regulate  it  at  pleasure. 

In  the  knowledge  that  we  acquire,  we  should  distinguish  between 
two  sets  of  notions :  the  first  corresponds  to  the  cause  of  phenomena, 
the  second  to  the  means  of  producing  them.  By  the  cause  of  a 
phenomenon  we  mean  the  constant  and  definite  condition  necessary 
to  existence;  we  call  this  the  relative  determinism  or  the  how  of 
things,  i.e.,  the  immediate  or  determining  cause.  The  means  of 
obtaining  phenomena  are  the  varied  processes  by  whose  aid  we  may 
succeed  in  putting  in  action  the  single  determining  cause  which  pro- 
duces the  phenomenon.  The  necessary  cause  in  the  formation  of 
water  is  the  combination  of  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  with  one  of 
oxygen;  this  is  the  single  cause  which  always  determines  the  phe- 
nomenon. We  cannot  conceive  of  water  apart  from  this  essential 
condition.  Subordinate  conditions  or  processes  in  the  formation  of 
water  may  be  extremely  varied;  only  all  these  processes  reach  the 
same  result,  viz.,  combination  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  in  invariable 
proportions.  Let  us  take  another  example.  I  assume  that  we  wish 
to  transform  starch  into  glucose;  we  have  any  number  of  means  or 
processes  for  doing  this,  but  fundamentally  there  will  always  be  the 
identical  cause,  and  a  single  determinism  will  beget  the  phenomenon. 
This  cause  is  fixation  of  one  more  unit  of  water  in  the  substance,  to 
bring  about  its  transformation.  Only  we  may  produce  this  hydration 
in  any  number  of  conditions  and  by  any  number  of  methods:  by 
means  of  acidulated  water,  of  heat,  of  animal  or  vegetable  enzymes; 
but  all  these  processes  finally  come  to  a  single  condition,  hydrolysis 
of  the  starch.  The  determinism,  i.e.,  the  eause  of  the  phenomenon, 
is  therefore  single,  though  the  means  for  making  it  appear  may  be 
multiple  and  apparently  very  various.  It  is  most  important  to 
establish  this  distinction  especially  in  medicine,  where  the  greatest 
confusion  reigns,  precisely  because  physicians  recognize  a  multitude 
of  causes  for  the  same  disease.  To  convince  ourselves  of  what  I  am 
urging  we  have  only  to  open  a  treatise  on  pathology.  By  no  means 
all  the  circumstances  enumerated  are  causes ;  at  most  they  are  means 
or  processes  by  which  a  disease  can  be  produced.  But  the  real  and 
effective  cause  of  a  disease  must  be  constant  and  determined,  that 
is  unique;  anything  else  would  be  a  denial  of  science  in  medicine. 
It  is  true  that  determining  causes  are  much  harder  to  recognize  and 
define  in  the  phenomena  of  living  beings ;  but  they  exist  nevertheless, 


84 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


in  spite  of  the  seeming  diversity  of  means  employed.  Thus  in  cer- 
tain toxic  phenomena  we  see  different  poisons  lead  to  one  cause  and  to 
a  single  determinism  for  the  death  of  histological  units,  for  example, 
the  coagulation  of  muscular  substance.  In  the  same  way,  varied 
circumstances  producing  the  same  disease  must  all  correspond  to  a 
single  and  determined  pathogenic  action.  In  a  word,  determinism 
which  insists  on  identity  of  effect  bound  up  with  identity  of  cause 
is  an  axiom  of  science  which  can  no  more  be  transgressed  in  the  sci- 
ences of  life  than  in  the  sciences  of  inorganic  matter. 

X.  In  the  Sciences  of  Living  Bodies,  as  in  Those  of  Inoeganio 
Bodies,  Experimenters  Create  Nothing  ;  They  Simply 
Obey  the  Laws  of  Nature 

We  know  the  phenomena  of  nature  only  through  their  relations 
with  the  causes  which  produce  them.  Now  the  law  of  phenomena  is 
nothing  else  than  this  relation  numerically  established,  in  such  a  way 
as  to  let  us  foresee  the  ratio  of  cause  to  effect  in  any  given  case.  This 
ratio,  established  by  observation,  enables  astronomers  to  predict  celes- 
tial phenomena ;  this  same  ratio,  established  by  observation  and  ex- 
periment, again  enables  physicists,  chemists,  physiologists,  not  only 
to  predict  the  phenomena  of  nature,  but  even  to  modify  them  at 
pleasure  and  to  a  certainty,  provided  they  do  not  swerve  from  the 
ratio  which  experience  has  pointed  out,  i.e.,  the  law.  In  other  terms, 
we  can  guide  natural  phenomena  only  by  submitting  to  laws  that 
govern  them. 

Observers  can  only  observe  natural  phenomena;  experimenters 
can  only  modify  them;  it  is  not  given  them  to  create  or  to  destroy 
them  utterly,  because  they  cannot  change  natural  law.  We  have 
often  repeated  that  experimenters  act,  not  on  phenomena  themselves, 
but  on  the  physico-chemical  conditions  necessary  to  their  appear- 
ance. Phenomena  are  just  the  actual  expression  of  the  ratio  of  these 
conditions;  hence,  when  conditions  are  similar,  the  ratio  is  constant 
and  the  phenomenon  identical,  and  when  conditions  change,  there 
is  another  ratio,  and  a  different  phenomenon.  In  a  word,  to  make 
a  new  phenomenon  appear,  experimenters  merely  bring  new  condi- 
tions to  pass,  but  they  create  nothing,  either  in  the  way  of  force  or 
of  matter.  At  the  end  of  the  last  century  science  proclaimed  a  great 
truth,  to  wit,  that  with  respect  to  matter,  nothing  is  lost,  neither 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


85 


is  anything  created  in  nature ;  the  bodies  whose  qualities  ceaselessly 
vary  under  our  eyes  are  all  only  transmutations  of  aggregations  of 
matter  of  equal  weight.  In  recent  times  science  has  proclaimed  a 
second  truth  which  it  is  still  seeking  to  prove  and  which  in  some 
sense  is  truly  complementary  to  the  first,  to  wit,  that  with  respect  to 
forces  nothing  is  lost  and  nothing  created  in  nature ;  it  follows  that 
all  the  infinitely  varied  forms  of  phenomena  in  the  universe  are  only 
equivalent  transformation  of  forces,  one  into  another.  I  reserve  for 
treatment  elsewhere  the  question  whether  differences  separate  the 
forces  of  living  bodies  from  those  of  inert  bodies;  let  it  suffice  for 
the  moment  to  say  that  the  two  preceding  truths  are  universal,  and 
that  they  embrace  the  phenomena  of  living  bodies  as  well  as  those  of 
inert  bodies. 

All  phenomena,  to  whatever  order  they  belong,  exist  implicitly  in 
the  changeless  laws  of  nature ;  and  they  show  themselves  only  when 
their  necessary  conditions  are  actualized.  The  bodies  and  beings  on 
the  surface  of  our  earth  express  the  hannonious  relation  of  the  cosmic 
conditions  of  our  planet  and  our  atmosphere  with  the  beings  and 
phenomena  whose  existence  they  permit.  Other  cosmic  conditions 
would  necessarily  make  another  world  appear  in  which  all  the  phe- 
nomena would  occur  which  found  in  it  their  necessary  conditions, 
and  from  which  would  disappear  all  that  could  not  develop  in  it. 
But  no  matter  what  infinite  varieties  of  phenomena  we  conceive  on 
the  earth,  by  placing  ourselves  in  thought  in  all  the  cosmic  conditions 
that  our  imagination  can  bring  to  birth,  we  are  still  forced  to  admit 
that  this  would  all  take  place  according  to  the  laws  of  physics,  chem- 
istry and  physiology,  which  have  existed  without  our  knowledge  from 
all  eternity;  and  that  whatever  happens,  nothing  is  created  by  way 
either  of  force  or  of  matter;  that  only  different  relations  will  be 
produced  and  through  them  creation  of  new  beings  and  phenomena. 

When  a  chemist  makes  a  new  body  appear  in  nature,  he  cannot 
flatter  himself  with  having  created  the  laws  which  brought  it  to 
birth;  he  produced  only  the  conditions  which  the  creative  law  de- 
manded for  its  manifestation.  The  case  of  organic  bodies  is  the 
same.  Chemists  and  physiologists,  in  their  experiments,  can  make 
new  beings  appear  only  by  obeying  the  laws  of  nature  which  they  can- 
not alter  in  any  way. 

It  is  not  given  to  man  to  alter  the  cosmic  phenomena  of  the  whole 
universe  nor  even  those  of  the  earth;  but  the  advances  of  science 


86         THE  STUDY  OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


enable  him  to  alter  the  phenomena  within  his  reach.  Thus  man 
has  already  gained  a  power  over  mineral  nature  which  is  brilliantly 
revealed  in  the  applications  of  modem  science,  still  at  its  dawn.  The 
result  of  experimental  science  applied  to  living  bodies  must  also  be 
to  alter  vital  phenomena,  by  acting  solely  on  the  conditions  of  these 
phenomena.  But  here  our  difficulties  are  greatly  increased  by  the 
delicacy  of  the  conditions  of  vital  phenomena  and  the  complexity  and 
interrelation  of  all  the  parts  grouped  together  to  form  an  organized 
being.  This  is  why  man  can  probably  never  act  as  easily  on  animal 
or  vegetable,  as  on  mineral,  species.  His  power  over  living  beings 
will  remain  more  limited,  especially  where  they  form  higher,  i.e., 
more  complicated  organisms.  Nevertheless,  the  difficulties  obstruct- 
ing the  power  of  physiologists  do  not  pertain  to  the  nature  of  vital 
phenomena,  but  merely  to  their  complexity.  Physiologists  will  first 
begin  by  getting  at  phenomena  of  vegetables  and  of  animals  in  easier 
relations  with  the  outer  cosmic  environment.  It  appears,  at  first 
sight,  as  if  man  and  the  higher  animals  must  escape  from  its  power  to 
change,  because  they  seem  freed  from  the  direct  influence  of  the  outer 
environment.  But  we  know  that  vital  phenomena  in  man,  as  in  the 
animals  nearest  him,  are  connected  with  the  physico-chemical  condi- 
tions of  an  inner  organic  environment.  This  inner  environment  we 
must  first  seek  to  know,  because  this  must  become  the  real  field  of 
action  for  physiology  and  experimental  medicine. 


CHAPTER  II 

EXPERIMENTAL  CONSIDERATIONS  PECULIAR  TO 

LIVING  BEINGS 

1.   The  Phenomena  of  Living  Beings  Must  Be  Considered  as 

A  Harmonious  Whole 

So  far  we  have  been  explaining  experimental  considerations  ap- 
plicable to  both  living  and  inorganic  bodies;  for  living  bodies  the 
difference  consists  merely  in  the  greater  complexity  of  phenomena, 
making  experimental  analysis  and  determination  of  the  conditions 
incomparably  harder.  But  in  the  behavior  of  living  bodies  we  must 
call  the  reader's  attention  to  their  very  special  interdependence; 
in  the  study  of  vital  functions,  if  we  neglected  the  physiological  point 
of  view,  even  if  we  experimented  skilfully,  we  should  be  led  to  the 
most  false  ideas  and  the  most  erroneous  deductions. 

We  saw  in  the  last  chapter  that  the  object  of  the  experimental 
method  is  to  reach  the  determinism  of  phenomena,  no  matter  of  what 
nature,  whether  vital  or  mineral.  We  know,  moreover,  that  what 
we  call  determinism  of  a  phenomenon  means  nothing  else  than  the 
determining  cause  or  immediate  cause  determining  the  appearance  of 
phenomena.  Thus  we  necessarily  obtain  the  conditions  in  which 
the  phenomena  exist,  and  on  which  the  experimenter  must  act  to 
make  the  phenomena  vary.  We  therefore  consider  the  various  ex- 
pressions above  as  equivalents;  and  the  word  determinism  sums 
them  all  up. 

It  is  indeed  true,  as  we  have  said,  that  life  brings  absolutely 

no  difference  into  the  scientific  experimental  method  which  must 

be  applied  to  the  study  of  physiological  phenomena,  and  that  in  this 

respect  physiological  science  and  physico-chemical  science  rest  on 

exactly  the  same  principles  of  investigation.    But  still  we  must 

recognize  that  determinism  in  the  phenomena  of  life  is  not  only  very 

complex,  but  that  it  is  at  the  same  time  harmoniously  graded.  Thus 

complex  physiological  phenomena  are  made  up  of  a  series  of  simpler 

phenomena  each  determining  the  other  by  associating  together  or 

combining  for  a  common  final  object.    Now  the  physiologist's  prime 

87 


88 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


object  is  to  detemiine  the  elementary  conditions  of  physiological 
phenomena  and  to  grasp  their  natural  subordination,  so  as  to  under- 
stand and  then  to  follow  the  different  combinations  in  the  varied 
mechanism  of  animal  organisms.  The  ancient  emblem  representing 
life  as  a  closed  circle,  formed  by  a  serpent  biting  its  own  tail,  gives 
a  fairly  accurate  picture  of  things.  In  complex  organisms  the 
organism  of  life  actually  forms  a  closed  circle,  but  a  circle  which  has 
a  head  and  a  tail  in  this  sense,  that  vital  phenomena  are  not  all  of 
equal  importance,  though  each  in  succession  completes  the  vital  cir- 
cle. Thus  the  muscular  and  nervous  organs  sustain  the  activity 
of  the  organs  preparing  the  blood ;  but  the  blood  in  its  turn  nourishes 
the  organs  which  produce  it.  Here  is  an  organic  or  social  inter- 
dependence which  sustains  a  sort  of  perpetual  motion,  until  some 
disorder  or  stoppage  of  a  necessary  vital  unit  upsets  the  equilibrium, 
or  leads  to  disturbance  or  stoppage  in  the  play  of  the  animal  machine. 
The  problem  for  experimenting  physicians  consists,  therefore,  in  find- 
ing the  simple  determinism  of  an  organic  disorder,  that  is  to  say,  in 
grasping  the  initial  phenomenon  which  brings  all  the  others  in  its 
train  through  a  complex  determinism  as  necessary  in  character  as 
the  initial  determinism.  This  initial  determinism  is  like  Ariadne's 
thread  guiding  the  experimenter  in  the  dark  labyrinth  of  physiologi- 
cal and  pathological  phenomena,  and  enabling  him  to  understand 
how  their  varied  mechanisms  are  still  bound  together  by  absolute 
determinisms.  By  examples  cited  further  on,  we  shall  see  how  a 
dislocation  of  the  organism  or  an  apparently  highly  complex  disorder 
may  be  traced  back  to  an  initial  simple  determinism  which  later 
produces  more  complex  determinisms.  A  case  in  point  is  poisoning 
by  carbon  monoxide  (cf.  Part  III).  I  am  devoting  my  whole  course 
at  the  College  de  France  this  year  to  the  study  of  curare,  not  for  the 
sake  of  the  substance  itself,  but  because  this  study  shows  us  how  the 
simplest  single  determinism,  such  as  the  lesion  of  a  terminal  motor 
nerve,  re-echoing  successively  from  all  the  other  vital  units,  leads  to 
secondary  determinisms  which  grow  more  and  more  complicated  till 
death  ensues.  I  wish  thus  to  establish  experimentally  the  existence 
of  intra-organic  determinisms  to  which  I  shall  later  return,  because 
I  consider  study  of  them  the  true  basis  of  pathology  and  of  scientific 
therapeutics. 

Physiologists  and  physicians  must  never  forget  that  a  living  being 
is  an  organism  with  its  own  individuality.    Since  physicists  and 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


89 


chemists  cannot  take  their  stand  outside  the  universe,  they  study 
bodies  and  phenomena  in  themselves  and  separately  without  neces- 
sarily having  to  connect  them  with  nature  as  a  whole.  But  physiol- 
ogists, finding  themselves,  on  the  contrary,  outside  the  animal  organ- 
ism which  they  see  as  a  whole,  must  take  account  of  the  harmony  of 
this  whole,  even  while  trying  to  get  inside,  so  as  to  understand  the 
mechanism  of  its  every  part.  The  result  is  that  physicists  and  chem- 
ists can  reject  all  idea  of  final  causes  for  the  facts  that  they  observe ; 
while  physiologists  are  inclined  to  acknowledge  an  harmonious  and 
pre-established  unity  in  an  organized  body,  all  of  whose  partial 
actions  are  interdependent  and  mutually  generative.  We  really  must 
learn,  then,  that  if  we  break  up  a  living  organism  by  isolating  its 
different  parts,  it  is  only  for  the  sake  of  ease  in  experimental  analy- 
sis, and  by  no  means  in  order  to  conceive  them  separately.  In- 
deed when  we  wish  to  ascribe  to  a  physiological  quality  its  value  and 
true  significance,  we  must  always  refer  it  to  this  whole,  and  draw 
our  final  conclusion  only  in  relation  to  its  effects  in  the  whole.  It 
is  doubtless  because  he  felt  this  necessary  interdependence  among  all 
parts  of  an  organism,  that  Cuvier  said  that  experimentation  was  not 
applicable  to  living  beings,  since  it  separated  organized  parts  which 
should  remain  united.  For  the  same  reason,  other  physiologists  or 
physicians,  called  vitalists,  have  proscribed  and  still  proscribe  experi- 
mentation in  medicine.  These  views,  which  have  their  connect  side, 
are  nevertheless  false  in  their  general  outcome  and  have  greatly 
hampered  the  progress  of  science.  It  is  doubtless  correct  to  say 
that  the  constituent  parts  of  an  organism  are  physiologically  insepa- 
rable one  from  another,  and  that  they  all  contribute  to  a  common 
vital  result ;  but  we  may  not  conclude  from  this  that  the  living  ma- 
chine must  not  be  analyzed  as  we  analyze  a  crude  machine  whose 
parts  also  have  their  role  to  play  in  a  whole.  With  the  help  of 
experimental  analysis  we  must  transfer  physiological  functions  as 
much  as  possible  outside  the  organism;  segregation  allows  us  to  see 
and  to  grasp  hidden  conditions  of  the  phenomena,  so  as  to  follow 
them  later  inside  the  organism  and  to  interpret  their  vital  role. 
Thus  we  establish  artificial  digestion  and  fecundation,  so  as  to  know 
natural  digestion  and  fecundation  better.  Thanks  to  their  organic 
self-regulation,  we  can  also  detach  living  tissues,  and  by  means  of 
artificial  circulation  or  otherwise,  we  can  place  them  in  conditions 
where  we  can  better  study  their  characteristics.    We  occasionally 


90 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


isolate  an  organ  by  using  anesthetics  to  destroy  the  reactions  of 
its  general  group;  we  reach  the  same  result  by  cutting  the  nerves 
leading  to  a  part,  but  preserving  the  blood  vessels.  By  means  of 
experimental  analysis,  I  have  even  transformed  warm-blooded  ani- 
mals, as  it  were,  into  cold-blooded  animals,  so  as  to  study  better  the 
characteristics  of  their  histological  units ;  I  have  succeeded  in  poison- 
ing glands  separately  and  in  making  them  work,  by  means  of  dis- 
sected nerves,  quite  apart  from  the  organism.  In  this  last  case  we 
can  have  a  gland,  at  will,  in  a  state,  first,  of  absolute  rest,  then,  of 
exaggerated  action;  when  both  extremes  of  the  phenomenon  are 
known  we  can  later  easily  grasp  all  the  intervening  stages,  and  we 
then  understand  how  a  completely  chemical  function  can  be  regulated 
by  a  nervous  system,  so  as  to  supply  organic  fluids  in  conditions  that 
are  always  the  same.  We  will  not  further  amplify  these  suggestions 
about  experimental  analysis;  we  sum  up  by  saying  that  proscribing 
experimental  analysis  of  organs  means  arresting  science  and  deny- 
ing the  experimental  method ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  that  practising 
physiological  analysis,  while  losing  sight  of  the  harmonious  unity  of 
an  organism,  means  misunderstanding  the  science  of  life  and  indi- 
viduality, and  leaving  it  characterless. 

After  carrying  out  an  analysis  of  phenomena,  we  must  therefore 
always  reconstruct  our  physiological  synthesis,  so  as  to  see  the  joint 
action  of  all  the  parts  we  have  isolated.  A  propos  of  the  phrase 
physiological  synthesis,  we  must  further  explain  our  thought.  It  is 
generally  agreed  that  synthesis  reunites  what  analysis  has  divided, 
and  that  synthesis  therefore  verifies  analysis,  of  which  it  is  merely 
the  counterproof  or  necessary  complement.  This  definition  is  en- 
tirely true  for  analysis  and  synthesis  of  matter.  In  chemistry,  syn- 
thesis produces,  weight  for  weight,  the  same  body  made  up  of  identical 
elements  combined  in  the  same  proportions ;  but  in  the  case  of  ana- 
lyzing and  synthesizing  the  properties  of  bodies,  i.e.,  synthesizing 
phenomena,  it  is  much  harder.  Indeed,  the  properties  of  bodies  result 
not  merely  from  the  nature  and  proportions  of  matter,  but  also  from 
the  arrangement  of  matter.  Moreover,  as  we  know,  it  happens  that 
properties,  which  appear  and  disappear  in  synthesis  and  analysis,  can- 
not be  considered  as  simple  addition  or  pure  subtraction  of  proper- 
ties of  the  constituent  bodies.  Thus,  for  example,  the  properties  of 
oxygen  and  hydrogen  do  not  account  for  the  properties  of  water, 
which  result  nevertheless  from  combining  them. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


91 


I  do  not  intend  to  go  into  these  difficult  yet  fundamental  problems 
about  the  relative  properties  of  combined  or  combining  bodies ;  they 
will  find  their  proper  place  elsewhere.  I  shall  here  only  repeat 
that  phenomena  merely  express  the  relations  of  bodies,  whence  it 
follows  that,  by  dissociating  the  parts  of  a  whole,  we  must  make  phe- 
nomena cease  if  only  because  we  destroy  the  relations.  It  follows 
also,  in  physiology,  that  analysis,  which  teaches  us  the  properties  of 
isolated  elementary  parts,  can  never  give  us  more  than  a  most  incom- 
plete ideal  synthesis ;  just  as  knowing  a  solitary  man  would  not  bring 
us  knowledge  of  all  the  institutions  which  result  from  man's  associa- 
tion, and  which  can  reveal  themselves  only  through  social  life.  In 
a  word,  when  we  unite  physiological  elements,  properties  appear 
which  were  imperceptible  in  the  separate  elements.  We  must  there^ 
fore  always  proceed  experimentally  in  vital  synthesis,  because  quite 
characteristic  phenomena  may  result  from  more  and  more  complex 
union  or  association  of  organized  elements.  All  this  proves  that 
these  elements,  though  distinct  and  self-dependent,  do  not  therefore 
play  the  part  of  simple  associates;  their  union  expresses  more  than 
addition  of  their  separate  properties.  I  am  persuaded  that  the 
obstacles  surrounding  the  experimental  study  of  psychological  phe- 
nomena are  largely  due  to  difficulties  of  this  kind ;  for  despite  their 
marvellous  character  and  the  delicacy  of  their  manifestations,  I  find 
it  impossible  not  to  include  cerebral  phenomena,  like  all  other  phe^ 
nomena  of  living  bodies,  in  the  laws  of  scientific  determinism. 

Physiologists  and  physicians  must  therefore  always  consider 
organisms  as  a  whole  and  in  detail  at  one  and  the  same  time,  without 
ever  losing  sight  of  the  peculiar  conditions  of  all  the  special  phe- 
nomena whose  resultant  is  the  individual.  Yet  particular  facts  are 
never  scientific;  only  generalization  can  establish  science.  But  here 
we  must  avoid  a  double  stumbling  block;  for  if  excess  of  detail  is 
anti-scientific,  excessive  generalization  creates  an  ideal  science  no 
longer  connected  with  reality.  This  stumbling  block,  unimportant 
to  a  contemplative  naturalist,  is  large  for  physicians  who  must  first 
of  all  seek  objective,  practical  truths.  We  must  doubless  admire 
those  great  horizons  dimly  seen  by  the  genius  of  a  Goethe,  an  Oken, 
a  Cams,  a  Geoffrey  Saint-Hilaire,  a  Darwin,  in  which  a  general  con- 
ception shows  us  all  living  beings  as  the  expression  of  types  ceaselessly 
transformed  in  the  evolution  of  organisms  and  species, — types  in 
which  every  living  being  individually  disappears  like  a  reflection  of 


92 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


the  whole  to  which  it  belongs.  In  medicine  we  can  also  rise  to  the 
most  abstract  generalizations,  whether  we  take  the  naturalist's  point 
of  view  and  conceive  diseases  as  morbid  species  to  be  classified 
nosologically,  or  whether  we  start  from  the  physiological  point  of 
view  and  consider  that  disease  does  not  exist,  in  the  sense  that  it  is 
only  a  special  case  of  a  general  physiological  state.  Doubtless  all 
these  brilliant  views  do,  after  a  fashion,  guide  and  serve  us.  But 
if  we  gave  ourselves  up  exclusively  to  hypothetical  contemplation, 
we  should  soon  turn  our  backs  on  reality;  and  in  my  opinion,  we 
should  misunderstand  true  scientific  philosophy,  by  setting  up  a  sort 
of  opposition  or  exclusion  between  practice,  which  requires  knowl- 
edge of  particulars,  and  generalizations  which  tend  to  mingle  all 
in  all. 

A  physician,  in  fact,  is  by  no  means  physician  to  living  beings 
in  general,  not  even  physician  to  the  human  race,  but  rather,  phy- 
sician to  a  human  individual,  and  still  more  physician  tO'  an  indi- 
vidual in  certain  morbid  conditions  peculiar  to  himself  and  forming 
what  is  called  his  idiosyncrasy.  Hence  it  seems  to  follow  that  medi- 
cine, in  contrast  with  other  sciences,  should  be  established  more  and 
more  on  particulars.  This  opinion  is  incorrect  and  based  only  on 
appearances ;  for  in  all  sciences,  generalization  leads  to  the  law  of  phe- 
nomena and  the  true  scientific  goal.  Only  we  must  recognize  that 
all  the  morphological  generalizations  to  which  we  alluded  above  are 
too  superficial  and  are  therefore  insufficient  for  physiologists  and 
physicians.  Naturalists,  physiologists  and  physicians  have  wholly 
different  problems  in  view ;  their  investigations  advance  in  far  from 
parallel  lines;  hence  we  cannot,  for  instance,  exactly  superpose  a 
physiological  scale  on  the  geological  scale.  Physiologists  and  phy- 
sicians delve  much  more  deeply  than  zoologists  into  the  problem  of 
biology;  physiologists  consider  the  general  conditions  necessary  to 
vital  phenomena  as  well  as  the  various  changes  to  which  they  may 
be  subject.  But  physicians  cannot  content  themselves  with  knowing 
that  all  vital  phenomena  occur  in  identical  conditions  among  all 
human  beings;  they  must  go  still  further  by  studying  the  details  of 
these  conditions  in  each  individual  considered  in  given  morbid  condi- 
tions. Only  after  delving,  then,  as  deeply  as  possible  into  the  secrets 
of  vital  phenomena  in  the  normal  and  pathological  states  can  physiol- 
ogists and  physicians  attain  illuminating  and  fertile  generalizations. 

The  primary  essence  of  life  is  a  developing  organic  force,  the 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


93 


force  which  constituted  the  mediating  nature  of  Hippocrates  and  the 
archeus  faher  of  Van  Helmont.  But  whatever  our  idea  of  the  nature 
of  this  force,  it  is  always  exhibited  concurrently  and  parallel  with 
the  physico-chemical  conditions  proper  to  vital  phenomena.  Through 
study,  then,  of  physico-chemical  details,  physicians  will  learn  to  un- 
derstand individualities  as  special  cases  included  in  a  general  law, 
and  will  discover  there,  as  everywhere,  an  harmonious  generalization 
of  variety  in  unity.  But  since  physicians  deal  with  variety,  they 
must  always  seek  to  define  it  in  their  studies  and  to  comprehend  it  in 
their  generalizations. 

If  I  had  to  define  life  in  a  single  phrase,  I  should  clearly  express 
my  thought  by  throwing  into  relief  the  one  characteristic  which,  in 
my  opinion,  sharply  differentiates  biological  science.  I  should  say : 
life  is  creation.  In  fact,  a  created  organism  is  a  machine  which 
necessarily  works  by  virtue  of  the  physico-chemical  properties  of  its 
constituent  elements.  To-day  we  differentiate  three  kinds  of  prop- 
erties exhibited  in  the  phenomena  of  living  beings:  physical  prop- 
erties, chemical  properties  and  vital  properties.  But  the  term  ^Vital 
properties"  is  itself  only  provisional;  because  we  call  properties 
vital  which  we  have  not  yet  been  able  to  reduce  to  physico-chemical 
terms;  but  in  that  we  shall  doubtless  succeed  some  day.  So  that 
what  distinguishes  a  living  machine  is  not  the  nature  of  its  physico- 
chemical  properties,  complex  as  they  may  be,  but  rather  the  creation 
of  the  machine  which  develops  under  our  eyes  in  conditions  proper 
to  itself  and  according  to  a  definite  idea  which  expresses  the  living 
being^s  nature  and  the  very  essence  of  life. 

When  a  chicken  develops  in  an  egg,  the  formation  of  the  ani- 
mal body  as  a  grouping  of  chemical  elements  is  not  what  essentially 
distinguishes  the  vital  force.  This  grouping  takes  place  only  accord- 
ing to  laws  which  govern  the  chemico-physical  properties  of  matter; 
but  the  guiding  idea  of  the  vital  evolution  is  essentially  of  the  domain 
of  life  and  belongs  neither  to  chemistry  nor  to  physics  nor  to  any- 
thing else.  In  every  living  germ  is  a  creative  idea  which  develops 
and  exhibits  itself  through  organization.  As  long  as  a  living  being 
persists,  it  remains  under  the  influence  of  this  same  creative  vital 
force,  and  death  comes  when  it  can  no  longer  express  itself;  here 
as  everywhere,  everything  is  derived  from  the  idea  which  alone 
creates  and  guides;  physico-chemical  means  of  expression  are  com- 
mon to  all  natural  phenomena  and  remain  mingled,  pell-mell,  like  the 


94 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


letters  of  the  alphabet  in  a  box,  till  a  force  goes  to  fetch  them,  to 
express  the  most  varied  thoughts  and  mechanisms.  This  same  vital 
idea  preserves  beings,  by  reconstructing  the  living  parts  disorgan- 
ized by  exercise  or  destroyed  by  accidents  or  diseases.  To  the 
physico-chemical  conditions  of  this  primal  development,  then,  we 
must  always  refer  our  explanation  of  life,  whether  in  the  normal  or 
the  pathological  state.  We  shall  see,  indeed,  that  physiologists  and 
physicians  can  really  act  only  indirectly  through  animal  physico- 
chemistry,  that  is  to  say,  through  physics  and  chemistry  worked  out 
in  the  special  field  of  life,  where  the  necessary  conditions  of  all 
phenomena  of  living  organisms  develop,  create  and  support  each 
other  according  to  a  definite  idea  and  obedient  to  rigorous 
determinisms. 


II.  Experimental  Practice  with  Living  Beings 

As  we  have  said,  the  experimental  method  and  the  principles  of 
experimentation  are  identical  for  the  phenomena  of  inorganic  bodies 
and  the  phenomena  of  living  bodies.  But  it  cannot  be  the  same  with 
experimental  practice,  and  it  is  easy  to  conceive  that  the  peculiar 
organization  of  living  bodies  requires  special  processes  for  its  analysis 
and  must  offer  difficulties  sui  generis.  However,  the  considerations 
and  special  precepts,  which  we  shall  present  to  physiologists,  to  fore- 
arm them  against  sources  of  error  in  experimental  practice,  have  to 
do  only  with  the  delicacy,  mobility  and  fugitiveness  of  vital  qualities 
and  the  complexity  of  the  phenomena  of  life.  Physiologists,  indeed, 
have  only  to  take  apart  the  living  machine,  and  with  the  help  of  tools 
and  processes  borrowed  from  physics  and  chemistry,  to  study  and 
measure  the  various  vital  phenomena  whose  law  they  seek  to  discover. 

Each  of  the  sciences  possesses,  if  not  an  individual  method,  at 
least  particular  processes;  and  the  sciences,  moreover,  serve  as  in- 
struments one  for  another.  Mathematics  serves  as  an  instrument  for 
physics,  chemistry  and  biology  in  different  degrees;  physics  and 
chemistry  serve  as  powerful  instruments  for  physiology  and  medicine. 
In  the  mutual  service  which  sciences  render  one  another,  we  must 
of  course  distinguish  between  the  men  of  science,  who  use,  and  those 
who  carry  forward  each  science.  Physicists  and  chemists  are  not 
mathematicians  because  they  make  calculations;  physiologists  are 
not  chemists  or  physicists  because  they  make  use  of  chemical  reagents 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


95 


or  physical  instruments,  any  more  than  chemists  and  physicists  are 
physiologists  because  they  study  the  composition  or  properties  of 
certain  animal  or  vegetable  fluids  or  tissues.  Each  science  has  its 
problem  and  its  point  of  view  which  we  may  not  confuse  without 
risk  of  leading  scientific  investigation  astray.  Yet  this  confusion 
has  often  occurred  in  biological  science  which,  because  of  its  com- 
plexity, needs  the  help  of  all  the  other  sciences.  We  have  seen,  and 
we  still  often  see  chemists  and  physicists  who,  instead  of  confining 
themselves  to  the  demand  that  living  bodies  furnish  them  suitable 
means  and  arguments  to  establish  certain  principles  of  their  own 
sciences,  try  to  absorb  physiology  and  reduce  it  to  simple  physico- 
chemical  phenomena.  They  offer  explanations  or  systems  of  life 
which  tempt  us  at  times  by  their  false  simplicity,  but  which  harm 
biological  science  in  every  case,  by  bringing  in  false  guidance  and 
inaccuracy  which  it  then  takes  long  to  dispel.  In  a  word,  biology 
has  its  own  problem  and  its  definite  point  of  view ;  it  borrows  from 
other  sciences  only  their  help  and  their  methods,  not  their  theories. 
This  help  from  other  sciences  is  so  powerful  that,  without  it,  the 
development  of  the  science  of  vital  phenomena  would  be  impossible. 
Previous  knowledge  of  the  physico-chemical  sciences  is  therefore 
decidedly  not,  as  is  often  said,  an  accessory  to  biology,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  is  essential  to  it  and  fundamental.  That  is  why  I  think 
it  proper  to  call  the  physico-chemical  sciences  allied  sciences,  and 
not  sciences  accessory  to  physiology.  We  shall  see  that  anatomy  is 
also  a  science  allied  to  physiology,  just  as  physiology  itself,  which 
requires  the  help  of  anatomy  and  of  all  the  physico-chemical  sciences, 
is  the  science  most  closely  allied  to  medicine  and  forms  its  true  scien- 
tific foundation. 

The  application  of  physico-chemical  sciences  to  physiology  and 
the  use  of  their  processes  as  instruments,  suited  to  the  analysis  of  the 
phenomena  of  life,  present  a  great  many  difficulties  inherent,  as  we 
have  said,  in  the  mobility  and  fugitiveness  of  vital  phenomena. 
The  spontaneity  and  mobility  enjoyed  by  living  beings  make  the 
properties  of  organized  bodies  very  hard  to  fix  and  to  study.  We 
must  return  for  an  instant  here  to  the  nature  of  these  difficulties, 
as  I  have  already  had  occasion  to  do  in  my  lectures.-^ 

*  Claude  Bernard,  Legons  sur  les  propri4t4s  physiologiques  des  alterations 
pathologiques  des  Uquides  de  Vorganisme.  Paris,  1859,  Vol.  I.  Legon  d'ouver- 
tv/re,  Dec.  9,  1857. 


96 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


A  living  body  differs  essentially  from  an  inorganic  body  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  experimenter.  An  inorganic  body  has  no  sort 
of  spontaneity;  as  its  properties  are  in  equilibrium  with  outside 
conditions,  it  soon  settles  into  physico-chemical  indifference,  i.e.,  into 
stable  equilibrium  with  its  surroundings.  Hence,  all  the  phenom- 
enal changes  that  it  experiences  will  necessarily  come  from  altera- 
tions occurring  in  surrounding  circumstances;  and  we  can  easily 
see  that  by  taking  strict  account  of  these  circumstances,  we  can  be 
sure  of  having  the  experimental  conditions  necessary  to  a  good 
experiment.  A  living  body,  especially  in  the  hi^er  animals,  never 
falls  into  chemico-physical  indifference  to  the  outer  environment; 
it  has  ceaseless  motions,  an  organic  evolution  apparently  spontaneous 
and  constant ;  and  though  this  evolution  requires  outer  circumstances 
for  its  manifestation,  it  is  nevertheless  independent  in  its  advance 
and  modality.  As  proof  of  this,  we  see  living  beings  born,  develop, 
fall  ill  and  die,  without  the  conditions  of  the  outer  world  changing 
for  the  observer. 

It  follows  that,  in  experimenting  on  inorganic  bodies  with 
the  help  of  such  instruments  as  the  barometer,  thermometer  and 
hygrometer,  we  can  put  ourselves  in  identical  conditions  and 
consequently  carry  on  well-defined  and  similar  experiments. 
Physiologists  and  physicians  have  rightly  imitated  the  physicists 
and  have  sought  to  make  their  experiments  more  accurate  by 
using  the  same  instruments.  But  we  can  see  at  once  that  outer 
conditions  whose  changes  are  of  such  importance  to  physicists  and 
chemists  are  of  much  less  value  to  physicians.  Alterations  in  the 
phenomena  of  inorganic  bodies  are,  in  fact,  always  brought  about 
by  an  outer  cosmic  change,  and  it  happens  at  times  that  a  very 
slight  alteration  in  the  surrounding  temperature  or  in  barometric 
pressure  leads  to  important  changes  in  the  phenomena  of  inor- 
ganic bodies.  But  in  man  and  in  the  higher  animals  the  phe- 
nomena of  life  may  alter  without  any  appreciable  outer  cosmic 
change,  and  slight  thermometric  or  barometric  changes  often  exert 
no  real  influence  on  vital  manifestations;  and  though  we  cannot 
say  that  these  outer  cosmic  influences  are  essentially  nil,  circum- 
stances occur  where  it  would  be  almost  ludicrous  to  take  account 
of  them.  Such  was  the  experimenter's  case  who  repeated  my  ex- 
periments on  puncture  of  the  floor  of  the  fourth  ventricle,  to  cause 
artificial  diabetes:  he  thought  that  he  exhibited  greater  accuracy  in 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


97 


carefully  noting  the  barometric  pressure  at  the  moment  of  making 
the  experiment. 

However,  instead  of  experimenting  on  man  and  the  higher  ani- 
mals, if  we  experiment  on  lower  living  beings,  whether  animal  or 
vegetable,  we  shall  see  that  the  thermometric,  barometric  and  hygro- 
metric  data,  which  were  so  unimportant  in  the  first  case,  must  on  the 
contrary  be  kept  very  seriously  under  consideration  in  the  second. 
Indeed,  if  we  vary  the  conditions  of  humidity,  heat  and  atmospheric 
pressure  for  infusoria,  the  vital  manifestations  in  these  beings  are 
altered  or  annihilated  according  to  the  more  or  less  significant  varia- 
tions that  we  make  in  the  cosmic  influences  cited  above.  In  vege- 
tables and  in  cold-blooded  animals,  the  conditions  of  t-emperature 
and  humidity  in  the  cosmic  environment  again  play  a  very  large  part 
in  the  manifestations  of  life.  This  is  what  is  called  the  influence 
of  the  seasons,  which  is  familiar  to  everyone.  In  fine,  then,  only 
the  warm-blooded  animals  and  man  seem  to  escape  cosmic  influences 
and  to  have  free  and  independent  manifestations.  We  have  already 
said  elsewhere  that  this  kind  of  independence  of  vital  manifestations 
in  man  and  the  higher  animals  results  from  greater  perfection  of 
their  organism,  but  does  not  prove  that  manifestations  of  life  in  these 
physiologically  more  perfect  beings  are  subject  to  other  laws  or  other 
causes.  We  know,  in  fact,  that  the  histological  units  of  our  organs 
express  the  phenomena  of  life;  now  if  the  functions  of  these  units 
show  no  variations  under  the  influence  of  variations  in  the  tempera- 
ture, humidity  and  pressure  of  the  outer  atmosphere,  it  is  because 
they  are  immersed  in  an  organic  environment  whose  degrees  of  tem- 
perature, humidity  and  pressure  do  not  change  with  variations  in 
the  cosmic  environment.  Hence,  we  must  conclude  that  funda- 
mentally manifestations  of  life  in  warm-blooded  animals  and  in  man 
are  equally  subject  to  exact  and  definite  physico-chemical  conditions. 

In  recapitulating  all  that  we  have  already  said,  we  see  that  con- 
ditions of  environment  in  all  natural  phenomena  govern  their  phe- 
nomenal manifestations.  The  conditions  of  our  cosmic  environment 
generally  govern  the  mineral  phenomena  occurring  on  the  surface 
of  the  earth ;  but  organized  beings  include  within  themselves  the  con- 
dition peculiar  to  their  vital  manifestations,  and  in  proportion  as  the 
organism,  i.e.,  the  living  machine,  perfects  itself,  and  its  organized 
units  grow  more  delicate,  it  creates  conditions  peculiar  to  an  organic 
environment  which  becomes  more  and  more  isolated  from  the  cosmic 


98 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


environment.  We  thus  come  back  to  tlie  distinction  which  I  estab- 
lished long  since,  and  which  I  believe  very  fruitful,  to  wit,  that 
two  environments  must  be  considered  in  physiology:  the  general 
macrocosmic  environment  and  the  microcosmic  environment  pe- 
culiar to  living  beings  ;  the  latter  is  more  or  less  independent  of  the 
former,  according  to  the  degree  of  perfection  of  the  organism.  More- 
over, we  easily  understand  what  we  see  here  in  the  living  machine, 
since  the  same  thing  is  true  of  the  inanimate  machines  created  by 
man.  Thus,  climatic  changes  have  no  influence  at  all  on  the  action 
of  a  steam  engine,  though  everyone  knows  that  exact  conditions  of 
temperature,  pressure  and  humidity  inside  the  machine  govern  all 
its  movements.  For  inanimate  machines  we  could  therefore  also 
distinguish  between  a  macrocosmic  environment  and  a  microcosmic 
environment.  In  any  case,  the  perfection  of  the  machine  consists 
in  being  more  and  more  free  and  independent,  so  as  to  be  less  and 
less  subject  to  the  influence  of  the  outer  environment.  The  human 
machine  is  the  more  perfect,  the  better  it  defends  itself  from  pene- 
tration by  the  influences  of  the  outer  environment;  as  the  organism 
grows  old  and  enfeebled,  it  becomes  more  sensitive  to  the  outer  influ- 
ences of  cold,  heat,  humidity,  and  in  general  to  all  other  climatic 
influences. 

To  sum  up,  if  we  wish  to  find  the  exact  conditions  of  vital  mani- 
festations in  man  and  the  higher  animals,  we  must  really  look,  not 
at  the  outer  cosmic  environment,  but  rather  at  the  inner  organic  en- 
vironment. Indeed,  as  we  have  often  said,  it  is  in  the  study  of  these 
inner  organic  conditions  that  direct  and  true  explanations  are  to  be 
found  for  the  phenomena  of  the  life,  health,  sickness  and  death  of  the 
organism.  From  the  outside,  we  see  only  the  resultant  of  all  the 
inner  activities  of  the  body,  which  therefore  seem  like  the  result  of 
a  distinct  vital  force  in  only  the  most  distant  relations  with  the 
physico-chemical  conditions  of  the  outer  environment,  and  mani- 
festing itself  always  as  a  sort  of  organic  personality  endowed  with 
specific  tendencies.  We  have  elsewhere  said  that  ancient  medicine 
considered  the  influence  of  the  cosmic  environment,  of  water,  air 
and  locality;  we  may  indeed  find  useful  suggestions  here  as  to 
hygienic  and  as  to  morbid  changes.  But  modem  experimental  medi- 
cine will  be  distinguished  for  being  especially  founded  on  knowledge 
of  the  inner  environment  where  normal  and  morbid  as  well  as  medic- 
inal influences  take  action.    But  how  are  we  to  know  this  inner 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE  99 

environment  of  the  organism,  so  complex  in  man  and  in  the  higher 
animals,  unless  we  go  down  and,  as  it  were,  penetrate  into  it,  by 
means  of  experimentation  applied  to  living  bodies  ?  That  is  to  say, 
to  analyze  the  phenomena  of  life,  we  must  necessarily  penetrate  into 
living  organisms  with  the  help  of  the  methods  of  vivisection. 

To  sum  up,  only  in  the  physico-chemical  conditions  of  the  inner 
environment  can  we  find  the  causation  of  the  external  phenomena  of 
life.  The  life  of  an  organism  is  simply  the  resultant  of  all  its  in- 
most workings;  it  may  appear  more  or  less  lively,  or  more  or  less 
enfeebled  and  languishing,  without  possible  explanation  by  anything 
in  the  outer  environment,  because  it  is  governed  by  the  conditions  of 
the  inner  environment.  We  must  therefore  seek  the  true  foundation 
of  animal  physics  and  chemistry  in  the  physico-chemical  properties 
of  the  inner  environment.  However,  as  we  shall  see  further  on,  it  is 
necessary  to  consider  not  only  the  physico-chemical  conditions  indis- 
pensable to  life,  but  also  the  peculiar,  evolutionary,  physiological 
conditions  which  are  the  quid  proprium  of  biological  science.  I  have 
always  greatly  emphasized  this  distinction  because  I  believe  that  it  is 
basic,  and  that  physiological  considerations  must  predominate  in  a 
treatise  on  experimentation  applied  to  medicine.  Here  indeed  we 
shall  find  the  differences  due  to  influences  of  age,  sex,  species,  race, 
or  to  state  of  fasting  or  digestion,  etc.  That  will  lead  us  to  con- 
sider, in  the  organism,  reciprocal  and  simultaneous  reactions  of  the 
inner  environment  on  the  organs,  and  of  the  organs  on  the  inner 
environment. 

III.  Vivisection 

We  have  succeeded  in  discovering  the  laws  of  inorganic  matter 
only  by  penetrating  into  inanimate  bodies  and  machines;  similarly 
we  shall  succeed  in  learning' the  laws  and  properties  of  living  matter 
only  by  displacing  living  organs  in  order  to  get  into  their  inner 
environment.  After  dissecting  cadavers,  then,  we  must  necessarily 
dissect  living  beings,  to  uncover  the  inner  or  hidden  parts  of  the 
organisms  and  see  them  work;  to  this  sort  of  operation  we  give  the 
name  of  vivisection,  and  without  this  mode  of  investigation,  neither 
physiology  nor  scientific  medicine  is  possible ;  to  learn  how  man  and 
animals  live,  we  cannot  avoid  seeing  great  numbers  of  them  die, 
because  the  mechanisms  of  life  can  be  unveiled  and  proved  only  by 
knowledge  of  the  mechanisms  of  death. 


100  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 

Men  have  felt  this  truth  in  all  ages;  and  in  medicine,  from  the 
earliest  times,  men  have  performed  not  only  therapeutic  experiments 
but  even  vivisection.  We  are  told  that  the  kings  of  Persia  delivered 
men  condemned  to  death  to  their  physicians,  so  that  they  might 
perform  on  them  vivisections  useful  to  science.  According  to  Galen, 
Attains  III  (Philometor),  who  reigned  at  Pergamum,  one  hundred 
thirty-seven  years  before  Jesus  Christ,  experimented  with  poisons 
and  antidotes  on  criminals  condemned  to  death. ^  Celsus  recalls  and 
approves  the  vivisection  which  Herophilus  and  Erasistratus  per- 
formed on  criminals  with  the  Ptolemies'  consent.  It  is  not  cruel,  he 
says,  to  inflict  on  a  few  criminals,  sufferings  which  may  benefit 
multitudes  of  innocent  people  throughout  all  centuries.^  The  Grand 
Duke  of  Tuscany  had  a  criminal  given  over  to  the  professor  of 
anatomy,  Pallopius,  at  Pisa,  with  permission  to  kill  or  dissect  him  at 
pleasure.  As  the  criminal  had  a  quartan  fever,  Eallopius  wished  to 
investigate  the  effects  of  opium  on  the  paroxysms.  He  administered 
two  drams  of  opium  during  an  intermission ;  death  occurred  after  the 
second  experiment.*  Similar  instances  have  occasionally  recurred, 
and  the  story  is  well  known  of  the  archer  of  Meudon  who  was  par- 
doned because  a  nephrotomy  was  successfully  performed  on  him. 
Vivisection  of  animals  also  goes  very  far  back.  Galen  may  be  consid- 
ered its  founder.  He  performed  his  experiments  especially  on 
monkeys  and  on  young  pigs  and  described  the  instruments  and 
methods  used  in  experimenting.  Galen  performed  almost  no  other 
kind  of  experiment  than  that  which  we  call  disturbing  experiments, 
which  consist  in  wounding,  destroying  or  removing  a  part,  so  as  to 
judge  its  function  by  the  disturbance  caused  by  its  removal.  He  sum- 
marized earlier  experiments  and  studied  for  himself  the  effects  of  de- 
stroying the  spinal  cord  at  different  heights,  of  perforating  the  chest 
on  one  side  or  both  sides  at  once ;  the  effects  of  section  of  the  nerves 
leading  to  the  intercostal  muscles  and  of  section  of  the  recurrent 
nerve.  He  tied  arteries  and  performed  experiments  on  the  mecha- 
nism of  deglutition.^    Since  Galen,  at  long  intervals  in  the  midst  of 

•  Daniel  Leclerc,  Histoire  de  la  midecine,  p.  338. 

•  Celsus,  De  Medicina. 

*A8truc,  De  Morhis  Venereis.   Vol.  II,  pp.  748  and  749. 

•  Rayer,  Traiti  des  maladies  des  reins.    Vol.  Ill,  p.  213.    Paris,  1841. 

•  Dezeimeris,  Dicticmnaire  historique,  Vol.  II,  p.  444.  Daremberg.  Exposition 
des  connaissances  de  Oalien  sur  Vanatomie  pathologique  et  la  pathologic  du 
systeme  nerveux.    Thesis,  1841,  pp.  13  and  80. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


101 


medical  systems,  eminent  vivisectors  have  always  appeared.  As  such, 
the  names  of  Graaf,  Harvey,  Aselli,  Pecquet,  Haller,  etc.,  have  been 
handed  down  to  us.  In  our  time,  and  especially  under  the  influence 
of  Magendie,  vivisection  has  entered  physiology  and  medicine  once 
for  all,  as  an  habitual  or  indispensable  method  of  study. 

The  prejudices  clinging  to  respect  for  corpses  long  halted  the 
progress  of  anatomy.  In  the  same  way,  vivisection  in  all  ages  has 
met  with  prejudices  and  detractors.  We  cannot  aspire  to  destroy 
all  the  prejudice  in  the  world ;  neither  shall  we  allow  ourselves  here 
to  answer  the  arguments  of  detractors  of  vivisection;  since  they 
thereby  deny  experimental  medicine,  i.e.,  scientific  medicine.  How- 
ever, we  shall  consider  a  few  general  questions,  and  then  we  shall  set 
up  the  scientific  goal  which  vivisection  has  in  view. 

First,  have  we  a  right  to  perform  experiments  and  vivisections  on 
man?  Physicians  make  therapeutic  experiments  daily  on  their 
patients,  and  surgeons  perform  vivisections  daily  on  their  subjects. 
Experiments,  then,  may  be  performed  on  man,  but  within  what  lim- 
its ?  It  is  our  duty  and  our  right  to  perform  an  experiment  on  man 
whenever  it  can  save  his  life,  cure  him  or  gain  him  some  personal 
benefit.  The  principle  of  medical  and  surgical  morality,  therefore, 
consists  in  never  performing  on  man  an  experiment  which  might  be 
harmful  to  him  to  any  extent,  even  though  the  result  might  be  highly 
advantageous  to  science,  i.e.,  to  the  health  of  others.  But  performing 
experiments  and  operations  exclusively  from  the  point  of  view  of 
the  patient's  own  advantage  does  not  prevent  their  turning  out 
profitably  to  science.  It  cannot  indeed  be  otherwise;  an  old  phy- 
sician who  has  often  administered  drugs  and  treated  many  patients 
is  more  experienced,  that  is,  he  will  experiment  better  on  new  pa- 
tients, because  he  has  learned  from  experiments  made  on  others.  A 
surgeon  who  has  performed  operations  on  different  kinds  of  pa- 
tients learns  and  perfects  himself  experimentally.  Instruction  comes 
only  through  experience ;  and  that  fits  perfectly  into  the  definitions 
given  at  the  beginning  of  this  introduction. 

May  we  make  experiments  on  men  condemned  to  death  or  vivi- 
sect them  ?  Instances  have  been  cited,  analogous  to  the  one  recalled 
above,  in  which  men  have  permitted  themselves  to  perform  dangerous 
operations  on  condemned  criminals,  granting  them  pardon  in  ex- 
change. Modem  ideas  of  morals  condemn  such  actions;  I  com- 
pletely agree  with  these  ideas ;  I  consider  it  wholly  permissible,  how- 


102  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


ever,  and  useful  to  science,  to  make  investigations  on  the  properties 
of  tissues  immediately  after  the  decapitations  of  criminals.  A 
helminthologist  had  a  condemned  woman  without  her  knowledge 
swallow  larvae  of  intestinal  worms,  so  as  to  see  whether  the  worms 
developed  in  the  intestines  after  her  death.  Others  have  made 
analogous  experiments  on  patients  with  phthisis  doomed  to  an  early 
death ;  some  men  have  made  experiments  on  themselves.  As  experi- 
ments of  this  kind  are  of  great  interest  to  science  and  can  be  con- 
clusive only  on  man,  they  seem  to  be  wholly  permissible  when  they 
involve  no  suffering  or  harm  to  the  subject  of  the  experiment.  For 
we  must  not  deceive  ourselves,  morals  do  not  forbid  making  experi- 
ments on  one's  neighbor  or  on  one's  self ;  in  everyday  life  men  do 
nothing  but  experiment  on  one  another.  Christian  morals  forbid 
only  one  thing,  doing  ill  to  one's  neighbor.  So,  among  the  experi- 
ments that  may  be  tried  on  man,  those  that  can  only  harm  are  for- 
bidden, those  that  are  innocent  are  permissible,  and  those  that  may 
do  good  are  obligatory. 

Another  question  presents  itself.  Have  we  the  right  to  make 
experiments  on  animals  and  vivisect  them?  As  for  me,  I  think 
we  have  this  right,  wholly  and  absolutely.  It  would  be  strange  in- 
deed if  we  recognized  man's  right  to  make  use  of  animals  in  every 
walk  of  life,  for  domestic  service,  for  food,  and  then  forbade  him 
to  make  use  of  them  for  his  own  instruction  in  one  of  the  sciences 
most  useful  to  humanity.  No  hesitation  is  possible ;  the  science  of 
life  can  be  established  only  through  experiment,  and  we  can  save 
living  beings  from  death  only  after  sacrificing  others.  Experiments 
must  be  made  either  on  man  or  on  animals.  Now  I  think  that  phy- 
sicians already  make  too  many  dangerous  experiments  on  man,  before 
carefully  studying  them  on  animals.  I  do  not  admit  that  it -is  moral 
to  try  more  or  less  dangerous  or  active  remedies  on  patients  in  hos- 
pitals, without  first  experimenting  with  them  on  dogs;  for  I  shall 
prove,  further  on,  that  results  obtained  on  animals  may  all  be  con- 
clusive for  man  when  we  know  how  to  experiment  properly.  If  it  is 
immoral,  then,  to  make  an  experiment  on  man  when  it  is  dangerous 
to  him,  even  though  the  result  may  be  useful  to  others,  it  is  essen- 
tially moral  to  make  experiments  on  an  animal,  even  though  painful 
and  dangerous  to  him,  if  they  may  be  useful  to  man. 

After  all  this,  should  we  let  ourselves  be  moved  by  the  sensitive 

'  Davaine,  Traite  de&  entozoaires.    Paris,  1860.    Synopsis,  xxvii. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


103 


cries  of  people  of  fashion  or  by  the  objections  of  men  unfamiliar  with 
scientific  ideas?  All  feelings  deserve  respect,  and  I  shall  be  very 
careful  never  to  offend  anyone's.  I  easily  explain  them  to  myself, 
and  that  is  why  they  cannot  stop  me.  I  understand  perfectly  how 
physicians  under  the  influence  of  false  ideas,  and  lacking  the  scien- 
tific sense,  fail  to  appreciate  the  necessity  of  experiment  and  vivisec- 
tion in  establishing  biological  science.  I  also  understand  perfectly 
how  people  of  fashion,  moved  by  ideas  wholly  different  from  those 
that  animate  physiologists,  judge  vivisection  quite  differently.  It 
cannot  be  otherwise.  Somewhere  in  this  introduction  we  said  that, 
in  science,  ideas  are  what  give  facts  their  value  and  meaning.  It  is 
the  same  in  morals,  it  is  everywhere  the  same.  Facts  materially 
alike  may  have  opposite  scientific  meanings,  according  to  the  ideas 
with  which  they  are  connected.  A  cowardly  assassin,  a  hero  and  a 
warrior  each  plunges  a  dagger  into  the  breast  of  his  fellow.  What 
differentiates  them,  unless  it  be  the  ideas  which  guide  their  hands  ? 
A  surgeon,  a  physiologist  and  Nero  give  themselves  up  alike  to  muti- 
lation of  living  beings.  What  differentiates  them  also,  if  not  ideas  ? 
I  therefore  shall  not  follow  the  example  of  LeGallois,^  in  trying  to 
justify  physiologists  in  the  eyes  of  strangers  to  science  who  re- 
proach them  with  cruelty ;  the  difference  in  ideas  explains  everything. 
A  physiologist  is  not  a  man  of  fashion,  he  is  a  man  of  science, 
absorbed  by  the  scientific  idea  which  he  pursues :  he  no  longer  hears 
the  cry  of  animals,  he  no  longer  sees  the  blood  that  flows,  he  sees 
only  his  idea  and  perceives  only  organisms  concealing  problems  which 
he  intends  to  solve.  Similarly,  no  surgeon  is  stopped  by  the  most 
moving  cries  and  sobs,  because  he  sees  only  his  idea  and  the  purpose 
of  his  operation.  Similarly  again,  no  anatomist  feels  himself  in  a 
horrible  slaughter  house;  under  the  influence  of  a  scientific  idea,  he 
delightedly  follows  a  nervous  filament  through  stinking  livid  flesh, 
which  to  any  other  man  would  be  an  object  of  disgust  and  horror. 
After  what  has  gone  before  we  shall  deem  all  discussion  of  vivisec- 
tion futile  or  absurd.  It  is  impossible  for  men,  judging  facts  by 
such  different  ideas,  ever  to  agree;  and  as  it  is  impossible  to  satisfy 
everybody,  a  man  of  science  should  attend  only  to  the  opinion  of  men 
of  science  who  understand  him,  and  should  derive  rules  of  conduct 
only  from  his  own  conscience. 

The  scientific  principle  of  vivisection  is  easy,  moreover,  to  grasp. 
•LeGallois,  (Euvrea.   Paris,  1824.   Preface,  p.  xxx. 


104  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


It  is  always  a  question  of  separating  or  altering  certain  parts  of  the 
living  machine,  so  as  to  study  them  and  thus  to  decide  how  they  func- 
tion and  for  what.  Vivisection,  considered  as  an  analytic  method  of 
investigation  of  the  living,  includes  many  successive  steps,  for  we 
may  need  to  act  either  on  organic  apparatus,  or  on  organs,  or  on 
tissue,  or  on  the  histological  units  themselves.  In  extemporized  and 
other  vivisections,  we  produce  mutilations  whose  results  we  study 
by  preserving  the  animals.  At  other  times,  vivisection  is  only  an 
autopsy  on  the  living,  or  a  study  of  properties  of  tissues  immediately 
after  death.  The  various  processes  of  analytic  study  of  the  mecha- 
nisms of  life  in  living  animals  are  indispensable,  as  we  shall  see,  to 
physiology,  to  pathology  and  to  therapeutics.  However,  it  would 
not  do  to  believe  that  vivisection  in  itself  can  constitute  the  whole 
experimental  method  as  applied  to  the  study  of  vital  phenomena. 
Vivisection  is  only  anatomical  dissection  of  the  living;  it  is  neces- 
sarily combined  with  all  the  other  physico-chemical  means  of  investi- 
gation which  must  be  carried  into  the  organism.  Reduced  to  itself, 
vivisection  would  have  only  a  limited  range  and  in  certain  cases  must 
even  mislead  us  as  to  the  actual  role  of  organs.  By  these  reservations 
I  do  not  deny  the  usefulness  or  even  the  necessity  of  vivisection  in 
the  study  of  vital  phenomena.  I  merely  declare  it  insufficient.  Our 
instruments  for  vivisection  are  indeed  so  coarse  and  our  senses  so 
imperfect  that  we  can  reach  only  the  coarse  and  complex  parts  of  an 
organism.  Vivisection  under  the  microscope  would  make  much  finer 
analysis  possible,  but  it  presents  much  greater  difficulties  and  is 
applicable  only  to  very  small  animals. 

But  when  we  reach  the  limits  of  vivisection  we  have  other  means 
of  going  deeper  and  dealing  with  the  elementary  parts  of  organisms 
where  the  elementary  properties  of  vital  phenomena  have  their  seat. 
We  may  introduce  poisons  into  the  circulation,  which  carry  their  spe- 
cific action  to  one  or  another  histological  unit.  Localized  poisonings, 
as  Fontana  and  J.  Miiller  have  already  used  them,  are  valuable  means 
of  physiological  analysis.  Poisons  are  veritable  reagents  of  life,  ex- 
tremely delicate  instruments  which  dissect  vital  units.  I  believe 
myself  the  first  to  consider  the  study  of  poisons  from  this  point 
of  view,  for  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  studious  attention  to  agents 
which  alter  histological  units  should  form  the  common  foundation 
of  general  physiology,  pathology  and  therapeutics.  We  must  always, 
indeed,  go  back  to  the  organs  to  find  the  simplest  explanations  of  life. 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


105 


To  sum  up,  dissection  is  a  displacing  of  a  living  organism  by 
means  of  instruments  and  methods  capable  of  isolating  its  different 
parts.  It  is  easy  to  understand  that  such  dissection  of  the  living 
presupposes  dissection  of  the  dead. 

IV.  NoRMAii  Anatomy  in  Its  Relations  with  Vivisection 

Anatomy  is  the  basis  necessary  to  all  medical  investigation, 
whether  theoretical  or  practical.  A  corpse  is  an  organism  deprived 
of  living  motion,  and  the  earliest  explanation  of  vital  phenomena  was 
naturally  sought  in  dead  organs,  just  as  we  seek  explanation  of  the 
action  of  a  machine  in  motion  by  studying  the  parts  of  the  machine  at 
rest.  It  seems,  therefore,  that  the  anatomy  of  man  ought  to  be  the 
basis  of  physiology  and  human  medicine.  Prejudice,  however,  op- 
posed dissection  of  corpses,  and  in  default  of  the  human  body,  men 
dissected  corpses  of  animals,  in  organization  as  close  as  possible  to 
man.  Thus  Galen's  anatomy  and  physiology  were  done  mainly  on 
monkeys.  At  the  same  time,  Galen  also  performed  dissections  of 
cadavers  and  experiments  on  living  animals,  thus  proving  that  he 
understood  perfectly  that  dissection  of  cadavers  is  significant  only 
in  so  far  as  it  is  compared  with  dissection  of  living  bodies.  In  this 
way,  anatomy  is  indeed  only  the  first  step  in  physiology.  Anatomy 
in  itself  is  a  sterile  science;  its  existence  is  justified  only  by  the 
presence  of  living  men  and  animals,  well  and  sick,  and  by  its  own 
possible  usefulness  to  physiology  and  pathology. 

We  shall  limit  ourselves  here  to  considering  the  kinds  of  service 
which  anatomy,  whether  of  man  or  of  animals,  in  our  present  state  of 
knowledge,  can  render  physiology  and  medicine.  This  seems  to  me 
the  more  necessary,  because  different  ideas  on  this  subject  hold  sway 
in  science ;  in  judging  these  questions  it  is,  of  course,  understood  that 
I  take  the  point  of  view  of  experimental  physiology  and  medicine, 
which  together  make  up  the  truly  active  science  of  medicine.  In 
biology  we  may  accept  various  points  of  view  which  establish,  as  it 
were,  just  so  many  distinct  sub-sciences.  One  science,  in  fact,  is  sep- 
arate from  another  science  only  because  it  has  a  special  point  of 
view  and  a  particular  problem.  In  normal  biology,  we  may  distin- 
guish the  zoological  point  of  view,  the  direct  and  comparative  ana- 
tomical points  of  view,  the  special  and  the  general  physiological 
points  of  view.    Zoology,  describing  and  classifying  species,  is  only 


106 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


a  science  of  observation  used  as  a  vestibule  to  the  true  science  of  ani- 
mals. Tbe  zoologist  merely  catalogues  animals  by  outward  or  inner 
characteristics  of  form,  according  to  the  types  and  the  laws  which 
nature  offers  him  in  the  formation  of  these  types.  The  zoologists 
object  is  classification  of  beings  according  to  a  sort  of  plan  of  crea- 
tion, and  for  him  the  problem  is  summed  up  in  finding  the  precise 
place  that  an  animal  should  fill  in  a  given  classification. 

Anatomy,  or  the  science  of  animal  organization,  is  more  closely 
and  necessarily  related  to  physiology.    The  anatomical  point  of  view 
differs,  however,  from  the  physiological  in  this,  that  anatomists  wish 
to  explain  anatomy  by  physiology,  while  physiologists  seek  to  explain 
physiology  by  anatomy,  which  is  quite  another  matter.   The  anatom- 
ical point  of  view  has  dominated  science  from  the  beginning  up  to 
the  present,  and  it  still  has  many  partisans.    The  great  anatomists 
who  took  this  point  of  view  all  contributed  valiantly,  nevertheless,  to 
the  development  of  physiological  science ;  and  Haller  summed  up  the 
idea  of  the  subordination  of  physiology  to  anatomy  in  defining  physi- 
ology as  anatomia  animata.    I  can  easily  understand  that  the  ana- 
tomical principle  was  destined  necessarily  to  present  itself  first,  but  I 
believe  that  it  is  false  in  its  limitations,  and  that  it  has  to-day  grown 
harmful  to  physiology,  after  having  rendered  great  service,  which  I 
should  be  the  last  to  deny.    Anatomy,  in  fact,  is  a  simpler  science 
than  physiology  and  consequently  should  be  subordinate  to  it,  in- 
stead of  dominating  it.   Every  explanation  of  vital  phenomena,  based 
exclusively  on  anatomical  considerations,  is  necessarily  incomplete. 
The  great  Haller,  who  summed  up  the  anatomical  period  of  physi- 
ology in  his  immense  and  admirable  writings,  restricted  himself  so 
far  that  his  physiology  is  reduced  to  an  irritable  fibre  and  a  sensitive 
fibre.    The  whole  humoral  or  physico-chemical  side  of  physiology, 
which  cannot  be  approached  by  dissection  and  which  treats  of  what 
we  call  our  inner  environment,  was  neglected.    The  reproach  which 
I  am  making  here  against  the  anatomists  who  wished  to  subordinate 
physiology  to  their  point  of  view,  I  make  in  the  same  way  against 
chemists  and  physicists  who  wish  to  do  the  same  thing.   They  are  also 
wrong  in  endeavoring  to  subordinate  physiology,  a  more  complex 
science,  to  chemistry  or  physics,  which  are  simpler  sciences.  This 
has  not  prevented  great  service  being  rendered  to  physiology  by  much 
work  in  physiological  chemistry  and  physics,  even  though  conceived 
from  a  false  point  of  view. 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


107 


In  a  word,  I  consider  that  the  most  complex  of  all  sciences,  physi- 
ology, cannot  be  completely  explained  by  anatomy.  To  physiology, 
anatomy  is  only  an  auxiliary  science,  the  most  immediately  necessary, 
I  agree,  but  insufficient  alone,  unless  we  wish  to  assume  that  anatomy 
includes  everything,  and  that  the  oxygen,  chloride  of  sodium  and  iron 
found  in  the  body  are  anatomical  units  of  the  body.  Attempts  of  this 
kind  have  been  revived  in  our  day  by  eminent  anatomists  and  his- 
tologists.  I  do  not  share  these  views,  because  they  seem  to  me  to 
create  confusion  in  the  sciences  and  to  lead  to  darkness  instead  of 
light. 

Anatomists,  we  said  above,  try  to  invert  the  true  method  of  ex- 
planation, i.e.,  they  take  anatomy  as  an  exclusive  starting  point,  and 
propose  to  deduce  directly  from  it  all  the  functions  solely  by  logic 
and  without  experiments.  I  have  already  protested  against  the  pre- 
tentiousness of  anatomical  deductions,^  by  showing  that  they  rest  on 
an  illusion  of  which  anatomists  are  unaware.  In  anatomy,  we  must 
in  fact  distinguish  between  two  classes  of  things:  (1)  The  passive 
mechanical  arrangements  of  various  organs  and  apparatus  which, 
from  this  point  of  view,  are  really  nothing  but  instruments  of  animal 
mechanics;  (2)  the  activity  of  vital  units  which  put  in  play  this 
diverse  apparatus.  The  anatomy  of  corpses  can  certainly  take  ac- 
count of  the  mechanical  arrangements  of  the  animal  organism; 
inspection  of  the  skeleton  certainly  shows  a  combination  of  levers 
whose  action  we  understand  solely  through  their  arrangement.  So 
with  the  system  of  canals  or  of  tubes  conducting  fluids;  and  thus 
the  valves  in  the  veins  have  mechanical  functions  which  put  Harvey 
on  the  track  leading  to  the  discovery  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood. 
The  reservoirs,  the  bladders,  the  various  pockets  in  which  secreted 
and  excreted  fluids  reside,  offer  mechanical  arrangements  which  more 
or  less  clearly  indicate  the  functions  which  they  must  fulfill,  without 
our  necessarily  having  recourse  to  experiment  on  the  living  to  learn  it. 
But  we  should  notice  that  these  mechanical  deductions  are  by  no 
means  absolutely  restricted  to  the  functions  of  living  beings;  we 
deduce  everywhere,  in  the  same  way,  that  pipes  are  meant  to  conduct, 
reservoirs  meant  to  hold  and  levers  meant  to  move. 

When  we  come  to  the  active  or  vital  elements  which  put  all  the 
passive  instruments  of  the  organism  in  play,  then  anatomy  of  corpses 

•  Cf.  Claude  Bernard,  Legons  do  physiologie  experiment  ale,  Paris,  1856,  Vol. 
II.   Legon  d'ouvertwre.  May  2,  1855. 


108 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


cannot  and  does  not  teach  anything.  All  our  knowledge  on  this 
subject  must  necessarily  come  from  experiment  or  from  observation 
of  the  living ;  when,  therefore,  anatomists  believe  that  they  are  making 
deductions  solely  from  anatomy  and  without  experiments,  they  forget 
that  their  starting  point  was  the  same  experimental  physiology  which 
they  seem  to  disdain.  When  anatomists  deduce  the  functions  of  an 
organism,  as  they  say,  from  their  texture,  they  merely  use  knowledge 
gained  on  the  living,  to  interpret  what  they  see  in  the  dead;  but 
anatomy  really  teaches  them  nothing,  it  merely  supplies  them  with 
the  quality  of  a  tissue. 

So  when  anatomists  meet  with  muscular  fibres  in  some  part  of  the 
body,  they  infer  contractile  motion ;  when  they  meet  gland  cells,  they 
infer  secretion ;  when  they  meet  with  nerve  fibres,  they  infer  sensa- 
tion or  movement.  But  what  taught  them  that  muscular  fibre 
contracts,  that  gland  cells  secrete,  that  a  nerve  is  sensory  or  motor, 
unless  it  was  observation  of  the  living,  or,  in  other  words,  vivisection  ? 
Only,  noting  that  these  contractile,  secreting  or  nerve  tissues  have 
definite  anatomical  forms,  they  establish  a  relation  between  the  form 
of  the  anatomical  unit  and  its  functions,  so  that  when  they  meet  one, 
they  infer  the  other.  But,  I  repeat,  dead  anatomy  teaches  nothing; 
it  merely  leans  on  what  experimental  physiology  teaches ;  and  a  clear 
proof  of  this  is  that,  where  experimental  physiology  has  learned  noth- 
ing as  yet,  anatomists  can  interpret  nothing  by  anatomy  alone.  Thus, 
the  anatomy  of  the  spleen,  the  suprarenal  glands  and  the  thyroid  is 
as  well  known  as  the  anatomy  of  a  muscle  or  of  a  nerve,  and  neverthe- 
less anatomists  are  silent  as  to  the  uses  of  these  parts.  But  as  soon 
as  physiologists  have  discovered  something  about  the  functions  of 
these  organs,  anatomists  will  put  the  physiological  properties  noted 
into  relation  with  their  anatomical  observations.  I  must  also  point 
out  that  anatomists,  in  their  localizations,  can  never  go  beyond  the 
teachings  of  physiology,  except  under  penalty  of  falling  into  error. 
Thus,  if  anatomists,  on  the  basis  of  physiological  teaching,  suggest 
that,  where  muscular  fibres  are  present,  there  are  contraction  and 
movement  also,  they  may  not  infer  that,  where  they  see  no  muscular 
fibre,  there  is  never  contraction  or  movement.  Experimental  physi- 
ology has  proved,  in  fact,  that  contracting  units  are  of  various  forma, 
among  them  some  which  anatomists  have  not  yet  been  able  to  define. 

In  a  word,  to  know  something  about  the  functions  of  life,  you 
must  study  them  in  the  living.   Anatomy  yields  only  characteristics 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


109 


by  which  to  recognize  tissues,  but  itself  teaches  nothing  about  their 
vital  properties.  How  indeed  could  the  form  of  the  nerve  cell  show 
us  the  nervous  properties  which  it  transmits  ?  How  could  the  form 
of  a  liver  cell  show  us  that  sugar  is  made  in  it  ?  How  could  the  form 
of  a  muscle  fibre  teach  us  about  muscular  contraction?  We  have 
here  only  an  empirical  relation  established  by  comparative  observa- 
tion of  the  living  and  the  dead.  I  remember  having  often  heard 
de  Blainville  try  to  differentiate  in  his  lectures  between  what  should 
be  called,  according  to  him,  a  substratum.,  and  what  should  be  called, 
on  the  other  hand,  an  organ.  In  an  organ,  according  to  de  Blainville, 
we  should  be  able  to  understand  the  necessary  mechanical  relation 
between  a  structure  and  its  function.  Thus,  from  the  form  of  bony 
levers,  he  said,  we  conceive  a  definite  motion;  from  the  disposal  of 
the  blood  of  the  reservoirs  for  liquids,  and  of  the  excretory  ducts  of 
glands,  we  understand  that  liquids  are  put  in  circulation  or  retained 
by  mechanical  arrangements  that  we  can  explain.  But  as  for  the 
encephalon,  he  added,  no  material  relations  can  be  established  between 
the  structure  of  the  brain  and  the  nature  of  intellectual  phenomena. 
Therefore,  concluded  de  Blainville,  the  brain  is  not  the  organ  of 
thought,  it  is  merely  a  substratum.  We  may  accept,  if  we  like,  de 
Blainville's  distinction,  but  if  so,  it  will  be  general  and  not  limited 
to  the  brain.  Indeed,  if  we  understand  that  a  muscle  inserted  be- 
tween two  bones  may  act  mechanically  as  a  power  drawing  them  to- 
gether, we  by  no  means  understand  how  the  muscle  contracts,  and  we 
can  just  as  well  say  that  the  muscle  is  the  substratum  of  contraction. 
Though  we  understand  that  a  fluid  secreted  by  a  gland  flows  out  of  its 
tubes,  we  cannot  thereby  conceive  any  idea  of  the  essence  of  secretory 
phenomena.  And  we  may  just  as  well  say  that  the  gland  is  a  sub- 
stratum of  secretion.  To  sum  up,  the  anatomical  point  of  view  is 
wholly  subordinate  to  the  point  of  view  of  experimental  physiology, 
as  an  explanation  of  vital  phenomena.  But,  as  we  said  above,  there 
are  two  things  in  anatomy :  the  tools  of  the  organism  and  the  essen- 
tial agents  of  life.  The  essential  agents  of  life  depend  upon  the  vital 
properties  of  our  tissues,  which  can  be  defined  only  by  observation 
or  by  experiment  on  the  living.  These  agents  are  the  same  in  all 
animals,  without  distinction  of  class,  genus  or  species.  Here  is  the 
domain  of  general  anatomy  and  physiology.  Next  come  tools  of  life, 
which  are  nothing  but  mechanical  tools  or  weapons  with  which  nature 
especially  provides  each  organism  according  to  its  class,  its  genus 


110 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


or  it8  species.  We  may  even  say  that  the  special  tools  constitute  the 
species;  for  a  rabbit  differs  from  a  dog  only  because  one  has  organs 
that  make  it  eat  grass,  and  the  other  organs  that  force  it  to  eat  flesh. 
But  as  to  the  inmost  phenomena  of  life,  the  two  animals  are  identical. 
A  rabbit  is  carnivorous  if  we  give  him  meat  ready  prepared,  and  I 
long  ago  proved  that  all  fasting  animals  are  carnivorous. 

Comparative  anatomy  is  merely  an  inner  zoology;  its  aim  is  to 
classify  the  apparatus  or' tools  of  life.  These  classifications  should 
corroborate  or  rectify  the  characteristics  suggested  by  outer  forms. 
Thus  the  whale,  which  naight  be  put  with  the  fishes  by  reason  of  its 
outer  form,  is  placed  with  the  mammals  because  of  its  interior  or- 
ganization. Comparative  anatomy  shows  us  also  that  the  tools  of 
life  are  arranged  in  necessary  and  harmonious  relations  with  the 
whole  organism.  Thus,  an  animal  with  claws  should  have  the  jaws, 
teeth  and  the  articulations  of  the  limbs  disposed  in  a  definite  way. 
The  genius  of  Cuvier  amplified  these  views  and  derived  from  them 
a  new  science,  paleontology,  which  reconstructs  an  entire  animal 
from  a  fragment  of  his  skeleton.  The  object  of  comparative  anatomy, 
then,  is  to  show  the  functional  harmony  of  the  tools  with  which  na- 
ture has  endowed  an  animal  and  to  teach  us  the  changes  necessary 
in  these  tools  according  to  various  circumstances  of  animal  life.  But 
beneath  all  these  changes  comparative  anatomy  always  shows  us  the 
uniform  plan  of  creation;  thus  any  number  of  organs  exist,  not  as 
aids  to  life  (they  are  often  actually  harmful),  but  as  characteristics 
of  the  species  or  as  vestiges  of  a  single  plan  of  organic  composition. 
The  stag's  antlers  have  no  use  favorable  to  the  animal's  life;  the 
shoulder  blade  of  a  slow-worm  and  the  mammae  in  males  are  ves- 
tiges of  organs  that  have  lost  their  functions.  Nature,  as  Goethe  said, 
is  a  great  artist;  to  ornament  forms,  she  often  adds  organs  that  are 
useless  to  life  in  itself,  as  an  architect  makes  ornaments  for  his 
building,  such  as  friezes,  cornices  and  volutes  which  are  useless  for 
habitation. 

The  object  of  comparative  anatomy  and  physiology  is,  therefore, 
to  find  the  morphological  laws  of  the  tools  and  the  organs  which 
together  make  up  organisms.  Comparative  physiology,  in  so  far  as  it 
infers  functions  by  comparing  organs,  would  be  an  insufficient  and 
false  science  if  it  rejected  experimentation.  Comparing  the  forms  of 
limbs  or  of  the  mechanical  apparatus  of  life  may  suggest  the  uses  of 
these  parts.    But  what  can  the  form  of  the  liver  or  the  pancreas  tell 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


111 


us  about  the  function  of  these  organs  ?  Has  not  experiment  shown 
the  mistake  of  likening  the  pancreas  to  a  salivary  gland  ?  What 
can  the  form  of  the  brain  or  the  nerves  teach  us  about  their  func- 
tions ?  All  that  we  know  has  been  learned  by  the  observation  of  the 
living,  or  by  experiment.  What  can  we  say  about  fishes'  brains,  for 
instance,  until  experiment  has  clarified  the  question?  In  a  word, 
anatomical  deduction  has  yielded  what  it  can.  To  linger  in  this 
path  means  lagging  behind  the  progress  of  science  and  believing  that 
we  can  impose  scientific  principles  without  experimental  verification. 
That,  in  a  word,  is  a  relic  of  the  scholasticism  of  the  Middle  Ages. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  comparative  physiology,  in  so  far  as  it  relies 
on  experiment  and  seeks  the  properties  of  tissues  and  organs  in  ani- 
mals, does  not  seem  to  me  to  have  separate  existence  as  a  science. 
It  falls  back  necessarily  into  special  or  general  physiology,  since  its 
object  is  the  same. 

We  distinguish  between  the  various  biological  sciences  only  by  the 
goal  which  we  set  ourselves  or  the  idea  which  we  pursue  in  studying 
them.  Zoologists  and  comparative  anatomists  see  all  living  beings 
as  a  whole,  and  by  studying  the  outer  and  inner  characteristics  of 
beings,  they  seek  to  discover  the  morphological  laws  of  their  evolu- 
tion and  their  transformation.  Physiologists  take  a  quite  different 
point  of  view :  they  deal  with  just  one  thing,  the  properties  of  living 
matter  and  the  mechanism  of  life,  in  whatever  form  it  shows  itself. 
For  them,  genus,  species  and  class  no  longer  exist.  There  are  only 
living  beings ;  and  if  they  choose  one  of  them  for  study,  that  is  usually 
for  convenience  in  experimentation.  Physiologists  also  follow  a 
different  idea  from  the  anatomists.  The  latter,  as  we  have  seen,  try 
to  infer  the  source  of  life  exclusively  from  anatomy ;  they  therefore 
adopt  an  anatomical  plan.  Physiologists  adopt  another  plan  and 
follow  a  different  conception ;  instead  of  proceeding  from  the  organ 
to  the  function,  they  start  from  the  physiological  phenomenon  and 
seek  its  explanation  in  the  organism.  To  solve  the  problem  of  life, 
physiologists  therefore  call  to  their  aid  all  the  sciences, — anatomy 
physics,  chemistry,  which  are  all  allies  serving  as  indispensable 
tools  for  investigation.  We  must,  therefore,  necessarily  be  familiar 
enough  with  these  various  sciences  to  know  all  the  resources  which 
may  be  drawn  from  them.    Let  us  add,  in  ending,  that  from  every 

"  Claude  Bernard,  Memoire  sur  le  pancreas.  ( Supplement  au(c  Comptes 
rendus  de  VAcademie  des  sciences.    1856.    Vol.  I.) 


112 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


biological  point  of  view,  experimental  physiology  is  in  itself  the  one 
active  science  of  life,  because  by  defining  the  necessary  conditions  of 
vital  phenomena  it  will  succeed  in  mastering  them  and  in  governing 
them  through  knowledge  of  their  peculiar  laws. 

Y.  Pathological  Anatomy  and  Dissection  in  Relation  to 

Vivisection 

What  we  said  in  the  last  paragraph  about  normal  anatomy  and 
physiology  may  be  repeated  for  pathological  anatomy  and  physiology. 
We  find  similarly  three  points  of  view  appearing  one  after  another, 
the  taxonomical  or  nosological  point  of  view,  the  anatomical  point  of 
view  and  the  physiological  point  of  view.  We  cannot  here  go  into  de- 
tailed study  of  these  questions,  which  would  include  neither  more 
nor  less  than  the  entire  history  of  medical  science.  We  shall  limit 
ourselves  to  suggesting  our  idea  in  a  few  words. 

While  observing  and  describing  diseases,  men  must  have  sought 
at  the  same  time  to  classify  them,  as  they  sought  to  classify  animals, 
and  according  to  precisely  the  same  principles,  by  artificial  or  nat- 
ural methods.  Pinel  applied  to  pathology  the  natural  classification 
introduced  into  botany  by  de  Jussieu,  and  into  zoology  by  Cuvier. 
It  is  sufficient  to  quote  the  first  sentence  of  PineFs  Nosography  : 
"Given  a  disease,  to  find  its  place  in  a  nosological  scheme."  No 
one,  I  think,  will  consider  this  the  goal  of  all  medicine ;  it  is  merely 
a  partial  point  of  view,  the  taxonomic  point  of  view. 

After  nosology  came  the  anatomical  point  of  view ;  that  is,  after 
considering  diseases  as  morbid  species,  men  try  to  place  them  ana- 
tomically. It  was  thought  that,  just  as  there  is  a  normal  organiza- 
tion to  take  account  of  vital  phenomena  in  the  normal  state,  so  there 
must  be  an  abnormal  organization  to  take  account  of  morbid  phe- 
nomena. Though  the  point  of  view  of  pathological  anatomy  can  al- 
ready be  recognized  in  Morgagni  and  Bonnet,  still  it  is  especially 
in  this  century,  under  the  influence  of  Broussais  and  Laennec, 
that  pathological  anatomy  has  been  systematically  built  up.  Men 
compared  the  anatomy  of  diseases,  they  classified  changes  in  tissues, 
but  they  also  tried  to  bring  these  changes  into  relation  with  the 
morbid  phenomena  and,  as  it  were,  to  deduce  the  second  from  the  first. 
The  same  problems  presented  themselves  as  in  comparative,  normal 
"Pinel,  Nosographie  philosophique.  1800. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


113 


anatomy.  In  the  case  of  morbid  changes  producing  physical  or  me- 
chanical alteration  in  a  function,  as  for  instance  a  vascular  compres- 
sion or  mechanical  lesion  of  a  limb,  men  could  understand  the  rela- 
tion connecting  the  morbid  symptom  with  its  cause  and  could  make 
what  is  called  a  rational  diagnosis.  Laennec,  one  of  my  predecessors 
in  the  chair  of  medicine  at  the  College  de  France,  immortalized  him- 
self in  this  field  by  the  precision  which  he  gave  to  physical  diagnosis 
of  diseases  of  the  heart  and  lungs.  But  diagnosis  became  impossible 
in  the  case  of  diseases  where  changes  were  imperceptible  with  our 
present  means  of  investigation.  'No  longer  able  to  find  an  anatomical 
relation,  men  said  then  that  the  disease  was  essential,  i.e.,  without 
any  lesion;  which  is  absurd,  for  it  amounts  to  acknowledging  an 
effect  without  a  cause.  Men  came  to  understand  that,  to  find  the 
explanation  of  such  diseases,  they  must  carry  their  investigations 
into  the  minutest  parts  of  the  organism  where  life  has  its  seat.  The 
new  era  of  microscopic  pathological  anatomy  was  inaugurated  in 
Germany  by  Johannes  Miiller;  and  an  illustrious  professor  in  Ber- 
lin, Virchow,  recently  systematized  microscopic  pathology. -^^  So  in 
changes  of  the  tissues,  they  found  proper  characteristics  for  defining 
diseases.  A  propos  of  this,  they  invented  the  name  pathological  physi- 
ology, to  designate  pathological  function  in  relation  to  abnormal 
anatomy.  I  shall  not  have  to  consider  whether  these  expressions, 
pathological  anatomy  and  physiological  pathology,  are  well  chosen. 
I  shall  simply  say  that  the  pathological  anatomy,  whose  pathological 
phenomena  they  define,  is  subject  to  the  same  objection  of  insuffi- 
ciency that  I  have  already  made  to  normal  anatomy.  First,  the 
pathological  anatomists  assume  it  proved  that  anatomical  changes 
are  always  primary,  which  I  do  not  admit,  believing  the  contrary, 
that  a  pathological  change  is  very  often  secondary  and  is  the  con- 
sequence or  fruit  of  the  disease  instead  of  its  germ ;  which  does  not 
prevent  this  product  from  later  becoming  a  morbid  germ  of  other 
symptoms.  I  shall  therefore  not  admit  that  cells  or  fibres  of  tissues 
are  always  primarily  attacked;  a  morbid  physico-chemical  change  in 
the  organic  environment  being  able,  in  itself,  to  lead  to  the  morbid 
phenomena,  in  the  manner  of  a  toxic  symptom  which  occurs,  without 

"  Miiller,  De  Olandularum  secernentium  structura  penitiori  earumque  prima 
formatione  in  homine  atque  animalihus.    Leipzig,  1830. 

"Virchow,  La  Pathologic  cellulaire  basee  sitr  Vitude  physioloyique  et  patho- 
logique  des  tissus,  translated  by  P,  Picard.    Paris,  1860. 


114 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


primary  lesion  of  the  tissues,  through  mere  change  in  the  environ- 
ment. 

The  anatomical  point  of  view  is  therefore  insufficient,  and  the 
changes  noted  in  cadavers  after  death  really  show  characteristics  by 
which  to  recognize  and  classify  diseases,  rather  than  lesions  capable 
of  explaining  death.  It  is  indeed  strange  to  see  how  little  attention 
most  physicians  pay  to  this  latter  point  of  view,  which  is  the  true 
point  of  view  of  physiology.  When  a  physician,  for  example,  makes  a 
typhoid  autopsy,  he  notes  the  intestinal  lesions  and  is  satisfied.  But 
in  reality  that  explains  absolutely  nothing  about  either  the  cause  of 
the  disease,  or  the  action  of  drugs,  or  the  reason  for  death.  Micro- 
scopic anatomy  teaches  us  no  more  about  it,  for  when  a  person  dies 
of  tuberculosis  or  pneumonia  or  typhoid  fever,  the  microscopic  lesions 
found  after  death  existed  before,  and  often  long  before ;  death  is  not 
explained  by  the  particles  either  of  the  tubercle  or  of  Peyer's 
patches  in  the  intestines  or  of  other  morbid  products ;  death,  in  fact, 
can  be  understood  only  because  some  histological  unit  has  lost  its 
physiological  properties,  a  loss  which  has  brought  on  the  disruption 
of  vital  phenomena.  But  to  grasp  the  physiological  lesions  in  their 
relations  with  the  mechanism  of  death,  we  should  have  to  make 
autopsies  on  cadavers  immediately  after  death,  which  is  impossible. 
This,  then,  is  why  we  must  perform  experiments  on  animals  and 
must  necessarily  give  medicine  the  experimental  point  of  view,  if 
we  mean  to  found  a  truly  scientific  medicine  which  shall  logically 
embrace  physiology,  pathology  and  therapeutics.  For  many  years  I 
have  done  my  best  to  advance  in  this  direction.^*  But  the  point  of 
view  of  experimental  medicine  is  most  complex,  in  that  it  is  physio- 
logical and  also  includes  explanation  of  pathological  phenomena  by 
anatomy.  A  propos  of  pathological  anatomy,  I  shall  repeat  what  I 
said  about  normal  anatomy,  to  wit,  that  anatomy  in  itself  teaches 
nothing  without  observation  of  the  living.  For  pathology  we  must 
therefore  establish  pathological  vivisection,  that  is  to  say,  we  must 
create  diseases  in  animals  and  sacrifice  them  at  various  stages  of 
these  diseases.  We  may  also  study  in  the  living  the  changes  in  the 
physiological  properties  of  tissues  as  well  as  the  changes  in  the  cells 
or  the  environments.  When  the  animal  dies,  we  must  make  an  au- 
topsy immediately  after  death,  just  as  if  we  were  dealing  with  one 
of  those  instantaneous  diseases  called  poisoning,  for  fundamentally 

"Claude  Bernard,  Cours  de  pathologic  e(cp4rimentale.    {Medical  Times,  1860.) 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


115 


there  is  no  difference  in  the  study  of  physiological  activities,  whether 
morbid,  toxic  or  medicinal.  In  a  word,  a  physician  should  not  hold 
to  anatomical  pathology  alone,  to  explain  the  disease ;  he  starts  from 
observation  of  the  patient  and  later  explains  the  disease  by  physi- 
ology with  the  help  of  pathological  anatomy  and  all  the  allied  sciences 
used  by  investigators  of  biological  phenomena. 

VI.   The  Variety  of  Animals  Subjected  to  Experimentation  ; 
THE  Variability  of  Organic  Conditions  Which  They 
Present  to  Experimenters 

All  animals  may  be  used  for  physiological  investigations,  because, 
with  the  same  properties  and  lesions  in  life  and  disease,  the  same 
result  everywhere  recurs,  though  in  mechanism  the  vital  manifesta- 
tions vary  greatly.  However,  the  animals  most  used  by  physiologists 
are  those  procured  most  easily,  and  here  we  must  set  in  the  front 
rank  domestic  animals  such  as  dogs,  cats,  horses,  rabbits,  oxen,  sheep, 
pigs,  barnyard  fowl,  etc.,  but  if  we  had  to  reckon  up  the  services 
rendered  to  science,  frogs  would  deserve  the  first  place,  l^o  other 
animal  has  been  used  for  greater  or  more  numerous  discoveries,  at  all 
points  in  science ;  and  even  to-day,  physiology  without  frogs  would  be 
impossible.  If  the  frog,  as  has  been  said,  is  the  Job  of  physiology, 
that  is  to  say,  the  animal  most  maltreated  by  experimenters,  it  is 
certainly  the  animal  most  closely  associated  with  their  labors  and 
their  scientific  glory.  To  the  list  of  animals  cited  above,  we  must 
add  many  others,  warm-blooded  and  cold-blooded,  vertebrates  and 
invertebrates,  and  even  infusoria  which  may  be  used  for  special 
investigations.  But  specific  diversity  is  not  the  sole  difference  be- 
tween the  animals  which  physiologists  subject  to  experimentation; 
in  the  condition  in  which  they  are  found,  they  present  many  differ- 
ences which  at  this  point  require  consideration;  for  without  knowl- 
edge or  appreciation  of  their  individual  characteristics,  we  can  have 
neither  biological  exactness  nor  precision  in  experimentation. 

The  first  condition  for  making  an  experiment  is  that  its  cir- 
cumstances must  be  so  well  known  and  so  precisely  defined  that  we 
can  always  reconstruct  them  and  reproduce  the  same  phenomena 
at  will.    We  have  said  elsewhere  that  this  fundamental  condition  of 

"  C.  Dumeril,  Notice  historique  sur  les  decouvertes\  faites  dans  les  sciences 
d'ohservation  par  Vetude  de  Vorganisme  des  grenouilles.  1840. 


116 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


experimentation  is  relatively  easy  to  fulfill  in  inorganic  beings  and 
is  surrounded  with  great  difficulties  in  living  beings,  particularly 
in  warm-blooded  animals.  In  fact,  we  must  not  only  reckon  with 
variations  in  the  surrounding  cosmic  environment,  but  must  also 
reckon  with  variations  in  the  organic  environment, — that  is  to  say,  the 
present  state  of  the  animal  organism.  We  should  therefore  be  greatly 
in  the  wrong  if  we  believed  it  enough,  in  making  an  experiment  on 
two  animals  of  the  same  species,  to  place  them  in  exactly  the  same 
experimental  conditions.  In  every  animal,  certain  physiological 
conditions  of  the  inner  environment  have  an  extreme  variability, 
which,  at  a  given  moment,  produces  appreciable  differences,  from  the 
experimental  point  of  view,  between  animals  of  the  same  species 
whose  outward  appearance  is  identical.  I  believe  that,  more  than 
anyone  else,  I  have  emphasized  how  necessary  it  is  to  study  physio- 
logical conditions,  and  have  shown  that  knowledge  of  them  is  the 
necessary  foundation  of  experimental  physiology. 

We  must  indeed  admit  that  vital  phenomena  in  an  animal  vary 
only  with  precise  and  definite  conditions  of  the  inner  environment. 
We  shall  therefore  try  to  find  these  experimental,  physiological  con- 
ditions, instead  of  tabulating  the  variations  in  phenomena  and 
taking  averages  as  expressions  of  reality ;  we  should  thus  reach  con- 
clusions based  on  correct  statistics,  but  with  no  more  scientific  reality 
than  if  they  were  wholly  arbitrary.  If  we  wish  to  wipe  out  the 
diversity  evident  in  organic  fluids  by  taking  the  averages  of  all  the 
analyses  of  urine  or  blood,  even  from  an  animal  of  the  same  species, 
we  should  thus  have  a  mere  combination  of  these  humors  corre- 
sponding to  no  definite  physiological  state  of  the  animal.  I  have 
indeed  shown  that,  in  fasting,  urine  always  has  the  same  definite  com- 
position ;  I  have  shown  that  the  blood  coming  out  of  an  organ  is  quite 
different,  according  to  whether  the  organ  is  in  a  state  of  activity  or 
rest.  If  we  look  for  sugar  in  the  liver,  for  instance,  and  make  tabu- 
lations of  its  absence  or  presence,  and  take  averages  to  find  out  how 
many  times  per  hundred  there  is  sugar  or  glycogen  in  that  organ, 
we  shall  find  a  number  which,  whatever  it  is,  means  nothing,  because, 
as  I  have  shown,  in  certain  physiological  conditions  there  is  always 
sugar,  and  in  other  conditions  there  is  never  any.  Now  taking  an- 
other point  of  view,  if  we  meant  to  consider  all  the  experiments  suc- 
cessful in  which  there  was  hepatic  sugar  and  consider  all  those  unsuc- 
cessful in  which  there  was  none,  we  should  fall  into  another  but  no 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


117 


less  reprehensible  kind  of  error.  In  fact,  I  have  posited  this  prin- 
ciple: there  never  are  any  unsuccessful  experiments;  they  are  all 
successful  in  their  own  definite  conditions,  so  that  negative  cannot 
nullify  positive  results.  I  shall  return  elsewhere,  however,  to  this 
important  subject.  For  the  moment,  I  wish  merely  to  call  to  the 
attention  of  experimenters  the  importance  of  defining  organic  con- 
ditions, because,  as  I  have  already  said,  they  are  the  one  foundation 
of  experimental  physiology  and  medicine.  In  what  follows,  a  few 
indications  will  suffice,  since  those  conditions  will  be  studied  later, 
d  propos  of  each  particular  experiment,  from  the  three  points  of  view : 
physiological,  pathological  and  therapeutic. 

In  every  experiment  on  living  animals,  three  kinds  of  physio- 
logical conditions  peculiar  to  the  animal  must  be  considered,  apart- 
from  general  cosmic  conditions,  to  wit:  anatomical  operative  condi- 
tions, physico-chemical  conditions  of  the  inner  environment  and  or- 
ganic conditions  of  units  in  the  tissues. 

1.  Operative  Anatomical  Conditions. — Anatomy  is  the  neces- 
sary foundation  of  physiology,  and  never  can  we  become  good  physi- 
ologists if  we  are  not  first  deeply  versed  in  anatomical  studies  and 
trained  in  delicate  dissections,  so  as  to  be  able  to  make  the  prepara- 
tions which  are  often  required  for  physiological  experiments.  In 
fact,  operative  anatomical  physiology  has  not  yet  been  founded; 
the  zoologists'  comparative  anatomy  is  too  vaguely  superficial  for 
physiologists  to  find  in  it  the  exact  topographical  knowledge  that 
they  need ;  the  anatomy  of  domestic  animals  is  done  by  veterinarians 
from  too  special  and  restricted  a  point  of  view  to  be  of  great  use  to 
experimenters,  and  thus  physiologists  are  ordinarily  reduced  to  mak- 
ing for  themselves  the  anatomical  investigations  which  they  need  to 
devise  their  experiments.  It  is  evident  that,  in  severing  a  nerve,  ty- 
ing a  duct  or  injecting  a  vessel,  knowledge  of  the  anatomical  arrange- 
ment of  parts,  in  the  animal  operated  on,  is  absolutely  indispensable 
to  understanding  and  defining  the  physiological  results  of  the  experi- 
ment. Some  experiments  would  be  impossible  with  certain  species 
of  animals,  and  intelligent  choice  of  an  animal  offering  a  happy 
anatomical  arrangement  is  often  a  condition  essential  to  the  success 
of  an  experiment  and  to  the  solution  of  an  important  physiological 
problem.  Anatomical  arrangements  may  sometimes  present  anom- 
alies which  must  also  be  thoroughly  known,  as  well  as  the  variations 
observed  between  one  animal  and  another.    In  the  sequel  of  this 


118 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


work,  I  shall  therefore  be  careful  always  to  describe  experimental 
methods,  including  the  anatomical  arrangement,  and  I  shall  show 
that  divergencies  of  opinion  among  physiologists  have  been  caused, 
more  than  once,  by  anatomical  differences  which  they  failed  to  reckon 
with,  when  interpreting  the  results  of  experiments.  As  life  is  merely 
a  mechanism,  anatomical  arrangements  peculiar  to  certain  animals 
may  seem  insignificant  at  first  sight ;  yet  these  seemingly  futile  mi- 
nutiae are  often  enough  to  change  the  physiological  manifestations 
completely  and  to  form  what  we  call  a  highly  important  idiosyncrasy. 
A  case  in  point  is  section  of  the  two  facial  nerves,  which  is  mortal  in 
horses,  but  not  mortal  in  other  closely  related  animals. 

2.  Physico-chemical  Conditions  of  the  Inner  Environment. — 
Life  is  made  manifest  by  the  action  of  outer  stimuli  on  irritable  living 
tissues  which  react  by  manifesting  their  special  properties.  The 
physiological  conditions  of  life  are  therefore  nothing  but  the  special 
physico-chemical  stimuli  which  set  in  action  the  tissues  of  the  or- 
ganism. These  stimuli  are  found  in  the  atmosphere  or  the  environ- 
ment which  the  animal  inhabits ;  but  we  know  that  the  properties  of 
the  general  outer  atmosphere  pass  into  the  organic  atmosphere  in 
which  all  the  physiological  conditions  of  the  outer  atmosphere  are 
found,  plus  a  certain  number  of  others  peculiar  to  the  inner  environ- 
ment. We  shall  content  ourselves  here  with  naming  the  principal 
physico-chemical  conditions  of  the  inner  environment  to  which  ex- 
perimenters should  direct  their  attention.  These,  moreover,  are  only 
the  conditions  oifered  by  every  environment  in  which  life  manifests 
itself. 

Water  is  the  first  indispensable  condition  of  every  vital  manifes- 
tation, as  of  every  manifestation  of  physico-chemical  phenomena. 
In  the  outer  cosmic  environment  we  may  distinguish  between  aquatic 
and  aerial  animals;  but  this  distinction  can  no  longer  be  made  be- 
tween histological  units ;  plunged  in  the  inner  environment,  they  are 
aquatic  in  all  living  beings,  that  is  to  say,  they  are  bathed  in  organic 
fluids,  including  very  large  quantities  of  water.  The  proportion  of 
water  at  times  reaches  90  to  99  per  cent,  in  the  organic  fluids,  and 
when  this  proportion  of  water  is  notably  diminished,  peculiar  physio- 
logical troubles  result.  Thus,  if  we  remove  water  from  frogs  by 
prolonged  exposure  to  dry  air,  and  if  we  reduce  the  quantity  of  water 
in  the  blood  by  introducing  into  the  body  substances  with  a  very  high 
endosmotic  equivalent,  we  witness  convulsive  phenomena,  which 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


119 


cease  as  soon  as  we  restore  the  normal  proportion  of  water.  Com- 
plete removal  of  water  from  living  bodies  invariably  leads  to  death 
in  large  organisms  provided  with  delicate  histological  units ;  but  it  is 
well  known  that  in  small  inferior  organisms,  removal  of  water  invari- 
ably suspends  life.  Cases  in  point  are  the  return  to  life  of  rotifera, 
of  tardigrades  and  the  small  eels  in  mildewed  wheat.  There  are  num- 
berless cases  of  latent  life  in  vegetables  and  animals,  due  to  removal 
of  the  organism's  water. 

Temperature  has  a  considerable  influence  on  life.    Eaising  the 
temperature  makes  vital  phenomena  as  well  as  the  manifestation  of 
physico-chemical  phenomena  more  active.    In  the  outer  cosmic  en- 
vironment, variations  of  temperature  create  the  seasons  which  are 
characterized  only  by  variations  in  the  behavior  of  animal  and  vege- 
table life  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.   These  variations  take  place  only 
because  the  inner  environment  or  organic  atmosphere  of  plants  and 
certain  animals  remains  in  equilibrium  with  the  outer  atmosphere. 
If  we  put  plants  in  hothouses,  the  influence  of  winter  no  longer 
makes  itself  felt ;  the  case  of  cold-blooded  and  hibernating  animals  is 
the  same.    But  warm-blooded  animals  keep  their  organic  units,  as  it 
were,  in  a  hothouse ;  so  they  do  not  feel  the  influence  of  hibernation. 
However,  since  this  is  only  a  special  resistance  of  the  inner  environ- 
ment to  falling  into  heat  equilibrium  with  the  outer  environment, 
this  resistance  can  be  overcome  in  certain  cases,  and  in  some  circum- 
stances warm-blooded  animals  can  warm  or  cool  themselves.  The 
maximum  temperature  compatible  with  life  does  not  generally  rise 
above  75  degrees.   The  minimum  does  not  go  below  the  freezing  point 
of  the  organic  animal  or  vegetable  fluids.    However,  these  extremes 
may  vary.    In  warm-blooded  animals  the  temperature  of  the  inner 
atmosphere  is  normally  from  38  to  40  degrees :  it  cannot  go  above  45 
to  50  degrees  nor  below  15  to  20  degrees,  without  causing  physiolog- 
ical disturbance  or  even  death  if  the  variations  are  rapid.    In  hiber- 
nating animals,  the  gradual  change  of  temperature  which  occurs  may 
go  much  lower,  causing  the  progressive  disappearance  of  manifes- 
tation of  life,  to  the  point  of  lethargy  or  latent  life,  which  may  some- 
times last  a  very  long  time,  if  the  temperature  does  not  vary. 

Air  is  necessary  to  the  life  of  all  vegetable  and  animal  beings; 
air  therefore  exists  in  the  inner  organic  atmosphere.  The  three  gases 
of  the  outer  air,  oxygen,  nitrogen  and  carbonic  acid  gas,  are  in  solu- 
tion in  the  organic  fluids  in  which  the  histological  units  breathe  di- 


120 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


rectly,  like  fish  in  water.  Cessation  of  life  through  removal  of  these 
gases,  especially  oxygen,  is  what  we  call  death  by  asphyxiation.  In 
living  beings,  there  is  a  constant  interchange  of  gases  between  the 
inner  and  the  outer  environment;  yet  vegetables  and  animals,  as  we 
know,  differ  in  respect  to  the  changes  which  they  cause  in  the  sur- 
rounding air. 

Pressure  exists  in  the  outer  atmosphere;  we  know  that  on  the 
surface  of  the  earth  the  air  exerts  on  living  beings  a  pressure  that 
lifts  a  column  of  mercury  to  a  height  of  about  76  centimeters.  In 
the  inner  atmosphere  of  warm-blooded  animals,  the  nutritive  fluids 
circulate  under  the  influence  of  a  pressure  greater  by  about  150  mm. 
than  the  outer  atmospheric  pressure,  but  this  does  not  necessarily 
indicate  that  the  histological  units  really  support  such  pressure.  The 
influence  of  variations  of  pressure  on  the  manifestations  of  life  of 
organic  units,  moreover,  is  little  known.  We  learn,  however,  that  life 
cannot  appear  in  too  highly  rarefied  air,  not  only  because  the  gases  of 
the  outer  air  cannot  then  dissolve  in  the  alimentary  fluid,  but  also 
because  the  gases  dissolved  in  it  escape.  This  is  what  we  observe 
when  we  place  a  small  animal  under  an  air  pump;  its  lungs  are 
obstructed  by  the  gases  liberated  in  the  blood.  The  articulates  bear 
this  removal  of  air  much  better,  as  various  experiments  have  shown. 
Fishes  in  the  depths  of  the  sea  sometimes  live  under  considerable 
pressure. 

The  chemical  composition  of  the  cosmic  or  outer  environment  is 
constant  and  very  simple.  Its  composition  is  that  of  the  air,  which 
remains  the  same,  except  for  the  proportions  of  water  vapor  and  a  few 
electric  and  other  conditions  which  vary.  The  chemical  conditions 
of  the  inner  or  organic  environments  are  much  more  complex;  and 
complication  increases  as  the  animal  itself  becomes  higher  and  more 
complex.  Organic  environments,  as  we  have  said,  are  always  aque- 
ous ;  they  hold  in  solution  definite  saline  and  organic  substances ;  they 
show  fixed  reactions ;  the  lowest  animal  has  its  own  organic  environ- 
ment; infusoria  have  an  environment  belonging  to  them,  in  this 
sense  that  they  are  more  permeated  than  is  a  fish  with  the  water  in 
which  he  swims.  In  the  organic  environments  of  the  higher  animals, 
the  histological  units  are  like  veritable  infusoria,  that  is  to  say,  they 
are  provided  with  an  environment  proper  to  themselves  which  is  not 
the  general  organic  environment.  Thus  a  corpuscle  of  blood  is  per- 
meated with  a  fluid  different  from  the  serum  in  which  it  floats. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


121 


3.  Organic  Conditions. — Organic  conditions  are  those  which  cor- 
respond to  the  evolution  or  change  of  the  vital  properties  of  organic 
units.  Variation  of  these  conditions  necessarily  leads  to  changes 
whose  principal  features  we  must  recall  here.  Manifestations  of  life 
grow  more  varied,  delicate  and  active  in  proportion  as  heings  rise 
in  the  scale  of  organization.  But  susceptibility  to  disease  also  in- 
creases at  the  same  time.  Experimentation,  as  we  have  already 
said,  is  necessarily  more  difficult  as  organization  becomes  more 
complex. 

Animal  and  vegetable  species  are  separated  by  peculiar  condi- 
tions which  prevent  them  from  mingling,  so  that  fecundation,  graft- 
ing and  transfusion  cannot  be  performed  between  beings  of  different 
species.  These  are  problems  of  the  greatest  interest,  which  I  be- 
lieve may  be  attacked  and  reduced  to  differences  in  the  physico- 
chemical  properties  of  environment. 

In  the  same  species  of  animals,  breeds  may  still  show  a  certain 
number  of  very  interesting  differences.  In  different  breeds  of  dogs 
and  horses  I  have  noted  very  peculiar  physiological  characteristics 
related,  in  different  degrees,  to  the  properties  of  certain  histological 
units,  particularly  of  the  nervous  system.  Finally,  among  indi- 
viduals of  the  same  breed  we  find  physiological  peculiarities 
which  are  also  connected  with  special  variations  in  the  properties 
of  certain  histological  units.  These,  therefore,  are  what  we  call 
idiosyncrasies. 

The  same  individual  is  unlike  himself  at  some  periods  in  his  evo- 
lution; this  leads  to  differences  connected  with  age.  After  birth, 
the  phenomena  of  life  are  of  slight  intensity ;  soon  they  become  very 
active,  to  slow  down  again  toward  old  age. 

Sex  and  the  physiological  state  of  the  genital  organs  may  lead 
to  changes  which  are  sometimes  very  profound,  especially  in  the  lower 
animals,  among  which  the  physiological  characteristics  of  the  larvae, 
in  certain  cases,  completely  differ  from  the  characteristics  of  the 
animal  when  full  grown  and  endowed  with  genital  organs. 

Molting  at  times  leads  to  such  profound  organic  changes  that 
experiments  performed  on  animals  in  different  stages  yield  by  no 
means  the  same  results. 

Hibernation  also  leads  to  great  differences  in  the  phenomena  of 

"  See  L.  Ziegler,  Ueler  die  Brunst  und  den  Embryo  der  Rehe.    Hanover,  1843. 


122 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


life ;  and  operating  on  a  frog  or  a  toad  is  by  no  means  the  same  thing 
in  summer  as  in  winter. -^^ 

States  of  digestion  or  fasting,  of  health  or  disease,  also  cause  great 
changes  in  the  intensity  of  vital  phenomena  and  so  in  the  resist- 
ance of  animals  to  the  influence  of  certain  toxic  substances  and  in 
their  susceptibility  to  one  or  another  parasitic  or  virulent  disease. 

Habit  is  yet  another  condition  potent  in  changing  organisms. 
This  condition  is  one  of  the  most  important  to  keep  in  mind,  espe- 
cially when  we  intend  to  experiment  on  the  action  of  toxic  or  me- 
dicinal materials. 

The  size  of  animals  also  involves  important  changes  in  the  in- 
tensity of  vital  phenomena.  In  general,  vital  phenomena  are  more 
intense  in  small  animals  than  in  large,  which  means,  as  we  shall  see 
further  on,  that  we  cannot  rigorously  measure  physiological  phe- 
nomena in  proportion  to  weight. 

To  sum  up,  after  all  that  we  have  previously  said,  we  see  what 
huge  complexity  inheres  in  animal  experimentation  because  of  the 
numberless  factors  with  which  the  physiologist  must  reckon,  i^ever- 
theless,  we  may  succeed  if  we  make  proper  distinctions  and  subordi- 
nations, as  we  have  just  said,  among  the  various  factors,  and  if  we 
seek  to  connect  the  factors  in  question  with  definite  physico-chem- 
ical conditions. 

VII.   The  Choice  of  Animals  ;  the  Usefulness  to  Medicine  of 
Experiments  on  Various  Species  of  Animals 

Among  the  objections  that  physicians  have  offered  to  experimen- 
tation is  one  which  must  be  seriously  considered  because  it  throws 
doubt  on  the  usefulness  of  animal  experiments  to  human  physiology 
and  medicine.  It  has  been  said,  indeed,  that  experiments  performed 
on  a  dog  or  a  frog  may  be  conclusive  in  their  application  to  dogs  and 
frogs,  but  never  to  man,  because  man  has  a  physiological  and  patho- 
logical nature  proper  to  himself  and  different  from  all  other  animals. 
It  has  been  further  stated  that  to  be  really  conclusive  for  man,  experi- 
ments would  have  to  be  made  on  man  or  on  animals  as  near  to  him 
as  possible.  It  was  surely  with  this  idea  that  Galen  chose  a  monkey 
for  his  experiments,  and  Vesalius  a  pig,  as  subjects  more  closely 

"  See  Stannius,  Beobachtungen  uher  Verjiingungsvorgdnge  im  thierischen 
Organismus.    Rostoch  and  Scliwerin,  1853. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICmE 


123 


resembling  man  in  his  omnivorous  capacity.  Even  to-day,  many 
people  choose  dogs  for  experiments,  not  only  because  it  is  easier  to 
procure  this  animal,  but  also  because  they  think  that  experiments 
performed  on  dogs  can  more  properly  be  applied  to  man  than  those 
performed  on  frogs.  How  well  founded  are  these  opinions  ?  How 
much  importance  should  we  ascribe  to  the  choice  of  animals  in  rela- 
tion to  the  usefulness  of  the  experiment  to  physicians? 

As  far  as  direct  applicability  to  medical  practice  is  concerned,  it 
is  quite  certain  that  experiments  made  on  man  are  always  the  most 
conclusive.  'No-  one  has  ever  denied  it.  Only,  as  neither  the  moral 
law  nor  that  of  the  state  permits  making  on  man  the  experiments 
which  the  interests  of  science  imperatively  demand,  we  frankly  ac- 
claim experimentation  on  animals:  from  the  theoretic  point  of  view, 
experiments  on  all  sorts  of  animals  are  indispensable,  while  from 
the  immediately  practical  point  of  view,  they  are  highly  useful  to 
medicine.  In  fact,  as  we  have  already  often  expressed  it,  two  things 
must  be  considered  in  the  phenomena  of  life:  first  the  fundamental 
properties  of  vital  units  which  are  general,  then  arrangements  and 
mechanisms  in  organizations,  which  give  each  animal  species  its 
peculiar  anatomical  and  physiological  form.  Now,  among  all  the 
animals  on  which  physiologists  and  physicians  may  experiment,  some 
are  better  suited  than  others  to  the  studies  depending  on  these  two 
points  of  view.  Here  we  shall  merely  say  in  general  that,  for  the 
study  of  tissues,  cold-blooded  animals  or  young  mammals  are  more 
appropriate,  because  the  properties  of  their  living  tissues  vanish 
more  slowly  and  so  can  better  be  studied.  There  are  also  experi- 
ments in  which  it  is  proper  to  choose  certain  animals  which  offer  fa- 
vorable anatomical  arrangements  or  special  susceptibility  to  certain 
influences.  For  each  kind  of  investigation  we  shall  be  careful  to 
point  out  the  proper  choice  of  animals.  This  is  so  important  that 
the  solution  of  a  physiological  or  pathological  problem  often  depends 
solely  on  the  appropriate  choice  of  the  animal  for  the  experiment 
so  as  to  make  the  result  clear  and  searching. 

General  physiology  and  pathology  are  necessarily  based  on  the 
study  of  tissues  in  all  animals,  for  a  general  pathology  that  did  not 
ultimately  rest  on  considerations  drawn  from  the  comparative  pa- 
thology of  animals  at  all  stages  of  organization  could  build  up  a  collec- 
tion of  generalities  about  human  pathology,  but  never  a  general 
pathology  in  the  scientific  sense  of  the  word.    Just  as  an  organism 


124 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


can  live  only  by  the  normal  manifestation  of  its  properties  or  the 
help  of  one  or  more  of  its  vital  units,  so  the  organism  can  become 
diseased  only  by  abnormal  manifestation  of  the  properties  of  one  or 
more  of  its  vital  units.  Now  the  vital  units,  being  of  like  nature 
in  all  living  beings,  are  subject  to  the  same  organic  laws.  They  de- 
velop, live,  become  diseased  and  die  under  influences  necessarily  of 
like  nature,  though  manifested  by  infinitely  varying  mechanisms.  A 
poison  or  a  morbid  condition,  acting  on  a  definite  histological  unit, 
should  attack  it  in  like  circumstances  in  all  animals  furnished  with 
it ;  otherwise  these  units  would  cease  to  be  of  like  nature ;  and  if  we 
went  on  considering  as  of  like  nature  units  reacting  in  different  or 
opposite  ways  under  the  influence  of  normal  or  pathological  vital 
reagents,  we  should  not  only  deny  science  in  general,  but  also  bring 
into  zoology  confusion  and  darkness  that  would  absolutely  block  its 
advance;  for  the  quality  which  should  be  placed  in  the  front  rank 
of  the  science  of  life  and  should  dominate  all  the  rest  is  vitality. 
The  vital  quality  may  doubtless  offer  great  diversities  in  degree  and 
kind  of  manifestation,  according  to  peculiar  circumstances  of  environ- 
ment or  mechanism  shown  by  healthy  or  diseased  organisms.  The 
lower  organisms  have  fewer  distinct  vital  units  than  do  the  higher 
organisms ;  whence  it  follows  that  these  beings  are  less  easily  attacked 
by  morbid  or  mortal  influences.  But  in  animals  of  the  same  class, 
order  or  species  there  are  also  constant  or  variable  differences  which 
medical  physiologists  must  absolutely  know  and  explain,  because 
these  differences,  though  resting  on  delicate  distinctions,  give  phe- 
nomena an  essentially  different  aspect.  The  problem  of  science  will 
consist  precisely  in  this,  to  seek  the  unitary  character  of  physio- 
logical and  pathological  phenomena  in  the  midst  of  the  infinite  va- 
riety of  their  particular  manifestations.  Experimentation  on  ani- 
mals is  therefore  one  foundation  of  comparative  physiology  and 
pathology ;  and  we  shall  later  quote  examples  to  prove  how  important 
it  is  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  above  ideas. 

In  special  questions  of  physiology  and  pathology,  experimentation 
on  the  higher  animals  yields  daily  results,  which  are  applicable  in 
practice,  that  is,  in  hygiene  or  in  medicine ;  studies  of  digestion  made 
on  animals  are  evidently  comparable  with  the  same  phenomena  in 
man,  as  W.  Beaumont's  observations  on  his  Canadian,  compared 
with  those  he  made  by  means  of  a  gastric  fistula  in  a  dog,  have  super- 
abundantly proved.   Experiments  made  with  animals,  whether  on  the 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


125 


cerebrospinal  nerves  or  on  tbe  vasomotor  and  secretory  nerves  of 
the  large  sympathetic  (like  experiments  on  circulation),  are  appli- 
cable at  every  point  to  the  physiology  and  pathology  of  man.  Ex- 
periments on  animals,  with  deleterious  substances  or  in  harmful  cir- 
cumstances, are  very  useful  and  entirely  conclusive  for  the  toxicology 
and  hygiene  of  man.  Investigations  of  medicinal  or  of  toxic  auh- 
stances  also  are  wholly  applicable  to  man  from  the  therapeutic  point 
of  view;  for,  as  I  have  shown,^^  the  effects  of  these  substances  are 
the  same  on  man  as  on  animals,  save  for  differences  in  degree.  In 
pathological  physiology,  investigations  of  the  formation  of  callus, 
the  production  of  pus,  etc.,  in  animals  are  incontestably  useful  to 
human  medicine. 

But  aside  from  all  the  connections  to  be  found  between  man  and 
animals  we  must  recognize  that  there  are  differences  also.  Thus 
from  a  physiological  point  of  view,  experimental  study  of  sense 
organs  and  cerebral  functions  must  be  made  on  man,  on  the  one 
hand,  because  man  is  made  higher  than  the  animals  by  faculties  which 
animals  lack,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  because  animals  cannot  di- 
rectly account  to  us  for  the  sensations  which  they  experience.  From 
the  pathological  point  of  view,  we  also  note  differences  between  man 
and  animals;  thus  animals  have  parasitic  and  other  diseases  un- 
known to  man,  and  vice  versa.   Among  these  diseases  some  are  trans^ 
missible  from  man  to  animals  and  from  animals  to  man;  others, 
not.    Finally,  certain  susceptibilities  to  inflammation  of  the  perito- 
neum and  other  organs  are  not  developed  to  the  same  degree  in  man 
as  in  animals  of  various  classes  or  species.    But,  far  from  being 
motives  to  hold  us  back  from  experimenting  and  from  applying  con- 
clusions from  pathological  investigation  made  on  animals  to  differ- 
ences observed  in  man,  these  differences  provide  convincing  reasons 
to  the  contrary.    Different  species  of  animals  show  numerous  and 
important  differences  in  pathological  tendencies.    I  have  already  said 
that  there  are  breeds  and  varieties  among  domestic  animals,  such  as 
asses,  dogs  and  horses,  which  present  wholly  individual  physiological 
and  pathological  susceptibilities;  I  have  even  noted  individual  dif- 
ferences that  were  often  rather  marked.    Only  experimental  studies 
of  these  diversities  can  furnish  an  explanation  of  the  individual  dif- 
ferences observed  in  man,  either  in  different  races  or  in  different  in- 

^*  Claude  Bernard,  Recherches  sur  Vopium  et  ses  alcaloides  { Comptes  rendus 
de  VAcad^mie  des  sciences,  1864). 


126 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


dividuals  of  the  same  race,  differences  which  physicians  call  predis- 
positions or  idiosyncrasies.  Instead  of  persisting  as  indeterminate 
states  of  the  organism,  predispositions,  when  studied  experimentally, 
will  be  classed  in  due  time  as  particular  cases  of  a  general  physio- 
logical law,  which  will  thus  become  the  scientific  foundation  of  prac- 
tical medicine. 

To  sum  up,  I  not  only  conclude  that  experiments  made  on  animals 
from  the  physiological,  pathological  and  therapeutic  points  of  view 
have  results  that  are  applicable  to  theoretic  medicine,  but  I  think  that 
without  such  comparative  study  of  animals,  practical  medicine  can 
never  acquire  a  scientific  character.  In  this  connection  I  shall  finish 
with  the  words  of  Buffon,  to  which  we  might  ascribe  a  different 
philosophic  meaning,  but  which  are  scientifically  very  true  for  this 
occasion :  "If  animals  did  not  exist,  man's  nature  would  be  still  more 
incomprehensible. " 

VIII.   Comparison  between  Animals  and  Compaeativb 

Experimentation 

In  animals,  and  especially  the  higher  animals,  experimentation 
is  so  complex  and  liable  to  so  many  sources  of  error,  both  foreseen 
and  unforeseen,  that  we  must  proceed  most  circumspectly  to  avoid 
them.  To  bring  experimentation  to  bear  on  parts  of  the  organism 
that  we  wish  to  explore,  we  must  often  do  considerable  tearing  down 
and  produce  direct  or  indirect  disturbances  which  must  change  or 
destroy  our  experimental  results.  These  very  real  difficulties  have 
often  vitiated  experimental  investigations  on  living  beings  and  fur- 
nished arguments  to  the  detractors  of  experimentation.  But  science 
would  never  progress  if  we  thought  ourselves  justified  in  renouncing 
scientific  methods  because  they  were  imperfect ;  in  this  case,  the  one 
thing  to  do  is  to  perfect  the  methods.  Now  perfecting  physiological 
experimentation  consists  not  only  in  improving  instruments  and  op- 
erative methods,  but  above  all  and  still  more  in  study  and  well-regu- 
lated use  of  comparative  experimentation. 

We  have  elsewhere  said  (p.  55)  that  experimental  counterproof 
must  not  be  mistaken  for  comparative  experimentation.  Counter- 
proof  has  not  the  slightest  reference  to  sources  of  error  that  may  be 
met  in  observing  facts;  it  assumes  that  they  are  all  avoided  and 
is  concerned  only  with  experimental  reasoning;  it  has  in  view  only 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


127 


judging  whether  the  relation  established  between  a  phenomenon  and 
its  immediate  cause  is  correct  and  rational.  Counterproof  is  there- 
fore only  a  synthesis  verifying  an  analysis  or  an  analysis  controlling 
a  synthesis. 

Comparative  experimentation,  on  the  contrary,  bears  solely  on 
notation  of  fact  and  on  the  art  of  disengaging  it  from  circumstances 
or  from  other  phenomena  with  which  it  may  be  entangled.  Compara- 
tive experimentation,  however,  is  not  exactly  what  philosophers  call 
the  method  of  differences.  When  an  experimenter  is  confronted  with 
complex  phenomena  due  to  the  combined  properties  of  various  bodies, 
he  proceeds  by  differentiation,  that  is  to  say,  he  separates  each  of  these 
bodies,  one  by  one  in  succession,  and  sees  by  the  difference  what  part 
of  the  total  phenomenon  belongs  to  each  of  them.  But  this  method  of 
exploration  implies  two  things :  it  implies,  first  of  all,  that  we  know 
how  many  bodies  are  concerned  in  expressing  the  whole  phenomenon, 
and  then  it  admits  that  these  bodies  do  not  combine  in  any  such  way 
as  to  confuse  their  action  in  a  final  harmonious  result.  In  physiology 
the  method  of  differences  is  rarely  applicable,  because  we  can  never 
flatter  ourselves  that  we  know  all  the  bodies  and  all  the  conditions 
combining  to  express  a  collection  of  phenomena,  and  in  numberless 
cases  because  various  organs  of  the  body  may  take  each  other's  place 
in  phenomena,  that  are  partly  common  to  them  all,  and  may  more  or 
less  obscure  the  results  of  ablation  of  a  limited  part.  Suppose,  for 
instance,  that  we  paralyze  the  whole  body,  a  single  muscle  at  a  time. 
The  disturbance  produced  by  each  paralyzed  muscle  will  be  more  oi: 
less  compensated  and  replaced  by  neighboring  muscles,  and  we  should 
finally  come  to  the  conclusion  that  each  particular  muscle  contributed 
little  to  the  movements  of  the  body.  The  nature  of  this  source  of 
error  has  been  very  well  expressed  by  comparing  it  with  what  would 
happen  to  an  experimenter  who  removed,  one  after  another,  every 
brick  in  the  foundation  of  a  column.  He  would  see,  indeed,  that  re- 
moving in  succession  one  brick  at  a  time  does  not  make  the  column 
totter,  and  he  would  come  to  the  logical  but  false  conclusion  that 
not  one  of  these  bricks  helps  to  support  the  column.  In  physiology, 
comparative  experimentation  depends  upon  quite  another  idea;  for 
its  object  is  to  reduce  the  most  complex  investigation  to  unity,  and 
its  result  is  to  eliminate  by  a  single  stroke  all  known  and  unknown 
sources  of  error. 

Physiological  phenomena  are  so  complex  that  we  could  never  ex- 


128 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


periment  at  all  rigorously  on  living  animals  if  we  necessarily  had  to 
define  all  the  other  changes  we  might  cause  in  the  organism  on  which 
we  were  operating.  But  fortunately  it  is  enough  for  us  completely 
to  isolate  the  one  phenomenon  on  which  our  studies  are  brought  to 
bear,  separating  it  by  means  of  comparative  experimentation  from  all 
surrounding  complications.  Comparative  experimentation  reaches 
this  goal  by  adding  to  a  similar  organism,  used  for  comparison,  all 
our  experimental  changes  save  one,  the  very  one  which  we  intend 
to  disengage. 

If,  for  instance,  we  wish  to  know  the  result  of  section  or  ablation 
of  a  deep-seated  organ  which  cannot  be  reached  without  injuring 
many  neighboring  organs,  we  necessarily  risk  confusion  in  the  total 
result  between  the  effects  of  lesions  caused  by  our  operative  procedure 
and  the  particular  effects  of  section  or  ablation  of  the  organ  whose 
physiological  role  we  wish  to  decide.  The  only  way  to  avoid  this 
mistake  is  to  perform  the  same  operation  on  a  similar  animal,  but 
without  making  the  section  or  ablation  of  the  organ  on  which  we  are 
experimenting.  We  thus  have  two  animals  in  which  all  the  experi- 
mental conditions  are  the  same,  save  one, — ablation  of  an  organ  whose 
action  is  thus  disengaged  and  expressed  in  the  difference  observed  be- 
tween the  two  animals.  Comparative  experimentation  in  experi- 
mental medicine  is  an  absolute  and  general  rule  applicable  to  all 
kinds  of  investigation,  whether  we  wish  to  learn  the  effects  of  vari- 
ous agents  influencing  the  bodily  economy  or  to  verify  the  physiolog- 
ical role  of  various  parts  of  the  body  by  experiments  in  vivisection. 

At  times  comparative  experimentation  may  be  done  on  two  ani- 
mals of  the  same  species  in  condition  as  closely  comparable  as  possi- 
ble ;  again  the  experiment  must  be  made  on  the  same  animal.  When 
working  on  two  animals,  as  we  have  just  said,  we  must  place  them 
in  the  same  conditions,  save  one,  the  one  that  we  wish  to  compare. 
This  implies  that  the  two  animals  compared  are  so  much  alike  that 
differences  noted  in  them  after  the  experiment  cannot  be  attributed 
to  a  difference  depending  on  the  individuals  themselves.  For  experi- 
menting on  organs  or  tissues  whose  properties  are  definite  and  easily 
perceived,  comparison  of  two  animals  of  the  same  species  will  suffice ; 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  when  we  wish  to  compare  delicate  and  fugi- 
tive qualities,  we  must  make  our  comparison  on  the  same  animal, 
whether  the  nature  of  the  experiment  permits  experimenting  on  him 
repeatedly  at  different  times,  or  whether  we  have  to  act  at  one  and 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


129 


the  same  time  on  similar  parts  of  the  same  specimen.  Differences,  in 
fact,  are  harder  to  grasp  in  proportion  as  the  phenomena  that  we 
wish  to  study  grow  more  fugitive  or  more  delicate ;  in  this  respect 
no  animal  is  ever  absolutely  comparable  with  another,  and,  as  we 
have  already  said,  neither  is  the  same  animal  comparable  with  him- 
self at  different  times  when  we  examine  him,  whether  because  he  is  in 
different  conditions,  or  because  his  organism  has  grown  less  sensitive, 
by  getting  used  to  the  substance  given  him  or  to  the  operation  to  which 
he  is  subjected. 

IX.   The  Use  of  Calculation  in  Study  of  Living  Beings; 

Averages  and  Statistics 

Finally,  it  sometimes  becomes  necessary  to  extend  comparative 
experimentation  outside  of  the  animal,  since  sources  of  error  may  also 
be  met  in  the  instruments  used  for  experimentation.  I  shall 
limit  myself  here  to  pointing  out  and  defining  the  principle  of  com- 
parative experimentation ;  it  will  be  explained,  a  propos  of  special 
cases,  in  the  course  of  this  work.  In  the  third  part  of  this  Intro- 
duction I  shall  cite  examples  chosen  to  show  the  importance  of  com- 
parative experimentation,  which  is  the  true  foundation  of  experi- 
mental medicine ;  it  would  be  easy,  in  fact,  to  prove  that  almost  all 
experimental  errors  come  from  neglecting  comparative  judgment  of 
facts  or  from  thinking  cases  comparable  which  are  not  so. 

In  the  experimental  sciences,  measurement  of  phenomena  is  fun- 
damental, since  their  law  can  be  established  by  quantitatively  deter- 
mining an  effect  in  relation  to  a  given  cause.  In  biology,  if  we  wish 
to  learn  the  laws  of  life,  we  must  therefore  not  only  observe  and  note 
vital  phenomena,  but  moreover  must  also  define  numerically  the  ratios 
of  their  relative  intensity  one  to  another. 

The  application  of  mathematics  to  natural  phenomena  is  the  aim 
of  all  science,  because  phenomenal  law  should  always  be  mathemat- 
ically expressed.  To  this  end,  data  used  in  calculations  should  be 
results  of  well-analyzed  facts,  so  that  we  may  be  sure  that  we  fully 
know  the  conditions  of  the  phenomena  between  which  we  wish  to 
establish  an  equation.  Now,  I  think  that  efforts  of  this  kind  are 
premature  in  most  vital  phenomena,  precisely  because  these  phe- 
nomena are  so  complex  that  we  must  not  only  assume,  but  are  in  fact 
certain  that,  beside  the  few  among  their  conditions  which  we  know, 


130 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


there  are  numberless  others  which  are  still  totally  unknown.  I  be- 
lieve that  the  most  useful  path  for  physiology  and  medicine  to  follow 
now  is  to  seek  to  discover  new  facts  instead  of  trying  to  reduce  to 
equations  the  facts  which  science  already  possesses.  This  does  not 
mean  that  I  condemn  the  application  of  mathematics  to  biological 
phenomena,  because  the  science  will  later  be  established  by  this  alone ; 
only  I  am  convinced  that,  since  a  complete  equation  is  impossible  for 
the  moment,  qualitative  must  necessarily  precede  quantitative  study 
of  phenomena. 

Physicists  and  chemists  have  already  often  tried  to  reduce  the 
physico-chemical  phenomena  of  living  beings  to  figures.  Among  the 
ancients,  as  well  as  among  the  modems,  the  most  eminent  physicists 
and  chemists  wished  to  establish  principles  of  animal  mechanics  and 
laws  for  chemical  statistics  of  animals.  Though  the  progress  of 
physico-chemical  science  has  made  these  problems  more  accessible 
to-day  than  in  the  past,  it  seems  to  me  impossible  to  reach  accurate 
conclusions  at  present,  because  foundations  are  lacking  on  which  to 
base  our  calculations.  We  may,  of  course,  strike  a  balance  between 
what  a  living  organism  takes  in  as  nourishment  and  what  it  gives  out 
in  excretions;  but  the  results  would  be  mere  statistics  incapable  of 
throwing  light  on  the  inmost  phenomena  of  nutrition  in  living  beings. 
According  to  a  Dutch  chemist's  phrase,  this  would  be  like  trying  to 
tell  what  happens  inside  a  house  by  watching  what  goes  in  by  the  door 
and  what  comes  out  by  the  chimney.  We  can  accurately  fix  the  ex- 
treme terms  of  nutrition ;  but  if  we  afterward  try  to  interpret  the  in- 
termediary between  them,  we  find  ourselves  in  an  unknown  region  the 
greater  part  of  which  is  created  by  the  imagination,  and  this  the 
more  easily  because  figures  often  lend  themselves  marvellously  to 
demonstrating  the  most  diverse  hypotheses.  Twenty-five  years  ago, 
at  the  outset  of  my  career  as  a  physiologist,  I  was  one  of  the  first,  I 
think,  to  carry  experimentation  into  the  inner  environment  of  the 
organism,  so  as  to  follow  experimentally,  step  by  step,  all  the  trans- 
formations of  substances  that  chemists  explained  theoretically.  I 
therefore  devised  experiments  to  investigate  how  sugar,  one  of  the 
best  defined  of  alimentary  substances,  is  broken  down  in  living  be- 
ings. But  instead  of  informing  myself  about  the  breaking  down  of 
sugar,  my  experiments  led  me  to  discover  that  sugar  is  continually 
produced  in  animals,  no  matter  what  they  eat.  Moreover,  these  in- 
"  See  the  third  part  of  this  Introduction. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


131 


vestigations  convinced  me  that  numberless  very  complex  physico- 
chemical  phenomena  take  place,  in  the  organic  environment,  which 
give  rise  to  many  other  products,  still  unknown  to  us,  with  which 
the  chemists  do  not  at  all  reckon  in  their  static  equations.  In  the 
chemical  statics  of  life,  as  well  as  in  the  various  quantitative  esti- 
mates of  physiological  phenomena,  certainly  neither  chemical  think- 
ing nor  rigor  in  calculation  is  lacking;  but  physiological  foundations, 
which  most  of  the  time  are  false,  simply  because  they  are  incomplete. 
We  are  afterwards  led  astray  all  the  more  easily  because  we  start 
from  an  incomplete  experimental  result  and  reason  without  verify- 
ing our  deductions  at  every  step.  Let  me  cite  examples  of  calcula- 
tions which  I  condemn,  taking  them  from  works  which  I  neverthe- 
less hold  in  the  highest  esteem.  In  1852  Bidder  and  Schmidt  of 
Dorpat  published  highly  important  works  on  digestion  and  nutri- 
tion. Their  investigations  include  excellent  and  very  numerous  raw 
data,  but  in  my  opinion  the  deductions  from  their  calculations  are 
often  risky  or  erroneous.  Thus,  for  example,  they  took  a  dog  weigh- 
ing 16  kilograms;  in  the  duct  of  the  submaxillary  gland  they  placed 
a  tube  through  which  the  secretion  flowed ;  and  in  one  hour  they  ob- 
tained 5.640  grams  of  saliva,  from  which  they  concluded  that  for 
both  glands  this  should  make  11.280  grams.  They  afterward  placed 
another  tube  in  the  duct  of  the  same  animal's  parotid  gland;  and 
in  an  hour  they  obtained  8.790  grams  of  saliva  which  for  both 
parotid  glands  would  make  17.580  grams.  Now,  they  went  on,  if 
we  wish  to  apply  these  numbers  to  man,  we  must  take  a  man  weighing 
64  kilograms  or  about  four  times  as  much  as  the  dog  in  question; 
a  calculation  based  on  this  ratio  consequently  gives  us,  for  the  man's 
submaxillary  glands,  46  grams  of  saliva  per  hour,  or  1.082  kilo- 
grams per  day.  For  the  parotid  glands,  we  have  70  grams  per  hour, 
or  1.687  kilograms  per  day  which  reduced  one  half  gives  about  1.40 
kilograms  of  saliva  secreted  in  twenty-four  hours  by  the  salivary 
glands  of  an  adult  man.^^ 

As  the  authors  themselves  feel,  only  one  thing  is  true  in  the  above : 
the  crude  result  found  in  the  dog ;  all  the  calculations  deduced  from 
this  rest  on  false  or  doubtful  foundations;  first  of  all,  doubling  the 
product  of  one  gland  to  get  the  product  of  both  is  incorrect,  because 
physiology  teaches  us  that  in  most  cases  double  glands  secrete  alter- 

"  Bidder  and  Schmidt,  Die  Verdauungssdfte  und  der  8toffwechsel.  Mittau 
and  Leipzig,  1852.    p.  12. 


132 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


nately,  and  that,  when  one  secretes  a  great  deal,  the  other  secretes 
less ;  then,  besides  the  two  submaxillary  and  parotid  salivary  glands, 
there  are  others  which  are  not  mentioned.  Next,  it  is  a  mistake  to 
believe  that  multiplying  one  hour's  output  of  saliva  by  24  gives  the 
saliva  poured  into  an  animal's  mouth  in  24  hours.  In  fact,  salivary 
secretion  is  highly  intermittent  and  takes  place  only  at  meal  time  or 
when  stimulated ;  during  the  rest  of  the  time,  the  secretion  is  nil  or 
insignificant.  Finally,  the  quantity  of  saliva  got  from  the  salivary 
glands  of  the  dog  in  this  experiment  was  not  absolute;  it  would 
have  been  nil  if  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth  had  not  been 
stimulated ;  it  might  have  been  greater  or  less  if  another  stimulant, 
stronger  or  weaker  than  vinegar,  had  been  used. 

Now  the  application  of  the  above  calculations  to  man  is  still  more 
questionable.  If  the  quantity  of  saliva  had  been  multiplied  by  the 
weight  of  the  salivary  glands,  a  closer  relation  would  have  been 
found ;  but  I  cannot  concede  the  validity  of  calculating  the  quantity 
of  saliva  from  the  weight  of  the  body  taken  as  a  whole.  Estimating 
a  phenomenon  in  kilograms  of  the  animal's  body  seems  to  me  wholly 
incorrect,  when  all  sorts  of  tissues  foreign  to  the  phenomenon  in 
question  are  included. 

In  the  part  of  their  investigation  devoted  to  nutrition.  Bidder 
and  Schmidt  described  a  very  notable  experiment,  perhaps  one  of  the 
most  laborious  ever  performed.  From  the  point  of  view  of  elemen- 
tary analysis,  they  kept  a  balance  sheet  of  everything  taken  in  and 
given  out  by  a  cat  during  eight  days'  nourishment  and  nineteen  days' 
fasting.  But  this  cat  was  in  a  physiological  condition  of  which,  they 
were  unaware;  she  was  pregnant,  and  she  had  her  kittens  on  the 
seventeenth  day  of  the  experiment.  In  these  circumstances,  our  au- 
thors considered  the  kittens  as  excretions,  and  calculated  them  with 
other  eliminated  materials  as  a  simple  loss  of  weight. I  believe 
that  these  interpretations  should  be  rectified  when  trying  to  define 
such  complex  phenomena. 

In  a  word,  I  think  that,  if  figures  correspond  with  reality  in  these 
works  of  chemical  statics  applied  to  vital  phenomena,  it  is  only  by 
chance  or  because  the  experimenters'  feeling  guides  and  rearranges 
the  calculation.  I  repeat,  nevertheless,  that  the  criticism  which  I 
have  just  made  is  not  directed  against  the  principle  of  using  calcu- 
lations in  physiology,  but  against  its  application  under  present 

"Bidder  and  Schmidt,  loc.  cit.,  p.  397. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


133 


conditions.  I  am  fortunate,  moreover,  in  being  able  here  to  rely 
on  the  opinion  of  the  physicists  and  chemists  most  competent  in  such 
matters.  Regnault  and  Reiset,  in  their  fine  work  on  respiration, 
express  themselves  as  follows  about  the  calculations  used  to  estab- 
lish the  theory  of  animal  heat:  "We  have  no  doubt  that  animal  heat 
is  produced  wholly  by  chemical  reactions  occurring  in  the  bodily 
economy;  but  we  think  the  phenomenon  much  too  complex  for  pos- 
sible calculation  of  the  heat  from  the  quantity  of  oxygen  consumed. 
The  substances  burned  in  respiration  are  generally  composed  of  car- 
bon, hydrogen,  nitrogen  or  oxygen,  often  in  considerable  proportions ; 
when  they  are  completely  destroyed  in  respiration,  the  oxygen  which 
they  contain  contributes  to  the  formation  of  water  and  carbonic  acid ; 
and  the  heat  liberated  is  therefore  necessarily  quite  different  from 
what  would  be  produced  in  burning  the  supposedly  free  carbon  and 
hydrogen.  These  substances,  moreover,  are  not  wholly  destroyed ; 
a  portion  is  transformed  into  other  substances  which  play  special 
parts  in  the  animal  economy  or  escape,  in  excretions,  in  the  form  of 
highly  oxidized  materials  (urea,  uric  acid).  Now,  in  all  these  trans- 
formations and  in  the  assimilation  of  substances  taking  place  in  the 
organs,  heat  is  liberated  or  absorbed ;  but  the  phenomena  are  obvi- 
ously so  complex  that  there  is  little  chance  that  we  shall  ever  succeed 
in  reducing  them  to  calculation.  It  was  therefore  by  a  fortuitous  cir- 
cumstance in  the  experiments  of  Lavoisier,  Dulong  and  Despretz, 
that  the  quantity  of  heat  liberated  by  an  animal  was  found  to  be  about 
equal  to  what  the  carbon  (contained  in  the  carbonic  acid  produced) 
and  the  hydrogen  would  give  off  in  burning, — the  quantity  of  hydro- 
gen being  determined  by  a  quite  gratuitous  assumption  that  the 
quantity  of  oxygen  consumed,  but  not  found  in  the  carbonic  acid, 
had  been  used  in  turning  the  hydrogen  into  water." 

Chemico-physical  phenomena  of  living  organisms  are  therefore 
still  too  complex  to-day  to  be  embraced  as  a  whole,  except  by  means 
of  hypotheses.  To  find  correct  solutions  of  such  vast  problems,  we 
must  begin  by  analyzing  the  results  of  complicated  reactions,  and  by 
separating  them  experimentally  into  distinct  and  simple  questions. 
In  several  attempts  which  I  have  made  on  this  analytic  path,  I  have 
shown  that  we  should  not  handle  the  problem  of  nutrition  en  bloc, 

^  Cf.  Regnault  and  Reiset,  Recherches  chimiques  sur  la  respiration  des  animaux 
des  diverses  classes.  {Annates  de  chimie  et  de  physique.  3d  Series,  Vol.  XXVI, 
p.  217.) 


134 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


but  rather  should  first  define  the  nature  of  the  physico-chemical  phe- 
nomena taking  place  in  an  organ  made  of  some  definite  tissue,  such  as 
a  muscle,  gland  or  nerve ;  that  we  must  at  the  same  time  take  account 
of  the  organ's  state  of  activity  or  rest.  I  have  also  shov^n  that  v^e 
can  regulate  an  organ's  state  of  rest  or  activity  at  will,  by  means 
of  its  nerves,  and  that  we  can  even  act  on  it  locally  withaut  reverbera- 
tion through  the  organism,  if  we  first  separate  the  peripheral  nerves 
from  the  nervous  centres. When  we  have  analyzed  the  physico- 
chemical  phenomena  peculiar  to  each  tissue  and  each  organ,  then 
only  can  we  try  to  understand  nutrition  as  a  whole  and  to  found 
biochemistry  on  a  solid  base,  that  is  to  say,  on  the  study  of  definite, 
complete  and  comparable  physiological  facts. 

Another  very  frequent  application  of  mathematics  to  biology  is 
the  use  of  averages  which,  in  medicine  and  physiology,  leads,  so  to 
speak,  necessarily  to  error.  There  are  doubtless  several  reasons  for 
this ;  but  the  greatest  obstacle  to  applying  calculation  to  physiological 
phenomena  is  still,  at  bottom,  the  excessive  complexity  which  pre^ 
vents  their  being  definite  and  comparable  one  with  another.  By  de- 
stroying the  biological  character  of  phenomena,  the  use  of  averages 
in  physiology  and  medicine  usually  gives  only  apparent  accuracy  to 
the  results.  From  our  point  of  view,  we  may  distinguish  between 
several  kinds  of  averages:  physical  averages,  chemical  averages  and 
physiological  and  pathological  averages.  If,  for  instance,  we  ob- 
serve the  number  of  pulsations  and  the  degree  of  blood  pressure  by 
means  of  the  oscillations  of  a  manometer  throughout  one  day,  and  if 
we  take  the  average  of  all  our  figures  to  get  the  true  or  average  blood 
pressure  and  to  learn  the  true  or  average  number  of  pulsations,  we 
shall  simply  have  wrong  numbers.  In  fact,  the  pulse  decreases  in 
number  and  intensity  when  we  are  fasting  and  increases  during  di- 
gestion or  under  different  influences  of  movement  and  rest;  all  the 
biological  characteristics  of  the  phenomenon  disappear  in  the  aver- 
age. Chemical  averages  are  also  often  used.  If  we  collect  a  man's 
urine  during  twenty-four  hours  and  mix  all  this  urine  to  analyze 
the  average,  we  get  an  analysis  of  a  urine  which  simply  doe^  not 
exist;  for  urine,  when  fasting,  is  different  from  urine  during  diges- 
tion.  A  startling  instance  of  this  kind  was  invented  by  a  physiologist 

"  Claude  Bernard,  Sur  le  chart gement  de  couleur  du  sang  dans  I'etat  de 
fonction  et  de  repos  des  glandes. — Analyse  du  sang  des  muscles  au  repos  et  en 
contraction.    Legons  sur  les  liquides  de  I'organisme.    Paris,  1859. 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


135 


who  took  urine  from  a  railroad  station  urinal  where  people  of  all  na- 
tions passed,  and  who  believed  he  could  thus  present  an  analysis  of 
average  European  urine !  Aside  from  physical  and  chemical,  there 
are  physiological  averages,  or  what  we  might  call  average  descrip- 
tions of  phenomena,  which  are  even  more  false.  Let  me  assume  that 
a  physician  collects  a  great  many  individual  observations  of  a  disease 
and  that  he  makes  an  average  description  of  symptoms  observed  in 
the  individual  cases ;  he  will  thus  have  a  description  that  will  never 
be  matched  in  nature.  So  in  physiology,  we  must  never  make  aver- 
age descriptions  of  experiments,  because  the  true  relations  of  phe^ 
nomena  disappear  in  the  average ;  when  dealing  with  complex  and 
variable  experiments,  we  must  study  their  various  circumstances,  and 
then  present  our  most  perfect  experiment  as  a  type,  which,  however, 
still  stands  for  true  facts.  In  the  cases  just  considered,  averages  must 
therefore  be  rejected,  because  they  confuse,  while  aiming  to  unify, 
and  distort  while  aiming  to  simplify.  Averages  are  applicable  only 
to  reducing  very  slightly  varying  numerical  data  about  clearly  de- 
fined and  absolutely  simple  cases. 

Let  me  further  point  out  that  the  reduction  of  physiological  phe- 
nomena to  an  expression  in  kilograms  of  body  weight  is  vitiated  by 
many  sources  of  errors.  Eor  a  certain  number  of  years  this  method 
has  been  used  by  physiologists  studying  the  phenomena  of  digestion 
(see  p.  131).  We  observe,  for  instance,  how  much  oxygen  or  how 
much  food  an  animal  consumes  in  a  day;  we  then  divide  by  the 
animal's  weight  and  get  the  intake  of  food  or  of  oxygen  per  kilogram. 
This  method  may  also  be  applied  to  measure  the  action  of  toxic  or 
medicinal  materials.  We  poison  an  animal  with  a  maximum  dose 
of  strychnine  or  curare,  and  divide  the  amount  by  the  weight  of  the 
body,  to  get  the  amount  of  poison  per  kilogram.  For  greater  ac- 
curacy in  the  experiments  just  cited,  we  should  have  to  calculate, 
not  per  kilogram  of  the  aninaal's  body  taken  as  a  whole,  but  per  kilo- 
gram of  blood  and  of  the  unit  on  which  the  poison  acts ;  otherwise  we 
could  not  deduce  any  direct  law  from  the  reductions.  But  other  con- 
ditions would  still  remain  to  be  established  similarly  by  experiment, 
conditions  varying  with  age,  height,  state  of  digestion,  etc. ;  in  these 
measures,  physiological  conditions  should  always  hold  first  rank. 

To  sum  up,  every  possible  application  of  calculation  would  be 
excellent  if  the  physiological  conditions  were  quite  accurately  defined. 
Physiologists  and  physicians  should  therefore  concentrate  their  ef- 


136  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


fort,  for  the  moment,  on  defining  these  conditions.  We  naust  first 
accurately  define  the  conditions  of  each  phenomenon;  this  is  true 
biological  accuracy,  and,  without  this  preliminary  study,  all  numer- 
ical data  are  inaccurate,  and  the  more  inaccurate  because  they  include 
figures  which  mislead  and  impose  on  us  by  a  false  appearance  of 
accuracy. 

As  for  statistics,  they  are  given  a  great  role  in  medicine,  and  they 
therefore  raise  a  medical  question  which  we  should  examine  here. 
The  first  requirement  in  using  statistics  is  that  the  facts  treated  shall 
be  reduced  to  comparable  units.  Now  this  is  very  often  not  the  case 
in  medicine.  Everyone  familiar  with  hospitals  knows  what  errors 
may  mark  the  definitions  on  which  statistics  are  based.  The  names 
of  diseases  are  very  often  given  haphazard,  either  because  the  diag- 
nosis is  obscure,  or  because  the  cause  of  death  is  carelessly  recorded 
by  a  student  who  has  not  seen  the  patient,  or  by  an  employee  unfa- 
miliar with  medicine.  For  this  reason  pathological  statistics  can  be 
valid  only  when  compiled  from  data  collected  by  the  statistician  him- 
self. But  even  then,  no  two  patients  are  ever  exactly  alike;  their 
age,  sex,  temperament  and  any  number  of  other  circumstances  involve 
diiferences,  with  the  result  that  the  average,  or  the  relation  deduced 
from  our  comparison  of  facts,  may  always  be  contested.  But  I 
cannot  accept  even  the  hypothesis  that  facts  can  ever  be  absolutely 
alike  and  comparable  in  statistics ;  they  must  necessarily  differ  at 
some  point,  for  statistics  would  otherwise  lead  to  absolute  scientific 
results,  while  they  can  actually  show  only  probability,  never  certainty. 
I  acknowledge  my  inability  to  understand  why  results  taken  from 
statistics  are  called  laws;  for  in  my  opinion  scientific  law  can  be  based 
only  on  certainty,  on  absolute  determinism,  not  on  probability.  I 
should  stray  from  my  subject,  if  I  went  into  all  possible  explanation 
of  the  value  of  statistical  methods  based  on  the  calculus  of  proba- 
bilities ;  yet  I  cannot  but  say  here  what  I  think  about  the  application 
of  statistics  to  physiological  science  in  general  and  to  medicine  in 
particular. 

In  every  science,  we  must  recognize  two  classes  of  phenomena, 
first,  those  whose  cause  is  already  defined;  next,  those  whose  cause 
is  still  undefined.  With  phenomena  whose  cause  is  defined,  statis- 
tics have  nothing  to  do ;  they  would  even  be  absurd.  As  soon  as  the 
circumstances  of  an  experiment  are  well  known,  we  stop  gathering 
statistics :  we  should  not  gather  cases  to  learn  how  often  water  is  made 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAX.  MEDICINE 


137 


of  oxygen  and  hydrogen ;  or  when  cutting  the  sciatic  nerve,  to  learn 
how  often  the  muscles  to  which  it  leads  will  be  paralyzed.  The 
effect  will  occur  always  without  exception,  because  the  cause  of  the 
phenomena  is  accurately  defined.  Only  when  a  phenomenon  in- 
cludes conditions  as  yet  undefined,  can  we  compile  statistics ;  we-  must 
learn,  therefore,  that  we  compile  statistics  only  when  we  cannot 
possibly  help  it ;  for  in  my  opinion  statistics  can  never  yield  scientific 
truth,  and  therefore  cannot  establish  any  final  scientific  method. 
A  single  example  will  illustrate  my  meaning.  Certain  experi- 
menters, as  we  shall  later  see,  published  experiments  by  which  they 
found  that  the  anterior  spinal  roots  are  insensitive;  other  experi- 
menters published  experiments  by  which  they  found  that  the  same 
roots  were  sensitive.  These  cases  seemed  as  comparable  as  possible ; 
here  was  the  same  operation  done  by  the  same  method  on  the  same 
spinal  roots.  Should  we  therefore  have  counted  the  positive  and 
negative  cases  and  said :  the  law  is  that  anterior  roots  are  sensitive, 
for  instance,  25  times  out  of  a  100  ?  Or  should  we  have  admitted, 
according  to  the  theory  called  the  law  of  large  numbers,  that  in  an 
immense  number  of  experiments  we  should  find  the  roots  equally 
often  sensitive  and  insensitive  ?  Such  statistics  would  be  ridiculous, 
for  there  is  a  reason  for  the  roots  being  insensitive  and  another  rea- 
son for  their  being  sensitive ;  this  reason  had  to  be  defined ;  I  looked 
for  it,  and  I  found  it;  so  that  we  can  now  say:  the  spinal  roots  are 
always  sensitive  in  given  conditions,  and  always  insensitive  in  other 
equally  definite  conditions. 

I  will  cite  still  another  example  borrowed  from  surgery.  A  great 
surgeon  performs  operations  for  stone  by  a  single  method;  later  he 
makes  a  statistical  summary  of  deaths  and  recoveries,  and  he  con- 
cludes from  these  statistics  that  the  mortality  law  for  this  operation 
is  two  out  of  five.  Well,  I  say  that  this  ratio  means  literally  nothing 
scientifically  and  gives  us  no  certainty  in  performing  the  next  opera- 
tion; for  we  do  not  know  whether  the  next  case  will  be  among  the 
recoveries  or  the  deaths.  What  really  should  be  done,  instead  of 
gathering  facts  empirically,  is  to  study  them  more  accurately,  each 
in  its  special  determinism.  We  must  study  cases  of  death  with 
great  care  and  try  to  discover  in  them  the  cause  of  mortal  accidents, 
so  as  to  master  the  cause  and  avoid  the  accidents.  Thus,  if  we  ac- 
curately know  the  cause  of  recovery  and  the  cause  of  death,  we  shall 
always  have  a  recovery  in  a  definite  case.   We  cannot,  indeed,  admit 


138  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


that  cases  with  different  endings  were  identical  at  every  point.  In 
the  patient  who  succumbed,  the  cause  of  death  was  evidently  some- 
thing which  was  not  found  in  the  patient  who  recovered ;  this  some- 
thing we  must  determine,  and  then  we  can  act  on  the  phenomena  or 
recognize  and  foresee  them  accurately.  But  not  by  statistics  shall  we 
succeed  in  this ;  never  have  statistics  taught  anything,  and  never  can 
they  teach  anything  about  the  nature  of  phenomena.  I  shall  further 
apply  what  I  have  just  said  to  all  the  statistics  compiled  with  the 
object  of  learning  tbe  efficacy  of  certain  remedies  in  curing  diseases. 
Aside  from  our  inability  to  enumerate  the  sick  who  recover  of  them- 
selves in  spite  of  a  remedy,  statistics  teach  absolutely  nothing  about 
the  mode  of  action  of  medicine  nor  the  mechanics  of  cure  in  those 
in  whom  the  remedy  may  have  taken  effect. 

It  is  said  that  coincidence  may  play  so  large  a  part  in  causes  of 
statistical  errors,  that  we  should  base  conclusions  only  on  large  num- 
bers. But  physicians  have  nothing  to  do  with  what  is  called  the  law 
of  large  numhers,  a  law  which,  according  to  a  great  mathematician's 
expression,  is  always  true  in  general  and  false  in  particular.  This 
amounts  to  saying  that  the  law  of  large  numbers  never  teaches  us 
anything  about  any  particular  case.  What  a  physician  needs  to  know 
is  whether  his  patient  will  recover,  and  only  the  search  for  scientific 
determinism  can  lead  to  this  knowledge.  I  do  not  understand  how 
we  can  teach  practical  and  exact  science  on  the  basis  of  statistics. 
The  results  of  statistics,  even  statistics  of  large  numbers,  seem  indeed 
to  show  that  some  compensation  in  the  variations  of  phenomena  leads 
to  a  law ;  but  as  this  compensation  is  indefinite,  even  the  mathemati- 
cians confess  that  it  can  never  teach  us  anything  about  any  particular 
case ;  for  they  admit  that  if  the  red  ball  comes  out  fifty  times  in  suc- 
cession, that  is  no  reason  why  a  white  ball  would  be  more  likely  to 
come  out  the  fifty-first  time. 

Statistics  can  therefore  bring  to  birth  only  conjectural  sciences; 
they  can  never  produce  active  experimental  sciences,  i.e.,  sciences 
which  regulate  phenomena  according  to  definite  laws.  By  statistics, 
we  get  a  conjecture  of  greater  or  less  probability  about  a  given  case, 
but  never  any  certainty,  never  any  absolute  determinism.  Of  course, 
statistics  may  guide  a  physician's  prognosis ;  to  that  extent  they  are 
useful.  I  do  not  therefore  reject  the  use  of  statistics  in  medicine,  but 
I  condemn  not  trying  to  get  beyond  them  and  believing  in  statistics 
as  the  foundation  of  medical  science.    This  false  idea  leads  cer- 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICmE  139 

tain  physicians  to  believe  that  medicine  cannot  but  be  conjectural; 
and  from  this,  they  infer  that  physicians  are  artists  who  must  make 
up  for  the  indeterminism  of  particular  cases  by  medical  tact.  Against 
these  anti-scientific  ideas  we  must  protest  with  all  our  power,  because 
they  help  to  hold  medicine  back  in  the  lowly  state  in  which  it  has 
been  so  long.    All  sciences  necessarily  began  by  being  conjectural ; 
even  to-day  science  has  its  conjectural  parts.    Medicine  is  still  almost 
wholly  conjectural.    I  do  not  deny  it;  I  only  mean  to  say  that 
modern  medical  science  must  exert  itself  to  get  out  of  the  temporary 
condition  which  is  no  more  a  final  scientific  state  for  medicine  than 
for  any  other  science.    The  scientific  state  will  be  harder  to  reach 
and  will  take  longer  to  establish  in  medicine,  because  of  the  com- 
plexity of  the  phenomena;  but  the  goal  of  scientific  physicians  in 
their  own  science,  as  in  the  rest,  is  to  reduce  the  indeterminate  to 
the  determinate.    Statistics  therefore  apply  only  to  cases  in  which 
the  cause  of  the  facts  observed  is  still  indeterminate.    In  these  cir- 
cumstances, statistics  in  my  opinion  can  serve  only  to  guide  the 
observer  toward  investigation  of  the  indeterminate  cause,  but  they 
can  never  lead  to  any  real  law.  I  emphasize  this  point,  because  many 
physicians  have  great  confidence  in  statistics  when  based  on  well- 
observed  facts  which  they  consider  mutually  comparable,  and  they 
believe  that  such  statistics  may  lead  to  knowledge  of  phenomenal 
law.    I  have  already  said  that  facts  are  never  identical ;  therefore  sta- 
tistics are  simply  an  empirical  enumeration  of  observations. 

In  a  word,  if  based  on  statistics,  medicine  can  never  be  anything 
but  a  conjectural  science;  only  by  basing  itself  on  experimental 
determinism  can  it  become  a  true  science,  i.e.,  a  sure  science.  I 
think  of  this  idea  as  the  pivot  of  experimental  medicine,  and  in  this 
respect  experimental  physicians  take  a  wholly  different  point  of  view 
from  so-called  observing  physicians.  Indeed,  if  a  phenomenon  ap- 
pears just  once  in  a  certain  aspect,  we  are  justified  in  holding  that, 
in  the  same  conditions,  it  must  always  appear  in  the  same  way.  If, 
then,  it  differs  in  behavior,  the  conditions  must  be  different.  But 
indeterminism  knows  no  laws;  laws  exist  only  in  experimental 
determinism,  and  without  laws  there  can  be  no  science.  Most  phy- 
sicians seem  to  believe  that,  in  medicine,  laws  are  elastic  and  indefi- 
nite. These  are  false  ideas  which  must  disappear  if  we  mean  to  found 
a  scientific  medicine.  As  a  science,  medicine  necessarily  has  definite 
and  precise  laws  which,  like  those  of  all  the  sciences,  are  derived  from 


140 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


the  criterion  of  experiment.  To  the  explanation  of  these  ideas  I 
shall  especially  devote  the  work  which  I  have  named  Principles  of 
Experimental  Medicine,  in  order  to  show  that  the  principles  of 
experimental  determinism  must  be  applied  to  medicine,  if  it  is  to 
become  an  exact  science  founded  on  experimental  determinism, 
instead  of  remaining  a  conjectural  science  based  on  statistics.  A 
conjectural  science  may  indeed  rest  on  the  indeterminate;  but  an 
experimental  science  accepts  only  determinate  or  determinable 
phenomena. 

Only  determinism  in  an  experiment  yields  absolute  law ;  and  he 
who  knows  the  true  law  is  no  longer  free  to  see  a  phenomenon  other- 
wise. The  indeterminism  of  statistics  leaves  to  thought  a  certain 
liberty  limited  by  the  numbers  themselves;  and  in  this  sense  phi- 
losophers were  able  to  say  that  liberty  begins  where  determinism 
ends.  But  when  determinism  increases,  statistics  can  no  longer 
grasp  and  confine  it  within  a  limit  of  variations.  There  we  leave 
science,  for  we  are  forced  to  invoke  chance  or  an  occult  cause  to 
regulate  phenomena.  We  shall  certainly  never  reach  absolute  deter- 
minism in  everything;  man  could  no  longer  exist.  There  will 
always  be  some  indeterminism  then,  in  all  the  sciences,  and  more  in 
medicine  than  in  any  other.  But  man's  intellectual  conquest  con- 
sists in  lessening  and  driving  back  indeterminism  in  proportion  as 
he  gains  ground  for  determinism  by  the  help  of  the  experimental 
method.  This  alone  should  satisfy  his  ambition,  for  by  this  alone 
is  he  extending,  and  can  he  further  extend,  his  power  over  nature. 


X.   The  Physiologist's  Laboratory  and  Various  Methods 
Necessary  to  the  Study  of  Experimental  Medicine 

Every  experimental  science  requires  a  laboratory.  There  the 
man  of  science  withdraws,  and  by  means  of  experimental  analysis 
tries  to  understand  phenomena  that  he  has  observed  in  nature. 

A  physician's  subject  of  study  is  necessarily  the  patient,  and  his 
first  field  for  observation  is  the  hospital.  But  if  clinical  observa- 
tion teaches  him  to  know  the  form  and  course  of  diseases,  it  cannot 
suffice  to  make  him  understand  their  nature;  to  this  end  he  must 
penetrate  into  the  body  to  find  which  of  the  internal  parts  are  in- 
jured in  their  functions.  That  is  why  dissection  of  cadavers  and 
microscopic  study  of  diseases  were  soon  added  to  clinical  observa- 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICmE  141 

tion.  But  to-day  these  various  methods  no  longer  suffice;  we  must 
push  investigation  further  and,  in  analyzing  the  elementary  phe- 
nomena of  organic  bodies,  must  compare  normal  with  abnormal 
states.  We  showed  elsewhere  how  incapable  is  anatomy  alone  to 
take  account  of  vital  phenomena,  and  we  saw  that  we  must  add 
study  of  all  physico-chemical  conditions  which  contribute  necessary 
elements  to  normal  or  pathological  manifestations  of  life.  This 
simple  suggestion  already  makes  us  feel  that  the  laboratory  of  a 
physiologist-physician  must  be  the  most  complicated  of  all  labora- 
tories, because  he  has  to  experiment  with  phenomena  of  life  which 
are  the  most  complex  of  all  natural  phenomena. 

Libraries  may  also  be  considered  as  part  of  the  laboratory  of  a 
man  of  science  or  experimenting  physician.  But  this  is  on  condi- 
tion that  he  shall  read  the  observations,  experiments  and  theories  of 
his  predecessors  in  order  to  know  them  and  verify  them  in  nature, 
and  not  to  find  opinions  ready-made  in  books,  thus  saving  himself 
the  trouble  of  working  and  of  trying  to  further  the  investigation  of 
natural  phenomena.  Misconceived  erudition  has  been,  and  still 
is,  one  of  the  greatest  obstacles  to  the  advancement  of  experimental 
science.  Thus  erudition,  setting  man's  authority  in  the  place  of 
facts.,  halted  science  through  several  centuries  at  Galen's  ideas,  with- 
out any  one's  daring  to  touch  them;  and  this  scientific  superstition 
was  such  that  Mundini  and  Vesalius,  who  first  contradicted  Galen  by 
confronting  his  opinions  with  animal  dissections,  were  considered  in- 
novators and  revolutionaries.  Yet  such  should  always  be  the  prac- 
tice of  scientific  erudition.  It  should  always  be  accompanied  by 
critical  investigations  of  nature,  planned  to  verify  the  facts  about 
which  we  speak,  and  to  decide  the  opinions  which  we  discuss.  In 
this  way  science  in  advancing  would  be  simplified  and  cleansed 
by  sound  experimental  criticism,  instead  of  being  encumbered  by 
exhuming  an  accumulation  of  numberless  facts  and  opinions  among 
which  it  is  soon  impossible  to  distinguish  falsehood  from  truth.  It 
would  be  out  of  place  for  me  here  to  say  more  of  the  mistakes  and 
misdirection  of  most  of  the  studies  of  medical  literature,  character- 
ized as  historical  or  philosophical.  I  may  perhaps  have  occasion 
to  explain  myself  elsewhere  on  this  subject ;  for  the  moment,  I  shall 
limit  myself  to  saying  that,  in  my  opinion,  all  these  mistakes  have 
their  origin  in  a  perpetual  confusion  between  literary  or  artistic  pro- 
duction and  scientific  production,  between  criticism  of  art  and 


142 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


scientific  criticism,  between  the  history  of  science  and  the  history  of 
men. 

Literary  and  artistic  productions  never  grow  old,  in  this  sense, 
that  they  are  expressions  of  feeling,  changeless  as  human  nature. 
We  may  add  that  philosophical  ideas  stand  for  aspirations  of  the 
human  spirit  which  are  also  of  all  time.  But  science,  which  stands 
for  what  man  has  learned,  is  essentially  mobile  in  expression;  it 
varies  and  perfects  itself  in  proportion  to  the  increase  of  acquired 
knowledge.  Present  day  science  is  therefore  necessarily  higher  than 
the  science  of  the  past;  and  there  is  no  sort  of  reason  for  going 
in  search  of  any  addition  to  modern  science  through  knowledge  of 
the  ancients.  Their  theories,  necessarily  false  because  they  do  not 
include  facts  discovered  since  then,  can  be  of  no  real  advantage  to 
contemporary  science.  No  experimental  science,  then,  can  make 
progress  except  by  advancing  and  pursuing  its  work  in  the  future.  It 
would  be  absurd  to  believe  that  we  should  go  in  search  of  it  in  the 
study  of  books  bequeathed  to  us  by  the  past.  We  can  find  there 
only  the  history  of  the  human  mind,  which  is  quite  another  matter. 

We  must  of  course  be  familiar  with  what  we  call  scientific  litera- 
ture, and  know  what  our  predecessors  have  done.  But  scientific 
criticism  in  the  literary  manner  can  be  of  no  possible  use  to  sci- 
ence. Indeed,  we  need  not  ourselves  be  poets  or  artists  to  judge 
literary  or  artistic  work,  but  this  is  not  true  of  experimental  sci- 
ence. We  cannot  judge  of  a  memoir  on  chemistry  without  being 
chemists  nor  of  a  memoir  on  physiology  if  we  are  not  physiologists. 
In  deciding  between  two  different  scientific  opinions,  it  is  not  enough 
to  be  a  good  philologist  or  a  good  translator,  we  must  above  all  be 
deeply  versed  in  technical  science;  we  must  even  be  masters  of  the 
special  science  and  ourselves  be  able  to  experiment  and  do  better 
than  the  men  whose  opinions  we  discuss.  Some  time  ago  I  discussed 
an  anatomical  question  concerning  the  anastomoses  of  the  pneumo- 
gastric  and  spinal  nerves.^*  Willis,  Scarpa  and  Bischoif  had  ex- 
pressed different  and  even  opposite  opinions  on  this  subject.  A 
mere  scholar  could  only  have  quoted  these  various  opinions  and  more 
or  less  correctly  compared  the  texts;  that  would  not  have  answered 
the  scientific  question.    It  was  therefore  necessary  to  dissect  and 

"  Claude  Bernard,  Recherches  experimentales  sur  lea  fonctiona  du  nerf  spinal. 
{Memoires  prSsent^s  par  divers  savants  etrangers  d  VAcademie  des  sciences. 
Vol.  X.  1851.) 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


143 


to  perfect  our  methods  of  dissection,  so  as  to  follow  the  nervous 
anastomoses  more  precisely  and  to  compare  each  anatomist's  descrip- 
tion with  nature.  This  is  what  I  did,  and  I  found  that  the  differ- 
ence between  the  authors  in  question  came  from  their  not  having 
assigned  the  same  limits  to  the  nerves.  So  anatomy,  carried  fur- 
ther, explained  their  anatomical  dissension.  I  therefore  refuse  to 
acknowledge  that  science  has  a  place  for  men  who  make  criticism 
their  specialty,  as  in  letters  and  in  the  arts.  To  be  really  useful, 
criticism  in  every  science  must  be  done  by  men  of  science  themselves, 
and  by  the  most  eminent  masters. 

Another  somewhat  frequent  error  consists  in  confusing  the  his- 
tory of  man  with  the  history  of  some  science.  Theological  and  didac- 
tic evolution  of  experimental  science  is  by  no  means  expressed  in  the 
chronological  history  of  the  men  concerned  with  it.  We  must  never- 
theless except  the  mathematical  and  astronomical  sciences;  but  this 
cannot  apply  to  the  physico-chemical  experimental  sciences  or  to 
medicine  in  particular.  Medicine  was  born  of  need,  said  Baglivi, 
that  is  to  say,  from  the  first  time  that  anyone  was  ill,  men  went  to 
his  aid  and  sought  to  cure  him.  From  its  cradle,  medicine  has  there- 
fore been  an  applied  science  mixed  with  religion  and  with  the  feel- 
ings of  sympathy  that  men  experienced  one  for  another.  But  did 
medicine  as  a  science  exist?  Evidently  not.  Continuing  through 
centuries  as  blind  empiricism,  it  enriched  itself,  little  by  little  and 
almost  by  chance,  with  observations  and  investigations  in  unrelated 
directions.  Physiology,  pathology  and  therapeutics  developed  as 
distinct  sciences.  That  was  the  wrong  road.  Only  to-day  can  we 
begin  to  see  the  conception  of  an  experimental,  scientific  medicine  in 
the  fusion  of  these  three  in  a  single  point  of  view. 

The  experimental  point  of  view  is  a  coronation  of  perfected  sci- 
ence; for  we  must  not  deceive  ourselves;  true  science  exists  only 
when  man  succeeds  in  accurately  foreseeing  the  phenomena  of  nature 
and  mastering  them.  Noting  and  classifying  natural  bodies  and  phe- 
nomena is  not  at  all  the  equivalent  of  complete  science.  True  science 
acts  and  explains  its  action  or  its  power:  that  is  its  character,  that 
is  its  aim.  Let  me  amplify  my  idea.  I  have  often  heard  physi- 
cians say  that  physiology  or  the  explanation  of  vital  phenomena 
in  either  the  physiological  or  the  pathological  state  is  only  a  part 
of  medicine,  because'  medicine  is  knowledge  of  diseases  in  general. 
I  have  similarly  heard  zoologists  say  that  physiology,  or  the  explana- 


144  AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


tion  of  vital  phenomena  in  all  their  variety,  is  only  a  dismember- 
ment or  specialty  of  zoology,  because  zoology  is  knowledge  of  ani- 
mals in  general.  Talking  in  the  same  v^ay,  a  geologist  or  a  mineral- 
ogist might  say  that  physics  and  chemistry  are  only  dismemberments 
of  geology  or  mineralogy,  which  include  knowledge  of  the  earth  and 
of  animals  in  general.  Here  are  mistakes  or  at  least  misunder- 
standings which  need  to  be  explained.  First  of  all,  we  must  recog- 
nize that  our  divisions  into  sciences  are  not  a  part  of  nature;  they 
exist  only  in  the  mind  which,  by  reason  of  its  infirmity,  is  forced 
to  create  categories  of  bodies  and  of  phenomena,  so  as  to  understand 
them  better  by  studying  their  characteristics  or  properties  from  spe- 
cial points  of  view.  It  follows  that  the  same  body  may  be  studied 
mineralogically,  physically,  chemically,  etc. ;  but  in  nature  there  is 
really  neither  chemistry  nor  physics,  nor  zoology,  nor  physiology, 
nor  pathology ;  there  are  only  bodies  to  be  classified  or  phenomena  to 
be  known  and  mastered.  JSTow  the  science  that  gives  man  means 
of  analyzing  and  experimentally  mastering  phenomena  is  the  fur- 
thest advanced.  It  must  necessarily  be  the  last  established;  that 
is  no  reason  to  consider  it  a  dismemberment  of  earlier  sciences.  In 
this  respect,  physiology,  which  is  the  highest  and  most  difficult  sci- 
ence of  living  beings,  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  dismemberment  of 
medicine  or  zoology,  any  more  than  physics  or  chemistry  are  dismem- 
berments of  geology  or  mineralogy.  Physics  and  chemistry  are  the 
two  active  mineral  sciences  by  means  of  which  man  can  master  the 
phenomena  of  inorganic  bodies.  Physiology  is  the  vital,  active  sci- 
ence by  whose  aid  man  will  be  able  to  act  on  animals  and  on  man, 
whether  in  health  or  in  sickness.  It  would  be  a  grave  illusion  for 
physicians  to  believe  they  know  diseases  by  giving  them  names,  be- 
cause they  classify  and  describe  them,  just  as  it  would  be  an  illusion 
for  zoologists  or  botanists  to  believe  they  know  animals  and  vegetables 
because  they  have  named  them,  catalogued,  dissected  and  shut  them 
up  in  museums,  after  stuffing,  preparing  or  drying  them.  Physicians 
will  not  know  diseases  until  they  can  act  on  them  rationally  and  ex- 
perimentally, just  as  zoologists  will  not  know  animals  until  they 
explain  and  regulate  the  phenomena  of  life.  To  sum  up,  we  must 
not  be  duped  by  our  own  works;  we  cannot  assign  any  absolute 
value  to  scientific  classifications,  either  in  books  or  in  academies. 
Men  who  leave  the  beaten  track  are  innovators,  and  those  who  blindly 
persist  in  it  hamper  scientific  progress.    The  very  evolution  of 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


145 


human  knowledge  means  that  experimental  science  must  be  the  goal, 
and  this  evolution  requires  that  earlier  sciences  of  classification  shall 
lose  importance  as  the  experimental  sciences  develop. 

The  spirit  of  man  follows  a  necessary  and  logical  course  in  the 
search  for  scientific  truth.  It  observes  facts,  compares  them,  de- 
duces appropriate  results  which  it  controls  by  experiment,  to  rise 
to  more  and  more  general  propositions  and  truths.  In  this  advanc- 
ing labor,  a  man  of  science  must,  of  course,  know  and  deal  with  his 
predecessors'  work.  But  he  must  be  thoroughly  convinced  that  this 
work  is  merely  a  support  from  which  to  go  farther,  and  that  new 
scientific  truths  are  not  to  be  found  in  study  of  the  past,  but  rather 
in  studies  made  anew  on  nature,  i.e.,  in  the  laboratory.  Useful  sci- 
entific literature,  then,  is  preeminently  the  scientific  literature  of 
modem  work  which  enables  us  to  keep  up  with  scientific  progress; 
and  even  this  must  not  be  carried  too  far,  lest  it  dry  up  the  mind 
and  stifle  invention  and  scientific  originality.  But  what  use  can  we 
find  in  exhuming  worm-eaten  theories  or  observations  made  without 
proper  means  of  investigation  ?  That  may,  of  course,  be  helpful  in 
learning  the  mistakes  through  which  the  human  mind  has  passed  in 
its  evolution,  but  it  is  time  wasted  for  science,  properly  speaking. 
I  deem  it  highly  important  to  guide  the  minds  of  students  early 
toward  active  experimental  science,  by  making  them  understand  that 
it  develops  in  laboratories,  instead  of  leaving  them  to  believe  that 
it  awaits  them  in  books  or  in  the  interpretation  of  ancient  writings. 
We  know  from  history  the  sterility  of  the  scholastic  path  and  that 
science  did  not  begin  to  soar  until  men  substituted  for  the  authority 
of  books  the  authority  of  facts  ascertained  in  nature  with  the  help  of 
more  and  more  perfect  experimental  methods ;  Bacon's  greatest  merit 
was  that  he  proclaimed  this  truth  aloud.  As  for  me,  I  think  that 
turning  medicine  back  to-day  toward  the  belated  and  aged  com- 
mentaries of  antiquity  is  a  retrogression,  a  return  to  scholasticism, 
while  guiding  medicine  toward  laboratories  and  toward  experimental, 
analytical  study  of  disease  is  an  advance  along  the  path  of  true 
progress,  that  is,  toward  the  foundation  of  experimental  medical 
science.  With  me,  this  is  a  deep  conviction;  I  shall  always  seek 
to  make  it  prevail  both  in  my  teaching  and  in  my  work. 

A  physiological  laboratory,  therefore,  should  now  be  the  culmi- 
nating goal  of  any  scientific  physician's  studies;  but  here  again  I 
must  explain^  myself  to  avoid  misunderstanding.     Hospitals,  or 


146 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


rather  hospital  wards,  are  not  physicians'  laboratories,  as  is  often 
believed ;  as  we  said  before,  these  are  only  his  fields  for  observation ; 
there  must  be  held  what  we  call  clinics,  i.e.,  studies  of  disease  as 
complete  as  possible.  Medicine  necessarily  begins  with  clinics,  since 
they  determine  and  define  the  object  of  medicine,  i.e.,  the  medical 
problem;  but  while  they  are  the  physician's  first  study,  clinics  are 
not  the  foundation  of  scientific  medicine ;  physiology  is  the  founda- 
tion of  scientific  medicine  because  it  must  yield  the  explanation  of 
morbid  phenomena  by  showing  their  relations  to  the  normal  state. 
We  shall  never  have  a  science  of  medicine  as  long  as  we  separate 
the  explanation  of  pathological  from  the  explanation  of  normal,  vital 
phenomena. 

Here  then  lies  the  real  medical  problem;  this  is  the  foundation 
on  which  modem  scientific  medicine  will  be  built.  As  we  see,  ex- 
perimental medicine  does  not  exclude  clinical  medicine;  on  the  con- 
trary, it  comes  only  after  it.  But  it  is  a  higher  science,  and  one 
necessarily  more  vast  and  general.  We  easily  imagine  how  an 
observational  or  empirical  physician,  never  leaving  his  hospital,  may 
think  medicine  completely  shut  in  there,  as  a  science  distinct  from 
physiology,  of  which  it  feels  no  need.  But  for  a  man  of  science  there 
is  no  separate  science  of  medicine  or  physiology,  there  is  only  a 
science  of  life.  There  are  only  phenomena  of  life  to  be  explained 
in  the  pathological  as  well  as  in  the  physiological  state.  By  putting 
this  fundamental  idea  and  this  general  conception  of  medicine  into 
the  minds  of  young  people  at  the  outset  of  their  medical  studies,  we 
shall  show  them  that  the  physico-chemical  sciences  which  they  have 
learned  are  tools  to  help  them  analyze  the  phenomena  of  life  in  its 
normal  and  pathological  states.  In  frequenting  hospitals,  amphi- 
theatres and  laboratories,  they  will  easily  grasp  the  general  connec- 
tion uniting  all  the  medical  sciences,  instead  of  learning  them  like 
fragments  of  detached  knowledge  with  no  relation  between  them. 

In  a  word,  I  consider  hospitals  only  as  the  entrance  to  scien- 
tific medicine;  they  are  the  first  field  of  observation  which  a  phys- 
ician enters ;  but  the  true  sanctuary  of  medical  science  is  a  labora- 
tory ;  only  there  can  he  seek  explanations  of  life  in  the  normal  and 
pathological  states  by  means  of  experimental  analysis.  I  shall  not 
concern  myself  here  with  the  clinical  side  of  medicine ;  I  assume  it 
as  known  or  as  still  being  perfected  in  hospitals  by  the  new  methods 
of  diagnosis  which  physics  and  chemistry  are  constantly  giving  to 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICmE 


147 


symptomatology.  In  my  opinion,  medicine  does  not  end  in  hos- 
pitals, as  is  often  believed,  but  merely  begins  there.  In  leaving 
the  hospital,  a  physician,  jealous  of  the  title  in  its  scientific  sense, 
must  go  into  his  laboratory;  and  there,  by  experiments  on  animals, 
he  will  seek  to  account  for  what  he  has  observed  in  his  patients, 
whether  about  the  action  of  drugs  or  about  the  origin  of  morbid 
lesions  in  organs  or  tissues.  There,  in  a  word,  he  will  achieve  true 
medical  science.  Every  scientific  physician  should,  therefore,  have 
a  physiological  laboratory;  and  this  work  is  especially  intended  to 
give  physicians  rules  and  principles  of  experimentation  to  guide 
their  study  of  experimental  medicine,  that  is,  their  analytic  and  ex- 
perimental study  of  disease.  The  principles  of  experimental  medi- 
cine, then,  will  be  simply  the  principles  of  experimental  analysis 
applied  to  the  phenomena  of  life  in  its  healthy  and  its  morbid  states. 

The  biological  sciences  to-day  are  no  longer  seeking  their  path. 
Because  of  their  complex  nature  they  vacillated  longer  than  other 
simpler  sciences  in  the  regions  of  philosophy  and  system;  but  they 
launched  at  last  into  the  experimental  path  where  to-day  they  are 
well  advanced.  So  they  now  need  only  one  thing  more,  and  that 
is  means  of  development.  Such  means  are  laboratories  and  all  the 
conditions  and  instruments  necessary  to  cultivate  the  scientific  field 
of  biology. 

To  the  honor  of  French  science,  it  must  be  stated  that  it  had  the 
glory  of  decisively  inaugurating  the  experimental  method  in  the 
science  of  vital  phenomena.  Toward  the  end  of  the  last  century, 
the  renewal  of  chemistry  strongly  influenced  the  advance  of  physio- 
logical science,  and  the  work  of  Lavoisier  and  Laplace  on  breathing 
cleared  a  fertile  path  for  analytic  physico-chemical  experimentation 
on  the  phenomena  of  life.  My  teacher,  Magendie,  who  was  led  into 
a  medical  career  by  this  same  influence,  devoted  his  life  to  advocat- 
ing experimentation  in  the  study  of  physiological  phenomena. 
^Nevertheless,  application  of  the  experimental  method  to  animals  was 
hindered  from  the  first  by  the  lack  of  suitable  laboratories  and  by 
all  sorts  of  difficulties  which  are  disappearing  to-day,  but  from  which 
I  myself  often  suffered  in  my  youth.  The  scientific  impulse,  started 
in  France,  spread  through  Europe,  and  little  by  little  the  analytic 
experimental  method  entered  the  realm  of  biological  science  as  a 
general  method  of  investigation.  But  this  method  was  perfected 
more,  and  it  brought  forth  more  fruit  in  countries  where  conditions 


148 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


for  its  development  were  more  favorable.  Throughout  Germany- 
to-day  there  are  laboratories,  called  physiological  institutes,  which 
are  admirably  endowed  and  organized  for  the  experimental  study  of 
vital  phenomena.  They  exist  in  Russia  also,  where  new  ones  of 
gigantic  size  are  being  built.  Scientific  production  is  naturally  in 
proportion  to  the  means  of  cultivation  which  a  science  possesses; 
there  is  nothing  astonishing,  then,  in  the  fact  that  Germany,  where 
the  means  of  cultivating  the  physiological  sciences  are  most  liberally 
installed,  is  distancing  other  countries  in  the  quantity  of  its  scien- 
tific production.  The  genius  of  man,  of  course,  cannot  abdicate  its 
supremacy  in  science.  In  experimental  science,  however,  a  scientific 
man  is  the  prisoner  of  his  ideas^  if  he  does  not  learn  to  question 
nature  for  himself,  and  if  he  does  not  possess  suitable  and  necessary 
tools.  We  cannot  imagine  a  physicist  or  a  chemist  without  his 
laboratory.  But  as  for  the  physician,  we  are  not  yet  in  the  habit 
of  believing  that  he  needs  a  laboratory;  we  think  that  hospitals 
and  books  should  suffice.  That  is  a  mistake;  clinical  informa- 
tion no  more  suffices  for  physicians  than  knowledge  of  minerals 
suffices  for  chemists  or  physicists.  Physiological  physicians  must 
experimentally  analyze  the  phenomena  of  living  matter,  as  physi- 
cists and  chemists  experimentally  analyze  the  phenomena  of  inorganic 
matter.  A  laboratory  is  therefore  a  condition  sine  qua  non  of  the 
development  of  experimental  medicine,  as  it  was  for  all  the  other 
physico-chemical  sciences.  Without  it,  neither  experimenters  nor 
experimental  science  can  exist. 

I  shall  no  longer  dwell  on  so  important  a  subject  which  cannot 
here  be  sufficiently  worked  out ;  let  me  end  by  saying  that  one  truth 
is  well  established  in  modern  science,  namely,  that  scientific 
courses  can  only  serve  to  introduce  and  to  create  a  taste  for  the  sci- 
ences. By  pointing  out,  from  a  professional  chair,  the  results  as 
well  as  the  methods  of  a  science,  a  teacher  may  form  the  minds 
of  his  hearers  and  make  them  apt  in  learning  and  choosing  their 
own  direction ;  but  he  can  never  make  them  men  of  science.  The 
laboratory  is  the  real  nursery  of  true  experimental  scientists,  i.e., 
those  who  create  the  science  that  others  afterward  popularize.  N^ow 
if  we  want  much  fruit,  we  must  first  care  for  our  nurseries  of  fruit 
trees.  The  evidence  of  this  truth  will  necessarily  bring  about  gen- 
eral and  deep  reform  in  scientific  teaching.  For,  I  repeat,  it  is  to-day 
everywhere  recognized  that  pure  science  germinates  and  develops  in 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICmE 


149 


laboratories,  to  spread  out  later  and  cover  the  world  with  useful 
applications.  We  must,  therefore,  first  of  all  attend  to  the  scientific 
source,  since  applied  science  necessarily  proceeds  from  pure  science. 

Science  and  men  of  science  are  cosmopolitans,  and  it  seems 
hardly  important  whether  a  scientific  truth  develops  at  any  particular 
spot  on  the  globe,  as  long  as  the  general  diffusion  of  science  allows  all 
men  to  share  in  it.  However  I  cannot  help  praying  that  my  coun- 
try, the  evident  promoter  and  protector  of  scientific  progress  and 
the  starting  point  of  the  brilliant  era  through  which  experimental 
physical  science  is  now  passing,  may  have  great,  public,  physio- 
logical laboratories  as  soon  as  possible,  so  as  to  make  pleiads  of  physi- 
ologists and  young  experimenting  physicians.  Only  laboratories  can 
teach  the  difficulties  of  science  to  those  who  frequent  them ;  they  show 
that  pure  science  has  always  been  the  source  of  all  the  riches  ac- 
quired by  man  and  of  all  his  real  conquests  over  the  phenomena  of 
nature.  This  is  also  excellent  education  for  the  young,  because  it 
makes  them  understand  that  the  present,  very  brilliant  applications 
of  science  are  merely  the  blossoming  of  earlier  labors,  and  that  those 
who  reap  the  benefits  to-day  owe  a  tribute  of  gratitude  to  their  pre- 
decessors who  painfully  cultivated  the  tree  of  science,  but  never  saw 
its  fruits. 

I  cannot  here  treat  all  the  conditions  necessary  to  a  good  labora- 
tory of  physiology  or  experimental  medicine.  That  would  obviously 
amount  to  summarizing  everything  still  to  be  explained  in  this  work. 
I  shall  therefore  limit  myself  to  adding  one  word.  I  said  above, 
that  the  laboratory  of  a  physiological  physician  must  be  the  most 
complex  of  all  laboratories,  because  the  experimental  analyses  to 
be  made  there  are  the  most  complex  of  all,  requiring  the  help  of  all 
other  sciences.  The  laboratory  of  a  medical  physiologist  must  be 
connected  with  a  hospital  so  as  to  receive  the  various  pathological 
specimens  on  which  scientific  investigation  is  brought  to  bear.  It 
\nust  next  include  healthy  and  diseased  animals  for  the  study  of 
questions  of  normal  and  pathological  physiology.  But  as  vital  phe- 
nomena, whether  in  the  normal  or  in  the  pathological  state,  are 

^  In  1771  a  course  in  experimental  physiology  was  given  by  Professor  A. 
Portal  at  the  College  de  France;  the  experiments  were  reported  by  Monsieur 
Collomb  who  published  them  in  letter  form  in  1771;  they  were  republished  in 
1808  with  a  few  additions  in  the  work  by  Portal  entitled:  M^moires  sur  la 
nature  et  le  traitem&nt  de  plusieu/rs  maladies,  aveo  le  precis  d'expSriences  stur 
les  animaux  vivanis.   Paris,  1800-1825. 


150 


THE  STUDY  OF  EXPEKIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


analyzed  mainly  by  means  of  tools  borrowed  from  physico-chemical 
science,  instruments  must  necessarily  be  somewhat  liberally  provided. 
The  solution  of  certain  scientific  questions  often  imperatively  de- 
mands costly  and  complicated  instruments,  so  that  we  may  then 
say  that  scientific  questions  are  secondary  to  the  question  of  money. 
However,  I  do  not  approve  the  luxury  as  to  instruments  to  which 
certain  physiologists  have  yielded.  In  my  opinion,  we  should  seek 
to  simplify  instruments  as  much  as  possible,  not  only  for  pecuniary, 
but  also  for  scientific  reasons ;  for  we  need  to  learn  that  the  more 
complicated  the  instrument,  the  more  sources  of  error  does  it  create. 
Experimenters  do  not  grow  great  by  the  number  and  complexity  of 
instruments ;  it  is  really  the  other  way.  The  great  experimenters, 
Berzelius  and  Spallanzani,  made  great  discoveries  by  means  of 
simple  instruments.  In  the  course  of  this  work,  our  principle,  then, 
will  be  to  seek,  as  far  as  possible,  to  simplify  means  of  study ;  for 
instruments  must  be  allies  not  sources  of  error  because  of  their 
complications. 


PART  THREE 


APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  EXPEEIMENTAL  METHOD 
TO  THE  STUDY  OF  VITAL  PHENOME^TA 

CHAPTEK  I 

EXAMPLES  OF  EXPERIMENTAL  PHYSIOLOGICAL 

INVESTIGATION 

The  ideas  explained  in  the  first  two  parts  of  this  introduction 
will  be  all  the  better  understood  if  we  can  connect  them  with  actual 
investigations  in  experimental  physiology  and  medicine.  For  this 
reason,  I  have  put  together  in  the  following  part  a  certain  num- 
ber of  examples  that  seem  to  me  appropriate.  As  far  as  possible, 
I  have  quoted  from  myself  in  all  these  examples,  for  the  sole 
reason  that,  in  the  matter  of  reasoning  and  intellectual  processes, 
I  shall  be  much  more  certain  of  what  I  describe  in  telling  what  has 
happened  to  me  than  in  interpreting  what  may  have  taken  place  in 
the  minds  of  others.  I  am  not,  however,  so  fatuous  as  to  give  these 
examples  as  models  to  follow;  I  use  them  only  to  express  my  ideas 
better  and  to  make  my  thought  easier  to  grasp. 

In  scientific  investigations,  various  circumstances  may  serve  as 
starting  points  for  research ;  I  will  reduce  all  these  varieties,  however, 
to  two  chief  types: 

1.  Where  the  starting  point  for  experimental  research  is  an 
observation ; 

2.  Where  the  starting  point  for  experimental  research  is  an 
hypothesis  or  a  theory. 

I.  Where  the  Starting  Point  for  Experimentax  Pesearch  Is 

AN  Observation 

Experimental  ideas  are  often  born  by  chance,  with  the  help  of 
some  casual  observation.  Nothing  is  more  common ;  and  this  is 
really  the  simplest  way  of  beginning  a  piece  of  scientific  work.  We 
take  a  walk,  so  to  speak,  in  the  realm  of  science,  and  we  pursue 

151 


152 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


what  happens  to  present  itself  to  our  eyes.  Bacon  compares  scien- 
tific investigation  with  hunting;  the  observations  that  present  them- 
selves are  the  game.  Keeping  the  same  simile,  we  may  add  that, 
if  the  game  presents  itself  when  we  are  looking  for  it,  it  may  also 
present  itself  when  we  are  not  looking  for  it,  or  when  we  are  look- 
ing for  game  of  another  kind.  I  shall  cite  an  example  in  which 
these  two  cases  presented  themselves  in  succession.  At  the  same 
time  I  shall  be  careful  to  analyze  every  circumstance  involved,  so 
as  to  show  how  the  principles  apply  which  we  explained  in  the  first 
part  of  the  introduction  and  especially  in  Chapters  I  and  II. 

First  example. — One  day,  rabbits  from  the  market  were  brought 
into  my  laboratory.  They  were  put  on  the  table  where  they  uri- 
nated, and  I  happened  to  observe  that  their  urine  was  clear  and  acid. 
This  fact  struck  me,  because  rabbits,  which  are  herbivora,  generally 
have  turbid  and  alkaline  urine;  while  on  the  other  hand  carnivora,  as 
we  know,  have  clear  and  acid  urine.  This  observation  of  acidity  in 
the  rabbits'  urine  gave  me  an  idea  that  these  animals  must  be  in  the 
nutritional  condition  of  carnivora.  I  assumed  that  they  had  prob- 
ably not  eaten  for  a  long  time,  and  that  they  had  been  transformed 
by  fasting,  into  veritable  carnivorous  animals,  living  on  their  own 
blood.  ^Nothing  was  easier  than  to  verify  this  preconceived  idea 
or  hypothesis  by  experiment.  I  gave  the  rabbits  grass  to  eat ;  and  a 
few  hours  later,  their  urine  became  turbid  and  alkaline.  I  then  sub- 
jected them  to  fasting  and  after  twenty-four  hours  or  thirty-six 
hours  at  most,  their  urine  again  became  clear  and  strongly  acid ; 
then  after  eating  grass,  their  urine  became  alkaline  again,  etc.  I 
repeated  this  very  simple  experiment  a  great  many  times,  and  always 
with  the  same  result.  I  then  repeated  it  on  a  horse,  an  herbivorous 
animal  which  also  has  turbid  and  alkaline  urine.  I  found  that 
fasting,  as  in  rabbits,  produced  prompt  acidity  of  the  urine,  with 
such  an  increase  in  urea,  that  it  spontaneously  crystallizes  at  times 
in  the  cooled  urine.  As  a  result  of  my  experiments,  I  thus  reached 
the  general  proposition  which  then  was  still  unknown,  to  wit,  that  all 
fasting  animals  feed  on  meat,  so  that  herbivora  then  have  urine  like 
that  of  carnivora. 

We  are  here  dealing  with  a  very  simple,  particular  fact  which 
allows  us  easily  to  follow  the  evolution  of  experimental  reasoning. 
When  we  see  a  phenomenon  which  we  are  not  in  the  habit  of  seeing, 
we  must  always  ask  ourselves  what  it  is  connected  with,  or  putting  it 


OF  EXPEKIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


153 


differently,  what  is  its  proximate  cause ;  tlie  answer  or  the  idea,  which 
presents  itself  to  the  mind,  must  then  be  submitted  to  experiment. 
When  I  saw  the  rabbits'  acid  urine,  I  instinctively  asked  myself 
what  could  be  its  cause.  The  experimental  idea  consisted  in  the  con- 
nection, which  my  mind  spontaneously  made,  between  acidity  of  the 
rabbits'  urine,  and  the  state  of  fasting  which  I  considered  equivalent 
to  a  true  flesh-eater's  diet.  The  inductive  reasoning  which  I  im- 
plicitly went  through  was  the  following  syllogism:  the  urine  of 
carnivora  is  acid;  now  the  rabbits  before  me  have  acid  urine, 
therefore  they  are  carnivora,  i.e.,  fasting.  This  remained  to  be 
established  by  experiment. 

But  to  prove  that  my  fasting  rabbits  were  really  carnivorous, 
a  counterproof  was  required.  A  carnivorous  rabbit  had  to  be  ex- 
perimentally produced  by  feeding  it  with  meat,  so  as  to  see  if  its 
urine  would  then  be  clear,  as  it  was  during  fasting.  So  I  had  rab- 
bits fed  on  cold  boiled  beef  (which  they  eat  very  nicely  when  they 
are  given  nothing  else) .  My  expectation  was  again  verified,  and,  as 
long  as  the  animal  diet  was  continued,  the  rabbits  kept  their  clear 
and  acid  urine. 

To  complete  my  experiment,  I  made  an  autopsy  on  my  animals, 
to  see  if  meat  was  digested  in  the  same  way  in  rabbits  as  in  carnivora. 
I  found,  in  fact,  all  the  phenomena  of  an  excellent  digestion  in  their 
intestinal  reactions,  and  I  noted  that  all  the  chyliferous  vessels  were 
gorged  with  very  abundant  white,  milky  chyle,  just  as  in  carnivora. 
But  a  propos  of  these  autopsies  which  confirmed  my  ideas  on  meat 
digestion  in  rabbits,  lo  and  behold  a  fact  presented  itself  which  I  had 
not  remotely  thought  of,  but  which  became,  as  we  shall  see,  my  start- 
ing point  in  a  new  piece  of  work. 

Second  example. — (Sequel  to  the  last) — In  sacrificing  the  rab- 
bits which  I  had  fed  on  the  meat,  I  happened  to  notice  that  the  white 
and  milky  lymphatics  were  first  visible  in  the  small  intestine  at  the 
lower  part  of  the  duodenum,  about  thirty  centimeters  below  the 
pylorus.  This  fact  caught  my  attention  because  in  dogs  they  are 
first  visible  much  higher  in  the  duodenum  just  below  the  pylorus. 
On  examining  more  closely,  I  noted  that  this  peculiarity  in  rab- 
bits coincided  with  the  position  of  the  pancreatic  duct  which  was 
inserted  very  low  and  near  the  exact  place  where  the  lymphatics 
began  to  contain  a  chyle  made  white  and  milky  by  emulsion  of  fatty 
nutritive  materials. 


154 


AN  INTRODUCTION"  TO  THE  STUDY 


Chance  observation  of  this  fact  evoked  the  idea  which  brought 
to  birth  the  thought  in  my  mind,  that  pancreatic  juice  might  well 
cause  the  emulsion  of  fatty  materials  and  consequently  their  absorp- 
tion by  the  lymphatic  vessels.  Instinctively  again,  I  made  the  fol- 
lowing syllogism :  the  white  chyle  is  due  to  emulsion  of  the  fat ;  now 
in  rabbits  white  chyle  is  formed  at  the  level  where  pancreatic  juice 
is  poured  into  the  intestine ;  therefore  it  is  pancreatic  juice  that  makes 
the  emulsion  of  fat  and  forms  the  white  chyle.  This  had  to  be 
decided  by  experiment. 

In  view  of  this  preconceived  idea  I  imagined  and  at  once  per- 
formed a  suitable  experiment  to  verify  the  truth  or  falsity  of  my 
suppositions.  The  experiment  consisted  in  trying  the  properties  of 
pancreatic  juice  directly  on  neutral  fats.  But  pancreatic  juice  does 
not  spontaneously  flow  outside  of  the  body,  like  saliva,  for  instance, 
or  urine;  its  secretory  organ  is,  on  the  contrary,  lodged  deep  in  the 
abdominal  cavity.  I  was  therefore  forced  to  use  the  method  of  ex- 
perimentation to  secure  the  pancreatic  fluid  from  living  animals  in 
suitable  physiological  conditions  and  in  sufficient  quantity.  Only 
then  could  I  carry  out  my  experiment,  that  is  to  say,  control  my 
preconceived  idea ;  and  the  experiment  proved  that  my  idea  was  cor- 
rect. In  fact  pancreatic  juice  obtained  in  suitable  conditions  from 
dogs,  rabbits  and  various  other  animals,  and  mixed  with  oil  or 
melted  fat,  always  instantly  emulsified,  and  later  split  these  fatty 
bodies  into  fatty  acids,  glycerine,  etc.,  etc.,  by  means  of  a  specific 
ferment. 

I  shall  not  follow  these  experiments  further,  having  explained 
them  at  length  in  a  special  work.^  I  wish  here  to  show  merely  how 
an  accidental  first  observation  of  the  acidity  of  rabbits'  urine  sug- 
gested to  me  the  idea  of  making  experiments  on  them  with  carnivorous 
feeding,  and  how  later,  in  continuing  these  experiments,  I  brought 
to  light,  without  seeing.it,  another  observation  concerning  the  peculiar 
arrangement  of  the  junction  of  the  pancreatic  duct  in  rabbits.  This 
second  observation  gave  me,  in  turn,  the  idea  of  experimenting  on 
the  behavior  of  pancreatic  juice. 

From  the  above  examples  we  see  how  chance  observation  of  a 
fact  or  phenomenon  brings  to  birth,  by  anticipation,  a  preconceived 
idea  or  hypothesis  about  the  probable  cause  of  the  phenomenon  ob- 

*  Claude  Bernard,  Memoire  sur  le  pancreas  et  sur  le  role  du  sue  pancr^atique 
dans  les  phenomenes  digestifs.    Paris,  1856. 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


155 


served ;  how  the  preconceived  idea  begets  reasoning  which  results  in 
the  experiment  which  verifies  it;  how,  in  one  case,  we  had  to  have 
recourse  to  experimentation,  i.e.,  to  the  use  of  more  or  less  compli- 
cated operative  processes,  etc.,  to  work  out  the  verification.  In  the 
last  example,  experiment  played  a  double  role;  it  first  judged  and 
confirmed  the  provisions  of  the  reasoning  which  it  had  begotten; 
but  what  is  more,  it  produced  a  fresh  observation.  We  may  there- 
fore call  this  observation  an  observation  produced  or  begotten  by 
experiment.  This  proves  that,  as  we  said,  all  the  results  of  an 
experiment  must  be  observed,  both  those  connected  with  the  precon- 
ceived idea  and  those  without  any  relation  to  it.  If  we  saw  only 
facts  connected  with  our  preconceived  idea,  we  should  often  cut  our- 
selves off  from  making  discoveries.  For  it  often  happens  that  an 
unsuccessful  experiment  may  produce  an  excellent  observation,  as 
the  following  example  will  prove. 

Third  example. — In  1857,  I  undertook  a  series  of  experiments 
on  the  elimination  of  substances  in  the  urine,  and  this  time  the 
results  of  the  experiment,  unlike  the  previous  examples,  did  not 
confirm  my  previsions  or  preconceived  ideas.  I  had  therefore  made 
what  we  habitually  call  an  unsuccessful  experiment.  But  we  have 
already  posited  the  principle  that  there  are  no  unsuccessful  experi- 
ments; for,  when  they  do  not  serve  the  investigation  for  which 
they  were  devised,  we  must  still  profit  by  observation  to  find  occasion 
for  other  experiments. 

In  investigating  how  the  blood,  leaving  the  kidney,  eliminated 
substances  that  I  had  injected,  I  chanced  to  observe  that  the  blood 
in  the  renal  vein  was  crimson,  while  the  blood  in  the  neighboring 
veins  was  dark  like  ordinary  venous  blood.  This  unexpected  pecu- 
liarity struck  me,  and  I  thus  made  observation  of  a  fresh  fact  begot- 
ten by  the  experiment,  but  foreign  to  the  experimental  aim  pursued 
at  the  moment.  I  therefore  gave  up  my  unverified  original  idea, 
and  directed  my  attention  to  the  singular  coloring  of  the  venous  renal 
blood ;  and  when  I  had  noted  it  well  and  assured  myself  that  there  was 
no  source  of  error  in  my  observation,  I  naturally  asked  myself  what 
could  be  its  cause.  As  I  examined  the  urine  flowing  through  the 
urethra  and  reflected  about  it,  it  occurred  to  me  that  the  red  coloring 
of  the  venous  blood  might  well  be  connected  with  the  secreting  or 
active  state  of  the  kidney.  On  this  hypothesis,  if  the  renal  secre- 
tion was  stopped,  the  venous  blood  should  become  dark :  that  is  what 


156  AN  INTKODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


happened;  when  the  renal  secretion  was  reestablished,  the  venous 
blood  should  become  crimson  again ;  this  I  also  succeeded  in  verifying 
whenever  I  excited  the  secretion  of  urine.  I  thus  secured  experi- 
mental proof  that  there  is  a  connection  between  the  secretion  of  urine 
and  the  coloring  of  blood  in  the  renal  vein. 

But  that  is  still  by  no  means  all.  In  the  normal  state,  venous 
blood  in  the  kidney  is  almost  constantly  crimson,  because  the  urinary 
organ  secretes  almost  continuously,  though  alternately  for  each 
kidney.  Now  I  wished  to  know  whether  the  crimson  color  is  a 
general  fact  characteristic  of  the  other  glands,  and  in  this  way  to 
get  a  clear-cut  counterproof  demonstrating  that  the  phenomenon  of 
secretion  itself  was  what  led  to  the  alteration  in  the  color  of  the 
venous  blood.  I  reasoned  thus :  if,  said  I,  secretion,  as  it  seems 
to  be,  causes  the  crimson  color  of  glandular  venous  blood,  then,  in 
such  glandular  organs  as  the  salivary  glands  which  secrete  intermit- 
tently, the  venous  blood  will  change  color  intermittently  and  become 
dark,  while  the  gland  is  at  rest,  and  red  during  secretion.  So  I  un- 
covered a  dog's  submaxillary  gland,  its  ducts,  its  nerves  and  its  ves- 
sels. In  its  normal  state,  this  gland  supplies  an  intermittent  secre- 
tion which  we  can  excite  or  stop  at  pleasure.  ^Tow  while  the 
gland  was  at  rest,  and  nothing  flowed  through  the  salivary  duct,  I 
clearly  noted  that  the  venous  blood  was,  indeed,  dark,  while,  as  soon 
as  secretion  appeared,  the  blood  became  crimson,  to  resume  its  dark 
color  when  the  secretion  stopped;  and  it  remained  dark  as  long  as 
the  intermission  lasted,  etc.^ 

These  last  observations  later  became  the  starting  point  for  new 
ideas  which  guided  me  in  making  investigations  as  to  the  chemical 
cause  of  the  change  in  color  of  glandular  blood  during  secretion.  I 
shall  not  further  describe  these  experiments  which,  moreover,  I 
have  published  in  detail.^  It  is  enough  for  me  to  prove  that  scien- 
tific investigations  and  experimental  ideas  may  have  their  birth 
in  almost  involuntary  chance  observations  which  present  themselves 
either  spontaneously  or  in  an  experiment  made  with  a  different 
purpose. 

'  Claude  Bernard,  Legons  sur  les  proprietes  physiologiques  et  les  alterations 
pathologiques  des  liquides  de  Vorganisme.    Paris,  1859.    Vol.  II. 

•  Claude  Bernard,  Sur  la  quantity  d'oxygene  que  contient  le  sang  veineuw 
des  organes  glandulaires.  {Compt.  rend,  de  VAcad.  des  sciences.  Vol.  XL VII, 
Sept.  6,  1858.) 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


157 


Let  me  cite  another  case, — one  in  which,  an  experimenter  pro- 
duces an  observation  and  voluntarily  brings  it  to  birth.  This  case  is, 
so  to  speak,  included  in  the  preceding  case ;  but  it  differs  from  it  in 
this,  that,  instead  of  waiting  for  an  observation  to  present  itself  by 
chance  in  fortuitous  circumstances,  we  produce  it  by  experiment. 
Returning  to  Bacon's  comparison,  we  might  say  that  an  experimenter, 
in  this  instance,  is  like  a  hunter  who,  instead  of  waiting  quietly  for 
game,  tries  to  make  it  rise,  by  beating  up  the  locality  where  he 
assumes  it  is.  We  use  this  method  whenever  we  have  no  precon- 
ceived idea  in  respect  to  a  subject  as  to  which  previous  observations 
are  lacking.  So  we  experiment  to  bring  to  birth  observations  which 
in  turn  may  bring  to  birth  ideas.  This  continually  occurs  in  medi- 
cine when  we  wish  to^  investigate  the  action  of  a  poison  or  of  some 
medicinal  substance,  on  an  animal's  economy;  we  make  experiments 
to  see,  and  we  then  take  our  direction  from  what  we  have  seen. 

Fourth  example. — In  1845,  Monsieur  Pelouze  gave  me  a  toxic 
substance,  called  curarej  which  had  been  brought  to  him  from  Amer- 
ica. We  then  knew  nothing  about  the  physiological  action  of  this 
substance.  From  old  observations  and  from  the  interesting  accounts 
of  Alex,  von  Humboldt  and  of  Roulin  and  Boussingault,  we  knew  only 
that  the  preparation  of  this  substance  was  complex  and  difficult,  and 
that  it  very  speedily  kills  an  animal  if  introduced  under  the  skin. 
But  from  the  earlier  observations,  I  could  get  no  idea  of  the  mechan- 
ism of  death  by  curare ;  to  get  such  an  idea  I  had  to  make  fresh  obser- 
vations as  to  the  organic  disturbances  to  which  this  poison  might  lead. 
I  therefore  made  experiments  to  see  things  about  which  I  had  abso- 
lutely no  preconceived  idea.  First,  I  put  curare  under  the  skin  of 
a  frog :  it  died  after  a  few  minutes ;  I  opened  it  at  once,  and  in  this 
physiological  autopsy  I  studied  in  succession  what  had  become  of 
the  known  physiological  properties  of  its  various  tissues.  I  say 
physiological  autopsy  purposely,  because  no  others  are  really  instruc- 
tive. The  disappearance  of  physiological  properties  is  what  ex- 
plains death,  and  not  anatomical  changes.  Indeed,  in  the  present 
state  of  science,  we  see  physiological  properties  disappear  in  any 
number  of  cases  without  being  able  to  show,  by  our  present  means 
of  observation,  any  corresponding  anatomical  change;  such,  for 
example,  is  the  case  with  curare.  Meantime,  we  shall  find  examples, 
on  the  contrary,  in  which  physiological  properties  persist,  in  spite 
of  very  marked  anatomical  changes  with  which  the  functions  are  by 


158 


AN  INTRODrCTIOX  TO  THE  STUDY 


no  means  incompatible.  Now  in  my  frog  poisoned  with  curare,  the 
heart  maintained  its  movements,  the  blood  was  apparently  no  more 
changed  in  physiological  properties  than  the  muscles,  which  kept 
their  normal  contractility.  But  while  the  nervous  system  had  kept 
its  normal  anatomical  appearance,  the  properties  of  the  nerves  had 
nevertheless  completely  disappeared.  There  were  no  movements, 
either  voluntary  or  reflex,  and  when  the  motor  nerves  were  stimulated 
directly,  they  no  longer  caused  any  contraction  in  the  muscles.  To 
learn  whether  there  was  anything  accidental  or  mistaken  in  this  first 
observation,  I  repeated  it  several  times  and  verified  it  in  various 
ways;  for  when  we  wish  to  reason  experimentally,  the  first  thing 
necessary  is  to  be  a  good  observer  and  to  make  quite  certain  that  the 
starting  point  of  our  reasoning  is  not  a  mistake  in  observation.  In 
mammals  and  in  birds,  I  found  the  same  phenomena  as  in  frogs, 
and  disappearance  of  the  physiological  properties  of  the  motor 
nervous  system  became  my  constant  fact.  Starting  from  this  well 
established  fact,  I  could  then  carry  analysis  of  the  phenomena  fur- 
ther and  determine  the  mechanism  of  death  from  curare.  I  still 
proceeded  by  reasonings  analogous  to  those  quoted  in  the  above  exam- 
ple, and,  from  idea  to  idea  and  experiment  to  experiment,  I  pro- 
gressed to  more  and  more  definite  facts.  I  finally  reached  this  gen- 
eral proposition,  that  curare  causes  death  by  destroying  all  the  motor 
nerves,  without  affecting  the  sensory  neirves^ 

In  cases  where  we  make  an  experiment  in  which  both  precon- 
ceived idea  and  reasoning  seem  completely  lacking,  we  yet  neces- 
sarily reason  by  syllogism  without  knowing  it.  In  the  case  of  curare, 
I  instinctively  reasoned  in  the  following  way :  no  phenomenon  is  with- 
out a  cause,  and  consequently  no  poisoning  without  a  physiological 
lesion  peculiar  or  proper  to  the  poison  used ;  now,  thought  I,  curare 
must  cause  death  by  an  activity  special  to  itself  and  by  acting  on 
certain  definite  organic  parts.  So  by  poisoning  an  animal  with 
curare  and  by  examining  the  properties  of  its  various  tissues  immedi- 
ately after  death,  I  can  perhaps  find  and  study  the  lesions  peculiar 
to  it. 

The  mind,  then,  is  still  active  here,  and  an  experiment  in  order  to 
see  is  included,  nevertheless,  in  our  general  definition  of  an  experi- 
ment (p.  10).    In  every  enterprise,  in  fact,  the  mind  is  always  rea- 

Cf.  Claude  Bernard,  Legons  sur  les  effets  des  substances  toxiquea;  Paris, 
1857  J  Du  curare.    {Revue  des  Deuw  Mondes,  Sept.  1,  1864.) 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


159 


soning,  and,  even  when  we  seem  to  act  without  a  motive,  an  instinctive 
logic  still  directs  the  mind.  Only  we  are  not  aware  of  it,  because  we 
begin  by  reasoning  before  we  know  or  say  that  we  are  reasoning,  just 
as  we  begin  by  speaking  before  we  observe  that  we  are  speaking,  and 
just  as  we  begin  by  seeing  and  hearing  before  we  know  what  we  see 
or  what  we  hear. 

Fifth  example. — About  1846,  I  wished  to  make  experiments  on 
the  cause  of  poisoning  with  carbon  monoxide.  I  knew  that  this  gas 
had  been  described  as  toxic,  but  I  knew  literally  nothing  about  the 
mechanism  of  its  poisoning;  I  therefore  could  not  have  a  precon- 
ceived opinion.  What,  then,  was  to  be  done?  I  must  bring  to 
birth  an  idea  by  making  a  fact  appear,  i.e.,  make  another  experiment 
to  see.  In  fact  I  poisoned  a  dog  by  making  him  breathe  carbon 
monoxide  and  after  death  I  at  once  opened  his  body.  I  looked  at  the 
state  of  the  organs  and  fluids.  What  caught  my  attention  at  once 
was  that  its  blood  was  scarlet  in  all  the  vessels,  in  the  veins  as  well 
as  the  arteries,  in  the  right  heart  as  well  as  in  the  left.  I  repeated 
the  experiment  on  rabbits,  birds  and  frogs,  and  everywhere  I  found 
the  same  scarlet  coloring  of  the  blood.  But  I  was  diverted  from 
continuing  this  investigation,  and  I  kept  this  observation  a  long  time 
unused  except  for  quoting  it  in  my  course  a  propos  of  the  coloring  of 
blood. 

In  1856,  no  one  had  carried  the  experimental  question  further, 
and  in  my  course  at  the  College  de  France  on  toxic  and  medicinal 
substances,  I  again  took  up  the  study  of  poisoning  by  carbon  mon- 
oxide which  I  had  begun  in  1846.  I  found  myself  then  in  a  con- 
fused situation,  for  at  this  time  I  already  knew  that  poisoning  with 
carbon  monoxide  makes  the  blood  scarlet  in  the  whole  circulatorv 
system.  I  had  to  make  hypotheses,  and  establish  a  preconceived 
idea  about  my  first  observation,  so  as  to  go  ahead.  Now,  reflecting 
on  the  fact  of  scarlet  blood,  I  tried  to  interpret  it  by  my  earlier  knowl- 
edge as  to  the  cause  of  the  color  of  blood.  Whereupon  all  the  fol- 
lowing reflections  presented  themselves  to  my  mind.  The  scarlet 
color,  said  I,  is  peculiar  to  arterial  blood  and  connected  with 
the  presence  of  a  large  proportion  of  oxygen,  while  dark  coloring 
belongs  with  absence  of  oxygen  and  presence  of  a  larger  proportion 
of  carbonic  acid ;  so  the  idea  occurred  to  me  that  carbon  monoxide, 
by  keeping  venous  blood  scarlet,  might  perhaps  have  prevented  the 
oxygen  from  changing  into  carbonic  acid  in  the  capillaries.  Yet 


160 


AN  INTEODUCTIOX  TO  THE  STUDY 


it  seemed  hard  to  understand  how  that  could  be  the  cause  of  death. 
But  still  keeping  on  with  my  inner  preconceived  reasoning,  I  added : 
If  that  is  true,  blood  taken  from  the  veins  of  animals  poisoned 
with  carbon  monoxide  should  be  like  arterial  blood  in  containing 
oxygen ;  we  must  see  if  that  is  the  fact. 

Following  this  reasoning,  based  on  interpretation  of  my  obser- 
vation, I  tried  an  experiment  to  verify  my  hypothesis  as  to  the  per- 
sistence of  oxygen  in  the  venous  blood.  I  passed  a  current  of  hydro- 
gen through  scarlet  venous  blood  taken  from  an  animal  poisoned  with 
carbon  monoxide,  but  I  could  not  liberate  the  oxygen  as  usual.  I 
tried  to  do  the  same  with  arterial  blood;  I  had  no  greater  success. 
My  preconceived  idea  was  therefore  false.  But  the  impossibility 
of  getting  oxygen  from  the  blood  of  a  dog  poisoned  with  carbon 
monoxide  was  a  second  observation  which  suggested  a  fresh  hypoth- 
esis. What  could  have  become  of  the  oxygen  in  the  blood?  It 
had  not  changed  into  carbonic  acid,  because  I  had  not  set  free  large 
quantities  of  that  gas  in  passing  a  current  of  hydrogen  through 
the  blood  of  the  poisoned  animals.  Moreover,  that  hypothesis  was 
contrary  to  the  color  of  the  blood.  I  exhausted  myself  in  conjec- 
tures about  how  carbon  monoxide  could  cause  the  oxygen  to  disappear 
from  the  blood ;  and  as  gases  displace  one  another  I  naturally  thought 
that  the  carbon  monoxide  might  have  displaced  the  oxygen  and  driven 
it  out  of  the  blood.  To  learn  this,  I  decided  to  vary  my  experimen- 
tation by  putting  the  blood  in  artificial  conditions  that  would  allow 
me  to  recover  the  displaced  oxygen.  So  I  studied  the  action  of 
carbon  monoxide  on  blood  experimentally.  Tor  this  purpose  I  took 
a  certain  amount  of  arterial  blood  from  a  healthy  animal ;  I  put  this 
blood  on  the  mercury  in  an  inverted  test  tube  containing  carbon 
monoxide;  I  then  shook  the  whole  thing  so  as  to  poison  tlie  blood 
sheltered  from  contact  with  the  outer  air.  Then,  after  an  interval, 
I  examined  whether  the  air  in  the  test-tube  in  contact  with  the  poi- 
soned blood  had  been  changed,  and  I  noted  that  the  air  thus  in 
contact  with  the  blood  had  been  remarkably  enriched  with  oxygen, 
while  the  proportion  of  carbon  monoxide  was  lessened.  Repeated  in 
the  same  conditions,  these  experiments  taught  me  that  what  had  oc- 
curred was  an  exchange,  volume  by  volume,  between  the  carbon 
monoxide  and  the  oxygen  of  the  blood.  But  the  carbon  monoxide,  in 
displacing  the  oxygen  that  it  had  expelled  from  the  blood,  remained 
chemically  combined  in  the  blood  and  could  no  longer  be  displaced 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


161 


either  by  oxygen  or  by  other  gases.  So  that  death  came  through 
death  of  the  molecules  of  blood,  or  in  other  words  by  stopping  their 
exercise  of  a  physiological  property  essential  to  life. 

This  last  example,  which  I  have  very  briefly  described,  is  com- 
plete; it  shows  from  one  end  to  the  other,  how  we  proceed  with  the 
experimental  method  and  succeeded  in  learning  the  immediate  cause 
of  phenomena.  To  begin  with  I  knew  literally  nothing  about  the 
mechanism  of  the  phenomenon  of  poisoning  with  carbon  monoxide. 
I  undertook  an  experiment  to  see,  i.e.,  to  observe.  I  made  a  pre- 
liminary observation  of  a  special  change  in  the  coloring  of  blood.  I 
interpreted  this  observation,  and  I  made  an  hypothesis  which  proved 
false.  But  the  experiment  provided  me  with  a  second  observation 
about  which  I  reasoned  anew,  using  it  as  a  starting  point  for  making 
a  new  hypothesis  as  to  the  mechanism,  by  which  the  oxygen  in  the 
blood  was  removed.  By  building  up  hypotheses,  one  by  one,  about 
the  facts  as  I  observed  them,  I  finally  succeeded  in  showing  that 
carbon  monoxide  replaces  oxygen  in  a  molecule  of  blood,  by  combin- 
ing with  the  substance  of  the  molecule.  Experimental  analysis,  here, 
has  reached  its  goal.  This  is  one  of  the  cases,  rare  in  physiology, 
which  I  am  happy  to  be  able  to  quote.  Here  the  immediate  cause  of 
the  phenomenon  of  poisoning  is  found  and  is  translated  into  a  theory 
which  accounts  for  all  the  facts  and  at  the  same  time  includes  all 
the  observations  and  experiments.  Formulated  as  follows,  the  the- 
ory posits  the  main  facts  from  which  all  the  rest  are  deduced :  Carbon 
monoxide  combines  more  intimately  than  oxygen  with  the  hemoglobin 
in  a  molecule  of  blood.  It  has  quite  recently  been  proved  that 
carbon  monoxide  forms  a  definite  combination  with  hemoglobin.^  So 
that  the  molecule  of  blood,  as  if  petrified  by  the  stability  of  the 
combination,  loses  its  vital  properties.  Hence  everything  is  logically 
deduced:  because  of  its  property  of  more  intimate  combination, 
carbon  monoxide  drives  out  of  the  blood  the  oxygen  essential  to  life ; 
the  molecules  of  blood  become  inert,  and  the  animal  dies,  with  symp- 
toms of  hemorrhage,  from  true  paralysis  of  the  molecules. 

But  when  a  theory  is  sound  and  indeed  shows  the  real  and  defi- 
nite physico-chemical  cause  of  phenomena,  it  not  only  includes 
the  observed  facts  but  predicts  others  and  leads  to  rational  appli- 
cations that  are  logical  consequences  of  the  theory.    Here  again  we 

'  Hoppe-Seyler,  Handbuch  der  physiologisch-  und  pathologisich-chemischen 
Analyse.   Berlin,  1865. 


162 


AN  INTRODUCTIOX  TO  THE  STUDY 


meet  this  criterion.  In  fact,  if  carbon  monoxide  has  the  property 
of  driving  out  oxygen  by  taking  its  place  in  combining  with  a  mole- 
cule of  blood,  we  should  be  able  to  use  the  gas  to  analyze  the  gases 
in  blood,  and  especially  for  determining  oxygen.  From  my  experi- 
ments I  deduced  this  application  which  has  been  generally  adopted 
to-day.^  Applications  of  this  property  of  carbon  monoxide  have  been 
made  in  legal  medicine  for  finding  the  coloring  matter  of  blood ;  and 
from  the  physiological  facts  described  above  we  may  also  already 
deduce  results  connected  with  hygiene,  experimental  pathology,  and 
notably  with  the  mechanism  of  certain  forms  of  anemia. 

As  in  every  other  case,  all  the  deductions  from  the  theory  doubt- 
less still  require  experimental  verification;  and  logic  does  not  suf- 
fice. But  this  is  because  the  conditions  in  which  carbon  monoxide 
acts  on  the  blood  may  present  other  complex  circumstances  and  any 
number  of  details  which  the  theory  cannot  yet  predict.  Otherwise, 
as  we  have  often  said  (p.  29),  we  could  reach  conclusions  by  logic 
alone,  without  any  need  of  experimental  verifications.  Because  of 
possible  unforeseen  and  variable  new  elements  in  the  conditions  of  a 
phenomenon,  logic  alone  can  in  experimental  science  never  sufiice. 
Even  when  we  have  a  theory  that  seems  sound,  it  is  never  more  than 
relatively  sound,  and  it  always  includes  a  certain  proportion  of  the 
unknown. 

II.  When  the  Starting  Point  of  Experimental  Research  Is 

AN  Hypothesis  or  a  Theory 

We  have  already  said  (p.  25)  and  we  shall  see  further  on,  that  in 
noting  an  observation  we  must  never  go  beyond  facts.  But  in  making 
an  experiment,  it  is  different.  I  wish  to  show  that  hypotheses  are 
indispensable,  and  that  they  are  useful,  therefore,  precisely  because 
they  lead  us  outside  of  facts  and  carry  science  forward.  The  object 
of  hypotheses  is  not  only  to  make  us  try  new  experiments ;  they  also 
often  make  us  discover  new  facts  which  we  should  not  have  perceived 
without  them.  In  the  preceding  examples,  we  saw  that  we  can  start 
from  a  particular  fact  and  rise  one  by  one  to  more  general  ideas, 
i.e.,  to  a  theory.    But  as  we  have  just  seen,  we  can  also  sometimes 

•  Claude  Bernard,  De  Vemploi  de  Voxyde  de  carhone  pour  la  determination 
de  Voxygdne  du  sang  {Compt.  rend,  de  VAcad.  des  sciences,  Meeting  of  Sept.  6, 
1858,  Vol.  XLVII). 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


163 


start  with  an  hypothesis  deduced  from  a  theory.  Though  we  are 
dealing  in  this  case  with  reasoning  logically  deduced  from  a  theory, 
we  have  an  hypothesis  that  must  still  be  verified  by  experiment. 
Indeed,  theories  are  only  an  assembling  of  the  earlier  facts,  on  which 
our  hypothesis  rests,  and  cannot  be  used  to  demonstrate  it  experi- 
mentally. We  said  that,  in  this  instance,  we  must  not  submit  to  the 
yoke  of  theories,  and  that  keeping  our  mental  independence  is  the 
best  way  to  discover  the  truth.  This  is  proved  by  the  following 
examples. 

First  example. — In  1843,  in  one  of  my  first  pieces  of  work,  1 
undertook  to  study  what  becomes  of  different  alimentary  substances 
in  nutrition.  As  I  said  before,  I  began  with  sugar,  a  definite 
substance  that  is  easier  than  any  other  to  recognize  and  follow 
in  the  bodily  economy.  With  this  in  view,  I  injected  solutions  of 
cane  sugar  into  the  blood  of  animals,  and  I  noted  that  even  when 
injected  in  weak  doses  the  sugar  passed  into  the  urine.  I  recog- 
nized later  that,  by  changing  or  transforming  sugar,  the  gastric 
juice  made  it  capable  of  assimilation,  i.e.,  of  destruction  in  the 
blood.^ 

Thereupon  I  wished  to  learn  in  what  organ  the  nutritive  sugar 
disappeared,  and  I  conceived  the  hypothesis  that  sugar  introduced 
into  the  blood  through  nutrition  might  be  destroyed  in  the  lungs  or 
in  the  general  capillaries.  The  theory,  indeed,  which  then  pre- 
vailed and  which  was  naturally  my  proper  starting  point,  assumed 
that  the  sugar  present  in  animals  came  exclusively  from  foods,  and 
that  it  was  destroyed  in  animal  organisms  by  the  phenomena  of  com- 
bustion, i.e.,  of  respiration.  Thus  sugar  had  gained  the  name  of 
respiratory  nutriment.  But  I  was  immediately  led  to  see  that  the 
theory  about  the  origin  of  sugar  in  animals,  which  served  me  as  a 
starting  point,  was  false.  As  a  result  of  the  experiments  which  I 
shall  describe  further  on,  I  was  not  indeed  led  to  find  an  organ  for 
destroying  sugar,  but,  on  the  contrary,  I  discovered  an  organ  for 
making  it,  and  I  found  that  all  animal  blood  contains  sugar  even 
when  they  do  not  eat  it.  So  I  noted  a  new  fact,  unforeseen  in  the- 
ory, which  men  had  not  noticed,  doubtless  because  they  were  under 
the  influence  of  contrary  theories  which  they  had  too  confidently  ac- 
cepted. I  therefore  abandoned  my  hypothesis  on  the  spot,  so  as  to 
pursue  the  unexpected  result  which  has  since  become  the  fertile 
*  Claude  Bernard,  Thesis  for  doctorate  in  medicine,  Paris,  1843. 


164 


AN  INTRODUCTIOX  TO  THE  STUDY 


origin  of  a  new  path  for  investigation  and  a  mine  of  discoveries  that 
is  not  yet  exhausted. 

In  these  researches  I  followed  the  principles  of  the  experimental 
method  that  we  have  established,  i.e.,  that,  in  presence  of  a  well-noted, 
new  fact  which  contradicts  a  theory,  instead  of  keeping  the  theory 
and  abandoning  the  fact,  I  should  keep  and  study  the  fact,  and  I 
hastened  to  give  up  the  theory,  thus  conforming  to  the  precept  which 
we  proposed  in  the  second  chapter:  ^^When  we  meet  a  fact  which 
contradicts  a  prevailing  theory,  we  must  accept  the  fact  and  abandon 
the  theory,  even  when  the  theory  is  supported  by  great  names  and 
generally  accepted.'' 

We  must  therefore  distinguish,  as  we  said,  between  principles 
and  theories,  and  never  believe  absolutely  in  the  latter.  We  had  a 
theory  here  which  assumed  that  the  vegetable  kingdom  alone  had 
the  power  of  creating  the  individual  compounds  which  the  animal 
kingdom  is  supposed  to  destroy.  According  to  this  theory,  established 
and  supported  by  the  most  illustrious  chemists  of  our  day,  animals 
were  incapable  of  producing  sugar  in  their  organisms.  If  I  had  be- 
lieved in  this  theory  absolutely,  I  should  have  had  to  conclude  that 
my  experiment  was  vitiated  by  some  inaccuracy;  and  less  wary  ex- 
perimenters than  I  might  have  condemned  it  at  once,  and  might 
not  have  tarried  longer  at  an  observation  which  could  be  theo- 
retically suspected  of  including  sources  of  error,  since  it  showed 
sugar  in  the  blood  of  animals  on  a  diet  that  lacked  starchy  or  sugary 
materials.  But  instead  of  being  concerned  about  the  theory,  I  con- 
cerned myself  only  with  the  fact  whose  reality  I  was  trying  to  estab- 
lish. By  new  experiments  and  by  means  of  suitable  counterproofs,  I 
was  thus  led  to  confirm  my  first  observation  and  to  find  that  the  liver 
is  the  organ  in  which  animal  sugar  is  formed  in  certain  given  cir- 
cumstances, to  spread  later  into  the  whole  blood  supply  and  into  the 
tissues  and  fluids. 

Animal  glycogenesis  which  I  thus  discovered,  i.e.,  the  power  of 
producing  sugar,  possessed  by  animals  as  well  as  vegetables,  is  now 
an  acquired  fact  for  science ;  but  we  have  not  yet  fixed  on  a  plausible 
theory  accounting  for  the  phenomenon.  The  fresh  facts  which  I 
made  known  are  the  source  of  numerous  studies  and  many  varied 
theories  in  apparent  contradiction  with  each  other  and  with  my  own. 
When  entering  on  new  ground  we  must  not  be  afraid  to  express  even 
risky  ideas  so  as  to  stimulate  research  in  all  directions.   As  Priestley 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


165 


put  it,  we  must  not  remain  inactive  through  false  modesty  based  on 
fear  of  being  mistaken.  So  I  made  more  or  less  hypothetical  theories 
of  glycogenesis ;  after  mine  came  others ;  my  theories,  like  other 
men^s,  will  live  the  allotted  life  of  necessarily  very  partial  and  tem- 
porary theories  at  the  opening  of  a  new  series  of  investigations ;  they 
will  be  replaced  later  by  others,  embodying  a  more  advanced  stage 
of  the  question,  and  so  on.  Theories  are  like  a  stairway ;  by  climbing, 
science  widens  its  horizon  more  and  more,  because  theories  embody 
and  necessarily  include  proportionately  more  facts  as  they  advance. 
Progress  is  achieved  by  exchanging  our  theories  for  new  ones  which 
go  further  than  the  old,  until  we  find  one  based  on  a  larger  number 
of  facts.  In  the  case  which  now  concerns  us,  the  question  is  not 
one  of  condemning  the  old  to  the  advantage  of  a  more  recent  theory. 
What  is  important  is  having  opened  a  new  road ;  for  well-observed 
facts,  though  brought  to  light  by  passing  theories,  will  never  die; 
they  are  the  material  on  which  alone  the  house  of  science  will  at 
last  be  built,  when  it  has  facts  enough  and  has  gone  sufficientlj^  deep 
into  the  analysis  of  phenomena  to  know  their  law  or  their  causation. 

To  sum  up,  theories  are  only  hypotheses,  verified  by  more  or  less 
numerous  facts.  Those  verified  by  the  most  facts  are  the  best;  but 
even  then  they  are  never  final,  never  to  be  absolutely  believed.  We 
have  seen  in  the  preceding  examples  that  if  we  had  had  complete  con- 
fidence in  the  prevailing  theory  of  the  destruction  of  sugar  in  ani- 
mals, and  if  we  had  only  had  its  confirmation  in  view,  we  should 
probably  not  have  found  the  road  to  the  new  facts  which  we  met.  It  is 
true  that  an  hypothesis  based  on  a  theory  produced  the  experiment ; 
but  as  soon  as  the  results  of  the  experiment  appeared,  theory  and  hy- 
pothesis had  to  disappear,  for  the  experimental  facts  were  now  just 
an  observation,  to  be  made  without  any  preconceived  idea  (p.  21). 

In  sciences  as  complex  and  as  little  developed  as  physiology,  the 
great  principle  is  therefore  to  give  little  heed  to  hypotheses  or  the- 
ories and  always  to  keep  an  eye  alert  to  observe  everything  that  ap- 
pears in  every  aspect  of  an  experiment.  An  apparently  accidental 
and  inexplicable  circumstance  may  occasion  the  discovery  of  an  im- 
portant new  fact,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  continuation  of  the  example 
just  noted. 

Second  example  (Sequel  to  the  Last). — After  finding,  as  I  said 
above,  that  there  is  sugar  in  the  livers  of  animals  in  their  normal 
state,  and  with  every  sort  of  nutriment,  I  wished  to  learn  the  pro- 


166 


AN  INTE.ODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


portion  of  this  substance  and  its  variation  in  certain  physiological 
and  pathological  states.  So  I  began  to  estimate  the  sugar  in  the  livers 
of  animals  placed  in  various  physiologically  defined  circumstances. 
I  always  made  two  determinations  of  carbohydrate  for  the  same 
liver  tissue.  But  pressed  for  time  one  day,  it  happened  that  I  could 
not  make  my  two  analyses  at  the  same  moment ;  I  quickly  made  one 
determination  just  after  the  animal's  death  and  postponed  the  other 
analysis  till  next  day.  But  then  I  found  much  larger  amounts  of 
sugar  than  those  which  I  got  the  night  before  with  the  same  mate- 
rial. I  noticed,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  proportion  of  sugar, 
which  I  had  found  just  after  the  animaPs  death  the  night  before, 
was  much  smaller  than  I  had  found  in  the  experiments  which  I  had 
announced  as  giving  the  normal  proportion  of  liver  sugar.  I  did 
not  know  how  to  account  for  this  singular  variation,  got  with  the 
same  liver  and  the  same  method  of  analysis.  What  was  to  be  done  ? 
Should  I  consider  two  such  discordant  determinations  as  an  unsuc- 
cessful experiment  and  take  no  account  of  them  ?  Should  I  take  the 
mean  between  these  experiments  ?  More  than  one  experimenter 
might  have  chosen  this  expedient  to  get  out  of  an  awkward 
situation.  But  I  disapprove  of  this  kind  of  action  for  reasons  which 
I  have  given  elsewhere.  I  said,  indeed,  that  we  must  never  neglect 
anything  in  our  observation  of  fact,  and  I  consider  it  indispensable, 
never  to  admit  the  existence  of  an  unproved  source  of  error  in  an 
experiment  and  always  to  try  to  find  a  reason  for  the  abnormal  cir- 
cumstances that  we  observe.  Nothing  is  accidental,  and  what  seems 
to  us  accident  is  only  an  unknown  fact  whose  explanation  may  fur- 
nish the  occasion  for  a  more  or  less  important  discovery.  So  it 
proved  in  this  case. 

I  wished,  in  fact,  to  learn  the  reason  for  my  having  found  two 
such  different  values  in  the  analysis  of  my  rabbit's  liver.  After 
assuring  myself  that  there  was  no  mistake  connected  with  the  method 
of  analysis,  after  noting  that  all  parts  of  the  liver  were  practically 
equally  rich  in  sugar,  there  remained  to  be  studied  only  the  elapsed 
time  between  the  animal's  death  and  the  time  of  my  second  determi- 
nation. Without  ascribing  much  importance  to  it,  up  to  that  time  I 
had  made  my  experiments  a  few  hours  after  the  animal's  death; 
now  for  the  first  time  I  was  in  the  situation  of  making  one  deter- 
mination only  a  few  minutes  after  death  and  postponing  the  other 
till  next  day,  i.e.,  twenty-four  hours  later.    In  physiology,  questions 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


167 


of  time  are  always  very  important  because  organic  matter  passes 
through  numerous  and  incessant  changes.  Some  chemical  change 
might  therefore  have  taken  place  in  the  liver  tissue.  To  make  sure,  I 
made  a  series  of  new  experiments  which  dispelled  every  obscurity  by 
showing  me  that  liver  tissue  becomes  more  and  more  rich  in  sugar 
for  some  time  after  death.  Thus  we  may  have  a  very  variable  amount 
of  sugar  according  to  the  moment  when  we  make  our  examination.  I 
was  therefore  led  to  correct  my  old  determination  and  to  discover  the 
new  fact  that  considerable  amounts  of  sugar  are  produced  in  animals' 
livers  after  death.  For  instance,  by  forcibly  injecting  a  current  of 
cold  water  through  the  hepatic  vessels  and  passing  it  through  a  liver 
that  was  still  warm,  just  after  an  animal's  death,  I  showed  that  the 
tissue  was  completely  freed  from  the  sugar  which  it  contained;  but 
next  day  or  a  few  hours  later,  if  we  keep  the  washed  liver  at  a  mild 
temperature,  we  again  find  its  tissue  charged  with  a  large  amount 
of  sugar  produced  after  it  was  washed.^ 

Once  in  possession  of  the  first  discovery  that  sugar  is  formed  in 
animals  after  death  as  during  life,  I  wished  to  carry  my  study  of  this 
singular  phenomenon  further;  I  was  then  led  to  find  that  sugar  is 
produced  in  the  liver  with  the  help  of  an  enzyme  reacting  on  an 
amylaceous  substance  which  I  isolated  and  which  I  called  glyco- 
genous  matter,  so  that  I  succeeded  in  proving  in  the  most  clear-cut 
way  that  sugar  is  formed  in  animals  by  a  mechanism  in  every  respect 
like  the  mechanism  found  in  vegetables. 

This  second  series  of  facts  embodied  results,  which  are  also  firmly 
acquired  for  science,  and  which  have  greatly  advanced  our  knowl- 
edge of  glycogenosis  in  animals.  I  have  just  very  briefly  told  how 
these  facts  were  discovered,  and  how  they  started  with  an  experimen- 
tal circumstance  that  was  apparently  inconsequential.  I  quote  this 
case  so  as  to  prove  that  we  must  never  neglect  anything  in  experi- 
mental research,  for  every  accident  has  a  necessary  cause.  We  must, 
therefore,  never  be  too  much  absorbed  by  the  thought  we  are  pursuing, 
nor  deceive  ourselves  about  the  value  of  our  ideas  or  scientific  theo- 
ries ;  we  must  always  keep  our  eyes  open  for  every  event,  the  mind 
doubting  and  independent  (p.  80),  ready  to  study  whatever  presents 
itself  and  to  let  nothing  go  without  seeking  its  reason.    In  a  word, 

•  Claude  Bernard,  8ur  le  mecanisme  de  la  formation  du  sucre  dans  le  foie 
{Comptes  rendus  par  VAcad.  des  sciences,  Sept.  24,  1855,  and  Comptes  rendus 
de  VAcad.  des  sciences,  March  23,  1857). 


168 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


we  must  be  in  an  intellectual  attitude  which  seems  paradoxical  but 
which,  in  my  opinion,  expresses  the  true  spirit  of  an  investigator. 
We  must  have  robust  faith  and  not  believe.  Let  me  explain  myself  by 
saying  that  in  science  we  must  firmly  believe  in  principles,  but  must 
question  formulae;  on  the  one  hand,  indeed,  we  are  sure  that  deter- 
minism exists,  but  we  are  never  certain  we  have  attained  it.  We 
must  be  immovable  as  to  the  principles  of  experimental  science  (de- 
terminism), but  must  not  absolutely  believe  in  theories.  The  aphor- 
ism which  I  just  uttered  is  sustained  by  what  we  expounded  else- 
where (p.  67),  to  wit,  that  for  experimental  science  principles 
are  in  our  mind,  while  formulae  are  external  things.  In  practical 
matters,  we  are  indeed  forced  to  tolerate  the  belief  that  truth  (at 
least  temporary  truth)  is  embodied  in  a  theory  or  a  formula.  But 
in  scientific  experimental  philosophy  those  who  put  their  faith  in 
formulae  and  theories  are  wrong.  All  human  science  consists  in 
seeking  the  true  formula  and  true  theory.  We  are  always  approach- 
ing it;  but  shall  we  ever  find  it  completely?  This  is  not  the  place 
to  go  into  an  explanation  of  philosophic  ideas :  let  us  return  to  our 
subject  and  pass  on  to  a  fresh  experimental  example. 

Third  example. — About  the  year  1852,  my  studies  led  me  to 
make  experiments  on  the  influence  of  the  nervous  system  on  the 
phenomena  of  nutrition  and  temperature  regulation.  It  had  been 
observed  in  many  cases  that  complex  paralyses  with  their  seat  in  the 
mixed  nerves  are  followed,  now  by  a  rise  and  again  by  a  fall  of  tem- 
perature in  the  paralyzed  parts.  !Now  this  is  how  I  reasoned,  in 
order  to  explain  this  fact,  basing  myself  first  on  known  observa- 
tions and  then  on  prevailing  theories  of  the  phenomena  of  nutrition 
and  temperature  regulation.  Paralysis  of  the  nerves,  said  I,  should 
lead  to  cooling  of  the  parts  by  slowing  down  the  phenomena  of  com- 
bustion in  the  blood,  since  these  phenomena  are  considered  as  the 
cause  of  animal  heat.  On  the  other  hand,  anatomists  long  ago  noticed 
that  the  sympathetic  nerves  especially  follow  the  arteries.  So, 
thought  I  inductively,  in  a  lesion  of  a  mixed  trunk  of  nerves,  it 
must  be  the  sympathetic  nerves  that  produce  the  slowing  down  of 
chemical  phenomena  in  capillary  vessels,  and  their  paralysis  that  then 
leads  to  cooling  the  parts.  If  my  hypothesis  is  true,  I  went  on,  it 
can  be  verified  by  severing  only  the  sympathetic,  vascular  nerves 
leading  to  a  special  part,  and  sparing  the  others.  I  should  then  find 
the  part  cooled  by  paralysis  of  the  vascular  nerves,  without  loss  of 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


169 


either  motion  or  sensation,  since  the  ordinary  motor  and  sensory 
nerves  would  still  be  intact.  To  carry  out  my  experiment,  I  therefore 
sought  a  suitable  experimental  method  that  would  allow  me  to  sever 
only  the  vascular  nerves  and  to  spare  the  others.  Here  the  choice  of 
animals  was  important  in  solving  the  problem  (p.  122)  ;  for  in  cer- 
tain animals,  such  as  rabbits  and  horses,  I  found  that  the  anatomical 
arrangement  isolating  the  cervical  sympathetic  nerve  made  this  solu- 
tion possible. 

Accordingly,  I  severed  the  cervical  sympathetic  nerve  in  the  neck 
of  a  rabbit,  to  control  my  hypothesis  and  see  what  would  happen  in 
the  way  of  change  of  temperature  on  the  side  of  the  head  where  this 
nerve  branches  out.  On  the  basis  of  a  prevailing  theory  and  of  earlier 
observation,  I  had  been  led,  as  we  have  just  seen,  to  make  the  hypothe- 
sis that  the  temperature  should  be  reduced.  Now  what  happened 
was  exactly  the  reverse.  After  severing  the  cervical  sympathetic 
nerve  about  the  middle  of  the  neck,  I  immediately  saw  in  the  whole 
of  the  corresponding  side  of  the  rabbit's  head  a  striking  hyperac- 
tivity in  the  circulation,  accompanied  by  increase  of  warmth.  The 
result  was  therefore  precisely  the  reverse  of  what  my  hypothesis,  de- 
duced from  theory,  had  led  me  to  expect;  thereupon  I  did  as  I 
always  do,  that  is  to  say,  I  at  once  abandoned  theories  and  hypothesis, 
to  observe  and  study  the  fact  itself,  so  as  to  define  the  experimental 
conditions  as  precisely  as  possible.  To-day  my  experiments  on  the 
vascular  and  thermo-regulatory  nerves  have  opened  a  new  path  for 
investigation  and  are  the  subject  of  numerous  studies  which,  I  hope, 
may  some  day  yield  really  important  results  in  physiology  and  path- 
ology.^ This  example,  like  the  preceding  ones,  proves  that  in  experi- 
ments we  may  meet  with  results  different  from  what  theories  and 
hypothesis  lead  us  to  expect.  But  I  wish  to  call  more  special  atten- 
tion to  this  third  example,  because  it  gives  us  an  important  lesson, 
to  wit :  without  the  original  guiding  hypothesis,  the  experimental  fact 
which  contradicted  it  would  never  have  been  perceived.  Indeed,  I 
was  not  the  first  experimenter  to  cut  this  part  of  the  cervical  sym- 
pathetic nerve  in  living  animals.  Pourfour  du  Petit  performed  the 
experiment  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  century  and  discovered  the 

•  Claude  Bernard,  Reoherches  expSrimentales  stir  le  grand  sympathique,  etc. 
{M^moirea  de  la  8oci6t6  de  hiologie,  Vol.  V,  1853).  8ur  les  nerfs  vasoulaires 
et  caloriques  du  grand  sympathique  {Comptes  rendus  de  VAcad.  des  sciences, 
1852,  Vol.  XXXIV;  1862,  Vol.  LV). 


170 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


nerve's  action  on  the  pupil,  by  starting  from  an  anatomical  hypothesis 
according  to  which  this  nerve  was  supposed  to  carry  animal  spirits 
to  the  eye.-^^  Many  physiologists  have  since  repeated  the  same  opera- 
tion, with  the  purpose  of  verifying  or  explaining  the  changes  in  the 
eye  which  Pourfour  du  Petit  first  described.  But  none  of  them  no- 
ticed the  local  temperature  phenomenon,  of  which  I  speak,  or  con- 
nected it  with  the  severing  of  the  cervical  sympathetic  nerve,  though 
this  phenomenon  must  necessarily  have  occurred  under  the  very  eyes 
of  all  who,  before  me,  had  cut  this  part  of  the  sympathetic  nerve.  The 
hypothesis,  as  we  see,  had  prepared  my  mind  for  seeing  things  in  a 
certain  direction,  given  by  the  hypothesis  itself;  and  this  is  proved 
by  the  fact  that,  like  the  other  experimenters,  I  myself  had  often 
divided  the  cervical  sympathetic  nerve  to  repeat  Pourfour  du  Petit's 
experiment,  without  perceiving  the  fact  of  heat  production  which  I 
later  discovered  when  an  hypothesis  led  me  to  make  investigations  in 
this  direction.  Here,  therefore,  the  influence  of  the  hypothesis  could 
hardly  be  more  evident ;  we  had  the  fact  under  our  eyes  and  did  not 
see  it  because  it  conveyed  nothing  to  our  mind.  However,  it  could 
hardly  be  simpler  to  perceive,  and  since  I  described  it,  every  physi- 
ologist without  exception  has  noted  and  verified  it  with  the  greatest 
ease. 

To  sum  up,  even  mistaken  hypotheses  and  theories  are  of  use  in 
leading  to  discoveries.  This  remark  is  true  in  all  the  sciences.  The 
alchemists  founded  chemistry  by  pursuing  chimerical  problems  and 
theories  which  are  false.  In  physical  science,  which  is  more  ad- 
vanced than  biology,  we  might  still  cite  men  of  science  who  make 
great  discoveries  by  relying  on  false  theories.  It  seems,  indeed,  a 
necessary  weakness  of  our  mind  to  be  able  to  reach  truth  only  across 
a  multitude  of  errors  and  obstacles. 

What  general  conclusions  shall  physiologists  draw  from  the 
above  examples?  They  should  conclude  that  in  the  present  state  of 
biological  science  accepted  ideas  and  theories  embody  only  limited 
and  risky  truths  which  are  destined  to  perish.  They  should  conse- 
quently have  very  little  confidence  in  the  ultimate  value  of  theo- 
ries, but  should  still  make  use  of  them  as  intellectual  tools  necessary 
to  the  evolution  of  science  and  suitable  for  the  discovery  of  new  facts. 

"  Pourfour  du  Petit,  Memoire  dans  lequel  il  est  d4montrS  que  les  nerfs 
intercostaux  fournissent  des  rameaux  qui  portent  des  esprits  dans  les  yeux 
{Histoire  de  VAcad4mie  pour  VannSe  1727). 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


171 


The  art  of  discovering  new  phenomena  and  of  noting  them  accurately 
should  to-day  be  the  special  concern  of  all  biologists.  We  must  estab- 
lish experimental  criticism  by  creating  rigorous  methods  of  investiga- 
tion and  experimentation,  which  will  enable  us  to  define  our  observa- 
tions unquestionably,  and  thus  get  rid  of  the  errors  of  fact  which  are 
the  source  of  errors  in  theory.  A  man  who  to-day  attempted  a  gen- 
eralization for  biology  as  a  whole  would  prove  that  he  had  no  accurate 
feeling  for  the  present  state  of  the  science.  To-day,  the  biological 
problem  has  hardly  begun  to  be  put ;  and,  as  stones  must  first  be  got 
together  and  cut,  before  we  dream  of  erecting  a  monument,  just  so 
must  the  facts  first  be  got  together  and  prepared  which  are  destined 
to  create  the  science  of  living  bodies.  This  role  falls  to  experimen- 
tation ;  its  method  is  fixed,  but  the  phenomena  to  be  analyzed  are  so 
complex  that,  for  the  moment,  the  true  promoters  of  science  are  those 
who  succeed  in  giving  its  methods  of  analysis  a  few  principles  of 
simplification  or  in  introducing  improvements  in  instruments  of 
research.  When  there  are  enough  quite  clearly  established  facts,  gen- 
eralizations never  keep  us  waiting.  I  am  convinced  that,  in  experi- 
mental sciences  that  are  evolving,  and  especially  in  those  as  complex 
as  biology,  discovery  of  a  new  tool  for  observation  or  experiment  is 
much  more  useful  than  any  number  of  systematic  or  philosophic  dis- 
sertations. Indeed,  a  new  method  or  a  new  means  of  investigation 
increases  our  power  and  makes  discoveries  and  researches  possible 
which  would  not  have  been  possible  without  its  help.  Thus  researches 
as  to  the  formation  of  sugar  in  animals  could  be  made  only  after 
chemistry  gave  us  reagents  for  recognizing  sugar,  which  were  much 
more  sensitive  than  those  we  had  before. 


CHAPTER  II 


EXAMPLES  OF  EXPERIMENTAL  PHYSIOLOGICAL 

CRITICISM 

Experimental  criticism  rests  on  absolute  principles  which  must 
guide  experimenters  in  noting  and  interpreting  the  phenomena  of 
nature.  It  will  be  particularly  useful  in  the  biological  sciences 
where  prevailing  theories  are  so  often  propped  up  with  false  ideas 
or  based  on  poorly  observed  facts.  We  shall  here  deal  with  examples 
recalling  the  principles,  by  virtue  of  which  we  may  well  judge  physio- 
logical theories,  and  discuss  the  facts  on  which  they  are  based.  As 
we  already  know,  our  criterion  pur  excellence  is  the  principle  of 
experimental  determinism  united  with  philosophic  doubt.  In  this 
connection,  let  me  again  recall  the  fact  that,  in  science,  we  must  never 
confuse  principles  with  theories.  Principles  are  scientific  axioms ;  as 
absolute  truths,  they  are  an  immutable  criterion.  Theories  are  sci- 
entific generalizations  or  scientific  ideas  which  sum  up  our  present 
state  of  knowledge ;  they  are  always  relative  truths,  destined  to  change 
with  the  progress  of  science.  So  if  we  posit  as  a  basic  conclusion, 
that  we  must  not  believe  absolutely  in  the  formulae  of  science,  we 
must,  on  the  contrary,  believe  absolutely  in  its  principles.  Men  who 
too  completely  believe  in  theories  and  neglect  principles,  take  the 
shadow  for  reality;  they  lack  any  solid  criterion  and  are  liable  to 
all  the  consequent  sources  of  error.  In  every  science,  progress  con- 
sists in  so  changing  our  theories  as  to  get  more  and  more  perfect 
ones.  Indeed,  of  what  use  would  study  be,  if  we  could  not  change 
our  opinions  or  theories?  But  principles  and  the  scientific  method 
are  higher  than  theory;  they  are  immutable  and  can  never  change. 

Experimental  criticism  must  therefore  forearm  itself,  not  only 

against  belief  in  theories,  but  against  being  led  astray  by  too  highly 

valuing  the  words  which  we  have  created  to  picture  to  ourselves  the 

supposed  forces  of  nature.   In  every  science,  but  in  the  physiological 

sciences  more  than  all  others,  we  are  in  danger  of  deceiving  ourselves 

about  words.  We  must  never  forget  that  our  characterizations  of  the 

172 


THE  STUDY  OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE  173 


phenomena  of  nature,  as  mineral  or  vital  forces,  are  merely  figurative 
language  by  which  we  must  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  duped.  The 
only  realities  are  manifestations  of  phenomena  and  the  conditions 
of  these  manifestations  which  remain  to  be  determined ;  experimental 
criticism  should  never  lose  sight  of  that.  In  a  word,  experimental 
criticism  casts  doubt  on  everything  except  the  principle  of  scientific, 
rational  determinism  in  the  realm  of  facts  (pp.  52-67).  It  is  always 
founded  on  this  same  base,  whether  we  direct  it  against  ourselves  or 
others;  that  is  why  we  shall  usually  present  two  examples  in  what 
follows,  one  chosen  from  our  own  researches,  the  other  from  other 
men's  work.  In  science,  indeed,  we  must  not  only  try  to  criticise 
others,  but  every  man  of  science  must  always  be  a  severe  critic  of 
himself.  Whenever  he  proffers  an  opinion  or  proposes  a  theory,  he 
must  be  the  first  to  try  to  control  it  by  criticism  and  to  base  it  on 
well  observed  and  accurately  determined  facts. 


I.  The  Principle  of  Experimental  Determinism  Does  Not 

Admit  of  Contradictory  Facts 

First  example. — It  is  now  a  long  time  since  I  announced  an 
experiment  which  greatly  surprised  physiologists:  the  experiment 
consists  in  making  an  animal  artificially  diabetic  by  means  of  a  punc- 
ture in  the  floor  of  the  fourth  ventricle.  I  was  led  to  try  this  punc- 
ture as  a  result  of  theoretical  considerations  which  I  need  not  recall ; 
all  that  we  here  need  to  know  is  that  I  succeeded  at  the  first  attempt, 
i.e.,  that  I  saw  the  first  rabbit  on  which  I  operated  become  strikingly 
diabetic.  But  I  afterward  had  the  experience  of  repeating  the  ex- 
periment many  times  (eight  or  ten  times)  without  getting  the  same 
result.  I  then  found  myself  in  presence  of  a  positive  fact  and  of 
eight  or  ten  negative  facts ;  yet  I  never  thought  of  denying  my  first 
positive  experiment  in  favor  of  the  negative  experiments  which  fol- 
lowed it.  Thoroughly  convinced  that  my  failures  were  due  only  to 
not  knowing  the  true  conditions  of  my  first  experiment,  I  persisted 
in  experimenting,  to  try  to  discover  them.  As  a  result,  I  succeeded 
in  defining  the  exact  place  for  the  puncture,  and  showing  the  con- 
ditions in  which  the  animal  to  be  operated  on  should  be  placed ;  so 
that  we  can  to-day  reproduce  artificial  diabetes  whenever  we  place 
ourselves  in  the  conditions  known  to  be  necessary  to  its  appearance. 


174 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


Let  me  add  to  the  above  a  reflection  showing  how  many  sources 
of  error  may  surround  physiologists  in  the  investigation  of  vital  phe- 
nomena. Let  me  assume  that,  instead  of  succeeding  at  once  in 
making  a  rabbit  diabetic,  all  the  negative  facts  had  first  appeared; 
it  is  clear  that,  after  failing  two  or  three  times,  I  should  have  con- 
cluded, not  only  that  the  theory  guiding  me  was  false,  but  that  punc- 
ture of  the  fourth  ventricle  did  not  produce  diabetes.  Yet  I  should 
have  been  wrong.  How  often  men  must  have  been  and  still  must 
be  wrong  in  this  way !  It  even  seems  impossible  absolutely  to  avoid 
this  kind  of  mistake.  We  wish  to  draw  from  this  experiment  another 
general  conclusion  which  will  be  corroborated  by  subsequent  exam- 
ples, to  wit,  that  negative  facts  when  considered  alone,  never  teach  us 
anything. 

Second  example. — ^Every  day  we  see  discussions  which  remain 
profitless  for  science,  because  we  are  not  thoroughly  enough  imbued 
with  the  principle  that,  since  every  fact  has  its  own  appropriate 
cause,  a  negative  fact  proves  nothing  and  can  never  destroy  a  posi- 
tive fact.  To  prove  what  I  am  setting  forth,  I  will  quote  the  criti- 
cisms which  M.  Longet  formerly  made  on  Magendie's  experiments. 
I  choose  this  example,  on  the  one  hand,  because  it  is  highly  instruc- 
tive, and,  on  the  other,  because  I  was  involved  in  it,  and  know  all 
the  circumstances  accurately.  Let  me  begin  with  M.  Longet's  criti- 
cisms about  Magendie's  experiments  on  the  properties  of  recurrent 
sensitivity  in  the  anterior  spinal  roots. The  first  objection  which 
M.  Longet  makes  to  Magendie  is  that  he  changed  his  opinion  as  to 
the  sensitivity  of  the  anterior  roots,  holding  in  1822  that  the  anterior 
roots  were  scarcely  sensitive,  and  in  1839  that  they  were  very  sen- 
sitive, etc.  Thereupon  M.  Longet  exclaims :  "Truth  is  single ;  from 
the  midst  of  these  contrasted,  contradictory  assertions  of  the  same 
author,  let  the  reader  choose  if  he  dare.''  (loc.  cit.,  p.  22.)  Finally 
M.  Longet  goes  on,  "M.  Magendie  ought  at  least  to  have  told  us, — to 
get  us  out  of  our  difficulties, — which  of  his  experiments  were  prop- 
erly made,  the  1822  experiments  or  those  in  1839."    (loc.  cit.,  p.  23.) 

These  criticisms  are  all  ill  founded  and  completely  violate  the 

*  F.  A.  Longet,  Recherches  cliniquea  et  expSrimentales  sur  lea  fonctions  des 
faisceaux  de  la  moelle  4piniere  et  des  racines  des  nerfs  rachidiens,  prSc^ddes  d'un 
Examen  historique  et  critique  des  experiences  fait.es  sur  ces  organes  depuis  Sir  Ch. 
Bellf  et  suivies  d'autres  recherches  sur  diverses  parties  du  systeme  nerveux 
{Archives  generates  de  midecine,  1841,  3d  Series,  Vol.  X,  p.  296  and  Vol.  XI 
p.  129). 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


176 


rules  of  experimental  scientific  criticism.  In  fact,  if  Magendie  in 
1822  said  that  the  anterior  roots  were  insensitive,  and  if  he  said 
later  in  1839  that  the  anterior  roots  are  very  sensitive,  it  was  because 
he  then  found  them  very  sensitive.  We  do  not  have  to  choose  be- 
tween the  two  results,  as  M.  Longet  believes;  we  must  accept  them 
both  and  merely  explain  and  define  them  in  their  respective  condi- 
tions. When  M.  Longet  exclaims :  ^^Truth  is  single,"  does  he  mean 
that  if  one  of  these  results  is  true,  the  other  must  be  false  ?  By  no 
means ;  they  are  both  true,  unless  we  say  that  in  one  case  Magendie 
lied,  and  that  is  certainly  not  the  critic's  idea.  But  by  virtue  of 
the  scientific  principle  of  the  determinism  of  phenomena,  we  must 
absolutely  affirm  a  priori  that  in  1822  and  in  1839  Magendie  did  not 
see  the  phenomena  in  identical  conditions;  the  differences  in  condi- 
tions are  precisely  what  we  must  seek  out  and  define,  so  as  to  har- 
monize the  two  results  and  thus  find  the  cause  of  variation  in  the 
phenomenon.  The  only  objection  which  M.  Longet  might  have  made 
to  Magendie  was  that  he  did  not  himself  seek  out  the  reason  for  the 
difference  in  the  two  results;  but  the  criticism  by  exclusion  that  M. 
Longet  directed  against  Magendie's  experiments  is  false  and,  as  we 
said,  out  of  harmony  with  the  principles  of  experimental  criticism. 

We  cannot  doubt  that  the  above  criticism  is  sincere  and  purely 
scientific;  for  in  other  circumstances  connected  with  the  same 
discussion  M.  Longet  directed  against  himself  the  same  criticism 
by  exclusion-  and  in  his  own  criticism  was  led  into  the  same  kind 
of  mistake  as  in  the  criticism  directed  against  Magendie. 

In  1839  M.  Longet,  like  myself,  was  working  in  the  laboratory 
of  the  College  de  France  when  Magendie  discovered  the  sensitivity 
of  the  anterior  spinal  roots  and  showed  that  it  is  derived  from  the 
posterior  roots  and  returns  by  the  periphery,  whence  the  name  re- 
verse sensitivity  or  recurrent  sensitivity  which  he  gave  it.  Like 
Magendie  and  me,  M.  Longet  then  saw  that  the  anterior  root  was 
sensitive  and  that  it  was  so  under  the  influence  of  the  posterior  root, 
and  he  saw  it  so  clearly  that  he  claimed  discovery  of  the  latter  fact 
for  himself.^  But  later,  in  1841,  when  Longet  wished  to  repeat 
Magendie's  experiment,  he  found  no  sensitiveness  in  the  anterior 
root.    In  rather  amusing  circumstances,  M.  Longet  thus  found  him- 

'  Longet,  Comptes  rendus  de  VAcademie  des  sciences,  Vol.  VIII,  p.  787,  June  3 
and  10;  Comptes  rendus  de  VAcademie  des  sciences,  June  4;  Gazette  des  hdpitauXy 
June  13  and  18,  1839. 


176  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 

self  in  exactly  the  same  position  in  relation  to  the  same  fact  of  sen- 
sitiveness in  the  anterior  spinal  roots  with  which  he  had  reproached 
Magendie,  i.e.,  M.  Longet  in  1839  saw  that  the  anterior  spinal  root 
was  sensitive  and,  in  1841,  saw  that  it  was  insensitive.  Magendie's 
sceptical  mind  was  not  disturbed  by  these  seeming  obscurities  and 
contradictions;  he  went  on  experimenting  and  always  said  what  he 
saw.  M.  Longet's  mind,  on  the  contrary,  wished  to  have  the  truth 
on  one  side  or  the  other;  that  is  why  he  decided  in  favor  of  the  1841 
experiments,  i.e.,  the  negative  experiments ;  and  here  is  what  he  said : 
^Though  at  that  time  (1839)  I  brought  forward  my  claim  to  the 
discovery  of  one  of  these  facts  (recurrent  sensitiveness),  now  that  I 
have  made  many  and  varied  experiments  on  this  point  in  physiology, 
I  combat  these  very  facts  as  erroneous,  whether  they  are  regarded  as 
Magendie' s  property  or  my  own.  When  we  have  made  a  mistake, 
the  service  which  we  owe  to  truth  requires  that  we  should  never  fear 
retraction.  I  shall  here  only  recall  the  insensitivity  of  the  anterior 
roots  and  sheaves  which  we  have  so  often  proved,  so  that  the  reader 
may  readily  understand  how  meaningless  are  these  results  which,  like 
so  many  others,  merely  encumber  science  and  embarrass  its  advance.''^ 
After  this  confession,  we  may  be  sure  that  M.  Longet  is  animated 
only  by  a  desire  to  find  the  truth,  which  he  proves  when  he  says  that 
we  must  never  be  afraid  of  retraction  if  we  have  made  an  error.  I 
wholly  share  this  feeling.  Let  me  add  that  it  is  always  instructive 
to  acknowledge  an  error.  The  precept,  therefore,  is  excellent,  for 
we  are  all  likely  to  make  mistakes,  except  those  of  us  who  do  nothing. 
But  the  first  requirement  in  acknowledging  a  mistake  is  to  prove 
that  there  is  an  error.  It  is  not  enough  to  say :  I  was  mistaken ;  we 
must  say  how  we  were  mistaken;  the  important  point  is  precisely 
that.  Now  M.  Longet  explains  nothing;  he  seems  purely  and  sim- 
ply to  say:  In  1839  I  saw  sensitive  roots;  in  1841,  I  saw  insensi- 
tive ones  more  often,  therefore  I  was  mistaken  in  1839.  Such  rea- 
soning is  inadmissible.  Here,  in  fact,  are  a  number  of  experiments 
in  1839,  d  propos  to  the  sensitivity  of  anterior  roots, — experiments 
in  which  the  spinal  roots  were  cut  one  by  one;  and  to  note  their 
properties,  their  ends  were  pinched.  Magendie  wrote  half  a  volume 
on  the  subject.  Later  when  people  fail  to  obtain  the  same  results, 
the  question  cannot  be  decided  simply  by  saying  that  we  made  a  mis- 
take the  first  time  and  are  right  the  second  time.  After  all,  why 
"  Longet,  loc.  cit.  p.  21. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


177 


should  we  be  mistaken  ?  Shall  we  say  that  our  senses  played  us  false 
at  one  period  and  not  the  other  ?  In  that  event  we  must  give  up 
experimentation;  for  the  first  requirement  of  experimenters  is  con- 
fidence in  their  senses  and  never  any  doubt  except  as  to  interpreta- 
tions. If  we  cannot  find  the  concrete  reason  for  an  error,  despite  all 
our  efforts  and  all  our  investigations,  we  must  suspend  judgment 
and  meantime  keep  both  results;  but  never  believe  that  denying 
positive  facts  can  suffice  even  in  the  name  of  more  numerous  negative 
facts,  or  vice  versa.  NTegative  facts,  no  matter  how  numerous  they 
may  be,  can  never  destroy  a  single  positive  fact.  That  is  why  pure 
and  simple  negation  is  not  criticism,  and  this  method  should 
be  absolutely  rejected  in  science,  because  science  is  never  built  up 
by  negation. 

To  sum  up,  we  must  maintain  the  conviction  that  negative  facts 
are  determined  like  positive  facts.  We  posited  the  principle  that  all 
experiments  are  successful,  in  that  their  conditions  are  determined ; 
in  research  into  the  conditions  of  each  of  these  determinations  lie  the 
lessons  that  teach  us  the  law  of  a  phenomenon ;  because  in  this  way 
we  learn  the  conditions  necessary  to  its  existence  and  its  non-exist- 
ence. After  witnessing  Magendie's  experiments  in  1839  and  M, 
Longet's  discussions  in  1841,  I  have  made  this  principle  my  guide, 
when  I  wished  to  take  account  of  the  phenomena  myself  and  to  judge 
the  differences.  I  repeated  the  experiments,  and,  like  Magendie  and 
like  M.  Longet,  I  found  cases  of  sensitivity  and  cases  of  insensitivity 
of  the  anterior  spinal  roots ;  but  as  I  was  convinced  that  the  two  cases 
depended  on  different  experimental  conditions,  I  tried  to  define  the 
conditions ;  by  dint  of  observation  and  perseverance,  I  finally  found  * 
the  conditions  in  which  we  must  place  ourselves  to  get  both  results. 
Now  that  the  conditions  of  the  phenomenon  are  known,  it  is  no  longer 
questioned.  M.  Longet  himself  ^  and  all  physiologists  accept  the  fact 
of  recurrent  sensitivity  as  constant  in  the  conditions  which  I  an- 
nounced. 

From  what  has  gone  before,  we  must  therefore  establish  the  abso- 
lute and  necessary  determination  of  phenomena  as  a  principle  of  ex- 
perimental criticism.  This  principle,  when  thoroughly  understood, 
should  make  us  cautious  about  our  natural  tendency  to  contradic- 

*  Claude  Bernard,  Lecons  sur  la  physiologic  et  la  pathologic  du  syatdme 
nerveuxy  p.  32. 

•  See  Longet,  TraitS  de  phyaiologie,  1860,  Vol.  II,  p.  177. 


178 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


tion.  Certainly  every  experimenter,  especially  every  beginner,  feels 
a  secret  pleasure  whenever  he  finds  something  different  from  what 
others  have  seen  before  him.  His  first  impulse  is  to  contradict,  espe- 
cially when  contradicting  someone  high  in  the  scientific  world.  We 
must  protect  ourselves  against  this  tendency,  for  it  is  not  scientific. 
Pure  contradiction  would  amount  to  an  accusation  of  lying,  and  we 
should  avoid  it  because  happily  scientific  falsifiers  are  rare.  As  such 
cases,  moreover,  have  no  connection  with  science,  I  need  not  offer 
any  precept  on  the  subject.  I  wish  merely  to  point  out  here  that 
science  does  not  consist  in  proving  that  others  are  mistaken;  and 
even  if  we  proved  that  an  eminent  man  was  mistaken,  that  would 
not  be  a  great  discovery ;  it  can  be  a  profitable  work  for  science  only 
in  so  far  as  we  show  how  he  was  mistaken.  Indeed,  great  men  often 
teach  us  by  their  errors  as  much  as  by  their  discoveries.  I  some- 
times hear  it  said  that  pointing  out  an  error  is  equivalent  to  a  dis- 
covery. Yes,  on  condition  that  we  bring  to  light  a  new  truth  by  show- 
ing the  source  of  error,  in  which  event  it  is  unnecessary  to  combat 
the  error;  it  falls  of  itself.  Thus  only  is  criticism  equivalent  to  a 
discovery;  when  it  explains  everything  without  denying  anything 
and  finds  the  correct  causation  of  apparently  contradictory  facts. 
By  such  determinism  everything  is  unified,  everything  becomes 
transparent ;  and  as  Leibnitz  says,  science,  as  it  broadens,  grows  clear 
and  simple. 


II.  The  Principle  of  Determinism  Ejects  Causeless  and 
Irrational  Facts  from  Science 

We  said  elsewhere  (p.  54)  that  our  reason  scientifically  includes 
the  determinate  and  the  indeterminate  but  that  it  cannot  accept  the 
indeterminable,  because  that  would  be  nothing  but  accepting  the  mar- 
vellous, occult  or  supernatural  which  should  be  absolutely  banished 
from  all  experimental  science.  The  result  is  that  a  fact  gains  scientific 
value  only  through  knowledge  of  its  causation.  A  crude  fact  is  not 
scientific,  and  a  fact  whose  causation  is  irrational  should  also  be 
ejected  from  science.  Indeed,  if  an  experimenter  must  submit  his 
ideas  to  the  criterion  of  facts,  I  do  not  acknowledge  that  he  must 
submit  his  reason ;  for  then  he  would  extinguish  the  torch  of  his  inner 
criterion  and  would  necessarily  fall  into  the  realm  of  the  indeter- 
minable, i.e.,  the  occult  and  the  marvellous.    In  science,  many  crude 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


179 


facts  are  doubtless  still  incomprehensible;  I  do  not  mean  to  conclude 
that  we  should  willfully  reject  all  these  facts,  I  wish  simply  to  say 
that  they  should  be  held  in  reserve,  for  a  time,  as  crude  facts,  and  not 
introduced  into  science,  i.e.,  into  experimental  reasoning,  until  their 
necessary  conditions  are  defined  in  terms  of  rational  determinism. 
Otherwise,  our  experimental  reasoning  would  be  continually  halted 
or  else  inevitably  led  into  the  absurd. 

The  following  examples,  among  many  others,  will  prove  what  I 
assert. 

First  example. — A  few  years  ago,^  I  experimented  on  the  influ- 
ence of  ether  on  intestinal  secretions.  Now  a  propos  of  this,  I  hap- 
pened to  observe  that  injecting  ether  into  the  intestinal  canal  of  a  dog 
kept  without  food  even  for  several  days  gave  rise  to  splendid  white 
lymphatics,  absolutely  like  those  in  an  animal  actively  digesting 
mixed  food  in  which  there  is  fat.  After  frequent  repetitions,  the 
fact  was  unquestionable.  But  what  meaning  could  be  ascribed  to 
it  ?  What  reasoning  was  possible  about  its  cause  ?  Should  we  say : 
ether  causes  secretion  of  chyme?  This  is  a  fact.  But  that  would 
be  absurd,  since  there  was  no  food  in  the  intestine.  As  we  see,  rea- 
son rejected  this  causation  as  irrational  and  absurd  in  our  present 
state  of  knowledge.  I  therefore  tried  to  find  the  reason  for  this  in- 
comprehensible fact,  and  I  finally  saw  that  there  was  a  source  of 
error,  because  the  ether  dissolved  the  oil  lubricating  the  piston  of 
the  syringe  with  which  it  was  injected  into  the  stomach;  when  the 
ether  was  injected  with  a  glass  pipette,  instead  of  a  syringe,  it  no 
longer  produced  the  phenomenon.  The  irrationality  of  the  fact, 
therefore,  led  me  to  see  a  priori  that  it  must  be  false,  and  that  it  could 
not  be  used  as  a  basis  for  scientific  reasoning.  Otherwise  I  should 
not  have  found  the  curious  source  of  error  located  in  the  piston  of  a 
syringe.  But  when  the  source  of  error  was  once  recognized,  every- 
thing was  explained,  and  the  fact  became  rational  in  this  sense,  that 
the  chyle  was  produced  there,  as  everywhere  else,  by  the  absorption 
of  fat ;  only  the  ether  stimulated  absorption  and  made  the  phenome- 
non more  evident. 

Second  example. — Able  and  accurate  experimenters    had  seen 

•  Claude  Bernard,  LeQons  sur  lea  ejfets  des  substances  toxiques  et  m^dica- 
menteuses,  p.  428. 

'Vulpian,  Comptes  rendus  et  Memoires  de  la  8ociH4  de  hiologie,  1854,  p.  133; 
1856,  p.  125;  1858,  2d  Series,  Vol.  V,  Paris,  1859,  p.  113;  1864. 


180  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 

that  the  venom  of  a  toad  speedily  poisons  frogs  and  other  animals, 
while  it  has  no  effect  on  the  toad  himself.  Here,  in  fact,  is  a  quite 
simple  experiment  that  seems  to  prove  it :  if  we  take  venom  on  a  lan- 
cet from  the  parotid  glands  of  a  domestic  toad  and  insert  it  under  the 
skin  of  a  frog  or  a  bird,  the  animals  soon  perish ;  while  if  we  insert 
the  same  amount  of  venom  under  the  skin  of  a  toad  of  about  the  same 
size,  he  does  not  die  of  it,  indeed  he  feels  no  effect.  Here  again  is 
a  crude  fact  which  could  become  scientific  only  on  condition  that  we 
learn  how  venom  acts  on  a  frog,  and  why  it  does  not  act  on  a  toad. 
To  do  this,  I  necessarily  studied  the  mechanism  of  death,  for  special 
circumstances  might  be  encountered  which  would  explain  the  differ- 
ence in  results  on  the  frog  and  on  the  toad.  Thus  a  special  arrange- 
ment of  the  nostrils  and  the  epiglottis  explains  very  well  why,  for  ex- 
ample, section  of  the  two  facial  nerves  is  mortal  in  horses  and  not  in 
other  animals.  But  this  exceptional  fact  is  rational ;  it  confirms  the 
rule,  as  we  say,  in  that  it  makes  no  change  fundamentally  in  the  ner- 
vous paralysis  which  is  the  same  in  all  animals.  There  was  nothing 
of  the  kind  in  the  case  with  which  we  are  concerned :  study  of  the 
mechanism  of  death  by  toad's  venom  led  to  the  conclusion  that  toad's 
venom  kills  by  stopping  the  heart  in  frogs,  while  it  does  not  act  on 
a  toad's  heart.  Now,  in  logic,  we  should  necessarily  have  to  admit 
that  the  muscular  fibres  of  a  toad's  heart  have  a  different  nature  from 
those  of  a  frog's  heart,  since  the  poison  which  acts  on  the  former  does 
not  act  on  the  latter.  That  was  impossible:  for  admitting  that  or- 
ganic units  identical  in  structure  and  in  physiological  characteristics 
are  no  longer  identical  in  the  presence  of  a  toxic  action  identically 
the  same  would  prove  that  phenomena  have  no  necessary  causation ; 
and  thus  science  would  be  denied.  Pursuant  to  these  ideas,  I  rejected 
the  above-mentioned  fact  as  irrational,  and  decided  to  repeat  the  ex- 
periments, even  though  I  did  not  doubt  their  accuracy  as  crude  fact^ 
I  then  saw  ®  that  toad's  venom  easily  kills  frogs  with  a  dose  that  is 
wholly  insufficient  for  a  toad,  but  that  the  latter  is  nevertheless  poi- 
soned if  we  increase  the  dose  enough.  So  that  the  difference  de- 
scribed was  reduced  to  a  question  of  quantity  and  did  not  have  the 
contradictory  meaning  that  might  be  ascribed  to  it.  The  irrational- 
ity of  the  fact  was,  therefore,  again  what  led  me  to  ascribe  to  it  an- 
other meaning. 

'Claude  Bernard,  Coura  de  pathologic  exp^rimentale  (Medical  Times,  1860). 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


181 


III.  The  Principle  of  Determinism  Kequires  Comparative 

Determination  of  Facts 

We  have  just  seen  that  our  reason  forces  us  to  reject  apparently 
causeless  facts  and  leads  us  to  criticise  them  so  as  to  find  for  them  a 
rational  meaning  before  using  them  in  experimental  reasoning.  But 
since  criticism,  as  we  said,  rests  at  once  on  reason  and  on  philosophic 
doubt,  it  follows  that  a  simple  and  logical  appearance  is  not  enough  to 
make  us  accept  an  experimental  fact;  we  should  still  doubt  and  by 
a  counter  experiment  should  see  whether  the  rational  appearance  is 
not  misleading.  This  is  an  absolutely  strict  precept,  especially  in 
medical  science  which  by  its  complexity  conceals  additional  sources 
of  error.  I  have  elsewhere  (p.  55)  described  the  experimental  char- 
acter of  counterproof s ;  I  will  not  return  to  that  subject;  I  wish 
merely  to  point  out  here  that,  even  when  a  fact  seems  logical,  i.e., 
rational,  we  are  never  justified  in  omitting  a  counterproof  or  counter 
experiment,  so  that  I  consider  this  precept  a  kind  of  order  which 
we  must  blindly  follow  even  in  cases  which  seem  the  clearest  and 
most  rational.  I  am  going  to  quote  two  examples  which  will  show 
the  necessity  of  thus  making  a  comparative  experiment  always  and 
in  spite  of  everything. 

First  example. — I  explained  before  (p.  164)  how  I  was  once  led 
to  study  the  part  played  by  sugar  in  nutrition  and  to  investigate  the 
mechanism  by  which  this  nutritive  principle  was  destroyed  in  the 
organism.  To  solve  this  problem,  I  had  to  hunt  for  sugar  in  the  blood 
and  follow  it  into  the  intestinal  vessels  which  absorbed  it,  until  I 
could  note  the  place  where  it  disappeared.  To  carry  out  my  experi- 
ment, I  gave  a  dog  sweetened  milk  soup ;  then  I  sacrificed  the  animal 
during  digestion  and  found  that  the  blood  in  the  superhepatic  ves- 
sels, which  hold  all  the  blood  of  the  intestinal  organs  and  the  liver, 
contained  sugar.  It  was  quite  natural  and,  as  we  say,  logical  to  think 
that  the  sugar  found  in  the  superhepatic  vessels  was  the  same  that 
1  had  given  the  animal  in  his  soup.  I  am  certain  indeed  that  more 
than  one  experimenter  would  have  stopped  at  that  and  would  have 
considered  it  superfluous,  if  not  ridiculous,  to  make  a  comparative 
experiment.  However,  I  made  a  comparative  experiment,  because  I 
was  convinced  of  its  absolute  necessity  on  principle:  which  means 
that  I  am  convinced  that  we  must  always  doubt  in  physiology,  even 
in  cases  where  doubt  seems  least  allowable.    However,  I  must  add 


182 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


that  a  comparative  experiment  was  also  required  here  by  another 
circumstance,  viz.,  that  I  used  the  reduction  of  copper  as  a  test  for 
sugar.  This,  however,  is  an  empirical  characteristic  of  sugar  which 
might  be  shown  by  substances  still  unknown  in  the  bodily  economy. 
But,  even  apart  from  that,  I  repeat,  a  comparative  experiment  would 
have  had  to  be  made  as  an  experimental  necessity;  for  this  very 
case  proves  that  we  can  never  foresee  its  importance. 

So  for  comparison  with  the  dog  fed  on  sugary  soup,  I  took  another 
dog  to  which  I  gave  meat  to  eat,  being  careful  moreover  to  exclude 
all  sugary  or  starchy  material  from  its  diet ;  then  I  sacrificed  the  ani- 
mal during  digestion  and  examined  comparatively  the  blood  in  its 
superhepatic  veins.  Great  was  my  astonishment  at  finding  that  the 
blood  of  the  animal  which  had  not  eaten  any  also  contained  sugar. 

We  therefore  see  that  comparative  experiment  led  me  to  the  dis- 
covery that  sugar  is  constantly  present  in  the  blood  of  the  superhe- 
patic veins,  no  matter  what  the  animal's  diet  may  be.  You  may 
imagine  that  I  then  abandoned  all  hypotheses  about  destruction  of 
sugar,  to  follow  this  new  and  unexpected  fact.  I  first  excluded  all 
doubt  of  its  existence  by  repeated  experiments,  and  I  noted  that 
sugar  also  existed  in  the  blood  of  fasting  animals.  But  if  benefits 
are  linked  with  comparative  experiment,  not  performing  them  has 
its  necessary  annoyances.    This  is  proved  by  the  following  example : 

Second  example. — Magendie  once  made  investigations  on  the 
uses  of  the  cerebrospinal  fluid  and  was  led  to  the  conclusion  that 
removing  this  fluid  produces  a  kind  of  titubation  in  animals  and  a 
characteristic  disturbance  in  their  motions.  Indeed,  after  uncover- 
ing the  occipito-atloidian  membrane,  if  we  pierce  it  to  let  the  cere- 
brospinal fluid  run  out,  we  notice  that  the  animal  is  seized  with 
peculiar  motor  disturbances.  Apparently  nothing  could  be  simpler 
or  more  natural  than  the  influence  on  their  motions  of  removal  of 
the  cerebrospinal  fluid ;  yet  this  was  an  error,  and  Magendie  told  me 
how  another  experimenter  chanced  to  find  it.  After  cutting  the  neck 
muscles,  this  experimenter  was  interrupted  in  his  experiment  at  the 
moment  when  he  had  just  laid  bare  the  occipito-atloidian  membrane. 
Now  when  he  came  back,  to  go  on  with  his  experiment,  he  saw  that 
the  simple  preliminary  operation  had  produced  the  same  titubation, 
though  the  cephalorachidian  fluid  had  not  been  removed.  What 
was  merely  the  result  of  severing  the  neck  muscles  had  therefore  been 
attributed  to  removal  of  the  cerebrospinal  fluid.    Comparative  ex- 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICmE 


183 


periment  would  obviously  have  solved  the  difficulty.  In  this  case, 
two  animals,  as  we  have  said,  ought  to  be  placed  in  the  same  condi- 
tions save  one,  that  is,  the  occipito-atloidian  membrane  should  be  laid 
bare  in  both  animals,  and  it  should  be  pierced,  to  let  the  fluid  flow 
out,  in  only  one  of  them ;  then  it  would  be  possible  to  judge  by  com- 
parison and  thus  ascertain  the  precise  part  which  the  removal  of  the 
fluid  plays  in  the  disturbances.  I  might  quote  a  great  many  errors 
into  which  able  experimenters  have  fallen  by  neglecting  the  precept 
about  comparative  experiment.  Only,  as  the  examples  that  I  have 
quoted  prove,  it  is  often  hard  to  know  in  advance  whether  comparative 
experiment  is  necessary  or  not;  and  so  I  repeat  that,  to  avoid  all 
annoyance,  we  should  accept  comparative  experiment  as  a  veritable 
command,  to  be  executed  even  when  useless,  so  as  not  to  be  missing 
when  it  is  necessary.  Comparative  experiments  are  sometimes  made, 
now  on  two  animals,  or  for  greater  accuracy,  on  two  similar  organs  in 
the  same  animal.  Thus,  at  the  time  when  I  wished  to  judge  the  in- 
fluence of  certain  substances  on  the  glycogen  of  the  liver,  I  could 
never  find  two  animals  comparable  in  this  respect,  even  by  putting 
them  in  exactly  similar  dietary  circumstances,  i.e.,  without  food  for 
the  same  number  of  days.  According  to  their  age,  sex,  plumpness, 
etc.,  animals  bear  starvation  better  or  worse  and  destroy  more  glyco- 
gen or  less,  so  that  I  could  never  be  sure  that  the  differences  I  found 
were  the  result  of  difference  in  diet.  To  remove  this  source  of  error, 
I  was  forced  to  make  the  whole  experiment  on  the  same  animal,  by 
taking  away  a  preliminary  piece  of  its  liver  before  the  dietary  injec- 
tion, and  another  afterward.  So  when  we  want  to  see  the  influence 
of  contraction  on  the  metabolism  of  the  muscle  in  a  frog,  we  have 
to  compare  both  members  of  a  single  animal,  because  in  this  respect 
two  frogs  are  not  always  comparable. 


lY.  Experimental  Criticism  Should  Bear  on  Facts  Alone 

AND  Never  on  Words 

At  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  I  said  that  we  are  often  deceived 
by  false  values  ascribed  to  words.  I  wish  to  explain  my  idea  by 
examples. 

First  example. — In  1859  I  made  a  report  to  the  Philomathic 
Society,  in  which  I  discussed  Brodie's  and  Magendie's  experiments 
on  ligature  of  the  bile  duct,  and  I  showed  that  the  divergent  results 


184  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


whicli  the  two  experimenters  reached,  depended  on  the  fact  that  one 
operated  on  dogs  and  tied  only  the  bile  duct,  while  the  other  operated 
on  cats  and,  without  suspecting  it,  included  in  his  ligature,  both  the 
bile  duct  and  a  pancreatic  duct.  Thus  I  showed  the  reason  for  the 
difference  in  the  results  they  reached,  and  I  concluded  that,  in 
physiology  as  everywhere  else,  experiments  are  rigorous  and  give 
identical  results  whenever  we  operate  in  exactly  similar  conditions. 

A  propos  of  this,  a  member  of  the  society  took  the  floor  to  attack 
my  conclusions;  it  was  Gerdy,  surgeon  at  the  Charite,  professor  in 
the  faculty  of  medicine,  and  known  through  various  works  on  surgery 
and  physiology.  ^^Your  anatomical  explanation  of  Brodie's  and 
Magendie^s  experiments,''  said  he,  "is  correct,  but  I  cannot  accept 
your  general  conclusion.  You  say,  in  fact,  that  the  results  of  experi- 
ments in  physiology  are  identical ;  I  deny  it.  Your  conclusion  would 
be  correct  for  inert  nature,  but  it  cannot  be  true  for  living  nature. 
Whenever  life  enters  into  phenomena,"  he  went  on,  "conditions  may 
be  as  similar  as  we  please;  the  results  may  still  be  different."  To 
support  his  opinion,  Gerdy  cited  cases  of  individuals  with  the  same 
disease,  to  whom  he  had  given  the  same  drugs,  with  different  results. 
He  also  recalled  cases  of  like  operations  for  the  same  disease,  but 
followed  by  cure  in  one  case  and  death  in  another.  These  differences, 
according  to  him,  all  depended  on  life  itself  altering  the  results, 
though  the  experimental  conditions  were  the  same ;  but  this  could  not 
happen,  he  thought,  in  phenomena  of  inert  bodies,  into  which  life  does 
not  enter.  Opposition  to  these  ideas  was  prompt  and  general  in  the 
Philomathic  Society.  Everyone  pointed  out  to  Gerdy  that  his  opin- 
ions were  nothing  less  than  a  denial  of  biological  science;  and  that, 
in  the  cases  of  which  he  spoke,  he  completely  deceived  himself  as  to 
the  identity  of  conditions,  in  this  sense,  that  the  diseases  which  he 
regarded  as  similar  or  identical  were  not  in  the  least  alike,  and  that 
he  attributed  to  the  influence  of  life  what  should  be  accounted  for  by 
our  ignorance  about  phenomena  as  complex  as  those  of  pathology. 
Gerdy  continued  to  maintain  that  life  had  the  effect  of  altering 
phenomena  so  as  to  make  them  differ  in  different  individuals,  even 
when  the  conditions  in  which  they  took  place  were  identical.  Gerdy 
believed  that  one  man's  vitality  was  not  the  saine  as  another's,  and 
that  there  must  therefore  be  between  individuals  differences  impos- 
sible to  define.  He  would  not  give  up  his  ideas ;  he  entrenched  him- 
self behind  the  word  vitality  and  could  not  be  made  to  understand 


OF  EXPEKIMENTAL  MEDICmE 


185 


that  it  was  only  a  word,  devoid  of  meaning  and  corresponding  to 
nothing ;  and  that  saying  that  something  was  due  to  vitality  amounted 
to  calling  it  unknown. 

In  fact,  we  are  often  duped  by  such  words  as  life,  death,  health, 
disease,  idiosyncrasy.  We  think  we  have  explained  when  we  say  that 
a  phenomenon  is  due  to  a  vital  influence,  a  morbid  influence,  or  an 
individual  idiosyncrasy.  We  must  really  learn,  however,  that  vital 
phenomenon  means  only  a  phenomenon  peculiar  to  living  beings, 
whose  cause  we  do  not  yet  know ;  for  I  think  that  every  phenomenon, 
called  vital  to-day,  must  sooner  or  later  be  reduced  to  definite  proper- 
ties of  organized  or  organic  matter.  We  may,  of  course,  use  the 
expression  vitality  as  chemists  use  the  word  affinity,  but  knowing  that 
fundamentally  there  are  only  phenomena  and  conditions  of  phe- 
nomena which  we  must  learn ;  when  the  conditions  necessary  to  phe- 
nomena are  known,  then  occult,  vital  and  mineral  forces  will  dis- 
appear. 

I  am  very  happy  to  be  in  perfect  harmony  on  this  point  with  my 
colleague  and  friend,  M.  Henri  Sainte-Claire  Deville.  This  will  be 
seen  in  the  following  words  spoken  by  M.  Sainte-Claire  Deville  in 
explaining  his  splendid  discoveries  on  the  effects  of  high  tempera- 
tures to  the  Chemical  Societv  of  Paris.^  "We  must  not  conceal  from 
ourselves  the  fact  that  studying  primary  causes  of  the  phenomena 
which  we  observe  and  measure  has  its  grave  dangers.  Escaping  exact 
definition,  independent  of  particular  facts,  it  leads  us,  much  oftener 
than  we  think,  really  to  beg  the  question,  and  to  content  ourselves 
with  specious  explanations  that  cannot  withstand  severe  criticism. 
Chiefly  affinity,  defined  as  the  force  which  presides  over  chemical 
combinations,  has  long  been  and  still  is  an  occult  cause,  a  sort  of 
archeus  to  which  we  refer  all  the  facts  which  we  do  not  understand 
and  which  we  thenceforth  consider  explained,  though  they  are  often 
only  classified  and  often  wrongly  classified:  in  the  same  way  we 
attribute  to  catalytic  force  any  number  of  extremely  obscure  phe- 
nomena which,  in  my  opinion,  become  more  sO'  when  we  refer  them 
en  bloc  to  an  entirely  unknown  cause.   In  giving  them  the  same  name, 

•  H.  Sainte-Claire  Deville,  Legona  su/r  la  dissociation  prononcies  devant  la 
8ociit6  chimique.   Paris,  1866. 

"  All  this  applies  to  those  recently  invented  forces,  to  the  forces  of  dissolu- 
tion and  diffusion,  to  crystalogenic  force,  to  all  the  special  attractive  and  re- 
pelling forces  brought  in  to  explain  phenomena  of  heating  and  superfusion, 
electric  phenomena,  etc. 


186 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


we  certainly  believe  we  are  placing  them  in  the  same  category.  But 
this  classification  is  not  even  proved  legitimate.  What,  indeed,  could 
be  more  arbitrary  than  setting  side  by  side  catalytic  phenomena  that 
depend  on  the  action  or  the  presence  of  platinum  sponge  and  con- 
centrated sulphuric  acid,  when  the  platinum  and  the  acid  are  not, 
so  to  speak,  parties  to  the  operation  ?  These  phenomena  will  per- 
haps later  be  explained  in  an  essentially  different  way,  according  to 
whether  they  are  produced  under  the  influence  of  a  porous  material 
like  platinum  sponge  or  under  the  influence  of  a  highly  energetic 
chemical  agent  like  concentrated  sulphuric  acid. 

"In  our  studies,  we  must  therefore  lay  aside  unknown  forces, 
to  which  we  have  recourse  only  because  we  have  not  measured  their 
effects.  On  the  contrary,  we  should  direct  our  attention  to  the  ob- 
servation and  numerical  determination  of  effects,  which  alone  are 
within  our  range.  By  such  work,  we  establish  differences  and  anal- 
ogies, and  new  light  results  from  comparisons  and  measurements. 

"Thus  heat  and  affinity  are  constantly  face  to  face  in  our  chemical 
theories.  Affinity  completely  escapes  us,  and  yet  we  attribute  combi- 
nation to  it,  as  the  effect  of  an  unknown  cause.  Let  us  simply 
study  the  physical  circumstances  which  accompany  a  combination, 
and  we  shall  see  how  many  measurable  phenomena,  how  many  curious 
relations  present  themselves  at  every  moment.  Heat,  they  say,  de- 
stroys affinity.  Let  us  patiently  study  the  decomposition  of  bodies 
under  the  influence  of  heat  measured  in  quantity  of  work,  heat  or 
energy :  we  shall  immediately  see  how  fruitful  this  study  is,  and  how 
independent  of  every  unknown  force,  unknown  even  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  kind  of  units  to  which  we  must  refer  it  for  precise  or 
approximate  measurement.  Especially  in  this  sense  affinity,  consid- 
ered as  a  force,  is  an  occult  cause,  unless  it  simply  expresses  a 
quality  of  matter.  In  that  case,  it  would  be  used  simply  to  designate 
the  fact  that  such  and  such  substances  can  or  cannot  be  combined  in 
such  and  such  definite  circumstances." 

When  a  phenomenon  takes  place  outside  the  living  body  and  does 
not  occur  in  the  organism,  that  is  not  because  an  entity  called  life 
prevents  the  phenomenon  from  taking  place,  but  because  the  neces- 
sary condition  for  the  phenomenon  is  not  met  with  inside,  as  it  is 
outside,  the  body.  Thus  it  has  actually  been  said  that  life  prevents 
fibrin  from  coagulating  in  living  animals'  blood  vessels,  though  it  does 
coagulate  outside  the  vessels  because  life  no  longer  affects  it.  It 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


187 


is  nothing  of  the  sort ;  certain  physico-chemical  conditions  are  needed 
to  make  fibrin  coagulate ;  they  are  harder  to  produce,  but  may  never- 
theless be  found  in  the  living,  and,  as  soon  as  they  appear,  fibrin 
coagulates  as  well  inside  as  outside  the  organism.  The  life  invoked 
here  is  therefore  only  a  physical  condition  which  does  or  does  not 
exist.  I  have  shown  that  sugar  is  produced  in  the  liver  more  abun- 
dantly after  death  than  during  life;  certain  physiologists  drew  the 
conclusion  that  life  influences  the  formation  of  sugar  in  the  liver; 
they  said  that  life  hinders  its  formation  and  death  favors  it.  One  is 
surprised  to  hear  such  vitalistic  opinions  in  our  day  and  to  see  them 
supported  by  men  who  pique  themselves  on  applying  to  physiology 
and  medicine  the  accuracy  of  physical  science.  I  shall  later  show 
that  here  again  physical  conditions  are  either  present  or  absent,  but 
nothing  else  is  real ;  because  again,  at  the  base  of  all  these  explana- 
tions, only  the  conditions  of  phenomena  are  to  be  found. 

To  sum  up,  we  must  learn  that  the  words  we  use  to  express  phe- 
nomena whose  cause  we  do  not  know  are  nothing  in  themselves ;  and 
that  the  moment  we  grant  them  any  value  in  criticism  or  discussion, 
we  abandon  experience  and  fall  into  scholasticism.  In  discussing  or 
explaining  phenomena,  we  must  be  very  careful  never  to  abandon 
observation  or  put  a  word  in  place  of  a  fact.  Very  often  we  even  ex- 
pose ourselves  to  attack,  solely  because  we  abandon  facts  and  con- 
clude with  a  word  that  goes  beyond  what  we  have  observed.  The 
following  example  will  prove  it  clearly. 

Second  example. — When  I  made  my  investigations  of  pancreatic 
juice,  I  noted  that  this  fluid  includes  a  peculiar  material,  pancrea- 
tin,  which  has  characteristics  of  both  albumen  and  casein.  It  resem- 
bles albumen  in  being  coagulated  by  heat,  but,  like  casein,  differs 
from  it  in  being  precipitated  by  sulphate  of  magnesia.  Magendie 
had  made  experiments,  before  me,  on  pancreatic  juice,  and  had  said 
that,  according  to  his  tests,  pancreatic  juice  is  a  fluid  containing  albu- 
men, while,  from  my  investigations,  I  concluded  that  pancreatic  juice 
does  not  comprise  albumen,  but  does  contain  pancreatin,  which  is  a 
material  distinct  from  albumen.  I  showed  my  experiments  to  Ma- 
gendie, pointing  out  that  we  disagreed  on  the  conclusion,  but  that  we 
nevertheless  agreed  on  the  fact  that  pancreatic  juice  is  coagulated 
by  heat;  only  that  other  new  characteristics  that  I  had  seen  pre- 
vented my  deciding  on  the  presence  of  albumen.  Magendie  an- 
swered :   "This  difference  between  us  comes  from  my  having  inferred 


188 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


more  than  I  saw;  if  I  had  simply  said:  pancreatic  juice  is  a  liquid 
coagulated  by  heat,  I  should  have  remained  within  the  facts,  and 
should  have  been  unassailable."  This  example,  which  I  have  always 
remembered,  shows  how  little  value  we  should  ascribe  to  words  apart 
from  the  facts  they  represent.  Thus  the  word  albumen  means  noth- 
ing in  itself;  it  merely  recalls  characteristics  and  phenomena.  By 
extending  this  example  to  medicine,  we  should  see  that  the  words, 
fever,  inflammation,  and  the  names  of  diseases  in  general  have  no 
meaning  at  all  in  themselves. 

When  we  create  a  word  to  characterize  a  phenomenon,  we  then 
agree  in  general  on  the  idea  that  we  wish  it  to  express  and  the  precise 
meaning  we  are  giving  to  it ;  but  with  the  later  progress  of  science  the 
meaning  of  the  word  changes  for  some  people,  while  for  others  the 
word  remains  in  the  language  with  its  original  meaning.  The  re- 
sult is  often  such  discord  that  men  using  the  same  word  express  very 
different  ideas.  Our  language,  in  fact,  is  only  approximate,  and 
even  in  science  it  is  so  indefinite  that  if  we  lose  sight  of  phenomena 
and  cling  to  words,  we  are  speedily  outside  of  reality.  We  therefore 
only  injure  science  by  arguing  in  favor  of  a  word  which  is  now  merely 
a  source  of  error,  because  it  no  longer  expresses  the  same  idea  for 
everyone.  Let  us  therefore  conclude  that  we  must  always  cling  to 
phenomena  and  see  in  words  only  expressions  empty  of  meaning,  if 
the  phenomena  they  should  represent  are  not  definite,  or  if  they  are 
absent. 

The  mind  by  its  very  nature  has  systematic  tendencies ;  that  is 
why  we  try  to  seek  agreement  about  words  rather  than  things.  For 
experimental  criticism,  this  is  a  false  direction  which  confuses  quesr 
tions  and  makes  us  believe  in  differences  of  opinion  which  generally 
exist  only  in  our  way  of  interpreting  phenomena,  instead  of  having 
some  bearing  on  the  existence  of  facts  and  on  their  real  importance. 
Like  everyone  who  has  had  the  good  fortune  of  bringing  into  science 
unexpected  facts  or  new  ideas,  I  have  been  and  still  am  the  object 
of  much  criticism.  Up  to  this  time,  I  have  not  answered  my  oppo- 
nents, because  I  have  always  had  investigations  on  hand  so  that  time 
and  opportunity  have  been  lacking ;  but  in  the  remainder  of  this  work, 
occasion  to  study  them  will  quite  naturally  present  itself,  and  by 
applying  the  principles  of  experimental  criticism  suggested  in  earlier 
paragraphs,  we  shall  easily  weigh  the  criticisms  in  question.  Mean- 
time I  shall  merely  say  that  it  is  essential  to  distinguish  between  two 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICmE 


189 


things  in  experimental  criticism :  experimental  fact  and  its  interpre- 
tation. Science  requires  us  first  of  all  to  agree  on  fact,  because  that 
is  the  basis  on  which  we  must  reason.  As  to  interpretations  and 
ideas,  they  may  vary,  and  discussing  them  is  an  actual  advantage, 
because  such  discussion  leads  us  to  make  other  investigations  and  to 
undertake  new  experiments.  In  physiology,  we  should  therefore 
never  lose  sight  of  the  principles  of  true  scientific  criticism  nor  mix 
them  with  personalities  or  artifice.  Among  the  artifices  of  criticism, 
many  do  not  concern  us  because  they  are  extra-scientific ;  one  of  them, 
however,  we  must  point  out.  It  consists  in  considering  in  a  piece 
of  work  only  what  is  defective  and  open  to  attack,  while  neglecting  or 
concealing  what  is  valid  and  important.  This  is  the  method  of  false 
criticism.  In  science  the  word  criticism  is  not  a  synonym  for  dis- 
paragement; criticising  means  looking  for  truth  by  separating  the 
true  from  the  false  and  distinguishing  the  good  from  the  bad.  While 
just  to  men  of  science,  such  criticism  alone  is  profitable  for  science. 
And  this  we  shall  easily  show  in  the  particular  examples  which  we 
shall  mention. 


CHAPTER  III 


IJSTVESTIGATION  AND  CRITICISM  AS  APPLIED  TO 
EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 

Methods  of  investigation  and  of  scientific  criticism  cannot  vary 
from  one  science  to  another  nor,  for  that  matter,  in  different  parts 
of  the  same  science.  It  will  therefore  be  easy  to  show  that  the  rules 
for  physiological  investigation,  suggested  in  the  last  chapter,  are 
absolutely  the  same  as  those  which  should  be  followed  in  pathology 
and  therapeutics.  Thus  methods  of  investigation  of  the  phenomena 
of  life  should  be  the  same  in  normal  as  in  pathological  conditions. 
This  seems  to  us  fundamental  in  biological  science. 

I.  Pathological  and  Theeapeutic  Investigation 

As  in  physiology,  so  in  pathology  and  in  therapeutics,  the  starting 
point  of  scientific  investigation  is  now  a  casual  fact  or  one  occurring 
by  chance,  now  an  hypothesis,  i.e.,  an  idea. 

I  have  sometimes  heard  physicians  express  the  opinion  that  medi- 
cine is  not  a  science,  because  all  our  knowledge  of  practical  medicine 
is  empirical  and  bom  of  chance,  while  scientific  knowledge  is  de- 
duced with  certainty  from  theories  or  principles.  There  is  an  error 
here,  to  which  I  wish  to  call  attention. 

All  human  knowledge  had  to  begin  with  casual  observations.  Man 
indeed  could  know  things  only  after  seeing  them ;  and  the  first  time, 
necessarily,  he  saw  them  "by  chance ;  then  he  came  to  conceive  ideas 
about  things,  to  compare  old  facts  and  to  deduce  from  them  new  ones ; 
in  a  word,  after  empirical  observation,  he  was  no  longer  led  to  find 
other  facts  by  chance,  but  by  induction. 

Fundamentally,  then,  all  the  sciences  began  with  empiricism,  that 
is  to  say,  observation  or  chance  experience  had  to  form  the  first  period. 
But  empiricism  is  not  a  permanent  state  in  any  science.  In  the  com- 
plex sciences  of  humanity,  empiricism  will  necessarily  govern  prac- 
tice much  longer  than  in  simpler  sciences.   Medical  practice  to-day  is 

190 


THE  STUDY  OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICINE  191 


empirical  in  most  cases;  but  that  does  not  mean  that  medicine  will 
never  escape  from  empiricism.  The  complexity  of  its  phenomena 
will  make  it  harder  to  escape ;  but  that  should  make  us  redouble  our 
efforts  to  enter  the  scientific  path  as  soon  as  we  can.  In  a  word, 
empiricism  is  not  the  negation  of  science,  as  certain  physicians  seem 
to  think ;  it  is  only  its  first  stage.  We  must  even  add  that  empiricism 
never  wholly  disappears  from  any  science.  Sciences,  in  fact,  are  not 
lighted  up  in  every  portion  at  once;  they  develop  only  a  little  at  a 
time.  In  parts  of  physics  and  chemistry,  empiricism  still  persists. 
This  is  proved  every  day  by  chance  discoveries,  unforeseen  by  pre- 
vailing theories.  I  therefore  conclude  that  we  make  discoveries  in  the 
sciences  only  because  all  are  still  partially  obscure.  In  medicine 
more  numerous  discoveries  are  still  to  be  made,  because  almost  every- 
where empiricism  and  obscurity  prevail.  So  this  very  complicated 
science  is  proved  further  behind  the  times  than  others ;  but  that  is  all. 

!New  medical  observations  are  generally  made  by  chance;  if  a 
patient  with  a  hitherto  unknown  affection  is  admitted  to  a  hospital 
where  a  physician  comes  for  consultation,  surely  the  physician  meets 
the  patient  by  chance.  But  a  botanist  in  the  field  happens  on  an 
unfamiliar  plant  in  exactly  the  same  way;  and  by  chance  also  an 
astronomer  catches  sight  of  a  planet,  whose  existence  he  did  not 
know  of,  in  the  sky.  In  such  circumstances,  the  physician's  origi- 
nality consists  in  seeing  the  fact  that  chance  presents  to  him  and  in 
not  letting  it  escape,  and  his  only  merit  is  accurate  observation.  I 
cannot  here  analyze  the  characteristics  of  good  medical  observation. 
Reporting  instances  of  chance  medical  observations  would  be  just  as 
dull.  Medical  works  teem  with  them;  everybody  knows  them.  I 
shall  therefore  limit  myself  to  saying  in  general  that,  to  make  a  good 
medical  observation,  it  is  not  only  necessary  to  have  an  observing 
mind,  but  also  to  be  a  physiologist.  We  shall  the  better  interpret 
the  various  meanings  of  a  morbid  phenomenon,  we  shall  assign  it 
the  proper  value,  and  we  shall  certainly  not  fall  into  the  difficulty, 
with  which  Sydenham  ^  reproached  certain  physicians,  of  putting 
important  phenomena  of  a  disease  on  the  same  plane  as  insignificant 
and  accidental  facts,  like  the  botanist  who  described  caterpillar  bites 
among  the  characteristics  of  a  plant.  Besides,  we  must  bring  to 
observation  of  a  pathological  phenomenon,  i.e.,  a  disease,  exactly  the 
same  state  of  mind  and  the  same  rigor,  as  to  observation  of  a  physio- 

*  Sydenham,  Medecine  pratique.    Preface,  p.  12. 


192  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


logical  phenomenon.    We  must  never  go  beyond  facts  and  must  be, 
as  it  were,  photographers  of  nature. 

But  once  made,  every  medical  observation  becomes  the  starting 
point,  as  in  physiology,  for  ideas  and  hypotheses  which  experimental 
physicians  go  on  to  investigate  through  fresh  observations  of  pa- 
tients or  by  experiments  on  animals. 

We  said  that,  in  making  physiological  investigations,  it  often 
happens  that  a  fresh  fact  arises  unsought;  that  also  occurs  in  pa- 
thology. To  prove  it,  I  need  only  cite  the  recent  case  of  Zenker,  who,^ 
in  pursuing  his  investigations  of  certain  muscular  changes  in  typhoid 
fever,  found  trichinae  which  he  was  not  Igoking  for. 

Pathological  investigation  may  also  take  for  its  starting  point  a 
theory,  an  hypothesis  or  a  preconceived  idea.  We  might  easily  give 
examples  to  prove  that  absurd  ideas,  in  pathology  as  in  physiolog}% 
may  sometimes  lead  to  useful  discoveries,  just  as  it  would  not  be 
hard  to  find  arguments  to  prove  that  even  the  best  accredited  theories 
should  be  regarded  only  as  temporary,  and  not  as  absolute  truths  to 
which  facts  should  be  bent. 

Therapeutic  investigation  conforms  to  exactly  the  same  rules  as 
physiological  and  pathological  investigation.  Everyone  knows  that 
the  first  promoter  of  therapeutic  science  was  chance,  and  that  only 
by  chance  were  the  effects  of  most  medicines  first  observed.  Physi- 
cians have  also  often  been  guided  in  their  therapeutic  attempts  by 
ideas;  and  it  must  also  be  said  that  they  were  often  the  strangest 
and  most  absurd  theories  or  ideas.  I  need  only  cite  the  theories  of 
Paracelsus,  who  deduced  the  action  of  drugs  from  astrological  influ- 
ences, and  recall  the  ideas  of  Porta,  who  assigned  medicinal  uses  to 
plants,  deduced  from  their  resemblances  to  certain  diseased  organs; 
thus  carrots  cured  jaundice;  lung-wort,  phthisis,  etc.^ 

Summing  up,  we  cannot  establish  any  valid  distinction  between 
methods  of  investigation  that  should  be  applied  in  physiology,  in 
pathology  and  in  hygiene.  The  method  of  observation  and  experi- 
ment is  still  the  same,  unchangeable  in  its  principles  and  offering 
only  a  few  peculiarities  in  its  application,  according  to  the  relative 
complexity  of  phenomena.   We  cannot,  indeed,  find  any  radical  dif- 

*  See  Rapport  des  prix  de  mMeoine  et  de  chirurgie  pour  186 ( Compt.  rendua 
de  VAcad.  des  sciences). 

'  See  Chevreul,  Considerations  sur  Vhistoire  de  la  partie  de  la  midecine  qui 
conceme  la  prescription  des  remMes  {Jowrnal  des  savants,  1865). 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


193 


ference  in  the  nature  of  physiological,  pathological  and  therapeutic 
phenomena.  Since  all  these  phenomena  depend  on  laws  peculiar  to 
living  matter,  they  are  identical  in  essence  and  vary  only  with  the 
various  conditions  in  which  phenomena  appear.  We  shall  see  later 
that  physiological  laws  are  repeated  in  pathological  phenomena, 
whence  it  follows  that  the  foundations  of  therapeutics  must  reside 
in  knowledge  of  the  physiological  action  of  morbid  causes,  of  medi- 
cines and  of  poisons;  and  that  is  just  the  same  thing. 

II.  Experimental  Criticism  m  Pathology  and  Therapeutics 

Criticism  of  facts  gives  sciences  their  true  individuality.  All 
scientific  criticism  should  explain  facts  rationally.  If  criticism  is 
attributed,  on  the  other  hand,  to  personal  feeling,  science  disappears ; 
because  such  criticism  rests  on  a  criterion  that  can  neither  be  proved 
nor  conveyed  as  scientific  truths  should  be.  I  have  often  heard  phy- 
sicians answer,  when  asked  the  reason  for  a  diagnosis,  "I  do  not 
know  how  I  recognize  such  and  such  a  case,  but  it  is  evident";  or 
when  one  asks  them  why  they  give  certain  remedies,  they  answer 
that  they  cannot  exactly  tell,  and  besides  that  they  need  not  explain, 
since  they  are  guided  by  their  medical  tact  and  intuition.  It  is  easy 
to  understand  that  physicians  who  reason  in  that  way  deny  science. 
But  we  cannot  too  strongly  protest  against  such  ideas,  which  are 
bad,  not  only  because  they  stifle  every  germ  of  science,  but  also  be- 
cause they  especially  encourage  laziness,  ignorance  and  charlatanism. 
I  entirely  understand  a  physician's  saying  that  he  cannot  always 
rationally  account  for  what  he  is  doing,  and  I  accept  his  conclusion 
that  medical  science  is  still  plunged  in  the  shades  of  empiricism ;  but 
if  he  goes  on  to  proclaim  his  medical  tact  or  his  intuition  as  a  criterion 
which  he  then  means  to  impose  on  others  without  further  proof,  that 
is  wholly  antiscientific. 

As  in  physiology,  the  only  scientific  criticism  possible  in  pa- 
thology and  in  therapeutics  is  experimental  criticism;  and  whether 
applied  to  ourselves  or  to  the  work  of  others,  this  criticism  should 
always  be  based  on  absolute  determination  of  facts.  Experimental 
criticism,  as  we  have  seen,  should  reject  statistics  as  a  foundation 
for  experimental  therapeutic  and  pathological  science.  In  pathology 
and  therapeutics,  we  should  repudiate  undetermined  facts,  that  is  to 


194  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


say,  those  badly  made,  and  sometimes  imaginary,  observations  which 
are  constantly  brought  forward  as  perpetual  objections.  As  in  physi- 
ology, there  are  crude  facts  which  can  enter  into  scientific  reasoning 
only  on  condition  that  they  be  determined  and  exactly  defined  as  to 
their  necessary  conditions. 

But  it  is  characteristic  of  criticism  in  pathology  and  therapeutics, 
first  and  foremost  to  require  comparative  observation  and  experiment. 
How,  indeed,  can  a  physician  judge  the  etiology,  if  he  does  not  make 
a  comparative  experiment  to  eliminate  all  the  secondary  circum- 
stances, that  might  beeome  sources  of  error,  and  make  him  take  mere 
coincidences  for  relations  of  cause  and  effect?  Especially  in  thera- 
peutics, the  need  of  comparative  experiment  has  always  struck  physi- 
cians endowed  with  the  scientific  spirit.  We  cannot  judge  the  influ- 
ence of  a  remedy  on  the  course  and  outcome  of  a  disease  if  we  do  not 
previously  know  the  natural  course  and  outcome  of  the  disease.  That 
is  why  Pinel  said  in  his  clinic :  "This  year  we  will  observe  diseases 
without  treating  them,  and  next  year  we  will  treat  them."  Scien- 
tifically, we  ought  to  adopt  Pinel' s  idea  without,  however,  accepting 
the  long-range,  comparative  experiment  which  he  proposed.  Dis- 
eases, in  fact,  may  vary  in  seriousness  from  one  year  to  another; 
Sydenham's  observations  on  the  undetermined  or  unknown  influence 
of  what  he  calls  the  epidemic  genius  prove  it.  To  be  valid, 
comparative  experiments  have  therefore  to  be  made  at  the  same 
time  and  on  as  comparable  patients  as  possible.  In  spite  of  that, 
such  comparisons  still  bristle  with  immense  difficulties  which  phy- 
sicians must  strive  to  lessen ;  for  comparative  experiment  is  the  sine 
qua  non  of  scientific  experimental  medicine;  without  it  a  physician 
walks  at  random  and  becomes  the  plaything  of  endless  illusions.  A 
physician,  who  tries  a  remedy  and  cures  his  patients,  is  inclined  to 
believe  that  the  cure  is  due  to  his  treatment.  Physicians  often  pride 
themselves  on  curing  all  their  patients  with  a  remedy  that  they 
use.  But  the  first  thing  to  ask  them  is  whether  they  have  tried 
doing  nothing,  i.e.,  not  treating  other  patients;  for  how  can  they 
otherwise  know  whether  the  remedy  or  nature  cured  them?  Gall 
VTrote  a  little  known  book  *  on  the  question  as  to  what  is  nature's 
share  and  what  is  the  share  of  medicine  in  healing  disease,  and  he 
very  naturally  concludes  that  their  respective  shares  are  quite  hard  to 

*  Gall,  Philosophische  medicinische  Untersuchungen  uher  Kunst  und  Natur 
im  gesunden  und  kranken  Zustand  des  Menschen.    Leipzig,  1800. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


196 


assign.  We  may  be  subject  daily  to  the  greatest  illusions  about  the 
value  of  treatment,  if  we  do  not  have  recourse  to  comparative  experi- 
ment. I  shall  recall  only  one  recent  example  concerning  the  treat- 
ment of  pneumonia.  Comparative  experiment  showed,  in  fact,  that 
treatment  of  pneumonia  by  bleeding,  which  was  believed  most  effi- 
cacious, is  a  mere  therapeutic  illusion. 

From  all  this,  I  conclude  that  comparative  observation  and  experi- 
ment are  the  only  solid  foundation  for  experimental  medicine,  and 
that  physiology,  pathology  and  therapeutics  must  be  subject  to  this 
criticism  in  common. 

*B6clard,  Rapport  gSn^ral  sur  les  prix  d^cern4»  en  1862  {Mimoirea  de 
VAcad^mie  de  midecine,  Paris,  1863,  Vol.  XXVI,  p.  xxiii). 


CHAPTER  IV 

PHILOSOPHIC  OBSTACLES  ENCOUNTERED  BY 
EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 

According  to  everything  so  far  said  in  this  Introduction,  the 
principal  obstacles  encountered  by  experimental  medicine  lie  in  the 
enormous  complexity  of  the  phenomena  studied.  I  need  not  return 
to  this  point  already  explained  from  every  angle.  But  besides  these 
wholly  material  and,  so  to  speak,  objective  difficulties,  there  are 
obstacles  to  experimental  medicine  arising  from  vicious  methods, 
bad  mental  habits  and  certain  false  ideas  about  which  we  shall  now 
say  a  few  words. 

I.  The  False  Application  of  Physiology  to  Medicine 

I  certainly  do  not  claim  to  have  been  the  first  to  propose  apply- 
ing physiology  to  medicine.  That  was  long  ago  recommended,  and 
numerous  attempts  have  been  made  in  this  direction.  In  my  works 
and  my  teaching  at  the  College  de  France,  I  am  therefore  merely  fol- 
lowing out  an  idea  which  is  already  bearing  fruit  through  its  appli- 
cation to  medicine.  More  than  ever  to-day,  young  physicians  are 
advancing  along  this  path,  rightly  considered  the  path  of  progress. 
However,  I  have  frequently  seen  the  application  of  physiology  to 
medicine  misunderstood,  so  that  it  not  only  fails  to  produce  the  good 
results  which  we  have  a  right  to  expect,  but  becomes  actually  harm- 
ful, and  thus  furnishes  arguments  to  the  detractors  of  experimental 
medicine.  It  is  therefore  most  important  to  make  the  subject  plain ; 
for  in  dealing  with  the  important  question  of  method,  we  shall  find 
a  fresh  opportunity  to  define  more  exactly  the  true  point  of  view  of 
what  we  call  experimental  medicine. 

Experimental  medicine  differs  in  object  from  the  medicine  of 

observation,  just  as  the  sciences  of  observation  in  general  differ  from 

the  experimental  sciences.    The  object  of  any  science  of  observation 

is  to  discover  the  laws  of  natural  phenomena  so  as  to  foresee  them; 

196 


THE  STUDY  OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE  197 

but  it  cannot  master  them  or  alter  them  at  pleasure.  Astronomy  is 
typical  of  these  sciences;  we  can  foresee  astronomical  phenomena, 
but  we  cannot  change  them  in  any  way.  The  object  of  an  experi- 
mental science  is  to  discover  the  laws  of  natural  phenomena,  for 
the  purpose  not  only  of  foreseeing  them,  but  of  regulating  them  at 
pleasure  and  mastering  them :  such  are  physics  and  chemistry. 

Among  physicians,  there  are  some  who  actually  believe  that  medi- 
cine should  remain  a  science  of  observation,  i.e.,  that  it  should  be 
able  to  foresee  the  course  and  outcome  of  diseases,  but  should  not 
directly  act  on  disease.  There  are  others,  and  I  am  one  of  them, 
who  think  that  medicine  can  be  an  experimental  science,  i.e.,  that 
it  should  delve  into  the  interior  of  organisms  and  find  ways  of 
altering  and,  to  a  certain  extent,  regulating  the  hidden  springs  of 
living  machines.  Observing  physicians  look  on  a  living  organism 
as  a  little  world  contained  in  the  great  world,  like  a  kind  of  ephemeral 
living  planet  whose  motions  are  ruled  by  laws  which  we  discover  by 
simple  observation,  so  as  to  foresee  the  progress  and  evolution  of 
vital  phenomena  in  health  or  disease,  but  without  ever  being  able 
to  alter  their  natural  course  in  any  way.  This  doctrine  is  found 
in  Hippocrates  in  its  purest  form.  Medicine  of  simple  observation 
obviously  excludes  all  manner  of  active  medical  intervention;  for 
this  reason  it  is  also  known  as  expectant  medicine,  that  is  to  say, 
medicine  that  observes  and  foresees  the  course  of  diseases  without 
aiming  to  act  directly  on  their  progress.^  It  is  rarely  that  we  find 
a  physician  purely  Hippocratic  in  this  respect,  and  it  would  be  easy 
to  prove  that  many  physicians,  who  loudly  applaud  Hippocratism, 
do  not  trust  to  its  precepts  in  the  least  when  they  give  themselves  up 
to  the  most  active  and  disordered  flights  of  empirical  medication. 
Not  that  I  condemn  these  therapeutic  attempts  which,  most  of  the 
time,  are  only  experimentations  to  see;  only  I  say  that  this  is  not 
Hippocratic  medicine,  but  empiricism.  Empirical  physicians,  acting 
more  or  less  blindly,  are,  after  all,  experimenting  on  vital  phenomena, 
and  thus  class  themselves  in  the  empirical  period  of  experimental 
medicine. 

Experimental  medicine  is  therefore  medicine  that  claims  knowl- 
edge of  the  laws  of  healthy  and  diseased  organisms,  not  only  so  as  to 
foresee  phenomena,  but  also  so  as  to  be  able  to  regulate  and  alter  them 

^  LeQon  d'ouverture  du  cours  de  mSdecine  au  ColUge  de  France  (Revue  des 
cours  scientifiquea,  Dec.  31,  1864). 


198 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


within  certain  limits.  Accordingly,  we  easily  perceive  that  medicine 
necessarily  tends  to  become  experimental,  and  that  every  physician 
who  gives  his  patients  active  medicines  cooperates  in  building  up 
experimental  medicine.  But  if  such  action,  on  the  part  of  experi- 
menting physicians,  is  to  transcend  empiricism  and  deserve  the 
name  of  science,  it  must  be  based  on  knowledge  of  the  laws  govern- 
ing action  in  the  organism's  inner  environment,  whether  in  a  healthy 
or  a  pathological  state.  The  scientific  basis  of  experimental  medi- 
cine is  physiology;  we  have  often  said  this;  it  must  be  proclaimed 
aloud,  because  without  it  no  medical  science  is  possible.  Diseases 
at  bottom  are  only  physiological  phenomena  in  new  conditions  still 
to  be  determined;  toxic  and  medicinal  action,  as  we  shall  see,  come 
back  to  simple  physiological  changes  in  properties  of  the  histological 
units  of  our  tissues.  In  a  word,  physiology  must  be  constantly  ap- 
plied to  medicine,  if  we  are  to  understand  and  explain  the  mechanism 
of  disease  and  the  action  of  toxic  and  medicinal  agents.  Now,  pre- 
cisely this  application  of  physiology  must  here  be  carefully  defined. 

We  saw  above  how  experimental  medicine  differs  from  Hip- 
pocratism  and  from  empiricism;  but  we  did  not  say  that  experi- 
mental medicine  should  therefore  renounce  observational  medicine 
or  the  empirical  use  of  medicines;  far  from  it,  experimental  medi- 
cine makes  use  of  medical  observation  as  a  necessary  support.  In 
fact,  experimental  medicine  never  systematically  rejects  any  fact 
or  popular  observation ;  it  must  examine  everything  experimentally, 
and  it  seeks  the  scientific  explanation  of  facts  which  observational 
medicine  and  empiricism  have  already  noted.  Experimental  medi- 
cine, then,  is  what  I  might  call  the  second  period  of  scientific 
medicine,  the  first  period  being  observational  medicine;  and  quite 
naturally,  therefore,  the  second  period  is  added  to  the  first  and  rests 
on  it.  The  first  requirement,  then,  in  practising  experimental  medi- 
cine, is  to  be  an  observing  physician  and  to  start  from  pure  and 
simple  observations  of  patients  made  as  completely  as  possible;  ex- 
perimental science  comes  next,  analyzing  every  symptom  by  trying 
to  connect  it  with  explanations  and  vital  laws  that  shall  include 
the  relation  of  the  pathological  state  to  the  normal  or  physiological 
condition. 

But  in  the  present  state  of  biological  science,  no  one  can  presume 
to  explain  pathology  by  physiology  alone ;  we  must  move  in  that 
direction  because  it  is  the  scientific  path,  but  we  must  shun  belief 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


199 


in  the  illusion  that  our  problem  is  solved.  For  the  moment,  there- 
fore, the  prudent  and  reasonable  thing  to  do  is  to  explain  all  that 
we  can  explain  in  a  disease  by  physiology  and  leave  what  is  still 
inexplicable  to  the  future  progress  of  biological  science.  This  kind 
of  analysis,  advancing  only  step  by  step  as  the  progress  of  physiologi- 
cal science  permits,  isolates  the  essential  elements  of  a  disease  by 
elimination,  a  little  at  a  time,  grasps  its  characteristics  more  ac- 
curately and  allows  us  to  guide  therapeutics  more  intelligently. 
Besides,  the  analytic,  progressive  advance  still  keeps  the  individual 
character  and  aspect  of  the  disease.  But  if  we  take  advantage, 
instead,  of  a  few  possible  connections  between  pathology  and  physiol- 
ogy, to  try  to  explain  the  whole  disease  at  a  single  stroke,  then  we 
lose  sight  of  the  patient,  we  distort  the  disease,  and  by  our  false 
application  of  physiology,  we  retard  experimental  medicine,  instead 
of  promoting  its  progress. 

Unfortunately  I  must  blame  not  only  pure  physiologists  for  the 
wrong  application  of  physiology  to  pathology,  but  also  professional 
pathologists  and  physicians.  In  various  recent  publications  on  medi- 
cine, whose  physiological  tendencies,  by  the  way,  I  approve  and  praise, 
I  see  that  before  any  exposition  of  medical  observations,  the  authors 
begin  with  a  summary  of  everything  learned  by  experimental  phys- 
iology about  phenomena  connected  with  the  disease  with  which  they 
are  concerned.  Then  they  contribute  observations  of  patients,  some- 
times without  definite  scientific  object,  sometimes  to  show  that  phys- 
iology and  pathology  are  in  agreement.  But  aside  from  the  fact 
that  agreement  is  not  always  easy  to  prove,  because  points  in  experi- 
mental physiology  are  often  still  under  consideration,  I  find  this  sort 
of  procedure  essentially  disastrous  to  medical  science,  in  that  it 
subordinates  the  more  complex  science,  pathology,  to  physiology,  a 
simpler  science.  This  is,  in  fact,  the  inverse  of  what  we  previously 
said  should  be  done :  we  should  first  of  all  state  the  medical  problem 
as  given  by  observation  of  the  disease,  then  try  to  find  the  physi- 
ological explanation,  by  experimentally  analyzing  the  pathological 
phenomena.  But  in  this  analysis,  medical  observation  must  never 
disappear  or  be  lost  sight  of ;  it  must  remain  as  the  constant  basis 
or  common  ground  of  all  our  studies  and  explanations. 

In  this  work,  I  cannot  develop  as  a  whole  the  things  that  I 
have  just  said,  because  I  have  had  to  limit  myself  to  giving  the  re- 
sults of  my  experience  in  physiological  science  with  which  I  am 


200 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


most  familiar.  In  publishing  a  simple  essay  on  the  principles  of 
scientific  medicine,  my  idea  is  to  be  of  some  use  to  medicine. 
Medicine,  indeed,  is  so  vast  that  we  can  never  hope  to  find  a  man 
able  to  cultivate  all  parts  of  it  fruitfully  at  one  time.  But  in  the 
part  where  each  physician  takes  up  his  quarters,  he  must  thoroughly 
understand  the  scientific  connections  between  all  the  medical  sciences, 
90  as  to  avoid  scientific  anarchy  by  guiding  his  investigations  in  a 
direction  useful  to  the  whole.  I  am  not  practising  clinical  medi- 
cine here ;  but  I  must  take  account  of  it,  nevertheless,  and  assign  it 
the  first  place  in  experimental  medicine.  So  if  I  were  planning  a 
treatise  on  experimental  medicine,  I  should  go  to  work  by  invariably 
making  observation  of  disease  the  basis  of  every  experimental 
analysis.  I  should  then  proceed  with  my  explanations,  symp- 
tom by  symptom,  until  I  had  exhausted  all  the  information  obtain- 
able from  present  experimental  physiology,  and  the  result  of 
all  this  would  be  medical  observation  reduced  to  its  simplest 
terms. 

In  saying  above  that  we  must  explain  by  experimental  physiology 
only  what  can  be  explained  in  disease,  I  do  not  want  my  idea  misun- 
derstood or  taken  as  an  admission  that  there  are  things  in  disease 
which  can  never  be  physiologically  explained.  My  idea  is  just  the 
reverse,  because  I  believe  that  we  shall  explain  everything  in  pathol- 
ogy, but  little  by  little  and  in  step  with  the  development  of  experi- 
mental physiology.  We  can  just  now  explain  nothing  about  cer- 
tain diseases,  for  instance  the  eruptiva  diseases,  because  the  related 
physiological  phenomena  are  unknown.  So  the  objection,  which  some 
physicians  find  here,  to  physiology  as  a  help  to  medicine,  is  not 
worthy  of  consideration.  That  kind  of  argumentation  is  tinged  with 
scholasticism  and  proves  that  those  who  use  it  have  no  correct  idea 
of  such  a  science  as  experimental  medicine  can  be. 

To  sum  up,  as  the  natural  foundation  of  experimental  medicine, 
experimental  physiology  cannot  suppress  observation  of  the  sick  or 
lessen  its  importance.  Moreover,  physiological  knowledge  is  not 
only  indispensable  in  explaining  disease,  but  is  also  necessary  to 
good  clinical  observation.  For  example,  I  have  seen  observers  sur- 
prised into  describing  as  accidents  certain  thermal  phenomena  which 
occasionally  result  from  nerve  lesions ;  if  they  had  been  physiologists, 
they  would  have  known  how  to  evaluate  morbid  symptoms  which 
are  really  nothing  but  physiological  phenomena. 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICmE 


201 


II.   Scientific  Ignorance  and  Certain  Illusions  of  the  Scien- 
tific Spirit  Hinder  the  Development  of  Experimental 

Medicine 

We  have  just  said  that  knowledge  of  physiology  is  indispensable 
to  physicians ;  we  must  therefore  cultivate  the  physiological  sciences, 
if  we  wish  to  further  the  development  of  experimental  medicine. 
This  is  all  the  more  necessary,  because  it  is  the  only  way  to  provide 
a  foundation  for  scientific  medicine,  and  unfortunately  we  are  still 
far  from  the  time  when  we  shall  see  the  scientific  spirit  generally 
prevailing  among  physicians.  IN^ow  the  absence  of  the  scientific 
habit  of  mind  is  a  serious  hindrance,  because  it  favors  belief  in  occult 
forces,  rejects  determinism  in  vital  phenomena,  and  leads  to  the 
notion  that  the  phenomena  of  living  beings  are  governed  by  mys- 
terious, vital  forces  which  are  continually  invoked.  When  an  obscure 
or  inexplicable  phenomenon  presents  itself,  instead  of  saying  "I  do 
not  know,"  as  every  scientific  man  should  do,  physicians  are  in  the 
habit  of  saying,  "This  is  life" ;  apparently  without  the  least  idea  that 
they  are  explaining  darkness  by  still  greater  darkness.  We  must 
therefore  get  used  to  the  idea  that  science  implies  merely  determin- 
ing the  conditions  of  phenomena ;  and  we  must  always  seek  to  exclude 
life  entirely  from  our  explanations  of  physiological  phenomena  as  a 
whole.  Life  is  nothing  but  a  word  which  means  ignorance,  and 
when  we  characterize  a  phenomenon  as  vital,  it  amounts  to  saying 
that  we  do  not  know  its  immediate  cause  or  its  conditions.  Science 
should  always  explain  obscurity  and  complexity  by  clearer  and  sim- 
pler ideas.  Now  since  nothing  is  more  obscure,  life  can  never 
explain  anything.  I  emphasize  this  point,  because  I  have  seen  even 
chemists  at  times  appeal  to  life  to  explain  certain  physico-chemical 
phenomena  peculiar  to  living  beings.  Thus  the  ferment  in  yeaSt  is 
an  organic,  living  material  which  has  the  property  of  converting 
sugar  into  alcohol,  carbonic  acid  and  several  other  products.  I  have 
sometimes  heard  it  said  that  the  property  of  decomposing  sugar  was 
due  to  the  life  inherent  in  a  globule  of  yeast.  This  vitalistic  explana- 
tion means  nothing  and  explains  nothing  about  the  action  of  yeast. 
We  do  not  know  the  nature  of  this  property,  but  it  must  necessarily 
belong  to  the  physico-chemical  order  and  be  as  precisely  defined  as, 
for  instance,  the  property  of  platinum  sponge  which  produces  a  more 
or  less  analogous  action  that  cannot  be  attributed  to  vital  force.  In 


202  AN  INTRODIJCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


a  word,  all  the  properties  of  living  matter  are,  at  bottom,  either 
known  and  defined  properties,  in  which  case  we  call  them  physico- 
chemical  properties,  or  else  unknown  and  undefined  properties,  in 
which  case  we  name  them  vital  properties.  Certainly  a  special  force 
in  living  beings,  not  met  with  elsewhere,  presides  over  their  organi- 
zation ;  but  the  existence  of  this  force  cannot  in  any  way  change  our 
idea  of  the  properties  of  organic  matter, — matter  which,  when  once 
created,  is  endowed  with  fixed  and  determinate,  physico-chemical 
properties.  Vital  force  is,  therefore,  an  organizing  and  nutritive 
force ;  but  it  does  not  in  any  way  determine  the  manifestation  of  the 
properties  of  living  matter.  In  a  word,  physiologists  and  physicians 
must  seek  to  reduce  vital  properties  to  physico-chemical  properties, 
and  not  physico-chemical  properties  to  vital  properties 

The  habit  of  vitalistic  explanation  makes  us  credulous  and  pro- 
motes the  introduction  of  erroneous  or  absurd  data  into  science. 
Thus,  quite  recently  I  was  consulted  by  an  honorable  and  much 
respected  practising  physician  who  asked  my  opinion  of  a  most 
unusual  case,  of  which,  he  said,  he  was  very  sure,  because  he  had 
taken  all  precautions  necessary  to  observing  it  well:  here  was  a 
woman  in  good  health  except  for  a  few  nervous  anomalies,  who 
had  neither  eaten  nor  drunk  anything  for  several  years.  Evidently 
the  physician  was  persuaded  that  vital  force  is  capable  of  anything, 
so  that  he  sought  no  other  explanation.  The  slightest  idea  of  sci- 
ence, however,  and  the  simplest  notions  of  physiology,  would  have 
been  enough  to  undeceive  him,  by  showing  that  his  statement  very 
nearly  amounted  to  saying  that  a  candle  can  go  on  shining  and 
burning  for  several  years  without  growing  any  shorter. 

Belief  that  the  phenomena  of  living  beings  are  dominated  by  an 
indeterminate  vital  force  often  also  gives  experimentation  a  false 
basis  and  puts  a  vague  word  in  place  of  exact  experimental  analysis. 
I  have  seen  physicians  submit  questions  to  experimental  analy- 
sis in  which  they  took  as  their  starting  point  the  vitality  of  certain 
organs,  the  idiosyncrasy  of  certain  individuals  or  the  antagonism 
of  certain  medicines.  Now,  vitally,  idiosyncrasy  and  antagonism 
are  merely  vague  words  which  should  first  be  qualified  and  reduced 
to  a  definite  meaning.  In  the  experimental  method,  then,  it  is  a 
matter  of  absolute  principle  always  to  take,  as  our  starting  point 
for  experimentation  or  reasoning,  an  exact  fact  or  a  good  observation, 
and  not  a  vague  word.    When  the  discussions  of  physicians  and 


OF  EXPEKIMENTAL  MEDICmE 


203 


naturalists  lead  to  nothing,  it  is  usually  because  they  fail  to  conform 
to  this  analytic  precept.  In  a  word,  in  experimentation  on  living 
beings,  as  with  inorganic  bodies,  it  is  essential,  before  beginning  our 
experimental  analysis  of  a  phenomenon,  to  make  sure  that  the 
phenomenon  exists  and  never  to  let  ourselves  be  deceived  by  words 
that  lose  sight  of  facts  as  they  are. 

As  we  have  elsewhere  explained,  doubt  is  the  foundation  of  ex- 
perimentation;  yet  we  must  not  confuse  philosophic  doubt  with 
that  systematic  negation  which  casts  doubt  on  the  very  principles  of 
science.  We  must  doubt  only  theories,  and  we  must  doubt  even  them 
only  to  the  point  of  experimental  determinism.  Some  physicians 
believe  that  the  scientific  spirit  sets  no  limit  to  doubt.  Aside  from 
these  physicians,  who  deny  medical  science  by  admitting  that  nothing 
positive  can  be  known,  others  deny  it  by  the  opposite  method,  admit- 
ting, as  they  do,  that  they  have  learned  their  medicine  they  know  not 
how,  and  are  masters  of  it  through  a  kind  of  intuitive  science  which 
they  call  clinical  sense  or  instinct.  In  medicine,  as  in  other  prac- 
tical sciences,  I  do  not  of  course  question  the  existence  of  what  is 
called  tact  or  clear-sightedness.  Everyone  knows,  in  fact,  that  habit 
may  give  a  kind  of  empirical  knowledge  of  things  sufficient  to  guide 
practitioners,  even  though  they  cannot  always  precisely  account  for  it 
at  first.  But  what  I  blame  is  willfully  staying  in  this  empirical  state 
and  not  trying  to  get  out  of  it.  By  attentive  observation  and  study,  we 
can  always  manage  to  account  for  our  actions  and  so  succeed  in  trans- 
mitting our  knowledge  to  others.  Besides,  I  do  not  deny  that  the 
practice  of  medicine  has  severe  requirements ;  but  here  I  am  talking 
pure  science  and  am  attacking  medical  tact  as  an  anti-scientific  datum 
whose  natural  exaggerations  are  decidedly  harmful  to  science. 

Another  false  opinion,  which  is  pretty  well  accredited  and  even 
professed  by  great  practising  physicians,  is  expressed  in  saying  that 
medicine  is  not  destined  to  become  a  science,  but  only  an  art,  and 
that  physicians  accordingly  should  be  artists,  not  men  of  science.  I 
find  this  idea  erroneous  and  essentially  harmful  to  the  development 
of  experimental  medicine.  First,  what  is  an  artist  ?  An  artist  is  a 
man  who  carries  out  a  personal  idea  or  feeling  in  a  work  of  art. 
Here,  then,  are  two  things:  the  artist  and  his  work;  the  artist  is 
necessarily  judged  by  his  work.  But  what  can  a  medical  artist  be  ? 
If  he  is  a  physician  who  treats  disease  according  to  his  personal 
idea  or  feeling,  then  where  is  the  work  of  art  by  which  the  medical 


204 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


artist  is  to  be  judged  ?    Is  it  cure  of  the  disease  ?    That  would  be 
a  strange  kind  of  work  of  art,  and  the  physician's  authorship  would 
be  seriously  disputed  by  nature.    When  a  great  painter  or  a  great 
sculptor  makes  a  beautiful  picture  or  a  magnificent  statue,  no  one 
imagines  that  the  statue  grew  out  of  the  earth  or  that  the  picture 
made  itself,  while  we  can  perfectly  well  maintain  that  a  disease  has 
cured  itself  and  can  often  prove  that  the  cure  would  have  been 
better  without  the  artist's  interference.    Then  what  has  become  of 
the  criterion,  or  medical  work  of  art  ?    The  criterion  evidently  dis- 
appears; because  no  physician's  ability  can  be  judged  by  the  num- 
ber of  patients  that  he  says  he  has  cured ;  he  must  first  of  all  prove 
scientifically  that  it  was  he  who  cured  them,  and  not  nature.  I 
shall  not  further  emphasize  this  untenable  medical  claim  to  art. 
In  reason,  physicians  can  be  men  of  science  only,  or,  in  the  mean- 
time, empiricists.    Empiricism,  which  means  experience  at  bottom 
(kfiTeipiay  experience),  is  only  unconscious  or  non-rational  experi- 
ence, acquired  by  every-day  observation  of  facts,  in  which  the  experi- 
mental method  itself  originates  (see  p.  12).    But  as  we  shall  see 
again  in  the  next  paragraph,  empiricism  in  its  true  sense  is  merely 
the  first  step  in  experimental  medicine.    Empirical  physicians 
should  strive  toward  science,  for  though  they  often  decide  in  practice 
according  to  unconscious  experience,  they  should  at  least  still  guide 
themselves  by  induction  based  on  as  solid  medical  learning  as  pos^ 
sible.    In  a  word,  since  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  medical  work  of 
art,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  medical  artist ;  physicians  calling  them- 
selves such  injure  medical  science,  because  they  exalt  a  physician's 
personality  by  lowering  the  importance  of  science ;  thus  they  prevent 
men  from  seeking,  in  the  experimental  study  of  phenomena,  the 
support  and  criterion  which  they  believe  they,  through  inspiration 
or  mere  feeling,  have  within  themselves.    But  as  I  just  said,  this 
supposed  therapeutic  inspiration  is  often  supported  by  no  other 
proofs  than  some  chance  fact  which  might  favor  an  untaught  man 
or  a  charlatan,  just  as  much  as  an  educated  man.    This  bears  no  sort 
of  relation  to  the  artist's  inspiration  which  is  embodied  at  last  in  a 
work  judged  by  all  the  world,  and  always  requiring,  for  its  execu- 
tion, exact  study  often  accompanied  by  unwearied  labor.    In  my 
opinion,  then,  the  inspiration  of  physicians,  who  do  not  rely  on 
experimental  science,  is  mere  fantasy;  and  in  the  name  of  science 
and  humanity  they  should  be  rebuked  and  proscribed. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


205 


To  sum  up,  experimental  medicine,  which  is  a  synonym  for  scien- 
tific medicine,  can  be  established  only  by  spreading  the  scientific 
spirit  more  and  more  among  physicians.  In  my  opinion,  the  one 
thing  to  do,  to  reach  this  goal,  is  to  give  our  young  men  solid  instruc- 
tion in  experimental  physiology.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  physiol- 
ogy is  the  whole  of  medicine;  I  have  explained  myself  elsewhere 
on  this  point,  but  I  do  mean  to  say  that  experimental  physiology 
is  the  most  scientific  part  of  medicine,  and  that  in  studying  it,  young 
physicians  will  acquire  scientific  habits  which  they  will  later  carry 
into  pathological  and  therapeutic  investigation.  The  wish  that  I  am 
expressing  here  roughly  corresponds  to  Laplace's  idea:  when  he  was 
asked  why,  since  medicine  was  not  a  science,  he  had  proposed  admit- 
ting physicians  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences;  he  answered.  "This  is 
why :  to  get  them  among  men  of  science." 

III.  Empirical  and  Experimental  Medicine  Are  by  No  Means 
Incompatible  ;  on  the  Contrary,  They  Must  Be  Inseparable 

For  a  long  time,  men  have  said  and  repeated  that  the  physicians 
most  learned  in  physiology  are  the  worst  physicians,  and  that  they 
are  the  most  awkward  when  action  is  necessary  at  the  patient's  bed- 
side. Does  this  mean  that  physiological  science  is  harmful  to  prac- 
tice? In  that  case,  I  must  have  taken  a  completely  false  point  of 
view.  We  must  therefore  carefully  study  this  opinion,  which  is  a 
favorite  theme  of  many  practising  physicians,  but  which.  I,  for  my 
part,  consider  completely  erroneous. 

To  begin  with,  we  must  remember  that  the  practice  of  medicine  is 
exceedingly  complex,  involving  any  number  of  social  and  extra- 
scientific  questions.  Even  in  practical  veterinary  medicine,  thera- 
peutics is  often  dominated  by  considerations  of  profit  or  of  agricul- 
ture. I  recall  my  membership  in  a  commission  studying  what  was 
to  be  done  to  prevent  the  ravages  of  certain  murrains  of  homed  cattle. 
We  were  all  weighing  physiological  and  pathological  considerations, 
to  decide  on  the  proper  treatment  to  cure  the  sick  animals,  when  a 
practising  veterinarian  took  the  floor  to  say  that  this  was  not  the 
question;  and  he  proved  clearly  that  curative  treatment  would  be 
the  ruin  of  agriculture,  and  that  the  best  thing  to  do  was  to  slaughter 
the  sick  animals  and  turn  them  to  the  best  possible  account.  Con- 
siderations of  this  kind  never  enter  into  human  medicine,  because 


206  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


preserving  human  life  is  the  physician's  sole  aim.  Yet  physicians, 
in  their  treatment,  often  have  to  take  account  of  the  so-called  influ- 
ence of  the  moral  over  the  physical,  and  also  of  any  number  of  family 
and  social  considerations  which  have  nothing  to  do  with  science. 
Therefore,  an  accomplished  practising  physician  should  be  not  only 
learned  in  his  science,  but  also  upright  and  endowed  with  keenness, 
tact  and  good  sense.  Practising  physicians  exert  an  influence  in 
every  rank  of  society.  In  numberless  cases,  physicians  are  the  custo- 
dians of  state  interests  in  major  affairs  of  public  administration ;  at 
the  same  time  they  are  the  confidants  of  families  and  often  hold 
reputation  and  most  cherished  interests  in  their  hands.  Able  prac- 
titioners can  acquire  great  and  legitimate  influence  among  men,  be- 
cause apart  from  science,  they  have  a  moral  influence  on  society. 
And  so,  like  Hippocrates,  everyone  having  the  dignity  of  medicine 
at  heart  has  always  insisted  strongly  on  moral  qualities  in  physicians. 

I  have  no  intention  of  discussing  here  the  social  and  moral  in- 
fluence of  physicians  nor  of  penetrating  what  might  be  called  the 
mysteries  of  medical  practice;  I  am  simply  treating  the  scientific 
side  and  am  separating  it  so  as  to  judge  its  influence  better.  I 
certainly  do  not  here  intend  to  study  the  question  whether  an  edu- 
cated physician  would  treat  his  patients  better  or  worse  than  an 
uneducated  one.  Put  in  that  form,  the  question  would  be  absurd; 
I  naturally  assume  two  physicians  equally  well  educated  in  methods 
of  treatment,  and  I  intend  to  consider  here  only  whether  the  scientific 
physician,  i.e.,  the  physician  endowed  with  the  experimental  spirit, 
will  treat  his  patient  less  successfully  than  the  empirical  physician 
who  contents  himself  with  noting  facts  solely  on  the  basis  of  medical 
tradition,  or  the  systematic  physician  who  acts  according  to  the  prin- 
ciples of  some  doctrine  or  other. 

In  medicine,  there  have  always  been  two  divergent  tendencies 
resulting  from  the  very  nature  of  things.  The  first  tendency  in  medi- 
cine, arising  from  the  kindly  feelings  of  man,  is  to  help  a  neighbor  in 
trouble,  and  to  relieve  him  with  remedies  or  by  moral  or  religious 
means.  Medicine  must  therefore  have  been  mingled  with  religion, 
from  its  beginning,  while  possessing  at  the  same  time  numberless 
more  or  less  active  agents.  Found  by  chance  or  of  necessity,  these 
remedies  were  later  handed  down  by  tradition,  either  alone  or  to- 
gether with  religious  practices.  But  after  this  first  flight,  which 
started,  so  to  speak,  from  the  heart,  men  must  have  begun  to  reflect, 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


207 


and  seeing  the  sick  recover  of  themselves  and  without  medicine,  they 
were  inclined  to  ask,  not  only  whether  the  medicines  given  were 
useful,  but  whether  they  were  not  harmful.  The  first  medical  reflec- 
tion, or  first  medical  reasoning,  resulting  from  study  of  the  sick,  made 
men  recognize  a  spontaneous,  medicinal  force  in  the  living  organism ; 
and  observation  taught  them  to  respect  it  and  try  merely  to  guide  and 
help  it  in  its  fortunate  tendencies.  The  first  steps  in  scientific 
medicine  taken  by  Hippocrates  involved  a  doubt  about  the  curative 
results  of  empirical  methods  and  the  appeal  to  the  laws  of  living  or- 
ganisms to  effect  the  cure  of  the  sick.  But  this  kind  of  medicine, 
founded  as  science  on  observation,  and  as  treatment  on  expectancy, 
still  allows  other  doubts  to  subsist.  While  recognizing  how  direful 
for  the  patient  it  may  be  to  use  empirical  medicaments  to  disturb 
the  tendencies  of  nature  when  they  are  favorable,  men  must  have 
asked  themselves,  on  the  other  hand,  whether  it  might  not  be  possible, 
and  useful  to  the  patient,  to  disturb  and  change  them  when  they 
were  bad.  It  was  therefore  no  longer  merely  a  case  of  physicians 
guiding  and  helping  nature  in  its  fortunate  tendencies;  Quo  vergit 
natura,  eo  ducendum,  but  also  of  combating  and  dominating  nature 
in  its  evil  tendencies,  medicus  naturae  superator.  The  heroic  reme- 
dies, the  universal  panaceas,  the  specifics  of  Paracelsus  and  others, 
are  merely  the  empirical  expression  of  a  reaction  against  Hip- 
pocratic  medicine,  i.e.,  against  expectancy. 

By  its  very  nature,  experimental  medicine  has  no  system 
and  rejects  nothing  in  the  way  of  treatment  or  cure  of 
disease;  it  believes  and  accepts  everything  that  is  founded  on 
observation  and  proved  by  experience.  Though  we  have  repeated 
it  often  already,  we  must  here  recall  the  fact  that  experimental 
medicine,  as  it  is  called,  is  certainly  not  a  new  theory  of  medicine. 
It  is  one  with  the  medicine  of  all  people  and  times,  in  all  its  solid 
gains  and  sound  observatioiis.  Scientific,  experimental  medicine 
goes  as  far  as  possible  in  the  study  of  vital  phenomena;  it  cannot 
limit  itself  to  observing  diseases  or  content  itself  with  expectancy 
or  stop  at  remedies  empirically  given,  but  in  addition  it  must  study 
experimentally  the  mechanism  of  diseases  and  the  action  of  remedies, 
so  as  to  account  for  them  scientifically.  Above  all,  the  analytic  spirit 
of  the  experimental  method  in  modem  science  must  be  brought  into 
medicine;  but  this  will  not  absolve  experimental  physicians  from 
being  good  observers;  they  must  be  thoroughly  educated  in  clinics, 


208 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


must  know  diseases  accurately  in  all  their  normal,  abnormal  and 
insidious  forms,  be  familiar  with  every  method  of  pathological  in- 
vestigation, and  be  good,  as  we  say,  in  diagnosis  and  prognosis.  Be- 
sides this,  they  must  be  consummate  therapeutists  and  know  every- 
thing that  empirical  or  systematic  attempts  have  taught  us  about  the 
action  of  remedies  in  different  diseases.  In  a  word,  experimental 
physicians,  like  all  educated  physicians,  must  have  every  kind  of 
knowledge  that  we  have  just  enumerated;  but  they  will  differ  from 
systematic  physicians  in  not  conducting  themselves  according  to 
any  system;  but,  instead  of  taking  as  their  goal  observation  of  dis- 
ease and  notation  of  the  action  of  remedies,  they  will  be  distinguished 
from  Hippocratic  and  empirical  physicians  by  their  will  to  go  fur- 
ther and,  with  the  help  of  experimentation,  enter  into  the  explanation 
of  vital  mechanisms.  For  their  part,  Hippocratic  physicians  are 
satisfied  when  they  succeed  in  clearly  describing  a  disease  in  its 
course,  in  learning  and  foreseeing  its  various  favorable  or  direful 
endings  by  exact  signs,  so  as  to  be  able  to  intervene,  if  necessary,  to 
help  nature  and  to  guide  it  toward  a  happy  ending ;  scientific  medi- 
cine, they  believe,  should  set  itself  this  goal.  Empirical  physicians 
are  satisfied  when,  with  the  help  of  empiricism,  they  succeed  in 
knowing  that  a  given  remedy  cures  a  given  disease,  in  learning  the 
exact  doses  in  which  to  administer  it,  and  the  cases  in  which  it  must 
be  used ;  they  may  also  believe  they  have  reached  the  limits  of  medi- 
cal, science.  But  while  experimenting  physicians  are  the  first  to 
admit  and  understand  the  scientific  and  practical  importance  of  the 
preceding  ideas,  without  which  medicine  could  not  exist,  they  do 
not  believe  that  medicine  as  a  science  should  stop  at  observation  and 
empirical  knowledge  of  phenomena  or  be  satisfied  with  somewhat 
vague  systems.  So  that  Hippocratic,  empirical  and  experimenting 
physicians  do  not  differ  in  the  least  in  the  nature  of  their  knowl- 
edge ;  they  differ  only  in  the  mental  point  of  view  which  leads  them 
to  carry  the  medical  problem  somewhat  further.  The  mediating 
power  of  nature  invoked  by  Hippocratists,  and  the  therapeutic  or 
other  force  assumed  by  empiricists  are  simple  hypotheses  in  the  eyes 
of  experimenting  physicians.  With  the  help  of  experimentation, 
they  must  penetrate  into  the  inmost  phenomena  of  living  machines 
and  define  their  mechanism  in  its  normal  as  well  as  its  pathological 
state.  We  must  investigate  the  immediate  causes  of  normal  phe- 
nomena, which  should  be  found  in  definite  organic  conditions  in 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICmE 


209 


relation  to  the  properties  of  fluids  and  tissues.  It  is  not  enough  to 
know  the  phenomena  of  mineral  nature  empirically  as  well  as  their 
results;  but  physicists  and  chemists  mean  to  go  back  to  their  neces- 
sary conditions,  i.e.,  to  their  immediate  causes,  so  as  to  be  able 
to  regulate  their  manifestation.  In  the  same  way,  it  is  not  enough 
for  physiologists  to  know  empirically  the  normal  and  abnormal  phe- 
nomena of  living  nature ;  but  like  physicists  and  chemists,  they  mean 
to  go  back  to  the  immediate  causes  of  phenomena,  i.e.,  to  their  neces- 
sary conditions.  In  a  word,  it  is  not  enough  for  experimenting  phy- 
sicians to  know  that  quinine  cures  fever ;  but  what  is  above  all  signifi- 
cant to  them  is  knowing  what  fever  is  and  accounting  for  the 
mechanism  by  which  quinine  cures.  All  this  is  significant  to  ex- 
perimenting physicians  because,  as  soon  as  they  know  it,  the  fact  of 
curing  fever  with  quinine  will  no  longer  be  an.  empirical,  isolated 
fact,  but  a  scientific  fact.  This  fact  will  then  connect  itself  with 
conditions  which  will  relate  it  to  other  phenomena,  and  we  shall  thus 
be  led  to  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  organisms  and  the  possibility  of 
regulating  their  manifestations.  Experimental  physiciajis  are  there- 
fore concerned  most  of  all  with  seeking  to  establish  medical  science 
on  the  same  principles  as  all  the  other  experimental  sciences.  Let 
us  now  see  how  a  man  animated  with  this  scientific  spirit  should 
behave  at  a  patient's  bedside. 

Hippocratists,  believing  in  a  mediating  nature,  and  but  little  in 
the  curative  effect  of  drugs,  quietly  follow  the  course  of  a  disease; 
in  almost  passive  expectancy,  they  limit  themselves  to  encouraging 
the  fortunate  tendencies  of  nature  with  a  few  simple  medicines. 
Empiricists,  with  their  faith  in  the  efficacy  of  drugs  as  a  means  of 
changing  the  direction  of  diseases  and  curing  them,  content  them- 
selves with  empirically  noting  medicinal  effects,  without  trying  to 
understand  their  mechanism  scientifically.  They  are  never  per- 
plexed :  when  one  remedy  fails,  they  try  another ;  they  always  have 
receipts  or  formulae  at  hand  for  any  and  every  case,  because  they 
draw  on  an  immense  therapeutic  arsenal.  Empirical  medicine  is 
certainly  the  most  popular.  People  believe  that  through  a  kind  of 
compensation  nature  provides  a  remedy  for  every  ill,  and  that 
medicine  consists  in  a  collection  of  recipes  for  all  ills,  handed  down 
to  us,  age  by  age,  since  the  beginnings  of  the  healing  art.  Experi- 
menting physicians  are  Hippocratists  and  empiricists  at  one  and  the 
same  time,  in  that  they  believe  in  the  power  of  nature  and  the  effi- 


210  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


cacy  of  drugs;  only  they  want  to  know  what  they  are  doing;  it  is 
not  enough  for  them  to  observe  and  to  act  empirically,  they  want  to 
experiment  scientifically  and  to  understand  the  physiological  mech- 
anism producing  disease  and  the  medicinal  mechanism  effecting  a 
cure.  If  this  were  their  exclusive  mental  tendency,  it  is  true  that 
experimenting  physicians  would  be  as  much,  as  empirical  physicians 
are  little,  perplexed.  Indeed  in  the  present  state  of  medicine,  we 
know  so  little  about  the  action  of  drugs  that,  if  experimenting  phy- 
sicians were  logical,  they  would  be  reduced  to  doing  nothing  and  to 
remaining  most  of  the  time  in  the  state  of  expectancy  enjoined  by 
their  doubts  and  uncertainties.  In  this  sense  it  is  possible  to  say 
that  scientific  physicians  are  always  the  most  perplexed  at  a 
patient's  bedside.  That  is  thoroughly  true;  they  are  really  per- 
plexed, because,  on  the  one  hand,  they  are  convinced  that  we  can 
take  action  with  the  help  of  powerful  medicinal  means,  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  their  ignorance  of  the  mechanism  of  such  action  holds 
them  back,  for  the  experimental  scientific  spirit  is  utterly  averse  to 
producing  effects  and  studying  phenomena  without  trying  to  under- 
stand them. 

There  is  evidently  an  excess  of  these  two  radical  turns  of  mind 
among  empiricists  and  among  experimenters:  in  practice  the  two 
points  of  view  should  be  fused,  and  the  seeming  contradiction  be- 
tween them  should  disappear.  What  I  am  saying  here  is  by  no 
means  a  kind  of  compromise  or  arrangement  for  convenience  in  medi- 
cal practice.  I  am  maintaining  a  purely  scientific  opinion,  because 
I  can  easily  prove  that  the  true  experimental  method  consists  in  a 
logical  union  of  empiricism  and  experimentation.  In  fact,  we  have 
seen  that,  before  foreseeing  facts  according  to  the  laws  which  gov- 
ern them,  we  must  first  observe  them  empirically  or  by  chance;  just 
as  before  experimenting  along  the  lines  of  a  scientific  theory,  we 
must  first  experiment  empirically,  in  order  to  see.  Now,  in  this 
respect,  empiricism  is  nothing  but  the  first  step  of  the  experimental 
method;  for,  as  we  said,  empiricism  cannot  be  a  final  stage;  the 
vague,  unconscious  experience,  which  may  be  called  medical  tact, 
is  later  transformed  into  a  scientific  idea,  by  the  experimental  method 
which  is  conscious  and  logical.  Experimental  physicians,  there^ 
fore,  are  empirical  to  begin  with;  but  instead  of  stopping  at  that, 
they  try  to  pass  through  empiricism  so  as  to  reach  the  second  step 
in  the  experimental  method,  i.e.,  exact  and  conscious  experiment 


OF  EXPEKIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


211 


which  gives  experimental  knowledge  of  the  law  of  phenomena.  In 
a  word,  we  must  suffer  empiricism;  but  trying  to  set  it  up  as  a 
system  is  an  antiscientific  tendency.  As  for  systematic  and  doc- 
trinal physicians,  they  are  empiricists  who,  instead  of  having  recourse 
to  experimentation,  take  pure  hypotheses,  or  else  the  facts  taught 
them  by  empiricism,  and  join  them  together  with  the  help  of  an 
ideal  system,  from  which  they  later  deduce  their  line  of  medical 
conduct. 

Consequently,  I  think  that  experimenting  physicians  who  wish 
to  use,  at  the  patient's  bedside,  only  medicines  whose  physiological 
effect  they  understand  would  exaggerate  in  a  direction  that  made 
them  distort  the  true  meaning  of  the  experimental  method.  Before 
understanding  facts,  experimenters  must  first  note  them  and  free 
them  from  every  source  of  error  with  which  their  minds  be  tainted. 
Experimenters  must  therefore  first  apply  their  minds  to  collecting 
medical  or  therapeutic  observations  empirically  made.  But  they  do 
still  more;  they  are  not  limited  to  subjecting  to  the  experimental 
criterion  all  the  empirical  facts  that  medicine  presents  to  them ;  they 
go  out  to  meet  them.  Instead  of  waiting  for  chance  or  accidents  to 
teach  them  the  effects  of  medicines,  they  try  them  empirically  on 
animals,  to  get  indications  to  guide  them  in  the  experiments  that 
they  afterward  make  on  man. 

I  consider  then  that  true  experimenting  physicians  should  be 
no  more  perplexed  at  a  patient's  bedside  than  empirical  physicians. 
They  will  make  use  of  all  the  therapeutic  means  advised  by  empiri- 
cism ;  only  instead  of  using  them  according  to  authority  and  with  a 
confidence  akin  to  superstition,  they  will  administer  them  with  that 
philosophic  doubt  which  is  appropriate  to  true  experimenters;  they 
will  verify  the  results  on  animals,  and  by  comparative  observations 
on  man,  so  as  to  determine  rigorously  the  relative  influence  of  nature 
and  of  medicine  in  curing  disease.  In  case  it  is  proved  that  the 
remedy  does  not  cure,  and  all  the  more  so  if  it  is  shown  to  be 
harmful,  experimenters  should  renounce  it,  and,  like  the  Hippocrat- 
ists,  should  await  events.  Certain  practising  physicians,  fanatically 
convinced  of  the  excellence  of  their  medications,  cannot  understand 
the  experimental  therapeutic  criticism  of  which  I  have  just  spoken. 
They  say  we  can  give  sick  people  only  medicines  in  which  we 
have  faith,  and  they  think  administering  to  our  neighbors  a 
remedy,  which  we  doubt,  is  a  failure  of  medical  morals.    I  do 


212  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


not  accept  this  reasoning,  for  it  would  lead  us  both  to  deceive 
ourselves  and  to  deceive  others  without  scruple.  As  for  myself, 
I  think  it  better  to  try  to  enlighten  ourselves,  so  as  to  deceive 
no  one. 

Experimenting  physicians  should,  therefore,  not  be  mere  physiol- 
ogists waiting  with  folded  arms  for  experimental  medicine  to  be 
established  scientifically,  before  taking  action  in  behalf  of  their 
patients.  Far  from  it,  they  should  use  the  remedies  that  are  empir- 
ically known,  not  only  on  equal  terms  with  empiricists,  but  should 
go  even  further  and  try  new  medicines  according  to  the  rules  sug- 
gested above.  Experimental  physicians,  then,  like  empiricists,  should 
be  able  to  aid  the  sick  by  every  means  in  the  possession  of  practical 
medicine.  What  is  more,  with  the  help  of  the  scientific  spirit  that 
guides  them,  they  will  do  their  part  in  founding  experimental  medi- 
cine; and  that  should  be  the  most  ardent  wish  of  all  physicians  who 
want  to  see  medicine  rise  out  of  its  present  state.  We  must  suffer 
empiricism,  as  we  said,  as  a  transient  and  imperfect  stage  of  medi- 
cine, but  must  not  set  it  up  as  a  system.  In  our  faculties  of  medicine, 
we  must  therefore  not  limit  ourselves,  as  men  have  actually  said,  to 
making  empirical  healers;  that  would  degrade  medicine  and  reduce 
it  to  the  level  of  business.  First  of  all,  we  must  inspire  young  men 
with  the  scientific  spirit  and  initiate  them  into  the  ideas  and  tenden- 
cies of  modem  science.  Doing  anything  else  would  be  inconsistent, 
besides,  with  the  great  variety  of  knowledge  demanded  of  doctors, 
solely  to  enable  them  to  cultivate  medical  science ;  for  much  narrower 
knowledge  is  demanded  of  health  ofiicers  who  are  concerned  only 
with  empirical  practice. 

But  the  objection  may  be  raised  that  experimental  medicine, 
about  which  I  am  talking  at  such  length,  is  a  theoretic  conception 
whose  reality  has  not  yet  been  vindicated  in  practice ;  because  facts 
have  not  demonstrated  that  we  may  expect  the  same  scientific  pre- 
cision in  medicine  as  in  the  experimental  sciences.  As  far  as  pos- 
sible, I  wish  to  leave  no  doubt  in  the  reader's  mind  and  no  am- 
biguity in  my  own  thought ;  I  am  therefore  going  to  return  to  this 
subject  with  a  few  words,  in  order  to  show  that  experimental  medi- 
cine is  only  the  natural  blossom  of  practical  medical  investigation, 
guided  by  a  scientific  spirit. 

I  said  above  that  compassion  and  blind  empiricism  are  the  prime 
movers  of  medicine ;  later  came  reflection  bringing  doubt,  then  scien- 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDIC1J!^E 


213 


tific  verification.  This  medical  evolution  can  still  be  verified  around 
us  every  day,  for  every  man  goes  on  learning,  as  does  all  human- 
kind. 

Expectancy,  whatever  help  it  may  give  the  tendencies  of  nature, 
can  be  only  an  incomplete  method  of  treatment.  Moreover,  we  must 
often  act  against  the  tendencies  of  nature.  If,  for  example,  an 
artery  is  open,  we  clearly  must  not  favor  nature  which  makes  the 
blood  come  out  and  leads  to  death.  We  must  act  in  the  opposite 
direction,  stop  the  hemorrhage  and  save  a  life.  Just  so,  when  a 
patient  has  an  attack  of  septicemia,  we  must  act  against  nature  and 
stop  the  fever  if  we  mean  to  cure  our  patient.  Empiricists,  then, 
may  save  patients  whom  expectancy  would  leave  to  die,  just  as  ex- 
pectancy might  permit  the  recovery  of  a  patient  whom  empiricism 
would  kill.  So  that  empiricism  is  also  an  insufficient  method  of 
treatment,  in  that  it  is  uncertain  and  often  dangerous.  Now  experi- 
mental medicine  is  only  a  union  of  expectancy  with  empiricism, 
enlightened  by  reasoning  and  experimentation.  But  experimental 
medicine  will  be  the  last  to  establish  itself,  and  only  then  can  medi- 
cine become  scientific.  We  shall  see,  in  fact,  that  all  parts  of  medi- 
cal knowledge  are  interrelated  and  are  necessarily  subordinate  one 
to  another  in  their  evolution. 

When  a  physician  is  called  to  a  patient,  he  should  decide  on  the 
diagnosis,  then  the  prognosis,  and  then  the  treatment  of  the  disease. 
The  diagnosis  can  be  established  only  through  observation ;  in  recog- 
nizing a  disease,  physicians  connect  it  with  some  form  of  disease 
already  observed,  known  and  described.  Observation  also  gives  the 
progress  and  prognosis  of  the  disease ;  physicians  must  know  the  evo- 
lution of  the  disease,  its  duration  and  gravity  in  order  to  predict 
its  course  and  outcome.  Here  statistics  intervene  to  guide  phy- 
sicians, by  teaching  them  the  proportion  of  mortal  cases;  and  if 
observation  has  also  shown  that  the  successful  and  unsuccessful  cases 
can  be  recognized  by  certain  signs,  then  the  prognosis  is  more 
certain.  Finally  comes  the  treatment:  when  physicians  are  Hip- 
pocratists,  they  limit  themselves  to  expectancy;  when  they  are 
empiricists  they  give  remedies,  still  basing  their  action  on  observa- 
tion which  has  taught  by  experiments  or  otherwise  that  such  and 
such  a  remedy  has  succeeded  in  this  disease  a  certain  number  of 
times;  when  physicians  are  systematic,  they  may  accompany  their 
treatment  with  vitalistic  or  other  explanations,  that  will  make  no 


214 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


difference  in  the  result.  Here  again,  only  statistics  are  invoked  to 
establish  the  value  of  the  treatment. 

Such,  in  fact,  is  the  state  of  empirical  medicine,  which  is  con- 
jectural medicine  because  it  is  based  on  statistics  which  collect 
and  compare  cases  that  are  analogous  or  more  or  less  similar  in 
their  outer  characteristics,  but  undefined  as  to  their  immediate 
causes. 

Conjectural  medicine  must  necessarily  precede  exact  medicine, 
which  I  call  experimental  medicine  because  it  is  based  on  the  experi- 
mental determination  of  the  cause  of  disease.  In  the  meantime,  we 
must  resign  ourselves  to  practising  conjectural  or  empirical  medi- 
cine; but,  I  repeat,  though  I  have  often  said  it  before,  we  must 
recognize  that  medicine  should  not  stop  there,  and  that  it  is  des- 
tined to  become  experimental  and  scientific.  We  are  doubtless  far 
from  the  time  when  all  medicine  will  be  scientific;  but  that  need 
not  prevent  our  conceiving  it  possible  and  making  every  effort  to 
strive  toward  it,  by  trying  even  to-day  to  introduce  into  medicine  the 
method  that  must  lead  us  to  that  goal. 

Medicine  will  necessarily  first  become  experimental  in  the  dis- 
eases most  easy  of  experimental  approach.  Among  these,  let  me 
choose  an  example  to  show  my  idea  of  how  empirical  medicine  can 
become  scientific.  The  itch  is  a  disease  whose  causation  is  now 
pretty  well  defined  scientifically;  but  this  has  not  always  been  the 
case.  Formerly  we  knew  the  itch  and  its  treatment  only  empirically. 
Then  we  guessed  about  lesions  in  the  itch  and  collected  statistics  on 
the  value  of  one  salve  or  another  for  curing  the  disease.  Now  that 
the  cause  of  the  itch  is  known  and  experimentally  determined,  it  has 
all  become  scientific,  and  empiricism  has  disappeared.  We  know 
the  tick,  and  by  it  we  explain  the  transmission  of  the  itch,  the  skin 
changes  and  the  cure,  which  is  only  the  tick's  death  through  appro- 
priate application  of  toxic  agents.  No  further  hypotheses  need  now 
be  made  about  the  metastasis  of  the  itch,  no  further  statistics  collected 
about  its  treatment.  We  cure  it  always  without  any  exception, 
when  we  place  ourselves  in  the  known  experimental  conditions  for 
reaching  this  goal.^ 

Here,  then,  is  a  disease  that  has  reached  the  experimental  stage; 
and  physicians  are  masters  of  it  just  as  much  as  physicists  and  chem- 

'  Hardy,  Bulletin  de  VAcadimie  de  medecine.    Paris,  1863-64,  Vol.  XXIX,  p. 
546. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


215 


ists  are  masters  of  a  phenomenon  of  mineral  nature.  Experimenting 
physicians  will  exert  their  influence  successively  on  diseases  one  by 
one,  as  soon  as  they  experimentally  learn  their  correct  determinism, 
i.e.,  their  immediate  cause.  Even  the  best  informed  empirical  phy- 
sicians lack  the  experimenter's  sureness.  One  of  the  clearest  cases 
of  empirical  treatment  is  curing  fever  with  quinine ;  yet  this  cure  is 
far  from  being  as  certain  as  curing  the  itch.  Diseases  that  have  their 
seat  in  the  outer  organic  environment,  such  as  epidemic  diseases,  are 
the  easiest  to  study  and  to  analyze  experimentally.  These  diseases 
will  more  quickly  reach  the  stage  where  their  causation  is  known 
and  their  treatment  scientific.  But  later,  in  proportion  as  physiol- 
ogy progresses,  we  shall  be  able  to  get  at  the  inner  environment,  i.e., 
the  blood,  discover  there  the  parasitic  and  other  changes  that  cause 
diseases  and  determine  the  medicinal,  physico-chemical  or  specific 
agents  capable  of  acting  in  this  inner  environment,  altering  the 
pathological  mechanisms  located  there  and  reechoing  thence  through- 
out the  whole  organism. 

My  conception  of  experimental  medicine  is  summed  up  above. 
As  I  have  often  repeated,  it  is  nothing  but  the  consequence  of  the 
wholly  natural  evolution  of  scientific  medicine.  In  this  respect, 
medicine  does  not  differ  from  other  sciences  which  have  all  passed 
through  empiricism  before  reaching  their  final  experimental  stage. 
In  chemistry  and  in  physics,  practical  methods  of  extracting  metals, 
making  magnifying  glasses,  etc.,  were  known  before  the  scientific 
theory  evolved. 

Empiricism,  then,  also  guided  these  sciences  through  their  nebu- 
lous days;  but  only  since  the  advent  of  experimental  theories  have 
physics  and  chemistry  taken  such  brilliant  flights  as  applied  sci- 
ences, for  we  must  be  careful  to  avoid  confusing  empiricism  with 
applied  science.  Applied  science  always  implies  pure  science  as  its 
support.  Medicine  will  doubtless  pass  through  empiricism  much 
more  slowly  and  laboriously  than  the  physico-chemical  sciences;  not 
only  because  the  organic  phenomena  with  which  it  is  concerned  are 
much  more  complex,  but  also  because  the  requirements  of  medical 
practice,  which  I  need  not  study  here,  help  to  keep  medicine  in  the 
personal  realm,  and  thus  oppose  the  experimental  development.  I 
need  not  here  return  to  what  I  have  elsewhere  so  amply  explained, 
to  wit,  that  the  spontaneity  of  living  beings  does  not  prevent  the 
application  of  the  experimental  method,  and  that  knowledge  of  the 


216 


AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


simple  or  complex  causation  of  vital  phenomena  is  the  one  foundation 
of  scientific  medicine. 

The  object  of  experimenting  physicians  is  to  discover  and  grasp 
the  original  causation  of  a  series  of  obscure  and  complex  morbid  phe- 
nomena; as  a  result  they  will  dominate  all  secondary  phenomena; 
thus  we  have  seen  that,  on  mastering  the  tick  which  causes  the  itch, 
we  naturally  master  all  the  derived  phenomena.  By  learning  the 
ultimate  cause  of  poisoning  with  curare,  we  easily  explain  all  sec- 
ondary phenomena;  and  to  find  a  cure,  we  must  always  go  back,  in 
the  end,  to  the  original  causation  of  phenomena. 

Medicine  is  destined,  then,  to  get  away  from  empiricism  little  by 
little;  like  all  other  sciences,  it  will  get  away  by  the  scientific 
method.  This  deep  conviction  sustains  and  guides  my  scientific 
life.  I  am  deaf  to  the  physicians  who  ask  us  to  explain  measles 
and  scarlet  fever  experimentally,  and  who  believe  they  can  find  in 
them  an  argument  against  using  the  experimental  method.  These 
discouraging,  negative  objections  generally  come  from  systematic  or 
lazy  minds  that  prefer  resting  on  their  systems  or  sleeping  in  the 
dark,  to  working  and  making  an  effort  to  get  away.  The  different 
branches  of  physico-chemical  science  were  elucidated  only  gradually, 
step  by  step,  by  the  experimental  method,  and  they  still  have  to- 
day obscure  parts  which  we  are  studying  with  the  help  of  the  same 
method.  In  spite  of  all  the  obstacles  that  it  meets,  medicine  will 
follow  the  same  course;  it  will  follow  it  necessarily.  In  extolling 
the  introduction  of  the  experimental  method  into  medicine,  I  am 
therefore  only  trying  to  guide  men's  minds  toward  a  goal  that 
science  is  instinctively  and  unconsciously  pursuing, — a  goal  that  it 
will  more  quickly  and  certainly  reach  if  it  can  succeed  in  seeing  it 
clearly.  Time  will  then  do  the  rest.  Of  course,  we  shall  not  see 
scientific  medicine  blossoming  in  our  day,  but  that  is  man's  lot; 
those  who  sow  and  laboriously  cultivate  the  field  of  science  are  not 
also  destined  to  reap  the  harvest. 

To  sum  up,  experimental  medicine,  as  we  conceive  it,  includes 
the  problem  of  medicine  as  a  whole  and  comprises  both  the  theory 
and  the  practice  of  medicine.  But  when  I  said  that  every  physician 
should  be  an  experimenter,  I  did  not  mean  to  suggest  that  each  one 
should  cultivate  the  whole  extent  of  experimental  medicine.  Of 
necessity,  there  will  always  be  physicians  especially  devoting  them- 
selves to  physiological  experiments,  others  to  investigation  of  normal 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


217 


and  pathological  anatomy,  others  to  surgical  or  medical  practice,  etc. 
This  splitting  up  is  not  bad  for  the  progress  of  science ;  on  the  con- 
trary, practical  specialties  are  an  excellent  thing  for  science,  prop- 
erly speaking,  but  on  the  condition  that  men  devoting  themselves  to 
the  investigation  of  a  special  part  of  medicine  be  so  educated  as  to  be 
conversant  with  experimental  medicine  as  a  whole,  and  to  know  the 
place  which  the  special  science  they  cultivate  should  occupy  in  that 
whole.  By  specializing  in  this  way,  they  will  direct  their  studies 
so  as  to  contribute  to  the  progress  of  scientific  or  experimental  medi- 
cine. Practical  studies  and  theoretic  studies  will  thus  work  toward 
the  same  object;  that  is  all  that  we  can  ask  in  a  science,  like  medi- 
cine, which  is  forced  to  be  ceaselessly  in  action  before  it  is  fully 
established. 

Experimental  or  scientific  medicine  is  tending  on  every  side  to 
establish  itself  on  the  basis  of  physiology.  The  tendency  of 
studies  published  every  day,  whether  in  France  or  abroad,  furnishes 
unmistakable  proof.  In  my  research  and  teaching  at  the  College  de 
France,  I  unfold  every  idea  that  can  help  or  encourage  this  tendency 
in  medicine.  I  consider  this  my  duty  as  a  man  of  science  and  pro- 
fessor of  medicine  at  the  College  de  France.  In  fact,  the  College  de 
France  is  by  no  means  a  medical  faculty  in  which  every  part  of  medi- 
cine should  be  treated  systematically.  By  the  very  nature  of  its 
establishment,  the  College  de  France  should  always  be  in  the  fore- 
front of  science,  embodying  its  movement  and  its  tendencies. 
Consequently  the  course  in  medicine  with  which  I  am  entrusted  must 
embody  the  part  of  medical  science  which  is  by  way  of  the  greatest 
present  development,  and  which  involves  the  rest  in  its  evolution.  I 
have  already  explained  myself  at  length  on  the  proper  character  of  the 
course  in  medicine  at  the  College  de  France;  I  shall  not  return  to 
that.^  Let  me  simply  say  that,  while  I  acknowledge  that  the  experi- 
mental trend  of  science  must  be  slow  to  establish  itself  because  of 
difiiculties  inherent  in  the  complexity  of  medicine,  we  must  recog- 
nize that  it  is  now  a  definite  trend.  In  fact,  this  has  not  been 
brought  about  by  the  ephemeral  influence  of  some  personal  system  or 
other ;  it  results  from  the  scientific  evolution  of  medicine  itself.  My 
convictions,  in  this  respect,  are  what  I  am  seeking  to  impress  on  the 

•  Claude  Bernard,  Legons  de  physiologie  exp4rimentale  appliqu^e  d  la  midecine 
ifaitea  au  ColUge  de  France).  First  lesson,  Paris,  1857.  Cotira  de  nUdeoine  au 
ColUge  de  France.    First  lesson,  Paris,  1855. 


218  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


minds  of  the  young  physicians  attending  my  courses  at  the  College 
de  France.  I  try  to  show  them  that  they  are  all  called  to  contribute 
their  share  to  the  increase  and  development  of  experimental  or  scien- 
tific medicine.  For  that  reason  I  ask  them  to  familiarize  them- 
selves with  the  modem  methods  of  investigation  put  in  use  in  anatom- 
ical, physiological,  pathological  and  therapeutic  science;  because 
these  various  branches  of  medicine  must  always  remain  inseparably 
united  in  theory  and  in  practice.  I  tell  those  whose  path  leads  them 
toward  theory  or  toward  pure  science,  never  to  lose  sight  of  the  medi- 
cal problem,  which  is  to  preserve  health  and  cure  disease.  I  tell 
those  whose  career,  on  the  contrary,  guides  them  toward  practice, 
never  to  forget  that  if  theory  is  meant  to  enlighten  practice,  prac- 
tice in  turn  should  be  of  use  to  science.  Physicians  thoroughly  im- 
bued with  these  ideas  will  always  keep  their  interest  in  the  progress 
of  science,  at  the  same  time  that  they  do  their  duty  as  practitioners. 
In  noting  accurately  and  acutely  the  interesting  cases  that  present 
themselves,  they  will  understand  how  fully  science  may  profit  by 
them.  Experimental  scientific  medicine  will  thus  become  the 
achievement  of  us  all;  and  every  one  of  us,  even  if  he  be  only  a 
simple  country  doctor,  will  make  his  own  useful  contribution. 

Keturning  now  to  the  title  of  this  long  section,  I  conclude  that 
empirical  medicine  and  experimental  medicine  are  far  from  being 
incompatible,  but  on  the  contrary  must  be  intimately  united;  for 
both  are  indispensable  in  building  up  experimental  medicine.  I 
think  that  this  conclusion  is  well  established  by  all  that  has  gone 
before. 

IV.  Experimental  Medicine  Does  Not  Cokbespond  to  Ant 
Medical  Doctrine  or  Any  Philosophic  System 

We  said  that  experimental  medicine  is  not  a  new  system  of  medi- 
cine, but  on  the  contrary  is  the  negation  of  all  systems.  In  fact,  the 
advent  of  experimental  medicine  will  cause  all  individual  views  to 
disappear  from  the  science,  to  be  replaced  by  impersonal  and  general 
theories  which,  as  in  other  sciences,  will  be  only  a  regular  and  logical 
coordination  of  facts  furnished  by  experience. 

Scientific  medicine  is  certainly  not  yet  well  established  to-day; 
but  thanks  to  the  experimental  method  which  is  permeating  it  more 
and  more,  it  is  tending  to  become  an  exact  science.    Medicine  is  in 


OF  EXPEKIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


219 


transition;  the  day  of  personal  doctrines  and  systems  is  past,  and 
little  by  little  they  will  be  replaced  by  theories  embodying  the  present 
state  of  the  science  and  showing  from  that  point  of  view  the  results 
of  all  our  efforts.  But  that  must  not  make  us  believe  that  theories 
are  ever  absolute  truths ;  they  may  always  be  improved,  and  so  are 
always  mobile.  That  is  why  I  have  been  careful  to  say  that  we 
must  not,  as  men  often  do,  confuse  advancing  and  perfectible  pro- 
gressive theories,  which  may  be  improved,  with  scientific  methods 
and  principles  that  are  fixed  and  unshakable.  We  must  remember 
that  the  one  unchangeable  scientific  principle,  in  medicine  as  well  as 
in  the  other  experimental  sciences,  is  the  absolute  determinism  of 
phenomena.  We  gave  the  name  of  determinism  to  the  immediate  or 
determining  cause  of  phenomena.  We  never  act  on  the  essence  of 
natural  phenomena,  but  only  on  their  determining  causes;  and  be- 
cause we  act  thus,  determinism  differs  from  fatalism,  on  which  we 
cannot  act.  Fatalism  assumes  that  the  manifestation  of  any  phe- 
nomenon is  necessary  and  independent  of  its  conditions,  while  de- 
terminism is  the  condition  necessary  to  a  phenomenon,  whose  mani- 
festation is  free.  When  search  for  the  causes  determining  phenom- 
ena is  once  posited  as  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  experimental 
method,  materialism,  spiritualism,  inert  matter  and  living  matter 
cease  to  exist;  only  phenomena  are  left,  whose  conditions  we  must 
determine,  i.e.,  the  conditions  which  play  the  part  of  immediate 
cause.  Scientific  determinism  ceases  here;  there  are  only  words 
beyond,  which  are  of  course  necessary,  but  which  may  delude  us  if 
we  are  not  constantly  on  guard  against  the  traps  which  our  minds 
perpetually  set  for  themselves. 

As  experimental  medicine,  like  all  the  experimental  sciences, 
should  not  go  beyond  phenomena,  it  does  not  need  to  be  tied  to  any 
system;  it  is  neither  vitalistic,  nor  animistic,  nor  organistic,  nor 
solidistic,  nor  humoral ;  it  is  simply  the  science  which  tries  to  reach 
the  immediate  causes  of  vital  phenomena  in  the  healthy  and  in  the- 
morbid  state.  It  has  no  reason,  in  fact,  to  encumber  itself  with 
systems,  none  of  which  can  ever  embody  the  truth. 

In  this  connection  it  may  be  useful  to  recall,  in  a  few  words,  the 
essential  characteristics  of  the  scientific  method  and  to  show  how 
the  ideas  derived  from  it  differ  from  systematic  and  doctrinal  ideas. 
In  the  experimental  method  we  never  make  experiments  except  to 
see  or  to  prove,  i.e.,  to  control  or  verify.    As  a  scientific  method,  the 


220  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


experimental  method  rests  wholly  on  the  experimental  verification 
of  a  scientific  hypothesis.  We  obtain  this  verification  with  the  help, 
sometimes  of  a  fresh  observation  (observational  science),  sometimes 
of  an  experiment  (experimental  science).  In|  the  experimental 
method,  the  hypothesis  is  a  scientific  idea  that  we  submit  to  experi- 
ment. Scientific  invention  consists  in  the  creation  of  fortunate  and 
fertile  hypotheses;  these  are  suggested  by  the  feeling  or  even  the 
genius  of  the  men  of  science  who  create  them. 

When  an  hypothesis  is  submitted  to  the  experimental  method, 
it  becomes  a  theory,  while  if  it  is  submitted  to  logic  alone,  it  becomes 
a  system.  A  system,  then,  is  an  hypothesis  with  which  we  have 
connected  the  facts  logically  with  the  help  of  reason,  but  without  ex- 
perimental, critical  verification.  A  theory  is  a  verified  hypothesis, 
after  it  has  been  submitted  to  the  control  of  reason  and  experimental 
criticism.  The  soundest  theory  is  one  that  has  been  verified  by  the 
greatest  number  of  facts.  But  to  remain  valid,  a  theory  must  be 
continually  altered  to  keep  pace  with  the  progress  of  science  and 
must  be  constantly  resubmitted  to  verification  and  criticism  as  new 
facts  appear. 

If  we  consider  a  theory  perfect  and  stop  verifying  it  by  daily 
scientific  experience,  it  becomes  a  doctrine.  A  doctrine,  then,  is  a 
theory  which  we  regard  as  immutable,  which  we  take  as  a  starting 
point  for  later  deduction,  and  which  we  believe  we  are  no  longer 
obliged  to  submit  to  experimental  verification. 

In  a  word,  systems  and  doctrines  in  medicine  are  hypothetical 
or  theoretic  ideas  transformed  into  immutable  principles.  This  sort 
of  method  belongs  essentially  to  scholasticism  and  differs  radically 
from  the  experimental  method.  These  two  methods  of  the  mind, 
indeed,  are  contradictory.  Systems  and  doctrines  proceed  by  affirma- 
tion and  purely  logical  deduction;  the  experimental  method  always 
proceeds  by  doubt  and  experimental  verification.  Systems  and  doc- 
trines are  individual ;  they  are  meant  to  be  immutable  and  to  preserve 
their  personal  aspect.  The  experimental  method,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  impersonal;  it  destroys  individuality  by  uniting  and  sacrificing 
everyone's  particular  ideas,  and  turning  them  to  the  advantage  of  uni- 
versal truth  as  established  with  the  help  of  the  experimental  cri- 
terion. It  advances  slowly  and  laboriously  and  in  this  respect  will 
always  be  less  pleasing  to  the  mind.  Systems,  on  the  contrary,  are 
alluring  because  they  give  us  a  science  absolutely  regulated  by  logic 


OF  EXPEEIMENTAL  MEDICmE 


221 


alone;  and  that  frees  us  from  studying  and  makes  medicine  easy. 
Experimental  medicine,  then,  is  anti-systematic  and  anti-doctrinal  by 
nature,  or  rather  it  is  free  and  independent  in  its  essence  and  does 
not  try  to  attach  itself  to  any  kind  of  medical  system. 

What  I  have  just  been  saying  about  medical  systems,  I  can  apply 
to  philosophic  systems.  Experimental  medicine  (like  all  experi- 
mental sciences,  for  that  matter)  does  not  need  to  be  attached  to  any 
philosophic  system.  A  physiologist's  role,  like  every  scientific  man's, 
is  to  seek  truth  for  its  own  sake,  without  wishing  to  use  it  to  con- 
trol one  system  of  philosophy  or  another.  When  a  man  of  science 
takes  a  philosophic  system  as  his  base  in  pursuing  a  scientific  in- 
vestigation, he  goes  astray  in  regions  that  are  too  far  from  reality, 
or  else  the  system  gives  his  mind  a  sort  of  false  confidence  and  an 
inflexibility  out  of  harmony  with  the  freedom  and  suppleness  that 
experimenters  should  always  maintain  in  their  researches.  We 
must  therefore  carefully  avoid  every  species  of  system,  because 
systems  are  not  found  in  nature,  but  only  in  the  mind  of  man. 
Positivism,  like  the  philosophic  systems  which  it  rejects  in  the  name 
of  science,  has  the  fault  of  being  a  system.  ITow,  to  find  truth,  men 
of  science  need  only  stand  face  to  face  with  nature,  and  in  following 
experimental  medicine,  question  her  with  the  help  of  more  and 
more  perfect  means  of  investigation.  In  this  case,  I  think  that  the 
best  philosophic  system  consists  in  not  having  any. 

As  an  experimenter,  then,  I  avoid  philosophic  systems;  but  I 
cannot  for  that  reason  reject  the  philosophic  spirit  which,  without 
being  anywhere,  is  everywhere  and,  without  belonging  to  any  system, 
ought  to  reign,  not  only  over  all  science  but  over  all  human  knowl- 
edge. So  even  while  avoiding  philosophic  systems,  I  like  philosophers 
and  greatly  enjoy  their  converse.  Indeed,  from  the  scientific  point 
of  view,  philosophy  embodies  the  eternal  aspiration  of  human  rea- 
son toward  knowledge  of  the  unknown.  Therefore  philosophers 
always  live  in  controversial  questions  and  in  lofty  regions,  the  upper 
boundaries  of  science.  Hence  they  impart  to  scientific  thought  an 
enlivening  and  ennobling  motion ;  they  develop  and  fortify  the  mind 
by  general  intellectual  exercise,  while  ceaselessly  bearing  it  toward 
the  inexhaustible  solution  of  great  problems;  thus  they  nourish  a 
kind  of  thirst  for  the  unknown;  the  sacred  fire  of  research  must 
therefore  never  be  extinguished  in  men  of  science. 

Ardent  desire  for  knowledge,  in  fact,  is  the  one  motive  attracting 


222 


AN  INTRODUCTTON  TO  THE  STUDY 


and  supporting  investigators  in  their  efforts;  and  just  this  knowl- 
edge, really  grasped  and  yet  always  flying  before  them,  becomes  at 
once  their  sole  torment  and  sole  happiness.  Those  who  do  not  know 
the  torment  of  the  unknown  cannot  have  the  joy  of  discovery  which 
is  certainly  the  liveliest  that  the  mind  of  man  can  ever  feel.  But 
by  a  whim  of  our  nature,  the  joy  of  discovery,  so  sought  and  hoped 
for,  vanishes  as  soon  as  found.  It  is  but  a  flash  whose  gleam  dis- 
covers for  us  fresh  horizons,  toward  which  our  insatiate  curiosity 
repairs  with  still  more  ardor.  Thus,  even  in  science  itself,  the  known 
loses  its  attraction,  while  the  unknown  is  always  full  of  charm. 
Therefore  the  minds  that  rise  and  become  really  great  are  never 
self-satisfied,  but  still  continue  to  strive.  The  feeling,  about  which 
I  am  speaking  now,  is  familiar  to  men  of  science  and  to  philosophers. 
This  is  the  feeling  that  made  Priestley  *  say  that  each  discovery  we 
make  shows  us  many  others  that  should  be  made ;  this  is  the  feeling 
which  Pascal  expressed  in  somewhat  paradoxical  form,  when  he  said : 
"We  are  in  search  never  of  things,  but  of  the  search  for  things.'' 
Yet  truth  itself  is  surely  what  concerns  us  and,  if  we  are  still  in 
search  of  it,  that  is  because  the  part  which  we  have  so  far  found 
cannot  satisfy  us.  In  our  investigations,  we  should  else  be  per- 
forming the  useless  and  endless  labor  pictured  in  the  fable  of  Sisy- 
phus, ever  rolling  up  the  rock  which  continually  falls  back  to  its 
starting  point.  This  comparison  is  not  scientifically  correct :  a  man 
of  science  rises  ever,  in  seeking  truth ;  and  if  he  never  finds  it  in  its 
wholeness,  he  discovers  nevertheless  very  significant  fragments ;  and 
these  fragments  of  universal  truth  are  precisely  what  constitute 
science. 

Men  of  science,  then,  do  not  seek  for  the  pleasure  of  seeking; 
they  seek  the  truth  to  possess  it,  and  they  possess  it  already  within 
the  limits  expressed  in  the  present  state  of  the  sciences.  But  men 
of  science  must  not  halt  on  the  road ;  they  must  climb  ever  higher 
and  strive  toward  perfection ;  they  must  always  seek,  as  long  as  they 
see  anything  to  be  found.  Without  constant  stimulation  by  the 
spur  of  the  unknown,  without  constantly  recurring  thirst,  it 
might  be  feared  that  men  of  science  would  become  system-ridden  in 
their  acquirements  and  their  knowledge.  Then  science  would  halt 
through  intellectual  inertness,  just  as  minerals,  in  saturated  solution, 

*  Priestley,  Experiments  and  Observations  on  Different  Kinds  of  Air,  Intro- 
duction, p.  15. 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


223 


become  chemically  inert  and  crystallize.  We  must  tlierefore  prevent 
our  minds  from  becoming  too  much  absorbed  in  the  known  parts 
of  any  particular  science  or  dragging  themselves  along  the  ground 
and  losing  sight  of  questions  still  to  be  solved.  By  ceaselessly  stir- 
ring the  inexhaustible  mass  of  unsolved  questions,  philosophy  stimu- 
lates and  maintains  this  healthful  movement  in  science.  For  only 
the  indeterminate  belongs  to  philosophy,  in  the  restricted  sense  in 
which  I  am  here  considering  it,  while  the  determinate  necessarily 
falls  into  the  realm  of  science.  I  can  no  more  accept  a  philosophy, 
then,  which  tries  to  assign  boundaries  to  science,  than  a  science  which 
claims  to  suppress  philosophic  truths  that  are  at  present  outside  its 
own  domain.  True  science  suppresses  nothing,  but  goes  on  searching, 
and  is  undisturbed  in  looking  straight  at  things  that  it  does  not  yet 
understand.  If  we  denied  these  facts,  we  should  not  suppress  them ; 
we  should  only  be  shutting  our  eyes  and  believing  there  was  no  light ; 
we  should  be  sharing  the  delusion  of  the  ostrich  which  believes  it 
banishes  danger  by  hiding  its  head  in  the  sand.  In  my  opinion  the 
true  scientific  spirit  is  that  whose  high  aspirations  fertilize  the 
sciences  and  draw  them  on  in  search  of  truths  which  are  still  be- 
yond them,  but  which  must  not  be  suppressed,  because  they  have  been 
attacked  by  stronger  and  more  delicate  philosophic  minds.  Has 
this  aspiration  of  the  human  spirit  any  end, — will  it  find  its  limit  ? 
That,  I  cannot  know ;  but  meantime,  as  I  said  above,  men  of  science 
can  do  no  better  than  to  push  steadily  forward,  because  they  can 
always  go  forward. 

One  of  the  greatest  obstacles  to  the  free  and  universal  movement 
of  human  knowledge  is  the  tendency  that  leads  different  kinds  of 
knowledge  to  separate  into  systems.  This  is  not  a  consequence  of 
things  in  themselves,  because  everything  in  nature  is  connected  with 
everything  else  and  nothing  should  be  viewed  in  the  isolation  of  a 
system;  but  the  feeble  yet  dominating  tendency  of  our  minds  leads 
us  to  absorb  other  kinds  of  knowledge  into  our  personal  systems.  A 
science  that  halted  in  a  system  would  remain  stationary  and  would 
be  isolated,  because  systematization  is  really  a  scientific  encysting, 
and  every  encysted  part  of  an  organism  ceases  to  take  part  in  the 
organism's  general  life.  Systems  therefore  strive  to  enslave  the 
human  mind,  and,  in  my  opinion,  their  only  ascertainable  use  is  to 
promote  conflicts  which  destroy  them,  by  stirring  and  stimulating  the 
vitality  of  science.    We  must  try,  indeed,  to  break  the  fetters  of 


224 


AN  INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY 


philosophic  and  scientific  systems,  as  we  would  break  the  chains  of 
intellectual  slavery.  Truth,  if  we  can  find  it,  belongs  to  every 
system;  and  to  discover  it,  experimenters  need  free  movement  on 
every  side,  without  feeling  themselves  stopped  by  the  barriers  of  any 
system.  Philosophy  and  science,  then,  must  never  be  systematic: 
without  trying  to  dominate  one  another,  they  must  unite.  Their 
separation  could  only  be  harmful  to  the  progress  of  human  knowledge. 
Striving  ever  upward,  philosophy  makes  science  rise  toward  the  cause 
or  the  source  of  things.  It  shows  science  that  there  are  questions 
beyond  it,  torturing  humanity,  which  it  has  not  yet  solved.  Solid 
union  between  science  and  philosophy  is  useful  to  both:  it  lifts  the 
one  and  confines  the  other.  But  if  the  bonds  uniting  philosophy  to 
science  should  break,  philosophy,  lacking  the  support  or  the  counter- 
poise of  science  would  rise  out  of  sight  and  be  lost  in  the  clouds,  while 
science,  without  guidance  and  without  high  aspiration,  would  sail 
at  random. 

But  if  philosophy,  instead  of  contenting  itself  with  this  fraternal 
union,  tried  to  enter  the  household  of  science  and  dogmatically  lord 
its  productions  and  its  methods  of  manifestation,  then  their  under- 
standing would  cease.  Claiming  to  absorb  the  special  discoveries 
of  a  science  into  any  philosophic  system  would,  in  fact,  be  a  delusion. 
For  making  scientific  observations,  experiments  and  discoveries,  phil- 
osophic method  and  procedure  are  vague  and  powerless;  the  only 
means  available  for  that  are  scientific  methods  and  procedures  that 
can  be  known  only  by  experimenters,  men  of  science  or  philosophers, 
practising  some  definite  science.  The  different  kinds  of  human 
knowledge  are  so  entangled  and  so  interdependent  in  their  evolution, 
that  we  cannot  possibly  believe  that  any  individual  influence  can 
advance  them  unless  the  elements  of  progress  are  present  in  the 
scientific  soil  itself.  While  recognizing  the  superiority  of  great 
men,  I  therefore  still  think  that,  even  in  their  special  or  general  in- 
fluence on  science,  they  are  always  necessarily  more  or  less  a  function 
of  their  time.  It  is  the  same  with  philosophers :  they  can  only  follow 
the  movement  of  the  human  mind,  and  they  contribute  to  its  advance, 
only  by  opening  the  path  of  progress  wider.  But  in  that,  they  are 
an  expression  of  their  time.  No  philosopher,  coming  at  a  moment 
when  science  takes  a  fertile  turn,  should  create  a  system,  then,  in 
harmony  with  the  movement  of  science,  and  afterward  cry  out  that 
all  the  scientific  progress  of  his  day  is  due  to  the  influence  of  his 


OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 


225 


system.  In  a  word,  if  men  of  science  are  useful  to  philosophers, 
and  philosophers  to  men  of  science,  men  of  science  remain  free, 
none  the  less,  and  masters  in  their  own  house ;  as  for  myself,  I  think 
that  men  of  science  achieve  their  discoveries,  their  theories  and  their 
science  apart  from  philosophers.  If  we  meet  with  incredulity  with 
regard  to  this,  we  can  perhaps  easily  prove  that,  as  J.  de  Maistre 
says,  those  who  make  the  most  discoveries  in  science  know  Bacon  ^ 
least,  while  those  who  read  and  ponder  him,  like  Bacon  himself,  have 
poor  success.  For  scientific  methods  and  processes  are  learned,  in 
fact,  only  in  laboratories,  where  experimenters  grapple  with  the 
problems  of  nature;  the  young  must  be  gTiided  thither  first  of  all; 
men  of  riper  age  have  as  their  portion  erudition  and  scientific  criti- 
cism which  can  bear  fruit  only  when  we  have  begun  our  initiation 
into  science  in  its  true  sanctuary,  the  laboratory.  Processes  of 
reasoning  should  endlessly  vary  for  experimenters,  according  to  the 
different  sciences  and  to  the  more  or  less  difficult  questions  to  which 
they  apply  them.  Only  scientific  men,  and  indeed  scientific  men 
specializing  in  each  science,  can  take  up  such  questions,  because  a 
naturalist's  mind  is  not  a  physiologist's  mind,  any  more  than  a 
chemist's  mind  is  a  physicist's.  As  for  Bacon  and  the  other  more 
modem  philosophers  who  try  a  general  systematization  of  precepts 
for  scientific  research,  they  may  seem  alluring  to  people  who  look 
at  science  only  from  a  distance ;  but  works  like  theirs  are  of  no  use 
to  experienced  scientists;  and  by  false  simplification  of  things, 
they  mislead  men  who  wish  to  devote  themselves  to  cultivating  sci- 
ence. What  is  more,  they  embarrass  them  by  burdening  the  mind 
with  vague  and  inapplicable  precepts  that  we  must  hasten  to  forget 
if  we  wish  to  become  true  experimenters. 

I  have  said  that  scientific  men  and  experimenters  can  be  edu- 
cated only  in  special  laboratories  of  the  sciences  they  wish  to  culti- 
vate and  that  precepts  are  useful  only  when  derived  from  the  details 
of  experimental  practice  in  some  definite  science.  In  this  Introduc- 
tion, I  have  tried  to  give  as  exact  an  idea  as  possible  of  physiological 
science  and  of  experimental  medicine.  However,  I  am  far  fom  pre- 
suming to  believe  that  I  have  given  rules  and  precepts  which  experi- 
menters should  follow  rigorously  and  absolutely.  I  have  tried  merely 
to  study  the  nature  of  the  problems  to  be  solved  in  the  experimental 
science  of  living  beings,  so  that  everyone  might  thoroughly  under- 
•  J.  de  Maistre.    Examen  de  la  philosophie  de  Bacon,  Vol.  I,  p.  81. 


226        THE  STUDY  OF  EXPERIMENTAL  MEDICINE 

stand  the  scientific  questions  belonging  to  the  domain  of  biology  and 
know  the  means  which  that  science  now  has  to  attack  them.  I  have 
quoted  examples  of  investigation,  but  have  been  very  careful  not  to 
give  needless  explanations  or  to  formulate  a  single  or  absolute  rule; 
because  I  think  a  teacher's  role  should  be  limited  to  clearly  showing 
his  pupil  the  goal  that  a  science  sets  itself  and  to  pointing  out  all 
possible  means  at  his  disposal  for  reaching  it.  But  a  teacher  should 
then  leave  his  pupil  free  to  move  about  in  his  own  way  and,  accord- 
ing to  his  ovm  nature,  to  reach  his  goal,  only  coming  to  his  aid  if  he 
sees  that  he  is  going  astray.  I  believe,  in  a  word,  that  the  true 
scientific  method  confines  the  mind  without  suffocating  it,  leaves  it 
as  far  as  possible  face  to  face  with  itself,  and  guides  it,  while  re- 
specting the  creative  originality  and  the  spontaneity  which  are  its 
most  precious  qualities.  Science  goes  forward  only  through  new 
ideas  and  through  creative  or  original  power  of  thought.  In  educa- 
tion we  must,  therefore,  take  care  that  knowledge  which  should  arm 
the  mind  does  not  overwhelm  it  by  its  weight,  and  that  rules,  in- 
tended to  support  weak  parts  of  the  mind,  do  not  atrophy  the  strong 
and  fertile  parts.  I  need  not  enter  into  further  explanations  here; 
I  have  had  to  limit  myself  by  forewarning  biological  science  and 
experimental  medicine  against  exaggerating  the  importance  of  erudi- 
tion and  against  invasion  and  domination  by  systems;  because 
sciences  submitting  to  these  would  lose  their  fertility  and  would 
abandon  the  independence  and  freedom  of  mind  essential  to  the  prog- 
ress of  humanity. 


I 


r  ^  ©  ^^  ^ 


JOURNAL 

OF  THE 

History  of  Medicine 

AND  ALLIED  SCIENCES 

A  Quarterly 

BOARD  OF  EDITORS 

George  Rosen,  Editor 
Madeline  E.  Stanton,  Assistant  Editor 
Elizabeth  H.  Thomson,  Assistant  Editor 

Erwin  H.  Ackerknecht  Genevieve  Miller 
Max  H.  Fisch  Lloyd  G.  Stevenson 

John  F.  Fulton  Mrs.  Josiah  C.  Trent 

Also  forty-seven  consulting  editors  from  many 
parts  of  the  world,  including: 
Chauncey  D.  Leake  J.  Johnston  Abraham 
J.  B.  DEC.  M.  Saunders  Henry  E.  Sigerist 
Gregory  Zilboorg  Arturo  Castiglioni 
AuGUSTO  Da  Silva  Carvalho 

Abraham  Flexnbr,  foremost  authority  on  medical 
education,  says: 

"The  JOURNAL  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  MEDI- 
CINE AND  ALLIED  SCIENCES  meets  a  need  of  long 
standing  in  providing  in  authoritative,  comprehensive, 
and  readable  form  the  background  of  medicine  as  a 
science  and  an  art.  Most  important,  it  promotes  an 
understanding  of  the  unity  of  the  various  branches  of 
medicine  and  of  the  sciences  contributing  to  it.  I  look 
forward  to  each  new  issue  of  the  JOURNAL  with 
genuine  enthusiasm." 

Annual  Subscription  $7.50 
Single  Issues  2.50 
Special  rates  for  long-term  subscriptions 

ABELARD-SCHUMAN,  INC. 

PUBLISHERS 

404  FOURTH  AVE.,  NEW  YORK  16,  N.  Y. 


THE  LIFE  OF  SCIENCE  LIBRARY 


THE  UFE  OF  SCIENCE  UBRARY  is  a  carefully  planned  series  of  books  on 
the  history  of  science.  It  is  designed  to  give  the  general  reader  a  wider  under- 
standing of  the  roots  of  scientific  ideas  and  thus  help  him  feel  more  at  home 
in  a  world  increasingly  dominated  by  science. 

Nearly  100  authors  are  engaged  in  writing  books  for  the  Library.  Each 
volume  is  complete  in  itself.  Each  can  be  enjoyed  individually  or  can  be  read 
as  an  exciting  chapter  in  the  never-ending  drama  of  science  in  civilization. 

The  series  is  a  continuing  reading  project,  never  a  finished  set  of  books.  Its 
volumes  reach  into  and  interpret  the  past  in  terms  most  useful  for  an  under- 
standing of  the  general  history  of  oilture. 


VOLUMES  ALREADY  PUBLISHED  IN 
THE  LIFE  OF  SCIENCE  LIBRARY 


The  Life  of  Science: 

Victory  Over  Pain: 

Benjamin  Silliman: 

Sun,  Stand  Thou  Still: 

The  Story  of  the  Ship: 
Scientists  and  Amateurs: 

Sons  of  Science: 

James  Watt  and  the  History  of 

Steam  Power: 
The  Alchemists: 

Explorer  of  the  Human  Brain: 

Francis  Bacon: 

Goethe  as  a  Scientist: 


Essays  in  the  History  of  Civilization  (key- 
note volume  of  the  Library),  by  George 
Sarton 

A  History  of  Anesthesia,  by  Victor 
Robinson 

Pathfinder  in  American  Science,  by  John 
F.  Fulton 

The  Life  and  Work  of  Copernicus  the 
Astronomer,  by  Angus  Armitage 
by  Charles  E.  Gibson 

A  History  of  the  Royal  Society,  by  Dorothy 
Stimson 

The  Story  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution 
and  Its  Leaders,  by  Paul  H.  Oehser 

by  Ivor  B.  Hart 

Founders  of  Modern  Chemistry,  by  F.  Sher- 
wood Taylor 

The  Life  of  Santiago  Ramon  y  Cajal 
(1852-1934),  by  Dorothy  F.  Cannon 
Philosopher  of  Industrial  Science,  by  Ben- 
jamin Farrington 

by  Rudolf  Magnus,  translated  by  Heinz 
Norden 


The  distinguished  educators  and  scientists  who  provide  counsel  to  the 
editors  concerning  the  general  development  of  the  series  include: 

Lyman  Bryson,  Counsellor  on  Public  Affairs,  Columbia  Broadcasting  System; 
Max  H.  Fisch,  Professor  of  Philosophy,  University  of  Illinois;  John  F.  Fulton, 
Sterling  Professor  of  Physiology,  Yale  University  School  of  Medicine;  Frank 
P.  Graham,  Senator  from  North  Carolina  and  former  President  of  the  University 
of  North  Carolina;  Harlow  Shapley,  Director  of  the  Harvard  College  Observ- 
atory; Henry  E.  Sigerist,  former  Director  of  the  Institute  of  the  History  of 
Medicine,  The  Johns  Hopkins  University;  and  Charles  Singer,  Professor  Emeri- 
tus, University  of  London. 


