Travels in the Mogul Empire, Vol. II (François Bernier (Irving R. Brock, trans.), 1826)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1826 London edition, Irving R. Brock translation (https://archive.org/details/travelsinmogule01brocgoog). Bernier's eyewitness account of Mughal India under Aurangzeb, including the Kashmir journey — the classic European description of 17th-century India.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



1 

} 






Digitized by LjOOQIC 

i . 



Digitized by LjOOQlC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



I 



I 

J 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



wfte^mim 



*»a^ -. 



I 



Digitized by 



Google I 



TRAVELS 



IN 



THE MOGUL EMPIRE, 



BY 



FRANCIS BERNIER. 

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH 

BT 

IRVING brook;-. 1.1 



• • •• - 



• • - • - • 



IN TWO VOLUMES.- 
VOL. II. 



LONDON: 

WILLIAM PICKERING, CHANCERY-LANE. 

1826. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



ThomM Vmx», Vtlnikr, 
Crane Cbuif. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 






TRAVELS 



IN 



THE MOGUL EMPIRE. 



A LETTER TO MR. CHAPELAIN ON THE SUPERSTITIONS 
AND ON THE SINGULAR CUSTOMS AND OPINIONS OF 
THE HINDOOS OR PAGANS OF HINDOSTAN. 

SIR, Schiraz, in Persia, 1,0 /une?T^Sfl8*; - 1 

I HAVE witnessed two solar *$dipse&'°"whieh it„ is 
scarcely possible I should ever*forge€,v " The^one 
I saw from France in the year 18^^; the <fflhil^ 
from Delhi in India in 1666. Tlie 'M^Kfe "oif "the 
first eclipse was impressed upon my mind by the 
childish credulity of the French people, and by 
their groundless and unreasonable alarm; an 
alarm so excessive, that some bought drugs as 
charms to defend themselves against the eclipse ; 
some kept themselves closely shut up, and ex- 
cluded all light, either in carefully-barred apart- 
ments or in cellarii ; while thousands flocked to 
their respective churches : some apprehending and 
dreading a malign and dangerous influence: 

VOL. II. B 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



TRAVELS IN THE 



others believing that the last day was at hand and 

that the eclipse was about to shake the fo^^ri/^ations 

of the world. Such were the absurd notions 

entertained by our countrymen, notwithstanding 

the wiiting^ of Gassendi, Roberval and other 

celebrated astronomers and philosophers, which 

clearly demonstrated that the eclipse was only 

similar to many others which had been productive 

of no mjschief; th^ this obfiovrortion of ihe sun 

was known and predicted, and was without any 

other peculiarity than what might be found in 

the reveries of ignorant or designing astrologers. 

The eclipse of 1666 is also indelibly imprinted 

on my memory by the ridiculous errors and 

strange superstitions of the Indians. At the 

^ time fixed for its appearance I took my station 

.*x)))Hh*ctQri:ace of my bouse, situated on the hanks 

ef tne Juuite'; -vAp^n I saw both shoi^s of ^e 

"•• •• *•••;•*• 
rivM% f^F49jfcc^ly a teftgue> in length, covered witjfci 
• • *•• **/•«• 
pOEijg^ of *i^Ii(ters, who stood in the water up tp 

tKe'tl^aistVt]teir ^yes rivetted to the skies, w^tdlwg 

the commeBceoaent of the eiclips^, in order t^^ 

plunge and wash the^ncis^lves at the very in^tm^t* 

The Kttle boya and gWa we^e quitie naked ; the 

men had nothing but a scarf xomd their m^ 

die and the married wxwieft ai^ girls of s^v W 

seven yeg-rs of age were covered with a pi^ 

gle cloth. Persona of rai^ or wealth, such a^ 

rajahs (pagan sovereign prinees, and generally 

courtiers in the service and pay of ^ king) 

errafs or m(mey-changers, banker^y jewellers aod 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 3 

ctth^ riqh n)^^k»nt3 crossed from the oppo3He 
tide of the m^jr with their families^ and pitching 
thcar tmt^% fixed kanates or screens in the water 
within which they and their wives washed and 
pevformed the ww\ ceremopies without any 
expowve. No sooner did these idolaters perceive 
timt th^ obsct^ration of the sun was begun, than 
they all raised a loud cry, and plunged the whole 
body under water sereral tiipo^s in quick 
Quccession; after whii^^h they stood in the river^ 
Ijlteid their e;yes and ha^ds toward the si^ni, 
muttered and prayed with s^emi^g devotion, 
fining their hands from time to time with water^ 
which they tbjfow ii^ the dire<?tion of the sun; 
bowing their beads very low and moving i^nd 
tur&ing their arms and h^nds^ sojnetimes one way^^ 
sometiiaes another. The deluded people con* 
tiaued to plunge^ mutter, pray, and perform their 
silly tricks until the end of the eclipse. On 
letiring, they threw pieces of silver at a great 
distance into the Jumpa and gave alms to the 
brahmins, who failed not to be present at this 
abfturd ceremony. I iremarked that every indi- 
vidualii. on coming oiit of the water, put on new 
idothea. placed on the $and for that purpose, and 
^At several of the most devout left their old 
garments aa presents for the brahmins* 

In this manner did I observe from my terrace, 
the solemni^tion of the grand eclipse-festival, a 
feittval which was kept with the same external ob- 
aemrances in the Indua, iathe Ganges, and in the^ 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



4 TRAVELS IN THE 

other rivers of Hindostan ; it was celebrated even 
in all the talabs or reservoirs of water ; and it is 
calculated that the Tannesar contained on that 
occasion more than one hundred and fifty thousand 
persons^ assembled from all parts of the empire ; 
the waters of that stream being considered on the 
day of an eclipse more holy and meritorious than 
those of any other river. 

The Great Mogul, though a muselman^ 
permits these ancient and superstitious practices ; 
not wishing, or not daring, to disturb the pagans 
in the free exercises of their religion. But the 
ceremony I have described is not performed 
until a certain number of brahmins, as deputies 
from their nation, have presented the king with a 
lack of rupees, equal to about fifty thousand 
crowns; in return for which he begs their ac- 
ceptance only of a few vests and an old elephant. 

I shall now mention the wise and convincing 
reasons assigned for the festival of the eclipse, and 
for the rites with which it is attended. 

We have, say the Hindoos, our four beids ; 
that is, our four books of law, sacred and divine 
writings given unto us by God himself, through 
the medium of Brumhd. These books teach that 
a certain deutab, an incarnate demon extremely 
malignant and mischievous, very dark, very blacky 
very impure and very filthy, (these are their own 
expressions) takes possession of the sun, which it 
blackens to the colour of ink, infects and obscures ; 
that the sun, which is also a deutab, but of the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE; 5 

most beaeficent and perfect kind, is thrown into 
a state of the greatest uneasiness^ and suffers a 
most cruel agony, while in the power of and in- 
fected by this wicked and black being ; that an 
endeavour to rescue the sun from so miserable a 
condition becomes the duty of every person ; that 
this important object can be attained only by 
means of prayers^ ablutions and alms ; that those 
actions have an extraordinary merit during the 
festival of the eclipse, the alms then bestowed 
being an hundred times more valuable than alms 
given at any other time ; and who is he, they ask, 
that would refuse to mako a profit of cent per cent ? 

These, sir, were the eclipses which I told 
you I could not easily forget, and they natu- 
rally lead me to speak of other wild extrava- 
gancies of the unhappy heathens, from which I 
shall leave you to draw whatever conclusions you 
please. 

In the town of Juggernaut, situated in the 
Gulf of Bengal, and containing the famous temple 
of the idol of that name, a certain annual festival 
is holden, which continues, if my memory fail not, 
for the space of eight or nine days. At this fes- 
tival is collected an incredible concourse of people, 
as was the case anciently at the temple of Hammon, 
and as happens at present in the city of Mecca, 
The number, I am told, sometimes exceeds one 
hundred and fifty thousand. A superb wooden 
machine is constructed, such as I have seen in 
several other parts of India, with I know not how 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



6 THAVELS m TfiE 

many grotesque tigures, marly resembling oar 
monsters which we see depicted with two headd, 
beings half man and halfbeast> gigamic and hor- 
rible heads^ satyrs, apes and devils. This ma- 
chine is set on fourteen or sixteen wheels like those 
of a gun-carriage, and drawn or pushed along by 
the united exertions of fifty or sixty person*. 
The idol, Juggernaut, placed conspicuously in the 
middle, richly attired and gorgeously adorned^ 
is thus conveyed from one temple to another. 

The first day on which this idol is formally 
exhibited in the temple, the c^owd is so immense., 
•and the press so violent that some of the pilgrims, 
fatigued and worn out in consequence of their 
iong journey, are squeezed to death : the «ur- 
rotonding throng give them a thousand benedic- 
tions, and consider them highly fevoured to die 
on such a holy occasion after travelling so great 
a distance. And while the chariot of hellish 
triumph pursues its solemn march, persons are 
found (it is no fiction which I recount) so blindly 
credulous and so full of wild notions, as to throw 
themselves upon the gpround in the way of its 
ponderous wheels, which pass over and crush to 
atoms the bodies of the wretched fanatics, without 
exciting the horror or suprise of the spectators^ 
No deed, according to their estimation, is so heroic 
or meritorious as this self devotion : the victim « 
believe that Juggernaut will receive them as 
children, and recal them to life in a state of ha{>- 
piness and dignity. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



The brcdifibins eti<x)uiiage and prbmiote tli«s« 
g;toiSs errors and superstitiotis t^ which they lare 
itidi^hted fbr Iheir wealth an^ consequence. A^ 
p^ri^o&s attached and consecrated to important 
mysteries, they are held in general venemtion, 
and enrichedv by the alms of the people. So 
wicked and detestable are their tricks and in*- 
postnres, that I required the full and clear en* 
dence of them which I obtained, ere I could 
beliete that they had recourse to similar expe* 
dfents. The brahmins select a beautiful maiden 
for the bride of Juggernatit, who accompanies the 
god to the temple with all the pomp and cere- 
mony which I have ntDticed, where she remaing 
the whole night, having been ^ade tb believe that 
Jug^maut will come and fie with h^er. She is 
commanded to einquire of the god if the year will 
be fhiitful, and what may be the {^ocessioi^s, the 
feiftivals, the prayers and the alm« which. fee 
requires in return for his bounty^ In the night 
one of the brahmins enters the temple through a 
sttntll back door, enjoys the unsuspecting damiwl) 
i»akes her believe whatever tmay be deemed neces^ 
iway, ^tfid the following morning when on her way 
tJo another temple, whither she is carried with the 
usual forms and magnificence, «he is deared by 
the Iwrahmins to state aloud to tlie people all she 
has heard from the lustful priest, a« if every word 
had proceeded from the naoulh of iHggerna;ut. 
But let me relate follies of another kind. 

In front of the chariot, and even in the tem- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



8 TRAVBLS IN THE 

ples> pubUc women during festival days dance and 
throw their bodies into a variety of indecent and 
preposterous attitudes, which the brahmins deem 
quite consistent with the religion of the country. 
I have known females celebrated for beauty, and 
who were remarkably reserved in their general 
deportment, refuse valuable presents from mu- 
hammedans, Christians, and pagan foreigners, 
because they considered themselves dedicated to 
the ministry and to the ministers of the deura, to 
the brahmins, and to those fakirs who are com- 
monly seated upon ashes all round the temple, 
some quite naked with hideous hair, such as we 
may suppose belonged to Megaera, and in postures 
which r shall soon describe.* 

What has been said concerning women burn- 
ing themselves will be confirmed by so many 
travellers, that I suppose people will cease to be 
sceptical upon this melancholy fact. The accounts 
given of it have been certainly exaggerated, and 
the number of victims is less now than formerly ; 
the muhammedans, by whom the country is go- 
verned, doing all in their power to suppress the 
barbarous custom. They do not, indeed, forbid 
it by a positive law, because it is a part of their 
policy to leave the idolatrous population which is 
so much more numerous than their own in the 
free exercise of its religion : but the practice is 
checked by indirect means. No woman can sacrifice 

* See note H at the end of the volume. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 9 

herself without permission from the governor of 
the province in which she resides, and he never 
grants it until he shall have ascertained that she 
is not to be turned aside from her purpose ; to 
accomplish this desirable end the governor reasons 
with the widow and makes her enticing promises; 
after which, if these methods fail, he sometimes 
sends her among his women, that the effect of 
their remonstrances may be tried. Notwithstand- 
ing these obstacles, the number of self immo- 
lations is still very considerable, particularly in 
the territories of rajahs, where no muhammedan 
governors are appointed. But not to tire you 
with the history of every woman whom I have 
seen perish on the funeral pile, I shall advert to 
only two or three of those shocking spectacles at 
which I have been present; and first I shall give 
you some details concerning a female to whom I 
was sent for the purpose of diverting her from 
persevering in her dreadful intention. 

One of my friends, named Bendidas, Danech- 
mend-khan's principal clerk, died of a hectick 
fever for which I had attended him upwards of 
two years, and his wife immediately resolved to 
burn herself with the body of her husband. Her 
friends were in the service of my aga, and being 
commanded by him to dissuade the widow from 
the commission of so frantic an act, they repre- 
sented to her that although she had adopted a 
generous and commendable resolution which would 
redound to the honour and conduce to the hap- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



piMIM 6f th6 fa«)(^ily, yet Bh6 ou^ht tb cdtiriiadi^ 
IhW her childreh were of a tender ag^, that tt 
Would be cruel to abandon thetn^ bud that het 
lanxiety for their vpelf^re ought to exceed the 
affectbn she bore to the tnewory of her deceasisd 
husband. The infatuated creature attended not, 
however, to their reasoning, aftd I was requested 
to visit the widow as if by my aga's desire, and in 
quality of an oW ftlend of the fiamily, I ootti'- 
plied, and found on entering the apartment A 
cluster of seven or dght old hags, and another of 
four or five aged and harebrained brahmins standi 
ing round the body, all of whom gave by turns a 
horrid yell, and beat their hands with violehce. 
The widow was seated at the feet of her d^ad 
tmsband ; her hair was dishevelled and her visage 
piale, but her eyes were tearless and sparkling 
\vith animation while she cried and screamed 
aloud like the rest of the company, and beat time 
with her hands to this horrible concert. Thfe 
hurly-burly having subsided, I approatjhed the 
hellish group, and addressed the woman in a gentle 
to^p. '^ I am come hither,** said I, ^ by desire of 
Danechmend-khan, to inform yoU that he will 
settle a pension of two trowns per month on each 
of your two sons, provided ybU do not destroy 
your life, a life so necessary for their care and 
education. We have ways and means indeed to 
prevent your ascending the pile, and to punbh 
those who encourage you in so unreasonable a 
resolution. All yotir relalions wish you to live 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOOUL EMPIRE. 1 1 

for iiie sake of ytmr ofifepring, and you will i^ot bd 
reputed infEnnoiis us are the childless mdows who 
possess not courage to b«rn themselves with tlieit 
dead husbaT)ds.*' I repeated these arguments 
Several times without teceiving any answer ; b«t> 
at last^ fixing a determined look on me^ she HiM, 
^^ Well, if I am prev^ented from burning myi^lf 
on the ftmeiial pile, I will dash out my bi^n^ 
against a wall.^' What a diabolical spirit ha& 
taken possession of you ! thought I. '* Let it bfe 
so then," I rejoined , with undissembled anger, 
** but first take your children, wretchied and ti«i*- 
natursd mother ! cut their throats, and cc^nsam^ 
them ion the same pile ; otherwise you will leltve 
tbem to die of famine, for I shall return imme*- 
dlately to DaTiechmend4chan and annul thei^ {xsn- 
j^ons/' These woixis, spoken with A loud and 
i^dute voice, made the desired impression : with- 
out uttering a syllable^ her h^ad fell Suddenly on 
her knees, and the greater part of the old Women 
and brahmins sneaked tow^ttd the door and Idft 
the room. I thought I might now safdy iMVd 
tbe widow in the hands of jh^r friends who hdl 
iK^companied me, ahd mounting my hori^ re- 
turned home. In the evening, when on my Wiiy 
to Danechmend-khan, to inform him of what I 
had done, I met one of the relations who thanks 
me, and said that the body had been burnt without 
the widow, who h^d pt^ttiiis^ not to die by h^ 
own hands. 

In regard to the wooi^ who act'MHy bUrn 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



12 TRAVELS IN THE 

themselves^ I was present at so many of those 
shocking exhibitions^ that I could not persuade 
myself to attend any more, nor is it without a 
feeling of horror that I revert to the subject. I 
shall endeavour, nevertheless, to describe what 
passed before my eyes ; but I cannot hope to give 
you an adequate conception of the fortitude dis- 
played by these infatuated victims during the 
whole of the frightful tragedy : it must be seen 
to be believed. 

When travelling from Ahmedabad to Agra, 
through the territories of rajahs, and while the 
caravan halted in a town under the shade until 
the cool of the evening, news reached us that 
a widow was then on the point of burning herself 
with the body of her husband. I ran at once to 
the spot, and going to the edge of a large and 
nearly dry reservoir, observed at the bottom 
a deep pit filled with wood ; the body of a dead 
man extended thereon ; a woman seated upon the 
same pile ; four or five brahmins setting fire to 
it in every part : five middle-aged women, tolera- 
bly well dressed, holding one another by the hand, 
singing and dancing round the pit ; and a great 
number of spectators of both sexes. 

The pile, whereon large quantities of butter 
and oil had been thrown, was soon enveloped in 
flames, and I saw the fire catch the woman's 
garments, which were impregnated with scented 
oil, mixed with sandarach and saffron powder; 
but I could not perceive the slightest indication of 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EBfPIRE. 13 

pain or even uneasiness in the victim, and it was 
said that she pronounced with emphasis the words 
jive, txvo ; to signify that this being the fifth time 
she had burned herself with the same husband, 
there were wanted only two more similar sacri- 
fices to render her perfect, according to the 
doctrine of the transmigration of souls : as if a 
certain reminiscence, or prophetic spirit, had been 
imparted to her at that moment of her dissolution. 
But this was only the commencement of the 
infernal tragedy. I thought that the singing and 
dancing of the five women were nothing more 
than some unmeaning ceremony ; great therefore 
was my astonishment when I saw that the flames 
having ignited the clothes of one of these females, 
she cast herself head-foremost into the pit. The 
horrid example was followed by another woman, 
as soon as the flames caught her person: the 
three women, who remained, then took hold of 
each other by the hand, resuming the dance with 
perfect composure; and after a short lapse of 
time, they also precipitated themselves, one after 
the other, into the fire. 

I soon learnt the meaning of these multiplied 
sacrifices. The five women' were slaves, and 
having witnessed the deep affliction of their 
mistress in consequence of the illness of her 
husband, whom she promised not to survive, they 
were so moved with compassion that they en- 
tered into an engagement to perish by the same 
flames that consumed their beloved mistress. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



14 TRAVELS IN; TH£ 

Manjr persons, wltom I th^jn oonsuhed cm the 
m^dQt, WQuld fain ha^e pexsuaded me> that an 
f^^ess of affection was tbe cause why Hindoa 
women bijirn themselves with their deceased 
hjQfthands ; but I s^on found that this abominable 
pfQctic^e is the effect of early and deeply rooted 
pr^udices. Every girl is taught by her mother 
that it is virtuous and laudable m a wife ta 
n^Agle her ashes with those of her husband, and 
thfM^ ¥^ woman of honor will refuse compliance . 
^ith the estahli^hed custom. These opinions mea 
hs^ve^ always iiftjculcated aa an easy mode of keeping 
wive$ in su^etion, of securing their attention in 
tiones of ^iekness, and of deterring them from 
ackpinistering poisoa to their husbands. 

But let us proceed to another of these 
direadful ^cen^st^ not witnessed indeed by myself^ 
bvit selected in prefeirence to others, at which I 
h^ppeoed to be present, on account of the x^ 
mar]|[able hicident by which it was distinguished* 
I have seen so m^ny things which I should have 
pronounced incredible, that neither you nor I 
ought to reject the narrative in question merely 
l^^use '^ contains something e^^traordinary. 
^h<^ story is in every person s mouth in India, and 
is wiversally cji^ted. Perhaps it has^ already 
reached you in Europe* 

A woman, long engaged in love intriguea 
w^ a young muselman, her ni^hbour, by trade 
a taiilpr <ind a pluyer on the tambourine, poisoned 
her hifsband* She thenhtsteiMd to her lover, in- 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



foirip^ Mm ^ wbat she h^ done, aikd daiming 
the performaaee of his promiae to take ker to wife; 
mged the neciessity of iminediatety flying, as had 
been previously projected, from the sce»e of their 
guilt; "for," added i^, " if there be the least 
delay, I $hall be constrained, by a common sense 
Qf decency, to burn myself with the body of my 
dead spouse.** The young ma,n, who foresaw that 
«iieh a scheme would involve him in difficulty and 
danger, peremptorily refused; and the woman, 
without betraying the smallest emotion, went at 
tb^ instant to her relations, informed them of the 
sudden death of her husband, and of her fixed 
reaolution to die on the funeral pile. Pleaded 
with so magnanimous bmi intention, and with the 
honour she was about to confer on the fanuly, 
her friends prepare a pit, fill it with wood, lay 
the body upcm the pile and kindle the firew 
These anrangement^ being cempleted, thewoma^ 
makes the round of the pit fbr the purpose of 
embracing and bidding a last farewell to her 
Ipndred, among whom stood the young mubaBi;- 
medan, invited thither, with other musicians, to 
play on the tan^boqrine according to the custom of 
the oenntry. Approaching the lover as if she 
intended to take a last and tender adijeu, the infu- 
riated creature seizes him with a firm gr^tsp 
by the ooUar, draws him with irresistible ferce 
to the edge of the pit and precipitates herself 
headlong with the oli^d;of her resentipent into 
the midst of the raging fire. 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



16 T&AVBLS IN THE 

As I was leaving Surat for Persia^ I witnessed 
the devotion and burning of another widow : 
several Englishmen and Dutchmen, and Mr. 
Chardin of Paris, were present. She was of the 
middle age, and by no means uncomely. I do 
not expect, with my limited powers of expression, 
to convey a full idea of the brutish boldness, 
or ferocious gaiety, depicted on this woman's 
countenance; of her undaunted step; of the 
freedom from all perturbation with which she 
conversed, and permitted herself to be washed ; 
of the look of confidence, or rather of insensibility 
which she cast upon us ; of her easy air, free from 
dejection ; of her lofty carriage, void of embar- 
rassment, when she was examining her little 
cabin, composed of dry and thick millet straw, 
with an intermixture of small wood; when she en- 
tered into that cabin, sat down upon the funeral 
pile, placed her deceased husband's head in her 
lap, took up a torch, and with her own hand 
lighted the fire within, while I know not how 
many brahmins were busily engaged in kindling 
it without : — well indeed may I despair of repre- 
senting this whole scene with proper and genuine 
feeling, such as I experienced at the spectacle 
itself, or of painting it in colours sufficiently vivid. 
My recollection of it indeed is so vivid, that it 
seems only a few days since the horrid reality 
passed before my eyes, and with pain I per- 
suade myself that it was any thing but a frightful 
dream. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC * 



MOOUL EMPIRE. 17 

It is true, however, that I have known 
some of these unhappy widows shrink at the ' 
sight of the piled wood ; so as to leave no doubt 
on my mind that they would willingly have re- 
canted, if recantation had been permitted by the 
merciless brahmins ; but those demons animate 
jor astound the affrighted victims, and even thrust 
them into the fire. I was present when a poor 
young woman, who had fallen back five or six 
paces from the pit, was thus driven forward ; 
and I saw another of these wretched beings, 
struggling to leave the funeral pile when the fire 
increased around her person, but she was pre- 
vented from escaping by the long poles of the 
diabolical executioners. 

But sometimes the devoted widows elude the 
vigilance of the murderous priests. I have been 
often in the company of a fair pagan, who 
contrived to save her life by means of the 
scavengers or nightmen* who assemble on these 
occasions in considerable numbers, when they 
learn that the intended victim is young and 
handsome, that her relations are of little note, and 
that she is to be accompanied by only a few of her 
acquaintance. Yet the woman whose courage 
fails at the sight of the horrid apparatus of death 
and who avails herself of the presence of these men 
to avoid the impending sacrifice, cannot hope to 
pass her days in happiness, or to be treated with 

, * These men are holden Id great contempt all over India* 
VOL. II. C 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



18 TJUYELS IN THE 

respect or afibction. Never agttn can she Hve with 
Hindoos : no individual of that nation will at 
any time^ or under any circumstances, associate 
with a creature so degraded, who is accounted 
utterly infamous, and execrated because of the 
dishonour which her conduct has brought upon 
the religion of tl^ country* Consequently she is 
ever afterwards exposed to the ill-treatment of 
her low and vulgar protectors. There is no 
mogul who does not dread the consequences 
of contributing to the preservation of a woman 
devoted to the burning pile, or who will venture 
to afford an asylum to one who escapes from the 
fangs of the brahmins ; but many widows have 
been rescued by the Portuguese, in sea ports where 
tliat people happened to be in superior strength. 
I need scarcely say how much my own indignation 
has been excited, and how ardently I have wished 
for opportunities to exterminate those cursed 
brahmins. 

At Lahore I saw a noost beautiful young wi- 
dow ^sacrificed, who could not, I think, have been 
more than twelve years of age. The poor little 
creature apptored more dead than alive when 
1^ approached the dreadful pit: the ^"ony 
of her mind cannot be described; she tremUed 
and wept bitterly ; but three or four of tfee briA- 
mins, assisted by an old woman who held her un- 
der the arm, forced the unwilling victim toward 
the fatal spot, seated her on the wood, tied her 
hands and feet, lest she should run away, and in 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



ttiat sijtoatian the inoocent creature waa burnt 
alfve. I fowd it 4i£Byoult to repress^ my fbdings 
and to prevent their bursting forth into clamour- 
ed and unavailing rage ; but restrained by. pru- 
dential considerations^ I contented myself with 
si}j3ntly lamienting the abominable superstition of 
t^ipse people^ and applied to it the language of the 
poet^ when speaking of Iphigema^ whom her 
father AgamemnQn had offered in saori^ce to 

Seepius olim 

Relligio peperit scelerosa atque impia facta, 

Aulide quo pacto triyiai Virginis aram 

Ipkianassat.turp&runt sanguine foedi 

Ductores Danaum 

■ taajtum relligio potuit suadecemaloniisi ! 
I have not yet mentioned all tl^ barbanty- and 
atrocity of these monsters. In some parts of 
India instead of burning the women who deter- 
mine not to survive their husbands, the br^hmii^s 
bury them alive, by slow degrees, up to the 
throat ; then tWiO or three of them fall suddenly 
upon the victim, wring her neck, and when she 
has been efibctually and completely choked, 
cover over the body with earth thrown upon it 
from successive baskets, and tread upon the head.* 

* The female sacrifice in India is two-fold. Hiere is the 
imipolation of women on the death of their husbands ; and 
there is the murder of female children. 

Among the Hindoo tribes called the Jarejah, in the 
provinces of Cutch and Ouzerat in the west of India it is a 
custom to destroy female infants, and the mother herself is 
commonly die executioner of h^r own offspring. Doctor 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



20 TRAVELS IN THE 

Most of the pagans burn their dead ; but some 
partially broil the bodies with stubble^ near the 
side of a river, and then precipitate them into 
the water from a high and steep bank. I have 
attended these funeral rites on the Ganges several 
times, and observed flights of crows fluttering 
about the carcase^ which becomes as much the 
prey of those birds as of the fish and crocodiles. 

Some again carry a sick person, when at the 
point of death, to the river side; place his feet in 
the water, let him sink gradually to the neck; 
and when it is supposed that he is about to ex- 
pire, they immerse his whole body into the river, 

Buchanan informs us that this atrocity was investigated by 
the exertions of Mr. Duncan, governor of Bombay. That 
gentleman instructed Colonel Walker, late political resident 
in Guzerat, to inform himself of the extent of the practice of 
infanticide. The Bombay government transmitted to the 
court of directors the official report from that officer, dated 
the 15th March, 1808 ; and from this document the horrid 
fact was given to the public, that the number of females who 
were sacrificed in Cutch and Ouzerat alone (for the custom 
prevails in several other provinces) amounted, by the very 
lowest computation (in 1807) to three thousand annually, 
other calculations vastly exceed that number. Colonel 
Walker had first the honour of appearing before this people 
as the advocate of humanity ; and, as ambassador from the 
British nation, he entreated them to suffer their daughters to 
live ; but they peremptorily refused even to listen to this 
moral negociation. But Col. Walker, observes Dr. Bu- 
chanan, did not desist from his benevolent purpose, and the 
90«£ral chiefs bound themselves by a solemn engagement, in 
11^08, to discontinue the practice of infanticide. — Translator. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 21 

where they leave him, after violently clapping 
their hands, and crying out with great vehemence. 
The object of this ceremony (at which I have been 
present) is that the soul may be washed, on 
taking its flight, from all the impurities which it 
may have contracted during its abode in the body. 
This absurd notion is not confined to the vulgar ; 
I have heard it seriously defended by men of the 
highest reputation for learning. 

Among the vast number, and endless variety 
of fakirs, or dervises, and pagan religionists of 
India, many have convents, governed by superiors, 
where vows of chastity, poverty and submission 
are made. So strange is the life led by these 
votaries that I doubt whether my description of 
it will be credited. I allude particularly to the 
people called Jauguis, a name which signifies 
united to God. Numbers are seen, day and 
night, seated or lying on ashes, entirely naked ; 
frequently under the large trees near talabs, or 
reservoirs of water, or in the galleries round the 
deuras, or idol temples. Some have hair hanging 
down to the calf of the leg, twisted and entangled 
into knots, like the coat of our shaggy dogs, 
especially those afilicted with the Polish disease 
called "plica Polonica. I have seen several who 
hold one, and some who hold both arms, per- 
petually lifted up above the head ; the nails of 
their hands being twisted, and longer than, half 
my little finger, with which I measured them. 
Their arms are as small and thin as the arms 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



22 TRAVELS IN THE 

of persons who die in a decline, because in so 
forced and unnatural a position^ they receive not 
sufficient nourishment ; nor can they be lowered 
so as to supply the mouth with food, the musdes 
having become contracted, and the articulations 
dry and stiff. Novices wait upon these fiuiatics 
and pay them the utmost respect, as persons 
endowed with extraordinary sanctity. No fury 
in the infernal regions can be conceived more 
horrible than the jauguis, with their naked and 
black skin, long hair, spindle arms, long twisted 
nails, and fixed in the posture which I have 
Mentioned. 

I have often met, generally on the territory of 
some r^ah, bands of these naked fakirs, hideout to 
behold. Some had their arms lifted up in the 
manner just described; the frightful hair of 
others either hung loosely, or was tied and 
twisted round their heads;, some carried asa 
Herculean club ; others had a dry and rough tiger 
skin thrown over their shoulders. In this trim 
I have seen them shameleasly walk, stark naked> 
through a large town, men, women and gnrls 
looking at them without any more ^ emotion than 
may be created when a hermit passes throu^k 
our streets. Females would often bring them alms 
^ith much devotion, doubtless believing that 
they were holy personages, tmore chaste and 
discreet than other men.* 

*These idle and pretended devotees (the fakirs) assem- 
ble sometimes in armies of ten or twelve thousand, and under 



Digitized by LjOOQIC \ 



MOGUL EMPIRE* 2S 

I was for a long time ^kigi»ted ^with a cele^ 
biated fakir, named Sarmet, who paraded the 

a pretext of making pilgrimages to certain temples^ lay 
whole countries under contribution. These saints wear no 
clothes^ are generally very robust, and convert the wives of 
of the less holy part of mankind to their own use, in their 
religious progresses. They admit any man of parts into 
dieir number, and to make the order the morerevered among 
the vulgar, they take great care to instruct their disciples ii^ 
every branch of knowledge. 

When this naked army of robust saints direct their march 
to any temple, the men of the provinces through which their 
road lies, very often fly before them, notwithstanding the 
sanctified character of the fakirs : but the women are in 
general more resolute, and not only remain in their dwel- 
lings, but apply frequently for the prayers of those holy per- 
sons which are found to be most effectual in cases of steri- 
lity. When a fakir is at prayers with the lady of the house, 
be leaves either his slipper or his staff at the door, which, if 
seen by the husband^ effectually prevents him from disturb- 
ing their devotion. 

Though the fakirs inforce with their arms, that reve- 
rence which the people of Hindostan have naturally for their 
order, to gain more respect, they inflict upon themselves, 
voluntary penances of very extraordinai;y kinds. These fellows 
sometimes hold up one arm in a fixed position till it becomes 
stiff, and remains in that situation duriqg the rest of their 
lives. Some clench their fists very hard, and keep them so 
till their nails ^row into their palms^ and appear through the 
back of their hands. Others turn their faces over one shoul- 
der and keep them in that situation, till they fix for ever 
tbeir heads looking backward. Many turn their eyes to the 
point of tbeir nose, till they have lost the power of looking in 
any other direction. These last pretend sometimes to see 
what they call the sacred fire, which vision, no d6ubt, pro- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



24 TRAVELS IN THE 

streets of Delhi as naked as when he came into the 
world. He despised equally the promises and 
the threats of Aureng-Zebe, and underwent at 
length the punishment of decapitation from his 
obstinate refusal to put on wearing apparel. 

Several of these fakirs undertake long pil- 
grimages, not only naked, but laden with heavy- 
iron chains, such as are put about the legs of 
elephants. I have seen others who in consequence 
of a particular vow, stood upright, during seven 
or eight days, without once sitting or lying down, 
and without any other support than might be 
afforded by leaning forward against a cord for a 
few hours in the night ; their legs in the mean 
time, were swollen to the size of their thighs* 
Others again I have observed standing steadily, 
whole hours together, upon their hands, the head 
down and the feet in the air. I might proceed to 
enumerate various other positious in which these 
unhappy men place their body, many of them so 
difficult and painful that they could not be 

ceeds from some disorder arising from the distortion of the 
optic nerves. 

Tt often appears to Europeans in India a matter [of some 
ridicule to converse with those distorted and naked philoso- 
phers ; though their knowledge and their external appearance 
exhibit a very striking contrast. Some are really what they 
they seem, enthusiasts; but others put on the character of 
sanctity, as a cloke for their pleasures. But what actually 
makes them a public nuisance, and the aversion of poor hus- 
bands is^ that the women think they derive some holiness to 
to themselves, from an intimacy with a fakir. — Dow. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



KOaUL EMPIRE. 25 

imiiated by our tumblers ; and all this, let it be 
recollected^ is performed from an assumed feelingr 
of piety, of which there is not so much as the 
shadow in any part of India. 

I confess that this gross superstition filled me, 
on my first arrival in Hindostan, with amazement. 
I knew not what to think of it. Sometimes I 
should have been disposed to consider the fakirs 
as remnants, if not as the founders, of the ancient 
and infamous sect of cynics, could I have dis- 
covered any thing in them but brutality and 
ignorance, and if they had not appeared to me 
vegetative rather than rational beings. At another 
time, I thought they might be honest though 
deluded enthusiasts, until I found that, in fact, 
they were in the most extensive sense of the word, 
destitute of piety. Again, I reflected that a life 
of vagrancy, idleness and independence, may have 
a powerful and attractive charm; or that the 
:vanity which intermingles itself with every motive 
of human action, and which may be discovered as 
clearly through the tattered mantle of a Diogenes 
as under the comely garb of a Plato, was pro- 
bably the secret spring that set so many strange 
engines in motion. 

The fakirs, it is said, exercise painful auste- 
rities in the confident hope that they will be 
•rajahs in their renascent state ; or, if they do. not 
become rajahs, that they shall be placed in a 
condition of life capable of more exquisite en- 
joyment than is experienced by those sovereign 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



26 T&AYSLS JN THE 

priaces : hut, a$ I have frequ^tly obserred to 
ihem^ how can it be believed that men submit to 
a life of so much misery for the sake of a second 
state of existence^ as short and uncertain as the 
Ami, and which cannot be expected to yield 
B much greater degree of hi^piness even to him 
who may be invested with the high dignity of 
rana, or whd inay resemble Joy- Singh or Jess- 
wintrSingh^ the two most powerful rajdis of 
India? I am not to be so easily deceived, said I 
to them ; either you are egregious fools, or you 
isxe actuated by some sinister views which you 
<;arefuUy hide from the world. 

Some of the fakirs enjoy the reputation of 
being peculiarly enlightened saints, perfect jau- 
^uis, and really united to God. These. are sup- 
posed to have entirely renounced the world, >and 
like our hermits they live a secluded life in a 
gemote garden, without ever visiting a town. 
When food is brought to them, they receive at : 
if ncme be offered to them it is conduded that the 
holy men can live without £9od, that they subsist 
by the favour of God, voudisafed on account of 
}>revious long fasts and other reHgious mortificar 
tions. Frequently these pious jauguis: are ab- 
•sorbed .in .profound meditation. It is pretended, 
^andone of the favoured saints himself assured 
me, that their souls are often rapt in an ex- 
tasy of several hours duration ; that their ex- 
4£rnal senses lose their functions ; that the jauguis 
are biesssd with a sight of God, who appears as a 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



rMOGUL EMPIRE. 27 

Kght ineffably white and vivid, and that fliey ex'-* 
perience transports of holy joy, and a contempt 
of temporal concerns which defy every power of 
description. My saintly informant added, that 
he could at pleasure fall into such a trance as he 
described, and not one of the individuals who are 
in the habit of visiting the jauguis doubts the 
reality of these vaunted extasies. It is possible 
that the imagination, distempered by continued 
fasts and uninterrupted solitude, may be brought 
into these illusions, or that the rapturous dreams 
of the fakirs may resemble the natural extasieU 
into which Cardan tells us rhe could fall whenever 
he pleased, especially as the fakirs practise jtome 
art in what they do, prescribing to themselvas 
Certain rules for the binding up of their senses by 
slow degrees. For example, they say that after 
having fasted several days upon bread and watCTf 
it is necessary to be alone in a sequestered spot, 4;d 
fix the eyes most steadily toward heav^i, and when 
they have been so rivetted for some time, to khfair 
them gradually, and then point them both in 
such a manner that they shall lookiat one and ihe 
same time upon the tip of the nose, both sides of 
that feature being ^qufdly seen ; and in this pos- 
ture the saint must continue firm, the two sides 
of the nose in even proportions remaining con- 
stantly within sight until the bright lumiatfry 
makes its appearance. 

The trance and the means t)f enjoying it form 
the grand mystery of the jai^is, as well as of 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



28 TRAVELS IN THE 

the soofies. I call it mystery, because they keep 
these things secret among themselves, and I should 
not have made so many discoveries had it not 
been for the aid of the pundit or Hindoo doctor 
whom Danechmend-khan kept in his pay, and who 
dared not conceal any thing from his patron ; my 
aga, moreover, was already acquainted with the 
doctrines of the soofies. 

I believe that extreme poverty, long fasts and 
perpetual austerities contribute something to the 
counterfeit appearances of these fanatics. Our 
friars and hermits must not suppose that on these 
points they surpass the jauguis or other Asiatic 
religionists. I can,' for instances, appeal to the 
lives and fasts of the Armenians, Copts, Greeks, 
Nestorians, Jacobites and Maronites ; compared 
to these people, our European devotees are mere 
novices , though it must be confessed from what I 
have myself experienced in India, that the pains 
of hunger are not so sensibly felt there as in our 
colder climates. 

I have now to give an account of certain fakirs 
totally diflPerent from the saints just described^ 
but who also are extraordinary personages. They 
almost continually perambulate the country, make 
light of every thing, aflPect to live without care, 
and to be possessed of most important secrets. 
The people imagine that these favoured beings 
are well acquainted with the art of making gold, 
and thatthey can prepare mercury in so admirable 
a mariner that a grain or two swallowed every 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE,^ 29 

mprning must restore a diseased body to vigorous 
health, and so strengthen the stomach that it may 
ftied with avidity and digest with ease. This is 
not all : when, two of these good jauguis meet, 
and can be excited to a spirit of emulation, they 
make such a display of the power of jauguisism, 
that it may well be doubted if Simon Magus, 
with all his sorceries, ever performed more sur- 
prising feats. They tell any person his thoughts, 
cause the branch of a tree to blossom and to bear 
fruit within an hour, hatch an egg in their bosom 
in less than fifteen minutes, producing whatever 
bird may be demanded, and make it fly about 
the room; and execute many other prodigies that 
need not be enumerated. 

I regret that I cannot bear my testimony to 
the truth of all that people report of these con- 
jurers. My aga sent for one of them, and pro- 
mised to give him three hundred rupees (about 
an hundred and fifty crowns) if on the following 
day he would tell him, as he said he could do> 
what might then be passing in his mind, which he 
would previously write down in his presence to 
prevent any suspicion of unfair dealing on his own 
part. I engaged, at the same time, to present 
him with five and twenty rupees, if he mentioned 
my thoughts; but the prophet did not again s^- 
proach our house. On another occasion I was 
also disappointed in my expectation of the com- 
pany of one of these egg-hatchers, to whom I had 
promised twenty, rupees. Notwithstanding, my 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



30 TRAVELS IN THE 

diligence to pry into erery thing, I havis never 
been so happy as to witness any marvellous per- 
foraiance> and whenever I happened to be present 
when a deed was done which excited the surprise 
of the spectators^ it was generally my misfortune 
to examine and to question until I ascertained 
that the cause lay in some cheat or slight of hand. 
I recollect detecting the gross deception of a 
fellow who pretended to find out by the rolling 
c^ a cup the person who had stolen my aga's 
money. 

But there are fakirs of a nmch more comely 
appearance than those whom we have been con* 
sidering^ and their lives and devotion seem less ex- 
travagant. They walk the streets^ barefooted and 
bar^eaded, girt with a scarf which hangs down 
to the knee^ and wearing a white cloth which passes 
under the right arm and goes over the left shoulder 
in t^e form of a mantle, but they are without aay 
under garment : their persons however are always 
well washed, and they appear cleanly in every re- 
spect. In generd they walk two and two with a 
very modest demeanour, holding in one hand a>small 
and pretty earthen tripod with two handles : they 
do not beg from shop to shop like many other 
fakirs, but enter freely into the houses of Hindoos, 
wliere they meet with a hearty welcome and an 
hospitable reception, their presence being esteemed 
a blessing to the family. Heaven defend him who 
accuses them of any offence, although ev^ry body 
koQM^ what takee place between the sanottfied 



Digitized by VJ-OOQIC 



MOGUL EBIPIRB. 31 

vbiters and the women of the hoi^e : thia^ how'^ 
erer, is considered the custom of the country^ and 
their sanctity is not the kss on that account. I do 
not indeed attach much importance to their tmns^ 
actions with the females of the house : such pirac- 
tices we know are not confined to the Great 
Mogul's domnions ; but what appears truly ridi- 
culous is their impertinent comparison of ihexBr 
selves wilJi our own clergy in India. I have 
sometimes derived much amusement from their 
weakness and vanity: I used to address them 
with great ceremony, and apparently with Ae 
most profound respecti after which they imme- 
diately observed to one another : '* the.franguy 
knows who we are ; he has resided many yearsin 
India, and is well aware that we are the padrys 
of the Hindoos*" But I dwell too longxtpon diese 
Jieatlien beggars, and shaU proceed to notiee the 
books of law and science. 

Do not be surprised if, notwldistanding my 
ignorance of Shanscrit(the language of thelearned, 
and possibly that of the ancient brahmins,) I yet 
say something of books written in that tongue. 
^y aga,.Danechmend^khan> partly (!rom my soti- 
citation and partly to gratify his own curiosity, 
took into his service one of the most celebrated 
pundits of India, who had formeriy belpnged to 
the household of Dara, Sh<AhJe}»infa eldest .son:; 
and not only wa& this mail my constant conqia- 
nkm duringa' period of three years, but he ^o 
introduced me to the society of <ither learned 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



32 TRAVELS IN THE 

pundits^ whom he attracted to the house. When 
weary of explaining to my aga the recent dis- 
coveries of Harvey and Pecquet in anatomy, and 
of discoursing on the philosophy of Gassendi and 
Descartes, which I translated to him in Persian 
(for this was my priucipal employment for five or 
six years) we had generally recourse to our pundit, 
who, in his turn, was called upon to reason in his 
own manner, and to communicate his fables; these 
he related with all imaginable gravity without 
ever smiling ; but at length we became disgusted 
both with his tales and childish arguments. 

The Hindoos then pretend that God, whom 
they call Achar, The Immoveable or Immutable, 
has sent to them four books, to which they give the 
name of beids, a word signifying science, because 
according to them, these books comprehend all the 
sciences. The first of the books is named Ahtre- 
bun beid ; the second, Huchur beid ; the third. 
Rug beid; and the fourth, Sam beid. These 
books enjoin that the people shall be distinguished 
or divided, as in fact they are, into four tribes : 
first, the tribe of brahmins, or interpreters of the 
law; secondly, the tribe of chehteree, or war- 
riors; thirdly, the tribe of bice, or merchants 
and tradesmen, commonly called banians ; and 
fourthly, the tribe of sooder, or artisans and la- 
bourers* These different tribes are not permit- 
ted to intermarry ; that is to say, a brahmin is 
forbidden to marry a chehteree ; and the same in- 
junction holds good in regard to the other tribes. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 33 

The Hindoos believe in the transmigration of 
souls, and hold it illegal to kill or eat any animal; 
an exception being made, however, in favour of a 
few of the second tribe, provided the flesh eaten 
be not that of the cow or peacock. For these 
two animals they feel a peculiar respect, particu- 
larly for the cow, imagining that it is by holding 
to a cow's tail they are to cross the river which 
separates this life from the next. Possibly their 
ancient legislators saw the shepherds of Egypt in a 
similar manner pass the river Nile, holding with the 
left hand the tail of a buffalo or ox, and carrying 
in the right a stick for the guidance of the animal ; 
or this superior regard for the cow may more pro- 
bably be owing to her extraordinary usefulness, 
as being the animal which supplies them with 
milk and butter (a considerable part of their ali- 
ment) and which may be considered the source of 
husbandry, consequently the preserver of life 
itself. It ought likewise to be observed, that 
owing to the great deficiency of pasture land in 
India it is impossible to maintain large numbers of 
cattle ; the whole therefore would soon disappear 
if animal food were eaten in any thing like the 
proportion in which it is consumed in France and 
England, and the country would thus remain un- 
cultivated. The heat is so intense, and the ground 
so parched, during eight months of the year, that 
the beasts of the field, ready to die of hunger, feed 
on every kind of filth like so many «wine. It was on 
. account of the scarcity of cattle that Jehan-Guire 

VOL. n. D 



> 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



34 TRAVELS IN tHE 

at the tec^eH of t^ b^ahmiiis, iAMed aA ledibt to 
forbid the killing ^f Ineasts ef pasture for a eertliiii 
number of years ; and Bot bng since they pre- 
sented a similar petitioik to Aiiteng^Z^be^ ofihit^g 
to him a eonsiderabte sum of money t6 eiisure hk 
compliance. They urged that the negloet^ aikd 
ruinous condition of many tracts ef countlry during 
the last fifty or sixty years^ was attributable teethe 
paucity and deamess of oxen. 

Perhaps the first legislators of India hoped 
Aat the interdiction of aiiimal food would produce 
a beneficial effect upon the character of the people> 
and that they might be brought to exercise less 
cruelty toward one another when required by a 
positive precept to treat the brute creation with 
humanity. The docfarine of the transmigration of 
souls secured the treatment of animals, by leading 
to the belief tliat no animal cafn be kifled or eatctti 
without incurring the danger of kiUing or eatYng 
some tocestor^ than which a more heinous crime 
cannot be committed. It may be also that the 
briihmins were influenced by the consideraticm, 
that in thenr climate the flesh of cows or oxen iis 
neither savoury nor wholesome except for a short 
time during winter. 

The beids render it obligatory upon every 
Hindoo to say his prayers with his facetunied to 
the east, thrice m the twenty 4bur hours ; in the 
morning, at noon and at night. The whole of lis 
body must also be washed three times^ or at leiitst 
before every meal ; cmd he is taught that it is 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



Aoau£ IMPIKE. 35 

lAoTt iseritorioiis to perform his sbltttbns and to 
repeat his prayers in running than in stagnant 
water. Here again regard vtas probably bad to 
what is not ooly proper but highly important 
is such a elimate as that of jHhidostan. This, 
lumever, is found «ii ineonveoiient law to those 
who happen to lite in cold eoantrSes^ and I have 
met in my travels with some who placed their 
lives in imminent danger by a strict observanee of 
that law, by plunging into die rivers orreservoini 
within their reach, or if none were sufficiently 
near, by lowing large pafls of water over their 
Iliads. Sometimes I objected to their religion, 
that it eontakied a kw which it would not be 
poMiMe to ^(bserre in cold climates during the 
winter season, which was, in my mind, a clear 
ppoof that it possessed no divine original, but waJ 
merely a system of human invention. Their 
answer was amusing eiK>ugh. *' We pretend not,"^ 
they replied, ^ that our law is of universal appli- 
oertion. God intended it only lor us, and this is 
ibe rei^son why we cannot receive a foreigner into 
€iar religion* We doooit even say that yours is 
a M(ft religion : it un&y be adapted to your wants 
md <^rcum8tanoes, God having, no doubt, ap- 
pointed many different ways of going to heaven.** 
I found it impossible to convince them that the 
ChriatiMi faith was designed for <lie whole emtk, 
and thei» was mere (able and gross fabrication. 

The beids teach that God having determineH 
to ci'eate flie world, would not execute his pur- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



36 TRAVBLS IN THE 

pose immediately, but first created tbree perfect 
beings ; one was Burmbk, a name wbicb signifies 
penetrating into all things ; the second, Beschen^ 
that is, existing in all things ; and the thirds 
Mehahdeu or the mighty lord. By means of Burmhi 
he created the world ; by means of Beschen he 
upholds it ; and by means of Mehahdeu he will 
destroy it. It was Burmh4 who, by God's com- 
mand, published the four beids, and for this 
reason he is represented in some temples with four 
heads. 

I have conversed with European missionaries 
who thought that the pagans have some idea of 
the mystery of the Trinity, and maintained that 
the beids state in direct terms that the three 
beings, though three persons, are ojie God. 
This is a subject on which I have frequently 
heard the pundits dilate, but they explain them- 
selves so obscurely that I never could clearly 
comprehend their opinion. I have heard some of 
them say, that the beings in question are in reality 
three very perfect creatures, whom they call 
dewtahs, without being able, however, properly to 
explain what they mean by this word dewtah, 
like our ancient idolaters, who could never, in 
my opinion, explain what they meant by the 
names genii and numina, which were probably 
equivalent to the dewtahs of the Indians. I 
have also discoursed with other pundits distin- 
guished for learning, who said that these three 
beings are really one and the same God^ consi- 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 37 

dere4 under three different characters, as the 
creator, upholder, and destroyer of all things; 
but they said nothing of three distinct persons in 
one only God. 

I was acquainted with the reverend father 
Roa, a German Jesuit and missionary at Agra^ 
who had made great proficiency in the Shanscrit. 
He assured me that the books of the Hindoos not 
only state that there is one God in three persons, 
but that the second person has been nine times 
embodied in flesh. He added that when he was at 
Schiraz^ on his return to Rome, a Carmelite father 
in that city succeeded, with much address, in ascer- 
taining that the following doctrines are held by 
the Hindoos. The second person in the Trinity 
has been, according to them, nine times incar- 
nate in consequence of various evils in the world, 
from which he delivered mankind. The eighth 
incarnation was the most remarkable; for the 
Hindoos say that the world having been inthralled 
by the power of giants, it was rescued by the 
second person, incarnated and born of a virgin 
at midnight, the angels singing in the air, and 
the skies raining flowers during that whole 
night. This in some degree savours of Chris- 
tianity, but the fable returns again; for it is 
added that this incarnate god began by killing a 
giant who flew in the air, and was so huge as to 
obscure the sun : his fall caused the whole earth 
to tremble, and by his weight he so penetrated it> 
that he tumbled at once into hell. The incarnate 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



38 TiUVBLS IN TUB 

dditji wouiided m the side ia the ^xm^ict with 
this mighty g;iant £eXi aUcv but by his Ml put Us 
enemies to flight. He arose agaiu^ and «fti» de^ 
liyering the world ascended into h6a?en> and W 
t)iifme of his woundi he is geiierally known by the 
app^lation of wounded in the side. The tenth 
hiqaroation, say the Hindoos^ without however 
any wmrrdnty ftora the beidsj will have lor its 
ol^ect the emancipation of mankind from the 
tyranny <>f muhemmiedans^ and it wiU take place 
at the time when, According to our oaicBAataon^ 
antichrist is to s^pear. 

They say aliio that the Uiird perseri of the 
trinity has manifested himself to die world ; 4^e 
foIloWitig story is related of him. The dai|ghter 
of a certain king» when she had reached the ag^ 
of puberty^ was desked by her £Either to mention 
the person whom she felt disposed to marry^ and 
haying answered that she would be united to 
ftone btit a divine being, the tlurd person of tlie 
trinity appeared in the same instant to the king 
in the form of fire. He presently apprised ld» 
daughter of this happy circumstance^ and she withr 
outhesitationconsented to the marriage. The divine 
personage, though still assuming a fiery appear- 
ance^ was invited to the king's council, and findii^ 
that the privy counsellors opposed the matc^^ he 
first set fire to their beards, and then burnt them 
together with the royal household^ after wbich he 
parried the princess. In regard to the seoond 
p^rson^ the Hindoos say that lus first incaroiation 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



WM ift the niklure of 4 lio;^ th^ seeond in tbftt of 
ft bog, the thif d in that pf 9 tortoise^ the fourth h 
thit of » «eifeBfc th« fifth in th^t of a dwatHsh 
fetnak bpafamin^ only a cnlnt in heights the 
sixth was in the iorm of a monstk^ui man lion« 
the if9?enth in that of a dragon^ the eighth as al- 
letady described, the ninth in tib nature of au 
ape^ md the tenth is to be in thg person of a 
^mighty warrior. 

J entertidn no doubt that th^ re^^i^nd father 
JEUa deriyed from the beids Im knowledge of the 
doetrines held by the Hindoos^ and that the aei- 
eount he gave me forms the bftsis of their mytho- 
logy. I had written at considerable Ifs^gth ^pon 
this flubjeot, sketched the %ures pf several of the 
idols placed in the^ temples, and obtained the 
Shanscrit characters ; but finding that the priur 
eipal matter of my manuscript is contuned in the 
China lUmtrata of Fatl»sr Kirker^ (who obtliined 
much of his information when at Rome from Father 
Boa^) I deem it sufficient to recommend t^at book 
to your perusal I must observe, ho^vever, that 
the word ^'incamatfon,*' ^j^pioyed by the reverend 
&ther was new to me, having never seen it 
used in the same direct sense. Some pundits 
^iplmned their doctniie to me in this manner^ 
StntaoAy God appieared in the forvf^s which a^ 
^nentifimd^ ^nd in tho^ fi^rms p^rfom^d ^U the 
wonders which have been rels^tpd. Other punditfi 
said that the souls of certain gr^at n^ei^ whp^ wp 
oca wont to oUl hero^i hfid pas§ed into th$ dif^- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



40 TRAVELS IN TUB 

ferent bodies spoken of, and that they hud becMM 
dewtahs ; or, to speak in the phraseology of die 
idolaters of old, they had become powerful divi* 
nities, numina, genii, and daemons ; or if you will^ 
spirits and fairies ; for I know not now else to 
render the Indian word dewtah; but this second 
explanation comes much to the same thing as the 
iirst, inasmuch as the Hindoos believe that tb^ 
souls are constituent parts of the deity. 

Other pundits again gave me a more refined 
interpretation. They said that the incarnations 
or apparitions mentioned in their books, having 
a mystic sense, and being intended to explain the 
various attributes of God, oughtnot^tO'be under* 
stood literally. Some of the most learned of 
those doctors frankly acknowledged to me that 
nothing can be conceived more fabulou^i than all 
the incarnations, and that they were only the iix* 
vention of legislators for the sake of retaining 
the people in some sort of religion^ > ^On the 
supposition that our souls are portions.^ of the 
deity, a doctrine common to all Hindoos, must 
not (observed the pundits) the reality of those 
incarnations instead of being made a mysterious 
part of religion be exploded by sound philo- 
sophy? for, in respect of our souls, we are 
God, and therefore it would in fact be ourselves 
who had imposed upon ourselves a religious wor- 
ship, and a belief in the transmigration of souls 
in paradise and in hell. 

I am not less indebted to Messrs. Henry Lot 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 41 

and Abraham Roger^ than to the reverend fathers 
Kirker and Roa. I had collected a vast number 
of particulars concerning the Hindoos, that I 
have since found in the books written by thos^ 
gentlemen, and which I could not have arranged 
in the order which they have observed without 
great labour and difficulty. It is not necessary, 
therefore, that I could do more than touch briefly 
on the studies and the science of this people ; 
which I shall do in a general and desultory 
manner. 

The town of Benares, seated on the Ganges, 
in a beautiful situation, and in the midst of an 
extremely fine and rich country, may be con* 
aidered the general school of the Hindoos. It is 
the Athens of India, whither resort the brahmins 
^nd religionists ; who are the only persons who 
apply their minds to study.* The town contains 
no colleges or regular classes, as in our universities^ 
but resembles rather the schools of the ancients ; 
the masters being. dispersed over different parts of 
the town in private houses, and principally in the 
gardens of the suburbs, which the rich merchante 
permit them to occupy. Some of these masters 
have four disciples, others six or seven, and the 
most eminent may have twelve or fifteen ; but 
this is the largest number. It is usual for the 
pupils to remain ten or twelve years under their 
respective preceptors, during which time the work 

* See note I at the end of the volume.. , 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



43 TRAVBLS IN TBI 

of instruction prooMds rerj slowly; %m Qm 
generatity of Indians are of an indolent dispoiHio^ 
owingt in a great measure, to their Atei and tli^ 
liMt of the country. Feeling no spiiit of eamr 
latioD, and entertaiimig no hope that honours c^ 
emolument may be the reward of extraordhiary 
attainments^ the scholars content themselves wttb 
the customary and idle mode of pursuing their 
studies, while eating kicfaery, a mingled mass of 
leguminous plants prepared for them by deiire of 
the rich banians. 

The first thing taught is the Shanserit, a 
language known only to the pundits, and totally 
diiffisrent from that which is spoken in Hindostaa* 
It is of die Shanscrit that Father Kirker baa 
published an alphabet, which he received from 
Father Roa^ The name signifies pure Iwgua^^ ; 
and becaose the Hindoos believe that the four 
sacred bodks given to them by God> through the 
medimas of Burmhd, were originally published iH 
Shanscrit, diey call it The haly and ^im kmguttg&. 
They pretend, but I know not on what authority^ 
that it is as ancient as Burmhik himself, whose age 
they reckon by ladks, or hundreds of thousands of 
yeani. That it is eictremely old, it is imposssible 
to deny, the books of their religion, which ape of 
unquestionable antiquity, being all w:ritten in 
Shanscrit. it has also its anthers on philoBophy, 
works on medicme written in verse, and many 
other kinds of books, with which a large hall 
at Benares is entirely filled. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 43 

Wfa^i the scholars have acquired a knowle<l|;<e 
of this ancient and difficult language, difficult 
because without a good grammar, they generally 
study the poordn, whidh is an abridgemcmt and 
interpretation of the beids; those books being of 
great bulk, at least if they were the beids which 
were shewn to me at Secures. They are so 
scarce that my aga, notwithstanding all hi« dt- 
l^nce, has not succeeded in purchasing a cc^y. 
The Hindoos indeed conceal tiiem with much 
eare^ lest they should fall into the hands of thd 
muhammedutis, and be burnt, as frequently haa 
happened. 

After ike pooran, some of the students apply 
their minds to philosophy, wherein they certainly 
make very little progress. I have already ui« 
timated that the Indians are of a slow and indolent 
temper, and strangers to the excitement which the 
possdbility of adyancement in an honourable pro- 
fession produces among the anembers of European 
unirersities. 

Among the philosophers who have flourished 
m Hindostan six bear a great aiame ; and from 
l^ese have sprang the six sects, which cause 
much jealousy and dispute, the pundits of 
each pretending that the doctrines of their 
particular sect are the soundest, and most in 
conformity to the beids. A seventh sect has 
arisen, called Baut^ which again is the parent of 
twelve others; but this sect is not so eontti^ 
demble as the former : its adherents jure despsed 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



44 TRAVELS IN THE 

and hated ^ censured as irreligious and atheistical, 
and kad a life peculiar to themselves. 

All the books of the Hindoos speak of first 
principles ; but each in a manner totally different 
from the others. Some say that every thing 
is composed of small bodies which are indivisible, 
not by reason of their solidity, hardness, and 
resistance, but because of their smallness ; and 
upon this notion they build many other hypo- 
theses, which have an affinity to the theories of 
Democritus and Epicuriis ; but their opinions are 
expressed in so loose and indeterminate a manner 
that it is difficult to ascertain their meaning ; and 
considering the extreme ignorance of the pundits, 
those even reputed the most learned, it may be 
fairly doubted whether this vagueness be not 
rather attributable to the expounders than to the 
authors of the books. 

Others say that every thing is composed of 
matter and form, but not one of the doctors 
explains himself clearly about matter, and still less 
about form. They are so far intelligible, however, 
as to shew me that they understand neither the 
one nor the other ia the same manner as these 
terms are usually explained in our schools, where 
we speak . of educing form out of the power 
of matter; for they always take their examples 
from artificial things, such as that of a. vessel of 
soft clay, which a potter turns and forms into 
various shapes. 

Some hold that all is composed of the four 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 4S> 

elements and out of nothing ; yet they give not' 
the least explanation concerning mixtion and. 
transmutation. And as to nothing, which is 
nearly tantamount to our privation^ they admit I 
know not how many sorts, which I imagine thei 
pundits neither comprehend themselves, nor can 
make intelligible to others. 

Some maintain that light, and darkness are the 
first principles, and in support of this opinion the 
doctors make a thousand foolish and confused 
observations; alleging reasons disowned by true 
philosophy, and delivering long discourses, which 
would suit the ear only of the vulgar and illiterate. 
There, are others again, who admit privation 
as a principle, or rather, the privations which they 
distinguish from nothing, and of which they make 
a long enumeration, so useless and unphilosophical 
that I can scarcely believe their authors would 
employ the pen about such trifling opinions 
and that consequently it cannot be contained in 
their books. 

Many, in fine, pretend that every thing is the 
result of chances, and of these they also have 
a long, strange^ and tedious catalogue^ worthy 
only of an ignorant and low babbler. 

In regard to all these principles, it is agreed by 
the pundits that they are eternal. The pro- 
duction from nothing does not seem to have oc- 
curred to their mind, any more than to the mind 
of many of the ancient philosophers. There i^ 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



46 TRAVBUS IN TRE 

one of tbe sages, howerer, who^ tiiey prctelxd^ hai^^ 
said sometfaing on the subject ^ 

On physic the Hindoos haire a greAt nutntor- 
of small books^ which are rather eollectiona of^ 
i«eipes than regular treatises. The most ameient 
and the most esteemed is written in verse« I shall' 
observe^ by the way^ that their practioe diflfi^s^^ 
eventially frmn ours^ and that it is grounded on 
die following acknowledged principles : ap&itifliilli 
wi^alevear requires no great nourishment ; t^ 
BWfiteAgn remedy for sickness is nbstinenee;' 
nothing is worse for a sick body than meat bn^^ 
for it soon corrupts in the stomach of one aflidted 
with fever; a patient should be bled only on 
extraordinary occasions, and where the ftecesmtf 
h tacst obvious — as when there is reason t^ f^ 
prehend a brain fever, or when an inflamfmation'Of 
the ^hest^ liver, or kidneys, has taken place. 

W^th^ diese modes of treatment be judi-» 
aious, I leave to our learned physicians to decide ; 
1 shall qnly remark that they are succe»iful id 
Hindostan, and that the mogixl aiid muhammedan 
pkymciaM> who IbUow the rules K)f Aviccnna and 
Averrioes^ adopt them no less than the Hindoos^ 
especially in regard to abstioenoe from meat broth« 
The moguls, ft is true, are rather more given to 
tbe practice 4>{ bleeding than the pagans; for 
where they apprehended the inflammations jmt 
mentioned, they genially bleed once or twice^ 
not in the trying manner of the modern prao* 



Digitized by 



Google 



J 



dtSmiers of Goa i^ Pbi^h, Ibut odf^uidy, lSk» <^ 
ancients; taking eighteen ot twenty omu^d ol 
Moo^j sonietimei^ evien to ftiinting; th«s fre« 
qtiently subAuing the disease at the G6mmenie^ 
nient, accoii^ing to the advice of Galen^ ami as i 
have witnessed^n several cases. 

It is not surprising that the Hindoos txnde^' 
ttand nothing of anatomy. They never open die 
Ibody eiiSier of man or beast^ and the pagans in am 
hoAs^hold always run away^ with anwiement aad 
hotr^f whenever I opened a liviag goat or sheep 
for the purpose of explaining to my aga the 
i^eulation ef the Uood, and shewing him Ihe 
vessels, discovered by Pecquet^ tlnrough which the 
<&yie is eon^yed to the right ventricle of tiie 
heart* Yet notwithstanding their profound ^^no- 
tailed of the subject^ Ae Hindoos aflSrm that 
%he nmnbdr of veins in the human body is fim 
tliousand, neither more nor less ; just as if Hhey 
bad carefully reckoned them* 

in regard to astronomy^ ike Hindoos hme 
Iheir tdAAes, according to whiclr they fareteU 
eclipses, not perhaps with the minnite exactness 
t}f European astronomers, but stiU vridh giei^ 
a^uracy. They reason, however in the same 
ndiculons way cm the lunar as on the solar 
-eelipse, believing that the obscuration is caused 
tiy a black, filthy and misdiievoas dewtiJ^ 
fiaimed Rach, who takes possession of the moon 
jind fills her with infection. The Hindoos aim 
maintain, mudi on the same ground^ that the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



48 TftAYSLS IN THE 

mbon is four hundred thousand coses, that is above, 
fifty thousand leagues higher than the sun ; that 
she is a luminous body^ and that we receive frona^ 
her a certain vital liquid secretion, which collects, 
principidly in the brain, and descending thence as 
from its source into all the members of the body, 
euables them to exercise their respective functions. 
They believe, likewise that the sun, moon and stars 
are all so many dewtahs,; that the darktiess of 
ni^ht is caused by the sun retiring behind the 
Someire, an imaginary mountain placed iu the 
centre of the earth, inform like an inverted sugar 
loaf, and an altitude of I know not how many 
thousand leagues : so that they never enjoy the 
light of day but when the sun leaves the back of 
this mountain.'* . 

In geography the Hindoos are equally unin- 
structed. They believe that the world is flat and 
triangular ; that it is composed of seven distinct 
habitations, differing in beaut/t perfection and 
inhabitants, and that each is surrounded by its 
own peculiar sea ; that one sea is of milk ; another 
of sugar ; a third of butter ; a fourth of wine ; 
and so on: so that sea and land occur alter- 
nately until you arrive at the seventh stage 
from the foot of the Someire mountain, which 
is in the centre. The first habitation, or that 
nearest to the Someire, is inhabited by dewtahs 
who are very perfect; the second has also 
dewtahs for inhabitants, but they are less per- 
fect ; and so it is with the rest, whose inha- 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 49 

bitants are less and less perfect^ until the 
seventh, which is our earth, inhabited by men 
infinitely less perfect than any of the dewtahs ; 
and finally^ the Hindoos say that the whole of 
this world is supported on the heads of a number 
of elephants, whose occasional motion is the csUisb 
of earthquakes. 

If the renowned sciences of the ancient brah- 
mins consisted of all the extravagant follies which 
I have detailed, mankind have indeed been de- 
ceived in the exalted opinion they have long enter- 
tained of their wisdom. I should find it difficult 
to persuade myself that such was the fact, did I 
not consider that the religion of the Hindoos has 
existed from time immemorial; that it is written 
in Shanscrit, as are likewise all their scientific 
books; that the Shanscrit has long become a 
dead language^ understood only by the learned; 
and that its origin is unknown : all which proves 
a very great antiquity. 

When going down the river Ganges, I passed 
through Benares, and called upon the chief of the 
pundits, who resides in that celebrated seat of 
learning. He is a fakir so eminent for knowledge 
that Shah-Jehan, partly on that consideration, and 
partly to gratify the rajahs, granted him a pension 
of two thousand rupees. He is a stout, well made 
man, and his dress consists of a white silk scarf, 
tied about the waist, and hanging half way down 
the leg, and of another tolerably large scarf, of 
red silk, which he wears as a cloak on his shoul- 

VOL. II. E 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



50 TRAVELS IN THE 

ders. I had often seen him in this scanty dress 
at Delhi, in the assembly of the omrahs sad 
before the king, and met him in the streets ^tfaer 
on foot or in a palanquin. During one year he 
was in the constant habit of visiting my aga^ 
to whom he paid his court in the hope that 
he would exercise his influence to obtain the 
pension of which Aureng-Z6be, anxious to appear 
a true muselman, deprived him on coming to tte 
throne. I formed consequently a close intimacy 
with this distinguished personage, with whom I 
had long and frequent conversations ; and when I 
visited him at Benares he was most kind and 
attentive, giving me a collation in the university 
library, to which he invited the six most learned 
pundits in the town. Finding myself in such 
excellent company, I determined to ascertain their 
opinion of the adoration of idols, I told them 
I was leaving India scandalized at the prevalence 
of a worship which outraged common sense, and 
was totally un^X)rthy such philosophers as I had 
then the honour of addressing. " We have indeed 
in our temples," said they, "' a great variety of 
images, such as that of Burmh^, of Mehadeu^ of 
Genich and of Gavani, who are the principal and 
the most perfect of the dewtahs: and we have 
many others esteemed less perfect. To all these 
images we pay great honour; prostrating our 
bodies, and presenting to them, with much cere- 
mony, flowers, rice, scented oil, saffron and other 
similar articles. Yet do we not believe that these 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EBCPIRE. 51 

statues are BurmM or Bechen; but merely their 
images and representations. We shew them de- 
ference only for the sake of the deity whom they 
represent, and when we pray it is not to the statue 
but to that deity. Images are admitted in our 
temples, because we conceive that prayers are 
offered up with more devotion where there is 
something before the eyes that fixes the mind; 
but in fact we acknowledge that God alone is 
absolute, that he only is the omnipotent Lord." 

I have neither added to, nor taken from, the 
answer that the pundits gave me ; but I suspect 
it was so framed as to correspond with the ideas 
of the Roman Catholic church. The observations 
made to me by other learned brahmins were 
totally different. 

I then turned the conversation to the subject 
of chronology, and my company soon shewed me 
a far higher antiquity than ours. They would 
not say that the world was without a begin* 
ning; but the great age they gave it sounded 
almost as if they had pronounced it eternal. Its 
duration, said they, is to be reckoned by four 
jogues, or distant ages; not ages composed, as 
with us, of an hundred years, but of one hundred 
lacks, that is to say, of an hundred times one 
hundred thous^id years. I do not recollect exr 
actly the number of years assigned to each jogue, 
but I know that the first, called Suttee jogue, 
continued during a period of five and twenty lac^^ 
of years; that the second, called Tirtah Jogue, 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



52 TRAVELS IN THE 

lasted above twelve lacks ; the third, called Dwal 
paar Jogue, subsisted, if I mistake not, eight lacks 
and sixty-four thousand years; and the fourth, 
called Collee Jogue is to continue I forget how 
many lacks of years.* The first three jogues, 
they said, and much of the fourth, are passed 
away, and the world will not endure so many ages 
as it has done, because it is destined to perish at 
the termination of the fourth jogue, when alj 
things will return to their first principles. Having 
pressed the pundits to tell me the exact age of the 
world, they tried their arithmetical skill over and 
over again; but finding that they were sadly per- 
plexed, and even at variance as to the number of 
lacks, I satisfied myself with the general informa- 
tion that the world is astonishingly old. Whenever 
any of these learned brahmins is urged to state the 
facts on which he grounds his belief of this vast 
antiquity, he entertains the enquirer with a set of 
ridiculous fables, and finishes by asserting that it 
is so stated in the beids. 

I then tried them on the nature of their dew- 
tahsj but their explanation was very confused. 
These gods consist, they said, of three kinds, 
good, bad, and indifierent. Some of the learned 
believe that the dewtahs are composed of fire; 
others, that they are formed of light ; and many 
are of opinion that they are biapek ; a word of 
which I could obtain no clearer explication than 
than that God is biapek ; that our soul is biapek ; 
• See note K at the end of the volume. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 53 

and that whatever is biapek is incorruptible and 
independent of time and place. There are pundits 
again^ who, according to my learned host and his 
companions, pretend that dewtahs are only por- 
tions of the divinity ; and lastly, others consider 
them as certain species of distinct divinities, dis- 
persed over the surface of the globe. 

I remember that I also questioned them on 
the nature of the '* lengue cherire," which some 
of their authors admit ; but I could elicit no more 
from them than what I had long before learnt 
from our pundit ; namely, that the seeds of 
plants, of trees, and of animals, do not receive a 
new creation; that they have existed, scattered 
abroad, and intermixed with other matter, from 
the first creation of the world ; and that they are 
nothing more or less, not only in potentiality, as 
it is called, but in reality, than plants, trees and 
animals entirely perfect, but so minute, that their 
separate parts only become visible when being 
brought to their proper place, and there receiving 
nourishment, they develope and increase : so that 
the seed of an apple or pear tree is a lengue- 
cherire, a small apple or pear tree, perfect in all 
its essential parts ; and the seed of a horse, of an 
elephant or of a man is a lengue-cherire, a small 
horse, a small elephant or a small man, which 
requires only life and nourishment in order to its 
visibly assuming its proper form. 

In conclusion, I shall explain to you the 
mystery of a dispute which has latterly made 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



54 TRAVELS IN THE 

great noise in Hindostan, inasmuch as certain pun- 
dits or pagan doctors, had instilled it into the 
minds of Dara and Sultan Sujah, the elder sons 
of Shah-Jehan. 

You are doubtless acquainted with the doctrine 
of many of the ancient philosophers concerning 
that great life-giving principle of the world, of 
which they argue that we and all living creatures 
are so many parts : if we carefully examine the 
writings of Plato and Aristotle, we shall pro- 
bably discover that they inclined towards this 
opinion. This is the almost universal doctrine of 
the pagan pundits of India, and it is this same 
doctrine which forms the subject matter of dispute 
among the soofies and the greater part of the 
literati of Persia, and which is set forth in Persian 
poetry in very exalted and emphatic language, in 
their goult-chen-raz, or garden of mysteries. 
This was also the opinion of Fludd whom our 
great Gassendi has so ably refuted; and it is 
a doctrine in which the greater part of our alchy- 
mists have been lost. Now these disputers, or 
Hindoo pundits, push the incongruities in question 
further than all the philosophers, and pretend that 
God, or that supreme being whom they call Achar 
(immovable, unchangeable) has not only pro- 
duced life from his own substance, but also 
generally every thing material or corporeal in the 
universe, and that this production is not formed 
simply after the manner of efficient causes, but as 
a spider which produces a web from its own 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 55 

^avel, and withdraws it at pleasure. The crea- 
tion then say these visionary doctors, is no- 
thing more than an extraction or extension of 
the individual substance of God, of those filaments 
which he draws from his own bowels; and, in 
likp manner, destruction is merely the recalling of 
that divine substance and filaments into himself; 
$o that the last day of the world, which they call 
maperl^ or pralea and in which they believe every 
beipg will be annihilated, will be the general 
reqalling of those filaments which God had before 
drawn forth from himself. — There is, therefore, say 
they, nothipg real or substantial in that which we 
think we see, hear or smell, taste or touch ; the 
whole of this world is, as it were, an illusory 
dream, inasmuch as all that variety which 
appears to our outward senses, is but one only 
and the same thing, which is God himself; in the 
same manner as all those different numbers, of 
ten, twenty, a hundred, a thousand, &c. are but 
the frequent repetition of the same unit. — But ask 
thedDQi some reason for this idea; beg them to 
explain how this extraction and reception of 
substance occurs, or to account for that apparent 
variety ; or how it ip that God not being corporeal 
but biapek, as they allow, and incorruptible, 
he can be thus divided into so many portions of 
body and soul; they will answer you only with 
some fine similes : — That God is as an immense 
ocean in which many vessels of water are in con- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



56 TRAVELS IN THE 

tinual motion; let these vessels go where they^ 
will^ they always remain in the same ocean, in the 
same water ; and if they should break, the water 
they contain would then be united to the whole, 
to that ocean of which they were but parts. — Or 
they will tell you that it is with God as with the 
light, which is the same every where, but causes 
the objects on which it falls to assume a hundred 
different appearances, according to the various 
colours, or forms of the glasses, through which it 
passes. — They will never attempt to satisfy you, I 
say, but with such comparisons as th^se, which 
bear no proportion with God, and which serve 
only to blind an ignorant people. In vain wiU 
you look for any solid answer. If one should 
reply, that these vessels might float in a water 
similar to their own, but not in the same ; and 
that the light all over the world is indeed similar, 
but not the same, and so on to other strong 
objections, which may be made to their theory, 
they have recourse continually to the same similes, 
to fine words, or, as the soofies, to the beautiful 
poems of their goult-chen-raz. 

Now, I would ask, in allusion to all this fine 
tissue of extravagant folly on which I have re- 
marked ; to that childish panic of which I have 
spoken above ; to that superstitious piety and 
compassion toward the sun in order to deliver it 
from the mahgnant and dark dewtah; to that 
trickery of prayers, of ablutions, of dippings, and 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 57 

of alms, either cast into the river, or bestowed on 
brahmins ; to that mad and infernal hardihood of 
women to burn themselves with the body of those 
husbands whom frequently they have hated while 
alive ; to those various and frantic practices of the 
fakirs ; and lastly, to all that fabulous trash of 
their beids and other books: I would ask, in 
allusion to all this, do you not think I have reason 
to take as a motto to this letter, the wretched 
fruit of so many voyages and so many reflections, 
a motto of which the modern satirist has so well 
known how to catch and convey the idea without 
so long a journey : " There are no opinions too 
extravagant and ridiculous to find reception in 
the mind of man.** 

You will do me a kindness by delivering 
Mr. Chapelle's letter into his own hands ; it was 
he who first obtained for me that acquaintance 
with your intimate and illustrious friend, Mr. 
Gassendi, which has since proved so advantageous 
to me. I am so much obliged to him for this 
favour that I cannot but love and remember him 
wherever my lot may be cast. I also feel myself 
under much obligation to you, and am bound to 
honour you all my life, not only on account of 
the partiality you have manifested toward me, 
but also for the valuable advice contained in your 
frequent letters, by which you have aided me 
during my journies, and for your goodness in hav- 
ing sent me so disinterestedly, and gratuitously 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



68 TRAVJSLS IN THE 

a Gidlection of books to the extremity of the 
worlds whither my curiosity had led me ; while 
those of whom I requested them^ who might have 
been paid with money which I had left at Mar- 
^illes^ and who in common politeness should have 
4ient them,' deserted me and laughed at my lettersj 
looking on me as a lost mw whom they were 
never more to see. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 59 



A LETTER SENT FROM SCHIRAZ IN PERSIA^ TO MR. 
CHAPELLE, ON THE INTENTION EXPRESSED BY THAT 
GENTLEMAN TO RESUME HIS STUDY OF THE DOC- 
TRINE OF ATOMS AND OF THE NATURE OF THE 
HUMAN UNDERSTANDING. 

MY DEAR I^RIEND, 10 June, 1668. 

I ALWAYS thought, with M.Luillier, that the life you 
were leading, so much to the displeasure of your 
friends, ought to be ascribed only to the thought- 
lessness of youth, and that you would at length re- 
sume your studies with more vigour than ever. The 
last letters from France, received by way of Hin- 
dostan, inform me that you are now in earnest, 
and that we shall soon see you soar with Demo- 
critus and Epicurus, far beyond the resplendent 
walls or fiery bounds of the world, into infinite 
space, for the purpose of examining and tri- 
umphantly reporting what may be, and what may 
not be, et ultra proessit longe flammantia, &c. 
and gravely meditating on the nature of that 
space, where all things find a place ; on those 
infinite generations and corruptions of pretended 
worlds by the pretended fortuitous concurrence 
of atoms; on the nature, the indivisibility, and 
the other properties of their atoms ; on liberty, 
fate, and destiny; on the existence, unity, and 
providence of God ; on the use of particles ; on 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



60 TRAVELS IN THE 

the nature of the soul ; in fine, on all the sublime 
matters of which they have treated. 

I cannot condemn your design. Your wish to 
acquire knowledge is natural. It belongs only to 
great souls to aspire after it; and nothing so 
proudly distinguishes man from the brute^ as a 
disposition and a capacity to cultivate the fields of 
science and learning. But as the loftiest designs 
are often the most hazardous, so yours is not 
without much danger. If we have a strong 
inclination for truth, we are not without a very- 
powerful one for liberty and independence, for 
denying the existence of any master^ and for 
thinking, saying and doing every thing according 
to our fantasy, without fear of any being, and 
without recognizing any obligation to account 
for our deeds, words or thoughts. It follows, 
therefore, that unless we be constantly on our 
guard, this latter propensity will overpower the 
other ; and if we dwell upon the reasons that seem 
to favour our notions of liberty and independence^ 
while we slightly consider those that militate 
against them, we shall soon be deprived of any 
fixed principle of action, be tossed between oppo« 
site opinions, and become cold and indifferent to 
whatever concerns the rule and end of life. 

Most of our philosophers, it appears to me, 
entertain the silly notion that the holding of 
strange and uncommon opinions will gain them a 
reputation for wit and learning. They feel delight 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 61 

in propagating such opinions^ and would fain 
persuade their hearers, without being themselves 
persuaded, that those are founded on sure and 
solid grounds, and that tliey contain something too 
profound and mysterious to be comprehended by 
any but men of learning. Have a care, my dear 
friend, not to fall into this contemptible vanity. 
The constant endeavour to impress false ideas on 
the minds of others, as if we believe them sound, 
will insensibly fix them upon our own minds as 
indisputable truths ; in the same manner as a man^ 
by the frequent repetition of the same fictitious 
tale, becomes at length a firm believer in his own 
lie. The indulgence of this habit will also plunge 
us into a tormenting state of inquietude; our 
loose and indeterminate opinions will, as I have 
hinted, render us inattentive to the great purpose 
of our existence, and we shall seek in vain for the 
solid tranquillity which we fondly hoped would 
accompany the acquisition of science. 

I would observe that with all our inclination 
to learn, we are apt to be indolent. We covet, 
indeed, truth and knowledge, but we desire to 
procure them at a cheap rate, without that 
constant labour and unwearied attention which at 
last become irksome^ and often prove preju- 
dicial to health, but which nevertheless are 
indispensably necessary if we would attain 
a mastery of any species of science. Unless 
we are continually on our guard, and contend 
strenuously against our slothfolness, we shall soon 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



62 TRAYBLS IN TUE 

delude ourselves into the belief that extraordinary 
acquirements need not be preceded by persevering' 
and toilsome stud y^ and we shall rest satisfied with 
that appearance of truth which characterizes the 
reasonings of our pretenders to philosophy. 
Instead of this, we ought ta estimate these rea- 
sonings according to their real strength, and care- 
fully examine the arguments by which they migtit 
be confuted, arguments concealed or distorted by 
our dogmatizers, from vanity and presumption^ 
or from ignorance and prejudice. It happens un- 
fortunately that we feel pleasure, both in permit- 
ting things to be exaggerated by others, and in 
exaggerating them ourselves, and take equal dcr 
light in being agreeably deceived, and in impos* 
log agreeable delusions upon mankind. 

You see, my dear friend, I am frankly stating 
the thoughts which the design you have formed 
has suggested to my mind. It seems to me that 
in philosophy, and especially in studying those 
high matters which are become the subjects of 
your contemplation, there can be no middle course: 
a choice must be made of two plans. 

Either we must avoid the necessity of radc- 
ing our brains, and consent to be carried softly 
down the current, along with the many peri- 
sons of good sense, passing among us even for 
excellent philosophers, who thus suffer themselves 
to follow the stream: the labour of mental 
application will in this manner be obviated, as 
well as the consequences of philosophizing by 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 63 

halves, and of not penetrating things to the 
bottom ; and we shall escape the danger of 
imbibing disquieting doubts, which embitter every 
moment of life, and sometimes render men e3> 
tremely vicious in their lives, and nearly inl«i^ 
ferable in their manners : or we must devote 
our time to hard study; be steadfast in the 
pursuit of knowledge ; and, despising the pit*- 
fill vanity of being considered extraordinary wits, 
and of living without a master to whom we 
are amenable for the motives of our actions, 
make truth the sole object of our search* Wfc 
shall then feel the necessity of weighing Mid 
re-weighing the reasonableness of every proposi- 
tion ; of deeply meditating ; of writing, convers- 
ing and disputing ; in a word, of omitting no mode 
which may contribute to the expansion ofour ia^ 
tellect and the impi*ovement of our understanding. 
In regard to your request th^t I would com- 
municate to you the ideas which presented them- 
selves to my mind while discoursing with Da- 
nechmend-khan, the philosopher of Asia, on the 
various subjects of your present studies, I tell 
you candidly and without fearing the imputa- 
tion of vanity, that you might have applied to a 
person of greater intelligence, but not to one who 
has studied those matters with more assiduity and 
attention. Not only have I deeply considered s^ 
that I have read in ancient and modern authon^ 
and in Arabian, Persian and Hindostanee writ*- 
ings; but I have discoursed a hundred times on 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



64 TRAVELS IN THE 

the subjects of these books^ with very great and 
learned men who have chanced to fall in my way ; 
and when I have seen persons who held the 
fallacious opinions to which I have alluded^ I have 
not scrupled to feign an acquiescence in these 
opinions in the hope of drawing from my com- 
panions ail the information they had it in their 
power to communicate. But as your question 
involves considerations that would swell my letter 
to an inconvenient length, it is better, now that I 
am so far advanced on my return to Europe^ 
to defer my full answer to the time when I shall 
have the pleasure of meeting you in France. 

In the mean while, lest you should consider 
me inattentive to your request, I shall observe that 
it seems to me quite rational to believe that there 
exists something in us more perfect and excellent 
than that which we call body or matter. 

You know the opinions of Aristotle respect- 
ing the elementary matter, than which nothing can 
be more fallacious, because to be neither one thing 
nor another \Sy in fact, to be nothing. You know 
also that all the perfections and properties which 
Democritus and Epicurus attribute to their pri- 
mitive bodies, or to the first and sole existence 
of matter, resolve themselves principally into thb, 
— that there are certain very small and very solid 
beings, without any void, and indivisible; all having 
some peculiar and essential form; an infinite 
number, for example, being round; an infinite 
number pyramidal ; an infinite number square ; 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 65 

an infinite number cubical, crooked, pointed, 
triangular ; and also an innumerable, thougb not 
an infinite, quantity of various other forms ; all 
of them possessed of innate motion, and of an 
unimaginable swiftness. Some, however, are bet- 
ter suited than others for entering into combi- 
nation, or more susceptible of disintegration and 
recomposition according as they are more or 
less small, more or less round, or more or less 
smooth and slippery. These philosophers also pre- 
tend that all these beings are eternal in their own 
nature, consequently incorruptible and indepen- 
dent, although without sense, reason or judg- 
ment. You are well aware, I say, that all the 
properties of their little bodies nearly resolve 
themselves to what I have just now stated, and I 
wish you to bear this in mind that you may, dur- 
ing the progress of this enquiry, judge whether 
they are capable of the things attributed to them. 
However, not to deprive their principles of 
any part of their force, and to undeceive you if 
you believe that I have cast oflF the doctrine of 
atoms, I shall avow that the more I consider the 
infinite division of finite matter, the more absurd 
and unphilosophical it appears to me ; and the 
reasons by which it is attempted to establish that 
theory, are as captious as those wfeich Zeno, who 
supposed this same divisibility, assigned for the 
purpose of proving that there was no motion ; 
since mathematical points, lines. and superficies, 
which have no existence but in the mind, 
VOL. n. p 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



66 TRAVELS IN THE 

are without solidity, ought not to he transfer- 
red and applied to physical hodies, which can- 
not exist without all their dimensions and which 
are the workmanship of nature. A philosopher 
ought, as much as possible, to avoid diving into 
inlBnity : it is a deep and dark abyss in which the 
human understanding is bewildered and lost. 

Moreover I am still of opinion, that atoms 
are indivisible, because they are small portions of 
matter or small hard bodies, resisting and impene- 
trable (properties as essential to matter as exten- 
sion) and because they are pure and continuous 
matter, without any parts that are only contiguous, 
and each of which has its peculiar and determi- 
nate superficies. Here I shall also add that the 
separation, disjunction or dissociation of parts 
merely contiguous in a compound is^ in my 
judgment, the only division conceivable: so that 
it is impossible to divide any atom, that is, any 
portion of matter purely continuous, even though 
we should suppose it as long as a needle ; since 
to divide it with a chisel, for example, we must 
commence by producing a penetration, which is 
inconceivable ; and it would be necessary that 
some part of the needle gave way (if we could 
admit that there are parts in a whole which has 
by its constitution no contiguous parts) while it 
is inconceivable how it should give way to the 
chisel that might press it, or permit any of 
its portions to yield without penetration; more 
especially as the parts pressed and the part of the 
chisel pressing are both of them of the same 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 67 

nature and of the same force^ both being hard i 
resisting^ and impenetrable. The doctrine of 
atoms^ therefore, has this great advantage — that 
it does not even assume its principles, and demand 
the concession that primitive bodies are indivisible: 
inasmuch as it cannot be even conceived that they 
are divisible ; nor how a hard compound should 
result from soft, yielding, and divisible principles; 
nor how two extremely subtile portions of matter^ 
in striking against each other, should not resist by 
their hardness, without reducing themselves into 
some dust of smaller particles. Nor does this 
doctrine of atoms require that there must ne- 
cessarily be small void spaces between the parts 
of compounded bodies, let the matter with which 
it is endeavoured to fill them be ever so subtile ; 
since it is likewise inconceivable not only how 
a motion should begin in plena (where all is per- 
fectly full) but how the parts themselves of this 
extremely subtile matter, which must have their 
particular forms as much defined and determined 
as the parts of grosser matter, can be so perfectly 
arranged that there shall not necessarily remain 
small empty spaces between them. 

I shall further acknowledge that, according to 
the atomical philosophy, it may be very rationally 
imagined that there is no compound of such 
admirable shape, composition, order and dis- 
position of parts, not excepting the human body 
itself> but that it may have been formed by the 
junction, the peculiar order and disposition of small 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



68 TJiAVBLS IN THE 

l)odies^ or atoms^ provided there interyened a 
guiding and sufficiently intelligent cause. 

It may also be granted^ that there may result 
from the first causes of this philosophy^ a compound 
so perfect as to be capable of the most difficult 
species of loco-motion, such as walking like an 
animated substance^ or even perfectly to imitate 
the singings weeping, and all the other actions of 
the most perfect animals. This implies no sort of 
contradiction, as is proved by clocks and so many , 
other artificial machines. 

In fine, I am quite willing to allow that the 
sect of Democritus and Epicurus, (supposing for 
it that the atoms are the workmanship of an all- 
wise and all-powerful God) has great advantages 
over other sects, and that its followers can give 
more probable reasons for a great number of 
beautiful effects of nature than the followers of other 
sects. Of the truth of this observation those only 
can doubt who have not made a comparison 
between them and who are not in the habit 
of thoroughly examining questions of this kind. 
But to imagine that the first causes, with all these 
advantages, are, as they contend, capable of 
forming an animal, such as man is in all his 
operations, by a peculiar junction, order, union, 
and disposition, however admirable these may be, 
and even although some intelligent and guiding 
cause should intervene, is what I have always 
found it impossible to do. The idea appears to 
me contrary to reason and good sense; and so it 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOOUL EMPIRE. 69 

will doubtless appear to you, if you will recal 
to your remembrance what you have probably 
heard mentioned a hundred tipies, and what I am 
going to repeat after my own way. 

It is not within my purpose to moralize and 
to pretend that I am returning to my native 
country a very great man. Such a traveller as I 
am, nurtured too in the atomical school, might 
work miracles, which, however, no one would 
perhaps believe. Be assured, my friend, if I 
presume to communicate my ideas, it is not out of 
ostentation, but with the utmost sincerity, and 
according to my soundest judgment. 

Nor do I pretend, notwithstanding my Asiatic 
preamble, to have made the discovery of any new 
reasons during my stay in India. Entertain no 
such expectation, I pray you. I despair nearly as 
much as Cicero, of any new light being ever 
thrown upon the subject we are discussing. It 
would not be difficult to shew that whatever 
the moderns have said concerning it, amounts 
either to nothing at all, or to nothii^g new. 
I should need only to pursue the observations 
contained in the writings of Gassendi and Ar- 
nault in answer to M. Descartes, observations 
to which I do not find that gentleman has made 
any reply. Ardently do I wish that he could, as 
he pretends, oppose to them arguments invincibly 
conVdusive. I would embrace, and, as it were, 
adore, the author of demonstration on this subject: 
with how much greater propriety would the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



70 TRAVKLS IN THE 

verses addressed to an ancient atomist be ap- 
plicable to him. 

Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit, et omnes 
Prcestinxit Stellas, exortus uti sethereus, Sol. 

I exact only one thing of you — that you 
seriously reflect on what passes within us, on the 
operations of our understanding; and that you 
would then honestly tell me whether you conceive 
that there is any proportion between the per- 
fection of those operations, and the imperfection 
of what we call body or matter; supposing, 
what you will readily admit, that after the 
imagination has been stretched to its utmost 
limits, we can never conceive any other properties 
in atoms, and generally in all that is body or 
matter, than those I have already enumerated,— 
size, shape, hardness, indivisibility, motion ; or, if 
you will, (for it does not affect the argument) 
softness or divisibility. 

I flatter myself that you will not refuse the 
request I now make, which is thdt you would 
again apply your attention to those ideas so full 
of ingenuity and beauty, selected from your 
notes; to those passages of equal force still 
to be found there; and generally to all those 
flights of enthusiasm and poetic transports to be 
found in your Homer, your Virgil and your 
Horace, which partake of something divine ; and 
when in that severity of mind and philosophical 
temper, which you sometimes experience in the 
morning, you will not refuse to meditate on four 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 71 

or five points that appear to me to deserve the 
attention of a philosopher. 

1. The first— that our senses are not only 
struck hy bodies, as the eyes of a statue or an 
automaton might be, but that we feel the im- 
pression, that we feel titillation and pain, and even 
perceive that we feel them, when we say, " I 
perceive that this or that pleases my taste much 
more, or much less than ordinarily ; or, that my 
pain is much less, or much greater, than it was." 

2. The second— that frequently we do not rest 
satisfied with making the above observations, but 
make such deductions as these: " we ought, there- 
fore, to follow this method ; or, we ought, there- 
fore, to shun that." We then come to these 
general conclusions ; '' all that is good should be 
followed ; and all that is evil should be avoided.** 

3. The third — that we remember the past, 
consider the present, and foresee the future. 

4. The fourth — that sometimes we endeavour 
to penetrate, as it were, into ourselves, into our 
most inward parts ; as I am doing at this moment, 
while examining what I am, and what may be this 
reasoning power that is within me; these thoughts, 
ratiocinations, and reflections. Thus do we reflect 
on ourselves, and on our operations. 

6. The fifth — that being resolutely bent to 
meditate deeply on any matter, we sometimes 
make new discoveries, find new reasons, or, at 
least, see those which have been already found 
weighing and comparing them one with another. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



72 TRAVELS IN THE 

and sometimes drawing such consequences as de- 
pend upon a great number of antecedent proposi* 
tions. These propositions^ which we shall see at 
one glance, will all concur to establish the same 
conclusion : as happens in all the sciences^ and 
principally in mathematics. Such are the strength 
and admirable extent of the mental faculty ! 

These reflections may suffice for what I 
demand of you; the rather, as whatever else 
I might say would amount to nearly the same 
thing. But you must submit, for once, to the 
style of these eastern countries, the air of which I 
have breathed so long, and attend patiently to 
another observation, that I consider very im- 
portant. 

Not only do we know the particular things 
that make an impression upon our senses, but 
such is the strength and admirable capacity of 
our understanding that it discovers the means 
of knowing, and of forming to itself ideas of 
a thousand things which fall not immediately* 
and exactly as they are, upon the senses : such 
ideas, for example, as these: that man is a 
reasonable animal ; that the sun is much larger 
than the globe we inhabit ; that it is impossible a 
thing should be and should not be, at one and the 
same time ; that two things which are equal to a 
third, are equal to one another; that the absence 
of the sun is the cause of night ; that every thing 
engendered is subject to corruption ; that from 
nothing, nothing can be produced, any more 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 73 

than thi^t which really exists can return to 
iH>thing ; that there must of necessity be some- 
thing eternal and uncreated in the universe — 
God, or the original matter of things, or both; 
or that God must have created this matter either 
from all eternity, or in time. Besides these, the 
understanding forms to itself an infinite number 
of ideas, so profound and vast and so remote from 
iQatter, that we scarcely know how they have 
found admission into the human mind. 

Now, my dear friend, can all those actions 
I have mentioned, which argue such strength and 
power, capacity and extent, of the human mind ; 
can all those internal motions, that peculiar state 
which, though we cannot clearly explain, we yet 
plainly feel and acknowledge in ourselves, when 
we reflect on what passes within us, and consider 
our operations (for I am lost in my admiration of 
the reflections which we make on our^tions;) 
can all those actions, I say or interior motions, or 
whatever else you may choose to call them, can 
they indeed be attributed to spirits, to a wind, 
to fire, to air, to atoms, to particles of an ex- 
tremely subtile essence ; in short, to any thing 
that possesses no other qualities or properties 
than may be comprehended in the word matter, 
however small, attenuated, light and active that 
matter may be ; whatever may be its contexture 
or disposition, and what motions soever it may be 
made capable of giving and receiving? No; we 
can never believe that it can be any thing else 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



74 TRAVELS IN THE 

than the merely local movements of some ma- 
chine wholly artificial/ dead, insensible, devoid of 
judgment and devoid of reason. Never can it be con- 
ceived that these can be any of those internal actions 
I have mentioned, that perception or knowledge 
that I have knowledge, that perception that 
I reason, that perception of reasons, and that con- 
sciousness that they are perceived. 

Moreover, let us, for a moment, consider some 
of the principal propositions of Euclid, without 
reference to those of Archimedes, ApoUOnius, and 
so many others. When I think only of the 47th 
of the first book of Euclid, I find something so 
grand and noble that I confess I can scarcely per- 
suade myself it could be of human invention ; but 
imagine rather that it was the discovery of this 
incomparable proposition by Pythagoras which 
induced him, in the extasy of his joy, and the 
greatness of his astonishment, to offer that grate- 
ful and celebrated sacrifice to the gods ; thus 
testifying that the discovery was much beyond 
the reach of the human understanding. 

But I would not therefore say there is reason 
to believe that man possesses any thing divine, — 
any particle of the divinity. This idea is an in- 
supportable blasphemy of certain stoics, of the ca. 
balists of Persia and of the brahmins of India, who 
in their anxiety to maintain the dignity and per- 
fection of the human mind, have chosen to run 
into this opposite error, rather than countenance 
the notion that it is so base and imperfect as to 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 75 

be all corporeal or matter. I am far from enter* 
taining such an opinion, and you will see by my 
letter to Mr. Chapelain how much I consider it 
unworthy of any philosopher. Yet, like the stoics 
and others, I observe in man something so perfect, 
grand and elevated, that their notion of a divine 
principle in him, appears to me much less absurd 
than the theory that in man, and indeed in the 
whole universe, there is nothing but what is 
material ; nothing but local and corporeal mo* 
tions ; nothing but body, atoms and matter. 

But is it really so? Does that man exists 
supposing him not quite void of common sense, 
who persuades himself that when Archimedes^ 
Pythagoras, and other great men, were indulging 
the efforts of their genius, and engaged in pro- 
found meditations, there was nothing in their 
heads and brains but what was corporeal, nothing 
but vital and animal spirits; only a certain 
natural heat, only particles of a very subtile 
matter ; or, if the term be preferred, only atoms, 
which though they be insensible, without the least 
intelligence or reason, and notwithstanding they 
cannot move (according to the atomists) but by a 
fated and blind motion and concurrence, yet 
happened to move and concur with such asto- 
nishing luck, that, as they had once before^ 
by means of a similar concurrence, formed the 
h^ads of those great men, with those innumerable 
organs so industriously ordered and disposed: 
so also they were again so happy as to form and 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



76 TRAVELS IN THE 

produce those subtile thoughts imd profound 
meditations ; or rather they happened once more 
to move themselves in all these organs in so 
admirable a manner^ that falling at last into 
a certain wonderful order, into a certain wonderfol 
disposition, and into a certain wonderful state 
(for these are the terms employed by the atomical 
philosophers) they became themselves that con- 
ception, perception and meditation ; those admi- 
rable propositions and those divine inventions. 

Again, — When our choler and rage are excited 
by insult, or any other cause, and yet we restrain 
our anger, in obedience to an internal monitor, 
and feel disposed, contrary to our natural desire 
for revenge, to act with prudence and moderation^ 
by considerations, it may be, of decorum, of 
honour, or of virtue, what, I would ask, is this 
internal movement and state ? Can it be rationally 
Sfdd that they are nothing but certain rollings, 
counter-motions, reflections, peculiar conjunctures, 
and contextures of atoms or spirit ? or, if another 
mode of expression pleases our philosophers 
better, particles of matter within the nerves, 
within those delicate membranes, those subtile 
channels and organs of the brain, the heart, and 
other parts of the body ? Chimeras, my friend ; 
mere chimeras ! 

A word more concerning liberty. When, 
dreading to make a bad instead of a good choice, 
our mind remains as in a state of equipoise, 
while seeking within ourselves, and earnestly 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 77 

ezamining^ all the reasons for and against^ may 
I ask whether this dreads this hesitation^ this 
search, and the resolution to which we at length 
come^ of adopting or rejecting this or that line 
of conduct ; or, to employ the language .^pf 'our 
philosophers, the whole of those motions, of that 
inward state and mode of being, shall all this 
be nothing more than a fortuitous and blind 
concurrency of small bodies ? Is it possible you can 
imagine this? Even Lucretius, that warm par- 
tisan of the Epicurean sect, could not carry his 
credulity so far, nor persuade himself that the 
free motions of the will should be attributed 
solely to atoms. Because if the will be, as he 
says, torn forcibly from fate and raised above 
destiny, '^ et fatis avulsa voluntas, &c." how can 
he, with alF his '* clinamen," or bending pf 
principles, have really and honestly believed that 
there is nothing but what is corporeal, and that 
nothing is done within us, or elsewhere, but 
by a natural, eternal, independent, immutable, 
and inevitable concurrence of atoms? He was 
not ignorant that if such were the case, neither 
the will, nor any other thing whatsoever, could 
be separated and exempted from that conca* 
tenation, and eternal, immutable succession of 
motions, and from those causes which would 
follow and succeed one another by an internal 
law absolutely necessary and invariable. 

I could, in addition to what I have said, 
remind you of many reasons frequently urged 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



78 TRAVBLS IN THE 

upon this subject. You are acquainted with 
a great man who has collected more than twenty 
of the most cogent : but it would be trespassing 
too far upon your patience to recapitulate them 
in this place, especially as I have already noticed 
the most important arguments in refutation of 
the theory in question. 

I could also tell you how all the objections 
to those arguments may be answered; you are 
not a person, however, to whom one should send 
a book. I shall confine myself to two observations 
which I conceive are applicable to this point. 

I. What our philosophers say is unques- 
tionably true — that drinking, eating, healthy 
natural heat^ the spirits and the good disposition 
of the organs^ which are all corporeal things, 
and^ as they may say, depending upon atoms 
as principles and primary matter, are thingal 
necessary to all those thoughts, reasonings and 
reflections, in a word, to all the other internal 
operations which I have mentioned. This is 
a remark, the truth of which is too sensibly 
experienced by every person to be denied. But 
will any man of sense therefore conclude that 
all which intervenes and concurs to form those 
operations, are only corporeal, atoms, spirits, 
subtile matter? Can he possibly come to this 
conclusion when he has reflected upon the per- 
fection and excellence of the operations, and 
upon the imperfections of bodies or atoms, or 
upon the little conformity of their qualities 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 79 

to our internal operations? No; he cannot. I 
am satisfied that all which may be conceded 
is, that the atoms^ spirits, and the other things 
instanced, are indeed necessary, but merely as 
conditions and dispositions (or for other purposes 
unknown to us) and not as first and absolute 
principles, and as wholly the cause of our internal 
operations — which must be produced by something 
more noble, higher, and more perfect. 

II. The other observation I would make is 
this — It is very certain that we cannot form a true, 
or, as it is called, an immediate and positive idea 
of that which is above the body, or of any thing 
which is not body. This, I conceive, we can- 
not do while we remain in this mortal state>^ so 
strictly united to the body. We are prevented 
from doing it by our subjection to the bodily 
senses, which so much limits and obscures the 
light of our understanding. But I do not see it 
is therefore to be concluded that there is really 
nothing above the body, nothing but atoms or 
matter : for, hov^ many things are there of which 
we have not that positive idea, which yet our 
reason suffices to convince us that they have 
a real existence ? Or, rather, how few are 
the things of which we possess true and correct 
ideas! Have these philosophers themselves, any 
positive idea of their atoms ? They acknowledge 
that their smallness is such that it cannot be even 
imagined by hearing this word atom pronounced 
or explained : so far ar^ atoms from falling under 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



80 TRAVELS IN THE 

our senses, or from impressing us with a true 
and positive idea ! And yet our philosophers be- 
lieve and conclude from reason that they exist. 
Has a mathematician any positive idea of the sun's 
magnitude? It is so prodigious, and so com- 
pletely transcends the power of our senses, that 
we are not capable even to imagine it such 
as it is; there is not a mathematician, notwith- 
standing, who is not entirely persuaded and 
clearly convinced, by the force of demonstration, 
of its superior magnitude, and who does not 
perfectly know that it greatly surpasses that 
of our own globe. Is it not likewise true that the 
nature of a thing may be known by two different 
ways? — Either positively, as when we see the 
thing, and it falls under one or another of our 
senses; and when we say what the thing is, 
and we give it a positive definition. Or mgatvoehfj 
when we say what the thing is not. Now, I grant 
that we are not capable of knowing the principle 
of our operations, or reasonings, by the first 
of these ways ; nor even what it is, and how those 
operations are formed and produced. We are 
not, alas! so happy. We should need other 
senses much more perfect than all those which we 
possess. We are not born to penetrate and 
philosophize so profoundly. Shall we say *' Invida 
praeclusit speciem Natura videndi ?" But it must 
also be confessed that we may at least know it 
by the second of the methods I have mentioned ; 
so that, if we cannot say positively and as a 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 81 

truth, what it is, we can at least say, and we cer- 
tainly know what it is hot I mean, that from the 
perfection of the operations, which we evidently 
«ee to belong to it, operations which have no 
relation to the properties and perfections of 
atoms, and which generally surpass the reach 
of what is mere body; we can deduce this 
certain conclusion — that the principle of such 
operations, and those operations themselves, must 
be something superior to all that is body or 
corporeal. This is sufficient for my purpose; 
for at the commencement of this dissertation 
I advance nothing more. I pretend not that 
we can form a true and positive idea of that 
principle; but only that we can and ought to 
conclude by the reason of the thing, that it must 
be something, as I have said, much more perfect 
and much more noble, than all that is c6mpre^ 
bended under the term body, whatever may 
be its being hereafter, whatever may be its nature. 
Ought I to hesitate fully to disclose my 
thoughts ? You know I am not a man to speak 
or write out of vain ostentation, to fabi'icate 
untruths, or to speak at random on a subject 
of such importance as that which now engages 
our attention. It cannot be denied that there 
is a very great difference between the operations 
of brutes and those admirable operations of man 
which we are now contemplating. I speak not only 
in respect of the operations of their external senses, 
as smelling, seeing, tasting and others; but in 

VOL* II. o 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



B2 TRAV£LS IN THE 

reference alio to those of their internal senses, 
or their imagination. All these operations of the 
brutes are so much inferi<»r to the reasoning 
faculties of man, that it must be allowed there 
is not any proportion, and that the opera- 
tions of man proceed from a difierent and infi- 
nitely more perfect principle. And yet, my 
friend, notwithstanding these remarks, I should 
think that individual a hundred times less absurd 
who maintained that in the principle of those 
operations of brutes, whether it be of their in- 
ternal or even their external senses, there was 
something more perfect than can be found in 
that which is merely corporeal, or generally 
in all which may be comprehended in the terms 
body, matter or spirits: a person, I say, who 
defended this opinion, I should consider fax 
less absurd than him who should pretend that 
the principle of the operations of man was 
wholly coiporeal: so devoid of reason do I 
consider this latter opinion — so unworthy any man 
of sound judgment. Was it philosophizing with 
good faith to affirm so monstrous a proposition ? 
or was it not rather an excessive vanity that drore 
our philos<^hers to so irrational an extreme ? 
They saw, no doubt, that their sect possessed 
great advantages over all others, in being able 
to explain with much ease and plausilnlity many 
of the most beautiful effects of nature, solely by 
local motion, by the order and peculiar disposition 
of matter, corpuscules, particles or atoms ; and 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 6S 

they wished to impose the belief that by the same 
principles they could give a reason for every thitig, 
and explain all which concerns the human mind 
and its operations. 

Have not you and I, my dear sir, always con- 
curred in opinion that how much soever we 
strained our understanding, we should never be 
able to conceive how any thing sensible could result 
from insensible corpuscules, while nothing inter- 
vened but what was insensible ? and, in regard to 
atoms^ we felt equally satisfied that however small 
and active our philosophers might make them, 
whatever motions and forms they might attribute 
to them, and in whatever order, mixture aiid dispo- 
sition they might bring them, nay, however in- 
genious might be the hand that should regulate 
them ; we felt satisfied, I say, that no philoso- 
pher could ever succeed (supposing, with the 
sect, that atoms have no other properties or per- 
fections than those mentioned) in proving that 
there can result from those atoms a com- 
pound, — I do not say possessed of man's reason- 
ing faculties, but one merely sensitive, such as 
may be the vilest and most imperfect worm of the 
earth. And yet these men dare pretend that they 
can explain how there may result jrom atoms a 
thing imaginative and reasonable, a thing which 
shall be the imaginations and the reasonings them- 
selves ! 

Let us avoid, my dear friend, the monstrous 
presumption and contemptible vanity of these 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



84 TRAVELS IN THl^ 

free-tbinkers. Let us not presume to explain 
the nature of our reasoning principle in the 
same manner as we may explain such things 
as fall under our senses. This is a subject which 
it is folly to treat geometrically. We are not 
qualified for the attempt in this mortal state, 
and in that complete subjection to our bodily 
senses under which we now lie. 

Still we ought to entertain a more exalted 
opinion of ourselves than seems consistent with 
the theory of these great philosophers, and not 
imagine with them that our soul is composed 
of base matter We ought assuredly to believe 
that we are infinitely more noble and more perfect 
than they pretend ; and resolutely maintain that 
if we cannot discover what we really are, we yet 
know with certainty, what we are not :— we are 
not composed wholly and exclusively of mud and 
mire. Farewell. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE, 8S 



NARRATIVE OF AN EXCURSION MADE BY THE GREAT 
MOGUL^ AURENG-2EBE, IN THE YEAR 1616, FROM 
DELHI, THE CAPITAL OF HINDOSTAN, TO THE 
KINGDOM OF KASHMIRE, COMMONLY CALLED THE 
PARADISE OF INDIA, IN A SERIES OF LETTERS TO 
MONSIEUR DE MERVEILLES. 

SIR, Delhi, December, 1664. 

From the period of Aureng-Zebe's convalescence 
it had been constantly rumoured that he intended 
to visit Lahore and Kashmire, in order to benefit 
his health by change of air and avoid the approach- 
ing summer heat, from which a relapse might be 
apprehended. Many intelligent persons, it is 
true, could scarcely persuade themselves that 
the king would venture upon so long a journey, 
while his father remained a prisoner in the 
citadel of Agra. Considerations of policy, how- 
ever, have yielded to those of health ; if indeed 
this excursion may not rather be attributed 
to the arts and influence of Rochinara-Begum, 
who has been long anxious to inhale a purer 
air than that of the seraglio, and to appear 
in her turn amid a pompous and magnificent 
army, as her sister Begum-Saheb had done 
during the reign of Shah-Jehan. 

The king left this city on the sixth of this 
month, at three o*clock in the afternoon ; a day 
and hour which, according to the astrologers of 
Delhi, cannot fail to prove propitious to long 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



86 TRAVELS IN Tflfi 

journeys. Having reached Sha-limar^ his country 
villa^ which is about two leagues distant from 
the capital^ he remained there six whole days 
in order to afford time for the preparations 
required by an expedition which was to last 
eighteen months. We hear to-day that he has 
set out with the intention of encamping on the 
Lahore road^ and that after two days he will 
pursue his journey without further delay. 

He is attended not only by the thirty-five 
thousand cavalry which at all times compose his 
body guard and by infantry exceeding ten thou- 
sand in number^ but likewise by the heavy artillerj 
and the light or stirrup-artillery^ so called because 
it is inseparable from the king's person^ which the 
large pieces of ordnance must occasionally quit for 
the high roads^ in order that they may proceed 
with greater facility. The heavy artillery consists 
of seventy pieces^ mostly of brass. Many of these 
cannon are so ponderous that twenty yoke of oxea 
are necessary to dri^w them along; and some, 
when the road is steep or rugged require the 
aid of elephants in addition to the oxen^ to 
push the carriage wheels with their heads and 
trunks. The stirrup-artillery is composed of 
fifty or sixty small field-pieces^ all of brass ; eadi 
mounted^ as I have observed elsewhere^ on a small 
carriage of neat construction and beautifully 
painted ; decorated with a number of red stream- 
ers, and drawn by two handsome horses, driven 
by an artillery-man. There is always a third 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL JSMPIRE. iB7 

or relay horsCj which is led by an aasistant gunnei?. 
These field pieces traye) at a quick rate^ that 
they may be ranged in front of the royal tent, 
in efficient time to fire a ToUey as a signal to 
the tro(^ of the king^s arrival. 

So large a retinue has given rise to a suspicion 
that instead of visiting Kaslmirej we are destined 
to lay siege to the important city of Candahari 
which is situated equally <m the frontiers of Persia^ 
Hindostan and Usbec. It is the capital of a 
fine and productive country, yielding a very con- 
siderable reva:iue ; and the possession of it has 
consequently been at all times ww'mly contested 
between the monarchs of Persia and India* 

Whatever may be the destination of this for- 
midable force, every person ccHmected therewith 
must hapten to quit Pelhi> however the urgency 
of his affairs may require his stay ; and were I to 
delay my own d^arture I should find it difficult 
to overtake the army* Besides my nayaab, or 
aga, Danechmend-khan, expects my arrival with 
much impatience. He can no more dispense with 
his philosophicid studies in the afternoon, than 
avoid devoting the morning to bis weighty duties 
as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and 
Grand Master of the Horse, Astronomy^ geograr 
phy and anatomy are his favourite pursuits, and 
he reads with avidity the works of Gassendi and 
Descartes. I shall commence my journey this 
very night, after having finally arranged all my 
affairs, and supplied myself with much the same 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



88 TRAVELS IN THE 

necessaries as if > I were a cavalry officer of rank; 
As my pay -is one hundred and fifty crowns per 
months I am expected to keep two good Tarta- 
rian horses ; and I also take with me a powerful 
Persian camel^ and driver ; a groom for my horses, 
a cook and a servant to go before my horse with 
a flaggon of water in his hand, according to the 
custom of the country. I am also provided with 
every useful article ; such as a tent of moderate 
size ; a carpet ; a portable bed made of four very 
strong but light canes ; a pillow ; a couple of 
coverlets^ one of which twice doubled, serves for 
a mattrass ; a soufra, or round leathern cloth used 
at meals ; some few napkins of dyed cloth ; three 
small bags of culinary utensils and earthenware, 
which are all placed in a large bag, and this bag 
is again carried in a very capacious and strong 
double sack made of thongs. This double sack 
likewise contains the provisions, Knen, and wearing 
apparel, both of master and servants. I have 
taken care to lay in a stock of excellent rice, for 
vfive or six days' consumption ; of sweet biscuits 
flavoured with anise, of lemons and sugar. 
Nor have I forgotten a linen bag with its small 
iron hook for the purpose of suspending and 
draining dais, or curds ; nothing being considered 
so refreshing in this country as lemonade and 
dais. All these things, as I said before, are 
packed in one large sack, which becomes so un- 
wieldy that three or four men can with difficulty 
place it on the camel, although the animal kneels 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



/- 



MOGUL EMPIflE. 89 

iqjwn close to it, and all that is required is to turn 
one of the sides of the sack over its back. 

Not a single article which I have mentioned, 
could conveniently be spared during so ex* 
tended an excursion as the one in prospect. 
Here we cannot: expect the comfortable lodgings 
and accommodations of our own country ; a tent 
will be our only inn, and we must make up our 
minds to encamp and live after the fashion of 
Arabs and Tartars. Nor can we hope to supply 
our wants by pillage: in Hindostan every acre 
of land is considered the property of the king, and 
the spoliation of a peasant would be a robbery 
jcommitted upon the king's domain. In under- 
taking this long march it is consoling to reflect 
that we shall move in a northern direction ; that 
it is the commencement of winter ; and that the 
periodical rains have fallen. This is^ indeed, the 
proper season for travelling in India, the rains 
having ceased, and the heat and dust being no 
longer intolerable. I am also happy at the idea 
of not being any longer exposed to the danger of 
eating the bazaar bread of Delhi, which is often 
badly baked and full of sand and dust. I may 
hope, too, for better water than that of the 
capital, the impurities of which exceed my power 
of description ; as it is accessible to all persons 
and animals, and the receptacle of every kind 
of filth. Fevers most difficult of cure are 
engendered by it, and worms are bred in the 
legs which produce violent inflammation, at- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



/ 



90 TRil VSL8 IN THE 



tended with mudi danger. If the patient leee 
Delhi, the worm is generally toon expelld, 
although there have been instances whert it 
has continned in the system for a ye«r or irdre. 
They ore commonly of the me and length of tbe 
trebte string of a yiofin^ and might be easilj 
mistaken for a sinew. In extracting them, great 
caution should be used lest they iH'eak ; the best 
way is to draw them out little by little, from day 
to day, gently winding them round a small twig 
of the siae of a pin. 

It is a matter of considerable satisfaction to 
me to think that I shall not be exposed to any 
of these inconr^ences and dangers, as my na- 
raah has with marked kindness ordered that 
a new loaf of his own household bread, and 
a souray of Ganges water (with which, like every 
person attached to the court, he has laden sevenJ 
caimels) should be presented to me every morning. 
A souray is that tin flaggon of water, covered 
with red doth, which a servant carries before his 
master^s horse. It commonly holds a quiut, but 
mine is purposely made to contain two, a device 
which I hope may succeed. This flaggon keeps 
the water very cool, provided the cloth which 
covers it be always moist. The servant who 
bears it in his hand should also continue in 
motion and agitate the air ; or it should be ex- 
posed to the wind, which is usually done by 
putting the flaggon on three neat little sticks 
placed transversely, so that it may not touch the 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



MOGUL CMFIKE. 91 

ground. The moisture of the clothe the imitation 
^f the air^ or exposure to the wind» is absolutely 
necessary to keep the water fresh^ as if tlm 
moisture^ or rather the water which hi^ been 
imlnbed by the clothe arrested the little bodied^ 
or 6ery particles^ existing in the eir, at the sam<e 
time that it affords a passage to the nitrons OM 
other particles which impede motion m the watef 
and produce cold^ in the same manner as gla»l 
arrests water^ and allows light to pass through it^ 
in consequence of the contexture and particular 
disposition of the particles of glass^ and the differ- 
ence which exists between the minute particles of 
water and those of light.* It is only in the field 
that this tin flaggon is used. When at home^ we 
put the water into jars made of a certain porous 
earthy which we cover with a wet cloth ; and, if 
exposed to the wind, these jars keep the water 

* When a liquid, for isstancey water, is put into an un«- 
gla2ed earthen yesseli a portion of it, transuding through 
its sides, evaporates; and as during that process, heat is 
absorbed, the water in the vessel will, of course^ become 
cooled, insomuch that it may be frozen in this process. This 
effect is more completely produced when the vessel is placed 
in the sun, and when the surface of evaporation is encreased 
by wrapping round it cloths moistened with water. The older 
chymists imagined that a something, to which they gave va- 
rious names, passed off from the water in the process of cool- 
ing, the particles of which were so fine as to transude or pass 
through the containing vessel. That something modem 
chymists call caloric. — Translator. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



d2 TRAVELS IN THE 

much cooler than the flaggon. The lugher sort 
of people make use of saltpetre^ whether in towir 
or with the army. They pour the water, or any 
other liquid they may wish to cool, into a tin 
flaggon, round and long-necked, as I have seen 
English glass bottles. The flaggon is then stirred; 
for the space of seven or eight minutes, in water 
into which three or four handfuls of saltpetre have 
been thrown. The liquid thus becomes very cold 
and is by no means unwholesome, as I appre- 
hended, though at first it sometimes affects the 
bowels. 

But to what purpose am I indulging in scien- 
tific disquisitions when on the eve of departure ? 
when my thoughts should be occupied with the 
burning sun to which I am about to be exposed, 
and which in India it is sufficiently painful to en* 
dure at any season ; with the daily packing, load^ 
ing and unloading ; with the never-ceasing instruc- 
tions to servants ; with the pitching and striking 
of my tent ; with marches by day, and marches 
by night ; in short, with the precarious and wan- 
dering life which for the ensuing eighteen months 
I am doomed to experience ? Adieu, my friend ; 
I shall not fail to perform my promise, and to 
impart to you from time to time all our adven- 
tures. The army on this occasion will advance 
by easy marches : it will not be disquieted with 
the apprehension of an enemy, but move with the 
gorgeous magnificence peculiar to the kings of 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



3I0GUL EMPIRE. 9S 

Hindostan. I shall therefore endeavour to note 
every interesting occurrence in order that I may 
communicate it as soon as we arrive at Lahore. 



LETTER THE SECOND. 
SIR, Lahore, 25 Februaiy, 1665. 

This is indeed slow and solemn marching ; what 
we here call d la Mogole. Lahore is little more 
than one hundred and twenty leagues or about 
fifteen days* journey from Delhi, and we have been 
nearly two months on the road. The king, it is 
true, together with the greater part of the army, 
diverged from the high way, in search of better 
ground for the sports of the field, and for the con- 
venience of obtaining the water of the Jumna, 
which we had gone in search of to the right ; and 
we leisurely skirted its bank, hunting and shoofr 
ing amid grass so high as almost to conceal our 
horsemen, but abounding in every kind of game. 
We are now in a good town, enjoying repose ; 
and I cannot better employ my time than in com- 
mitting to paper the various particulars which 
have engaged my mind since I quitted Delhi. 
Soon I hope to conduct you to Kashmire, and to 
shew you one of the most beautiful countries in 
the world. 

Whenever the king travels in military pomp. 



I Digitized by LjOOQ IC 

I 



94 TRAVELS m THE 

hb has always two private camps ; that is to say, 
two separate bodies of teats* One of these camps 
being oonstimtly a day in advance of the oiite^, 
the king is snre to find at the end of every 
journey, a camp fully prepared for his reception. 
It is for this reason that these separate bodies of 
tents are called peiche-keiche-kanes or houses 
which precede. The two peiche-kanes are nearly 
equal, and to transport one of them, the aid 
of more than sixty elephants, two hundred camels, 
one hundred mules, and one hundred men*porters 
is required. The most bulky things are carried 
by the elephimts, such as the large tents, with 
their heavy pillars, which, on account of their 
great length and weight, are^ made so as to be 
taken down into three pieces. The smaller tents 
are borne by the camels, and the luggage and 
kitchen utensils by the mules. To the porters 
are confided the lighter and more valuable ar- 
ticles, as the porcelain used at the king's table, 
the painted and gilt beds, and those rich kar- 
guais, of which I shall speak hereafter. 

One of t§ie peiche-kanes has no sooner reached 
the place intended for the new encampment, than 
the Grand Quarter-Master selects some fine situ»- 
ation for the king's tents, paying, however, as 
much attention as possible to the exact symmetry 
of the whole camp. He then marks out a square, 
each side of which measures more than th):»e 
hundred ordinary paces. A hundred pioneers 
presently clear and level this space, raising square 



Dipitized by VjQOQ IC 



MOGUL BMPIRE. 95 

panes on mhixk they pitdi the taajts. The wfade 
of this extenstve square is ihea encompassed wilJi 
kanates, or screens^ seven or eight French feiet iit 
height^ secured bj <!OFds attached to p^s^ and 
hy poles fixed two by two in the ground^ at every 
ten paces^ one pole within and the other without^ 
and each leaning up<m the otbei!u The kanates 
are made of strong clothe lined wUh printed Indian 
calico^ representing Iwge vases of flowers. The 
royal entrance^ which is spacious and magnificent^ 
is in the centre of one of the sides of the square^ 
and the flowered calico of which it is composed, as 
well as that which lines the whole extedor face of 
this side of the square, is of much finer texture 
and richer than the rest. 

The first and largest tent ecected in the royal 
camp^ is named am-kas ; bang the place where 
the king and all ike nobility keep the mokmn ; that 
is, where they assemble at nine o^clock in the mom- 
ingfor the purpose of deliberating on afikifsof state 
and of administering justice. The kings of Hindos- 
tan seldom fail, even when in the fidd, to hold this 
assembly twice during the tw^tity-fout hours, the 
same as when in the cs^ital. The custom is re- 
gfirded as a matter of law and duty, and the ob- 
servance of it is rarely n^lected. 

The second tent, little inferior iri size and 
somewhat more advanced in the interior, is caUed 
gosle-kane, or the place for bathing. It is here 
that all the nobility meet every evening to pay 
their obeisance to the king, in the same manner 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



96 TRAVELS IN THE 

as when the court is at Delhi. This evening as«^ 
semblj subjects the omrahs to much inconvenience ; 
but it is a grand and imposing spectacle in a dark 
nighty to behold, when standing at some distance, 
long rows of torches lighting this nobilitj, 
through extended lanes of tents, to the gosle* 
kane, and attending them back again to their own 
quarters. These flambeaux, although not made 
of wax, like ours in France, burn a long time. 
They merely consist of a piece of iron hafted in 
a stick, and surrounded at the extremity with linen 
rags steeped in oil, which are renewed, as occasion 
requires, by the masalchis, or link boys, who 
carry the oil in long narrow-necked vessels of iron 
or brass. 

Still deeper in the square, is the third tent, 
smaller than those I have spoken of, called kalvet- 
kane, the retired spot, or the place of the 
privy council. To this tent none but the princi- 
pal ministers of state have access, and it is here 
that all the important concerns of the kingdom are 
transacted. 

Advancing beyond the kalvet-kane, you come 
to the king's private tents, which are surrounded 
by small kanates, of the height of a man, some 
lined with Masulipatam chintz, worked over with 
flowers of a hundred different kinds, and others 
with figured satin, decorated with deep silken 
fringes. 

Adjoining the royal tents, are those of the 
begums, or princesses, and of the great ladies and 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOOUL EMPIRE. " 97 

principal female attendants of the seraglio. ^ These 
tents are also enclosed on every side by rich ka- 
nates ; and in the midst of them are the tents of 
the inferior female domestics and other -women 
connected with the seraglio, placed ■ generally in 
much the same order according to . the offices of 
the respective occupants. 

^The am-kas, and the five or six other tents 
are elevated above the rest, as well for the sake of 
keeping off the heat as that they may be distin- 
guished at a distance. The outside is covered with a 
strong and coarse red cloth, ornamented with large 
and variegated stripes ; but the inside is lined with 
beautiful chintz manufactured for the purpose at 
Masulipatam, the work of which is set off by rich 
figured satin of various colours, or embroideries 
of silk, sHver and gold, with deep and elegant 
fringes. Cotton, mats, three or four inches in 
thickness, are spread over the whole floor, and 
these again are covered with a splendid carpet, on 
which are placed large . square brocade cushions 
to lean upon. The tents are supported by painted 
and gilt pillars. 

In each of the two tents wherein the king and 
nobility, meet, for deliberation is erected a .stage, 
which is mpst sumptuously adorned, and the king 
gives audience under a spacious canopy of. velvet 
or flowered silk. , The other tents have similar 
canopies, and they also contain what are called 
karguais or cabinets, the little doors of which, are 
secured with silver padlocks. You.raay form^some 

VOL. II. H 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



100 TAAVELS IN THE 

horses; and other tents for choice elephants and 
for the animals employed in hunting; for the 
birds of prey that invariably accompany the 
court; and are intended both for shew, and for 
field^ports ; for the dogs ; the leopards for catch- 
ing antelopes ; the nil-ghaus, or grey oxen, which 
I consider a species of elk ; the lions and the 
rhinoceroses, brought merely for parade; the 
large Bengal buffaloes, which attack the lion ; 
the tamed antelopes, frequently made to fight in 
the presence of the king. 

The quarters of the monarch are understood 
to comprehend not only the great square, but the 
numerous tents situated without the square, to 
which I have just drawn your attention. Their 
position is always in the centre of the army, or as 
much so as the nature of the ground will admit. 
You will easily conceive that there is something 
very striking and magnificent in these royal quar- 
ters, and that this vast assemblage of red tents, 
placed in the centre of a numerous army, produces 
a brilliant effect when seen from some neighbour- 
ing eminence ; especially if the country be open, 
and offer no obstruction to the usual and regular 
distribution of the troops. 
. The first care of the Grand-quarter-master is, 
as before remarked, to choose a suitable situation 
for the royal peiche-kanes. The am-kas is ele* 
vated above every other tent, because it is the 
object by which the order and disposition of the 
whole army is regulated. He then marks out 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



MOGU^ EMPIRE. 101 

the royal bazaars^ from which all the troops are 
supplied. The principal bazaar is laid out in the 
form of a wide street, tunning through the; whole 
extent of the army, now on the right, then on 
the left of the am-kas, and always, as : much 
as possible, in the direction of the next day's en- 
campment. The other royal bazaars, which are 
neither so long nor so spacious, generally cross 
this one, some on one side and some on another 
side of the king^s quarters. All of them are dis- 
tinguished by extremely long. poles, stuck in the 
ground at the distance of three hundred paces 
from each other, bearing red standards, and sur- 
mounted with the tails of the Great Thibet cows, 
which have the appearance of so many periwigs. 

The quarter-master then proceeds to plan 
the quarters for the omrahs, thiat there may always 
be the same observance of regularity, and that 
each nobleman may be placed at his usual distance 
from the royal square, whether on the right or on 
the left, so that no individual may be permitted 
to change the place allotted to him, or which 
he expressed a wish to occupy before the com- 
mencement of the expedition. 

The description I have given of the great 
square is, in many particulars, applicable to the 
quarters of the omrahs and rajahs. In general 
they also have two peiche-kanes, with a square of 
kanates enclosing their principal tents and those 
of their wives. Outside this square, are likewise 
pitched the tents of their oflScers and, cavaliers. 



L 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



102 TRAVELS IN THB 

and tbere id a bazaar in the form of a stre^t^ 
consisting of small tents belonging to the follow- 
ers of the army, who supply it with forage, rice, 
butter, and other necessary articles of life. The 
omrahs need not, therefore, always have recourse 
to the royal baeaars, where indeed every thing 
may be procured, almost the same as in the 
capital. A long pole is planted at both ends 
of each bazaar, and distinguished by a particular 
standard, floating in the air, as high as those 
of the royal bazaars, in order that the different 
quarters niiay be teadily discerned from a dis- 
tance. 

The chief omrahs and great rajahs pride 
themselves on the loftiness of their tents, which 
must not, however, be too conspicuo\te, lest the 
king discover it and command that the tents be 
thrown down, as he did on our late march. For 
the same reason, the outside must not be entirely 
red, there being none but the royal tents that can 
be of that colour ; and as a mark of proper respect 
every t6nt is also to front the am-kas, or quartern 
of the king. 

The remainder of the ground between the 
quarters of the monarch, those of the omrahs, and 
the bazaars, is filled with the tents of manseb-^ 
dars, or inferior otnrahs ; of persons attached to 
the artillery; of tradespeople of every descriptKm> 
of civil officers and other persons, who for va* 
rious reasons, follow the camp. The tents are 
therefore v^ry numerous^ and cover a large extent 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



AfOGUL EMPIRE. lOS 

ofgcouad; though with respect both to tlieir 
number and the space occupied by them^ very 
extravagant notions are formed* When the army 
halts in a fine and favourable country, which 
leaves it at liberty to adopt the acknowledged 
rules and order of circular aicampment, I do not 
believe that this space . measures more than two 
l^eiagues, or perhaps two leagues and ahalf^ in cir- 
cumference, including, here and there, several 
$pots of unoccupied ground. It should be men^ 
tioned, however, that the heavy artillery, which 
requires a great deal of room, is commonly a. day 
or two in advance of the army. 

What is said of the strange confusion that pre«; 
vails in the camp, and of the alarm thereby occa^ 
sioned to a new comer, is also much exaggerated. 
A slight acquaintance with the method observed 
in the quartering of the troops, will enable you to 
go, without much difficulty, from place to place, 
as your business may require ; the king's quarters, 
the tents and standards peculiar to every onirah, 
and the ensigns and cow-tails of the royal bazaars, 
which are all seen from a great distance, serving, 
after a little experience, for unerring guides* 

Sometimes indeed, notwithstanding all these 
precautions, there will be uncertainty and disor- 
der, particularly on the arrival of the army at 
tiie place of encampment in the mornhig ; when 
every one is actively employed in finding and 
establidiing his own quarters.. The dust, that 
arises often obsqures the marks L have mentioned. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 
/ 



104 TRXYELS 1^ THE 

and it becomes impossible to distiQguish.the kite's 
quarter^ the different :ba2aarsi or the tents ' of the 
several omrahs. Your progress is besides - liable 
to be impeded; by the tents then pitching^ ^and 
by the cords extended by inferior omrahs, who 
have.no peiche-kanes^ and. by mansebnlars, to 
mark their respective boundaries, and to prevent 
not only > the : public path from passing through, 
but the .fixing of any strange . tent , near their 
own, where, their wives, if accompanying th6m, 
reside. . . A troop of servants, with canes in 
their hands/ will not su&r these cords to be re- 
moved or lowered: you then naturally .Retrace 
your steps, and find that while you have been 
employedJn unavailing efforts to pass at one end^ 
your retreat has been cut off at the. other. There 
is now no means of extricating your laden cancels 
but by menace and entreaty ; outrageous passion, 
and calm remonstrance ; seeming as if you would 
proceed to blows, yet . carefully abstaining . from 
touching any. one ; prompting, a violent o quarrel 
between the servants of both parties, and after- 
y^ard reconciling them for fear of the consequences, 
and in this way taking advantage of a favourable 
moment to pass . your camels. But the greatest 
annoyance is perhaps in the evening, when busi- 
ness calls you to any distance. This is the t|me 
when the common people cook their victuals with 
a fire, made of cow and camel dung and* green 
wood.;: Thesmoke of so many., fires of this kind, 
when: there is little:; wind, is.highly, offensive,: jyid 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



koeuL BMPi&K. 105 

involves the atmosphere in total darkness. It was 
my fate to be overtaken three or four times by 
this wide-spreading vapour. I enquired^ but could 
not find my way: I turned and roamed about 
Ignorant whither I went. Once I was obliged to 
stop until the smoke dispersed^ and the moon 
arose ; and at another time I with difficulty reached 
the aquacy-die, at the foot of which I passed the 
night, with my horse and servant. The aquacy- 
die resembles a lofty mast of a ship, but is very 
sl^ider, and ^ takes down in three pieces. It is 
tiXed toward the king's quarters, near the tent 
called nagar-kane, and during the night has a 
lighted lantern suspended from the top. This 
light is very useful, for it may be seen when every 
object is enveloped in impenetrable darkness. ^ To 
this spot persons who lose their way resort, either 
to pass the night secure from all danger of robbers, 
or to resume their search after their own lodgings. 
The name aquacy-die may be translated Light of 
Heaven; the lantern when at a distance appearing 
like a star. 

To prevent robberies, every "omrah provides 
watchmen, who continually perambulate his par- 
ticular quarters . during the night, crying Kaber- 
dar! or. Have a care! and there are guards 
{k>sted round the whole army at every five hun- 
dred paces, who kindle fires, and also cry out 
Kaber-dar! Besides these precautions, the Co- 
toual^ or Grand Provost, sends soldiers in every 
direction, who especially;, pervade the bazaars. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



lOe TIIAVJ5I.fiHN TfiiP 

crykig out and soui^og a trunkpet N^wit^ 
standing all these measures, robberies ar^ often 
oommitted, and it is prudent to be idwayg on the 
alert ; not to rely too imich on the vigilane^ of 
servants ; and to repose at an early hOUr, sp ag to 
watch during the remainder of the night. 

I will now proceed to describe the different 
u^des of travelling adopted by the Great Mogpl 
on these occasions. 

Most commonly he is carried on ^lueu's sboul* 
ders, in a tucktravan, or field*tbrone, whareia he 
sits. This tuckt is a species of magnifioeiM^ taber* 
, iiacle, with painted and gilt piUajra and jglass^ 
windows, that are kept shut when the weatfe^f is 
had* The four branches, or outer parts of the 
poles by which this tuckt is carried^ are coywed 
either with scarlet ^ .brocade> and decorated witj^ 
deep fringes of silk and gold* At each branch are 
at^Aioned too sttong and handsomely dressed men, 
who are relieved by eight other men constantly in 
ilttendance. Sometimes the king rides on hprsa^ 
back, especially when the weather is favourable 
for hunting ; and at other times he is carried by 
an elephant, in a mik-demb^, or in a hauze, whi<^h 
ii^ by far the most striking and splendid style of 
traveling, as nothing can surpass the rithness tLXkd 
magnificence of the harness and trappings. The 
mik-dember is a small house, or square wooden 
tower, gilt and painted ; and the hau^e, an ovftl 
chair with a canopy of pillars, also superbly deeo- 
rated with colours and gold. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



1C06UL EMPIRE. 107 

In every march^ the king is accompanied by a 
great nmnber of omrahs and rajahs, who follow 
htm closely on horseback, placing themselres pro* 
miscnously in a body, without much method or 
regnlarity. On the morning of a journey, they 
assemble at break of day in the am-kas, with the 
exception of those who may be exempted by age 
or the nature of their offiee. They find these 
marches very fatiguing, especially on hunting- 
days, being exposed like a private soldier to the 
sun imd dust, frequently until three o'clock in the 
afternoon. 

These luxurious lords move along very iitB^ 
rently when not in the train of the king : neither; 
dost nor sun then annoys them, but they are 
stretched, as on a bed, in a palanquin closed and 
covered, or not, as may be found more agreeable ; 
sleeping at ease until they reach their tent, where 
they are sure to find an excellent dinner, the 
kitchen and every aeoessary article having been 
sent forward the preceding night, immediately 
after supper. The omrahs are always surrounded 
by B number of well-mounted cavaliers, called 
gour^e-berdars, because they carry a kind of club, 
or silver mtice. The king is also attended by 
many of them, who go before him, both 4m the 
right and on the left, together with a multitude 
of footmen. The gourze-berdars are chosen, weB- 
looking men, of fine figures, and are employed to 
convey orders and dispatches. With great sticks 
in their hand^, they drive every body before them, 
mid keep tlie way dear fior the king« 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



108 TRAVELS IN THE 

The kour follows the rajahs, and is intermixed 
with a large, number of tymbals and trumpets. 
This kour, as I before observed, consists of figures 
in silver, representing strange animals, hands, 
scales, fishes and other mystical objects, borne at 
the end of large silver canes. 

A numerous body of manseb-dars or inferior 
omrahs comes next, well-mouhted, and equipped 
with sword, quiver, and. arrows. This body is 
much more numerous than that of omrahs, which 
follows the king ; because not only the mimseb- 
dars who are on duty are obliged to assemble at 
break of day near the tent of the king, for the 
purpose of accompanying him, but there are many 
who join, the train in the hope of attracting notice 
and, obtaining preferment. 

; The princesses and great ladies of .the seragUo 
have also different modes of travelling. Some 
prefer tchaudoules, which are borne on men's 
shoulders, and are not unlike the tucktravans. 
They are gilt and painted, and covered with most 
magnificent silk nets of many colours, enriched 
with embroidery, fringes, and beautiful tassels. 
Others travel in stately and close palanquins, gilt 
and coloured, over which are also expanded simi- 
lar, silk nets. Some again, use capacious litters, 
suspended between two powerful camels, or be- 
tween two small elephants. It is in this style I 
have sometimes seen Rochinara-Begum pursuing 
her journey, and have observed more than once 
in the front of the litter, which was open, a young 
well-dressed Cemale slaye, with a peacock's tail in 

Digitized by LjOOQIC 



MOGUL ^IfPlRE. lOD 

her hand^ brushing away the dust^ and keeping off 
the flies from the princess. The ladies are not un- 
firequently carried on the backs of elephants, which, 
upon these occasions wear massy bells of silver,, 
and are decked with costly furniture : the har- 
nesses are sumptuous, and the ornaments ap- 
pendant to the saddles are curiously embroidered. 
These lovely and distinguished females, seated in 
mik-dembers, are thus elevated above the earthy 
like so many superior beings, borne along through 
the middle region of the air. Each mik-dember 
contains eight women, four on a side : it is lat- 
ticed and covered with a silken net, and yields not 
in richness and splendour to the tchaudoule or* the 
tucktravan. 

I cannot avoid dwelling on this pompous pro- 
cession of the seraglio. It strongly arrested my 
attention during the late march, and I feel delight 
in recalling it to my memory. Stretch imagina- 
tion to its utmost limits, and you can conceive no 
exhibition more grand and imposing than when 
Rochinara-Begum, mounted on a stupendous 
Pegu, elephant, and seated in a mik-dember 
blazing with gold and azure, is followed by five 
or six other elephants with mik-dembers nearly as 
resplendent as her own, and filled with ladies 
attached to her household. Close to the princess 
are the chief eunuchs, richly adorned and finely 
mounted, each with a cane in his hand; and sur- 
rounding her elephant, a troop of female ser? 
vahts from Tartary and Kashmire^ fantastically atr 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



1 10 TKAVrnM IN THE 

tired and riding handsome pad^iorses. fiesides 
tbese attendants, are several eunndis on horse* 
.back, accompanied by a multitude of pagys, or 
lackeys on foot, with large canes, who advance a 
^reat way before the princess, both to the rigb/t 
and to the left, for the purpose of clearing the 
road and driving before them every intruder* 
Immediately behind Rochinara-Begum's retinue, 
appears a principal lady of the court, mounted and 
attended much in the same manner as the princess. 
This lady is followed by a third ; she by a fourth; 
aiid so on^ until fifteen or sixteen females «f 
quality pass with a grandeur of appeararvoe, 
equipage and retinue more or less prc^rtionate 
to their rank, pay, and office. There is somethia^ 
very impressive of state and royalty in the miarch 
of these sixty or more elephants; in their solemn 
atid, as it were, measured steps ; in the splendcMir 
of the mik-dembers, and the brilliant and immmer* 
able Edllowers in attendance : and if I had not 
iiegarded this display of magmficence witJi a sort 
ef philosophical indiffisrence, I siMuld have been 
apt to be carried away by the similar flights o( 
imagination as inspire lasost of the Indian po^^ 
when they represent the elephants as eonveying 
so i»any goddesses, concealed from the vulgar 
gaze. 

Truly, it » wHh difficulty thart these ladies o^n 
be approadied, aoid they are almost inaccessihhi 
to the sight of man. Woe to any eavaUet, hcm^ 
^vet^exaHed ill rank, wh^ meeting the proeefrion^ 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



MOGUL BHPUE. 1 11 

is found too near. Nothing caii exceed the inso- 
lence of the tribes of eunuchs and pages which he 
has to encounter^ and they eagerly avail them- 
selves of any such opportunity to beat a man in 
ihe most unmerciful manner. I shall not easily 
forget being once surprised in a similar situation, 
and how narrowly I escaped the cruel treatment 
that many cavaliers have experienced : but deter*^ 
mined not to su£fer myself to be beaten and per- 
haps maimed without a struggle, I drew my 
sword, and having fortunately a strong and spirited 
horse, I Was enabled to open a passage, sword in 
hand, through a host of assailants, and to dash 
across the rapid stream which was before me. It 
is indeed a proverbial observation in the army that 
three things are carefully to be avoided : the first, 
getting among the choice and led horses, where 
kicking abounds ; the second, intruding on the 
hunting ground ; and the third, a too near ap^- 
protfM2!h to the ladies of the seraglio. It is much 
Woi^se, however, in Persia. I understand that 
in diat country life itself is forfeited if a man 
be within sight even of the eunuchs^ althougii he 
should be half a league distant from the women; 
ttnd all the male inhabitants of the towns and ril^ 
lages tbrough which the seraglio is to pass murt 
abandon their l^mies and €f to a coo^iderable 
^taQce. . ' '^ 

I shall now sp«ak of the fidd sports of iht 
king. We could never conceive hbw the Great 
Mogui could kufit With an army <>r <4ne hundred 



V 



«| Digitized by LjOOQIC 

V 



112 TRAVELS IN THE 

thousand men; but there certainly: is a sense^ in 
which he may be said to hunt with two hundred 
thousand, or with any number of which his army 
may consist. 

In the neigbourhoods of Agra and Delhi, aloi^ 
the course of the Jumna, reaching to the mountains^ 
and even on both sides of the road leading to 
Lahore, there is a large quantity of uncultivated 
land, covered either with copse wood or with 
grasses six feet high. All this land is guarded 
with the utmost vigilance; and excepting par- 
tridges, quails and hares, which the natives catch 
with nets, no person, be he who he may,^ is per- 
niitted to disturb the game ; which is consequently 
very abundant. 

Whenever the monarch is about to take the 
field, qvery game-keeper near whose district the 
army is to' pass, is called upon to apprize the 
grand master of the hunt, of the various sorts of 
game under his particular charge, and of the places 
where they are in the' greatest plenty. Guards 
are then stationed in the different avenues, to 
giiard the tract of ground selected, which' eittends 
sometimes four and five leagues; and while the 
army is on its march, on one side or the other, so 
as to avoid that tract, the king enters it with -as 
many omrahsr and pther persons as have liberty to 
do so, and enjoys, leisurely and uninterruptedly, 
the isports of the field, varying them according to 
the naturfe of the game. » 

I shall, in the first place; describe the^ manner 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MoaUL EMPIRE. 113 

in which they chase antelopes with tame leo^ 
pards. 

I think that I have elsewhere told you that 
there are in India large numbers of antelopes, 
very much resembling our fawns in shape; that 
they move generally in herds; and that every 
herd, which is never composed of more than 
five or six, is followed by a male, who is easily 
distinguished by his colour. When one of these 
little troops is discovered, the first step is to have 
it seen by the leopard, who is kept chained on a 
small car. The sagacious and cunning animal 
does not, as might be expected, run at once 
towards the antelopes, but winds about, hides him* 
self, crouches, and in this cautious manner ap- 
proaches them unperceived, so as to give himself 
a fair chance of catching them with those five or 
six bounds, which the leopard is noted for making 
with incredible agility. If successful, he gluts 
himself with their blood, heart and liver ; but if 
he miss his prey, as frequently happens, he makes 
no other effort, but stands perfectly still. It 
would indeed be useless to contend with these ani*- 
mals in a fair race^ for they run much more fleetly 
and much longer than the leopard. His keeper 
finds no great diflSculty in securing him again on 
the car; he comes softly, caresses him, throws 
down a few pieces of flesh and, covering his eyes, 
fastens his chain. During the march, one of these 
leopards very unexpectedly afforded us this amuse^ 
ment^ to the no small consternation, however, of 

VOL. II; I 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



114 TRAYSLSIMTHE 

many of us. A troop of imtelopefl ran through 
the midst of the army, as was indeed the caie 
every day ; but these happened to pass vei^ dose 
to two leopards who were placed as usual an theif 
car. One, whose eyes were not covered, made so 
violent an effort as to break his ohain, and rash 
aft^r the antelopes, but without ci^hiDg^ any 
Impeded however, in their flight, turned and par- 
sued on all sides, one of them could bot avoid 
again approaching the leopard, who pounotd 
upon, and seized the poor animal, notwithstanding 
the crowds of camels and horses that were in his 
way, and contrary to the common opinion thattiie 
leopard never attacks the prey which he has once 
missed. 

There is nothing very interesting in the mode 
of hunting the hil-ghaus, or grey bxen ; ^hich as 
I before stated are a species of elk. Thfey enclose 
thefai in great nets, iVhich are drawn closer by 
degrees ; and, when thfe spac6 is reduced to a small 
cotepass^ the king enters with his omrahs Md 
huntsmen, and the animal is killed with arrows, 
short pikes, swords and musketoons. Sometimes 
thes^ nil'ghaufl are slaughtered in such numben 
that the king sends whole quarters of them as 
presents to all the omrahs. 

It is curious enough to observe the manna in 
which cranes are caught Their courageous de- 
fence in the air against the birds of prey afibids 
much sport Sometimes they kill their assailants ; 
but from the slowness of their movements in 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOaUL EMPiRB. 1V5 

lirheeling touud, they are overcome a,s the number 
of their enemies hicrea3^e8. 

But of 1^11 the diverslofis of the field the 
hunting of the lion is npt oply the most perilous, but 
it is peculiarly royal ; ft)r, except by special pey- 
mission> the king and prince^ are the only persons 
who engage in the sport* As a preliminary step^, 
an ass is tied near the spot where the game-keepers 
have ascertained the lion retires. The wretched 
animal is soon devoured, and after so ample a 
meal the lion never seeks for other prey, but 
without molesting either oxen, sheep or shepherd 
goes in quest of water, and ^fter quenching his 
thirst, returns to his former place of retirement. 
H^ sleeps until the next morning, when he f|ndp 
and devours another ass, which the game-keepers 
have brought to the same spot. In this way they 
contrive, during several days, to allure the lion 
and to attach him to one place ; and when in- 
formation is received of the king's approach, they 
&8ten at the spot an ass where so many others have 
been sacrificed, down whose throat a large quan- 
tity of opium has been forced. This last meal is 
pf course intended to produce a soporific efffect 
upo|i the lion. The next operation is to spread, 
by means of the peasantry of the adjacent village?, 
large nets, made on purpose, which are gradually 
drawn closer, in the manner practised in hunting 
nil^ghaus. Every thing being in this state of pre- 
"pMration, the king appears on an elephant barbed 
with iron, and attended by the grand master of the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



116 . TRAVELS IN THE 

hunt, some omrahs mounted on elephants^ and 
a great number both of gourze-berdars on horise- 
back and of game-keepers on foot^ armed with 
half-pikes. He immediately approaches the 
tlet on the outside, and fires at the lion with a 
large musketoon. The wounded animal makes a 
spring at the elephant, according to the invariable 
practice of lions, but is arrested by the net ; and 
the king continues to discharge his musketoon, 
until the lion is at length killed. 

It happened, however, during the l^t hunt^ 
that the enraged animal leaped over the net, 
rushed upon a cavalier, whose horse he killed, and 
then effected his escape for a time. Being pursued 
by the huntsmen, he was at length found and again 
enclosed in nets. The whole army was on that 
occasion subjected to great inconveniencies and 
thrown into a considerable degree of confusion. 
We remained three or four days patrolling in a 
country intersected with torrents from the moun- 
tains, and covered with underwood, and long grass 
that nearly concealed the camels. No bazaars 
had been formed and there were no towns or 
villages near the army. * Happy those who during 
this scene of disorder could satisfy the cravings of 
hunger! Shall I explain the weighty reason of 
this long detention in such abominable quarters ? 
You must know then, that as it is considered a 
favourable omen when the king kills a lion, so is 
the escape of that animal portentous of infinite 
evil to the state. Accordingly, the termination of 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE* 117 

ihe hunt is attended with much grave ceremony. 
The king being seated in the general assembly of 
the omrahs, the dead lion is brought before hira^ 
and when the carcase has been accurately measured 
and minutely exanuned^ it is recorded in the royal 
archives that such a king on such a day slew a 
lion of such a size and of such a skin^ ^hose teeth 
were of such a lengthy and whose claws were of 
such dimensions. 

Let me just add a word on the subject of the 
opium given to the ass. One of the principal 
huntsnien assures me that it is a tale of the vulgar, 
and that the lion is sufficiently disposed to sleep 
when he has eaten to satiety. 

I observed that the great rivers are commonly 
without bridges. The army crossed them by 
means of two bridges of boats, constructed with 
tolerable skill, and placed between two and three 
hundred paces apart. Earth and straw mingled 
together, are thrown upon them to prevent the 
pattle from slipping. The greatest confusion and 
danger occur at the extremities; for not 
only the crowd and pressure occur most there, 
but when the approaches to the bridge are com- 
posed of soft moving earth, they become so 
buoken up and so full of pits, that horses and 
laden oxen tumble upon one another into them, 
and the people pass over the struggling animals 
in the utmost disorder. The evil would be much 
increased if the army were under the necessity of 
crossing in one day ; but the king generally fixes 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



116 TRAVELS IN TAB 

his camp ab^M half a league from th& bridges «( 
boats, and sufifer* a day or two to ehipse ere hi 
passes to the opposite udt of the river ; wfaeo, 
pitching his tents within half a league from tk 
bank, he again delays his departure so as to allow 
the army three days and eights, at least, to eftct 
the passage. 

As to the number of people, whether soldiers 
or others, which the camp contains^ it is not easy 
to determine accurately ; so variofts are the opi- 
nions on this point. I may vetttune, howevwr, to 
state generally, that in this march from Drfhi to 
Kashmire, there are at least one hundred ^usand 
horsemen, and more than one hundred and fifty 
thousand animals, comprising horses, mides^ and 
elephants; that besides these, diere cannot be 
much less than fifty thousand camels ; and neaoAf 
as many oxen or horses employed to carry the 
wives and children, the grain and other provisioiis 
belonging to the poor people connected with the 
bazaars, who when they travel take with th«tt, 
like the gypsies, the whole of their families, goocb 
and chattels. The servants in the army must be 
indeed numerous, since nothing is done without 
their assistance. I rank only with a two-hoi^ 
cavalier, and yet I cannot possibly contrive twA 
less than three men. Matiy are of opinion that 
the camp contains between three and four huHt- 
dred thousand persbns; somfe believe this estimate 
to be too small, while others consider it rather 
exaggerated. Accurately to determine the ques- 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



MOGUt EMPIRB. 119 

tipn tlie people should be numbered. AU I can 
cot^iexdly assett is l^at the multitude is pro* 
digious and almost incredible. The whole popur 
fefion of Delhi, the papital city, is in fact,colled;ed 
ill (the camp, because derinng its employmeo^ 
and maintenanoe fit)m the court aiid ^vmy^ it 
has no alternatire Imt to follow them in fhm 
march or to perish from want during their «fe- 

You iSare no do%dl)t at a loss to conceive how so 
im$t a nuinb^ both of men wd animais cw be 
Maintained in the field. Th^ best soluljan of the 
:diiffieitltj)r wiil be found in the t^oipex^nce and 
mvifflk dkat of the Indians. Of tbe five scoi:p 
ii^usaAd<eayjiJlei:s not a tejatb^ m>,mt9 twentjieM^ 
fwA, tmt mivxpl food ; the}r are satisfied with th€<^ 
laicheryi a mesa of rice mA other vieg^hles, oy^r 
wMch, when boiled, ihey pour melted feutter. 
|/t jshouJid be ceofisider^ed too, ithat cam^^Is endure 
fati^e> hunger and tiburst in a surprising .degree, 
Jive upon little, and eat imy kind ^:foQd* M the 
fcmd of every BEiarch^ they aise left to browse in the 
$dd$, where every thing series fox fodder. ' It k 
impwtfuil; likewise to obserye thal^ the same 
'l^ritdesmea who supply the bazaars at DeHu are 
impelled to fumsh them ia tbe camp; the 
.9h<qM( of whidb they lare 'compoaed being J^ept by 
. 4^ same pemons^ whether in ibhe capital or in the 
ifield. 

These poor people are at giieat pains fto 
procure forage .: they rove about firom viHage 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



120 TRAVELS JN THE 

to village^ and what they succeed in purciiasing^ 
they endearour to sell in the army at an advanced 
price. It is a common practice with them to 
clear, with a sort of trowel, whole fields of a 
peculiar kind of grass, which having heaten and 
washed, they dispose pf in the camp at a price 
sometimes very high and sometimes inadequately 
low. 

There is a curious fact respecting the' king 
which I had almost forgotten to relate. He 
enters the camp sometimes on one side, sometimes 
on another ; that is, he will to-day pass near the 
tents of certain omrahs and to-morrow near the 
tents of others. This variation of route is not, as 
you might suppose, accidental: the omrahs, whom 
the monarch honours by his vicinity, must leave 
their quarters to meet him, and must present his 
majesty with a purse of more or less value; 
from twenty to fifty golden rupees according 
to their liberality and the amount of their pay. 

I shall say nothing of the towns and vil- 
lages between Delhi and Lahore: I have in 
fact scarcely seen any of them. My aga*s sta^ 
tion not being in the centre of the ^army, 
where the high road is often found, but in the 
front of the right wing, it was our custom to 
traverse fields and by-paths during the ni^ht, 
guided by the stars; frequently miistaking our 
way, and marching five or six leagues, instead c^ 
three or four, the usual distance between two 
encampments, till day-light again set us right. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE* 121 

. LETTER THE THIRD, 

mmirtVN AT LAHOBK ON THB KING'S BSSimiNQ HIS JOURNEY TO KASHMIRI. 
' SIR, 

It i& not' without reason that the kingdom of 
which Lahore is the capital, is named the Penjeab, 
pr the Region of the Five Waters ; because five 
rivers do really descend from the great mountains 
which enclose the kingdom of Kashmire^ and taking 
their course through this country, fall into the 
Indus, which empties itself into the ocean at 
Sindy, near the mouth of the Persian Gulf.** 
Whether Lahore be the ancient Bucephala, I do 
not pretend to determine. Alexander is here 
sufficiently known by the name of Sekander Fi- 
Hfous, or Alexander the son of Philip : concerning 
his horse,, however, they know nothing. The 
river on which the city was built, one of the 
£ve^ is as considerable as the Loire, and is 
much in want of a similar causeway as that 
on which the road is carried on the banks of the 
French river ; for it is subject to inundations which 
c^use great injury and frequently change its bed : 
indeed within a few years the river has receded 
a full quarter of a league from Lahore to the 
great inconvenience of the inhabitants. Unlike the 
buildings of Delhi and Agra, the houses here 
are very lofty : but the court having resided 
during the last twenty years or more in one of 
those two cities, most of the houses in Lahore are 
in a ruinous state. Indeed, many have been 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



133 T&AVEU IN THE 

totally destroyed and have buried many of the 
inhabitants under their ruins, in consequence of 
the heavy rains which have prevailed of late years. 
There are still five or six considerable streets, two 
or three of which exceed a league in length ; but 
not a few of the houses in them adc tumbling to tfag 
ground. The river having changed its bed, the 
king^s palace is no loiter seated on its banks* 
This is a high and iioide edifice, though very 
kiferior to the palaces of Delhi or Agnu It is 
ifiore than two months sinee me arrived in tUi 
-tity*. we have waited for the mdlting of the snow 
on the mountains of Kashmire, in order to obtdn 
an easier passage into that country. Our de« 
paarture is finafly fixed, however, for to-morvow. 
The king quitted Lahore two days ago. I am 
provided with a small and handsome Kedhmirean 
t^it^ which I pmrchased yesterday. I hanre heeit 
•dvised to do the same as others, and to propeai 
no farther with my old tent, which is rather laige 
and heavy. It wild be difficult, they tell me, to 
And room for all our tents among tiie mountains 
of Kashmire, which ibeades are impassabie to 
camels ; so that mqifiring porters for xmit baggage, 
the carriage of my old tent would be itoo^ej^owtv^ 
Farewdll 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



uoavti mtn'R^. 123 



WmTTEN Mt««k mt CAMP 6f tHE AftBTf M^^Hmti fHOM lA^Oldl ft) tASHMIBB, 
THE FOURTH DAY OF ITS MARCH. 

SIR, 

I HOPED that^ as I had survived the heat of Mokha 
tiear the straits of Babelmandel^ 1 should have 
nothing to apprehend from the burning rays of the 
sun in any part of the earth; but that hope 
has abandoned me since the army left Lahore 
four days ago. I Bm indeed no longer surprised 
that even the Indians expressed much apprehen- 
sion of the misery which awaited them during the 
eleven or twelve days' march of the army from 
Lahore to Bember, which is situated at the 
entrance of the Kashmire mountains. I declare^ 
without the least exaggeration^ that I have been 
reduced by the intenseness of the heat to the last 
i&xtremity ; scarcely believing, when I rose in the 
morning, that I should outlive the day. This 
extraordinary heat is occasioned by the high 
mountains of Kashmire ; for being to the north 
of our road,4;hey intercept the cool breezes which 
would refresh us from that quarter^ at the same 
time that they reflect the scorching sun-beams, 
and leave the whole country arid and suffocating. 
^ut why should I attempt to account philoso- 
phically for that which may kill me to morraw ? 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



124 TRAVELS IN THE 

LETTER THE FIFTH, 

WBimCN FROM THE CAMP ON THE SIXTH DAY OF THE MARCH. 

I YESTERDAY crossed one of the great rivers of 
India, called the Chunaub. Its excellent water, 
with which the principal omrahs are providing 
themselves, instead of the Ganges' water that has 
hitherto supplied their wants, induces me to hope 
that the ascent of this river does not lead to the 
infernal regions, but that it may really conduct us 
to the kingdom of Kashmire, where they would 
make me believe we should be gladdened with 
the sight of ice and snow* Every day is found 
more insupportable than the preceding, and the 
farther we advance, the more does the heat inr 
crease. It is true that I crossed the bridge of 
boats at broad noon day, but I am not sure that 
my sufferings would have been less if I had 
remained stifling in my tent. My object was at 
least attained, I passed over this bridge quietly, 
while every body else was resting and waiting 
to cross toward the dose of the day, when the 
heat is less oppressive. Perhaps I owe my es- 
cape from some fatal accident to my prudence 
and foresight, for no passage of a river, since the 
army quitted Delhi, has been attended with such 
dreadful concision. The entrance at one ex- 
tremity of the bridge into the first boat, and 
the going out from the last boat at the other 
extremity, were rendered extremely difficult and 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL empire;. 125 

dangerous on account of the loose moving sand 
which it was necessary to pass, and which giving 
way under the feet of such crowds of animals, was 
carried oflP by the current, and left considerable 
cavities into which numbers of camels, oxen, and 
horses, were thrown down, and trodden under 
foot, while blows were dealt about without in- 
termission. There are generally upon these 
occasions oflBcers and cavaliers attached to omrahs, 
who to clear the way for their masters and their 
baggage, make an active use of their canes. My 
navaab has lost one of his camels, with the iron 
oven it carried ; so that I fear I shall be reduced 
to the necessity of eating the bazaar bread. 



LETTER THE SIXTH, 

WRITTKN FROM THE CAB4P ON THE EIGHTH DAY OP THE MABCB. 

Alas, my dear sir ! what can induce an European 
to expose himself to such terrible heat, and to 
these harassing and perilous marches ? It is too 
much curiosity; or rather it is gross folly and 
inconsiderate rashness. My hfe is placed in con- 
tmual jeopardy. Out of evil, however, may arise 
some good. When at Lahore, I was seized with a 
defluxion, accompanied by acute pains in my 
limbs, in consequence of having passed whole 
nights on a terrace in the open air, as is commonly 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



126 tRAYEIiB IN THB 

done in Delhi withoilt ^danger. My health was 
liii£Pering; but since we have been on the march^ 
the violent perspirations, continued for eight or 
nine days, have dissipated my bad humours, and 
my parched and withered body is become a mere 
sieve^ the quart of water, which I swallow at a 
draughty passing at the same moment through 
every one of my pores, even to my fingers* ends. 
I am sure I have not drunk to-day less than ten or 
eleven quarts. Amid all our sufferings, it is a 
great consolation to be able to drink as much 
wat^ as we please with impunity, provided it be 
of a good quality. 



LETTER THE SEVENTH, 

WBITTEN FROM THE CAMP ON THE TENTH DAY OF THE MARCH, IN THB MORNING. 
SIR, 

The sun is but just rising, yet the heat is insup- 
portable. There is not a cloud to be seen nor a 
breath of air to be felt. My horses are exhausted ; 
they have not seen a blade of green grass since we 
quitted Lahore. My Indian servants, notwith- 
standing their black, dry and hard skin, are inca- 
pable of farther exertion. The whole of my face, 
my feet and my hands are flayed. My body too 
is entirely covered with small red blisters, which 
prick like needles. Yesterday one of our poor 
cavaliers, who was without a tent, was found dead 
at the foot of a tree, whither he had crept for 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



UQQVh EMFIIW. 187 

^hj^lter. I feel as if I should lAydelf expire before 
i^ht* All my hopes are in four or five kmoiis 
itSl remaiDin^ for lemonade^ and in a little dry 
curd which I am about to drink diluted with water 
$ad with sugar. Heaveu Uess you! the ink 
dri$s at the end of my pen> and the pen itself 
drops from my hand. 



LETl^ER THE BIGHTH, v 

t^ITTEN At BEMBER, THE ENTRANCE OF THE MOUNTAINS OF KASHMIRB, AFTER 
HAVOrO BEEN TWO I>AYS JBNCAMf 8B NBAB THAT TOWN. 

At length we have reached Bember, situated at 
the foot of a steep, black and scorched mountain. 
We are encamped in the dry bed of a considerable 
torrent, upon pebbles and burning sands, — a very 
furnace; and if a heavy shower had not fallen 
opportunely this morning, and I had not received 
from the mountains a seasonable supply of curdled 
tnUk, lemons, and a fowl, I know not what would 
have become of your poor correspondent. But 
God be praised! the atmosphere is evidently 
cooler, my appetite is restored, my strength im- 
proved ; and the first use I make of returning health 
is to resume my pen. You must now be made ac- 
quainted with new marches and fresh troubles. 

Yesterday, at night, the king left these suffo- 
cating quarters. He was accompanied by Rochi- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



128 TRAVELS IM THE 

nara^-Begum and the other women of the seraglio, 
the Rajah Ragnat, who acts as vurier, and Fazel- 
khan^ the high steward : and last night the grand 
master of the hunt also left the camp, with some 
principal officers of the royal household^ and 
several ladies of distinction. To-night, it will he 
our turn to depart: besides my navaah Danech- 
mend-khan's family, the party will consist of 
Mahmet-Emir-khan, son of the celebrated Emir 
Jemla, of whom I have already spoken so much ; 
of my excellent friend Dianet-khan and his two 
sons, and of several other omrahs, rajahs and 
mansebdars. The other lords, who are to visit 
Kashmire will depart each in his turn, to lessen 
the inconvenience and concision that must attend 
the five days* journey between this place and 
Kashmire, through difficult and mountainous 
paths. The remainder of the court, such as 
Feday-khan, the grand master of the artillery, 
three or four principal rajahs^ and a large number 
of omrahs, will continue stationed as guards, Jn 
this town and neighbourhood, during three or four 
months, until the great heat be over, when the 
king will return* Some will pitch their tents on 
the banks of the Chunaub," others will repair to 
the adjacent towns and villages, and the rest will 
be under the necessity of encamping in this burn- 
ing Bember. 

That a scarcity of provisions may not be pro- 
duced in the small kingdom of Kashmire, the king 
will be followed by a very limited nuniber of in- 



Digilized by LjOOQ IC 



WOGUL EMFIRE. 129 

dividuals. Of females, he take^ only ladies of the 
first rank, the intimate friends, of Rpchinara* 
Begum, and those women whose services cannot 
easily be dispensed with. The omrahs and mili- 
tary will also be as few as possible ; and those 
lords, who have permission to attend the monarch, 
will be accompanied by no more than twenty- 
five cavaliers out of every hundred ; not however 
to the exclusion of the immediate officers of their 
household. These regulations cannot be evaded, 
an omrah being stationed at the pass of the moun- 
tains, who reckons every person one by one,, and 
effectually prevents the ingress of that multitude 
of mansebdars and other cavaliers who are eager 
to inhale the pure and refreshing air of Kashraire ; 
as well as of all those petty tradesmen and in- 
mates of the bazaars whose only object is to gain 
a livelihood, 

Tl\e king has a few of the choicest elephants 
for his baggage, and the women of the seraglio. 
Though heavy and unwieldy, these animals are yet 
very sure-footed, feeling their way when the road 
is difficult and dangerous, and assuring themselves 
of the firm hold of one foot before they move' 
another. The king has also a few mules ; but 
his camels, which would be more useful, are all 
left behind, the mountains being too steep and 
craggy for their long stiff legs. Porters sup- 
ply the place of camels; and you may judge 
of the immense number that will be employed, if 
what they tell me be true, that the king alone has no 

VOL. II. K 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



130 TRATEL8 IN THS 

fefw^r thaii Ax thousand. I miiBt myself hate thirM> 
although I left my large tent and a consideridili 
quaifttity of luggage at Lahore : every person did 
the same, not excepting the omrahs and the king 
himself; and yet it is calculated that there are at 
least fifteen thousand porters already collected in 
Bember ; some sent by the Governor of Kashmire 
and by the neighouring rajahs, and others who nt^ 
come voluntarily in the expectation of earnitog^ a 
little money. A royal ordinance fixes their pay 
at ten crowns for every hundred pounds weight. 
It is computed that thirty thousand will be ein'^ 
ployed ; an enormous number, when it is <K>nBi* 
dered that the king and omrahs have been sending 
forward baggage, and the tradespeople articles of 
every sort for the last month. 



LETTER THE NINTH, 



WRITTKN AT KASHMIBB, THE TEBBESTRIAL PAJIADISB OP TH* INDIES, AITBR A 
EESIBENCB OP THREE MONTHS. 

SIR, 

The histories of the ancient kings of Kashmire 
maintain that the whole of this country was in 
former times one vast lake, and that an outlet for 
the waters was opened by a certain pire, or aged 
saint, named Kacheb, who miraculously cut the 
mountain of Barehmooleh. This account is to be 
met with in the abridgement of the above-meh- 
tioned histories, made by order of Jehan Guire, 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



MOGUL EMPIRB* 13 1 

wikh I am now translating from the Persian. I 
am oertainly^not disposed to deny that thib region 
was once covered with water : the same thing is 
reported of Thessaly and of other conntries ; but 
I cannot easily persuade myself that the opening 
in question was the work of man, for the moun- 
taiiir b very extensive and very lofty. I rather 
ima^ne that the mountain sank into some sub- 
terraneous cavern> which was unclosed by a violent 
e»thquake, not uncommon in these countries* If 
we are to believe the Arabs of those parts, the 
opening of Babelmandel was effected in the same 
manner; and it is thus that entire towns and 
mountains have been engulphed in great lakes. 

Kashmire, however, is no longer a lake, but a 
beautiful country, diversified with a great many 
hillocks : about thirty leagues in length, and from 
ten to twelve in breadth. It is situated at the 
extremity of Hindostan, to the north of Lahore ; 
enclosed by the mountains at the foot of Caucasus, 
those of the kings of Great Thibet and Little 
Thibet, and of the Rajah Gamon ; who are its 
most immediate neighbours. 

The surrounding mountains nearest to the 
valley of Kashmire, are of moderate height, of the 
freshest verdure, decked with trees and covered 
with pasture land, on which cows, sheep, goats, 
horses, and every kind of cattle, is seen to 
graze. Game of various species is in great 
plenty, — partridges, hares, antelopes, and animals 
yielding musk. Bees are also in vast abundance ; 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



13s TRAVELS IN THE 

and, what may be considered very extraordinary 
in India, there are, with few or no exceptions, 
neither serpents, tigers, bears, nor lions. These 
mountains may indeed be characterized not only 
as innocuous, but as flowing in rich exuberance 
with milk and honey.* 

Beyond the mountains just described arise 
others of very considerable altitude whose summits^ 
at all times covered with snow, soar above the 
clouds and ordinary fogs and, like Mount 
Olympus, are constantly bright and serene. 

From the sides of all these mountains gush 
forth innumerable spring^ and streams of water, 
which are conducted, by means of aqueducts, 
even to the top of the numerous hillocks iq the 
valley; thereby enabling the inhabitants to irri- 
gate their fields of rice. These waters, after 
separating into a thousand rivulets and producing" 
* a thousand cascades through this charming" 
country, at length collect and form a beautiful 

* The valley or country of Kashmire is celebrated through- 
out Upper Asia for its romantic beauties, for the fertility of 
its soil and for the temperature of its atmosphere. AH these 
particulars may be accounted for, when it is considered that 
it is an elevated and exte sive valley, surrounded by steep 
mountains that tower above the regions of snow ; and that 
its soil is composed of the mud deposited by a capital rirer, 
which originally formed its waters into a lake that covered 
the whole valley; until it opened itself a passage .through 
the mountains, and hft this fertilized .valley, an ample field 
to human industry, and to the accommodation of a happy 
race : for such the ancient inhabitants of Kashmire undoubt- 
edly were. — Major RennelL 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. _--4^3^ 

river, navigable for vessels as large as are borne 
on tbe Seine. It winds gently around the king- 
dom, and passing through the capital, bends its 
peaceful course toward Barehmooleh, where it 
finds an outlet between two stupendous rocks 
and being then joined by several smaller rivers 
from the mountains, throws itself over precipices 
and falls into the Indus near the city of Attock. 

The numberless streams which issue from the 
mountains, maintain the valley and the hillocks 
in the most delightful verdure. The whole king>- 
dom wears the appearance of a fertile and highly 
cultivated garden. Villages and hamlets are 
frequently seen through the luxuriant foliage. 
Meadows and vineyards, fields of rice, wheat^ 
hemp, saffron and other vegetables, among which 
are intermingled trenches filled with water, rivu- 
lets, canals and a few small lakes, vary the en- 
chanting scene. The whole ground is enamelled 
with European flowers* and plants, and covered 
with our apple, pear, plum, apricot and walnut- 
trees, all bearing fruit in great abundance. The 
private gardens are full of melons, pateques, 
or water melons, skirrets, red beet, radishes, the 
major part of omr potherbs, and other herbs 
with which we are unacquainted. 

* I may venture to class in the first rank of vegetable 
produce, the'roseof Kashmire, which, for its brilliancy and 
delicacy of odour has long been proverbial in the east, and 
its essential oil or ottar iaheld in universal estimation. — 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



134 THAVBLS IN THE 

The fruit is certainly inferior to our owOf nor 
is it in such variety ; but this I am satisfied is not 
attributable to the soil, but merely to the com- 
parative ignorance of the gardeners ; for they do 
not understand the culture and the grafting pf 
trees as we do in France. I have eaten, however, 
a g^eat deal of very excellent fruit during my resi- 
dence in Kashmire, and should entertain no doubt 
of its arriving at the same degree of excellency 
as ihat of Europe if the people were more atten- 
tive to the aspect of the trees wd supplied them 
with grafts from foreign countries. 

The capital of Kashmire bears the same njs»ne 
as the kingdom. It has no walls and is not less than 
three quarter's of a league in length and half 
a league in breadth. It is situated in a plain; 
distant about two leagues from the mountains 
which seem to describe a semicircle ; and seated 
on the banks of a fresh water lake whose circum- 
ference IS from four to five leagues.^ This lake is 

* George Forster, who visited this city in the ye^r 1783, 
thus describes it. '' The city, which in the ancient annals of 
India was known by the name of Siringnahur, but now by 
that of the province at ]arge, extends about three miles on 
each side of the rive Gsdum, over which are four or 6ve 
wooden bridges, and occupies in some part of its breadths 
which is irregular, about two miles. The houses, many of 
them two and three stories high, are slightly built of brick 
and mortar with a large intermixture of Umber* On ^. 
standing roof of wood is laid a covering of fine earth, which 
'shelters the building from the great quantity of snow that 
falls in the winter season. This fence communicates an 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 135 

fiNrmed of lite springs and of streams descending 
from the mountains^ and communicates with the 
rivrer which rmis through the town b^ means of a 
canal sufficiently large to admit boats. In the 
town there are two wooden bridges thrown over 
tl» river ; and the houses, although for the most 
part of wood, are well-built and consist of two or 
tkffee stories. There is, however, plenty of very 
fine freestone in the country, some old buildings, 
aod a great number of ancient pagan temples 
in ruins, are of stone ; but wood is preferred 
on account of its cheapness, and the facility with 
which it is brought from the mountains by means 
of so many sm^U, rivers. Most of the houses 
along the banks of the river have little gardens, 
which produce a very pretty effect, especially 
in the spring and summer, when many parties 

efual warmth in winter, as^ r^freshipg: P^olpesq in th^Bum* 
mer season, when the tops of th^ houses, which are plaQt^4 
wi)h a variety of flpwers, exhibit at a distance the spacious 
view of a beautifully chequered parterre. The streets are 
narrow, and choked With the filth of the inhabitants, who 
are proverbially unclean. No buildings are seen in this city 
worthy of remark. The benefits wbieh this city enjoys of a 
mild salubrious air, a river flowing through its centre, of 
many large and commodious houses are essentially alloyed 
by its confined construction and the extreme filthiness of the 
people^ The covered floating baths, which are ranged along 
the sides of the river, give the only testimony of conveniency 
or order ; such baths are much wanted by the Indian mu- 
hammedans, who from the climate and their religion are ob- 
liged to make frequent ablutions.'' 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



136 TRAVELS IN THE 

of pleasure take place on the water. Indeed 
most houses m the city have also their gardens ; 
and many have a canal, on which the owner keeps 
a pleasure hoat, thus communicating with the 
lake. 

At an extreme end of the town, appears an 
isolated hill, with handsome houses on its de- 
clivity, each having a garden. Toward the sum- 
mit are a mosque and hermitage, both good 
buildings ; and the hill is crowned with a large 
quantity of fine trees. It forms altogether, an 
agreeable object, and from its trees and gardens 
it is called, in the language of the country, Hirriey 
Purvet or the Verdant Mountain. 

Opposite to this hill is seen another, on which 
is also erected a small mosque with a garden and 
an extremely ancient building which bears evident 
marks of having been a pagan temple, although 
named Tuckt Suliman, The Throne of Solomon. 
The muhammedans pretend it was raised by that 
celebrated king, when he visited Kashmire ; but 
I doubt whether they could prove that this 
country was ever honotired with his presence.* 

The lake is full of islands, which are so 

* The legends of the country assert, that Solomon visited . 
this valley, and finding it covered, except theiiill on which, 
some muhammedan has dedicated a temple to king Solomon, 
with a noxious water which had no outlet, he opened a pas* 
sage in the mountains, and gave to Kashmire iU beautiful 
plains. Tuckt Suliman, the name bestowed by* the mu- 
hammedans on the hill, forms one side of a grand portal to 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOaUL EMt>IRE. 137 

many pleasure grounds. They look beautiful 
and green in the midst of the water, being covered 
with fruit trees, and having regular walks laid 
out as so many bowers. In general they are sur- 
rounded by the large-leafed asp, planted at 
intervals of two feet. The largest of these trees 
may be clasped in a man's arms, but they are 
as high as the mast of a ship and have only 
a tuft of branches at the top, like the palm 
tree. 

The declivities of the mountains beyond the 
lake are crowded with houses and flower gardens. 
The air is salubrious, and the situation consi- 
dered most desirable : they abound with springs 
and streams of water^ and command a de- 
lightful view of the lake, the islands and the 
town. 

The most beautiful of all these gardens is one 
belonging to the king, called Shalimar. The 
entrance from the lake is through a spacious 
canal, bordered with green turf, and running 
between two rows of poplars. Its length is 
about five hundred paces, and it leads^ to a large 

the lake, and on the other stands a lower hill, which, in the 
Hinduee is called Himey Purvet, or the Green Hill, a name 
probably adopted from its being covered with gardens and 
orchards. - On the summit of the Himey Purvet, the Kash- 
mirians have erected a mosque to the honour of a Muck^ 
doom Saheb, who is as famous in their tales, as Thomas-a-: 
Becket in those of Canterbury. — Forster. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



138 TRAVELS IN THE 

summer*house placed in the middle of the garden. 
A second canal, still finer than the first, tlmn 
conducts yon to another summer*houae, at the 
end of the garden. This canal is paved with 
large freestone, and its sloping sides are covered 
with the same. In the middle, is a long roir 
of jet$ d'eau, or water-works, fifteen paces asqn^ 
der; besides which, there are, here and there, 
large circular basins, or reservoirs, out of whicbi 
arise other jets d'eau, formed into a variety, of 
shapes and figures. 

The summer houses are placed in the midst 
of the canal, consequently surrounded by watar, 
and between the two rows' of large poplais 
planted on either side. They are built in the 
form of a dome, and encircled by a gallery, iii|o 
which four doors open ; two looking up, or down, 
the canal, and two leading to bridges that connect 
the building with both banks. The houses coor* 
sist of a large room in the centre, and of four 
smaller at)artment8, one at each corner^ Th^ 
whole of the interior is painted and gilt, and cm 
the walls of all the chambers are inscribed certain, 
sentences, written in splendid Persian characters. 
The four doors are extremely valuable ; being 
composed of rare and large stone, and supported 
by two beautiful pillars. The doors and pillars 
were found in some of the pagan temples de- 
molished by Shah^ehan, and it is impossible 
to estimate their value. I cannot describe the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 1 39 

liature of the stone; but it is far superior to 
porphyry, or any species of marble.* 

You have no doubt discovered before this 
time that I am charmed with Kashmire. In 
truth, the kingdom surpasses in beauty all that 
mj warm imagination had anticipated. It h 
probably unequalled by any country of the same 
intent, and should be, as in former ages, the 
$tot of sovereign authority, extending its domi* 
nion over all the circumjacent mountains, even 
as far as Tartary, and over the whole of Hin- 

• In the centre of the plain, as it approaches the lake oa^ 
of the Delhi emperors, I believe Shah-Jehan, constructed 
a spacious garden, called the Shalimar, which is abundantly 
stored with fruit-trees and flowering shrubs. Some of the riyu* 
lets which intersect the plain, are led into a canal at the 
back of the garden, and flowing through its centre, or occar 
sionally thrown into a variety of water-works, compose the 
chief beauty of the Shalimar. To decorate this spot, the 
Mogul princes of India have displayed an equal magnifi- 
cence and taste ; especially JehantGuire, who, with the en- 
chanting Noor-M&hil, made Kashipire his usual residence 
during the summer months, and largely contributed to im- 
prove its natural advantages. On arches thrown over the 
canal are erected at equal distances, four or five suites of 
apartments, each consisting of a saloon, with four rooms at 
the angles, where the followers of the court attend, and the 
servants prepare sherbets, coffee, and the hookah. The 
frame of the doors of the principal saloon^ is composed (^ 
pieces of a stone of a black colour, streaked with yellow 
lines, and of a closer grain and higher polish than porphyry. 
They were taken, it is said, from an Hindoo temple, by one 
of the Mogul princesy and esteemed of great value. The 
Shalimar is preserved in good order. — Forster, 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



140 TRAVELS IN THE 

dostan, to the island of Ceylon. It is not indeed 
without reason that the moguls call Kashmiire the 
terrestrial paradise of India^ or that Acbar was so 
unremitting in his efforts to wrest the sceptre 
from the hand of its native princes. His son 
Jehan-Guire became so enamoured of this little 
kingdom as to make it the place of his favourite 
abode^ and he often declared that he would 
rather be deprived of every other province of his 
mighty empire than lose Kashmire.* 

I was quite prepared to witness the emulous 
contest between the native and the Mogul poets. 
We were no sooner arrived, than Aureng-Z6be 
received from the bards of both nations, poems in 
praise of this favoured land, which he accepted; 
and rewarded with kindness. They were 
written in a strain of extravagant hyperbole. 
One of them, I remember, speaking of the sur- 
rounding mountains, observed, that their extraor- 
dinary height had caused the skies to retire into 
the vaulted form which we see ; that nature had 
exhausted all her skill in the creation of this 



* Since the dismemberment of Kashmire from the empire 
of Hindostan (about the year 1754) it has been subject to 
the Afghans, and the country is held under a grievous op- 
pression. In the reign of Aureng-Z^be, when the revenue 
of the different portions of the empire exceeded that of the 
present day, the sum collected in Kashmire amounted to 
three and a half of lacks of rupees ; but at this time not less 
than twenty lacks are extracted by the Afghans* — Transr 
lator. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. HI 

country, and rendered it inaccessible to the attack 
of an hostile force ; because, being the mistress of 
the kingdoms of the earth, it was wise tp preserve 
her in perfect peace and security, that she might 
exercise universal dominion without the possi- 
bility of ever being subject to any. The poet 
went on to say, that the summits of the higher 
and more distant mountains were clothed resplen- 
dently in white, and the minor and more conti- 
guous preserved in perpetual verdure and were 
embellished with stately trees, because it was meet 
that the mistress of the kingdoms of the earth 
should be crowned with a diadem whose top ^nd 
rays of diamonds issued from a ground of erne- 
raids. " The poet," I remarked to my navaab, 
who wished me to relish these productions, " might 
easily jjiave amplified his subject. He could, witli 
a pardonable license, have included the moupr 
tainous and neighbouring regions within the 
kingdom of Kashmire, since it is pretended that 
they were once tributary to it. I mean Littl§ 
Thibet, the states of Rajah Gamon, Cashgar, and 
Sirinagur. He might then have gone on to say, 
that the Ganges, the Indus, the Chunaub, and the 
Jumna, issue from the kingdom of Kashmir^, 
rivers which cannot yield in beauty and impor- 
tance to the Pison, the Gihon or the two other 
rivers spoken of in Genesis; and that it may 
therefore be reasonably concluded the Garden of 
Eden was planted in Kashmire, and not, according 
to the received opinion, in Armenia,'* 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



142 TRATELS IN THE 

The Kashmirians are celebrated for mt, and 
considered much more intelligeDt and ingenious 
than the Indians. In poetry and the sciences they 
are not inferior to the Persians. They are also 
very actire and industrious. The workmanship 
and beauty of their palanquins, bedsteads, trunks, 
inkstands^ boxes, spoons and various other things, 
are quite remarkable, and articles of Kashmire 
manufacture are in use in every part of India« 
They perfectly understand the art of varnishing^ 
and are eminently skilful in closely imitating the 
beautiful veins of a certain wood, by inlaying with 
gold threads so delicately wrought that I never 
saw any thing more elegant or perfect. But 
what may be considered peculiar to Kashmire, and 
the staple commodity ; that which particularly 
promotes the trade of the country and fillait with 
wealth, is the prodigious quantity of shawls which 
they manufacture, and which gives occupation even 
to the little children. These shawls are about 
a French ell and a half long, and an ell broad ; 
ornamented at both ends with a sort of embroi*- 
dery, made in the loom, a French foot in width. 
The Moguls and Indians, women as well as men, 
wear them in winter round their heads^ passing 
them over the left shoulder as a mantle. There 
are two sorts manufactured. One kind with the 
wool of the country, finer and more delicate than 
that of Spain ; the other kind with the wool, or 
rather hair (called tou2) found on the breast of a 
species of wild goat which inhabits the Great 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 1 43 

Thibet. The touz shawls are much more esteemed 
than those ihade with the native wool. I hwe 
seen some^ made purposely for the omrahs^ which 
cost one hundred and fifty rupees ; but I cannot 
learn that the others have ever sold for more than 
fifty. They are very apt, however, to be worm- 
eatra, unless frequently unfolded and aired. The 
beaver is not so soft and fine as the hair from 
these goats^. 

Great pains have been taken to manufacture 
similar shawls in Patna, Agra, and Lahore ; but 
notwithstanding every possible care, they never 

* The wealth and fame of Kashmire have largely arisen 
from the manufacture of shawls, which it holds unrivalled, 
and almost without participation. The wool of the shawl is 
not produced in the country, but brbught from districts of 
Thibet, lying at the distance of a month's journey to the 
notth east. It is originally of a dark grey colour, and is 
bleiiched in Kashmire by the help of a certain preparation of 
rice flour. The yarn of this wool is stained with such colours 
as tnay be judged the best suited for sale, and after being 
woven, the piece is once washed. The border, which usually 
displays a variety of figures and colours, is attached to the 
shawls, after fabrie^ation ; but in so nice a manner, that the 
' junction is not discertiable. The texture of the shawl resem- 
bles that of the shaloons of Europe, to whieh it has probably 
communicated the name. The price^ at the loom, of an or- 
dinary dhawl, is eight rupees ; thence, in proportional quality, 
it produces from fifteen to twenty ; and I have seen a very 
fine piece sold at forty rupees the first cost. But the value 
of this commodity may be largely enhanced by the introduc- 
tion of flowered work ; and as the sum of one hundred rupees 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



144 TRAVELS IN THE 

have the delicate texture and softness of the Kash- 
mire shawls^ whose unrivalled excellence may be 
owing to certain properties in the water of that 
country* The superior colours of the Masulipa- 
tam chintzes or cloths, painted by the hand, 
whose freshness seems to improve by washing, are 
also, ascribed to the water peculiar to that town. 

The people of Kashmire are proverbial for their 
clear complexions and fine forms. They are as 
well made as Europeans, and their faces have 
neither the Tartar flat nose nor the small pig-eyes, 
that distinguish the natives of Cashgar, and which 
generally mark those of Great Thibet. The women 
especially are very handsome ;* and it is from this 

is occasionally given for a shawl to the weaver, the half 
amount maybe fairly ascribed to the ornaments. 

The oppressions of the government have reduced the 
commerce of Kashmire to a languid state. During their 
subjection to the Mogul dominion, the province contained 
forty thousand shawl looms, and at this day there are not 
sixteen thousand. — Forster, 

* As the natives of a country lying in the thirty-fourth 
degree of latitude, the Kashmirian women would in Spain 
or the South of France, be called brunettes. But having 
been prepossessed with an opinion of their charms, ' Mr. 
Forster suffered a sensible disappointment. A coarseness 
of figure prevails amon^ them, with broad features, and they 
too often have thick legs. Though excelling in their com- 
plexions, they are surpassed by the elegant form and pleasing 
countenance of the women of some of the western provinces 
of India. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



.MOGUL EMPIRE. 145 

Country that nearly every individual » when first 
admitted to the court of the Great Mogul, selects 
wives or concubines, that his children may be 
whiter than the Indians and pass for genuine 
Moguls. Unquestionably there must be beauti- 
ful women among the higher classes, if we may 
judge by those of the lower orders seen in the 
streets and in the shops. When at Lahore, I had 
recourse to a little artifice, often practised by the 
Moguls to obtain a sight of the hidden treasures ; 
the women of that town being the finest in India, 
of a brown complexion, and justly renowned 
for their fine and slender shapes. I followed the 
steps of some elephants, particularly one richly 
harnessed, and was sure to be gratified with the 
sight I was in search of, because the ladies no 
sooner hear the tinklijQg of the silver bells sus- 
pended from both sides of the elephant, than they 
all put their heads to the windows. This is a 
stratagem with which I often amused myself in 
Kashmire, until a more satisfactory method of 
seeing the fair sex was devised by an old peda- 
gogue, well known in the town, with whom I 
read .the Persian poets. I purchased a large 
quantity of sweetmeats, and accompanied him to 
im)re than fifteen houses, to which he had freedom 
of access. He pretended I was his kinsman 
lately arrived from Persia ; rich and eager to 
marry. As soon as we entered a house, he dis- 
tributed my sweetmeats among the children, and 
then ey^ry body was sure to flock around us, the 

VQL. II. L 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



146 TBAVELS IN THE 

married women and the single girls^ y^ung and 
old, with the twofold object of being seen and re- 
oriving a share of the present. The indulgence 
of my curiosity drew many rupees out of my 
piurse ; but it left no doubt on my mind that there 
are as handsome faces in Kashmire as in any^ part 
of Europe. 

It remains only to- speak of my journey 
through the mountains, from Bember to this 
place, with which I ought perhaps to have com- 
menced my letter ; — of the little excursions I hav^ 
made in the country, and finally, of all which il 
has been in my power to collect concerning the 
other mountainous tracts that encirde tMs king- 
dom. 

Iii respect then to the route from Bember^ I 
was surprised to find myself, on the very first 
night transported on a sudden, from a torrid to 
a temperate aone : for we had no sooner scaled 
that frightful wall of the world, I mean the lofty, 
ste^, black and bare mountain of Bembei, 
axA begun the descent on the other 8ide> thaniwo 
respired a pure, mild, and refreshing ain Whjsj^ 
sui^rised me still piore, was to find myself, Ieui it 
were^ transferred from India ta Europe; tl^ 
mountains we were traversing being: covered mitil 
every one of our plants and shra1ps,save the hyas(^ 
thyme, marjorum and rosemaryw I almost Iwi^ 
gined myself in the mountains of Auver^net Uk^ 
French forest of ^r^ green oak^ elm, mid {^biftf 
treet, and oould not aivoid ferHngf strongly tHf 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 147 

ifahirast between this scene and the biirmng fields 
ef Hkdostan^ which I had just quitted and where 
nothings of th^ kind is seen. 

My attention was partJeuIarly air^^tj^d hy ft 
mountain^ distatnt between one ai|d two days frot^ 
Bemhee^ covered on both sides with plants. Thie 
side facing the souths that is, looking toward Hiftr 
do|tan^ is f«ll of Indian and European plant6> 
mipgled together ; but the side exposed tq thf 
north, is crowded exclusively with the vegetftblp 
fnroductions of Europe. It would seem tbait c^ 
aide participates equally of the air and temp^rfi- 
ture of India and Europe, and that the oth^r 
feels only the milder climate of the latter qy^rter 
of the gbbe. 

I could not avoid admiring, in the course Qf 
jour march, the sucaessive generations and dec^y 
ef trees. I saw hundreds plunged and plunging 
into aby^es, down which man never ventured^ pi^ed 
dead one upon another and mouldering with timp; 
.while others were shooting out of the ground, apd 
supplying the places of those that were no more* 
I obseryed also trees consumed by fire ; but I am 
unable to say whether they were atifuck by ligl^tr 
ning^ or ignited by friction, when hot and impe^- 
pns winds agitate the trees agaipst e^ch otfier, or 
whether, as the natives pretendj tr^ees when grp^n 
old and Ary , may ignite spontanQOiisly . 

Jhe m^ignificent caseadesi between (he ro^^l^s^ 
kieiieafe the b^uty of Hm saene. TH^e^ is, oi^e 
espeeiaHy> whidi I conoeite has not it? parallel. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



148 TRAVELS IN THE 

I observed it at a distance from the side of a high 
mountain. A torrent of water rolling impetuously 
through a long and gloomy channel^ covered with 
trees, precipitates itself suddenly down a perpen- 
dicular rock of prodigious height, and the ear is 
stunned with the noise occasioned by the falling 
of these mighty waters, . Jehan Guire erected oh 
an adjacent rock, which was smoothed for the pur- 
pose, a large building from which the court might 
leisurely contemplate this stupendous work of 
nature, which, as well as the trees beforemen- 
tioned, bears marks of the highest antiquity, and 
is perhaps coeval with the creation of the world. 

A. most fatal accident cast a gloom over these 
scenes and damped all our pleasure. The king 
was ascending the Peer-Punchal mountains, the 
highest of all the mountains, and from which a 
distant view of the kingdom of Kashmire is first 
obtained. He was followed by a long line of ' 
elephants, upon which sat the ladies in mik- 
dembers and amaris. The foremost, appalled, 
as is supposed, by the great length and acclivity 
of the path before him, stepped back upon the 
elephant that was moving in his track ; who again 
pushed against the third elephant, the third 
against the fourth, and so on until fifteen of them, 
incapable of turning round or extricating them- 
selves in a road so steep and narrow fell down the 
precipice. Happily for the women, the place 
where they fell Was of no great height ; only three 
or four were killed ; but there were no means of 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 149 

saving any of the elephants. Whenever these 
animals fall under the tremendous burthen usually 
placed upon their backs, they never rise again 
even on a good road. Two days afterward we 
passed that way, and I observed that some of the 
poor elephants still moved their trunks. The 
army, which had been marching four days in files 
through the mountains, was subjected to serious 
inconvenience by this disaster. The remainder of 
the day and the following night, were employed 
in rescuing the women and in saving other matters, 
and the troops were under the necessity of halting 
during the whole of that time. Nearly every 
man continued pent up on the same spot, for it 
was impossible, in many places, to adyance or 
recede, and the porters with the tents and pro- 
visions were not within reach. My usual good 
fortune, however, attended me ; I contrived to 
clamber out of the line of march and find a spot 
whereon I and my horse slept pretty comfortably. 
The servant who followed me had a small quan- 
tity of bread, which we shared. It was here, I 
recollect, that in stirring some stones, we found a 
large black scorpion, which a young Mogul of my 
acquaintance took up and squeezed in his hand, 
then in the hand of my servant, and lastly in mine, 
without any of us being stung. This young ca- 
valier pretended that he had charmed the scor- 
pion, as he had charmed many others, with a 
passage from the Koran ; *' But I will not,*' added 
he, *' teach you that passage, because the occult 



Digitized by LjOOQI'C 



150 TRAVELS IH TKX 

poPr^r Wduld then depart from me and r€st Wifh 
jovi, in the same manner as it lieft my teacher ih^ 
fnoment hfe imj)ai'ted the secret.'* 

While traversing this mountain of Peer*-Pnh-» 
chd> three things exercised itajr philosophical spe^ 
culations. The first was that we experienced the 
opposite seasons of summer and winter within tha 
same hour* In ascending^ we were exposed td 
the intense heat of the sun, aiid perspired moM 
profusely ; but when we reached the summit^ wd 
found ourselves in the midst of frozen enow^ 
tiirough which a passage for the army had been 
irecently cut ; a small atid congealed rain was fyiXU 
mg, and the wind blew piercingly a)ld. The 
poor Indians, most of whom had never felt the 
severity of winter, and saw for the first tinie ice 
atid snow^ were in a state of great suffering mi, 
istdnishtnent and fled with precipitatbn* 

The second circumstance was, that within two 
hundred paces the trind blew from two opposite 
quarters. While climbing toward the summit^ it 
blew in my face, that is, from the north ; but I no 
isooner began to descend on the other side, than it 
blew on my back, that is, from the sobth ; as if 
tke vapours escaping from all sides^ and rising to 
the summit of the mountain^ had there condensed, 
atod caused the wind ; which equally attracted by 
the warm exhausted air below descended into the 
two opposite vallies. 

The third extraordinary appearance was an 
aged hermit, who had resided on the top of this 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIftfi. 151 

mountain eter iiiice the time of Jehan Gnire. Of 
liii^ rdi^^dn ^very body wa» ignorant ; but it wai^ 
said that he wrought miracles^ caused etraogd 
thunders 4ind raised storms of wind, hail^ siidW 
and rain. His while and uncombed beard Waif 
estr^lB^y long and bushy ; he had somewhat of 
the -savage in bis aspect, and was haughty iii his 
iianner Df dskin^ alms. He permitted the {)eopl€^ 
to drink water out of some Earthen cups placed in 
mwB on a krge ston^, making signs with his 
iMad that they should ilot stop, but hastily ledte 
^ aiimmit of the tnountaiUa The oM man #a^ 
Am v^ry angry with those who made a nc^^.^ 
Aft0t I had entered his cave, and softened his 
eou&tenance by means of half a rupee, which I 
bumbjiy put into his hahd^ he informed "me that 
floise made there stirred up the most furious tem- 
plets imaginable. It was wise in Aureng-Zdbe, 
be added, to be guided by his advice, and to order 
the army to pass with stillness and expedition.^ 
Hin father, Shah-Jehan, always acted with file 
sane prudence ; biit Jehan Guire having upon ono 
occasion derided his counsel, and, notwithstanding 
his earnest remonstrance, having ordered th^ 
keitle-drums to beat etnd the trumpets to sound/ 
cMrrowly escaped destruction. 

In regard to my excursidnfs in different parts^ 
of this kingdom, I shall begin by infbrming you, 
that we no sooner arrived in the city of Kashmire/ 
than my navaab Danechmend-khan sent me to the 
farther end of Ihd country, three shcwrt jouttieys 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



152 TRAVELS IN THE 

from the capital, that I migbt witniefis the 
'* wonders," as they are called, of a certain foun- 
tain. I was accompauied by a native, and es- 
corted by one of my navaab's cavaliers. The 
'* wonders" consist in this : in the month of May, 
when the melting of the snows has just taken 
}>iace, this fountain, during the space of fifiteen 
days, regularly flows and ebbs three times a day, 
-^when the morning dawns, at noon and at night. 
Its flow generally continues three quarters of an 
hour, and is sufiiciently abundant to fill a square re- 
servoir ten or twelve French feet deep, and as many 
in length and breadth. After a lapse of fifteen -days, 
the supply of water becomes less copious and regu- 
lar, and at the expiration of a month, the spring 
ceases to run, unless in the time of heavy and 
incessant rains, when it flows with the constancy 
and irregularity of other fountains. The Hindoos 
have a temple on the side of the reservoir, dedicated 
to Brare, one of their deities ; and hence this 
spiring is called Send-brare, or water of Brare. 
Pilgrims flock from all parts to this temple, for 
the purpose of bathing and purifying themselves 
in the sacred and miraculous water. Numberless 
fables are founded on the origin of this fountain, 
which not having a shadow of 'truth, would be 
little entertaining in the recital. The five or six 
days that I remained in the vicinity of Send-brare 
Were employed in endeavours to trace the, cause 
of the '* wonder." I paid considerable attention 
to the situation of the mountain, at whose foot is 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



m:DGUL EMPIRE. 153 

foani the ' supernatural spring. With nuicb 
labour and difficulty I reached the top^Ies^ying no 
part unexplored^ searching and prying at every 
step. I remarked that its length extends from 
north to southland that though very near to other 
mountains, yet it is completely detached from any; 
Its form resembles an ass's back ; the summit is of 
extreme lengthy but the greatest breadth is 
scarcely one hundred paces. One, side of. the 
mountain, which is covered with nothing but 
green grass, has an eastern aspect ; but the sun 
being intercepted by the opposite mountains, does 
not shine upon it before eight o'clock in the 
morning. The western side is covered with trees 
and bushes. 

Having made these observations, it occurred 
to me that this pretended wonder might be 
accounted for by .the heat of the sun, combined 
with the peculiar situation and internal disposition 
of the mountain. 

I supposed that the frozen waters wh}ch 
during the winter, when the whole ground is 
covered with snow, had insinuated themselves 
into the inner parts of that portion of the moun- 
tain exposed to the morning sun, melted partially ; 
that these waters running down, little .by little, 
into certain beds of quick rock, arid being thence 
conveyed toward the spring, produced the flow 
at noon: that the sun quitting this part of 
thc[ xtiQuntain (which then becomes cool) darts 
its vertical beams upon the jsummit, melting the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



td4 T&AVJELB IN THK. 

chagtaUd ivBtein, which d^iMiid also by 8il0# 
dagrees^ but throd^h different diaiineb> into tb 
flame biBds of quick rock» abd are the cause of th^ 
flow at night ; itnd finally^ th^t the siin heating 
the waltern side of the tmnidt^in^ siiailar effloets 
are occahioned, and fh6 nnnming flow k the con^. 
Sequence. That this last k slower than the 
others^ may be accounted for by the iremotenia» 
of the western side from the spring ; by its being 
dovered with wood, and therefore more shc^hered 
from the sun ; or simply by the coldness of tkci 
Bight. My reasoning may derire support froni 
the consideration that the water flows mbst 
copiously during the first days, and that having 
gradually diminished in quantity, it ceases to nm 
altogether : as if the waters which had remained 
frozen in the earth were in greater plenty at thd 
tmnmencement than afterward. It may be ob^ 
served too, that even at the beginning, t^e sup|dy 
of water as to quantity is very uncertain^ and 
that the flow is sometimes greater at noon than 
at night or in the nloming, or in the momingi 
greater than that at noon ; because, as I conceive* 
some ^ days are hotter than others, and because 
clouds, sometimes rendering the heat unequldi 
}»come the cause of inequality in the watei?. 

Returning from Send-brare, I turned a little 
from the high road for the sake of vi;siting 
Achiavel, a country house formerly of the kingi 
of Kashmire and now of the Great Mogul. What 
pBudpally constitutes the beauty of this place/ 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOffDL EMPniB* 165 

IB a feQBtbm wbcNse waters dispersii tfaaidsetrei 
kto a hundred canals, round the hmise, whidi 
is hot amisS) and throughout the gardens. The 
spring gushes^ out of the ^arth with violeiifcd^ 
as if it iissued from the bottom of sdme well^ &bA 
tbe water is so abundant that it ought rathet 
i6 be called a rirer thdn a foutitaiti. It is exf 
^.illent water ^nd cold as ice. The garden is 
r^ry handsome, laid out in regular Walks, iind 
full of fruit-trees^ — the apple> pear, plum, apricot 
aiid cherrjT. Jets d'eau in various farms and fi8h:<- 
{K)nds, are in great number, and there is a lofty 
cascade which in its fall takes the form and colour 
of a large sheet, thirty or forty paces in lehgih^ 
producing the finest effect imaginable; especially 
at night, when innumerable lamps fixed in parts 
a[ the wall adapted for that purpose^ are lighted 
under this sheet of water. 

From Adhiavel I prodeed^d to dndther royal 
garden, embellished much in the same manner^ 
One of its ponds contains fish so tame that they 
approach upon being called, or when pieces of 
bread are thrown into the water. Tbe largest 
have gold rings, with inscriptions, through tiie 
giUs, placed there, it ii^ said^ by the celebrated 
No6r*-M&hil, th6 wife of JehatnGuire, grandfather 
to Aureng-Z^be. 

Panechmend-4han seemed well satisfied with 
the account I brought of Send^brare, and wished 
me to undertake another journey^ that I mig^t 
btor my testimony to what he called a real 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



156 TRAVELS IN THE . 

miracle^ such a miracle as would induce m6 to 
renounce my religion ai^d embrace' muhamme- 
danism. '' Hasten to Barehmooleh," said he ; 
'' the distance is not greater than to Send-brare : 
there you will see a mosque which contains the 
tomb of a celebrated Pire, or holy dervise, who 
though dead yet miraculously cures the sick and 
and infirm. Perhaps you may deny the reality 
either of the disease or of the cure ; but another 
miracle is wrought by the power of this holy man, 
which no person can see without acknowledgmg. 
There is a large round stone that the strongest 
man can scarcely raise from the ground, but 
which eleven men, after a prayer made to the 
saint, lift up with the tip of their eleven fingers 
with the same ease as they would move a piece of 
stjaw." I was not sorry for another little ex- 
cursion, and set out with both my former com- 
panions. I found Barehmooleh a rather pleasant 
place ; the mosque is a tolerable building! and 
the saint's tomb is richly adorned. It was sur* 
rounded with a great number of people, engaged 
in acts of devotion, who said they were iU. 
Adjoining the mosque, is a kitchen, wherein I 
observed large boilers filled with meat and rice, 
which I conceived at once to be the magnet that 
draws the sick, and the miracle that cures them. 
On the other side of the mosque, are the apart- 
ments and garden of the mooUahs, who ^ pur- 
sue the even tenour of their way under the sha 
dow of the Fire's miraculous sanctity. They 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. Ifi7 

are sufficiently zealous in celebrating fais praises, 
but as I am always unbappy on similar occa- 
sions, be performed no miracle upon the sick 
while I remained at Barehmooleh. As to the 
round and heavy stone that was to convert me 
to miihammedanism, I noticed that eleven mobl- 
labs formed themselves into a circle round it, but 
what with their long cabayes, or vests, and the 
studied compactness of the circle, I had great 
difficulty to see the mode in which they held the 
stone. I watched narrowly, however, the whole 
of this' cheating process, and although the mool- 
lahs stoutly maintained that each person used 
only the tip of one finger, and that the stone felt 
as light as a feather, yet I could clearly discover 
that it was not raised from the ground without 
a great effort, and it seemed to me that the 
moollahs made use of the thumb as well as 
of the fore-finger. Still I mixed my voice with 
the cries of these impostors and by-standers, 
exclaiming karamet ! karamet !— a miracle ! a mi-^ 
racle ! I then presented them with a rupee, and 
assuming a look of the deepest devotion, entreated 
that I might have for once the distinguished ho- 
nour of being among the eleven who lifted . the 
stone. The moollahs were reluctant to comply 
with my request, but having presented them with 
a second rupee and expressed my belief in the 
truth of the miracle, one of them gave me up his 
place. No doubt they hoped that ten would be 
able, by an extraordinary effort, to lift the stone. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



158 TiUWt«^ IN UBB 

^tboiig[h T contributed no Qtb^r ^4 t^iMl tiie tip 
of my fitig«3r, and they ^xp^oted to m^^n^e ^. 
odroitly thftt I should not diaeoyer the impostwe. 
But tfcey were much m0?tified to find that t]^e 
stone, to wfai^h I persevered id iipplyirig the ^ 
of my finger only, was constantly indipiog imd 
fnlling towards me. I considered it prndeiM^ 
at last to hold it firmly with hoth my fing^ 
and thumb, when we sucoeeded, with greqt diffi-: 
eulty, to raise it to the usual height. ObjserriBg 
that every per^nm looked at me with an e?i} eye, 
not knowing what to think of me and that 
I incurred the dodger of lapidation, I contihaid 
to join in the cry of karamet, and throwing down 
a third rupee, stole away from the crowd. Though 
I had taken no refreshment since my arriTal^I did 
not hesitate to mount my horse directly^ and 
to quit for ever the dervise and his mirac^s^ 
I availed myself of this opportunity to visit those 
celebrated rocks that form the outlet of all the 
waters^ of the kingdom, and to which I i^lluded 
at the commencement of this letter. 

I was indiiced to quit the high road fcm the 
sake of approaching a large lake that I saw at 
some distance. It is well stocked witli fishj pw* 
ticularly eels, and covered with ducks, wild gmai^^ 
and many other water birds. The governor Gomfit 
hither in the winter, when these birds are in 
greatest plenty, to enjoy the sport of fowfing. 
In the centre of the l^ke |s on hermitage, witih 
its little garden, whiofa it is pretended floats 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



HOOUL BiiratE. IB9 

pArwmlomly upon the water. The hermit patees 
f he whole ef his life there he never leaves the 
j^ce* I shall not swell die sise of this letter 
hy recounting the thousand absurd tales re^ 
pc^rted of this hermita^ ezcept it be the tradition 
thfk% one of the ancient kings of Kadimire^ out 
of mere fancy^ built it upon a number of thidc 
b^i&s fiustened together. The river which runs 
toward Bsirehmooleh passes through the middle 
9f|lnslake. 

Leaving this lake,. I went in search of a 
$pi^iigj tK>nsidered an object of curiosity. It 
tmbbles gently and rises with some force^ bringing 
ivitfi it a certain quantity of very fine sand^ 
whidi returns the way it came; after which the 
Iffi^ater becomes still a moment or two without 
ebulHtion and without bringing up sand, and 
then bubbles as befons, and widi the same e^eij 
thus continuing its im)tion at irregular intervals. 
But the wonder, they say^ consists in this ; that 
^je least noise made, either by speaking/ or 
knocking the feet against the ground, agitates 
the water and causes it to run and bubbly in the 
n^UBtner described. I discovered, however » t]^at 
Ha movements are inftuenced neither by speaking 
nnr knocking, and that its action is the same 
niieth^ you make a noise or are sileaiu As* ia 
the real cause of the water rising in this manner; 
1 have nii^ reflected sufficie^tdy upon ^he subject 
tofgivf yxiu a siftisfffiDtory solution ; untess it ht 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



100 TRAVELS m THg^ 

that the sand by returning continues to obstruct 
the narrow channel of this small and weak springs 
until the water thus opposed and closed in, 
makes an effort to raise the sand and open 
a passage : or it may rather be, that the wind, 
pent in the channel of the spring, rises at inter- 
vals, as is the case in artificial springs. 

When we had sufficiently examined this foun- 
tain, we ascended the mountains for the purpose 
of seeing an extensive lake, in which there is ice, 
even in summer, which the winds heap up and 
dbperse, as in a' frozen sea. We then passed 
through a place called Sengsafed, or White-stone^ 
remarkable for producing in summer every kind 
of flower, the same as in a well-stored garde^i ; 
and for a circumstance said to have been observed 
from time immemorial, that when many persons 
visit this spot and make much noise and agitate 
the air, a heavy shower of rain invariably de- 
scends. Whether this be generally the case or 
not, there can be no doubt that a few years ago, 
when Sengsafed was visited by Shah-Jehan, the 
whole party was in danger of perishing in con- 
sequence of the violent and extraordinary raios 
which fell, although he had issued orders that 
no unnecessary noise should be made. This fact 
will remind you of the aged hermit's conversation 
with me on the summit of Peer-Punchal. 

I was pursuing my journey, to a grotto full of 
wonderful congelations, two days* journey from 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL fiMPlRE. J6^I 

Sengsafed, when I deceived iiltelli^e^ice thtA thf 
naraab felt very impatient and uneasy on account 
of my long absence. 

I regret that I can give you onl^ inipetfedt 
and scanty informatioh concerning the circiimja^ 
cent ihountains. The subject has much occupied 
my thoughts since my arrival irt this country ; bttt 
I can meet with no congenial mind, with nopefsoti 
of obsfifrVation and research, who possesses touch 
knowledge of the matters about which I wish to 
b€r informed. What I have leaarilt 1 shall, how- 
ever, communicate. 

The merchants who evet^ year tratd from 
motmtain to mountain to collect the fine wool Ivftii 
wliich shawls are manufactured, all agr^cf in sayitj^ 
that the land is very good between the mountain 
stfll d^pendatat upon Kasfamire. Among thes^ 
tracts there is one whose annual tribute is paid in 
leather and wool, and whose women are pro- 
verbial for beauty, chastity and industry. Beyond 
thi^ fcact is another whose valleys are deligbtfal 
attdf plains fertile, tiboundirig in com> rice, apples, 
pears, apricots, excellent melons and even grapes, 
with which good wirte is made. The tribute of 
this tract i^ likewise paid in wool and leather, and 
it sometimes happens that the inhabitants, tirusting 
to the inaccessible nature of the country, refuse 
payment ; but troops always contrive to penetrate 
and reduce the people to submission. I learn 
dso from the merchants, that in the more distant 
mountains, which have ceased to be tributary to 

VOL. II. M 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



162 TRAVELS IN THE 

Kashmire, there are other beautifiil tracts and 
countries^ where the inhabitants are white and 
well-formed, and remarkable for their attachm^it 
to their native land which- they seldom quit. 
Some of these people have no kingi nor even, as 
far as can be discovered, any religion ; though cer- 
tain tribes abstain from fish, , and consider it 
unclean* 

I shall add what was related to me, a few days 
ago, by a good old man, who married a descendant 
of the ancient kings of Kashmircr At the period^ 
when Jehau-Guire was making a diligent search 
after all persons connected with the royal family, 
this old man effected his escape to the mountains 
last' mentioned^ accompanied by three domestics, 
scarcely knowing whither he was going. Wan^ 
dering from place to place, he £Dund himself at 
length in the midst of a small but beautiful dis^« 
trict, where he was no sooner known than he ex- 
perienced a xordial reception. The happy man. 
was laden with presents, and in the evening the 
handsomest girls were presented by their pa-*, 
rents, and he was entreated to make his choice from 
them> that the country might be honoured with 
his o£&pring. My friend proceeded to another 
district in the vicinity and was received with equal 
kindness and respect : the evening ceremony 
differed however, in one particular; as the hus- 
bands brought their wives, not the fathers their 
daughters ; observing that their neighbours were 
simpletons in having supplied him with the latter^ 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 163 

because the children might not continue in their 
houisehold^ but 'must follow the foot-steps of the 
daughters* future husbands. 

Some few years since there existed great dis- 
sensions in the royal family of Little Thibet, a 
country bordering on Kashmire. One of the pre- 
tenders to the crown having applied secretly toihe 
governor of this kingdom for assistance, the latter 
v^as commanded by Shah-Jehan to afford all the 
succour he might need. The governor accord- 
ingly invaded Little Thibet, slew or put to 
flight the othier competitors, and left this prince 
in undisputed possession of the throne, subject 
to an annual tribute of crystal, musk, and wool. 
Thds circumstanced, he has not well been able 
to avoid paying his personal obeisance to Aurehg- 
^6be, bringing with him some of these artitiles 
as presents; but he is come with so wretched 
a retinue, that I should never have taken him 
for a^ person of distinguished rank. My na- 
vaab invited this personage to dinner, hoping 
to obtain some information concerning those 
mountainous regions. He informed us that his 
kingdom was bounded on the east by Great Thibet; 
that it was thirty or forty leagues in breadth ; that 
he was very poor, notwithstanding the crystal, 
musk and wool, which he had in small quantities ; 
and that the opinion generally entertained of his 
possessing gold mines was quite erroneous. '^ The 
country, in certain parts,** he added, *' produces 
excellent fruit, particularly melons, but the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



164 'HUVSIiS IM THE 

winters we mo$t wreJte, beoame of thd d«ep 
HEiowB." The iidiabitauts heretofore weie pagani^ 
but the great majority have become muhammie^ 
ddQ> as well as hiioself; of the sect of Sbiites^ 
which is that of all Persia* 

He spoke also of the attempt made by Shah^ 
JthaB^ seveuteea or eighteen years agOi to coiiquer 
Great Tfaibet> a CQimtry frequently iniwlad by 
the kings of Kashmire* The army> after a dniffir 
cult march of sixteen days^ through the mpwdr 
tains beseiged and took a fortress, which threw 
the inhabitants into such conster|iation« that the 
conquest of the kingdom would no doubt have 
been completed if the army had immediately 
crossed a certiun celebrated and rapid river« and 
marched boldly to the capital city. The season, 
however, was advanced, and the governor of Kaah- 
mire, who commanded the troops^ apprehendiug 
he might be overtaken by the snow^ determined to 
reU'eat* He placed a garrisoa in the fortress ji^t 
eaptored, intendmg to resume the invasion of the 
country early in the spring; but that garrison 
most strangely and unexpectedly evacuated the 
castle, either through few of the enemy^ or from 
want of provisions, and Great Thibfst esciqped the 
meditated attack that had heeu deferred to the 
next spring. That kingdom being threateued 
with war by Aureng-Z6be» the king dispatched 
an ambassador when informed of the Mogul*s 
arrival in Kashmire. The embassy was aacom- 
panied by various, presents, the productions of the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIHE. 165 

cmmtry ; suoh as orystal, musk^ a jade stond^ iMud 
those valuable white tails taken from a species of 
€0W peculiar to Great Thibet, which are attached 
by way of omameBt to the ears of elephants. The 
jade stone presented upon tMs occasion was of an 
extraordinary siae, and therefore very precious* 
These stones are in great estimation in the cowrfc 
of the Mogul : the colour is greenish^ with wUte 
reins^ and they are so hard as to be wrought only 
with diamond powdet. Cups and Tasas are made 
of this stone. I have some of most exi^uiaite 
wofkmMship, inlaid with strings of gold, and en« 
yicbed with precious stones. The embassador's 
train consisted of three or four cavaliersi and tea 
or twelve tall men, dry and lean^ with very scanty 
beards like the Chinese, and common red bonn^Ui^ 
suoh as our seamen wear. The remainder of the 
apparel was worthy of the bonnets. I rather 
diink that four or five of these gentlemen wore 
swords, but the oth^s fc^owed the ambassadoj^ 
without staves or sticks. He entered into a negO« 
eiation with Aureng<^Zdbe, tod pronnsed on the 
part of his master that a mosque should be built 
m the capital, wherein prayers in the Muhamme^ 
dan form should be offered ; that the com shouJd 
bemr on one side the impress of Aureng-Z^be; 
and that the Mogul should receive an annual 
tribute. But no person doubts that this treaty 
will be totidly dbregarded as soon as Anireng^ 
Z^be has quilted Kashmire, and that tli0 king of 
Gireat Thibet will no more fulfil its itipuiations 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



106 TRAVELS IM THE * 

than he did those of the treaty. c<mcladed between 
him and Shah-Jehan. 

There was in. the suite of the ambassador a 
physician^ said to be from the kingdom of Lissa, 
and of the Lamy or Loma tribe ; a tribe which is 
the depositary of the law in Lissa.as that of the brah- 
mins is in India. This tribe of Lama, unlike the 
brahmins, has a calif or pontiff recognised as such 
not only in the kingdom of Lissa, but over the 
whole of Tartary, and is .honoured and reve- 
renced as a divine personage. The physician had 
a book of receipts which I could not persuade 
him to sell ; the writing at a dUtance looked 
something like ours. We induced ^him to write 
down the alphabet, but he did this with so much 
difficulty, and his writing was so wretchedly bad, 
that we pronounced him an ignoramus. He was 
an ardent believer in metempsychosis, and enter- 
tained us with wonderful tales. Among others 
he mentioned that when his grand lama was very 
old and on the point of death, he assembled the 
council, and declared to them that his soul was 
going to pass into the body of an infant recently 
bom. The child was nourished with tender care ; 
and when he had attained his sixth or seventh 
year, a large quantity of household furniture and 
wearing apparel was placed before him, and. he 
had the sagacity to discern which part was his 
own property, and which was not ; a decisive proof, 
the physician observed, how true is the doctrine of 
the transm%ration of souls. At first, I thcmght 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



HOaUL EHPIRB. 107 

th6 man was speaking in irony^ but I soon disco- 
vered that he was perfectly serious. One day I 
went to see him at the ambassador's, taking a 
Kashmirian merchant with me as an interpreter. 
My pretext was the purchase of some woollen 
cloths which he had for sale, but the real object of 
the visit was to obtain information concerning 
those imperfectly known regions. But I learnt 
little or nothing new : he only said generally that 
Great Thibet would bear no comparison with his 
own country ; that the latter was covered with 
snow more than five months in the year, and that 
it was frequently engaged in war with the Tar- 
tars ; but which Tartars these were he could not 
say« At length I found that the time passed with 
this man was misspent, for he was incapable of 
answering any one of the numerous questions I 
intended to ask. 

It is not twenty years since caravans went 
annually from Kashmire to China. They used 
to traverse the mountains of Great Thibet, enter 
Tartary, and reach China in about three months. 
It is an extremely difficult road, and there 
are impetuous torrents that can be crossed only 
by means of cords extended from rock to rock. 
'The caravans returned from China with musk, 
China-wood, rhubarb and mamiron, a small 
root in great repute for the cure of bad eyes- 
and in repassing Great Thibet they farther 
loaded themselves with the produce of that coun- 
try, such as musk, crystal, jade stones and espe- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



1^ TRAVI^Ii^ IN TRiB 

ciallf witb t^e wool of shpep and wild-gpats, TUl^ 
latter/ whigh is known by the name of touz, regem^^ 
\fle8, as already ohsaxyed, the beaver, and should 
rather be called hair thap wooL Sut since 3halw 
Jehan's irruption into Great Thibet, the king has w* 
oply interdicted the passage of caraivans, but forbid- 
den any person from Kashmir? tp enter hi^ d^ 
minions^ This is the reason why the caravansi now 
take their departure from Patna, on the Gange9>* 
they leave Great Thibet on the left and pr4)CQ«4 
directly to the kingdon^ of Lissa. 

In regard to the kingdom known here by the 
name of K^achegu^rj, wbioh is probably the 
same as our maps Qal] Kascar*i I shall relate aJl 
the information I hav^ eoUeqted from merchants^ 
natives of that country, who when tUey heajrd 
^hat Aureng-^ebe inteuded to visit Kashwire, 
brought into this kingdom^ for sale^ a gTfia^ mw? 
ber of young slavea, girls and boys* 

They say tha^ Kach^uer lies to the ea^ 
of Kashmiri, inclining somewhat to the nortlv 
ward; that the short^t route from one kingdom 
to the other, is through Gr^at Thibet, but thfit 
passage being now shut, they were under tJie 
nec^sity of taking the rpad pf I^ittle Thibet* 
The first towu they passed^ in returning, w^s 
Gourtche, the last town dependant upon Ka^ 
mire^ and four days' journey from the city of 
Kashmire : from Gourtche, they were eight iajs 

* The namQ is aow generally writtw Casbgvr-r^JVww/a*^^ 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



ia reaching Edcerdou, the capital of Little Thibet ; 
and in two days mor e tbey caix>e to a small towu 
called Cheker, also witkin the territory of Little 
TWbet, and situated on a riveir celebrated for its 
medicinal waters. In fifteen daya» tbey came to 
^ Jftrge forest, on the confinef of Little Thibet, 
mi in fifteen days more they arrived at Kache- 
0uer^ a small town which was formerly the royal 
jrepidence, though now the king of Kacheguer 
reilides at Jourcend, a little more to the xkotth^ 
and ten days' journey from Kacheguer. These 
merchants added that the distance from the jlK>wn 
pf Kacheguer to China is not more than two 
month*' voyage; that caravans go thither every 
year, which return laden with the articles I have 
entrniei^ted, and proceed to Persia by way of^ 
Usbec ; as there are others that go from China to 
Patna^ in Hindostan. They also informed me 
that tba way from Kacheguer to China is through 
a small town eight days' journey from Coteo, ai^ 
l^at Coten is the h^t towi^ on that aide in the 
kingdom of Kacheguer* The road from Kash- 
wire to Kachegiieri they said, is extremely badf 
and among other difficult paths, there is a place 
wbere^ m every season, you must go a quarter 
of a league over ice. This, my dear sir, is all the 
information I could extract from these people, 
whose ignorance is deplorabk. IntelUgeikee ob- 
taip^ from such a source could not be otherwise 
than scanty and confused, and I had also to do 
with interpreters who experienced the utmost 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



170 TRAVELS IN THE 

difficulty both in clearly stating my interroga- 
tories, and in explaining satisfactorily the answers. 

Here I intended to close this letter, or rather 
this bo6k, and take my leave of you until our 
return to Delhi ; but my inclination for writing is 
still strong, and I enjoy some leisure. I shall 
endeavour, therefore, to answer five questions 
of the industrious and inquisitive Mr. Thevenot, 
who makes greater and more important dbcoveries 
in his study than others who circumnavigate l&e 
^lobe. 

His first enquiry is, whether it be true that 
Jews have during a long period resided in the 
kingdom of Kashmire : whether they be in pos- 
session of the Holy Scriptures, and, if so, whether 
there be any discrepancy between their Old Tes- 
tament, and our own. 

The second request is, that I commuilicate 
whatever observations I may have made concern- 
ing the monsoon, or periodical rains in India. 

The third, that I make him acqudnted with 
my remarks and opinions upon the singular 
regularity of the winds and currents in the seas of 
this part of the world. 

The fourth, whether the kingdom of Bengal 
be as fertile, rich and beautiful, as is commonly 
imagmed. 

The fifth, that I give a decisive opinion on the 
old controversies as to the causes of the Nile's 
increase. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 171 



ANSWER 



, THE FIRST ENQUIRY COlTCERiriKG THE JEWS. 

I SHOULD be as much pleased as Mr. Thevenot 
himself if Jews were found in these mountainous 
regions ; I mean such Jews as he would no doubt 
desire to find,— Jews descended from the tribes 
transported by Shalmaneser ; but you may assure 
that gentleman that although there seems ground 
for believing some of them were formerly settled in 
these countries, yet the whole population is at 
present either pagan or muhammedan. In China, 
indeed, there are probably people of that nation, 
for I have lately seen letters in the hands of 
our reverend father the Jesuit of Delhi, written 
T)y a German Jesuit at Pekin, wherein he states 
that he had conversed with Jews in that city, who 
adhered to the forms of Judaism and retained 
the books of the Old Testament. They were 
totally ignorant of the death of Jesus Christ, and 
had expressed a wish to appoint the Jesuit their 
Kakan, if he would abstain from swine's flesh. 

There, are however, many marks of Judaism 
to be found in this country. On entering the 
kingdom, after crossing the Peer-Punchal moun- 
tains, the inhabitants in. the frontier villages struck 
me as resembling Jews. Their countenance and 
manner, and that indescribable peculiarity which 
enables a traveller to distinguish the inhabitants 
of different nations, all seemed to belong to that 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



172 TRAVELS IN TBC 

ancient people. You are not to ascribe what 
I say to mere fancy^ the Jewish appearance of 
these villagers having been remarked by our 
father the Jesuit^ and by several other Europeans^ 
long bdfore I visited Kaslimire.* 

A second mark is the prevalence of the nacM 
of Mousa, which means Moses^ among the inhal»*- 
taAts of tUs dty, notwithstanding they are all 
muhammedans. 

A third, is the common tradition that Solomon 
vifi&ted thi6 country, and that it was he whd 
opened a passage for the waters^ by cutting the 
nM>Untain of Barehmooleh. 

A fourth, the bdief that Moses died in tib^ 
dty'of Kashmirie, and that his tomb ia within i 
leai^ueofit. 

And a fifth may be found in tlbe generally ref 
ceived opinion that the small and extremely and* 
ent edifice seen on one of the high hills, was built 
by Solomon ; and it is t^refore caUed Thf 
Throne of Solomon to this day. 

YoU will see then, my dear Sir, I am not dis^ 
posed to deny that J6ws may have taken up theri 
residence in Kashmire. The purity of their law, 
after » lapse of agesjimay have been corrupted^ 

"^ Qemga Foriter> ht a letter written all Kathwire^ in tbt 
year 1783, sa]r», that oti first seeia^ die ELashiairiaQs in tfaeir 
owa country » he imagined from their garb^ the cast of 
countenanQe, which i& long and of a grave aspect^ and the 
form of their beards^ that he had come among a Nation 
of Jews. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



ICOaiZI. ElIHAB. lit 

until hating long degenerated into idolatiy, they 
were induced, like many other pagans, to adopt 
the creed of Muhammed. 

It is certain Uiat many Jews are settled in 
Persia, at Lar and Ispahan ; and in Hindostan, in 
the parts of Goa and Cochin. I also learn that in 
Ethiopia, where they are Tery nnmerous these 
people are remarkaUe for courage and military 
prowess ; and if I am to helieye two amhassadow 
from the Ethiopian king, lately at this court, there 
was a Jew, fifteen or sixteen years ago, grown so 
formidable, that he endearoured to erect an inde- 
pendent kingdom in a certaki small and moun* 
tmnous district, difficult of access. 



AHSWBR 

TO 
THE S&COK]> £jrQIIl|tY COSrCEENIKG TH£ j^BEIOIXICAL 
RAIKS IK INDIA, 

The sun is so strong and violent in India durisg 
the whole year> particularly during eight months^ 
thajt the ground would he completely burnt, and 
irtkndered steril and uniidiabitable, if ProTidenoa 
d^d not kindly provide a remedy, and wisely or- 
4iiin ^t in the month of July, when the heat is 
most intense, rau^ begin to fall, which continue 
three successive montibs. The temp^ature of tine 
W thus becomes supportable, and the ^th is 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



174 TEAYELS IN THB 

rendered fruitful. These rains are not, however; 
so exactly regular as to descend undeviatingly on 
the same day or week. According to the ohserva- 
tibns I have made in various places, particularly 
in Delhi, where I resided a long time, they are 
never the same two years' together. Sometimes 
they commence or terminate a fortnight or three 
weeks sooner or later, and one year they may he 
more abundant than another. I have even known 
two entire years pass without scarcely a drop of 
ram, and the consequences of that extraordinary 
drought were wide-spreading sickness and famine. 
It should be observed too, that the rainy season is 
earlier or later, and more or less plentiful, in 
different countries, in proportion to their proximity 
or remoteness from one another. In Bengal, for, 
instance, and along the Coast of Coromondel, as 
far as the Island of Ceylon, the rains begin and 
end a month sooner than toward the Coast of 
Malabar ; and in Bengal they fall very violently 
for four months, in the course of which it sometimes 
pours during eight days and nights without the 
least intermission. In Delhi and Agra, however, 
the rains are neither so abundant nor of such long 
continuance ; two or three days often elapsing 
without the slightest shower ; arid from dawn o»f 
day to nine or ten o'clock in the morning, it com- 
monly rains very little, and sometimes not at all. 
It struck me very particularly, that the rains come 
from different quarters in different countries. In 
the neighbourhood of Delhi, they come from^ the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 175 

eastjt where Bengal is situated ; in the province of 
Bengitl^ and cm the Coast of Coromondel^ from ^e 
south ; and on the coast of Malabar, almost in- 
variably from the west; 

I have also remarked one thing, about which, 
indeed, there is a perfect agreement of opinion in 
India ; — that according as the heat of summer 
comes earlier or later, is more or less violent^ or 
lasts a longer or shorter time ; so the rains come 
sooner or later, are more or less abundanty and 
continue a longer or a shorter periooT 

From these observations I have been led to 
believe that the heat of the earth and the rarefac- 
tion of the air, are the principal causes of these 
rains^ which they attract. The atmosphere of the 
circumjacent seas being colder, more condensed 
and thicker, is filled with clouds drawn from the 
water by the great heat of the summer, and which^ 
driven and agitated by the winds, discharge them- 
selves naturally upon land, where the atmosphere 
is hotter, more rarefied, lighter and less resisting 
than on the sea ; and thus this discharge is more 
or less tardy and plentiful, according as the heat 
comes early or late, and is more or less intense. 

It is also agreeable to the observations con- 
tained in this dissertation, to suppose that if the 
rains commence sooner on the Coast of Coromon* 
del than on the Coast of Malabar, it is only because 
the summer is earlier ; and that it is earlier may 
be owing to particular causes which it would not 
perhaps be difficult to ascertain if the country were 
properly examined. We know that according to 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



IW TRAt«LS m THE 

ihe difPtrent situfttiont iydahdn, k rei^ect of tetti 
or momif aifls, tmd in proportion as they are snMy^ 
hilly, or covered with wood, summer is felt more 
or less early, and with greater or lesser violence. 

Nor is it surprising that the rains come ftom 
different quarters ; that on the Coast of Coromon* 
del, for example, they come from the south, and 
on the Malabar Coast from the west; because if 
is apparently the nearest sea which sends iAte rain ; 
and the sea nearest the Coromondel Coast, and to' 
which it is more mime£ately exposed, lies to the 
south ; as the sea which washes the <;oast of Mala- 
bar is to the west, extending itself towards Babel- 
mandel, Arabia and the Persian gulf. ^^ 

I have imagined, m fine, that although We see 
at Delhi the rainy clouds come from the east, yet 
their origin may be in the seas which lie to the 
south of that city : and being intercepted by some 
mountains or lands whose atmosphere is colder, 
more condensed and resisting, they are forced to 
turn aside and discharge themselves in a country 
where the air is more rarefied, and which conse- 
qnetatly offers less resistance. 

I had almost forgotten to notice another fact 
which fell under my observation while living in 
Delhi. There never falls any heavy rain until a 
great quantity of clouds have passed, dutfng^ sev^ 
ral days, to the westward ; as if it were necessary^ 
that the expanse of atmosphere to the west of 
Delhi, shovid be first filled with clouds, and that 
those clouds finding some impediment, such as Bit 
less hot and less rarefied, and dierefere more con* 

Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL £MPIB£. 177 

needs and more capable of resistance; or en- 
countering other clouds and contrary winds^ they 
become so thick, overcharged and heavy, as to 
burst and descend in rain ; in the same manner as 
it happens when clouds are driven by the wind 
against some mountain. 



ANSWER 

TO 



THE THIRD ENQUIRY WHICH RELATES TO THE REGU- 
LARITY OF THE CURRENTS AND WINDS IN INDIA. 

As soon as the rains cease ; which happens com- 
monly about the beginning of October, the sea 
takes its course toward the south and the cold v 
north wind rises. This wind continues four or 
five months without any intermission. It blows 
the whole of this time with equal force, unattended 
with tempests, and. always from the same quarter, 
excepting sometimes for a single day when it 
changes or lulls. After the expiration of this 
period, the winds blow for about two i^onths with- 
out any regularity. This is called the interptiediate 
iSeason, and by the Dutch, the time of the doubtful 
and variable winds. These two months being 
.passed, the sea resumes its course from the south 
.to .the north, and the south wind commences and 
continues to blow and the current continues to run 

VOL. II. N 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



178 TJUVBLS IN THE 

£9ttr or five months from the same quarter* There 
then elapse about two months more, which constitute 
the other intermediate season. In these interrals 
BaTigation is extremely difficult and perilous, but 
during the two seasons it is rery easy, pleasant 
and safe, excepting only the latter part of tihe 
south-wind season. It ought not, therefore, to 
excite your surprise, that the Indians, who are a 
very timid people, and ignorant of the art of na- 
vigation, undertake pretty long and important 
voyages; such as from Bengal to Tannasar, 
Acheen^ Malacca, Siam and Madagascar, or to 
Masulipatam, Ceylon, the Maldives, Mokha and 
Bender^Abbassy. They are of course very care- 
ful to avail themselves of the favourable season for 
going and the favourable season for returning. 
It often happens, however, that they are detained 
beyond the proper time, overtaken by bad weatber 
and wrecked* This is indeed sometimes the case 
with £urq>eans, who are much bolder and mare 
skilful, and the condition and equipment of wkiae 
vessels are so greatly superior. Of the two inter- 
mediate seasons, the one which follows ike soudi 
wind is without comparison the more dai^^eious, 
being much more subject to storms and sudtoi 
squalls. That wind, even during the seaaon, h ge- 
nerally more impetuous and unequal than the mnrtfa 
wind. Imustnot omit tonotice in tliis place, that In- 
ward the end of the south-wind season, and duxing 
the rains, although there be a perfect ealm out wt 
sea, yet near 1^ coasts, for a distaaee of fifteen or 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 179 

tifMitj kaguef^ the weaiher 19 extytHnely (enopes^ 
tuous. The csptoiiis of European and othetf 
Tessels^ should consequently be cares^l to approach 
the Indian coast, that o£ Surat or Ma0tilipatam> 
£[»r i&8t«ace^ just after the termination of the 
rains: otherwise they incur great risk of being 
dashed on shore. , 

Snch is the order of the seasons in India^ so &r 
at least £» my observations justify me in speaking 
upon the subject. I wish it were in my power to 
trace every effect to its true cause ; but how un- 
searchable frequently are the ways of Providence ! 
I ha.Te imagined^ in the first place^ that i^e air by 
^hidsi our globe is surrounded, ought to be con-« 
sidered ooe of its component parts^ just as maeh 
as the waters of the sea and rivers ; because both 
the one and the other gravitating on this globei 
and tending to the same common centre^ are in tfaisr 
manner united to our ii^here. The globe then is 
formed of three bodies^ — air^ water^ and earths 
SecDtidly^ our globe being suspended and balanced 
in that free and unresisting space wherein it 
pleased the Creator to place it, would be easify 
dispdaoed if it oame in contact with any unknown 
body. Thirdly, the sun, after having crossed the 
liAOj while moving toward one of the poles, 
towards iht arctic pole, for example, darting its 
beama that way, produces sufficient impresimm to> 
dqpxese m some nieasi»e the arctic pole, which m 
dt^cisaed moise and more in preportidn as the sun 
adymiQes towards tiie tropfe; and in the same 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



1 80 TRAVELS IN THE 

manner^ the sun permits it again to rise gradually 
in proportion as it returns toward the line ; until 
the same effect is produced by the power of its 
rays on the side of the antarctic pole. 

Taking for granted the truth of these suppo- 
sitions and considering them conjointly, with the 
diurnal motion of the earth, it is not without 
reason that the Indians affirm that the sun con- 
ducts and draws along with.it both the sea and 
the wind ; because^ if it be true that, having 
passed the line on its way toward one of the poles, 
the sun causes a change in the direction of the 
earth's axis and a depression of the pole, it follows 
as a necessary consequence, that the other pole is 
elevated, and that the sea and air, which are two 
fluid and heavy bodies, run in this declension. It 
is therefore correct to say, that the sun advancing 
toward one pole, causes on that side two great and 
regular currents, — the current of the sea and the 
current of the air,, which latter constitutes the 
monsoon wind ; as the sun is the cause of two 
opposite currents when it returns toward the 
other pole. 

Upon this theory it may, 1 think, be said that 
there are only two main and contrary flows of the 
sea, one from the northern and. the other from 
the southern pole ; . that if ^ there existed a sea 
from one pole to the other, which passed through 
Europe, we should there find these two currents 
regulated. in every respect as in India, and that 
the reason why this regularity is not 'general 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL empire; 181 

is that the seas are intercepted by lands, which 
obstruct, break and diversify their course; in th^. 
same manner as some persons allege that the 
usual flUx and reflux of the sea is prevented in 
those seas which, like the Mediterranean, extend in 
length from east to west. According to this 
theory, it might also, in my opinion, be main- 
tained that there are only two principal and 
opposite currents of air or wind, and that in 
regard to them the same regularity would reign 
generally, if the earth were also perfectly and 
generally smooth, equal and similar. 



ANSWER 

TO 



THE FOURTH ENQUIRY, AS TO THE FERTILITY, WEALTH 
AND BEAUTY OF THE KINGDOM OF BENGAL. 

Egypt has been represented iii every age as the 
finest and most fruitful country in the world, and 
even modern writers deny that there is any other 
land so peculiarly favoured by nature : but' the 
knowledge I have acquired of Bengal during two 
visits paid to that kingdom, inclines me to 
believe that the pre-eminence ascribed to Egypt 
is rather due to Bengal. The latter country 
produces rice in such abundance that its supplies 
not only the neighbouring but remote states. 
It is carried up the Ganges as far as Patna, and 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



182 TRAVELS IN THE 

exported by saa to Masulipaium and many other 
port3 on the coaat of CoromondeU It is abo 
<;ent to foreign kingdoms^ principally to the island 
pf Ceylon and the Maldives. Bengal abounds 
likewise in sugar with which it supplies the 
kingdoms of Golconda and the Carnatic, where 
very little is grown, Arabia and Mesopotamia, 
through the towns of Mokha and Bassora, and 
even Persia, by way of Bender^Abbassy. Bw^ 
gal likewise is celebrated for its sweetmeats, 
especially in places inhabited by Portuguese, who 
are skilful in the art of preparing them, and with 
whom they are an article of considerable trade. 
Among other fruits, they preserve large citrons, 
such as we have in Europe, a certain delicate 
root about the length of sarsaparilla, amba 
and pine-apples, two common fruits of India 
small mirobolan plums, which are excellent ; 
lemons and ginger. 

Bengal, it is true, yields not so much wheat 
as Egypt ; but if this be a defect, it is attri- 
butable ^0 the inhabitants, who live a great deal 
more upon rice than the Egyptians, and seldom 
taste bread. Nevertheless, wheat is cultivated in 
sufficient quantity for the consumption of the 
country, and for the making of excellent and 
cheap sea biscuits, with which the crews of Euro- 
pean ships, English, Dutch and Portuguese, are 
supplied. The three or four sorts of vegetables 
which, together with rice and butter, form the 
chief aliment of the common people, are pur- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL BMPIRE. 183 

efaased for the merest trifle^ and for a single rupee 
twenty or more good fowls may be boug^ 
Geese and ducks are proportionably cheap. There 
are also goats and sheep in abundance ; and pigs 
are obtained at so low a price that the Portuguese* 
settled in the country^ live almost entirely i^on 
pork. This meat is salted at a cheap rate by the 
Dutch and English^ for the supply of their res^ 
pective vessels. Fish of every species, whetheir 
fresh or salt, is in the same profusion. In a word* 
Bengal abounds with every necessary of life ; and 
it is this abundance that has induced so many 
Portuguese, half-casts, and other Christians, driven 
from their different settlements by the Dutch, to 
seek an asylum in this fertile kingdom. The Je-^ 
suits and Augustins, who have large churches and 
are permitted the free and unmolested exercise of 
their religion, assured me that Hoogly alone con*^ 
tains from eight to nine thousand Christians^ and 
that in other parts of the kingdom their number 
exceeded five and twenty thousand. The rich 
exuberance of the country, together with th^ 
beauty and amiable dispositions of the native wo* 
men^ has given rise to a proverb in common use 
among the Portuguese, English and Dutch, that 
the kingdom of Bengal has a hundred gates open 
for entrance, but not one for departure^ 

In regard to valuable commodities of a nature 
to attract foreign merchants, L am acquainted 
with no country where so great a variety is founds 
Besides the sugar I have spoken of, and which 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



1S4 TllAVELS IN THE 

may be placed in the list of valuable commodities, 
there is in Bengal such a quantity of cotton and 
silks, that the kingdom may be called the common 
storehouse for those two kinds of merchandise, 
not of Hindostan only, but of all the neighbouring 
kingdoms, and even of Europe. I have been 
sometimes amazed at the vast quantity of cotton 
cloths, of every sort, fine and coarse, white and 
coloured, which the Dutch alone export to differ- 
ent places, especially to Japan and Europe. The 
Enghsh, the Portuguese, and the native mer- 
chants deal also in these articles to a considerable 
extent. The same may be said of the ^Iks and 
silk stuffs of all sorts. It is not possible to 
conceive the quantity drawn every year from 
Bengal for the supply of the whole of the Mogul 
Empire, as far as Lahore and Cabul, and gene-r 
rally of all those foreign nations to which the 
cotton cloths are sent. The silks are not certainly 
so fine as those of Persia, Syria, Said and 
Baruth, but they are of a much lower price; and 
I know from indisputable authority that, if they 
were well selected and wrought with care, they 
might be manufactured into most beautiful stuffs. 
The Dutch have sometimes seven or eight hundred 
natives employed in their silk factory at Kassem- 
Bazar. The English and other merchants employ 
likewise a great number. 

Bengal is also the principal * emporium for 
•saltpetre. A prodigious quantity is imported 
from Patna. It is carried down the Ganges with 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 18$ 

great facility, and the Dutch and English send 
large cargoes to many parts of India, and to 
Europe. . 

Lastly, it is from this fruitful kingdom, that 
the best gum-lac, opium, wax, civet, long pepper 
and various drugs, are obtained; and butter 
which may a{)pear to you an inconsiderable 
article, is in such plenty, that although it be 
a bulky article to export, yet it is sent by sea 
to numberless places. 

It is fair to ackhowledge, ^however, that 
strangers seldom find the air salubrious, pja:- 
ticularly near the sea. There was a great mor- 
tality among the Dutch and English when they 
first settled in Bengal; and I saw in Balasore 
two beautiful English vessels, which had remained 
in that port a twelvemonth in consequence of the 
war with Holland, and at the expiration of that 
period, were unable to put to sea, because the 
greater part of the crews had died. Both the English 
and Dutch now live with more caution and the 
mortality is diminished. The masters of vessels 
take care that their crews drink less punch; 
nor ' do they permit them so frequently to visit 
the Indian women, or the dealers in arrack 
and tobacco. "^ Good Vin de Grave or Canary 
and Schiraz wines, taken in moderation, are found 
excellent preservatives against the effects of bad 
air. Their punch composed of arrack, a spirit distil- 
led from molasses, lemon juice, water and nutmeg. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



186 TRAVELS IN THE 

It if j^asant enough to the taste, but most delete* 
fious in the effects. 

In describing the beauty of Bengal^ it should 
be remarked that throughout a country extendmg 
nearly an hundred leagues in length, on both 
banks of the Ganges, from Raja-M&hii to the sea, 
is an endless number of canals^ cut from that 
river with immense labour, for the conveyance 
of merchandise and (^ the water itself, which 
is reputed by the Indians to be superior to any 
in the world. These canals are lined on both 
sides with towns and villages, thickly peopled 
with pagans ; and with extensive fields of xice, 
sugar, corn and other species 'of vegetables, 
mustard, sesame for oil, and small mulberry trees, 
two or three French feet in height, for the food 
of silk worms. But the most striking and pe« 
culiar beauty of Bengal is the innumerable 
islands filling the vast space between the two 
banks of the Ganges, in some places six or seven 
days' journey asunder. These islands vary in size, 
but are all extremely fertile, surrounded with 
wood, and abounding in fruit trees, and pine*apples, 
and covered with verdure ; a thousand canals run 
through them, stretching beyond the sight, and 
resembling long walks arched with trees. Se- 
veral of the islands, nearest tof\the sea, are 
now abandoned by the inhabitants, who were 
exposed to the attacks and ravagies of the Arracan 
pirates, spoken of in another place. At present 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPTltE. 1S7 

Aey are a dreary waste^ wherein no living ci^a- 
ture is seen except antelopes^ wild hogs^ fowls 
and^ tigers^ which sometimes swim from one 
island to another. In trarersing the Ganges 
in small rowing boats^ the usual mode of con* 
veyance am<Hig these islands, it is in many 
places, dangerous to land, and great care must 
be had that the boat, which during the night 
is fastened to a tree, be kept at some distance 
from the shore, for it constantly happens that 
some person or another falls a prey to tigers. 
These ferocious animals are very apt, it is said, 
to enter into the boat itself, while the people are 
asleep, and to carry away some victim, who, 
if we are to believe the boatmen of the country, 
generally happens to be the stoutest and fattest 
of the party, 

I remember a nine days' voyage that I made 
from Pipley to Hoogly, among these islands and 
canals, which I cannot omit relating, as no day 
passed without some extraordinary accident or 
adventure. When my seven-oared boat had con- 
veyed us out of the river of Pipley, and we 
had advanced three or four leagues at sea, along 
the coast, on our way to the islands and canals, 
we saw the sea covered with fish, apparently 
large carp, which were pursued by a great number 
of dolphins. I desired my men to row that way, 
and perceived that most of them were lying 
on their side as if they had been dead; some 
mov^ slowly along, and others seemed to be 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



188 THAVELS IN TH9 

struggling and turning about as if stupified. 
We caught four and twenty with our hands, and 
observed that out of the mouth of every onct 
protuberated a bladder, like that of a carp, which 
was full of air aiid of a reddish colour at the end.' 
I easily conceived that it was this bladder which 
prevented the fish from sinking, but could never 
understand why it thus protruded, unless it were 
that having been long and closely pursued by the 
dolphins, they made such violent eflforts to escape, 
that the bladder swelled, became red, and was 
forced out of the mouth. I have recounted this 
circumstance to a hundred ^sailors, whom I found 
incredulous ; with the exception, ind^d, of a Dutch 
pilot, who informed me that sailing in a large ves- 
sel along the coasts of China, his attention was 
arrested by a similar appearance, and that putting 
out their boat they caught, ias we did, with only 
their hands, many of the fish. 

The day following we arrived, at rather a late 
hour, among the islands ; and having chosen a 
spot that appeared free from tigers, we landed and 
lighted a fire. I ordered a couple of fowls and 
some of the fish to be dressed, and we made an 
excellent supper. The fish was delicious. I then 
re-embarked, and ordered my men to row on till 
night. There would have been danger in losing 
our way in the dark among the difiereht canals, 
and therefore we retired out of the great canal in 
search of a snug creek, where we pasised the 
night ; the boat being f;Astened to a thick branch 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 189 

of a tree, at a prudent distance from the shore. 
While keeping watch, I observed a strange ap- 
pearance in the heavens, such as I had seen twice 
at Delhi. I beheld a lunar rainbow, and awoke 
the whole of my company, who all expressed 
much surprise, especially two Portuguese pilots, 
whom I had received into the boat at the request 
of a friend. They declared that they had neither 
seen nor heard of such a rainbow. 

The third day, we lost ourselves among the 
canals, and I know not how we should have re- 
covered our right course, had we not met with 
some Portuguese, who were employed in making 
salt on one of jthe islands. This night again, our 
boat being under shelter in a small canal, my Por- 
tuguese, who were full of the strange appearance 
on the preceding night, and kept their eyes con- 
stantly fixed toward the heavens, roused me from 
my sleep and pointed out another rainbow as 
beautiful and as well defined as the last. You are 
not to imagine that I mistake a halo for an iris. I 
am familiar with the former> because during the 
rainy season at Delhi, there is scarcely a month in 
which abalo is not frequently seen round the moon. 
But they appear only when that luminary is very 
high above the horizon : I have observed ' them 
three and four nights successively, and sometimes I 
have seen them doubled. The iris of which I speak, 
was not a circle about the moon, but was placed in 
an opposite direction, in the siEtme relative position 
as a solar rainbow^ Whenever I have seen a night 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



190 TRAVELS IN THS 

irb, the moon has been at the west and the iril at 
the east. The moon was also nearly complete in 
its orb, because otherwise the beams of light 
would not, I conceive be sufficiently power- 
ful to form the rainbow; nor was the iris so 
white as the halo, but more strongly marked, 
and a variety of colours was even discernible. 
Thus you see, that I am more happy than the an- 
cients, who> according to Aristotle, had remarked 
no lunar rainbows before his time. 

In the evening of the fourth day we with* 
drew, as usual, out of the grand canal to a place 
of security, and passed a most extraordinary night. 
Not a breath of wind was felt, and the air became 
so hot and suffocating, that we could scarcely re- 
spire. The bushes around us were so full of 
glow-worms that they seemed ignited ; and fires 
resembling flames, arose every moment to the great 
alarm of our sailors, who did not doubt that they 
w«re so many devils. Two of these luminous ap- 
pearances were very remarkable. One was a great 
globe of fire, which ccmtinued longer than the 
time necessary to repeat a pater-noster, the other 
looked like a small tree all in flames, and lasted 
above a quarter of an hour. 

The night of the fifth day was altogether 
dreadful and perilous. A storm arose so violent, 
that although we were, as we thought, in excel- 
lent shelter under trees, and our boat care- 
fiilly fastened, yet our cable was broken, and we 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOOUIi EHFIRX« 191 

skould ha?e been driven into tlie great canal 
there inevitaUy to perish^ if I and my two PortiH 
guese had not^ by a sudden and spontanMUf 
movement^ entwined our arms round the branches 
of trees^ which we held lightly for the space of 
two hours, while the tempest was raging with una-* 
bated force. No assistance was to be expected 
from my Indian boatm^, whose fears completely 
overcame them. Our situation while clmging for 
our lives to the trees was indeed most painfol; 
the rain fell as if poured into the boat frotm 
buckets, and the lightning and thunder were 
so vivid and loud and so near our heads, that we 
despaired of surviving this horrible nighty 

Nothing however could be more pleasant that 
the remainder of tbe voyage. We arrived at 
Hoogly on the ninth day, and my eyes seemed 
never sated with gazing on the delightful country 
through which we passed. My trunk, however, 
and all my weaiiqg*appard were wet, the poultry 
dead, the fish spoilt, and the wbdeof my biscuits 
soaked with rmn. 



A1M0W&& 

TO 

THB FIFTH ENQUIRY, COVCEBJIING THE IKCEEASB 
OF THE NILE. 

I EKOW not whether my sdlulion of this fifth que»« 
tk)n will be satisfactory; but I shall impart 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



192 TRAVELS IN THE 

opinions formed after having been twice a witness 
of the increase, after having given to'the subject the 
whole of my attention, and after miaking certain 
observations in India which afford some facilities 
for the disquisition, which must have been wanting 
to the great man who has written so ingeniously 
and learnedly on this interesting topic, although 
he never saw Egypt but in his study. 

I have already mentioned, that while the two 
Ethiopian ambassadors were at Delhi, my aga^ 
Danechmend-khan, whose thirst for knowledge is 
incessant, invited them frequently to his hqui^, 
and that I was always one of the party. His 
object was to be made acquainted with the state 
of their country, and the nature of its govern- 
ment. Among other subjects, we spoke a great 
deal about the source of the Nile, which is 
called by them Abbabile. They spoke of its 
source as of a thing generally well known, and 
concerning which no one entertained any doubt 
One of the ambassadors had even seen it, accom- 
panied by a Mogul who had returned with him to 
Hindostan. They told us that the source of the 
river Nile is in the country of the Agows ; that it 
gushes out of the earth by two large and bubbling 
springs near one" another and forming a small lake 
of about thirty or forty paces in length ; that the 
river issuing from this lake is of considerable size, 
and that in its progress it receives many tributary 
waters, which swell it to an important stream. 
They went on to observe, that this stream pursues 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPUE/ 193 

a winding course^ and forms an extensive peiun- 
sula ; and that after descending from several steep 
rodks, it falls into a large lake^ in the country of 
Detnbea, only four or five days' journey from the 
source, and three short journeys from Gondar, 
the capital of Ethiopia; that having traversed 
this lake, the river leaves it, virith the accession of 
all the waters which fall into the lake ; passes 
through Sennaar, the chief city of the Fungi or 
Berberis, tributaries to the king of Ethiopia, 
whence tumbling among the cataracts, it pursues 
its way into the plains of Missir or Egypt. 

When the ambassadors had furnished these 
particulars as to the source and course of the Nile, 
J. wished to form some idea of the situation of the 
country where the source is found : I therefore 
enquired in what part of Africa, relatively to 
Babelmandel, Dembea, is situated. But they 
could return no other answer than that it lay 
toward the west. I was surprised to hear thi^ 
observation, especially from the muhammedan 
ambassador, who ought to be better informed 
than a Christian of the relative bearings of 
places, because all muselmans are bound, when 
repei^ting their prayers, to look toward Mecca. 
He also persisted in saying that Dembea is 
situated to the west of Babelmandel ; so that 
the source of the river Nile, according to thes^ 
ambassadors, is considerably to the north of 
the equator, and not to the south, where it is 
placed by Ptolemy, and in all our maps. 

VOL. II. o 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



194 TRAVELS m THE 

We inquired further of these gentiiemen whenit: 
rai&ed in Ethiopia^ and whether the rains wexe 
periodical in that country as in Hindostan. They 
answered that it seldom or never rained along the 
coast of the Red Sea^ from Suakin^ Arkeeko aod 
the island of Masuah, to Babelmandel, unj more 
than at Mokha^ in Arabia Felix, on the opposite 
shore of that sea. In the interior of the country, 
however, in the province of the Agows» in Dembea, 
and the circumjacent provinces, the rains w^e 
iFery heavy during the two hottest months of 
summer, those months when it also rains in Iiidia, 
and exactly the time when, according to my com- 
putation, the increase of the Nile in Egypt takes 
place. They were quite aware, the ambassadors 
added, that the swelling of that river and tho 
inundations of Egypt were caused by the rams <tf 
Ethiopia ; and that the former country owed its 
iecundity to the sUme conveyed and deposited 
thither by the Nile. It was from these circon^ 
stances, they observed, that the kings of Ethio^ 
pia derived the right of exacting tribute from 
Egypt ; and when that kingdom was subdued by 
the muhammedans, and its Christian populatioii 
became oppressed and exposed to every indignity, 
the Ethiopian monarch had thoughts of tunmig 
the course of the river toward the Red Sea, 
a measure which would have destroyed ^ 
fertility of Egypt, and consequently proved 
ruinous to the country: but die project ap- 
peared so gigantic, if not impracticable^ tha^ 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL EMPm£< 19$ 

tke attempt was never made to carry it into 
execntion. 

All these particulars I had already been made 
acquainted with when at Mokha^ in the course of 
Yanous conversations with ten or a dozen Gondar 
merchants, sent every year to that city by the 
King of Ethiopia for purposes of traffic with the 
vessels from India. The information is usefol, as 
tending to demonstrate that the Nile increases only 
by means of the rains which fall near its source 
and at a distance from Egypt. But I attach still 
greater importance to my own observations, made 
upon two separate occasions during the overflow<- 
ing of that river, because they detect the fallacy 
of some popular opinions, and prove them to be 
nferely vulgar and idle tales, the inventions of a 
people much given to superstition and lost in as- 
totushmelit at witnessing the increase of a river 
during the heat of summer, in a country where 
tain is unknown. I allude, among other conceits, 
to the notion that there is a certain determinate 
day on which the Nile begins its increase ; that a 
paiticular dew, called the goute, falls on this first 
day of the increase, which puts an end to the 
plague, no person dying of tiiat disease when 
the goute has begun to descend; and that the 
overflowing of the Nile is owing to particular and 
fiecret causes. I have ^covered that this cele^ 
brated stream, like other rivers, swells and ov^- 
flows in consequence of abundant rains, and that 
we are not to ascribe its increase to the fermentan 
tion of the nitrous soil of Egypt. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



196 TRAVELS IN 1«E 

I have seen it swell more than a French foot, 
and very turbid, nearly a month before the pre- 
tended determinate day of the increase. 

I have remarked, in the time of its augmen* 
tation and before the opening of the canals, that 
after the water had swollen during some days a 
foot of two, it decreased little by little, and then 
began to increase anew ; and in this manner the 
river augmented or lessened, just according as the 
rains did or did not fall near its source. The 
same thing is observable in our Loire ; it in- 
creases or diminishes in proportion to the rains on 
the mountains whence that river flows. 

Once, on my return from Jerusalem, I 
ascended the Nile from Damietta to Cairo, about 
a month before the day on which it is said that the 
goute falls ; and in the morning our clothes were 
soaked in consequence of the dew that had fallen 
during the night. 

I supped with M. de Bermon, our vice-consul 
at Rosette, eight or ten days after the fall of the 
goute. Three of the party were that same even- 
ing seized with the plague, of whom two died on 
the eighth day ; and the other patient, who hap- 
pened to be M. de Bermon himself, would per- 
haps have fallen a victim to the disease if I had 
not ventured to prescribe a remedy, and lanced 
his abscess. I caught the infection, and but for 
the butter of antimony* to which I had immedi- 

* Or, according to the modem medical nomenclatore 
liublimated muriate of antimony. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MOGUL BMPIRb. 197 

are recourse, it might have been seen in my case, 
also, that men die of the plague after the descent 
of the goute. My emetic, taken at the com- 
mencement of the disorder, peformed wonders,^ 
arid I was not confined to the house more than 
three or four days. A Bedouin servant attended 
me; he endeavoured to preserve my spirits by 
swallowing, without a moment's hesitation, what 
remained of my broth ; and being a predestinarian, 
he laughed at the idea of danger from the plague. 

I am far from denying that this distemper is 
generally attended with less danger after the fall 
of the goute. All I maintain is, that the decrease 
of danger should not be attributed to the goute. 
In my opinion the mitigation of the disease is 
owing to the heat of the weather, then become 
intense, which opens the pores and expels the 
pestiferous and malignant miasmata that remained 
confined in the body. 

Moreover I have carefully enquired of several 
rays, or masters of boats^ who have ascended the 
Nile to the extremity o£ the plains of Egypt, as 
far as the rocks and cataracts. They assured me 
that when the river overflows the Egyptian plains 
the soil of which is represented as nitrous and 
fermentative, the Nile is greatly increased between 
the mountains of the cataracts, which it inundates 
in a surprising manner, although the soil upon 
those mountains is not apparently impregnated 
with nitre. 

I was also very particular in making the ne- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



198 TRAVELS IN THE 

ceSsary enquiries of the Sennaar negroes vAko 
repair to Cairo for employment and whose coun- 
try, tributary to the King of Ethiopia, is situated 
on the Nile among the mountainous tracts to the 
south of Egypt. These negroes all agreed in 
asserting that at the time when the Nile inundates 
the plains of Egypt^ it is swollen and impetuous 
in their own country, because of the rwns wkiefa 
then fall, not only in their mountains, but higtor 
up, in the region of the Habesh or Ethiopin. 

The obserrations made by nie on the pario£- 
cal rains of India, which fall during the tpite tiuit 
the Nile is increasing in Egypt, throw (SOUsid^iH 
ble light upon this subject, and will leiad you to 
imagine that the Indus, the Ganges and all the 
other rivers in this part of the globe are so many 
rivers Nile, and the countries contiguous to their 
mouths, so many lands of Egypt. Such were the 
ideas which suggested themselves to my mind 
when in Bengal, trnd the following are the very 
words which I then wrote concernmg this matter* 
The numerous islands in the gulf of Bengal^ at 
the mouth of the Ganges, which the course of 
ages has united together, and at length has 
joined to the continent, recall to my mkid the 
mouths of the river Nile. When in Egypt, I re- 
marked the same process of nature ; and as it is 
often said, in the language of Aristotle, that 
Egypt is the workmanship of the Nile, so may it 
be observed that Bengal is the production of &e 
Ganges. There is only this di^rence between 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



UOeVh EMPIRE. 199 

^m tiro MYers, th^it the Qmg^s t>eing incompara* 
iify larger thao^ the Nik» it carrii^ toward the sea 
a mttct greater quantity pf earth, and tl^us forms 
Emwe ccHisiderable numbe): ^f i^landSj and of su* 
perior.sise^ thaii the Nile. The isjUtnds of the Nile 
too are destitute pf trees ; biit those of the Gangi^ 
«;e aU covered with them, owing to the four 
mondis of regular and excespivp rs^ns th^t fall in 
Isbe midst of summer* Thp^ rain)? pliviate tib^ 
necefisity of cutting canals in Bengal, as is done in 
Egypt, for the purpose of irrigating and enriching 
the land. They could indeed be made with as 
much facility in the one country as in the other, 
the Ganges and other rivers of Hindostan, increas- 
ing, the same as the Nile, in summer, in conse- 
quence of the rains which regularly fall at that 
season. There is this difference between the two 
countries ; that in Egypt no rain is known, neither 
in summer, nor scarcely at any other time, except- 
ing occasionally in a small quantity toward the 
sea. It is only near the source of the Nile, in 
Ethiopia, that rain falls ; whereas in India it rains 
periodically in countries through which rivers flow. 
It should be observed, however, that this is not 
the case universally ; for in the kingdom of Sindy, 
toward the Persian gulf, where the mouth of the 
Indus is situated, there are years during which no 
rain whatever falls, although the Indus be greatly 
swollen. The fields are then irrigated, as in Egypt, 
by means of kalis or canals. 

In regard to the wish expressed by Mr. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



200 TRAVELS IN THE MOGUL EMPIRE. 

Thevenot, that I should send you a detailed nar^ 
ration of my adventures and observations in the 
Red Sea^ at Suez, Tor, Mount Sinai, Jidda, (in 
that pretended holy land, half a day's journey 
from Mecca), in the island of Camaran and at 
Loheia, it is my intention to gratify that wi^^ 
when I find lebure to decipher my manuscripts. 
I hope also to communicate all the information 
wl^ch I obtained at Mokha concerning Ethiopia, 
and the best route for entering that kingdom. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPENDIX. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPENDIX. , . 

. 1 1 rii Mji null 

The Egyptians and PhenieiaYis^ the most ancient 
tiaviga4orft mentioned in history, are represented 
as the first people of the west who opened a 
ocmimunication by sea with India,* and Herodotus 
is the earliest historian who gires any account of 
this country ; bathe seems to have been acquainted 
only with the western parts, which were tributary 
to Persia, The aversion of the Indians themselves 
to disclose the annals of their history, which an 
interspeiMd with their religfious tenets, has m* 
volved their transactions, in ancient times, in 
impenetrable darkness, and the only light to 
conduct us through the obscure paths of thd^ 
antiquities, we derive frpm an historical pq^nh 
tranidated into .the Peisian langua^ in the rdgn 
of Acbanf • 

^ The Tynans kept up a constant mtercourse with some 
parts of India, by navi^ng die Arabian gulf, noinr called 
thie R^d Btei. Hindostau was called India by the Qteeki, 
ti term derived, it is tbonght, fVom Hind, a supposed son of 
Ham, the son of Noah« The termination Sian signifies coun- 
try in the Persic. 

t Could access be obtained to such records of the 
Hindoos as are divested of that redundancy of fable with 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



204 APPENDIX. 

After the Babylonish monarchy^ of which 
India is supposed to have formed a portion, was 
subdued by Persia, Darius Hystaspes, the king 
of Persia, conquered the western part of Hin- 
dostan, about the year 509 before the Christian 
era. The expedition of Alexander the Great» 
327 years before Christ, increased the scanty 
knowledge which Europeans had hitherto pos-^ 
sessed concerning India, although his military 
operations extended only to the modern province 
of Lahore and the countries on the banks of the 
Indus from Moultan to the sea. 

On the death of Alexander, the eastern 

tvhich their priests have so copiously interwoven them, 
it would not be presumptuous to suppose, that we would 
discover they had been, in the more early ages of the world, 
one of the most enlightened and powerful nations that 
inhabited the earth. 

The empire of the Hindoos, as related in many of their 
historical tracts, consisted of 56 separate principalities, 
ultimately governed by one prince, whose kingdom extended 
from the southern limits of Tartary to the island of Ceylon, 
And from the confines of Assam and Arracan, to the river 
Indus. This extensive space was inhabited bj a p^ple 
who were divided into four distinct tribes* each exercising 
different functions. It abounded in fair and opulent cities, 
which were decorated with magnificent temples for the 
worship of the gods, and with sumptuous mansions, gardens, 
and fountains, for the pleasure and the accommodation of 
the inhabitants. Useful and elegant artisans, skilled in 
raising stupendous buildings, in fabricating gold, silver 
and the most delicate cotton cloths, and in the curious 
workmanship of precious stones and metals, all found 
encouragement in the exercise of their professions.— For5<er. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPENDIX. 205 

part of his dominions devolved first on Pytho^ and 
afterwards on Seleucus, the founder of the Sy- 
rian empire. Sandracottus, king of the Prasii, a 
powerful nation on the Ganges, threatening to 
attack the Macedonians whose Indian territories 
bordered on his dominions, Seleucus was induced 
to march an army into the country. He advanced 
much beyond the boundary of Alexander's pro 
gress in India, but stopped in his career in order 
to oppose Antigonus who was preparing to invade 
his dominions. Seleucus concluded a treaty with 
Sandracottus ; in consequence of which that mo- 
narch retained the kingdom he had acquired. But 
the possessions of the Macedonians seem to have 
remained unimpaired during the reign of Seleucus. 
No historian has fixed the time or described the 
manner, in which the territories of the Syrian 
monarchs in India were wrested from them. It 
is probable they were obliged to abandon that 
country soon after the death of Seleucus. 

But the Greeks in a smaller kingdom, composed 
of some fragments of Alexander's empire, still 
maintained an intercourse with India, and even 
made some considerable acquisition of territory 
there. This was the kingdom of Bactria, originally 
subject to Seleucus, but wrested from his son or 
grandson and rendered an independent state 
about sixty-nine years after the death of Alexan- 
der. It seems that its commerce with India was 
great, and that the conquests of the Bactrian 
, kings in that country were more extensive than 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



2M Anvfumx.^ 

those of Alexander. We me iftfoitned hfik^i 
Instorians of Chma, that about 126 years before 
Ihe Christian ara, a horde of Tartars^ pushed 
from their native seats on the confines of Ghina5 
afiid obliged to move toward the west by the presr 
lure of a more numerous body that rolled en 
behind ihem» poured in upon BActria^overwhelaiod 
that kingdom, and put an end to the domiuiosa of 
the Greeks there, after it * had been established 
niear J 30 years^ 

From this time until the close of the fifteenth 
eentury, when the Portuguese, by doubling^ the 
Gape of Good Hope, opened a new commumcatiou 
with the east and carried their victorious arms 
into every part of India, no European power ac* 
t]uired territory or established its dominion there. 
During Ihis long period of more th^n sixteen 
hundred years, all schemes of conquest in India 
seem to hare been totally rdiinquished, and no- 
thing more was aimed at by any nation of Europe 
than to secure an intercourse of trade with that 
opulent country. 

The history of Hindostan is involved in much 
obscurity until the invasion of that country by the 
muhammedans, in the year 1000. This^ invs^ 
sion was conducted by Mahmud, Emperor of 
Ghizni,* who had made a vow that if ever he 

,* The empire of Ghizni was founded in the year of our 
era 960 by Abistagi, governor of Chorassan. Abistagi revolted 
from the King of Bucharia: whose ancestor^ in hb tuAi, 
had arisen to power on the ruing of the Caliphat empire. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



flhoidd be blessed with tranquiUity mhas owi^ 
donumons^ he would turn his arms agamst the 
idolaters of Hindostan. He was opposed by Jetpal^ 
the Indian prince of Lahore, and an ofastinatd 
battle ensued, in whidi ihe emperor was victor 
rious. Jeipal was taken prisoner, atid round h» 
nec^ were found sixteen strings of jewels, each of 
wMdi was valued at 180,000 rupees, (altogeliieY 
id>out 320^000/* of our money). In the year 
1008 Mahnnid marched against the Hindoos of 
Nagracot, destroying their temples. There was 
in Nagracot a fort called Bim6, where the Hinr 
doos had deposited the wealth consecrated to 
their idols in all the neighbouring kingdoms/; 
so that the emperor, when he took this fort, found 
in it seven hundred thousa^ golden dinars, 
seven hundred maunds^ of gold and silver i^ate» 
forty maunds of pure gold in ingots, two thou- 
jsand maunds of silver bullion, and twenty maunds 
cf various jewels set. Mahmud retired with 
this immense treasure to Ghizni ; but returned 
to Hindostan in 1011, and during this second 
inra^on Tannasar, a place held in the same 
Teneration by the Hindoos as Mecca by the 
xmsselmans, was d^troyed, and Delhi taken. 

^about eighty seven years before. Ghizni consisted chiefly 
of the tract which composed the kingdom of Bactria, after 
the division of Alexander's empire : that is^ the countries 
lying between Parthia and the Indus and south of the 
Oxu9. Mahmud was the third in succession from Abistagi. 
^ The least maund is about 37 pounds avoirdupois. . 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



208 APPENDIX.. ' 

After 8 lapse of seven years ICinhoge w&s re- 
duced^ and the city of Muttra, or Matura soon 
shared the same fate* He intended to destroy 
the temples^ hut found that the lahour exceeded 
his capacity. Some say that he 3¥as turned from 
his purpose hy the admirable heauty of those 
edifices. It is said that M ahmud found in Muttra 
five great idols of pure gold, with eyes of ruhies, 
each of which eyes was worth 50^000 dinars. 
Upon another idol he found a sapphire, weighing 
four hundred miskal ; aiid the image being melted, 
produced 98,300 miskals of pure gold. Brides 
these, there were ahove a hundred idols of silver^ 
which loaded a hundred camels with bullion. In 
the year 1024, Mahmud conquered the province 
of Guzerat, demolishing the temple of Sumnat, 
which contained a greater quantity of jewels and 
gold than it is thought, any royal treasury ever 
contained before. ^ 

Mahmud died in 1028, master of the eastern 
and by much the largest part of Persia and 
nominally of the Indian provinces, from thb 
western part of the Ganges to the peninsula 
of Guzerat; and also of the provinces between 
the Indus and the mountains of Agimere. It is 
worthy of remark that during these invasions the 
rajaputs of Agimere preserved their indeperi- 
denco, which indeed they have not altogether lost 
even at this day. 

Under a succession of warlike princes, the 
empire of Ghizni (or Gazna) rose to a surprising 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPENDIX. ' 20& 

magnitude/ In the reign of Musaood I. son of 
Mahmud, it extended from Ispahan to Bengal, and 
from the months of the Indus to the banks of the 
Jaxartes, which comprehends nearly one half of the 
great continent of Asia. 

But in the year 1158 the Ghiznian empire 
was broken. The family of Gauridaso, from the 
province of Gaur beyond the Indian Caucasus, 
became possessed of the western and most con- 
siderable part. The parts contiguous to both 
sides of the Indus continued in the possession 
ofChusero or Cusroe, who fixed his residence at 
Lahore. In 1184, however, the Gaurides ex- 
pelled the successors of Chusero from their domi- 
nions. In 1194, Muhammed Ghori invaded 
Hihdostan, carried his arms as far as Benares*, 
and conquered the eastern part of Agimiere and 
the country to the river Jumna, including the 
fortress of Gualior.f 

• Muhammed Ghero perpetrated in the city of Benares the 
same crimes as Mahmud had before done at Nagracot and 
Sumoat. Benares was regarded as the principal university 
of Brahminical learning; and we may conclude (observes 
Major Rennell) that about this period, the Shanscrit lan- 
guage, which was before the current language of Hindostan, 
began to decline in its purity, by the admixture of words 
from that of the conqueror; until the language of Hin- 
dostan became what it now is: the oeiginal Shanscrit, 
preserved in their ancient writings, becoming a dead lan- 
guage. 

+ The fortress of Gualior then gave name to a kingdom 
which since has composed nearly the Soubah of Agra. 

VOL. II. P 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



210 APPENDIX. 

After the death of this emperor, in 11M)!6» tibe 
Qhiznian empire was again divided. The un- 
ambitious character of the surviving princes 
of the family of Ghor gave an opportunity to 
two of the imperial slaves to divide the em{»r6 
which M uhammed had been at much pains to 
acquire. Eldoze retained possession of the Per ^n 
part^ and Cuttub was already viceroy of the 
empire over the conquests in India. It was from 
Cuttub the muhammedan empire of the Paians 
or Afghans in India commenced^ and Delhi became 
the capital city. The Afghans originally in^ 
habited the mountainous country between India 
and Persia. In 1210 the emperor Altuumah^ 
who succeeded Cuttub to the Patan throne, com* 
pleted the conquest of nes^ly the whole of Hin* 
dostan Proper.* He was the first muhammedan 

* Hindostan has by the people of modem Europe been 
understood to mean the tract situated between the riyers 
Ganges and Indus, on the east and west; the Thibetiaa 
and Tartarian mountains on the north; and the sea on the 
south. But strictly speaking, the extent of Hindostan is 
much more circumscribed, and the name ought to be applied 
only to that part of the al>oye tract, which lies to the north 
of the parallels of SI® or 2^^ The Nirbidda river is, 
indeed, the reputed southern boundary of Hindostan, as far 
as it goes ; and the southern frontiers of Bengal and Bahar 
compose the remainder of it. The countries on the souUi 
of this line go under the general name of Deccan, and 
comprise nearly one half of the tract generally known by th9 
name of the Mogul Empire. But as the term Hindostan 
has been applied in a lax sense to this whole region, it may 
be necessary to distinguish the northern part of it by the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPENDIX, 211 

who conquered Bengal. During his reign Jdnghiz 
khah achieved the conquest of the other branch 
of the Ghiznian empire ; but Hindostan was not 
molested at that time. In 1242 the Moguls^ 
suecessors of Jenghiz^ plundered the provinces on 
the banks of the five branches of the Indus^ and 
returned to Ghizni. The situation of the country 
was not very dissimilar from what it had been 
before the invasion of the muhammedans: it 
included a great number of states tributary to 
the emptor, but scarcely to be considered as 
forming part of the same empire. Revolts were 
therefore very frequent. The kingdoms of Gu- 
zerat and Malava^ which had been annexed 
to the empire by Cuttub^were permitted to shake 
off the yoke in 1265. The rajaputs likewise 
•were constantly asserting their freedom; and 
dreadful massacres^ rebellion and barbarous 
conquests make up the history of Hindostan 
almost to the period when the government fell 
into the hands of the English. 

While the kings of Delhi were prosecuting 
their conquests in the east and south of Hindostan^ 
the provinces on the west of the Indus were 
neglected^ though not avowedly relinquished. 
It might have been expected, observes Major 



of Hindostan proper. This tract has indeed the Indus 
aad the monntains of Thibet and Tartary for its western and 
norUiem boundaries ; but the Ganges was improperlj ap- 
plied as an eastern boundary, as it intersects in its course 
some of the richest provinces of the empire. — Rennell, 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



212 APPENDIX. 

Rennell, that so excellent a barrier as the vqp^r 
part of the Indus and the deserts beyond Agi- 
mere would have induced an emperor of Hin- 
dostan to give up, of choice, all the provinces 
that lay on the west of this line ; and the neglect 
of so prudent a conduct occasioned the peace, 
of the empire to be often disturbed, arid ended 
in their being forcibly taken away at last by the 
Moguls; who, not contented with their new 
acquisitions on the west of the Indus, crossed 
that river and invaded the Penjab; and so for- 
midable did they appear to Ferose II. that some 
tribes of them were permitted to settle in that 
country in the year 1292. 

In 1293, this emperor determined to invade 
the Deccan.* The riches of Ramdeo, king of 

* The Deccan at that time included all the territory lying 
to the south of the Nirbidda and Mahanada (or Cattack) 
rivers: an extent of dominion almost equal to all that 
Ferose already possessed in Hindostan ; and which extended 
from the shores of the Indus, to the mouth of the Ganges ; 
and from the northern mountains, to Cattack, Sirong and 
Agimere: the. greatest part of Malava, with Guzerat and 
Sindi, being then independent. 

Ferishta, in his history of the Deccan, informs us that 
its emperors of the Bahmincah dynasty (which commenced 
with Hassan Caco, A. D. 1347) appear to have exceeded 
in power and splendour, those of Delhi, even at the most 
flourishing periods of their history. Like other overgrown- 
empires, it fell to pieces with its own weight; and out of 
were formed four potent kingdoms, under the names 
of Visiapour (properly Bejapour) Golconda, Berar, and 
Amednagur. i Each of these subsisted with a considerable 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPENDIX. 213 

Deogire (now Dowlatabad), one of the princi- 
palities of the Deccan^ gave birth to this project ; 
and the projector was Alia, Ferose*s nephew, 
governor of Kurrah, which nearly bordered on 
the devoted country. 

Alia marched against Ramdeo, who possessed 
the wealth of a long line of kings, and having taken 
Deogire, he concluded a treaty of peace with that 
prince upon the following almost incredible terms ; 
that in consideration of evacuating the country 
AUa should receive six hundred maunds of pure 
gold,* seven maunds of pearls^ two maunds of 
diamonds, rubies, emeralds and sapphires, one 
thousand maunds of silver, four thousand pieces 
of silk, and a long list of other precious com- 
modities surpassing all belief. 

Alia had thus the means of increasing the 
number of his adherents, and having murdered 
the emperor, his uncle, he assumed to himself the 
sovereignty of Hindostan. During his reign the 
Moguls frequently invaded the empire, but were 
repulsed with great slaughter. AUa subdued Gu- 
zerat, the Deccan, and many other provinces, and 
obliged the rajah of the Carnatic to become tribu- 
tary to him.f He was a sanguinary prince. 

degree of power until the Mogul conquest ; and the two 

first preserved their independence until the time of Aureng- 

Z&be. 

♦ The maund of the Deccan is 251b. avoirdupois. - 

t Ferishta, mentions that Capor, Allans general, pre- 

ented to the emperror as spoils from the Carnatic, three 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



214 APPENDIX. 

Many thousand Moguls, whom he took ^pnaoo&n, 
were trodden to death by elephants; and the 
Mogul mercenaries in his army having incurred 
his displeasure, he ordered tibem to be all dis- 
charged. The greater number remained at D^Uii 
in great distress, and some among them entered 
into a conspiracy to murder the king. This plot 
being discovered. Alia, instead of punishing the 
conspirators, extended his inhuman rigour to the 
whole body. Me ordered them all to be instantly 
put to the sword ; so that fifteen thousand of 
those unhappy wretches lay dead in the streets 
of Delhi in one day. 

In 1316 Alia died. He was succeeded by 
some of his children, whose reigns, howevet, were 
short. The vengeance of heaven overtook aiid 
exterminated the race of that usurper, for his in- 
gratitude to his uncle Ferose, and the streams of 
innocent Uood which flowed from his hands. 

In the commencement of the reign of Mu- 
hammed III. who ascended the throne in 1335^ 

hundred and twelve elephants, twenty thousand horses, 
ninety six thousand maunds of gold, several chests of 
jewels and pearls, and other precious things. This treasure 
may appear to exj^'ed all belief in the eyes of Europeans ; 
but if we consider the Hindoos as a mercantile people un- 
disturbed perhaps by wars for thousands of yeare^ and 
that it is the invariable custom of that race to livQ with 
the abstinence of hermits in the midst of wealth, our wonder 
will cease, and the credit of Ferishta remain unimpeached. 
The gold alone amounts to about one hundred millions 
of our money. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPENDIX. 215 

ibe Moguls invaded Hindostaiu Having subdued 
Limghan^ Moultan and the northern provinces, 
they advanced toward Delhi. Muhammed sued 
for peace ; he sent an immense present in gold 
BXkA jewels to soften the Mogul chief, who at last 
consented, upon receiving almost the price of the 
empire, to return to his own country, taking 
Guz^at and Sind in his way, which he plundei^ 
of a world of wealth, 

Muhammed formed a resolution to subdue 
China, and a prodigious army was marched into 
that country ; but the troops were stru<^ with 
dismay upon seeing a formidable army prepared 
to oppose them, and scarcely a man came back 
to relate the particulars of their defeat. In the 
year 1343, Bellaldeo, the Prince of the Camatic^ 
was informed that the muhammedans had fomied a 
design of extirpating all the HiiMloos, and he acted 
as if he was convinced of sudi a scheme* He 
drove the muhammedans before him on all stdes, 
and within a few months Muhammed had no pos- 
sessions in the Deccan, except Dowlatabad.. Many 
provinces were also lost by rebellions in Bengal, 
Ouzerat and the Panjab* 

Ferose Ul. succeeded Muhammed in 1350, 
and reigned nearly t^ty-nine years. He built 
fifty great sluices, an hundred palaces> five hospi- 
tals, one hundred bridges imd many other public 
works. After his death in 1388 the distracted 
state of the empire prepared it for foreign subjec- 
tion ; and a minority in the person of Mahmud 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



216 APPENDIX, 

III. who succeeded in 1393/ brought matters to a 
crisis. 

The empire of Persia continued under petty 
princes till Timour Bee, commonly called Tamer- 
lane, mounted the throne of the kingdoms of 
Zagatay, which comprehended all Maver-ul-Nere 
or Transoxiana, and the provinces of Cabul, Za^ 
bulistan and others toward the Indus. After the 
conquest of the northern Tartary, he turned his 
arms against Persia, and entered Chorassan, seven 
years before the death of Ferose, the Patau empe- 
ror of Hindostan. He completed the conquest of 
Persia in less than five years, and when Ferose 
died, Timour was employed in the reduction of 
the provinces on the Euphrates. 

In the year 1398, Timour set out on his expe- 
dition to India, and took Delhi, having then an 
army of near 100,000 horse. But finding a general 
conquest of India would be attended with much 
diflficulty, he bent his thoughts on an expedition 
against the Turks, and three years and eight 
months after the taking of Delhi he retired from 
Hindostan. 

The death of Mahmud, in 1413, put an end 
to the Patau dynasty. He was succeeded by 
Chizer, a Seid ; that is, one of the race of the 
impostor Muhammed ; and his posterity continued 
to fill the throne till the year 1450 ; when Belloli, 
an Afghan of the tribe of Lodi, took possession erf 
it, on the abdication of Alia II. At this time all 
Hindostan fell into sepai:ate governments. A con- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPENDIX, 217 

siderable part of the empire, however, was re- 
covered by the son of Belloli; who in 1501, 
£xed his residence at Agra. 

During the reign of Ibrahim IL Sultan Baber; 
.a descendant of Tamerlane, made . five expedi- 
tions into Hindostan. In the first four he was 
unsuccessful; but in the fifth, he on the first 
of May 1526, gave battle to Ibrahim, totally de- 
feated him and put an end to the dynasty of 
Lodi.* 

Baber, died on the 25tli of December, 1530, 
near Agra. His son Humaioon was driven out of 
his country by the usurper Sher-Khan the Afghan, 
who was killed in 1545. After his death five 
sovereigns appeared in the space of nine years, but - 
at length the throne was offered to Humaioon, 
who lived only one year after his restoration. 

Acbar, though under fourteen years of age, 
succeeded his father Humaioon in 1555. He was 
ihe sixth in descent from Tamerlane, and the only 
sovereign of muhammedan race^ whose mind ap- 

* In the person of Baber, the line of Tamerlane first 
mounted the throne of Hindostan. The conquests of his 
ancestors, nearly a century and a half before, had no share 
in effecting the present settlement. Baber was in reality the 
founder of the Mogul dynasty, and from this event, Hindos- 
tan came to be called the Mogul Empire. Properly speak- 
ing, indeed, the Mogul Empire was that over which Tamer- 
lane and his immediate successors reigned, and in which 
India was not included. Custom, however, has transferred 
the name to the empire held by the descendants of Tamer- 
lane in Hindostan and the Deccan. — Rennell. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



218 APPBNDU. 

pears to have risen so hx above all the iOiberal 
projudioes of that fanatical reUgkm in which he 
was educated, as to be capable of forming a pfen 
worthy o£ a moi»rch who loved his people and 
was solicitous to render them happy. As the 
Hindoos formed the great body of his subjects, he 
laboured to acquire a perfect knowledge of their 
leligion, their sciences, their laws smd institutions ; 
in order that he might conduct every part of his 
government, particularly the administration of 
justice, in a manner as much accommodated as 
possible to their own ideas. In this generous un- 
dertaking he was seconded with zeal by his vi^er 
Abul Fazel, a minister whose understanding was 
. not less enlightened than that of his master.* 

♦ Robertson.— That the Hindoos retained a grateful recollec- 
tion of the mild and equitable government of Acbar, is evident 
from a letter of Jesswint-Singh, Ra|ah of Joudpore (whose name 
occurs so frequently in Bernier's narrative) to Aureng-Z^be. 
** Tour royal ancestor, Acbar^ whose throne is now in heaven, 
conducted the affairs of this empire in equity and secu* 
rity for the space of fifty-two years, preserving every tribe of 
men in ease and happiness ; whether they were followers <^ 
Jesus or of Moses, of David or of Muhammed ; were they 
Brahmins,were they of the sect of Dharians, which denies the 
eternity of matter, or of that which ascribes the existence of 
the world to chance, they all equally enjoyed his countenance 
and favour ; insomuch that his people in gratitude for the 
indiscriminate protection which he afforded them, dis- 
tinguished him by the appellation of Juggot Grow, Guardian 
of Mankind. If your majesty {daces any faith in those books 
by distinction called divine, you wiU there be instructed, that 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



Tills great pnnoe had not been k»g seated on 
die throne, when he reduced the revolted pro- 
yinces throughout his vast empire* In 1585 he 
^esohed to invade the Deccan, and soon after 
carried the ivar mto Berar, while another army 
efl^ted the conquest of Kashmire. But at the 
time of Acbar's death, in 1605, no farther progress 
was made in the reduction of the Deccan and the 
adjoining countries than the taking possession of a 
part of Berar, Candeish, Tellingana (a division of 
Gdbonda) and the northern part of Amednagur.* 

God is the God of all mankind, not the God of Muhaodme- 
dans alone. The ps^n and the muselman are equally in 
His presence. Distinctions of colours are of His ordination. 
It is He who gives existence. In your temples to His name 
the voice is raised in prayer ; in a house of images where 
the bell is shaken still He is the object of adoration. To 
vilify the religion and customs of other men is to set at 
nought the pleasure of the Almighty. When we deface a 
picture, we naturally incur the resentment of the painter ; and 
justly has the poet said, *^ Presume not to arraign or to 
scrutinize the various works of Divine Power." 

Dr. Robertson was assured by a gentleman who had 
read this letter in the original^ that the English translation 
(by Mr. Orme) is not only elegant but faithful. 

* The Deccan at this period was divided into the king- 
doms or states of Candeish, Amednagur (or Dowlatabad) 
Golconda and Visiapour. Berar and the Carnatic are not 
specified by the historian as members of the Deccan. The 
kingdoms which qomposed the Deccan were governed by 
muhammedan princes, although we are not in possession of 
any history of the conquests which transferred them firom 
the Hindoos to the muhammedans.-^AeitneU; 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



220 APPENDIX, 

The great abilities of Acbar confirmed the 
house of Timour on the throne^ and established 
tranquillity oyer all their vast conquests in India. 
Though the empire |of the muhammedans in that 
country was not so extensive under Acbar as it 
had been under some princes of the Patau dynasty^ 
it comprehended a vast tract, divided into twenty- 
two provinces,* each equal to some kingdoms in 
wealth, fertility and extents A small part only 
of the Deccan or southern peninsula of India had 
been conquered ; yet the dominions of the family 
of Timour, in their northern and southern fron- 
tiers, fell under the thirty-sixth and nineteenth 
parallels of latitude ; and they extended them- 
selves from east to west, about twenty-five degrees. 
The revenues, according to the imperial register, 
were thirty-two millions sterling received into the 
exchequer, exclusive of the customary presents, 
and the estates of the officers of the crown, which 
at their death reverted to the emperor and 
amounted, on an average to twenty millions more 
of our money. These sums were expended in 
maintaining an army of three hundred thousand 
horse and as many foot, in support of the splendor 
of the court, and in payment of the salaries of civil 
officers f. 

On the death of Acbar, his son Selim as- 

* Candahar, Ghizni, Cabul, Kashmire, Lahore, Moult&D, 
Outch, Sindi, Agimere, Sirbind, Delhi,* Dullb, Agra, Alla- 
habad, Oud, Beh^, Bengal, Orissa, Malava, Berllr, Chan- 
deish, Guzerat. 
t Dow. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPENDIX. 221 

cencled the throne in Agra, in the year 1606. He 
on his succession, assumed the title of Jehan* 
Guire, or Lord of the World, and reigned twenty- 
two years and ten months, with much more repu- 
tation and success than could have been expected 
from so weak a prince. Under him the conquest of 
the Deccan was but faintly pursued. The rebel- 
lions of the emperor's son. Shah- Jehan, embittered 
the latter part of his reign, and the influence of 
his favourite sultana, Noor-Jehan perplexed the 
councils of the nation. Her abilities were extraor- 
dinary ; for she rendered herself absolute, in a 
government in which women are thought inca- 
pable of bearing any part. 

In the year 1615, Sir Thomas Roe, the first 
English ambassador to the court of Hindostan, 
arrived at Agimere, where Jehan-Guire then 
kept his court. Sir Thomas was received by the 
emperor with the utmost kindness. The presents 
made by the ambassador were agreeable to him ; 
but a fine coach sent by King Jaines pleased him 
most of all. In the month of January, ]6]5, a 
firmdn was obtained for the establishment of an 
English factory at Surat. 

Seven children were born to the emperor Jehan- 
Guire; five sons and two daughters. The sons 
were Chusero, Purvez, Churrum (afterwards Shah- 
Jehan), Jehandar and Shariar. Chusero, Purvez, 
and Jehandar died before their father ; Sharidr 
fell a victim to his brother's jealousy ; and Shah* 
Jehan succeeded to the empire. The prince 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



222 APPENI>IX. 

Ch^sero left his two sons, Dawir Buxsh and 
Gursbap, who were both murdered at the instance 
of Shah-Jehan. The children of Purvez were a 
son and a daughter : the firsts by dying a natural 
death, prevented the dagger of Shah-Jehan from 
committing another murder ; and the latter be- 
came the wife of Dara, the eldest son of Shah- 
Jehan. The two sons of Danidl, Baids&r and 
Hoshung, had been confined during the reign of 
their uncle, Jehan-Guire. Strangers to the world, 
their nerves were relaxed by inactivity and their 
minds broken by adversity. This state of debUity 
did not secure them from the jealousy of the new 
emperor, by whose command they were strangled 
at Lahore. Shah-Jehan, as was observed in a 
note, either by the dagger or bowstring dispatched 
all the males of the house of Timour ; so that he 
himself and his children only remained of the pos- 
terity of Baber who conquered India. 

It was in the year 1628 that Shah-Jehan 
mounted the throne of the Moguls ; and, according 
the pompous manner of eastern provinces, as- 
sumed the title of The True Star of the Faith, The 
Second Lord of The Happy Conjunctions, Mu- 
hammed. The King of the World. He was bom 
at Lahore on the 5th January, 1592, and on the 
day of his accession, he was thirty-six years old. 

In this reign the Deccan was invaded by 
immense armies, and most of the princes of that 
country submitted to the Mogul. Golconda was 
partially conquered, but little or no impression 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPENDIX. 223 

was made by the arms of Shah-Jehan on the 
kingdom of Visiapour or on the Camatic. 

Caimn^ Govemor of B^ngal^ having complained 
to the emperor that the Portuguese, who had esta1>- 
Kshed themselves at Hoogly on the Ganges had 
committed acts of violence upon the subjects of the 
empire, Shah-Jehan wrote to him in these laconic 
terms : ^' Expel the idolaters from my dominions.'* 
Casim appeared with an army before the Portu*^ 
guese factory and carried the place by assault* 
These were the first hostilities against Europeans 
recorded in the histories of the east. The melan* 
choly consequences of the capture of Hoogly are 
detmled by Bernier. According to Colonel DoWj, 
three thousand Portuguese fell into the hands of 
the Moguls. 

Though the power of Shah-Jehan had, in a 
great measure, terminated with the sickness, which, 
as we have seen in Bernier, rouzed his sons to 
arms, mounted the throne. He held the sceptre 
of India thirty solar years and five months ; and 
when he was dethroned, he had attained the 
sixty-seventh year of his age. The means by 
which Shah-Jehdn obtained the empire of the 
Moguls, were no more justifiable than those which 
he so much blamed in Aureng-Zebe. He rebelled 
against his father, and he sacrificed his relations. 

In 1658 the civil wars, detailed by our tra- 
veller, commenced; and in 1660 Aureng-Z6be 
was in possession of the throne. From that 
period until the year 1678 profound peace pxe- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



!224 APPENDIX. 

vailed in Hindostan. In the latter part of his 
reign he conquered the Deccan, to which Ma- 
jor Rennell supposes he was incited by the reso- 
lution and growing power of Sevajee, the foun- 
der of the Mahratta state; and who, in that cha- 
racter, appeared almost as a rival to Aureng- 
Zdbe himself.* The emperor's persecutions of 

* The derivation of the word Mahratta, is from Marhat, 
the name of a province in the Deccan. Sevajee, who 
plays so important a part in the drama before us, may be 
considered as the founder of the Mahratta empire. His 
grandfather is supposed to have been an illegitimate son of 
a Rana of Oudipour, the chief of the Rajaput princes. 
Having, after the death of his father (the Rana of Oudipour) 
suffered some indignities from his brothers, on account 
of his birth, he retired to the Deccan and entered into the 
service of the King of Visiapour, who conferred upon' him 
a distinguished rank in his army. In this rank he was 
succeeded by his son : but his grandson Sevajee, who was 
born in 1628, embraced an opportunity, which the dis- 
tractions existing in the Visiapour monarchy afforded him, 
of becoming independent. So rapid was the progress 
of his conquests that he was grown formidable to the armies 
of the Mogul empire before Aureng-Z^be's accession to 
power. At his death, in 1680, his domains extended from 
the northern part of Baglana, near Surat, to the neighbour- 
hood of the Portuguese settlement of Goa, along the sea 
coast; but probably not inland; for Aureng-Z^be's armies 
kept the field in Visiapour at that period. His son Sam*- 
bajee was treacherously seized on and cruelly put to death 
by Aureng-Z^be in 1689. The Mahrattas continued, however, 
to increase in power. Sahoojee succeeded his father Sam- 
bajee and reigned more than fifty years. The confusions 
occasioned by the disputed succession among Aureng-Z^be's 
children and their descendants opened a wide field to this 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPENDIX. 225 

the Hindoos stirred up the Rajaput tribes in 
Agimere^ and he would have been taken prisoner, 
had not the enemy thought proper to allow him to 
escape. In 1681 he again attacked the Rajaputs, 
and destroyed Cheitore, the famous capital of the 
Rana, and every where demolished the Hindoo 
temples ; but he was obliged to abandon his 
enterprise, and theRajaputs preserved their in- 
dependence. After the tenth year of Aureng- 
ZSbe's reign, we know very little of his trans- 
actions, as he would not allow any history of 
them to be written. He died in 1 707, in the 90th. 
year of his age, leaving four sons ; M auzum, after- 
wards emperor, under the title of Bahader-Shah ; 
Azem, Kambukhsh, and Acbar, who had fled to 
Persia thirty years before, on account of a rebel- 
lion in which he was engaged against his father.* 

hardy aod enterprising people, at the time of Sahoojee*8 
death, in 1740, the Mahratta state had swallowed up the 
whole tract from the western sea to Orisa ; and from Agra 
to the Camatic. 

* Aureng-Z^be left a will ; of which for the satisfaction 
of the curious, I shall give a translation. It is extracted 
from a work (The History of Nadir-Shah) published by 
Mr. Jamef Fraser, in the year 1742. 

'^ I c^me empy -handed into the world, and empty- 
handed I quit it. Whoever of my fortunate children shall 
chance t^ rule the empire, let him not molest Muhammed 
Kambuldish,* should he rest contented with the two new 
Soubah|(.t 

• Mfbammed Kambukhsh, Aiiieng*Z6be>s youngest son. 

t TUb two new Sonbahs aie Visiapoor and Heyderabad, so called as 
being lately conquered by Aureng-Z^be. 



yh. II. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



226 APPENDIX. 

The seeds which produced the decay of the 
Mogul Empire, and which in our day have ri- 
pened into such malignancy, took a deep root 
during the reign of Aureng-Zebe; who though 
one of the most sagacious princes of the house of 
Timour, endangered the welfare of the state 
and the security of his subjects by an injudicious 
impulse of domestic affection. He portioned 
among his sons the most yaluable provinces of 
the empire; where acquiring an influence and 

** There cannot be a better vizier than £mir-al-Omrah. 

*^ Let all the king's servants be true and faithful to 
Muhammed-Azem-Shah.* 

'* Whoever shall chance to have the empire, let him not 
hurt or molest those born or bred up in my house. 

" If the division I formerly made proves agreeable to my 
children, it will prevent a great deal of confusion and 
bloodshed. 

" There are two imperial seats, Agra and Delhi: whoever 
settles in Agra may have the province thereof, Deecan 
Malava, and Gnzerat : and who resides at Delhi may have 
Cabul and tl^^ other provinces. 

^* I came naked into the world, and naked I go out of it. 
Let no ensigns or royal pomp accompany my funeral. Let 
Hamid 9din Khan, who is faithful and trusty, convey my 
corpse to the place of Shah Zen al din and make a tomb for 
it in the same manner as is done for dervises. L^t not my 
fortunate children give themselves any concern- aboat a 
monument. 

*' There is in my private treasury 57,382 ruipecs : let 
one thousand rupees be distributed among the pocw at my 
funeral." 

♦Another sonof Aureng-Zfibe. 



Digitized byLjOOQlCj 



strength tliat cantiot be held by an Asiatic 
subject with safety to the monarch, they expected 
with impatience the event that ivas to determine 
their schemes and pretensions. On the death of 
Aureng-Zebe, the sons eagerly took up arms, and 
after deluging the country with blood, the war 
was successfully terminated by Bahader*-Shah, 
who may be said to have mounted the throne 
from a mound of fraternal and kindred slaughter. 
Not being endowed with the genius of his father, 
the governors of provinces relaxed in their alle- 
giance during his short reign of five years- The 
Mahrattas, whom Aureng-Zebe had nearly sub- 
dued, descended at his death from their moun- 
tains, and rapidly recovered the territories from 
which they had been expelled. Previously to the 
Persian invasion in the year 1738, the subadars 
of Oudeand the Deccan, having virtually erected 
their chiefships into independent states, conv 
manded without the control of the court large 
armies. The empire thus enfeebled, invited Nadir 
Shah to conquest and plunder. The river Attock, 
the natural western barrier of India, on whose 
bank Muhammed-Shah, the then emperor, should 
have stood in person, was crossed by the Persians 
without opposition; and this inglorious prince 
surrendered to them, without drawing his sword, 
the wealth and dominions of Hihdostan. A sub- 
sequent train of diversified ruin, moving with a 
rapidity not paralleled in the history of nations^ 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



228 



APPENDIX. 



has now left scarcely a vestige of the Mogul Em- 
pire.* 

Under Aureng-Zebe's reign, the empire at- 
tained its full measure of extent. His authority 
reached from the 10th to the 25th degree of 
latitude, and nearly as much in longitude; and 
his revenue exceeded thirty two-millions of 
pounds sterlmg, in a country where the products 
of the earth are about four times as cheap as in 
]Sngland.f 



CHRONOLOGICAL 'TABLE OF XMPEHORS WHO HAVE BXIGNED IN HINDOSTAN, 
SINCE THE GHIZNIAN CONQUEST. 



Mahmud I. 
MufaammedJI. 
Musaood I. 
Modood 
Musaood II. 
All 

Reschid ' 
Feroch-Zaad 
Ibrahim I. 
Musaood III. 
Arsilla 
Byram I. 
Chusero I. 
Chusero IL 



} 

} 
} 



GHIZNIAN BMPERORS. 



Btginlufl 
»eign,A.I>. 

1000 
1028 

1041 
1051 



1052 

1056 
1098 
1115 
1118 
1152 
1159 



GHORIAN, OR OAUR^AN EMPEROR. 

Muhammed IL or Muhamned Ghori 

* Forster. f Rennell. 



1184 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



•APPENDIX. 

PATAK, OR AFOHAK EMPEROKS. 



I 



Cuttub 

Eldoze 

Aram 

Altumnsh 

Ferose I, 

Sultana Rizia, Empress 

Byram II. 

Musaood IV, 

Mahmnd II. 

Balin 

Keikobad 

Ferose 11. 

Alia I. 

Omar 

Mubarick I. 

Toglick 

Muhammed III. . 

Ferose III. 

Tuglick II. 

^uhammed IV.> 
Abu-Bicker y 
♦Mahmoodlll. 



229 



Began ids 
reign, A.D. 

1205 



1210 

1235 
1236 
12S9 
1242 
1245 
1265 
1286 
1289 
1295 
1316 
1317 
1321 
1325 
1351 
1388 

1389 

1393 



DYNASTY OP THE SEIDS. 



Chizer . 
Mubarick II. 
Muhammed V. 
AUall. . 



1414 
1421 
1433 
1447 



DYNASTY OP LODI. 



Belloli. ..... i 1460 

* Tamerlane's ia^askm happened in this «eign. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



2m 



APPENDIX* 



Secunder I. 
Ibrahim II. 



Began hb 
reign, A.I>. 

1488 
1M6 



Baber 
Humaioon 



MOGUL EMPERORS. 



1525 
U30 



SECOND PATAN DYNASTY, 



Shere 
Selim 

Mubammed VI. 
Ibrahim III 



L VI. i 



1542 
1545 

1552 



MOGUL DYNASTY RESTORED. 

Humaioon 

Acbar . . , 

JehanGuire 

Shah Jehan 

Aureng'Z^be, or AHumguire I. 

Bahader.Shah 

Jehaunder Shah . 

Feroksere 

Ruffieh-ul-Dirjat ^ 

Ruffieh-ul-Dowlah J 

Mubammed Shah 

Ahmed Shah 

AUuinguirell. • • 

Shah Aulum 



1554 
1555 

1605 
1628 
1559 
1707 
1712 
1713 

1717 

1718 
1748 
1753 
1760 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



The notes A^ B, C^ D, andE^ are extracted from the 
third volume of Colonel Dow's wori^ upon Hindos- 
tan* There is some discrepancy between him and 
our author in their respective accounts of the 
transactions to which these notes refer. The 
colonel says that he derived the greatest part of 
his facts from Eastern writers; but it is difficult 
to conceive that he can have consulted any who 
was more intelligent and faithful than Bemieri 
or who possessed easier opportunities of asoer* 
taioing the accuracy of his statements. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 



NOTE A. 
Dara had not long remained behind his lines^ 
when the princes, on the first of June (1658) 
appeared on the opposite bank of the Chunbul. 
Aureng-Zfebe's army consisted not of 40,000 men, 
and they were fatigued with the length of their 
march. But there was no time to be lost : 
Solim&n was approaching fast to support his 
father's cause. No hopes presented themselves 
to Aureng-Zebe. To retreat was ruin: to ad- 
fance destruction. He was lost in suspense. 
Mordd was for forcing the lines ; but a letter 
from Shaista, who was third in command in 
the imperial army, broke off that measure 
by presenting a better to the brothers. This 
treacherous lord informed Aureng-Z6be, that to 
attempt the lines would be folly, and that the 
only means left him was to leave his camp stand- 
ing to amuse Dara, and to march through the 
hills by a bye-road, which two chiefs, who were 
directed to attend him in the evening, would 
point out. The princes closed with the proposal. 
The guides joined them in the evening and they 
decamped with the greatest silence, leaving their 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



234 MOTES. 

tents^ luggage, and artillery under a strong guard, 
who were to amuse the enemy. The army moved 
about thirty miles that night ; and the next day 
they were discovered by the scouts of Dara 
in full march toward Agra. Dara decamped 
from his lines with precipitation, leaving the 
greater part of his cannon behind him. By 
a forced march he pushed between the enemy 
and the capital, and on the fourth of June he 
presented himself before the rebels. On the 
morning of the fifth, the prince ordered the army 
to be formed in order of battle. Rustum-khan, 
an experienced general from Tartary, marshalled 
llie field. The artillery was placed in the front, 
joined together with chains to prevent the passage 
of the cavalry of the enemy. Behind the artillery 
stood a number of camels, mounted with small 
swivels, which the riders of each camel, without 
alighting, could charge and discharge with ease. 
In the rear were drawn up the musqueteers in 
three lines ; and the two wings were formed of the 
cavalry, armed with bows and arrows together 
with sabres. One third of the cavalry formed the 
reserve behind the lines. Dara placed himself 
in the centre^ mounted on a lofty elephant, from 
which he could command a view of the field. The 
treacherous Shaista took the command of the 
right wing ; and that of the left was destined by 
Dara for Rustum. That officer, who was acknow- 
ledged the most experienced commander in Hin- 
dostan, was actually at the head of the army. He 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOT£6. 235 

bore the commission of captain general^ and all 
orders were issued by him. He represented to 
Dara^ before the action commenced, that he in- 
tended to place himself at the head of the reserve 
in the rear, where he might direct the movements 
of the fields and issue out his orders as the 
circumstances of affairs might require : *' My post" 
said Dara '^ is in the front of battle ; and I expect 
that all my friends shall partake of my danger^ 
if they wish to share the glory which I hope 
to obtain/' The generous and intrepid spirit 
of Rustum was offended at this reflection. He 
answered with a stern countenance and deter* 
mined tone of voice : " The front of battle has 
been always my post, though I never contended 
(ox an empire ; and if I wished to change it to* 
day, it was from an anxiety for the fortune of 
Dara.** The prince was struck with the impro- 
priety of his own conduct. He endeavoured to 
persuade Rustum to remain at the head of the 
reserve ; but he went beyond hearing, and placed 
himself in the front of the left wing, 

Aureng-Z^be, on the other hand, having mar-* 
shalled his army into order of battle, requested 
of Mordd to take the command of the centre. 
He committed the left wing to his son Mahom* 
medj and he placed himself on the right, MorM 
was astonished, and pleased at the ease with 
which Aureng-Zi^be assigned to him the post 
of honor. But the crafty prince had two reasons 
for his conduct. Mor&d was haughty: he had 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



236 NOTES. 

assumed the imperial titles^ and though, out of a 
preftended complaisance to his father^ he had laid 
them down> he looked forward with undeviating 
ardour to the throne. It was not the business 
of Aureng-Z6be to offend him at this critical 
juncture. But his reason was equally prudent. 
Rustum commanded the left wing of the enemy ; 
and he was the most renowned general of the 
times. He had passed many years in the service 
of the Tartars and Persians, being bred up to the 
field from his youth, in which he hiad always 
eminently distinguished himself. He had been 
present in one hundred general actions ; he was 
habituated to danger, and perfect master of 
his own mind in the most desperate situations 
Aureng-Z6be therefore could not trust the ex- 
perience of Rustum, against the conduct of any 
but his own. 

» Both lines began now to move from wing to, 
wing; and the artillery opened on both sides. 
Rustum advanced, on the left, with a hasty pace 
directing the march of his troops by the motbh 
of his sword. Aureng-Z^be ordered a part of his 
artillery to point toward Rustum; and that 
general received a cannon-ball in his breast, when 
he had advanced within five yards of the enemy. 
The whole wing stopt at the fall of Rustum : but 
Sittersal, one of the chiefs of the rajaputs, at th^ 
head of five thousand horse, fell in, sword in 
hand, with Aureng-Z6be. Mahomined, who com- 
manded under the prince, opposed the rajaputs 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 237 

with great bravery. A sharp conflict ensued; 
and the rajaputs began to file off^ when their 
leader engaged personally with Mahommed. 
The rajaputs strove to cover their chief, but iii 
yain; he was cut down by the sabre of Mahoni-* 
med. The whole wing fell into disorder but did 
not fly ; and a promiscuous slaughter covered the 
field with dead. 

'. Dara, mounted on his elephant^ in the meantime 
advanced with the centre. He was observed by 
his army to look over all the line, and they 
gathered courage from his intrepid demeanor. 
A part of the enemy's artillery was opposed to the 
very point where Dara advanced. A heavy fire 
was kept up, and his squadron fell into a kind 
of disorder; but when he waved his hand for them 
to advance, they resumed their ranks and followed 
him with ardour. Before he could come to blows 
with the enemy, a second volley occasioned a 
second disorder. He however stood upon his 
elephant, and, without any change of counte- 
nance, called out with a loud voice to advance 
with speed. He himself, in the meantime fell 
in with the first line of Morad. He rushed 
through with his elephant, and opened a way for 
his horse, who, pressing into the heart of the 
enemy, commenced a great slaughter. The 'whole 
centre under Morad was broken, and the prince 
himself was covered with wounds. He endea- 
voured to lead his troops again to the charge, 
but they were deaf to his commands. He ordered 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



238 NOT£S. 

his elephant to be driven among the thickest 
of the enemy; being determined to fall with 
his fortune, or, by a brave example, to re^animate 
his flying troops with hopes of recovering the 
day. His boldness was attended with success. 
His squadron seeing the enemy surrounding their 
prince, were ashamed of their terror and poured 
around him. Arib Dass, an Indian chief, thrice 
strove to reach Mordd with his sword ; but did 
not succeed, on account of the height of the 
elephant. He however, cut the pillars which 
supported the roof of the amari or castle, which 
falling upon the prince, incumbered him in such 
a manner, that he could not defend himself. He 
however disengaged himself, and dealt death with 
his arrows on every side. In the meantime, 
Mahommed, the son of Aureng-Z^be, was sent 
by his father's orders from the left to the assis* 
tance of Morad. He came up when the prince 
was in the greatest danger. Fresh spirit was 
given to the troops of Mordd, and Dara received 
a check. 

The battle now raged with redoubled fury. 
The elephant of Morad, rendered outrageous by 
wounds, rushed forward through the column of 
the enemy. Mahommed, ashamed of being left 
behind, followed him with great ardour. Dara 
did not retreat. He gave his orders with ap- 
parent composure. But a cannon-ball having 
killed his fostea: brother, who sat with him on the 
elephant, he was ahnost blinded with the Uood. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 289 

A rocket, at the same time, pasnng by his ear, 
singed his turban ; a second followed, and having 
struck in the front of the amari, burst, and broke 
it all to pieces. His colour was seen then to 
change. The lord who drove the elephant ob- 
served an alteration in the prince ; and, whether 
through personal fear, or for the safety of his 
master, is uncertain, retreated a few paces, Dara 
reprimanded him with severity ; but the mischief 
was already done. His squadrons saw the retreat 
of the prince; and their spirit flagged. He 
however ordered the driver to turn his elephant 
toward the enemy, but that lord represented to 
him, that now, being marked out by the rebels, 
it were better for him to mount his horse, and 
pursue the fugitives, for that now very few re- 
mained on the field. He alighted ; but there was 
no horse to be found. He fought for some time 
on foot. At length he mounted a horse whose 
rider had been killed. 

Almost the whole of both armies had now 
left the field. Not a thousand men remained 
with Dara, and scarce one hundred horse with 
Anreng-Z6be and Morad. The latter however 
fought with increasing ardour. His young son, 
of about eight years of age, sat with him upon 
the elephant. Him he covered with his shield, 
and dealt his arrows around on the enemy. 
Aureng-Zebe, having in vain endeavoured to 
rally his flying squadrons, advanced with fifty 
horsemen to the assistance of Mor&d, hoping 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



240 NOTES. 

more for an honoura^ile death than for a victoiy* 
It was at the very instant that he came to blows 
with the imperialists, that the unfortunate Dara 
dismounted from his elephant. The squadrons 
who . had still adhered to that prince^ seeing the 
elephant retreating with the imperial standard^ 
thought that Dara had been killed. The cause 
for which they fought, in their opinion, no . longer 
existed. They betook themselves to flight, and 
when Dara had mounted his horse, he found 
the field bare of all his troops. He fled with 
precipitation, and the rebel princes found them? 
selves at the head of only two hundred horsemen^ 
in possession of an unexpected victory.— i>ott2. 



NOTE B. 



The day after Mordd's arrival at the camp near 
Muttra, he invited his brother to an entertain- 
ment. Aureng-Zfebe, who never had suspected 
the open temper of Mor&d, accepted of the in- 
vitation. When the brothers sat at dinner, 
Nazir-Shabas, high steward of the household, 
who was in the secret, entered suddenly, and 
whispered in Morad's ear, that now was the 
time to makie a rent in a magnificent dress. 
Aureng-Z6be, whose eye could trace the thoughts 
in the features of the face, was alarmed at this 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 241 

mysterions whispering, as well as at the affected 
geiety of his brother. He remained silent, and 
Mor&d dispatched Shabas, with only desiring him 
to wait the signal. Aureng-Z^be was now con* 
vinced that there was a design against his life. 
He complained suddenly of a violent pain in his 
bowels ; and, rising under a pretence of retiring, 
joined his guards, and returned to his own 
quarter of the camp. 

'^ Mordd ascribed his brother's departure to his 
iUness, and entertained no idea that he had the 
least suspicion of his own intentions. In three 
days he recovered of the pretended pain in his 
bowels. He received his brother's congratulations 
with every mark of esteem and affection ; and 
the day after, he sent him an invitation to come 
to his tent to see some beautiful women whom 
he had collected for his amusement. Their per- 
formances in singing, in dancing and in playing 
upon various instruments of music, were, he said, 
beymid any thing ever seen in Hindostan. He 
enlarged upon their grace, their beauty and the 
elegant symmetry of theur limbs. The mind of 
Mor&d, who was naturally a great lover of plea- 
sure, was inflamed at the description ; and contrary 
to the advice of all his friends, he went to his 
brother's quarter. On the arrival of the emperor, 
as Aureng-Z^be affected to call his brother, he 
was reK^ived by the young ladies in an inner 
tent. They were handsome beyond description, 

VOL. II. R 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



2^ NOtbSf. 

And ftie tbltti)tuduis prince Wfsi fettut* wftit a 
^teasftig^'idtdtii^meiit at their ehafhis. 

^ Ati ielegant entertainment was in the meairtimie 
^erfeA up to the sbhnd of vocal and instrnmentafl 
mtisie. Mcnrdd \^as elevated arid called for ninLne 
6f StYAihii. The lidies ail i'oilnd him in a eirtele, 
Ahd Aureng-Zi&be, throwing off his usual austerfty, 
?)egan to partake tjf the wine; Morad in a sh6rt 
time became intoxicated^ and his brother^ irist^eKl 
of wirie, ihl^^o^ed upon Mm bumpers of arrack. 
He ^t length fell iasleep on a sopha, in the a^ritis 
6{ on6 -^of the ladfis. Aureng-Z^be had gilrfeh 
binJ^ts to sbiiie bf his officers^ to entertmn tiie 
lords whb Mtehded Me^Sd iA the sameiroluptAotis 
manner, Evten hfe body-guard Were ihtoidtttea 
with wine, so that the unfortunate prin<?e #^ 
ieh without defence. 

^ ^ At!r6ng-26be gaVe orilterS to Zifflfer^Jutig ahd 
thtee other ldrd&, t6 eiiter the tent ferd bind fcis 
krother. The lady retiifefl ta^oh their cbmhig^ 
fHid they Jtdviftced to the sophA ^ which hb lay. 
lils s^oM ^ttd dagger had beeh tilre^dy removed 
by thfe eare of Auitei4^-26t>e ; and they began 
softly \d IkhA hU hands. M:6r&d stairted up tt 
this '6^eiiati6ri-, iarid began to deal around Ins 
blows. The lords Were terrified, aftd iJie princie 
begtm to call ^l6iid f6r his feword. Aurdng-Zt§be, 
who stood at the doOr of thte itent, tld^tiit his head 
from behh^d the curt^iii, aod saiA^ ^h a Mb- 
nacing voice, ^ He h^s no choice but death or 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPBNWX. 243 

subBibsioH ; despatch Hm if ke resist^.' Mot 4d 

heariB^ the rdiee of hit brother, h^an to upbnod 

l»m and i^ubmitted to bis fate. Nclzir-Sihib4«i 

bus principal friend and iadviser^ was at the s^mQ 

mibtiEiiit seized^ He had beeii sitting uader: a 

€aAopj before ^e pay-diaster geii^ral's tent^ aoA 

^ a signal I^Yon^ the i*opes of the four polef wtere 

at om^e cut, and before he could Extricate hiit^ 

aelfi he was bound. The other lords ^ho wAre 

attach^ la the |)niiQe, being slirround^ with 

aorined men, wete brought before AureugrZ^bte 

to whom they swore alliegiance. A murmur 

ran through the camp; but it was an ineflfectual 

sound; and the army, as if but half wakened 

from a dre&m, fell fast asleep again. . 

. ^' The night was not far advanced^ whi&n Morad 
wad s^eijied a^ bound.. Before day-light appeared, 
he and his ikypurite were mounted on an elephemt, 
HI a covered amari or castle> aod sent off under 
an escort to Agra. — Dm. 



NOTE C. 

" Tflp prifice Mabommed,* who in coiymieiion 
with Jumla, commandedL the imperial army, had, 
before the pivil war, conqeiveA a passion for one 
of the dau)ghtera ^ ^jfth* Overtures of marriage 

* Mahmud is called by Colonel Dow, Mahommed. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



^44 NOTBS. 

had been made and accepted ; but the consum- 
mation of the nuptials had been broken off by the 
troubles which disturbed the times. He seemed 
even to have forgot his betrothed wife in bis 
activity in the field ; but the princess moved by 
the misfortunes of her father^ wrote with her 
own hand a very movihgf letter to Mahommed. 
She lamented her unhappy fate, in seeing the 
prince whom she loved^ armed against her father. 
She expressed her passion and unfortunate con- 
dition in terms which found their way to his 
heart. His former affections were rekindled in all 
their fury, and, in the elevation of his mind, he 
resolved to desert his father's cause. 

** The visier, upon affairs of some importance, 
was in the mean time at some distance from the 
army which lay at Raja-Mdhil. The opportunity 
was favourable for the late adopted scheme of 
Mahommed. He opened the affair to some of 
his friends : he complained of his father's coldness 
and even of his ingratitude to a son, to whom, 
as having seized the person of Shah-Jehdn, he 
owed the empire. He gave many instances of 
his own services, many of the unjust returns made 
by Aureng-Z6be, and concluded by declaring his 
fixed resolution to join Sujah. They endeavoured 
to dissuade him from so rash an action ; but he 
had taken his^ resolution, and he would listen to 
no argument. He asked them, whether they 
would follow his fortunes? they replied, 'We are 
the servants of Mahommed, and if the prince 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 246 

will tonight join Sujah, he is so much beloved 
by the army, that the whole will go over to him 
by the dawn of day/ On these vague assurances^ 
the prinee quitted the camp that evening with 
a small retinue. He embarked in a boat on the 
Gaiiges^ and the troops thought that he had only 
gone on a party of pleasure. 

'' Some of the pretended friends of M ahommed 
wrote letters, containing an account of the de- 
sertion of the prince, to the visier. Tumult, 
commotion and disorder reigned every where 
when the visier entered the camp; but his ap- 
pearance soon silenced the storm, and the troops 
desired to be led to the enemy. Accordingly, 
Jumla passed the Ganges with his whole army. 
Mahommed, in the meantime, was received with 
every mark of respect by Sujah. The nuptials 
were celebrated with magnificence and pomp; 
and the festivity was scarcely over, when news 
arrived of the approach of the imperial army. 
Sujah immediately issued out with all his forces 
from Tanda, and waited for the enemy. 

*' Mahommed behaved with his usual bravery ; 
but the effeminate natives of Bengal fled, and he 
was carried along with their flight The utmost 
efforts of Sujah proved also ineffectual. His 
troops gave way on all sides. A great slaughter 
was made in the pursuit, and Tanda opened her 
gates to the conqueror. The princes fled to Dacca; 
but Jumla^ remaining for some time in Tanda 
to settle the affairs of the now almost conquered 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



i4M NbTES. 

province, gave them some respite, itKich tfey 
employed in levying a new army. 

^< The news of the flight* of Mahommed arrifing 
in the mean time at Delhi, Aurengr^^ebe condii- 
ded that the whole array in Bengal had gone 6Yer 
to Sujah. He immediately marched with a grea^ 
force, and took the route of Bengal. He, however, 
had not advanced far, when intelligence of the 
success of his arms met him, and he forthwith 
Returned to the capital. He there had recourse 
to his usual policy, and wrote a letter to his son, 
as if in answer to one received ^; and he con- 
trived matters so, that it should be 'intercepted 
by Sujah. That prince, having perused <he letter, 
placed it in the hands of Mahonimed, who swore 
that he had never once written to his father since 
the battle of Kidgwa, Aureng-Zdbe's letter con- 
cluded in terms like these' 'As you seeni to' 
repent of your folly, I forget your cririies. You 
have caMed the name of God to votich for your 
sincerity, and my patetital 'a£fedti()ti rettims. 
You have already my forgiveness \ h\it the exe- 
cution of what you propose is the only means 
to regain my favour.' 

*' The letter made an impression on the mind 
of Sujah, which all the protestations of Mahom- 
med could not remove. He told * him, in the 
presence of his council, that after all the struggles 
of affection with suspicion, the latter had pre- 
vailed; and that, instead of a son and a friend, 
he hfilield him in the light of an enemy ; ^It is 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 24<7 

therefore necessary for the peace of both/ continued 
Sujah^ ' that Mahommed should depart. Let 
him take away his wife, with all the wealth and 
jewels which belong to her rank. The treasures 
of Sujah are open, he may take whatever he 
pleases. Gro. — Aureng-Zebe should thank me 
for sending away his son, before he has committed 
a crime/ 

'^ Mahommed felt the injustice of the reproach. 
He knew the stern rigour of his father, who ney0r 
trusted any man twice. The prospect was gloomy 
on either side. Distrust and misery were with 
Sujah, and a prison was the least punishment 
to be expected from Aureng-Z^be. He took leave 
of his father-in-law. That prince presented his 
daughter with jewels, plate, and iponey to a 
great amount, and the unfortunate pair pursued 
their journey to the camp of Jumla. 

^' Having approached withija a few miles of the 
imperialists, he sent to announce his arrival. THe 
visier hastened to receive him with all the honpurs 
due to his rank. Jumla, the very next day, 
received a packet from court, which contained 
orders to send Mahoinmed, should he falj into his 
hands, under a strong escort to Delhi. When he 
arrived at Agra he was confined in the citadel, 
whence he was soon after sent to Gualior, where 
he remained a' prisoner to his death/' — Dow. 



* 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



248 NOTES. 



NOTE D. 



Colonel Dow says that Aureng-Zdbe formed IrisF 
line on the 23rd of March, 1659. " He began,*' 
says that writer, '^ to fortify himself under the 
enemy's fire, and continued the work the whole 
night, and covered his men before day-light 
appeared, notwithstanding his brother had sallied 
thrice during that time* The sun was scarce 
risen, when Debere, and some other nobles, issued 
out of the camp, and advanced on full speed 
with five thousand horse near the lines, hoping, by 
insulting him, to draw Dara from his lines ; but 
the artillery of the enemy, being well served, 
obliged the assailants to retreat in disorder. 
Things remained in this doubtful situation for 
several days. The army of Dara, having the 
country in their rear open, were in no want 
of provisions; and it was impossible, without 
a long siege, to overcome their almost impreg- 
nable lines. 

** A petty Indian prince, however, informed 
himself of a steep path, by which men might 
ascend the mountain on the right of Dara's line. 
When night came on, he marched with his troops > 
and having ascended the mountain, the appointed 
signal was ready to be shewn by the dawn of 
day. 

'* Aureng-Z6be never rested his hopes upon 
the success of a single scheme. He had, during 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 249 

the nighty planned the ruin of his brother's affairs, 
by a more fatal stroke of policy than the stratagem 
of the rajah. Debere-Khan, and the Indian prince, 
Joy-Singh, had, at the beginning of the war, 
adhered with warmth to the interests of Dara ; 
but they deserted the colours of Solimdn, and 
ruined all the hopes which Dara derived from the 
army under his son. Aureng-ZSbe now prevailed 
upon these chiefs to write an insidious letter to 
Dara, which finished with these words : * When 
day-light shall appear^ let the gate of the camp 
be open to receive us, that we may have an 
opportunity of regainings by our merit, the favour 
of which we have been deprived by necessity. As 
soon as the sun shall arise, we look for admittance 
into the camp, with all our followers and friends/ 

*^ Shaw-Nawdz, in vain, remonstrated to Dara 
in the strongest terms, that there was danger 
in confiding in their sincerity. He was deter- 
mined to risk all on the faith of men who had a 
few months before betrayed his son. 

'' Aureng-Z6be, who was no stranger to the 
character of Dara, foresaw that his stratagem 
would succeed. He drew up his army before 
day behind his own camp, being covered by the 
tents from the enemy's view. The sun was not 
yet up, when he ordered Debere to issue forth 
from his right and Joy-Singh froipi his left and to 
advance on full speed toward the camp. These 
ofl^ers accordingly rushed forth; and Aureng- 
Z^be, to carry on the deceit, began to. Ave with 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



350 N0TE8« 

his artaiery, but with powder <mly, on the pre- 
twd^ deserters. Deher?, vho first advanced, 
gave th^ sigopl of attfickj an4 a dreadful slaugh- 
ter cottttnenced. Debere hewed on his way to 
the g^te which Shaw-Naw&? was endearQuring 
to shut; but the thing ws^s now impractiqable, 
feom the nunfibers that q-owded into the camp. 
Debere entered^ sword in hand, and Shaw- 
Nawaz advaip^ced to oppose him. Debere desired 
him to surrender, and to fear nothing from his 
son-in-law. ' No ! Debere-khan ; — I have hither-r 
to defended my life by my valour ; i^pr sh^ll 
I purchase a few yea^s of decrepid age at t\\^ 
expence of my former fapfie.' Peber^, at tl^e 
word, ran htm through with his qpe^r. ^itjbf 
I^WrNawafs the course of p^r^'i^ army fe]l. 
IW treacherous Deberei was now within the 
oamp» with his pquadrpn^ whp, fired with the 
example of their leader, xi^ade a prodigious 
slaughter* Joy-Singh followed close pn their 
heels. 

^' AurengrZabe ^n the mean time a^Yfinced 
wkh his whole line, ^nd the party whp. had 
gained the summit of the mountain in the night> 
daewed themselves above the camp. The hil|s 
rerecboed to their shouts ; and they began to roll 
stooies and loosened tofk^ in^p the yalley. An 
universal panic spread pver all. Dara mounted 
Ms elephant to be ^^en by his army. He rushf d 
foporard to meet the eqemyi l)ut he wasi l^ft 
alone. The safety of lus ^oiqen came then ac^9e8 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 2t51 

his mind ; he hastened with them from the fields 
while the spoils of his camp l^ept the enemy 
fhmi persuing his flight. Four thousand f<pll on 
the sid^ qf Para in this extraordinarjf aptiqq^ 
Aureng-Z^be lost not abqye two hundred-" 



NOTE E. 

Colonel Dow thus describes the conduct, of the 
rajah (or king) of Arracan to Sultan Sujah an^ 
fhmily. ^' Threatening letters from Jumla raised 
terrors in the mind of the rajah, and a sudden 
coolness to Sujah appeared in his behaviour. The 
wealth of his unfortunate guest became also an 
object for his avarice. He sent a message to 
Sujah requiring him to depart from his dominions^ 
and the impossibility of the thing was not ad- 
mitted as an excuse. The monsoons raged on 
the coast ; the hills behind were impassable. Sujah 
sent his son to request a respite for a few days, 
with which he was indulged. 
. <* Of 1600 adherents with whom the * prince 
quitted Bengal, only forty remained. The Sul- 
tana^ the mother of his children, had been for 
some time dead : his seccmd wife, three daughters, 
and two sons composed his family. The few 
days granted by the rajah were now expired. 
A message came from him, demanding in marriage 
the daughter of Siqah. * Go; tell your master/ 



Digitized by>LjOOQlC 



252 NOTES. 

said the prince^ 'that the race of Timour^ tiiough 
unfortunate, will never submit to dishonour. But 
why does he search for a cause of dispute ? His 
inhumanity and averice are too obvious to be 
covered by any pretence.' 

** The rajah was highly offended at the haughti- 
ness of the answer of Sujah. But the people 
pitied the fugitive, and the prince durst not openly 
do an act of flagrant injustice. To assassinate 
him in private was impossible, from the vigilance 
of his forty friends. A public pretence must be 
made to gain the wealth of Sujah. The report 
of a conspiracy against the rajah was spread 
abroad. It was affirmed that Sujah had formed 
a design to mount the throne of Arracan, by 
assassinating its monarch. 

'^ The raja.h, in a pretended terror, called sud- 
denly together his council. He unfolded to them 
the circumstances of the conspiracy, and he asked 
their advice. They were of opinion, that Sujah 
imd his followers should be sent away from the 
country. The rajah was disappointed ; he had 
hoped that death should be the punishment of 
projected murder. But the natural hospitality 
of the nobles of Arracan prevailed over his views. 
He, however, under the sanction of the deter- 
mination of his council, resolved to execute hb 
own designs. The prince, with his family and 
his forty friends, were apprised of his intentions. 
They were encamped on a narrow plain whidi 
lay between a precipice and a river which, issuing 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 253 

from Arracan, falls into the. country of Pegu. 
At either end of the plain a pass was formed 
between the rock and the river. Sujah^ with 
twenty of his men^ possessed himself of one^. and 
his son with the rest, stood in the other in arms. 
They saw the rajah's troops advancing. The 
women remained in their tent, in dreadful sus-* 
pence ; till roused by the clashing of arms, they 
rushed forth with dishevelled hair. The men 
behaved with wonderful courage, and twice re- 
pulsed the enemy, who, afraid of their swords, 
galled them with arrows. The greatest part 
of the friends of Sujah were at length either slain 
or wounded. He himself still stood undaunted, 
and defended the pass against the troops of Arra- 
can. The officer who commanded the party, sent 
some of his soldiers to the top of the precipice, 
to roll down stones on the prince and his gallant 
friends* One fell on the shoulder of Sujah ; and 
he sank down, being stunned with the pain. The 
enemy rushed forward, disarmed and bound him. 
'* He was hurried into a canoe which lay ready 
on the river. Two of his friends threw them- 
selves into it as they were pushing it away from 
the bank. The wife and the daughters of Sujah, 
threw themselves headlong into the river. They 
were, however, brought ashore, and carried away, 
together with the son of Sujah, who was wounded, 
to the rajah's palace. The prince, sad and deso- 
late, beheld their distress ; and, in his sorrow, 
heeded not his own approaching fate. They had 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



254 ' KOfts. 

now rowed to the middle of the stream ; biA hk 
eyes were turned toward the lihore. The tovretiy 
according to their ihstnictions^ drew a large pldg 
from the bottom of the canoe,* and throwing 
themselves into the river, were taken tip by 
another canoe which had followed them for that 
purpose. The canoe was instantly filled 1*ith 
water. The prince ^ and his two friends betoot 
themselves to swimming. They followed the 
other canoe ; but she hastened to the shore. 
The river was broad ; and at last, worn out with 
fatigue, Sujah resigned himself to death. 

*' Pidra Bani, the favourite, the only wife ttf 
Sujah, was so famed for her wit and beautj^, thttl 
many songs in her praise are still sung in Bengal. 
When the rajah came to wait upon her in the 
haram, she attextapted to stab him with a dei^ei 
which she had concealed. She, however^ wafei 
disarmed ; and perceiving that she was destilied 
tor the arms of the murderer of her lord, i^ 
disfigured hier beautiful face with her ov^h h^di^ ; 
and at last found with sad difficulty a cruel 4eath, 
by dashing her head against a stone. The thifefe 
daughters of Sujah still remaihed ; two of thiein 
found means by poisoti to put an end tb thfeir 
grief. The third wais married td the rajah ; but 
she dM not long survite ^hat ishe reckoned ah 
indelible disgrace on the family of Timour. The 
son of Sujah, who had defended himself to the 
last, was at length overpowered, by means of 
stones rolled down upon him from the rock. He 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



APPENDIX. S&6 

Mras earned to tbe rajah ; aad soon after, with bis 
infiiBt brother, feU a victim, by a cruel death, 
to the jealousy of that prince. 

*' No prince was ever more beloved than Sujah; 
he never did a cruel action during his life. 
Misfortune, and eVas death itself, eould not de- 
prive him of all his friends y and though his fate 
was not known in Hilido^tan for some years after 
lus death, when it was heard, it filled every eye 
wiA tears.** 



NOTE F. 

J^ BRIEF SKETCH OF THE PORTUGUEsIB SETIXEMENTS 
IN THE EAST, MAY BE USEFUL T6 SOME READERS 

OF tnrs voLUife. 

In the reign of John iL an intelligent prince, 
who first declared Lisbon a free port, and under 
whose auspices a new method was adopted of 
applying astronomy to navigation, the Portuguese 
doubled the Cape, which is at the extremity 
6f Africa. It was then called the Cape of Storms; 
but the prince, who foresaw that it would open 
a passage to India, gave it the name of the Cape 
of Good Hope. 

Emanuel pursued the plan marked out by his 
predecessor • On the 18th July. 1497, he sent 
out a fleet consisting of four ships, and gave the 
command of it to Vasco de Gama. This admiral 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



256 NOTM* 

having attempted seas before unknown, landed 
at length m Hindoatan, after a voyage of thirteen 
months. Hindostan was» at the arrival of the 
Portuguese, divided between the kings of Cam- 
baya^ Delhi, Bisnagar, Narzingua and Calicut, 
each of which reckoned several sovereigns among 
their tributaries. The last of these monarchs, 
who is better known by the title of Zamorin, 
which answers to that of emperor, than by the 
name of his capital city, possessed the most 
maritime states, and his empire extended over 
all the Malabar. 

Gama, informed that Calicut was the port in 
which commerce was the most flourishing, took 
a pilot to conduct him thither. In Calicut he met 
with a Moor of Tunis, who understood the Por- 
tuguese language, and had conceived an attach- 
ment for that people. He procured Gama an 
audience of Zamorin, who proposed an alliance, 
and a treaty of commerce with the king his master. 
This was upon the point of being concluded, 
when the muselmans found means to excite sus- 
picions against a rival power, whose courage and 
activity they dreaded. The reports they made 
to him of the ambition of the Portuguese, made 
such an impression on the mind of the prince, 
that he resolved to destroy those adventurers to 
whom he had just before given so favourable a 
reception; but he did not dare to carry his 
design into execution, and the admiral was allowed 
to return in safety to his fleet. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 257 

It is impossible to describe the joy that pre- 
vailed at Lisbon on his return. The inhabitants 
beheld themselves on the point of establishing the 
richest commerce in the world ; and the papal 
court which omitted no opportunity of confirming 
the opinion of its supreme authority upon earthy 
gave to the Portuguese all the coasts they should 
discover in the east. 

Thirteen vessels that sailed from the Tagus^ 
under the command of Alvares Cabral, arrived at 
Calicut^ and restored some of the Zamorin's 
subjects^ whom Gama had carried away^with hinu 
These Indians spoke in the most favourable terms 
of the treatment they had received ; but it was 
a long time before the Zamorin was reconciled 
to the Portuguese : the Moorish party prevailed^ 
and the people of Calicut^ seduced by their 
intrigues, massacred fifty of the adventurers. 
Cabral in [revenge burnt all the Arabian vessels 
in the harbour, cannonaded the town, and then 
sailed first to Cochin and afterwards to Cananor. 
The kings of both these towns gave him spices, 
offered him gold and silver, and proposed an 
alliance with him against the Zamorin, to whom 
they were tributary. The kings of Onor and Culan, 
and several other princes, made the same over-, 
tures ; flattering themselves that they should all 
be relieved from the tribute they paid to the 
Zamorin, and that they should extend the fron- 
tiers of their doniihions. This general infatuation 
procured to the Portuguese so great an ascendant 

VOL. II. s 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



258 MOTES. 

over the whole country of Malabar, that wherever 
they appeared they gave the law. No sovereign 
was suffered to enter mto an alliance with theni> 
unless he would acknowledge himself depen- 
dent on the court of Lisbon, permit a citadel 
to be built in his capital, and sell his mer- 
chandise at the price fixed by the buyer. The 
foreign merchant was obliged to wait till the 
Portuguese had completed their lading, and no 
person was suffered to navigate these seas without 
producing passports from them. The wai:s in 
which they were unavoidably engaged, gave little 
interruption to their trade : with a small number 
of men they defeated numerous armies ; and, in 
a short time, the ships of the Moors, of the 
Zamorin and of his dependents, no longer dared 
to make their appearance. 

Alphonso Albuquerque, the new viceroy, found' 
it necessary that Portugal should have a settle- 
ment which might easily be defended, where 
there was a good harbour and a wholesome ail, 
and where the Portuguese might refresh them- 
selves after the fatigues of their passage from 
Europe. With this view he cast his eyes upon 
Goa, which he foresaw would be an important 
acquisition to Lisbon. 

Though not so considerable at that time as 
it has been since, Goa was looked upon as the 
most advantageous post in India. It belonged to 
the king of the Deccan ; but Idalcan, who was 
intrusted with the government of it, had assumed 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 259 

m independency^ and endeavoured to extend his 
power in Malabar. While this usurper was pur-^ 
suing his schemes on the continent^ Albuquerque 
appeared before the gates of Goa and took the 
city by storm. 

Idalcan returned towards Goa, and the Por- 
tuguese having no firm footing there/ retreated 
to their ships ; but the Indian being obliged to 
take the field again to preserve his dominions 
from absolute destruction^ Albuquerque made 
a suddeh attack upon Goa^ which he carried 
by storm, and fortified himself in the place. As 
the harbour of Calicut was good for nothings 
all its trade and riches were transferred to this 
city, . which became the metropolis of all the 
Portuguese settlements in India. 

After the power of the Portuguese had been 
finally established in the Arabian and Persian 
Gulphs and on the Malabar coast, they thought 
of extending their conquests into the eastern parts 
of Asia. 

The.ilsland of Ceylon first presented itself to 
Albuquerque. It should seem that it was the in- 
terest of the Portuguese to place all their strength 
ill ihl^ .inland. Its harbours were the best in India ; 
it lies in the centre of the East, and is the passage 
that leads to the richest countries. It might have 
b^eii. vyell peopled and fortified with a small 
number of men ; while the numerous squadrons 
that; might hftve been sent out from every port 
in the island would have kept all Asia in awe. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



260 NOTES. 

The viceroy overlooked these advantages. He 
also neglected the coast of Coromandel vyrhich 
furnished the finest cottons in the virorld, and^which 
is admirably situated for the trade of Bengal and 
other countries. 

Notwithstanding this, Albtiquerque made uo 
settlement there. The settlements of St. Thoma& 
and Negapatan were not formed till afterward. 
He thought that when the Portuguese had made 
themselves masters of Ceylon, a conquest begun 
by his predecessor D'AImeyda and afterwards 
completed 9 they might command the. trade of 
Coromandel, if they got possession of Malacca* 
He therefore determined to make the attempt. 

The country of which Malacca is the capital 
is a narrow tract of land, about a hundred 
leagues in length. It joins to the continent towards 
the northern coast, where it borders on the state 
of Siam* The rest is surrounded by the sea. 

The situation of Malacca had made it the 
most considerable market in India, and the Por- 
tuguese were desirous of having a share in the 
general commerce of Asia. At first they appeared 
at Malacca in the character of merchants : but 
their usurpations in India had rendered their de* 
signs so much suspected, that measures were 
taken to destroy them. Several of them were 
massacred, and others were thrown into prison. 

Though Albuquerque did not intend to wait 
for a rupture to afibrd him a pretence of seizing^ 
upon Malacca^ yet this incident gave his enter- 



Digitized'by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 261 

prise an appearance of justice. The "^enemy ex- 
pected a sudden blow ; and accordingly^ when he 
appeared before this place, in the beginning of 
the year 1511, he found every thing in readiness 
to receive him. The place was attacked and 
carried after several doubtful and bloody engage- 
ments. The Portuguese found in it immense 
treasure and vast magazines. A fort was erected 
to secure the conquest, and Albuquerque con- 
tented himself with the possession of the city. 

After the reduction of Malacca, the kings of 
Siam and Pegu^ and several others, alarmed at a 
conquest so fatal to their independence, sent am- 
bassadors to congratulate Albuquerque, to make 
him an offer of their trade, and to desire an 
alliance with Portugal. 

Affairs being in this situation, a squadron 

was detached from the fleet to the Moluccas. 

The inhabitants of this cluster of islands had 

lived for ages upon the meal of the sago and the 

milk of the cocoa, when the Chinese, landing 

there by accident, discovered the clove and the 

nutmeg. They were soon admired all over India, 

whence they were conveyed to Persia and Europe. 

The Arabians, who at that time engrossed almost 

all the trade of the universe, did not overlook 

so lucrative a part of it. They repaired in 

crowds to these celebrated islands ; and they had 

already monopolized the produttions of them 

when the Portuguese, who pursued them every 

where, came and deprived them of this branch 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



262 NOTES. 

of trade. From thb tiine the court of Lkbon 
ranked the Moluccas among the number of its 
provmces^ and it was not long before they really 
became so. 

Albuquerque died at Goain the year 1515, 
was succeeded by Lopez Soarez, who pursued his 
'designs of aggrandisement. He was for some time 
employed in preventing the opposition with which 
the Portuguese were threatened in India ; and as 
soon as he was relieved from this anxiety, he re- 
solved to attempt a passage to China. 

The Chinese nation was unknown in' Europe. 
Marco Paolo, a Venetian, who had travelled to 
China by land, had given a description of it which 
was looked upon as fabulous. It corresponded, 
however, with the particulars since transmitted 
by Albuquerque, who had met with Chinese 
ships and merchants at Malacca, from whom be 
procured a particular account of that extensive 
empire. 

In the year 1518, a squadron saikd from Lis- 
bon to convoy an ambassador to China. As soon 
as it arrived at the islands in the neighbourhood 
of Canton, it was surrounded by Chinese vessels. 
Ferdinand Andrada, who commanded it, su£^ed 
the Chinese to come on board ; communicated the 
object of his voyage^ and sent on shore his am- 
bassador, Thomas Perez, who was conducted to 
Pekin. 

Perez found the court disposed to favour his 
nation, the fame of which had spread itself 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 263 

throoghotit Asia. It had already attracted the 
esteem of the Chinese, which the conduct of Fer- 
dinand Andrada tended to increase. The ports 
of China were now upon the point of being opened 
to the Portuguese ; Thomas Perez was just about 
concluding a treaty, when Simon Andrada, bro* 
ither to Ferdinand, appeared on the coasts with 
a fresh squadron. This commander treated the 
Chinese in the same manner as the Portuguese 
h»A for some time treated all the people of 
Asia. He built a fort without permission in the 
island of Tam«i, whence he pillaged and ex- 
torted money from all the ships bobnd from or 
to the ports of China. He seised upon the Chi- 
nese, made slaves of them, ahd gave Irimself up to 
the most licentious acts of piracy. The Chinese 
enraged at these outrages fitted out alar^ ^et; 
but the Portuguese escaped. The emptor im- 
prisoned Thomas Perez, who died in confmemeiit, 
and the Portuguese nation was banished from 
China for some years. After this, the Chinese 
gave permission* to the Portuguese to trade &t th^ 
port of Jancian. 

A pirate whose successes had made him 
powerful, had seized upon the Island of 'Macao, 
whence he blocked up the ports of China, a)id 
even proceeded so far as to lay siege to Cftnton. 
The ma;ndarins had recourse to the Poitugu^s^ ; 
who hastened to the i^elief of CJsmton, raised the 
siege, and obtained a complete victory over die 
pirate. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



264 NOTES. 

The emperor of China bestowed Macao on 
them as a mark of his gratitude. They built 
a town which became very flourishing, and was 
advantageously situated for the trade they soon 
after entered into with Japan. 

In the year 1542, a Portuguese vessel was 
driven by a storm on the coasts of these celebrated 
islands. The crew were well received, and ob- 
tained of the natives every thing they wanted to 
refit them for the sea. When they arrived at Goa, 
they reported what they had seen, and informed 
the viceroy, that a new country, no less rich than 
populous, presented itself to the industry of the 
merchants. Both missionaries and merchants 
embarked without delay for Japan, and found 
a great empire, which is, perhaps, the mort 
anc^nt of any in the world, except that of China. 

The Portuguese were received with joy. All 
the ports were opened to them. ^ All the petty 
princes of the country invited them to their 
provinces, each contending who should give them 
the most valuable advantages and grant them the 
greatest privileges. These merchants established 
a prodigious trade. The Portuguese carried 
.thither the commodities of India; and Macao 
served as a repository for their European goods. 
Immense quantities of the productions of Europe 
and Asia were consumed by the sovereign^ the 
nobles and the whole nation. But what had 
lliey to give in return? 

The country of Japan is in general moun- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTE?. 265 

tainous/ stony and by no means fertile. The 
empire affords no productions proper for export- 
ation, and were it not for its mines of gold, sil- 
ver and copper, which are the richest perhaps in the 
world, Japan could not support its own expence. 
The Portuguese every year carried off quantities 
of these metals to the amount of six hundred 
thousand pounds sterling. They married also the 
richest of the Japanese heiresses, and allied them- 
selves to the most powerful families. 

With such advantages the Portuguese might 
have been satisfied. They were masters of the 
coast of Guinea, Arabia, Persia and the two pe* 
ninsulas of India. They were possessed of the 
Moluccas, Ceylon and the isles of Sunda, while 
their settlement at Macao insured to them the 
commerce of China and Japan. 

Throughout this immense tract the will of 
the Portuguese was the supreme law. No nation 
dared to make voyages without their permission^ 
A number of articles^ by which so many nations 
have since enriched themselves, were entirely 
engrossed by the Portuguese. In consequence 
of this monopoly, the prices of the produce and 
manufactures both in Europe and Asia were 
regulated at their pleasure. 

Nor had the Portuguese neglected that part 
of Africa which lies between the Cape of Good 
Hope and the Red Sea. The Arabians had been 
nettled there for several ages> and had formed 
along the coast of Zanguebar several small in- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



266 NOTES. 

dependent sovereignties. The flourishing state 
of these settlements was owing to the mines 
<>f gold and silver found within their respective 
territories. Allured by this treasure, the Borta- 
guese attacked the Arabians, who were subdued 
about the year 1508. Upon their min was 
established an empire, extended from Soiala as 
far as M^linda, of which the island of Mosam- 
b^ue was made the centre. 

These successes, properly improved might have 
formed a power so considerable, that it could not 
have been shaken; but the vices and folly of 
«ome of their chiefs, the abuses of riches and 
of power, the distance of their own country 
<Jiaiiged the character of the Portuguese. They 
made no scruple of pillaging and enslaving the 
idolaters. Being absolute masters of the Eastern 
seas, they extorted a tribute from the ships of 
every country ; they ravaged the coasts, insulted 
the princes, and became in a short time the 
t^ror and scourge of all nations. 

From the era when Portugal was gradually 
rediffced under the dominion of Philip the Second^ 
Ihe Portuguese in India ceased to consider <3iem- 
selves as of the same country. Some made 
themselves independent; others turned pirates, 
and paid no respect to any flag. Many entered 
into the service of the princes of the country, 
and almost all these became ministers or ge- 
n^als, so great were the advantages this 
nation still maintained wet thefse of India. The 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



N0TE9. 287 

Portuguese possecteions in India were di^ed 
into three governiuents^ which gave m) osaidt- 
ance to each other and even dashed in tlieir 
projects and interests; neither discipline^ suboi?- 
dination^ nor the love of glory animated either 
the soldiers or the <^Scers. Manners became 
more and more depraved, and the Portugue^ 
had lost ^all their former greatness^ whca ii^ 
Dutch appeared in India and contended with 
them for the empire of that country. 



NOTE O. 

« 

** Ali Murdan Khan has left behind him many 
monuments of liberality and taste ; the grandest^ 
though now in ruins> is se^i in the vicinity of 
Delhi^ and displays at once a design, useful and 
magnificent. 

'^ During the splendid era of Delhi, the inhabit 
tants who resided at a distance from the Jumna, 
which skirted only one of its angles, experienced 
much difficulty in procuring river water, that of the 
wells not being esteemed so salubrious. AU 
Murdan, desirous of relieving this common griev- 
ance, surveyed the land to the westward, and 
saw that a sluice, opened from the Jumna, where 
that river approaches Karnal, would from the de- 
clivity of the ground, introduce water into the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



268 NOTEer. 

back part of the city and conduct it through alt 
the quarters. The design was put into execu- 
tion^ and to reward his success and preserve the 
work in good condition, Ali Murdan was vested 
with the privilege of levying a certain tax on 
those houses which enjoyed the uses of the canal. 
Water was conveyed by this branch of the Jumna, 
forming a distance of more than one hundred 
miles,, and afforded a commodious supply to all the 
inhabitants; nor did the canal fall into decay 
until the period of the Persian and Afghan inva- 
sions. Ali Murdan, who in his taste and disposi- 
tion would not have disgraced the Roman Lu- 
cullus, bestowed on the public numerous edifices 
and gardens ; one of which, thickly shaded with 
cypress trees, stands in the environs of Peshour, 
and another at Nimlah, a small village lying about 
eighty miles to the south-east of Cabul. Thb omrah 
erected in the centre of the city of Cabul, four spa- 
cious bazaars or market places in a line, whidi 
consist of a range of apartments on each side of 
two floors, the lower appropriated to merchants, 
and that above to private use. The intermediate 
^pace between the ranges, is covered by an arched 
roof, and each bazaar is separated by an open 
square, which was supplied with fountains^ but 
now choked with filth or occupied by the meanest 
order of mechanics*'' — Farster. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 269 



NOTE H. 

I subjoin a few extracts from Dr. Claudius 
Buchanan's Journal during his tour to the Tem- 
ple of Juggernaut in Orissa, in the year 1806. 

" Budderick, May 30, 1806. 

'^ We know that we are approaching Jugger- 
naut (and yet we are more than fifty miles from 
it) by the human bones which we have seen for 
some days strewed by the way. We have been 
joined by perhaps 2000 pilgrims, who have come 
from various parts of Northern India. Some say 
that they have been two months on their march^ 
travelling in the hottest season of the year, with 
their wives and children. Numbers of pilgrims 
die on the road ; and their bodies generally remain 
unburied. On a plain by the river, near the pil- 
grim^s caravansera ^t this place, there are more 
than a hundred skulls. 

** I passed a devotee to-day who laid himself 
down at every step, measuring the road to Jug- 
gernaut by the length of his body, as a penance of 
merit to please the God." 

" Joggernaut, I4th June, 1806. 
" I have seen Juggernaut. No record of his- 
tory can give, I think, an adequate idea of this 
valley of death : it may be truly compared with 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



270 NOTES. 

the valley of Hinnom. The idol called Jugger- 
naut^ has been considered as the Moloch of the 
present age ; and he is justly so named ; for the 
sacrifices oflfered up to him by self-devotement 
are not less criminal^ perhaps not less numerous, 
than those recorded of the Moloch of Canaan. 
Two other idols accompany Juggernaut, namely, 
Boloram and Shubudra, his brother and sister : for 
there are three deities worshipped here. They 
receive equal adoration, and sit on thrones of 
nearly equal height. 

** This morning I viewed the Temple ; 

a stupendous fabric, and truly commensurate with 
the extensive sway of ' the horrid king.' As other 
temples are usually adorned with figures emble- 
matical of their religion, so Juggernaut, has re- 
presentations (numerous and varied) of that vice 
which constitutes the essence of his worship. The 
walls and gates are covered with indecent em- 
blems in massive and durable sculpture. — I have 
also visited the sand plains by the sea, in some 
places whitened with the bones of the pilgrims ; 
and another place a little way out of the town, 
called by the English the Golgotha, where the 
dead bodies are usually cast forth ; and where 
dogs and vultures are ever seen. I reside at the 
house of James Hunter, Esq. the company's col- 
lector of the tax on pilgrims and superintendant 
of the temple. His house is on the sea shore, 
about a mile or more from the temple. He can- 
not live nearer, on account of the effluvia of the 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



NOTES. 271 

town. For, independently of the enormity of the 
superstition^ there are other cirGumstances which 
render Juggernaut noisonve in an extreme degree* 
The senses are assailed hy the squalid and ghastly 
appearance of the famished pilgrims ; many of 
whom die in the streets of want or of disiease ; 
while the devotees, with clotted hair and painted 
fleshj are seen practising their various austeritiea^ 
and modes of self-torture. Persons of both sexeSy 
with little regard to concealment, sit down on the 
sands close to the town, in public view ; and the 
SACRED BULLS Walk about among them and 
eat the ordure." 

'< Juggernaut, 18 June, 1806. 

*' I have returned home from witnessing 

a scene which I shall never forget. At twelve 
o'clock of this day, being the great day of the 
feast, the Moloch of Hindostan was brought out 
of his temple amid the acclamations of hundreds 
of thousands of his worshippers. When the idol 
was placed on his throne^ a shout was raised such 
as I had never heard before. After a short interval 
of silence, a mumxur was heard at a distance ; all 
eyes were turned towards the place, and behold, 
9k grace advancing. A body of men, having green 
branches or palms in their hands, approached 
with great celerity. The people opened a way 
for them ; and when they had come up to the 
throne, they fell down before him that sat thereon 
and worshipped. 

" The throne of the idol was placed on a stu- 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



272 NOTES^ 

pendous car or tower about sixty feet in hdght^ 
resting on wheels which indented the ground 
deeply, as they turned slowly under the ponder- 
ous machine. Attached to it were six cables, of 
the size and length of a ship's cable, by which* 
the people drew it along. Thousands of men, 
women and children pulled by each cable, crowd- 
ing so closely that some could only use one hand* 
Infants are made to exert their strength in this 
office, for it is accounted a merit of righteousnesa 
to move the god. Upon the tower were the 
priests and satellites of the idol, surrounding hifli 
throne. I was told that there were about 120 
persons upon the car. The idol is a block of 
wood, having a frightful visage painted black, 
with a distended mouth of a bloody colour. His 
arms are of gold, and he is dressed in gorgeous 
apparel. The other two idols are of a white and 
yellow colour. — Five elephants preceded the three 
towers, bearing towering flags, dressed in crim- 
son caparisons and having bells hanging to their 
caparisons. 

/' I went on in the procession, close by the 
tower of Moloch ; which, as it was drawn with 
difficulty, grated on its many wheels harsh thun- 
der. After a few minutes it stopped; and now 
the. worship of the god began. — A high priest 
mounted the car in front of the idol and pro- 
nounced his obscene stanzas. ' These songs,' said 
]{;ie, * are the delight of the god. His car can 
nrove onl/ when he is pleased with the song.' — 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 273* 

The car moved on a little way and then stopped.- 
A boy of twelve years was then brought forth to^ 
attempt something yet more lascivious^ if perad-' 
venture the god would move. The * child per- 
fected the praise' of his idol with such ardent ex- 
pression and gesture that the god was pleased^ 
and the multitude,' emitting a sensual yell of 
delight, urged the car along. — After a few mi- 
nutes it stopped again. An aged minister of the 
idol then stood up, and with a long rod in his 
hand, which he moved with indecent action, cojb- 
pleted the variety of this disgusting exhibition. 
But a scene of a different kind was now to be pre- 
sented. The characteristics of : Moloch's worship 
are . obscenity and blood. We have seen the 
former. Now comes the blood. 

''After the tower had proceeded some way, 
a pilgrim announced that he was ready to offer 
himself a sacrifice to the idol. He laid hiitiself 
down in the road before the tower as it was 
moving along, lying on his face, with his arms 
stretched forward. The multitude passed round 
him, leaving the space clear, and he was crushed 
to death by the wheels of the tower. A shout of 
joy was raised to the God. He is said to smile 
wheii the libation of the blood is made. The 
people threw cowries, or small money, on the 
body of the victim, in approbation of the deed.'* 

" Juggernaut, 20th June, 1806. 

" The horrid solemnities still continue. 

Yesterday a woman devoted herself tq the idol. 

VOL. II, T 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



274 MOTBS. 

She lud herself down on the roftd in an oUiqne 
direction so that the wheel did not kill her. 
instantaneously, as is generally the case^ but 
she died m a few hours. This morning as I 
passed the place of skulls, nothing remained- of 
her but her bones.** 

^^ Juggernaut; 2l8t June, 1805. 
*^ The idolatrous processions continue, but nrjT' 
gpitits are so exhausted by the constant view of 
these enormities, that I mean to hasten away. 
L beheld another distressing scene this momiiq; 
atttfae place of skulls; — a woman lying dead, or 
nearly dead, and her two children by her, looking 
at' the dogs and vultures which were near. The 
people passed by without noticing the duldren. 
I asked them where was their home. They said, 
they had no home but where their mother was. — 
Oj there is no pity at Juggernaut ! 

^ As to the number of worshippers assembled 
hei^ at this time, no accurate calculation can be 
made. The natives themselves, when speakii^ 
of the numbers at particular festivids> usually say 
that a lack of people (100,000) would not be 
missed. I asked a brahmin how many be sup- 
piMBied were present at the most numerous festivtil 
he had wer witnessed. ' How can I tell,* said 
he, ' how many grains there are in a^ haodfid 
of sand?"* 

The English nation will not expect to hear 
liiat the blood of Juggernaut is known at Calcutta ; 
hvii^ alasi it is shed at the very doorsi of the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



N<^T£fil. 275 

Bnglish^ almost uadefT tl^ c^e of the supreme 
g^o^mment Moloch has many a * tower in the 
province of Bengal ; that fair and fertile province, 
which has been called * The Garden of Nations/ 
Close to Ishera, a beautiful villa^ on the river*i» 
side, about eight miles from Calcutta, once the 
residence of governor Hastings, and within view 
oif the present Governor-General's country house, 
there is a temple of this idol ^irhieh is ofteli 
stained with human blood. At the festival of the 
Rut Jattra, in May, 1807, Dr. Buchanan visited it. 
One of the victims of that year was a well-made 
young man, of healthy t^pearance and comely 
aspect. He had a garland of flowers round his 
neck, and his long black hair was dishevelled. 
He danced for a while before the idol, singing in 
an enthusiastic strain, and then rushing suddenly 
to the wheels, he shed his blood under the tower 
of obscenity. The doctor was not on the spot 
at the time, his attention having been engaged by 
a more pleasing scene. 

On the other side, on a rising ground by the 
side of a tank, stood the Christian missionaries, 
and around them a crowd of people listening 
to their preaching. The town of Serampore, 
where the Protestant missionaries reside, is only 
about a mile and a half from this temple of 
Juggernaut. 

Doctor Buchanan sat down on an elevated 
spot to contemplate this scene> — ^the tower of 
blood and impurity on the one hand, and the 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



276 NOTES, 

Christian preachers on the other. How is so 
great and glorbus a ministry applauded by the 
holy angels^ who ' have joy in hearen over one 
sinner that . repenteth ;' and how far does it 
transcend the work of the warrior or statesman,, 
in charity, utility and lasting fame !" The pious 
doctor, could not help wishing that the represen- 
tatives of the church of Christ in our own country 
had.been present to witness, the scene, that they 
might have seen how practicable it is to oflfer 
Christian instruction to our Hindoo subjects. 



NOTE L 



'* The city of Benares, for its wealth, costly build- 
ings and the number of its inhabitants, is classed 
in the first of those now remaining in the pos- 
session of the Hindoos. There are . numerous 
temples at Benares dedicated to the almost innu- 
merable deities of the Hindoos; and this city 
is the chief repository of the science yet existing 
among them. At the distance of eight miles 
from the city of Benares, as it is approached 
on the river from the eastward, the eye is 
attracted by the view of two lofty minarets 
which were erected by Aureng-Zebe on the 
foundation of an ancient Hindoo temple dedL 
cated to the Mhah Deve. The construction on 
this sacred ruin of so towering a muhammedan 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES. 277 

pile, which from its elevated height seems to 
look down with triumph on the fallen state of a 
city so profoundly revered by the Hindoos, would 
appear to have been prompted to the mind of 
Aureng-Z6be by an intemperate desire of in- 
sulting their religion. If such were his wish, 
it has been completely fulfilled. For the Hindoos 
consider this monument as the disgraceful record 
of a foreign yoke, proclaiming to every stranger 
that their favourite city has been debased and 
the worship of their gods defiled. From the top 
of the minarets is seen the entire prospect of 
Benares, which occupies a space of about two 
miles and an half along the northern bank of the 
Ganges and generally a mile in-land from the 
river. Many of the houses, which are remarkably 
I high, some of them having six and seven floors, 
\ are built of stone, resembling that species found 
in the quarries of Portland and which abounds 
in this part of the country. But the streets 
where these lofty buildings stand are so narrow 
as not to admit of two common carriages abreast^ 
In addition to the pernicious e£Pect which must 
proceed from a confined atmosphere, there is in 
the hot season an intolerable stench arising from 
the many pieces of stagnated water dispersed in 
different quarters of the town, whose waters and 
borders are appropriated to the necessary uses of 
the inhabitants. The filth also, which is indis- 
criminately thrown into the streets and there 
v.. left exposed, (for the Hindoos possess but a small 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



27d NOTES. 

portion of cleanliness) adds to the compound of 
ill smells. The irregular and compressed manner, 
which has been invariably adopted in forming t e 
streets of Benares, has destroyed the effect which 
symmetry and arrangement would have otherwise 
bestowed on a city^ intitled from its valuable 
biuldings to a preference of any oqpital wluch I 
have seen in India/'^— JFbr^/er. 



NOT^ 



K. 



Mr. Halhed gives the following account of the 
£Dur seras of Indian chronology. 

^^ 1. The Suttee Jogue^ or age of purity, is sttd 
to have lasted three million two hundred thouasuKl 
years ; and the Hindoos hdd that the life of man 
was in that agci extended to one hundred thoo- 
s&nd years, and that his stature was twenty-one 
cubits. 

2. Tirtah Jogue, or age in which one-^third of 
mankind were reprobate^ tiiey suppose ccmsisted of 
two millions four hundred thousand years ; and that 
men then lived to the age often thousand years. 

3. The Dwapaar Jogue, in which half of tiie 
human race became depraved, endured one n^^ 
Hon six hundred thousand years ; and men's lii»S 
were reduced to one thousand years. 

4. The Collee Jogue, in which aQ mankind 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



NOTES* 279 

are corrupted, or rathaAessened, for that is the 
true meaning orCoQee, is the present sera, iirluohi 
they suppose ordained to subsist for four hundred 
tl^ousand years, of which near fire thousand ara 
already past ; and man's life in this period is limited 
to one hundred years." 

There can be no doubt that the information 
which we have hitherto received conoerningrthe 
chronology of the Hindoos is very incorrect. We 
have, according to Dh Robertson, only five ori-t 
ginal accounts of the different jogues or seraa of 
the Hindoos^ The first is given by M. Roger, who 
received it from the brahmins on the Cbromandel 
coast. According to this account^ the Suttee Jogue 
is a period of one million seven hundred and 
twenty-eight thousand years; the Tirfalh Jogue 
is one million two hundred and ninety-six thou- 
sand years ; the Dwapaar Jogue is eight hundred 
and sixty.four thousand years. The duration of 
the CoUee Jogue he does not speeify. The next 
original account is that of our author^ M^ Bemier^ 
who received it from the brahmins of Benares. 
According to him, the duration of the Suttee 
Jogue was two millions five hundred thousand 
years ; that of the Tirtah Jogue one million two 
hundred thousand years ; that of the Dwapaar 
Jogue was eight hundred and sixty-four thousand 
years. Concerning the period of the CoUee Jogue 
Bernier gives no information. The third original 
account is that of Colonel Dow, according to 
which the Suttee Jogue was a period of fourteen 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



280 NOTES. 

millions of years ; the Tirtah Jogue one million and 
eighty thousand years ; the Dwapaar Jogue seventy- 
two thousand ; and the CoUee Jogue thirty-six thou- 
sand years. The fourth account is that of M. 
Le Gentil^ who received it from the brahmins of 
the Coromandel coast ; and as his information was 
acquired in the same part of India and derived 
from the same source with that of M. Roger, it 
agrees with his in every particular. The fifth 
account is that of Mr. Halhed. From this dis- 
crepancy^ not only of the total numbers but 
of many of the articles in the different accounts, 
it is manifest, as is observed by Dr. Robertson, 
that our information concerning Indian chrono- 
logy is hitherto as uncertidn as the whole system 
of it is wild and fabulous. 



THE END. 



Huwim White, PriiUcr, 
Crane Covrt. 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



^ 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



\ 



'f) 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



f^M 



x.^-^ 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



\ 
