Travels in the Mogul Empire, Vol. I (François Bernier (Irving R. Brock, trans.), 1826)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1826 London edition, Irving R. Brock translation (https://archive.org/details/travelsinmogule00brocgoog). Bernier's eyewitness account of Mughal India under Aurangzeb (1656–1668) — physician at the imperial court, the classic European description of 17th-century India.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 







K 



V.-^Vv^ 











».o^_^ 






ITiftt* tCol.i,j..*tttt»frlanA. 







Digitized by LjOOQIC 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



TRAVELS 



IN 



THE MOGUL EMPIRE, 



FRANCIS BERNIER. 



TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH 

BY 

IRVING BROCK. 



IN TWO voLU?t?§r \ : / V : . :.;: •• 

• %--- •• • ••••••• 

VOL. L PI i:-^: :('; 



« • • • - • • • 



LONDON: 

WILLIAM PICKERING, CHANCERY-LANE. 

II I III ii 

1826. 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 



'^ 



'■- • • • ••• 

• * • ••• • • ••• 

• *• ••••• • 



'^ 



ThomM White, Priuteo 
Cr«ne Court. 




Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE. 



I 



XThe work of which a translation is now offered to the 
puhhc is deservedly held in high estimation. It was 
•first published in the year 1670, at which tune some of 
the countries described by M. Bemier had not yet been 
visited by any other European writer and great igno- 
rance prevailed on the affairs of India. The appearr 
ance of the book excited, therefore, a lively interest, 
and it became the subject of unequivocal commendation 
•during the brilliant age of Lewis the Fourteenth. 

The observations of subsequent travellers have con- 
.^rrned the celebrity of our author. Mr. Gibbon and 
T>octor Robertson quote him with approbation, and 
Major Rennell styles him '^ the most instructive of 
all East Indian travellers."* By Mr. Forster he is con- 
sidered as *' one of the most accurate and ingenious 
writers on the history of Hindostan ;" and in a letter, 
dated from Kashmire itself, that gentleman pronoimces 
a high eulogium on his exquisite judgment and the 
exactness of his researches, f 

Francis Bernier was born at Angers in France, 

* Memoir for illustrating the map of HindostaD, page 133. 

t George Forster proceeded by land from Bengal to the Cas- 
pian Sea, and thence to St. Petersburgh, in the years 1783 and 
1784. It was necessary, from a regard to safety, to avoid the 
country of the Seiks ^ that is Lahore : he accordingly crossed 
the Ganges and Jumna within the mountains, and proceeded to 

Digitized by 



Google 



In 1*REFACE. 

Ijut in what year it is not ascertained.* He was 
educated for the medical profession^ and after taking 
his degree of doctor of physic at Montpellier, he 
resolved on gratifying his eager desire for travel. He 
visited Syria in 1664, proceeded thence to Egypt, 
and resided above a twelvemonth in Cairo, where he was 
infected with the plague. Soon after his recovery, he 
jsailed from Suez for the purpose, as he tells us in the 
commencement of his narrative, of exploring every part 
of the Red Sea; but on his arrival at Mokha 
finding it unsafe to visit Gonda, he abandoned his first 
design a<id embarked on board a vessel bound to Surat, 
in HindJostan. In that country he remained twelve 

Kadhmire by the road of Jummoo. The foHowing is the letter to 
whkh tllueion has l^ea made. 

'' Kashmire^ 1783. 
" I am to express a regret that pre?iously to my route, I had 
not perused the accurate and candid memoirs of Mr. Bernier, who 
stands in the first rank of writers on Indian history ; yet should 
this cursory relation throw any light on his description of Kash- 
mirej as lively as it is just, by marking the changes which have 
happened since his day, I shall hold it in some estimation, and 
consider aay inconvenience which might have arisen from my 
journey thither, honourably requited. Mr. Bemier enjoyed ad- 
Tautages which have fallen to the lot of few Asiatic travellers^ 
and happily for the learned world his talents amply improved 
them. He travelled into Kashmire in the suite of Danechmend 
Khan, a favourite omrah of Aureng-Zdbe, who, having a taste for 
science and ktt^rs, encouraged this ingenious Frenchman to in- 
vestigate attentively the great variety of its curious produce. He 
has vlso desciibed the causes of that important revolution 
which raised Aureng-Zftbe to the throne of Hindostan. As he 
was personally engaged in the scene of acdon, and an eye-witness 
of many of the principal events, idl which are related in a simple 
loteresting language, I earnestly recommend to you a diligent 
perusal of his instructiye and judicious book. 

* Voltaire supposes it ww in i (5«6. 



L 



Digitized by 



Google 



The first part of the vohime contains a simple but 
entertainifig tiarrative of the citil domestic war which 
raged in Hkidostaii when our author visited that counti^, 
and which left Aureng-Z^be in quiet possession of the 
throne. 

Several events that occurred after the termination 
of the war are then recorded ; and anecdotes are in- 
troduced^ of whic^h although at first sight some may 
appear puerile, yet all are either characteristic of the 
individuals to whom they relate, or illustrative of the 
manners and genius of the people. 

The third section of the book consists of a letter 
to the celebrated Colbert, descriptive of the government 
of India, its pecuniary resources, its military strength 
sad its immense expenditure. The information which 
diis letter conveys is important and comprehensive, and 
w^ould alone entitle M. Bemier to the praise bestowed on 
him by his countrymen. He shews himself to have 
been ** an observer at once inquisitive and judicious^ 
who travelled for the double purpose of instructing 
hims^, and of contributing to the instruction of others."* 

A minute description of Delhi and Agra, the capital 
cities of the empire follows next ; and in this chapter^ 
written with all the author's powers of observation and 
research, is contained an animated account of the court 
of the Great Mogul. 

The degrading superstitions and unhallowed rites 
of the Hindoos — the crushings of Juggernaut's car — the 
juggles of the lustful and profligate Brahmins-* 
the immolations, often compulsory, of females, — the 
drowning of the side and dying,— all these abominations 
form the subject of another portion of the work. 

are required to make those benefits spread and fructify a 
tliousand-fold. 

• Histoire Generale des Voyages : tom 37, page 261. 

VOL. I. b 



Digitized by 



Google 



£ PREFACE. 

These awful and heart-rending particulars^ are 
succeeded by a dull and irrelevant^ but happfly short, 
dissertation on the doctrine of atoms. M. Bemier 
thought it worth while to confute the monstrous notion 
that the system of the universe had not its original 
from any intelligent nature; but that mind and in* 
telligence, as well as all things else, spnmg &om sense- 
less nature and chance, or from the unguided and 
undirected motion of matter. 

The journey of Aureng-Zftbe to the kingdom of 
Kashmire, " the Terrestrial Paradise of India/' with 
a miUtary retinue of nearly fifty thousand men, and 
accompanied by the whole population of Dellii, is 
rt^lated with the usual Uveliness and accuracy of the 
author ; and the volume closes with his solution of five 
questions proposed by M. Thevenot — concerning the 
settlement of Jews in Kashmire, the Monsoons, the 
regularity of the currents, and periodical winds in 
India, the fertility of Bengal ; and the increase of the 
river Nile. 

Among the many works with which the press is daily 
enriching the literature of the world, few merit a higher 
place in our estimation than the narratives of intelli- 
frent travellers. They make us acquainted with scenes 
before unknown to us, and manners ever-varying from 
our own; with civil and religious institutions**— if the 
cruelties and fooleries of paganism deserve the name — 
abhorrent from our opinions and habits; and with an 
oeconomy of domestic hfe so opposed to our every-day 
eicperience, that it seems to belong to a different order 
of beings. The additions made by such men to our 
knowledge in almost every department of science and, 
not imfrequently, in the arts which minister to the 
delight of refined society, are universally acknowledged. 
They furnish meditations to the philosopher, scenes 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE. XI 

to the painter, and songs to the poet : they open new 
fields to the speculations of commerce, and give a surer 
direction to the policy of states. But whatever delight 
or instruction voyages and travels may communicate, 
one lesson they are calculated to convey which has been 
fearfiilly disregarded — the universal depravity of man. 
However modified by chmate, laws, superstitions and 
various degrees of civilization, the character of man 
remains essentially the same in every country and in 
every age. From the wandering barbarian of the 
desert to the refined inhabitant of polished courts, 
all participate in the deadly bequest of the apostate 
father of our race. 

The heart sickens at the bare recital of the abomi- 
nable superstitions, the impure rites, and the murderous 
idolatries of pagan nations. Mr. Gibbon styles the 
dark obscene and cruel worship of the ancients ; "The 
elegant mythology of the Greeks ;" and the still more 
degraded system of Hindoo mythology has found an 
admirer and defender in Colonel Dow. But the perusal 
of such pages as the following, some of which deUneate 
that compound of absurdity, wickedness and cruelty in 
its most hateful forms, ought yet more to endear to the 
devout disciple of The Saviour of Sinners, the religion 
of the cross, and to increase his attachment to the pure 
morality of the Christian Code. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



TRAVELS 



IN 



THE MOGUL EMPIRE. 



The desire of seeing the worlds which had induc- 
ed me to visit Palestine and Egypt, still prompted 
me to extend my travels, and I formed the design 
of exploring the Red Sea from one end to the 
other. In pursuance of this plan, I quitted Grand 
Cairo, where I had resided more than a year, and 
in two and thirty hours (travelling at a caravan-rate) 
reached the town of Suez. Here I embarked in 
a galley, and was conveyed in seventeen days 
from Suez to the port of Giddah, half a day's 
journey from Mecca. Contrary to my expectation, 
and in violation of a promise which I had received 
from the Bey of the Red Sea, I was constrained to 
land on. this holy territory of Muhammed, where 
no. Christian, who is not a slave, dares set his foot. 
After a detention of nearly five weeks, I took 
my passage on board a small vessel^ which, sailing 
along the shores of Arabia Felix, brought me in 

B 



Digitized by 



Google 



Z TRAVBLS IN THE 

fifteen days to Mokha^ near the striuts of Babel- 
mandel. It was now my intention to pass over 
to the islands of Masuah and Arkecko^ on my 
way to Gondar^ the capital of Habesh (or 
Kingdom of Ethiopia) ; but I was informed that 
the catholics were not in safety in that country^ 
since the period when, through the intrigues of the 
queen-mother,, the Portuguese were slaughtered, 
or expelled, with the Jesuit Patriarch whom they 
had brought thither from Goa ; and that, in fact, 
an unhappy Capuchin had been recently beheaded 
at Suaken, for having attempted to enter the 
kingdom. It seemed, indeed, that less risk would 
be incurred if I adopted the disguise of a Greek or 
an Armenian ; and that when the king knew I 
could be of service to him, he would probably 
make me a grant of land, which might be cultivated 
hy slaves, if I possessed the means of purchasing 
them; but that I should, at the same time, be 
compelled to marry immediately, as a monk, who 
had aissuniied the character of a Greek physician, 
had already been obliged to do ; and that I could 
never hope to obtain permission to quit the 
country. 

These considerations^ among others which may 
be mentioned in the sequel, induced me to 
abandon my intention of visiting Gondar. I em* 
barked, therefore, in an Indian vessel, passed the 
straits of Babelmandel, and in two and twenty 
days arrived at Surat, in Hindostan^ the empire 
of the Great Mogul. I found that the reigning* 



Digitized by Google ' 

f 

I 



MOGVL EJKFIRB. 3 

prince was named Shah-Jehan> or Kin^ of the 
World. According to the s^nnals of the country, 
he was the son of Jehan Guire, or Conqueror of 
the World, and grakidson of Acbar, or the <?reat : 
so that in tracing his genealogy upwards to 
Humaioon, or the Fortunate, the father of Acbar, 
and to Humaioon's predecessors, Shah-Jehan .was 
proved to be the tenth, in regular descent, from 
Timor Lenk,the Lord, or Lame Prince, whom we 
commonly but corruptly call Tamerlane.* This 
Tamerlane, so celebrated for his conquests, married 
a kinswoman, the only daughter of the prince 
who then reigned over the people of Great Tartary 
called Moguls ; a name which they have commu- 
nicated to the foreigners who now govern .Hin- 
dostan, the country of the^ Hindoos, or Indians. 
It must not, however, be inferred, that offices of 
trust and dignity are exclusively held by those of 
the Mogul race, or that they alone obtain rank in 
the army. These situations are filled indifferently 
by them and strangers from all countries; the 
greater part by Persians, some by Arabia, and 
others by Turks. To be esteemed a Mogul, it is 
Plough if a foreigner have a white face and 
profess Muhammedanism ; in contradistinction to 
the European Christians, who are called Franguis, 
and to the Hindoos, whose complexion is brown, 
and ^hose religion is Pagan. 

♦ Timour is the correct name of this prince. Timour, in the 
Turkish language, means Iron. Lenk signifies in the Per- 
sian language, L?jne,^'Tran^tor. 



Digitized by 



Google 



4 TRAVELS IN THE 

I learnt also on my arrival that this king of 
the world, Shah-Jehan, who was about seventy 
years of age, was the father of four sons and two 
daughters ; that some years had elapsed since he 
elevated his sons to the vice-royalty of his four 
most considerable provinces or kingdoms ; and 
that he had been afflicted, for about the space of 
a twelvemonth, with a disorder which it was 
V / apprehended would terminate fatally. The situa- 
tion of the father having inspired the sons with 
projects of ambition, each laid claim to the empire, 
and a war was kindled among them which conti- 
nued about five years. 

This war, as I witnessed some of the most im- 
portant of its events, I shall endeavour to describe. 
During a period of eight years I was closely 
attached to the court; for the state of penury to 
which I had been reduced by various adventures 
with robbers, and by the heavy expences incurred 
on a journey of near seven weeks, from Surat to 
Agra and Delhi, the chief towns of the empire, 
had induced me to accept a salary from the 
Great Mogul, in the capacity of physician ; and I 
soon afterwards procured another from Danach- 
mend-Khan, the most learned man of Asia, formerly 
Bakchis, or Grand Master of the Horse, and one 
of the most powerful and distinguished omrahs, 
or lords of the court. 

The eldest son of the Great Mogul was named 
Dara, or Darius : the second Sultan Sujah, or 
the Valiant Prince : the third was Aureng- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 5 

Z6be, or the Throne*s Ornament ; and the name of 
the youngest was Morad Bakche^ or the Desire 
Accomplished.* Of the two daughters, the elder 
was called Begum-Saheb, or the Chief Princess ; 
and the younger Rochinara-Begum, the Light of 
Princesses, or Princess of the Enlightened Mind. 

It is usual in this country to give similar 
names to the members of the reigning family. 
Thus the wife of Shah-Jehan, so renowned for her 
beauty, and whose splendid mausoleum is more 
worthy df a place among the wonders of the 
world than the unshapen masses and heaps of stone 
in Egypt, was named Tage-MAhil, or the Crown 
of the Seraglio ; and the wife of Johan-Guire, 
who so long wielded the sceptre, while her 
husband abandoned himself to drunkenness and 
dissipation, was known first by the appellation of 
Noor-MAhil, the Light of the Seraglio, and after- 
wards by that of Noor-Jehan-Begum, the Light of 
the World. 

The reason why such names are • given to the 
great, instead of titles derived from domains and 
seigniories as in Europe, is this: as the land 
throughout the whole empire is considered the 
property of the sovereign, there can be no earldoms, 
marquisates or duchies. The royal grants consist 
only of pensions, either in land or money, which 
the king gives, augments, retrenches or takes away 
at pleasure. 

* Dara was born in the year 1615 ; Sultan Sujah in 1616 ; 
AurengZ^be in 1618 ; Mor&d Bakche in l624.^Translator. 



Digittzed by VjOOQIC 



6 TRAVBLS IN THE 

It will iiot> thereforet^ appear surprising^ that 
even the omrahs are distinguished only by this 
kind of title. One for instance, calling himself 
Rads-Andaze-Khan, another Safe-Cheken-Khan, a 
third Barc-Andaze-Khan; and others Dianet-Khan, 
or Danechmend-Khan, and Fazel-Khan : which 
terms respectively signify The Disposer of Thun- 
der, The Destroyer of Ranks, The Hurler of the 
Thunderbolt, The Faithful Lord, The Learned, 
and The Perfect. 

Dara was not deficient in good qualities : he 
was courteous in conversation, quick at repartee, 
polite, and extremely liberal : but he entertained 
too exalted an opinion of himself; believed he 
could accomplish every thing by the powers of 
his own mind, and imagined that there existed no 
man from whose counsel he could derive benefit* 
He spoke disdainfully of those who ventured to ad- 
vise him, and thus deterred his sincerest friends from 
disclosing the secret machinations of his brothers. 
He was also very irascible ; apt to menace ; abusive 
and insulting even to the greatest omrahs ; but 
his choler was seldom more than momentary. 
Born a Muhammedan, he continued to join in the 
exercises of that religion ; but although thus pub- 
licly professing his adherence to its faith, Dara 
was in private a Pagan with Pagans, and a 
Christian with Christians. He had constantly 
about his person some of the heathen doctors, on 
whom he bestowed pensions to a large amount, and 
from these ^t is thought he imbibed opinions in no 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIEB. 7 

wise> accordant with the religion of iht, land : but 
upon this subject I shall make a few observations 
when I treat of the religious worship of the Hindoos^ 
or Pagans. He had^ moreover^ for some time 
lent a willing ear to the suggestions of the 
Reverend Father Buzie, a Jesuit^ in the truth and 
propriety of which he began to acquiesce. There 
are persons^ however, who say that Dara was in 
reality destitute of all religion^ and that these ap- 
pearances were assumed only from motives of 
curiosity, and for the sake of amusement ; while, 
according to others, he embraced by turns 
Christianity and Paganism from political <Km- 
siderations; wishing to ingratiate himseff with the 
Christians who were jfretty numerous in his corps 
of artillery, and hoping to gain the affection of 
die r^ahs, or pagan princes tributary to the em- 
pire. It was most essential to be on good terms 
with these personages, that he might, as occasion 
arose, secure their <HM)peration. Dara's false pre- 
tences to this or that mode of worship, did not, 
however, promote the success of his plans; on 
the contrary, it will be found in the course of this 
narrative, that the reason assigned by Aureng- 
Z^be for causing him to be beheaded, was that he 
had turned kafer, or infi^del. 

Sultan Sujah, the second son of the Great 
Mogul, resembled in many characteristic traits 
his brother Dara; but he was more discreet, firmer 
of purpose, and excelled him in conduct apd 
address. He was sufficiently dexterous in the ma- 



Digitized by 



Google 



8 TRAVELS IN THE 

nagement of an intrigue ; and by means of repeated 
largesses, bestowed secretly, knew how to acquire 
the friendship of the great omrahs, and, in par- 
ticular, of the most powerful rajahs, such aa 
Jesswint Singh and others. He was, nevertheless, 
too much a slave to his pleasures ; and when sur- 
rounded by hisf women, who were exceedingly 
numerous,passed whole days and nights in dancing, 
singing, and drinking wine. No courtier, who 
consulted his own interest, would attempt to 
detach him from this mode of life : the business of 
government therefore often languished, and the 
affections of his subjects were in a great measure 
alienated. 

Sultan Sujah declared himself of the religion 
of the Persians, although his father and brothers 
professed that of the Turks. Muhammedanism 
is divided into various sects, which occasioned the 
following distich from the pen of the famous 
Sheik Sadi, author of the Gulistan.* 

I am a driokiog dervise ; I am apparently without religion ; 
I am known by, the seventy-two sects. * * 

Of these sects there are two whose respective par- 
tisans are mortal enemies to each other. The one 
is that of the Turks, called by the Persians 
Osmanlous, or Followers of Osman, whom the 

• The Proverbs of Solomon, the Ethics of Aristotle, and 
the Gulistan of Sadi are the favourite books of the Turks. 
Mr. Gladwin's English translation, from Gentius's Latin 
version, is well known. — Translator. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL BMPIRE. 9 

Turks believe to have been the true and legitimate 
successor of Muhammed, the Great Caliph^ or 
Sovereign Pontiff, to whom alone it belonged to 
interpret the Koran, and to decide the controver- 
sies that occur in the law. The other is that of 
the Persians, called by the Turks, Chias, Rafezago, 
and Ali'Merdans ; that is, sectaries, heretics^ and 
partisans of Ali ; because the Persians believe that 
the succession and pontifical authority belonged 
only to Ali, the son-in-law of Muhammed. 

When he avowed himself one of the latter sect. 
Sultan Sujah was evidently actuated by motives 
of policy ; for as the Persians were in possession 
of the most important offices in the kingdom, and 
exercised the largest share of influence at the 
Court of the Mogul, he hoped thus to secure in- 
terest and support, whenever the tide of events 
should render them necessary. 

Aureng-Zfebe, the third brother, was devoid 
of that urbanity and engaging presence, so much 
admired in Dara : but . he possessed a sounder 
judgment, and was more skilful in selecting for 
confidants such persons as were best qualified to 
serve him with faithfulness and ability. He dis* 
tributed his presents with a liberal but discrimi- 
nating hand among those whose good will it was 
essential to preserve or cultivate.- He was re- 
served, subtle and a complete master of the art of 
dissimulation. When in his father's court, he 
feigned a devotion which he never felt, and affected 
contempt for worldly grandeur while clandestinely 



Digitized by 



Google 



10 XBAYVIiS IN tHE< 

endeavouring to pave the way to future elevation. 
Even when nominated Viceroy of the Deccan^ he 
caujEted it to be believed that his feelings would be 
better gratified if permitted to turn Fakir or Der- 
vise * ; that the wish nearest his heart was to pass 
the rest of his days in prayer or in offices of piety^ 
and that he shrunk from the cares and responsi- 
bility of government. Still had his life been 
one of undeviating intrigue and contrivance; 
conducted, however^ with such admirable skill, 
that every person in the court, excepting only 
his brother Dara, seemed to form an erroneous 
estimate of his character. The high opinion 
expressed by Shah-Jehan of his son Aureng- 
Zehe, provoked the envy of Dara, and he would 
aometimes say to his intimate friends, that, of all 
his brothers, the only one who exciled hb suspi- 
cion, and filled him with alarm was Idie Nemazi — 
the bigot. 

Morid Bakohe, the youngest of the Mogul's 
sons, was inferior to his three brothers in judgment 
and address. The pleasures of the table and of 
Hie field engaged his undivided attention. He 
was, however, generous and polite. He used to 
boast that he hdd no secrets : he despised calnnet 
intrigues, and wished it to be known that he 
trusted only to his sword and to the strength of 
his arm. He w^ indeed full of courage ; and if 
that courage bad been under the guidance of a 

•The word Fakir is the Arabic, andDerrische or Dervise, 
the Turidfth «ad P«rsiai^ term, for a Bsendicimt. — Translator^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 11 

little more discretion, it is probable^ as we shaH 
see, that he would have prevailed over his three 
brothers, and remained the undisputed master of 
Hindostan. 

Begum-Saheb, Shah-Jehan's elder daughter, 
was very handsome, of lively parts, and passionately 
beloved by her father. It is painful to allude to 
the rumour of his unnatural attachment, the justi- 
fication of which he rested on the decision of the 
moollahs, or doctors of the law. According to 
them, it would have been unjust to deny the king 
the privilege of gathering fruit from the tree he 
had himself planted. Shah-Jehan reposed un- 
bounded confidence in this his favourite child ; she 
watched over his safety, and was so cautiously 
observant, that no dish was permitted to appear 
upon the royal table which had not been prepared 
under her superintendance. It is not surprising, 
therefore, that her ascendancy in the court of the 
Mogul should have been nearly unlimited ; that 
she should always have regulated the humours of 
her father and exercised a powerful influence an 
the most weighty concerns. This princess accu- 
mulated great- riches by means of her large 
allowances, and of the costly presents which flowed 
in from all quarters, in consideration of numberless 
negociations entrusted to her sole management. 
The affairs of her brother Dara prospered, and he 
retained the friendship of the king, because she 
attached herself steadily to his interest and de- 
clared openly in favour of his party. He cultivated 



Digitized by 



Google 



12 TRAVELS IN THE 

with assiduous attention the good will of this 
valuable coadjutor^ and it is thought promised 
that, on his accession to the throne, he would 
grant her permission to marry. This pledge was 
contrary to the laws of Hindostan, by which the 
marriage of princesses is strictly forbidden/ no 
man being considered worthy of royal alliance, 
and an apprehension being entertaine"^ that the 
husband might thereby be rendered powerful, and 
induced perhaps to aspire to the crown. 

I shall introduce two anecdotes connected with 
the amours of this princess, and hope I shall not 
be suspected of a wish to supply subjects for 
romance. What I am writing is matter of history, 
and my object is to present a faithful account of 
the manners of this people. Love adventures^ 
criminal as they are in every country, are not 
attended with the same danger in Europe as in 
Asia. In France they excite only merriment; 
they create a laugh, and are forgotten : but in this 
part of the world, few are the instances in which 
they are not followed by some dreadful and tragi- 
cal catastrophe. 

It is said, then, that Begum-Saheb, although 
confined in a seraglio, and guarded like other 
women, received the visits of a young man of no 
very exalted rank, but of an agreeable person. 
It was scarcely possible, surrounded as she was on 
all sides by those of her own sex whose envy she 
had long provoked, that her conduct should escape 
detection. Shah-Jehan was apprised of her guilt, 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 13 

and resolved to enter her apartments at an un- 
usual and unexpected hour. The intimation of 
his approach was too sudden to allow her the 
choice of more than one place of concealment. 
The affrighted gallant sought refuge in the * ca- 
pacious q^uldron used for the baths. The king's 
countenance denoted nejither surprise nor dis- 
pleasure; he discoursed with his daughter on 
ordinary topics^ but finished the conversation by 
observing that the state of her skin indicated a 
neglect of her customary ablutions, and that it 
was proper she should bathe. He then com- 
manded the eunuchs to light a fire under the 
cauldron, and did not retire until they gave, him to 
understand that his wretched victim was ,no more. 
At a subsequent period, Begum-Saheb formed 
another attachment, which also had a tragical ter- 
mination. She chose for her kane-saman, or 
steward, a Persian, named Nazir-Khan, a young 
nobleman remarkable for grace and mental 
accomplishments, full of spirit and ambition, and 
the favourite of the whole court. Shaista-Khan, 
the uncle of Aureng-Zfebe, greatly esteemed this 
young Persian, and ventured to propose him for 
Begum-SaheVs husband ; a proposition which was 
yery ill received by the Mogul. He had indeed 
already entertained some suspicion of an improper 
intercourse between the favoured nobleman and 
the princess and did not long deliberate on 
the course he should pursue.. As a mark of 
distinguished favour the king pr.esented the betel, 



Digitized by 



Google 



14 TRAVEL8 IN THE 

in the presence of thd whole courts to the Unsus- 
pecting youths which he was obliged immediatel]^ 
to ma^icate, agreeably to the custom of th^ 
country. Little did the unhappy lover imagine 
that he had received poison from the hand of the 
smiling monarchy but indulging in dreams of 
future bliss, he withdrew from the palace^ and as* 
cended his palanqaiu. Such, however, was the 
activity of the poison^ that he died before he could 
reach home. The Indians mix with the betel 
certain delicate leaves, a small portion of lime 
made of sea shells^ and other ingredients. The 
effect produced by its mastication is to render the 
breath sweet, and the lips red.* 

Rochinara Begum, the Mogul's younger 
daughter, was less beautiful than her sister^ 

* At all times of the day', and even in the night, the In- 
dians chew the leaves of the betel, the bitterness of which i$ 
corrected by the areca, a fruit common in most parts of 
Asia, that is wrapped up in them. There is constantly mixed 
with it the chinam, a kind of burnt lime made of shells. 
The rich frequently add perfumes, either to gratify their 
vanity or their sensuality. 

It would be thought a breach of politeness among the 
Indians to take leave for any length of time, without present- 
ing each other with a purse of betel. It is a pledge of 
friendship that relieves the pain of absence. It is custo- 
mary to have the mouth always perfumed with betel, unless 
one is going to address one's superiors. The women of gal- 
lantry are the most lavish in the use of betel, as being a 
powerful incentive to love. Betel is taken after meals; it 
is chewed during a visit ; it is offered when you meet and 
when you separate ; in short, nothing is to be done with- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL BMPtRE. 15 

neither was she so reililirkable for understanding ; 
she was nevertheless possessed of the same vivacity, 
and equally the votary of pleasure. She became 
the ardent partisan of Aureng-Zebe, and made no 
secret of her enmity to Begum-Saheb and Dara. 
This might be the reason why «he amassed but little 
wealth, and took but an inconsiderable part in 
public affairs. Still, as she was an inmate of the 
seraglio, and not deficient in artifice, she suc- 
ceeded in conveying, by means of spies, much 
valuable intelligence to Aureng-Zfebe. 

Some years previous to the war, the turbu- 
lent disposition of his four sons had filled Shah- 
J^han with perplexity and alarm. They were all 
married and of adult age ; but, in utter disregard 
of the ties of consanguinity, each," animated by 
deadly hatred toward the others, had set up his 
pretensions to the crown, so that the court Was 
divided into separate factions. The king, who 
trembled for his personal safety, and was torment- 
ed by sad forbodings of the events which actually 
befel him, would gladly have confined his re- 
out betel. If it be injurious to the teeth, it assists and 
strengthens the stomach. This is at least the prejudice ge- 
nerally prevailing throughout India. 

The betel is a plant that creeps or climbs, like the ivy, 
alongside of trees or props, to which it fixes itself by small 
tendrils. The betel grows in every part of India, but it 
comes to perfection, only in damp and clayey places. 
There are private cultivations of it, which are very pro- 
fitable, on account of the great demand for it. 

Abbi Raynal. 



Digitized by 



Google 



16 TRAYELa IN THE 

fractory children in Gualior^ a fortress which had 
often received members of the royal family within 
its walls^ and whose situation, on a lofty and 
inaccessible rock, renders it impregnable ; but he 
justly considered that they had become too power- 
ful to be dealt with in so summary a manner. He was 
indeed in perpetual apprehension of their having 
recourse to arms, and either erecting independent 
principalities, or converting the seat of government 
into a bloody arena, in which to settle their per- 
sonal differences. To save himself, therefore, ftom 
some impending and overwhelming calamity, 
Shah-Jehan resolved to bestow upon his sons 
the government of four distant provinces. Sultan 
Sujah was appointed to Bengal ; Aureng-^Zebe to 
the Deccan; Mor&d Bakche to Guzerat; and 
•Dara to Cabul and Moultan. The three first- 
mentioned princes repaired to their respective 
provinces ' without delay , and -soon betrayed the 
spirit by which they were animated. They acted 
in every respect as independent sovereigns, appro- 
priated the revenues to their own use, and levied 
formidable armies under pretence of maintaining 
tranquillity at home, and commanding respect 
abroad. Dara, because he was the eldest son 
and expected to succeed to the crown, did not 
quit the court of his father. Shah-Jehan 
appearing to encourage that expectation, autho- 
rised his son to issue orders, and permitted him to 
occupy an inferior throne, placed among the 
omrahs, beneath his own; so that two kings 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 17 

i^ypeared ta reign with almost equal power : but 
there is reason to beUeve that the Mogul 
practised much duplicity, and that, notwith- 
standing the respectful and affectionate demea- 
nour of Dara, his father was never cordiaHy 
attached to him. The old monarch lived in coh- 
tinual dread of poison, and carried on, it is 
supposed, a secret correspondence with Aureng- 
ZSbe, of whose talents for government he always 
entertained a high opinion. 

I have thought a slight sketch of Shah-Jehan 
and his sons a proper introduction to this history, 
and necessary to the right understanding of 
what is to follow. Nor could I well avoid adding 
a few particulars concerning his two daughters, 
who play so prominent a part in the tragedy. In 
India, as well as in Constantinople and other 
places, the most momentous events are too 
often caused by the influence of the sex, although 
the people may be ignorant of this fact, and may 
indulge in vain speculations as to the cause of the 
agitation they deplore. 

It may also elucidate my narrative to revert to 
the proceedings of Aureng-Zebe, of the King of 
Golconda, and of his vizier Emir-Jemla, a short 
time before the war broke out : this may give 
my readers an insight into the character and 
genius of Aureng-Zfebe, the hero of this history, 
and the future king of India. 

We shall first see in what manner Emir*Jemla 

c 



Digitized by 



Google 



18 TRATELS IK THE 

laid the foundation of tlie. power and supifmii^ 
of Shah-Jehau's third son. 

During the time that Aureng-Z^be was en^ 
4aru8ted with the government of Deccan, the king 
of Golconda had for his vizier and general of 
Mb armies; this.Emir*Jemla> a Persiianby birdi*, 
and celebrated throughout Hindostan. The 
vizier's lineage wasnot noble^ but his talents were 
of the first order : he was an atedmplished spldier, 
and deeply versed in busineissc His wealth, wfaidi 
was prodigious, he had acquired^ not only by the 
opportunities affi>rded him as chief minister of an 
opulent kingdom, but likewise by means of his 
extensive commerce with various parts of the 
worlds as well as by the diamond miites which be 
farmed under feigned names. These mines were 
worked with indefatigable industry, and it was 
usual to cbunt his diamonds by the t sack. His 
political influence,, it may readily be imagined^^ was 

* Jemla wa$ a. Persian, bora in Ardistan, a village in the 
uei|^bourhood of Ispahan. His parents, though of some 
rank, were extremely poor : he, however, found means to 
acquire some knowledge of letters, which circumstance pro- 
cured for him the place of clerk to a diamond merchant, who 
made frequent joumies to Qolconda. In that kingdom be 
quitted his master's service, traded on his own account, and 
became possessed pf a considerable fortune, which enabled 
him to purchase a place at the court of Cuttub« sovereign 
of "tellingana, and of a great part of Qolconda. In that sta- 
tion he behaved so well that he attracted the notice of this 
'pnnc^,who raised him to the head of the forces of Tellingana. 

Dow. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE^ 19 

also very great, commanding as he did not only 
the armies of the king, but keeping in his own pay 
a formidable body of troops> with a corps of ar- 
tillery composed principally of Christians*: It 
ought likewise to be mentioned that t the vizier, 
having found a pretext for the invasion of the 
Carnatic, pillaged, the whole of its ancient t«nd 
pagan temples, and thus increased his pecuniary 
resources to an incredible amount. 

The jealousy of the king of Golconda was 
naturally awakened ; and he eagerly, but silently, 
sought an opportunity to destroy^ or remove from 
his presence, one whom he regarded as a 
dangerous rival rather than an obedient subject. 
Surrounded by persons devoted to the interest of 
the minister, 'he felt the prudence of concealing 
his intentions ; but in an unguarded moment, when 
informed, for the first time, of the improper in* 
timacy subsisting between Emir-Jemla and the 
queen-mother, who still retained muclu beauty, he 
gave utterance to the feelings by which he had so 
long been oppressed, and denpunoed vengeance 
against this powerful offender^' • m ..v 

The vjzier Was at this time in the Carnatic; 
but every important office at court being filled 
by his relations, he was soon made acquainted* 
with the danger which aWaited him. This crafty 
man's first step was to write to his only son 
Mahmet Emir-Khan, then with the king, to urge 
his immediate departure feom court, under any 
false pretext, and to represent the necessity of 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



20 TRAVELS IN THE 

his joining him in the Carnatic : but he found 
it impossible to elude the vigilance with which 
he was guarded. Disappointed in this^ the vizier's 
next measure was at onee bold and original, and 
it brought the king of Golconda to the very verge 
of destruction : so true it 'is that he who cannot 
keep his own counsel cannot preserve his crown. 
Jemla addressed a letter to Aureng-Zfebe, at this 
time in Dowlatabad^ the metropolis of Deccan, 
to the following effect : 

*^ I have rendered, as all the world knows, 
essential services to the king of Golconda, and he 
owes me a heavy debt of gratitude. Nevertheless, 
he is plotting my ruin and that of my family. 
May I be permitted, therefore, to throw myself 
under your protection? In acknowledgment of 
the kindness I anticipate at your hands, I suggest 
a plan by which you may easily obtain possession 
both of the king's person and kingdom. Confide 
in my integrity, and the enterprise will neither be 
difficult nor dangerous : assemble four or five 
thousand of your choicest cavalry, and proceed by 
forced marches towards Golconda, which may be 
reached, in sixteen days> spreading a rumour that 
this body of horse is escorting an ambassador 
from Shah-Jehan, who has affairs of moment to 
negociate with the king at Bagnaguer (his usual 
place of residence). 

The Dabir, through whose medium the first 
communication is always made to the king, is my 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 21 

near relation and entirely in my confidence : you 
have only to advance with rapidity, and I promise 
so to order it, that you shall arrive at the gates of 
Bagnaguer without exciting a suspicion that you 
are any other than an ambassador from Shah- 
Jehan. When the king advances, according to 
custom, to receive the credentials^ you may easily 
secure his person, and dispose of him in the manner ^ 
you may deem fit. Meanwhile I will defray the 
whole expence of the expedition, and engage to 
pay fifty thousand rupees daily during the time it 
piay be in progress." 

Aureng-Z6be, ever intent upon projects of am* 
bition, immediately adopted the measures pro- 
posed in this letter. He proceeded at once 
towards the territory of the king of Golconda, and 
with such address was the plot conducted, that 
when the prince reached Bagnaguer, no one 
doubted that this formidable body of horse ac- 
companied an embassy from the Great Mogul. 
The king, as is usual on similar occasions, repaired 
to his garden for the purpose of receiving the 
pretended ambassador with appropriate ceremony 
and honour ; and while unsuspiciously approaching 
his perfidious enemy, he was about to be seized by 
ten or twelve slaves, as had been projected, when 
an omrah who was in the conspiracy, touched 
with sudden remorse and compassion, exclaimed, 
'* Your majesty is lost if you do not instantly fly ; 
this is Aureng-Z^be, and no ambassador/' I 



Digitized by 



Google 



22 TEAVELS IN THE 

would be superfluous to describe the king's con* 
steruation : he fled from the spot, mounted a horse^ 
and rode at full speed to the fortress of Golconda, 
distant only a league from Bagnaguer. 

Although disappointed of his prey, Aureng** 
Z^be felt that there was no occasion for alarm, 
and that he might securely prosecute hb endea- 
vours to obtain possession of the king's person. 
The Entire spoliation of the palace was his next 
act; He stript it of all its costly contents, but 
sent the women to the king, according to a 
custom most scrupulously observed among 
Eastern despots. He then determined, though 
destitute of cannmi, to besiege the king in his 
fortress, which the want of provisions woul^ have 
prevented from . iHaaking a protracted defence ; 
but Shah^Jehan, two months after the commence* 
ment of the siege, peremptorily commanded his son 
to relinquish his enteitprise, and return without 
delay to Deccan. 

Anreng-Z^be was aware that in issuing these 
orders, ^the Mogul was influenced by Bara and 
Begura-Saheb, who foresaw that if permitted to 
pursue his designs against the king of Golconda, 
he would bee€uae*.too powerfuL The prince, 
however, betrayed na resentment, but acknow«- 
led^ed the duty o£ implicit obedience to his 
fothev's conmi^ds;' oiBeioirerh^ retired he i«- 
ceived ampbtrmdemmficaidon for the expence of 
the armament, and stipulated that Emir-Jemla 
should have £nee permission to remove with his 



Digitized by 



Google 



« 



MOGUL ElfPIW- 29 

&iaily^ prc^erty and;1;rQops^ and .tl^at the silver 
coia of the realm should in fujtiure iiear tbie arm3 
of ShakJohan. Moreover he married his son 
Mahmiid' to the king's, eldest daughter^ exacted 
a promise that the young prince should be no? 
minated successor to the Uirone of Qolconda, and 
receiTed, as the princess's dowry, the fortress of 
Ramgiiyre, with the whole .of its appurtenances. , 

It would appear that Emir-'Jemla. joined 
Aureng^Z^be at this period ; because^ while re* 
turning to Deccmii, both these . comma^ers 
besieged and captured Beder, one of the strongest 
places in Visiapour. They then proceeded to 
Dowlatabad, in which city they lived upon terms 
of the closest intimacy, forming gigantic plans of 
future aggrandizement. Their union may 1)e 
remembered as an important epoch in the history 
of Hindostan : it prepared the way for the great- 
ness a;nd renown of Aureng^Z^be^ .. 
■i- Jemla, who had by his address coMrived to 
obtain frequent invitations to the court of Shah«- 
Jehan, repaired at length to Agra, and carried 
the most magnificent presents, in the hope of in- 
4^c}^g^ei ^9gul to declare war against the kings 
of CWwuda andiVisAappWi^nd, gainst tl^e Portu- 
^guese. On this oooasion it was thlit he presetted 
SHah-'Jehan with that celebrated diamond which 
has been generally deemed unparalleled in svie 
and beauty. He dilated with earnestness. on the 
benefits which would accrue from the conquest 



Digitized by 



Google 



24 TRAVELS IN THE 

of Golconda, whose precious stones* were surely. 
more deserving of his consideration than the rocks 
of Candahar, whither the Mogul was ahout to 
lead an army : his military operations in that 
kingdom ought not to cease, he said^ until the con* 
quest of his arms extended to Cape Comorin. 

The diamonds may have produced their effect 
upon the mind of Shah-Jehan; hut it is the 
more received opinion that he was glad of a 
pretext for raising an army which should restrain 
the growing insolence of his eldest son ; and that 
it was for this reason he entered into the views of 
Jemla. 

Whatever were his motives, he resolved to 
send an army towards Deccati, under the Emir's 
command. 

* Diamonds are found principally in the kingdoms of 
Golconda, Visiapour, Bengal and the island of Borneo. 
There are four mines, or rather two mines and two rivers, 
whence diamonds are drawn. The mines are 1. that of Raol- 
conda, ^ye days journey from the town of Golconda; ^2. that of • 
Gani, or Coulour, seven days journey from Golconda eastward- 
ly ; 3. that of Solempour, a town in Bengal : the latter should 
rather be called that of Gouel, which is the name of the river 
in the sand whereof these stones are found : lastly, the 
foufth mine, or rather the second river, is that of Succadan, 
in the island of Borneo. Till witiiin the last hundred years 
no diamond mines were known besides those in the East 
Indies. In the year 1728, however, a discovery of diamonds 
was made at Brazil, upon some branches of the river das 
Caravelas, and at Serro de Frio, in the province of Minas- 
Geraes. — Translator. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 25 

Dara had incurred his father's displeasure 
hj his recent and undisguised attempts to become 
paramount in power and authority : but there 
was one act of his which Shah-Jehan regarded 
with peculiar horror and indignation, and which 
he was least disposed to forgive, — the murder of 
vizier Sadullah-Khan, a nobleman whom the 
Mogul considered the most accomplished states- 
man of Asia, and for whom he felt a warmth of 
friendship that became quite proverbial. What 
was the oflFence which Dara judged worthy of 
death, is not ascertained. Perhaps he apprehended 
that in the event of the king's demise, the 
powerful ascendancy of the vizier might leave the 
crown at his disposal, and that he would place it 
on the head of Sultan-Sujah, whose party he 
iseemed to favour : or it is possible Dara may have 
been influenced by the reports promulgated re- 
specting the intentions of Sudallah-Khan, who,from 
being a Hindoo by birth, had excited the jealousy 
of the Persians at court. One of these rumours 
was, that, after the death of Shah-Jehan, the 
vizier designed to exclude the Moguls from the 
throne, and either to restore the royal race of 
Patau, or usurp the crown for himself or his son. 
His wife was from Patau, and it was pretended 
that he kept a well appointed army of that people 
cantoned in various parts, to aid him in accom- 
plishing his project. 

It was evident to Dara that to send troops to 
the Deccan was in effect to increase, by so paany 



Digitized by 



Google 



26 TRAYBiS IN THE 

mm, the strength of Anr&ig-Zthe. He o^osed 
llie measure, therefore, with many argaments aiid 
entreaties, and by every art he could devise. 
Findbg it, however, impossible to move Shah-Jehan 
from his purpose, he persuaded him to impose 
certain conditions ; by which Aureng-Zebe should 
engage to distain from all interference in the 
conduct of the war.; fix his residence at Dowlat* 
abtii ; confine his attention to the government of 
Deccan ; and also that the Emir should retain the 
absolute and undivided command of the army: 
leaving the whole ofhis^family at court, as hostages 
for his fidelity. This last clause was extremely 
0flbnsive to Jendia -^ but Shah-Jehan. prevailed 
with him to yield compliance, assuring liim that 
tjiis stipulation was intended only to ^ satisfy the 
caprice of his son, and that he should . soon be 
followed by his wife and children. The^ Emir 
put himself at the head of a fine army, with which 
he marched into the Deccan : and without tarrying 
jni^at country, entered yisiapour,^commencing 
his op€nrations with the siege of Calhanee, a place 
of considerable strength. 

Such was the state of Hihdostan when the 
Mogul, who had past faki seventieth year, was 
seised; with a disorder, the nature of which it were 
uatocoming to describe. Suffice it to state that 
it was disgraceful to a man of his age, who, instead 
of wasting, ought to have been carefiil to preserve 
thcremaibing vigour of his constitutbn.* 

* It is observed by Colonel Dow that Shah-Jehan's dis- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 27 

The MoguFs illness filled the whole ^j;tent of 
his dominions with agitation and alarm. Dara 
collected powerful armies in Delhi and Agra, the 
principal cities of the kingdom. In Bengal, 
Sultan-Sujah made the same vigorous preparations 
for war. Aureng-Z6be in the Deccan, and Morid- 
Bakdie in Guzerat, also levied such forces as 
evinced a determination to contend for empire. 
The four brothers gathered around them their 
friends and allies; all wrote letters/ made large 
promises, and entered into a variety of intrigues. 
Dara^ having intercepted some of these letters, 
shewed them to his father, inveighing bitterly 
against his brothers; and Begum-Saheb availed 
herself of so advantageous an opportunity to pre- 
judice the Mogul against his three rebellious sons : 
but Shah-Jehan placed no confidence in Dara, and 
suspecting he had a design to poison him, 
i^wallowed no food without the utmost fear and 
caution. It is even thought that he corresponded 
at this time with Aureng-Zfebe, and that Dara, 
h6ing apprized of the circumstance, was trans- 
ported with rage to such a degree as to threaten 
his father. Meanwhile, the king's distemper in- 
crieased, audit was reported that he was dead : the 
whole court waa in confusion ; the pppulation of 

pasting debaucheries had weakened his constitution. On the 
17th of September, 1657, he was suddenly seized with a pa- 
ralytic disorder, accompanied with a yiolent strangury, and 
he remained in a state of insensibility for several days.—* 
Translator, 



Digitized by 



Google 



28 TRAVELS IN THE 

of Agra was panic-struck ; the shops were closed 
for many days, and the four princes openly declared 
their settled purpose of making the sword the 
sole arbiter of their lofty pretensions- It was, in 
fact, too late to recede : not only was the crown 
to be gained by victory alone, but in case of defeat 
life was certain to be forfeited. There was now 
no choice between a kingdom and death : as Shah* 
Jehan had ascended the throne by imbruing his 
hands in the blood of his own brothers, so the 
unsuccessful candidates on the present occasion 
were sure to be sacrificed to the jealousy of the 
conqueror.* 

Sultan-Sujah was the first who took the field. 
He had filled his coflFers by ruining some of the 
rajahs, and by plundering others. He was 
therefore enabled to raise a numerous army ; and 
confiding in the support of the Persian omrahs, 
whose religious views he had embraced, advanced 
rapidly on Agra. He issued a proclamation 
which set forth the death of his father by poison 
from the hand of Dara, and declared his de- 
termination both to avenge so foul a murder, 
and to occupy the vacant throne. Shah-Jehan, 
at the instance of Dara, hastened to undeceive him 
in regard to the rumour of his decease; the 

* On ascending the throne, Shah-Jehan, either by the 
dagger or bowstrings dispatched all the males of the house 
of Timour; so that only himself and his children remained 
of the posterity of Baber, who conquered India. — Tram- 
hhr. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPOLE. 29 

malady was giving way, he said, to the power of 
medicine, and he expressly commanded him to 
return forthwith to his government of Bengal. 
But ^s Sultan-Sujah's friends at court represented 
the Mogul's disorder as incurahle, he continued 
his march toward the capital, pretending that he 
was too well convinced of the death of his revered 
parent, and that if contrary, to his expectation, he 
should be yet alive, he was desirous of kissing his 
feet and receiving his commands. 

Aureng-Zebe also published his proclamations, 
and put his forces in motion, much at the same 
time as Sultan-Sujah. He too was meditating an 
advance on Agra when he received a similar pro- 
hibition, both from the king and from Dara ; the 
latter of whom menaced him with punishment if he 
quitted Deccan. He dissembled, however, like 
his brother of Bengal, and returned a similar 
answer ; but as his finances were not abundant, 
and his army was comparatively small, he endea- 
voured to obtain by fraud what he could not hope 
to gain by arms. The immediate dupes of his ar- 
tifice were Morftd-Bakche and Emir-Jemla. In a 
letter to the former he said : ' 

''I need not remind you, my brother, how 
repugnant to my real diposition are the toils of 
government. While Dara and Sultan-Sujah are 
tormented with a thirst for dommion, I sigh only 
for the life of a Fakir. But, although renouncing 
all claim to the kingdom^ I nevertheless consider 



Digitized by 



Google 



so TRATSLS IN THE 

mysielf bound to impart my sentiments to you^ my 
friend, whom I have always tenderly lo?ed« 
Dara i^ not only incapable of reigning, but is ut- 
terly unworthy of the throne, inasmuch as he is a 
kafer (an infidel), and held in abhorrence by all 
the ^reat omrahs. Sultan-Sujah is equally un- 
deserving the crown ; for being avowedly a rafezy 
(heretic), he is of course an enemy to Hindost^m; 
Will you then permit me to say that in you alone 
are to be found the qualifications for ruling a 
mighty empire. This opinion is not adopted by 
myself 'only; it is likewise entertained by the 
leading nobles, who esteem you for your match- 
less valour, and are anxious for your arrival in the 
capital. With respect to myself, if I can exact a 
solemn promise from you that, when king, you 
will suffer me to pass my life in some sequestered 
spot of your dominions, where I may offer up my 
constant prayers to heaven in peace, and without 
molestation, I am prepared immediately to make 
common cause with you, to aid you with my coun- 
sel and my friends, and to place the whole of my 
army at your disposal, t send you one hun-' 
dred thousand rupees, of which I entreat your 
acceptance, as an earnest of my best wishes. The 
time is critical : you should, therefore, not lose 
one moment in taking possession of the castle of 
Surat, where I know the vast treasure of the state 
to be deposited.** 

Mor&d-Bakche,« whose wealth and power were 

"Digitized by Google 



MOQVh EMPIRC. 31 

comparativisly limited^ received Iris brotbeifa pro^ 
posals, accompanied as they werp by so large a 
sum^ wkh great de%ht^ aad was beyood measure 
elated at the prospect wluch' now presetted itself 
to hinu The letter was everywhere exhibited, in 
expectation that the young men would be induced 
by its contents t6 enter with cheerfulness into his 
army, and that it might dispose the opulent mer- 
chants more willingly to lend the large sums he 
was exaeting with undeviating rigour «. He now 
assumed all the consequence and authority of a 
king ; was profuse in his promises, and ccmtrived 
every thing, so successfully that he soon collected 
a pretty numerous army. From this army, it w^as 
his first care to detaeh three thousand men, under 
the command of the eunuch Shah-Abas, a valiant 
sold^, to lay siege to the castle of Surat. 

Aureng*Z£be next turned his thoughts on 
EmipJemla. He sent to him his eldest son SuU 
tan-Mahmud (whom he had married to the king 
of Golconda's daughter) with a request that he 
would come to him at Dowlatebad, as he had in«- 
telligence pf the last moment to impart. The 
:Emir was at no Ices to divine the nature of this 
intelligence, and: Refused to quit his army which 
was still engaged in the aege of Callianee ; allege 
ing that he had: recently received hidings from 
.Agra, and could <«isure Sukan-Mahmud that Sbidt- 
Jdum was not/dead. In no case^ however, tould 
Ji^ think of cb-dp^ating^ithi Avften^^^es, while 
his wife andrdiildreh were pxltera'^ -^werrrihfe 



Digitized by 



Google 



32 TRAVELS IN THE 

determination was fixed ; he would not be a party 
in the present quarrel. 

Finding it impossible to accomplish the object 
of his mission^ Sultan Mahmud returned to Dow- 
latabad, extremely displeased with the Emir ; but 
Aureng-Zebe, no way discouraged, sent another 
message by his second son Sultan Mazum^ who 
conducted his mission with so much address, and 
urbanity^ and made such protestations of friendship^ 
that Emir-Jemla could not withstand the force of 
his solicitations. He pressed the siege of Callianee, 
and having forced the garrison to capitulate^ 
hastened to Dowlatabad with the flower of his 
army. 

Aureng-Z6be received Emir-Jemla with the 
strongest professions of kindness, calling him 
Baba and Babagy — father, and the lord my father. 
He embraced his welcome visitor a hundred times; 
and taking him aside, addressed him thus : — '^ I 
acknowledge the force of the objection made by 
you to Sultan-M ahmud, and it is the opinion of 
my friends at court, who are men of judgment, 
that it would be extremely imprudent, while your 
family are in the hands of Dara, to stir openly in 
my favour, or even to manifest the slightest dis- 
position to promote the interest of my cause. 
But it is not for me to inform you that there are 
few difficulties which may not be overcome. 
A scheme has occurred to my mind, which, diough 
at first it may surprise you, will, I doubt not, on 
reflection, appear to you well calculated to ensure 



Digitized by 



Google 



Mogul empire. 33 

the safety of your family. Suflfer yourself to bcf 
confined in prison ; it will have the effect of im- 
posing upon the world, and we shall reap all the 
success we can desire from this plan : for who wilt 
ever imagine that a person of your rank could 
tamely suhmit to incarceration ? In the mean time, 
I can employ a part of your troops in any manner 
you think fit ; and you will not perhaps refuse, 
in furtherance of our project, to supply me with a 
isum of money, according to the offer you have so 
^repeatedly made. With these troops, and thiiy 
money, I may safely try my fortune. Allow me, 
therefore, to conduct you to the fortress of Dow- 
latabad where you will be guarded by one of my 
sons ; we may then deliberate upon the means to 
be pursued, and I cannot conceive how any sus 
picion should arise in the mind of Dara, or how 
he can reasonably ill-treat the wife and children 
of one who is apparently my enemy." 

I have authority for stating that such wa«r 
[Substantially the language used by Aureng-Z^be. 
The considerations which dictated the Emir'isr 
answer to these strange propositions, are not liow 
so well known. It is certain, however, that he 
complied with them, that he consented to place 
the troops under Aureng-Zfebe's orders, to lend 
him money, and, what is even more extraordinary 
to be conducted to the fortress of Dowlatabad« 
Some have thought that Emir-Jemla was really 
lallut^d by the solemn assurance of advantages to 
be derived from his acquiescence, and that he 

D 



Digitized by 



Google 



34 TRAVflliS IN THB 

w^s likewise influenced by the recpllection 6f lluxie 
vows of ardeiM^ m^ indissoluble frimd^hip which 
]^ been so frequency interchanged between him 
4rtd Aureng-Zfebe. Others there are who, perhaps 
with more reason believe that fear forbade Urn 
to withhold his assent, as the two sons of Aureng* 
^^be. Sultan Mazurn, and Sultan Mahmud were 
present at the conference; the former completely 
ariajad^ and assuming a look that could not h0 
wstaken; the latter indulging in unseemly 
grimaces, after having raised, his arm in a manneir 
which implied an intention of proceeding tp 
violence : for the pride of this prince was mortis 
^d because his brother's mission had been 
attended with better success than his own^ and 
he was at no pains to conceal his resentmenit. 

When the imprisonment of Emir-Jemla became 
t[;nown, that portion of the army which had been 
brought from Visiapour, demanded aloud the re* 
lease of their commander, and would soon have 
opened the door of his prison, if they had not been 
appeased by the arts of Aureng-Z^be, who intimat- 
ed to the superior officers that the Emir's confine- 
ment was quite voluntary, and a part, in fact^ of a 
scheme understood between themselves. He wag^ 
besides, lavish of his presents : he promised advanpe-^ 
9ient to the officers, and increased the pay of HiA 
private soldiers ; giving them at once three months- 
advance as a pledge of his liberal intentionil* 

In tl^is manner the troops lately under 
J^^lf^-a^ command were persuaded to take part in 



Digitized by 



Google 



HOQUL BMPmE. 95 

the campaign meditated by Aureng-Z^be^ who 
thiis soon found himself in a condition to take the 
field. He first marched in the direction of Sfiraf 
for the purpose of accelerating the fall of th«i 
place^ which persevered in a vigorous and xrn^ 
expected resistance; but a few days after hki 
army had been put in motion he received news of 
the surrender of that town. He then dispatched 
u congratulatory letter to Mot^-Bakche ; made 
Urn acqudnted with all that had passed with 
Emir* Jemla ; told him he was now at the heaid of 
a formidable force ; that he possessed abundance 
of money; that his understanding with the prin^ 
cipal courtiers was complete; and that he was 
fully prepared to proceed towards Burampour 
and Agra. He then conjured him to hasten his 
march^ and he fixed the place for the junction of 
the two armies. 

Mor^d-Bakche was disappointed in the amount 
of treasure found in Surat ; perhaps it had been 
exaggerated by report ; or the governor, as was 
generidly suspected, had impropriated a large pen*- 
tion of it to his own use. The money of which he 
came into possession, only sufficed to pay the 
soldiers, who had been induced to enlist l)y the ex- 
pectation of the immense wealth which the 
walls of Surat were believed to enclose. Nor 
ought the capture of the town to have increased 
the mHitary reputation of this prince ; for, although 
destitute of regular fortifications, it yet baffled his 



Digitized by 



Google 



36 TRAVELS IN THB 

Utmost endeavours for more than a month : and 
he had made no progress in the siege when the 
Butch mstructed him, for the first time> in the 
art of mining. The blowing up of a considerable 
part of the waU spread consternation in the 
garrison^ and terms of capitulation were imme^ 
diately proposed. 

The fall of Surat facilitated the future 
operations of Morid-Bakche. It procured him a 
great name ; mining is yet imperfectly known in 
India, and nothing could have inspired the 
Hindoos with more astonishment than the effica* 
cious method in which this new art had been 
employed by Mor^d-Bakche. It was moreover 
universally believed that vast riches had fallen 
into his hands. But notwithstanding the fitme 
acquired by this event, and all the flattering 
promises of Aureng-Zfebe, Shah-Abas urged him 
to disregard the extravagant declarations of his 
brother, and not rashly to throw himself into his 
hands. '* Listen," he said, *^ while it is yet time» 
to my advice; amuse him with fair words, if you 
please ; but do not think of joining him with your 
forces. Let him advance alone toward Agra. We 
fihall by and by receive positive intelligence of your 
father's state of health, and see the course that 
events may take. In the mean time you may fortify 
Surat, a most important post, which will secure 
to you the dominion of an extensive country 
producing a rich revenue, and with a little manager 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 37 

meni you may become master of BurampOur> also 
8 town in a commanding situation, and the key, 
as it were, of the Deccati ." 

But the letters daily received from Aurelig- 
Z^be, determined Morid-Bakche not to relax 
his exertions, and the wise counsel of the eunuch 
Shah-Abas was rejected. This acute statesman 
had a warm and affectionate heart, and was sin- 
cerely attached to the interests of his master. 
Happy would it have been for the young prince 
if he had listened to his sage advice ; but Morid 
was blinded by an inordinate thirst for dominion : 
his brother's letters were more and more expressive 
of his entire devotedness to his cause^ and he con- 
sidered that^ if left to his own resources, he should 
never be able to realize those schemes of greatness 
that continually haunted his imagination. He 
therefore broke up from his encampment at Ahme^ 
dab^d^ abandoned Guzerat, and made the best of 
his way^ over mountains and through forests^ to 
,ihe rendezvous where Aureng-Z^be had halted 
3ome days in expectation of his arrival. 

The junction of the armies was celebrated by 
great rejoicings and much festivity. The two 
brothers were inseparable, and Aureng-Z^be re- 
newed his professions of unalterable affection and 
his protestations of complete disinterestedness; 
Of the kingdom, he repeated, that he most as* 
suredly entertained no thought ; he had placed 
himself at the head of an army for the sole pur- 
pose of combating Dara, their conmion foe, and of 

Digitized by VjOOQIC 



38 TRAVElfi IN THE 

jseating Hotdtd on the vacant throne. Paring the 
narch df the armies toward the capital^ Amrwg^ 
Z^be spoke in the same tone^ and never cunitted, 
either in private or public, to address his brother 
with the reverence and humility due from a sub- 
ject to his sovereign, calling him Hazeret, king and 
majesty. Strange that MorM shotild never bive 
suspeeted hk honesty of intention, or that the late 
nefarious transactions in Golconda should have 
made so slight an impression on hh mind ! but this 
prince was blinded by a wild ambition for empire* 
and incapable of perceiving that he, who had re- 
cently incurred so much infamy by his attempt to 
usurp a kingdom, could feel little inclination ibr 
the life of a fakir or dervise. 

The combined armies formed an imposing 
force,, and their approach created a great senaa^ 
tion at the seat of government. Nothing could 
exceed the uneasdness of Dara, and Shah-Jehan 
Was appalled at the threatening aspect of afikirs. 
"Wliatever scope he permitted ,to hb imagination, 
he could conceive no event> however momentous 
^nd afflictive, wluch might not be brought to pass 
by the talents of Aureng^ZSbeand the intrepidity, 
of MorM^^Bakche. In vain did he dispatek 
courier after courier announcing his couvaleseenoe, 
said assuring the two brothers that the whole of 
their proceedings should be buried in oblivion if 
they immediately returned to their respective 
^vernments r^^the united armies continued to 
advance, and as the king's malady was really eoBr 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL BMPIRB. 39 

iiderdd tnortal> the princes had recourse to their 
MMl dlslimulatk»i^ affirming that the letters pur^ 
pottkig to bear the kinj^'s sign-manual were sur* 
I'^ptitiood and the invention of Dara ; that the 
M^^igul waJR either dead or on the point of death ; 
iind that if he should happily be alive, they were 
desirous of prostrating themseWes at his feet> and 
delivering him from the thraldom which he Was 
held in by Dara. 

Shah-Jehan's situation was indeed distressing : 
-^afflicted with disease, and almost a prisoner in 
the hands of Dara, who, guided by a furious re-' 
Bentment, breathed nothing but war, and was un* 
Wearied in preparations for conducting it with 
vigour ; — while his other children, regardless of 
repeated injunctions, accelerated their march to- 
ward Agra. Biit what a sad alternative was \^ 
him in this extremity ? his treasures, he Saw, 
must be dissipated, abandoned to his sons, and 
s<]uandered at their pleasure ; he was compelled 
to summon around him his faithful and veteran 
eaptains, who were generally unfavourable to 
Dara, and whom nevertheless he must command 
to elspouse Ins cause, and take the field against the 
other princes, though in his heart the old monarch 
felt more affection for them than for Dara. The 
danger being most pressing on the sidb whence 
Sttltan-^ujah was advancing, an army was imtae* 
dlately i?ent against that prince, while anotheir W&§ 
as^embkd in order to encounter the eombined 
«M^o^ 6f Aureng-Z^ and Morad»Bdkch«t 

Digitized by VjOOQIC 



40 TRAVELS IN THE 

tSoUman-Shekd, Dara's eldest son, wtw tto 
general nominated to the command of the corpa 
sent to oppose Sultan-Sujah*s progress. He wa9 
about five and twenty years of age, of a fine 
person, not without good abilities, generous and 
popular. He was a favourite of Shah-Jehan, from 
whom he had already received great riches, and 
who intended him for his successor in preference 
to Dara. As the Mogul's chief anxiety was to 
nvoid the efiusion of blood in this unnatural 
contest, he appointed an old rajah, named Joy- 
Singh, to be the companion or counsellor of his 
grandson. Joy-Singh is at present one of the rich* 
est rajahs in Hindostan^ and perhaps the ablest 
man in the whole kingdom. The king gave him 
secret instructions to avoid, if possible, coming to 
an engagement, and to leave no method untried 
to induce Sujah to retrace his steps. ** Represent 
to my son," he said, ** that not his duty alone^ but 
also his policy, demand the reservation of his 
strength for a more justifiable and promising 
occasion ; until my malady have terminated in 
death, or at least until the result of the united 
efforts of Aureng-Z6be and MorAd-Bakche shall 
be ascertained." 

But all the efforts of Joy-Singh to prevent a 
battle proved abortive. Soliman-Shekd, on the 
one side, was full of military ardour, and 
ambitious of acquiring a great name ; and, on the 
other, Sultan-Sujah apprehended that if he de- 
layed \m march^ Aureng-ZSbe might overcome 



Digitized by 



GoQgle 



IfOGUL EMPIRE* 41 * 

Dara and gain possession of the two capital cities^, 
Agra and Delhi. Thus the two armies were no 
sooner in sight, than a heavy cannonade com- 
menced; but I need not detain my readers by 
detailing the particulars of this action^ especially 
as I shall have to describe others of greater 
consequence : it is sufficient to state that the onset 
was impetuous on both sides^ and that after a 
warm struggle Sultan-Sujah was obliged to give 
way, and at length to fly in confusion. It 
is certain that if Joy-Singh and his bosom friend 
Debere-Khan, a Patau and an excellent soldier, 
had not purposely held back, the rout of the 
enemy would have been complete, and their 
commander probably made prisoner. But the 
rajah was too prudent to lay his hands on a prince 
of the blood, the son of his master ; and he act0d 
conformably to the Mogul's intentions when he 
afforded .Sultan-Sujah the means of escape. 
Although the loss of the enemy was inconsiderablej 
yet as the field of battle and a f^w pieces of 
artillery remained in Sohm&n-Shek6's possession, 
in was immediately reported at court that he had 
gained a decisive victory. This affair, v^hile it 
raised the reputation of Solim^-Shekd, was in- 
jurious to that of Sultan-Sujah, and the ardour of 
the Persians who favoured his cause was pro* 
portionably abated. 

Soliman-Shekd had been a few days employed 
in the feeble pursuit of Sujah^ when he received 
intelligence of the rapid and resolute march of 



Digitized by 



Google 



At TRAVELS IN tSfi 

AwMg^2^be and Mor&d-Bakche on Agra. Aware 
of hk fatiier's watit of tsonduct and prudence, 
and knowing that he was surrounded by secret 
aifiemies^ he prudently determined to return to 
1^6 capital^ in the neighbourhood of which Dara 
Wouid probably oflfer battle. Every one is of 
opknon that the young prince could not have 
adopted a wiser course ; and that if he could hav^ 
brought up his army in time, Aureng-ZAbe would 
hbve gained no advantage, if indeed he had ventured 
to engage in so unequal a contest* 

Notwithstanding the success which had at*- 
tended the arms of Solimdn-Shek6 at AUahabid^ 
(where the Jumna fells into the Ganges) afikirs 
took a very different turn on the side of Agra^ 
The government were struck with amazement 
whdn they heard that Aureng-Z^be had crossed 
the river at Burampour and forced his way through 
all the difficult passes in the mountains, on [the 
euocessful defence of which every reliance had 
been placed. A body of troops was hastily 
^Bpatched to dispute the pass^e of the river 
Mt Ugein, while the main body of the army was 
pr^ring to move forward. To command this 
body of troops, two of the most skilful, and, in 
point of personal influence, two of the most^w- 
«ftil men, were selected* The name of the one 
was Kasem-Khan, a soldier of first-rate reputation, 
wnperely attached ^o Shah-Jehan, but dislik- 
ing Dara: heassuined the command very reluc- 
*inllf i and only in obedience to the MoguL The 



Digitized by 



Google 



AKKIUL ElfPntB. 4S 

oliier was tiie Rajab /esBwint-^Singli; who in in^r« 
taace and authority yielded not to JaySinglu He 
was son-tn^law of the famous and powerful Rajdb^ 
Rani^ who lived in the reign of Acbar^ and was 
prince of the rs^ahs* 

Dara addressed these two generals in the most 
affeeti^iate terms, and presented them trilii 
costly gifts on their departure with the troops: 
but Shah-Jehan privately suggested the same 
measures of cauti<m and forbearance, which Were 
practised in the case of Sultau-Sujah. The con- 
sequence was that messenger after messenger was 
sent to Aureng^Z^be to beg that he would retire; 
but while there appeared this indecision on one 
side, all was activity and resolution on the other '; 
the messengers never returned, and the enemy 
unexpectedly crowned an eminence at a short dis- 
tance from the river. 

It was summer, and the heat was intense ; the 
river therefore became fordable. Kasem-Khan 
and the rajah prepared for battle on perceiving> as 
they apprehended> a dispositidn on the part al 
Aureng-Z^be to force the river. But in point 4^ 
fact, the whole of his army was not yet c^me up, 
and this was only a feifit ; for he feared that the 
enefi»y's troops might themselves cross the stl:«afff> 
cut him off from the water, attack him befdre^tfafe 
soldiers had reedveted from their fati^e, aftd 
thus prevent him from taking ilp an advantagOMN^ 
position. It appears certain indeed that he WKs 
at this time totally ineapable of opposing any 



Digitized by 



Google 



44 TRAVELS IN THE 

effectual resistance^ and that Kasem-Khan and the 
rajah might have obtained an easy victory. I was 
not present at this rencounter ; but such was the 
opinion entertained by every spectator, especially 
by the French officers in Aureng-Z^be's artillery. 
The two commanders, however, were compelled 
by their secret orders quietly to take a position on 
the banks of the river*, and to content themselves 
with disputing the passage. 

His army having rested two or three days^ 
Aureng-Z^be made the necessary dispositions for 
forcing the passage. Placing his artillery in a 
commanding position, he ordered the troops to 
move forward under cover of its fire. His pro- 
gress was opposed by the cannon of the enemy, and 
the combat was at first maintained with great 
obstinacy. Jesswint-Singh displayed extraordi- 
nary valour, disputing every inch of ground with 
skin and pertinacity. With regard to Kasem- 
Khan, although it cannot be denied that he de- 
iserved the celebrity he had hitherto enjoyed, yet 
upon the present occasion he approved himself 
neither a dexterous general nor a courageous 
soldier : he was even suspected of treachery, and 
of having concealed in the sand, during the 
night that preceded the battle, the greater part 
of his ammunition, a few vollies having left the 
lurmy without powder or balL However this 
jnaybe, the action was well supported and the 
passage vigorously opposed^ The assailants 
♦TheNirbidda. 



Digitized by 



Google 



l^OGUL EMPIRE. 45 

were much incommoded by rocks in the bed of 
the riyer ; and the uncommon height of its banks^ 
in many parts^ rendered it extremely difficult to 
gain a footing on the other side. The impe- 
tuosity of Morftd-Bakche at length overcame every 
impediment ; he reached the opposite bank with 
his corps, and was quickly followed by the re- 
mainder of the army. It was then that Kasem- 
Khan ingloriously fled from the field, leaving 
Jesswint-Singh exposed to the most imminent 
peril. That undaunted rajah was beset on all 
sides by an overwhelming force, and saved only 
by the afiecting devotion of his rajaputs> the far 
greater part of whom died at his feet. Fewer than 
six hundred of these brave men, whose number at 
the commencement of the action amounted to 
nearly eight thousand, survived the carnage of 
that dreadful day. With this faithful remnant 
Jesswint-Singh retired to his own territory, not 
considering it prudent to return to Agra. 

The word rajaputs signifies sons of rajahs. 
These people are educated from one generation 
to another in the profession of arms. Parcels of 
land are assigned to them for their maintenance by 
the rajahs whose subjects they are, on condition 
that they shall appear in the field on the sum-^ 
mons of their chieftain. They might be said 
to form a species of pagan nobility, if the land 
were inalienable and descended to their children. 
From an early age they are accustomed to the 
use of opium^ and I have sometimes been astonished, 



Digitized by 



Google 



40 TAATELS IN THB 

to see the lai^ quantity they swallow* On the 
4ay of hattle they never fail to douUe the dose; 
and thiB drug so animatesj or rather inehnatea 
them^ that they rush into the thickest of the coin- 
hat insensible of danger. If the rajah be bim^ 
self a brave man/ he need never entertain an ap*' 
prehensioa of being deserted by his rajaputs : 
they may want conduct, but their minds are made 
up to die in his presence rather than abandon him 
to his enemies. It is an interesting sight to see 
them on the eve of a battle> with the fumes of 
opium in their heads^ embrace and bid adieu to 
(me another as if certain of death. Who then can 
wonder that the Great Mogul, though a musul^^ 
man, and as such an enemy to heathens, always 
keeps in his service a large retinue of rajahs, 
treating them with the same consideration as the 
Mohammedan omrahs, and appointing them to im** 
portant commands in his armies?* 

I may here relate the ungracious reception 

* The rajaputs of Agimere, inhabiting rugged moun- 
tains and close vallies, are (observes Major Rennell) in 
respect of Hindostan what the Swiss are to Europe; but their 
country is much more extensive and populous. From Mah« 
mud to Aureng-Z^be, the Indian conquerors were contented 
with the nominal subjection of those hardy tribes ; among 
^om, military enthusiasm, grafted on religious principles, 
IB added to strength and agility of body. This race is dis* 
leminated over a tract equal to half the extent of France* 
It goes under the general name of rajaputana, and is the 
origina,l country of the founder of the Mahratta state, whose 
rulers, about the middle of the seventh century, aspired to 
Universal empire in Hindostan ^Trandator. 



Digitized by 



Google 



esperieoced by the vali^qt J'e^awmtHSingk frooi 
Iw wife, the daughter of Rana, When it was 
announced that he was approachiDig with his gah- 
lant band of about fire hundred rajaputs, the 
xpelanchdy remnant of nearly eight thousaiid, at 
the head of whom he bad fought wi^h noble intre«- 
pidity^ quitting the field from necessity^ but not 
with dishonour ; instead [of sending to congratur 
late the gallant soldier oa his escape, and console 
him in his misfortune^ she sternly commanded ihat 
the gates of the castle should be closed agaiMt 
him. *' The man is covered with infamy/' she said^ 
^^ mi he shall not enter within* these waUs. I 
disown him for my husband^ and these eyes eaa 
neyer again behold Jesswint-Singh. No son-in-- 
law of Rana can possess a soul so object. He 
who is allied to his illustrious house must imiti^ 
the virtues of that great man : if he cannot 
vanquish, he should die." The next moment the 
temper of her mind took another turn. ^^ Prepare 
the funeral pile," she exclaimed. '^ The fire ehaU 
cimsume my body. I am deceived; my husband 
is certainly dead; it cannot possibly be otheiv 
wise :'' and then again, transported with rage^ she 
broke into the bitterest reproaches. In this hu- 
mour she continued eight or nine days> refusing 
the whole of that time to see her husband. The 
arriya|i of her mother was attended, however, wiA 
a beneficial effect : she, in some measure, appeased 
and comforted her daughter, by solemnly promise 
iQg,,]n the rajab'3 name, <^at as soon as he should 



Digitized by 



Google 



48 TRAVELS IN THE 

be somewhat recovered from his fatigue, he would 
collect a second army, attack Aureng-Z^be/ and 
fully retrieve his reputation. 

This anecdote may serve as a specimen of 
the spirit which animates the women of this coun- 
try. I might mention several instances of the 
same kind, having seen many wives burn them? 
selves after the death of their husbands : but these 
are details which I reserve for another place ; where 
I shall, at the same time, shew the ascendancy 
which prejudice, hope, the force of opinion^ and the 
principle of honour have over the human mind. 

When Dara was, made acquainted with the 
calamitous events that had occurred at Ugein, 
the violence of his rage would have hurried him 
into a course of the most extravagant conduct, if 
he had not been restrained by the arguments and 
moderation of Shah-Jehan. That Kasem-Khan, 
iiad he been within his reach, would have paid the 
forfeit of his head, can scarcely be doubted ; and 
Emir-Jemla being regarded as the primary and 
principal cause of the present crisis> (since it was 
he who supplied Aureng-ZAbe with troops and 
money), Dara would have killed his son Mahmet 
£mir-^Khan and sent his wife and daughter to the 
bazaar, or market for women of pleasure, had he 
not at length yielded to the suggestions of the 
king, who shewed the extreme improbability of 
the emir's concurrence in the measures of Aureng* 
Z6be. His judgment was too sound, he observed, 
lb allow of his placing his family in jeopardy, for 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 49 

the sake of advancing the interests of a man for^ 
whom he could feel no warmth of friendship. On 
the contrary, it was suflSciently obvious that he, 
had been himself deceived and had fallen into the 
wiles of Aureng-Z^be. 

The invaders, in the mean time, were flushed 
with success, impressed with an idea of their 
invincibility, and persuaded that there was no 
object, however difficult and stupendous, which, 
they might not achieve. Still more to increase 
the confidence of his troops, Aureng-Z6be vaunted 
aloud that in Dara's army there were thirty 
thousand Moguls devoted to his service ; and that 
this was not entirely an empty boast, will soon be 
made apparent. Mor^-Bakche felt impatient of 
delay, and expressed his eagerness to piish 
forward ; but his brother repressed this ardour, 
representing the necessity of some repose on the 
banks of the beautiful Nirbidda, especially as it 
would afford an opportunity for corresponding 
with his friends, and ascertaining the situation of 
affairs. The advance on Agra was therefore slow 
and circumspect, exactly regulated by the in- 
formation daily received. 

Shah-Jehan was now reduced to a state of 
hc^elessness and misery. He saw that his sons 
were not to be turned aside from their deter- 
mination to enter the capital, and viewed with 
dismay the mighty preparation made by Dara for 
a decisive battle. He had a prescience of the 
terrible evils impending over his house, which he 



Digitized by 



Google 



50 TRAVBLS IN THE 

endeavoured by every expedient to avert. He 
was not in a situation^ however^ to renst the wishes 
of Dara, for he still continued to labour under 
the influence of disease^ and was the servant 
rather than th^ sovereign of his eldest son. To 
that son he had long been compelled to resign all 
authority, and the military commanders^ as well 
as the officers of the state^ were instructed to 
yield implicit obedience to the orders of Dara. 
It is not surprising^ therefore, that this prince 
was enabled to assemble a numerous army, 
finer than perhaps had ever trod the plains of 
Hindostan. The lowest calculation makes H 
amount to one hundred thousand horse, twenty 
thousand foot, and eighty pieces of cannon ; besides 
an incredible number of servants, fdllowers, and 
purveyors, so necessary for the support of an 
army in peace as well as in war, aild who, I sus- 
pect, are often included by historians in the num-^ 
ber of combatants, when they speak of imtnense 
armies of three or four hundred thousand meiu 
Unquestionably, that under Dara's command was 
sufficient, in point of physical strength, to over- 
whelm two or three such armies as Aureng-Z£be*£^ 
wfaoite utmost force could not exceed forty thou, 
sand men df all arms, and these harassed and 
nearly worn out by lokig ibarehes under a vertical 
sun. Yet, notwithstanding this disparity of num- 
bers, no one seemed to pieaage success to Dara; 
the only troops on whose fideility he could depisnd 
being with the army under £olim4n-Shekd> and 



Digitized by 



Google 



the princ^al opiiiraba having manifested symptoms 
of disa£(ection to hifif interests. His friends 
therefore^ earnestly recommended him not to 
hazard an engagement. Shah-Jehan was. most 
urgent on this poipt, offering, infirm as h^ was> to 
assume the chief command^ and to be conveyed in 
front of Aureng-Zebe's army. This scheme wa9 
admirably adapted to pre3^rve peace^ and to 
arrest the progress of that haughty prince : 
neither he nor Morad-Bakche would probably have 
felt disposed to fight against their father : or^ if 
they had ventured upon such a step, their ruin 
must have been the consequence ; for Shah-Jehan 
was popular among all the omrabs, and the whole 
army, including the troops under the two brothers, 
was enthusiastically attached to his person. 

Failing in their attempt to prevent an appeal 
to the sword, Dara's friends exhausted every ar- 
gument to dissuade him, at least, from acting 
with precipitancy, and to induce him to delay the 
battle until the arrival of SoUman-Shekd, who 
was hastening to his assistance. This also was 
sound advice, the young prince being generally 
beloved, and returning at the bead of a victorious 
army, composed of soldiers, as I have before 
observed, attached to Dara. But he rejected this^ 
as he had done the former proposition, and re- 
mained inflexible in his resolution to anticipate 
Aureng-Z£be and bring him immediately to 
action. 

If indeed Dara x;ould have commanded fortune. 



Digitized by 



Google 



52 TRAVELS IN THE 

and controlled events^ his own reputation and 
peculiar interest might have been promoted by 
such a procedure. These were the considerations 
that actuated him^ and which he could not 
altogether conceal : — he was master of the king's 
person ; in possession of his treasure^ and enjoying 
undivided authority over the royal armies. 
Sultan-Sujah was already half ruined ; his other 
brothers were come, with a weak and worn out 
army, voluntarily, as it were, to throw themselves 
into his hands. Once defeated, they would have 
no way of escape ; he would then become absolute 
lord, attain the end of his labours, and ascehd the 
throne without competition or diflSculty. If he 
entrusted the management of the campaign to 
his father, an amicable accommodation would take 
place ; his brothers would return quietly to their 
respective provinces ; Shah-Jehan, whose health 
was evidently improving, would resume the reins 
of government, ^nd affairs revert to their former 
state. If, again, he awaited the arrival of his son 
Solimin-Shekd, the king might employ the 
interval in forming some design to his disad- 
vantage, or enter into negociation with Aureng- 
Z^be injurious to his interests; and, admitting 
that after the junction of his son's army, a battle 
wer6 fought and gained, the part whip^he might 
have had in the success of the day would be 
denied him, and the honour of the achievement 
rest with Solim4n-Shek6, whose military re^ 
putation was already known and established 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 53 

Then, who could tell the eflFect which the general 
applause might produce on his youthful and 
ardent mind, countenanced as he would be by his 
grandfather, and many of the chief omrahs? 
There was no saying how boundless his ambition 
might become, or how little it might be restrained 
by the affection and respect he owed to his 
father. 

Such were the reasons which induced Dara to 
turn a deaf ear to the voice of prudence and friend- 
ship. He ordered the whole army to take the 
field, and presented himself before Shah-Jehan, 
then in the fortress of Agra, for the purpose of 
bidding him farewell. As his father embraced 
him, the unhappy old man shed tears; but ad- 
dressing him in a grave and serious tone, he said, 
^' Well, my son, since you will have it your own 
way, may heaven bless your undertaking! but 
remember this, my injunction ; — if the battle be 
lost have a care how you come again into my pre- 
sence !'* Little impressed with these words, Dara 
took a hasty leave of the king, and marched his 
army to the river Chumbul, about twenty leagues 
from Agra, where having fortified himself he 
waited with confidence the arrival of the enemy. 
But the quick-sighted and wily fakir, who was 
every where provided with spies, fully aware of 
the difficulty of passing the river when thus de- 
fended, came indeed, and encamped sufficiently 
near to have his tents descried by Dara, but was 
at the same time intriguing with a rajah of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



54 TRAVELS IN THE 

iame of Chempet, whom he gained over by 
pi^esents and promises, and through whose ter- 
ritory he obtained permission to march his army for 
the purpose of reaching speedily that part of the river 
where it is fordable. Chehipet even undertook to 
be his guide through forests and over mountains 
which perhaps were considered impracticable by 
Dara; and Aureng-Z^be, leaving his tents 
standing to deceive his brother, had crossed with 
his troops to the other side of the Chumbul, almost 
as soon as the enemy was apprized of his de- 
parture,* In this emergency, Dara was compelled 
to abandon his fortifications, and pursue Aureng- 
Z6be, who advanced by rapid strides towards the 
river Jumna, on the banks of which he had time 
to intrench himself, refresh his men, and in his 
tarn, await composedly the approach of the 
enemy. The position chosen by him was five 

* Colonel Dow does not notice the Rajah Chempet ; but 
states that Shaista-Khan, who was third in command in the 
In^perial army, informed Aureng-Z^be, that to attempt forc- 
ing the lines of Dara would be folly, and that the only means 
left him was to leave his camp standing to divert Dara's at- 
tention,and to march through the hills by a bye-road, which two 
chiefs, who were directed to attend him in the evening, would 
point out. The princes closed with the projposal. The 
"guides joined them in the evening, a^d they decamped with 
the greatest silepce, leaving their tents, baggage, and artil- 
lery under alstrong guard, who were to amuse the ene- 
my. The army moved about thirty miles that night ; and the 
next day they were discovered by the scouts of Dara, in full 
march towards Agra. — Translator. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 55 

leagues distaiit from Agra ; the name of the place 
lyjiich was ftmaaerlj called Samonguer^ is now 
Fateabad or the Place of Victory. Dara soon 
cimtie up> and encamped idso near the banks of the 
same river, between Agra and Aureng-Z6be. 

The two armies remained in sight of each 
other three or four .days without coming to an 
engagement. During this interval^ Shah-Jehan 
sent letter upon letter to Dara, apprizing him of 
Solim&n-Shekd's near approach^ and entreating 
him to do nothing rashly or prematurely ; but to 
draw closer to Agra, and select advantageous 
ground whereon to intrench his army until the 
arrival of his son. The only answer returned by 
Dara to these letters was, that three days should 
not elapse ere he brought Atireng-Z6be and Mo- 
Tdd-Bakche, bound hands and feet, to his father,, 
who might pass such judgment upon his rebellious 
sons as to him should seem meet. This answer 
dispatched, he prepared for battle* 

He placed the whole of his cannon in front, 
linked together by chains of iron, in order that no 
space might be left for the entrance of the enemy's 
cavalry. Immediately in the rear of the cannon, 
he ranged a line of light camels, on the fore part 
of whose, bodies small pieces of ordnanee, some- 
«what resembling swivels in our vessels,^ were 
fixed : these the rider could charge and discharge 
at pleasure, without being obliged to Amount.. 
Behind these camels, was posted the most consi- 
derable part of the musketeers. The rest of the 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



66 TRAVELS IN THE 

army consisted principally of cavalry^ armed either 
with sahres^ and those kind of half-pikes used by 
the rajaputs; or with sabres and bows and 
arrows ; which latter weapon is generally used by 
the Moguls, that is, (according to the present 
acceptation of the term Mogul) foreigners whose 
complexions are white, and who profess muhamme- 
danism; such as Persians, Turks^ Arabs, and 
Usbees. 

The army was formed into three divisions. 
The command of the right wing, consisting of 
thirty thousand Moguls, was given to Calil-uUah- 
Khan, and the left wing was entrusted to Rustum- 
Khan-Dakny, a brave and fanioiip captain, con- 
jointly with the Rajahs-Sittersal and Ram-Singh- 
Routl6. Calil-uUah had been made Bakchis, or 
grand master of the horse, in the stead of Da- 
nechmend-Khan (afterward my Aga) who resigned 
that situation because he knew that he had in- 
curred Dara's displeasure by his solicitude to up- 
hold the sole and unshackled authority of Shah- 
Jehan. 

Aureng-Z6be and Morad-Bakche made a near- 
.ly similar disposition of their forces, excepting 
that among the troops of the omrahs, stationed 
on either flank, a few pieces of field artillery were 
intermixed and concealed ; a stratagem invented, 
it is said, by Emir-Jemla, and attended with some 
. success. I am not aware that in this battle re-* 
course was had to any other artifice, unless it 
were that of a certain species of rocket, which was 
thrown, firom various parts of the line, among the 



Digitized by 



Google 






MOGUL EMPIRE. 57 

enemy's cavalry, and which produced the effect 
of terrifying the horses, and sometimes of killing 
the men. 

It cannot be denied that the cavalry of this 
country manoeuvre with much ease, and discharge 
their arrows with astdhishing quickness ; a dra^ 
goon shooting six times before a musketeer can 
fire twice. They also preserve excellent order, 
and keep in a compact body, especially when 
charging the enemy. But, after all, I do not think 
very highly of their proficiency in the art of war, 
as compared with that of Europeans, for reasons 
which I shall mention in another part of this work. 

The preparations I have described being com- 
pleted, the artillery of both armies opened their 
fire, the invariable mode of commencing an en- 
gagement ; and the arrows were already thick in 
the air, when suddenly there fell a shower of rain 
so violent as to interrupt the work of slaughter 
for a while. The weather had no sooner cleared 
than the sound of cannon was again heard, and 
Dara w^s at this lime seen iseated on a beauti&l 
' elephant of Ceylon, issuing his orders for a gene- 
ral onset; and, placing himself at the head of a 
numerous body of horse, advanced boldly toward 
the enemy's cannon. He was received with firm- 
ness, and soon surrounded by heaps of slain. And 
not only the body which he led to the attack, but 
those by which he was followed, were thrown into 
disorder. Still did he retain an admirable calm- 
ness, and evince his immoveable determination not 



Digitized by 



Google 



68 TRAVELS nv THE 

to recede. He was observed on his elephant lodc- 
mg about him with an undaunted air^ and mark- 
ing the progress of the action. The troops were 
animated by his example^ and the fugitives re- 
sumed their ranks ; the charge was repeated, but 
he could not come up to Ihe enemy befwe ano- 
ther volley carried death and dismay amrnig the 
assailanti^ : many took to flight ; but the greater 
part seemed to have imbibed Dara*s spirit, and 
followed their intrepid commander, until the 
cannon were forced, the iron chains disengaged, the 
enemy's camp entered, and the camels and infantry 
put completely to the rout. It was now that the 
cavalry of both armies coming in contact, the 
battle raged with the greatest fierceness. Showers 
of arrows obscured the air, Dara himself emptying 
hia^uiver : these weapons, however, produce, but 
little effect, nine out of ten jflying over the 
soldier's heads, or falling short. The arrows 
discharged, the sword was drawn, and the con- 
tending squadrons fought hand to hand, both 
sides appearing to increase in obstinacy in pro- 
portion as the sword performed its murderous 
work. During the whole of this tremendous 
conflict, Dara laff^rded undeniable proofs of in- 
idncible courage, raising the voice of encourage- 
ment and command, and performing such feats x)f 
valour that he succeeded at length in overthrow- 
ing the enemy's cavalry, and compelling it to fly, 
Aureng-Z6be, who was at no great distance, 
and mounted also on an elephant, endeavoured, 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGXTL EMPIRE. 



as^^i 



but without success^ to retrieve the disasters of 
the day. He attempted to make head against 
tfava with a strong body of his choicest cavalry ; 
but it was likewise driven from the field in 
gi^eat donfnsion. Here I cannot avoid com- 
mending his bravery and resolution. He saw 
that nearly the whole of the army under *Ms 
immediate cdmmafnd was defeated and put to 
flight ; the number which remained unbroken and 
collected about his person not exceeding one 
thousand ; (I have been told it scarcely amounted 
to five hundred) he found that Dara, notwith- 
standing the extreme ruggedness of the ground 
which separated them, evidently intended to 
rush upon his remaining little band ; yet did he 
not betray the slightest symptom of fear, or even 
an inclination to retreat; but calling many of 
his principal officers by name, exclaimed DeliranS/ 
(courage my friends) Koda-hS (God is) ffhat 
hope can we jind in flight ? Know ye not where is 
our Deccan? Koda-hS! Koda-hS!* and then, to 
remove all doubt of his resolution, and to shew 
that he thought of nothing less than a retreat, he 
commanded (strange expedient !) that chains 
should be fastened to the feet of his elephant; a 
command he would undoubtedly have seen 
obeyed, if all those who were about him had 
not given the strongest assurances of their un- 
subdued spirit and Unshaken fidelity. 

• I am repeating his exact words. 



Digitized by 



Google 



60 TRAVELS TN THB 

Ddra all this time meditated an advance upon 
Aureng-Z6be, but was retarded by the diflSculty 
of the ground and by the enemy's cavalry^ which, 
though in disorder, still covered the hills and 
plains that intervened between the two com- 
manders. Certainly he ought to have felt that 
without the destruction or capture of his brother, 
victory would be incomplete ; nor should he haye 
suffered any consideration to move him from his 
purpose of attacking Aureng-Z6be, now that he 
was so clearly incapable of offering effectual 
resistance. He had an easy opportunity to crush 
this formidable rival; but the circumstance I 
am about to relate distracted his attention, and 
saved Aureng-Z6be from the impending danger. 

Dara perceived at this critical moment that 
his left wing was in disorder ; and an aid-de-camp 
bringing him intelligence of the deaths of Rus- 
tum-Khan and Sittersal^ and of the imminent 
peril into which Ram-Singh-Routl6 was placed 
in consequence of having valiantly burst through 
the enemy, by whom he was, however, entirely 
surrounded. Dara abandoned the idea of pushing 
toward Aureng-Zebe, and determined to fly to the 
succour of the left wing. After a great deal of 
hard fighting, Dara's presence turned the tide of 
fortune,and the enemy was driven back at all points ; 
but the rout was not so complete as to leave him 
without occupation. Meanwhile Ram-Singh- 
RoutlS was opposed to Mor&d-Bakche, and per- 
forming prodigies of valour. The rajah wouinded 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 61 

the prince^ and approached so near as to cut 
some of the bands by which the amari was fixed 
upon the elephant^ hoping in that way to bring 
his antagonist to the earth ; but the intrepidity 
and adroitness of Mordd-Bakche did not permit 
him to accomplish his object. Though wounded^ 
and beset on all sides by the rajaputs^ the prince 
disdained to yield : he dealt his blows with terri- 
bFe effect^ throwing at the same time his shield 
over his son, a lad of seven years of age, seated 
at his side; and discharged an arrow with so 
unerring an aim that the rajah fell dead on the 
spot. 

It was not long before Dara was made ac- 
quainted with the serious loss he had sustained ; 
and hearing also that Mor^d-Bakche was hemmed 
in by the rajaputs, rendered furious by the death 
of their master, he determined, notwithstanding 
every obstacle, to advance to the attack of that 
prince ; the only measure by which he could hope 
to repair the error committed in suffering Aureng- 
Zthe to escape : but even this step was rendered 
abortive by an act of treachery, which involved 
Dara in immediate and irretrievable ruin. 

Calil-ullah-Khan, who commanded the right 
wing, consisting of thirty thousand Moguls, a force 
which alone was suflScient to destroy Aureng- 
Zebe's army, kept aloof from the engagement, 
while Dara, at the head of the left wing, fought 
with courage and success. The traitor pretended 



Digitized by 



Google 



62 TRAYSLg IN THE 

iktit his division was designed for a corps of 
reserve, and that he could not, consistently wjiih 
his orders, move one step, or discharge a single 
arrow, until the last extremity : but the bladkest 
perfidy was the cause of his inaction. 

A few years prior to this period, Calil-ullah 
had suffered some indignity at the hands of Dara, 
and he considered the hour arrived when he might 
gratify the resentment which had never ceased to 
rankle in his bosom. His abstinence from all 
share in the battle, did not, however, produce the 
mischief intended, Dara having proved victorious 
without the co-operation of the right wing. The 
traitor, therefore^ had recourse to another ex- 
pedient. He quitted his division^ followed by a 
few persons, and riding with speed towards Dara^ 
precisely at the moment when that prince was 
hastening to assist in the down&l of Morad- 
Bakche, he exclaimed, while yet at some distance, 
'' Mohbarek-bad, Hazaret, Salamet, Elhamd-ul- 
ellah; May you be happy! May your Majesty 
enjoy health and reign in safety ! The victory is 
your own ! But let me ask, why are you stiU 
mounted on this lofty elephant ? Have you not 
been sufficiently exposed to danger? If one of the 
numberless arrows, or balls, which have pierced 
your canopy had touched your person, who can 
imagine the dreadful situation to which we should 
be reduced ? In heaven s name, descend quickly 
and mount your horse ; nothing now remains but 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOeUL EMPIRE. 09^ 

to pursue the fugitives with vigour. I entreat 
your majesty, permit them not to escape." 

Had Dara considered the consequences of quit- 
mg the back of his elephant on which he had dis- 
played so much valour^ and served as a rallying 
point to the army^ he would have become master of 
the empire ; but the crediilous prince, duped by the 
artful ohseqii\iousQes& of Calil-Qllah, listened to his 
advice as though it had been sincere. He de-^ 
scended from the elephant, and mounted his horse ; 
but a quarter of an hour bad not elapsed when^ 
suspecting the imposture, he enquired impatiently 
or Calil-uUah. The villain was not, however^ 
within his reach : he inveighed vehemently against 
that officer, and threatened him with death ; but 
Dara's rage was now impotent, and his menace 
incapable of being executed. The troops having 
missed their prince, a rumour quickly spread that 
he was kiUed, and the army betrayed ; an uni* 
versal panic seized them ; every man thought only 
of his own safety, and how to escape from the re* 
sentment of Aureng-Z6be. In a few minutes Uie 
army seemed disbanded, and (strange and sud- 
den reverse!) the conqueror became the van- 
quished. Aureng-Z£be remained during a quarter 
of an hour steadily on his elephant, and was 
rewarded with the crown of Hindostan: Dara 
left his own elephant a few minutes too soon, and 
was hurled from the pinnacle of glory, to be 
numbered among the most miserable of princes : 
—so short sighted is num, and so mighty are the 



Digitized by 



Google 



64 TRAVELS IN THE 

consequences which sometimes flow from the most 
trivial incident,* v ^ ; 

These immense armies frequently perform 
great feats ; but when thrown into confusion it is 
impossible to restore them to discipline. They 
resemble an impetuous river which has burst its 
banks; and whose waters, unrestrained in their 
course, disperse over the surrounding country, 
while no means can be devised to arrest them in 
their career of desolation. I could never see these 
soldiers, destitute of order, and marching with the 
irregularity of a herd of animals, without reflect- 
ing upon the ease with which five and twenty 
thousand of our veterans from the army in Flan- 
ders, commanded by Prince Condfe or Marshal 
Turenne, \/ould overcome an Indian army, how- 
ever numerous. I am no longer incredulous, 
or even astonished, when I read of the ex- 
ploits of the ten thousand Greeks, or of the 
achievements of the fifty thousand Macedonians 
under Alexander, though opposed to six or 
seven hundred thousand men; if, indeed, it be 
true that the armies of Darius amounted to so 
many, and that the servants, and various other 
persons employed to procure provisions, were not 
comprehended in this number. By receiving the 
onset with their usual steadiness, the French 
troops would throw any Indian army into con- 
sternation; or they might, as Alexander did, 

* See note A at the end of the yolume. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 65 

direct their chief effort to a particular part of the 
line ; and the success attending such a movement 
would fill the enemy with terror, and occasion an 
immediate and general dispersion. 

Aureng-Z^be determined to derive every pos-^ 
sible benefit from this unexpected and almost 
miraculous victory; and^ to insure the attain- 
ment of the sole object of his desire, absolute 
dominion, resorted to every kind of unprincipled 
base intrigue. The perfidious Calil-ullah soon 
appeared in his presence, profferring his submission, 
and the services of whatever portion of the troops 
he might seduce from their first allegiance. The 
prince thanked him, and loaded him with pro- 
mises, but was cautious not to receive him in his 
own name. He accompanied him to Morad- 
Bakche, by whom the traitor was hailed, as may 
easily be imagined, with every profession of kind- 
ness. During this interview Aureng-Z6be ad- 
dressed his brother as the acknowledged sovereign 
of India, observing to Calil-ullah that it was 
Mordd-Bakche alone who was qualified to wear 
the crown, and that the victory was gained only 
by the skilful conduct and irresistible vdour of 
that prince. 

Notwithstanding this semblance of fealty to 
his younger brother, Aureng-Z6be was actively 
employed, day and night, in writing to the om- 
rahs, whom he brought over gradually to his 
party. Shaista-Khan, his uncle, was unwearied 
in promotmg the views of his nephew, and was 

p 



Digitized by 



Google 



60 tRAVns IM TOE 

indeed an inraluable eoadjutor, being active^ in^ 
teiligent, and possessed of extensive influenoe. 
He had the reputation of writing the most in^ 
sinuating letter^ and using the most pervasive 
eloquence, of any man in Hindostan. It is known 
that owmg to some real or imaginary affront 
he greatly disliked Dara» and therefore embra<sed 
this opportunity of contributing to his downfal. 
Aureng-Z^be coneealed under the garb of dis^ 
interestedness and purity of intention> his ragkag 
passion for sovereignty. Every thing that wai 
done^ the negotiations entered into^ and the pro* 
mises made, all was in M orad^Bi^heV name : 
from him every command was to emanate^ and he 
was to be regarded as the d^tined king of India» 
Aureng-Z£be acted only as his lieutenant, as his 
zealous and dutiful subject ; the turmoils of go^ 
vemment were ill suited to the disposition ot hu 
mind ; to live and die a fakir was his firm and in^ 
flexible resolution ! 

As for Dara, he was weighed down with 
despondency and terror. He repaired with all 
diligence to Agra, but did not venture in bis 
father's presence ; for his last injunction still 
sounded in his ear. The old monarch nevertheless 
sent a faithful eunuch to ccmdole with the unhappy 
prince, to assure him of his unalterable aifection, 
and of the grief into which he was plunged by the 
late disaster. '* But,** added the king, " th«re is 
surely no reason for despair while the army uncter 
Soliman-Shekd n&miains imbrc^en. JPor the pre- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 67 

sent, I advise you to take the road to Delhi, where 
you will find a thousand horses in the royal 
stables ; and the governor has my orders to furnish 
you with money and elephants. You should not 
withdraw to a greater distance than prudence 
may demand ; I shall write frequently, and wish 
you to be within easy reach of my letters. I still 
think I possess the means of bringing Aureng- 
Z6be into my power, and of inflicting due chas^ 
tisement upon him.** So utterly cast down, so 
absorbed in sorrow was Dara, that he could frame 
no answer to this affecting communication, or even 
transmit a formal acknowledgment of it to his 
father. He sent several messages to Begum- 
Saheb, and departed at midnight, with his wife, 
daughters, and his son Tipper'-Shek6, accompanied 
by only three or four hundred persons. We shaH 
leave him pursuing his melancholy way to Delhi, 
while we consider the deep policy and consum- 
mate address which marked the conduct of Au- 
reng-ZAbe on his arrival at Agra. 

One of his first measures was to gain over, or 
at least to sow the seeds of disunion, among the 
troops commanded by Solim4n-Shekd, and thus 
destroy Dara*s last hope of retrieving his fortunes. 
He therefore represented to the rajah Joy-Singh 
and to Debere-Khan, the principal oflScers in that 
army, the utter ruin of Dara*s affairs. The 
formidable force on which he founded such con- 
fident hopes of success (observed Aureng-Zlbe) 
after sustaining a total overthrow, had come oyer 



Digitized by 



Google 



68 TRAVELS IN THE 

to his standard. Dara was now a fugitive, un- 
attended by a single regiment, and must soon faU 
into his hands ; and, with respect to Shah-Jehan, 
such was the state of his health, that no expectation 
could be entertained of his surviving many days. 
It was evident that they were engaged in a cause 
which was now desperate, and that a longer 
adherence to Dara's fallen fortune would be the 
extreme of imprudence. He counselled them to 
consult their best interests by joining his army^ 
and bringing with them Solim4n-Shek6, whose 
person they might easily seize. 

Joy-Singh and Debere-Khan hesitated for 
some time as to the line of conduct they should 
pursue. They still feared Shah-Jehan and Dara, 
and dreaded the consequence of laying their hands 
on a prince of the blood ; a violence not likely to 
escape punishment, sooner or later, though that 
punishment should be inflicted by Aureng-Z6be 
himself. They were acquainted too, with the 
high and undaunted spirit of SolimAn-Shek6, and 
could have no doubt that the prince would die 
rather than submit to the loss of liberty. 

It was at length decided by the two generals 
that Joy-Singh should repair to Soliman-Shek6's 
tent, shew him the overtures made by Aureng- 
26be, and disclose frankly the whole state of his 
mind. *' I ought not to disguise from you," he 
told the prince, *' the danger of your situation : 
you can depend neither uponDebere*Khan, Daoud- 
Khan, nor upon any part of the troops ; and, by ad- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 69 

vancing to the relief of your father, you may involve 
yourself in irretrievable ruin. In. this emergency 
you cannot do better than seek refuge .in the 
mountains of Serinagur. The rajah of that 
country will receive you kindly ; his territory is 
inaccessible, and he can be in no dread of Aureng- 
Z^be. While in this secure retreat, you may 
calmly observe the progress of events, and descend 
from your mountains when a favourable occasion 
shall arise." 

The young prince could not fail to under- 
stand from this discourse, that he had lost all 
authority both with Joy-Singh and the troops, 
and that he should endanger the safety of his own 
person if he refused to relinquish the command : 
he yielded therefore to the sad necessity of the 
case^ and proceeded toward the mountains. He 
was attended by a few aflEbctionate friends, 
chiefly Manseb-dars and Siads. The bulk of the 
army remained with the rajah and Debere-Khan, 
who had the baseness to send a body of men to 
plunder the prince's baggage. Among other 
booty, they seized an elephant laden with golden 
rupees. Many of Solim4n-Shek6's attendants, 
discouraged by this disgraceful outrage, deserted 
him, and the peasantry after spoiling them even 
assassinated many of the prince's followers. He 
made his way, however, to Serinagur with his 
wife and family, and was received with the 
honours due to his rank ; the rajah assuring him 
he should be in perfect security wWle in bis 



Digitized by 



Google 



70 TRAVELS IN TEB 

I 

territory, and that he would assist him with all 
his forces. — We must now resume the thread of 
our narrative, as it relates to the occurrences oa 
the side of Agra. 

Three or four days after the hattle of Samoa-, 
geur, the combined princes presented them&dlTra 
before the gate of the dty, in a garden, about a 
league distant from the fortress. They then dit-^ 
patched a message to Shah-Jehan, by an eunuch 
in the confidence of Aureng-Z6be, and possessing 
all his address and deceit. This man saluted the 
aged monarch in the najne of his master, assured 
him of his undiminished respect and affection, and 
expressed his deep sorrow for the events which 
had recently taken place, events attributable to 
the inordinate ambition and sinister designs of 
Dara. He begged leave most sincerely to con- 
gratulate his august parent on the improvement 
which was manifesting itself in the state of his 
health, and declared that he was come to Agra 
only to receive and execute his commands. 

Shah-Jehan affected to approve of his son's 
conduct, and expressed himself satisfied with these 
expressions of allegiance. He was, however, too 
well acquainted with his hypocrisy and love of 
power, to place any confidance in his protesta- 
tions ; yet^ instead of acting with decision^ View- 
ing himself to his people, and assembling his 
omrahs, for which there was still time, he chose 
rather to try his own skill in artifice and dissimu- 
lation with Aureng-Z^be, who surpassed aUmea 



Digitized by 



Google 



uocwL laiPiRs. 71 

m bodi. It is not surprudng, therdbre^ that tht 
£itlier &11 into ihe snare which he had spread for 
his son. He sent a trtisty eunuch to say how 
sensible he was not only of the improper behaviour 
€if Dara^ but also of his incapacity; to remind 
Aureng*2^be of the peculiar tenderness he had 
ever borne him^ and to request he would visit his 
afiectionate father, that such arrangements might 
be concluded as the present distracted state of 
ecffiurs rendered necessary. The cautious prince 
likewise mistrusted the Mogul ; for he knew that 
Begum-Sabeb quitted him neither night nor day ; 
that he was completely under her controul ; that 
she had dictated the message, and that there were 
collected in the lortress several large and robust 
Tartar women, such as are employed in the sera- 
gUo, tox the purpose of falling upon him, with arms 
in their hands, as soon as he entered the fortress. 
Aureng-Z^be would not, therefore, venture within 
its walls ; and though he repeatedly fixed the day 
for obeying his fiather's summoiui, he as often de- 
ferred it to the morrow. Meanwhile, he con- 
tmued his se^et machinatiens, and sounded the 
opinion of the most powerful omrahs, until having 
well d^ested his plans, the public all a* once 
found to their astonishment that his son. Sultan-- 
Mahmud, had taken possession of the fortress. 
This ^iterprising young man having posted a 
number of men in the vicinity, entered the place 
on the plea of visiting the Mogul, with a message 
from Aureng-Z^be, and fell suddenly on the 



Digitized by 



Google 



72 TRAVELS IN THE 

guardi^ stationed at the gate : he was quickly fol- 
lowed by his men, who overcame the unsuspect- 
ing garrison^ and made themselves masters of the 
fortress. 

The dismay of Shah-Jehan will be easily con- 
ceived : he was now in the power of one whose 
imprisonment he had contemplated for a long time. 
It is said that the unhappy monarch sent at once 
a message to Sultan Mahmud promising, on his 
crown and the Koran, to nominate him king pro- 
vided he served him faithfully in this conjuncture. 
.'^ Come to me/* added the Mogul, '^ and lose not 
this opportunity of delivering your grandfather 
from prison ; an act which will obtain for you the 
blessing of heaven, and a glorious name that shall 
never die," 

If Sultan-Mahmud had possessed sufficient 
daring to close with these proposals, it appears ex- 
tremely probable that he might have supplanted 
his father. Shah-Jehan's influence was still power- 
ful, and if he had been permitted to leave the 
citadel, and to assume the personal command of 
the troops, I have reason to believe that they 
would have acknowledged his authority, and the 
leading omrahs remained faithful to his govern- 
ment. 

It is the general opinion that Sultan Mahmud 
committed the same error upon this occasion, as 
his g>lindfather had done after the battle of Sa- 
mongeur* And^ as I am again led to the subject, 
it is fair I should observe that there are several 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 7S 

politidans who contend that^ considering all the 
circumstances of his situation, the aged monarch, 
after the defeat of Dara^ adopted the most pru-» 
dent course in remaining within the fortress, and 
endeavouring to overcome Aureng-Zfebe by strata- 
gem. It is. the vulgar practice, these people say> 
to. judge of the wisdom of every plan according 
to the event by .which it is followed : the worst 
digested r schemes are frequently attended with 
success, and theii they are applauded by all the 
world ; and if, as there was reason to expect, the 
appearance of affection and good will toward 
Aureng-Zfebe, assumed by Shah-Jehan, had en- 
abled him to seize the person of that prince, he 
would be extolled for sagacity and wisdom, as 
much as he is now contemned for being, as is in- 
juriously said, a mere driveller, guided by his 
Begum, a woman whose passions blinded her un- 
derstanding, and whose vanity led her to believe 
that Aureng-Z^be would hasten to visit her ; in 
other words, that the bird would, of his own ac- 
cord, fly into the cage. But to return to Sultan 
Mahmud.— Itis inconceivable, according to the po- 
liticians of this country, that he did not eagerly 
grasp at a sceptre which seemed to fall into his 
hands ; especially when, by thus gratifying his amm 
bition, he would have gained a reputation for ten- 
derness and generosity. By restoring his grand- 
father to freedom, this young prince might have 
become the sovereign arbiter of affairs ; whereas 



Digitized by 



Google 



74 TRATELS IN TBB 

he is now probaUy destined to tenninate Ids ex^ 
iftence in the fortress of Gualior.* 

Few will believe that Sultan Mahmud was re* 
sfoained by a sense of duty to his fietther from ae* 
eeding to the wishes of Shah-Jehan : it is more 
likely that he doubted the sincerity of Ibe king's 
promises, and fek all the danger of disputmg the 
erown with a man endued with the mental en^gy 
and imposing talents of Aureng-Z&be. Whaterer 
were his;motives, he disregarded the offers of the 
unhappy prisoner, and even refused to enter his 
apartments, alleging that he was not authorised to 
visit him, but had received positive orders not 
to return to his father without carrying away with 
him the keys of every gate in die castle, in order 
that Aureng-Zfebe might come in perfect security 
for the purpose of kissing his m^esty's feet. For 
the space of nearly two days, Shah-Jehan could 
not persuade himself to surrender the keys ; but 
observing that his people were gradually de- 
serting him, especially the soldiers stationed at the 
little gate, and that he was no longer safe, he de- 
livered the keys at length into the hands of Sul- 
tan Mahmud, with an injunction to Aureng-Z^be 
to come to him without farther delay, if he were 
wise, as he had secrets <^ the greatest moment to 
disclose. But the fakir's wariness had not for- 

* This prince died in prison in the castle of Gualior in 
the year 1665, ^at is, in the seventh year of Aureng-Z6be's 
reign. — Tramlator. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MQQVh EMPIBE. 75 

»A&i him, and so tax from obeying the injitnetioii^ 
he immediately i^ypoiitted his emiuch EtabirUiaa, 
gorernor of the fortress^ by whose orders l^iah* 
Jehan, Begmn-Saheb, and the whole of the women^ 
were closely confined^ Many gates of tjie castle 
were also walled up, and all intercourse between 
the Mogul and his friends was effectually pre^ 
vented. He was not even permitted to leave 
his apartment without d^e knowledge of the 
governor. 

At this period Aureng-Z£be wrote a letter 
to his father which^befiire he sealed it^ was diewa 
to every body. '' I cannot better explain my con- 
duct/' observed the prince, *' than by stating thi^ 
while you professed extraordinary partiality for 
me, and expressed your dbpleasure at Dara's pro- 
ceedings, I was informed, on indie^table authority* 
that you had sent him two elephants laden with 
gold^i rupees. Thus is he furnished with means 
to collect new armies, and to prolong this dis^ 
asi^ous war ; I therefore put it to your candour 
whether I am not driven by his pertinacity to resort 
to measures which appear harsh and unnatural 2 
Is he not^ properiiy speaking, the cause of your 
imprisonment ? and is it not owing to him that 
I have so long been derived of the pleasure of 
throwing myself at your feet, and discharging ike 
duties, and paying the attentions, you have a 
right to demand from an affecti(mate son ? It only 
remains for me to b^ that you will pardon what 
now seems steaaige in my conduct, and to reccmir 



Digitized by 



Google 



76 TRAVELS IN THE 

mend the exercise of patience under the tem-^ 
porary loss of liberty ; for be assured that, as sood 
as Dara shall be rendered incapable of disturbing 
our repose, I shall fly to the citadel, and with my 
own hands,^ open the doors of your prison.** 

I have been told that Shah-Jehan did, in fact, 
«end the elephants, with the rupees, to Dara, on 
the very night of his departure from Delhi, and 
that it was Rochinara-Begum who communicated 
the information to Aureng-Z6be. That princess 
also apprized him of the presence of the Tartar 
women, by whom it was intended he should be 
assailed, when he entered the castle. It is even 
said that this prince intercepted some letters 
Tvritten by his father to Dara. 

Many intelligent persons, however, deny the 
truth of these allegations, and contend that the 
letter, thus generally exhibited,v was a mere in- 
vention to deceive the public, and to reconcile 
4liem to the outrageous measures of which the 
Mogul's adherents had so much right to complain. 
Be the truth what it may, it is certain that the 
dose confinement of Shah-Jehan seemed the 
signal for nearly the whole body of omrahs to 
pay their court to Aureng-Z6be and MorM- 
Bakche. I can indeed scarcely repress my indig- 
nation when I reflect that there was not a single 
movement, nor even a voice heard, in behalf of 
the aged and injured monarch ; although the 
omrahs who bowed the knee to his oppressors, 
were/ indebted to hinifor their rank and riches^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 77 

having been^ according to the custom of this 
court, raised by Shah-Jehan from a state of the 
lowest indigence, and many of them even re- 
deemed from absolute slavery. A few there 
were, and among them Danechmend-Khan, who 
espoused no party; but, with this small exception, 
every omrah declared in favour of Aureng-ZSbe* . 

It may, however, diminish our censure of this 
ungrateful conduct, if we call to mind that the 
omrahs of Hindostan cannot be proprietors of 
land, or enjoy an independent revenue, like the 
nobility of France, and of other christian states. 
Their income, as I said before, consists exclu* 
sively of pensions which the king grants, or takes 
away, according to his own will and pleasure. 
When deprived of this pension, they sink at once 
into utter insignificance, and find it impossible 
even to borrow the smallest sum. 

The combined princes having thus disposed of 
IShah-Jehan, and received the homage of the 
omrahs, set out in the pursuit of Dara. The 
royal treasury supplied their pecuniary wants, and 
Shaista-Khan, Aureng-Z^be*s uncle, was appointed 
governor of Agra. 

When the day arrived for the departure of the 
army, Mor^d-Bakche's particular friends, and 
among them the eunuch, Shah^Abas^ employed 
every argument to induce him to remain with his 
own troops in the neighbourhood of Agra and 
Delhi. An excess of respect, and too smooth a 
tongue, denoted, they said, a treacherous heart. 



Digitized by 



Google 



7B TRAVELS IN THE 

They represented to him that being king, and 
tmiyersally acknowledged as such, even by 
Anreng-Z^be himself, it was his wisest policy not 
to remove from the neighbourhood of Agra^ or 
Delhi, but to let his I^other go alone in pursuit 
df Dara. Had he been swayed by this prudent 
counsel, Aureng-Z6be would indeed have felt 
greatly embarrassed ; but it made no impression 
upon his mind, and he continued to repose un>- 
reserved confidence in his brother's solemn pro^ 
mises, and in the oaths which they had mutually 
and repeatedly sworn on the Koran. The two 
brothers quitted Agra together, and took the 
road to Delhi* 

When they halted at Muttra, four short jour- 
nies from Agra, M or&d-Bakche's friends, who had 
seen and heard enough to excite their suspicion, 
once more endeavoured to awaken his fears. 
They assured him that Aiireng-Zfebe entertained 
some 6vil design, and that some dreadful plot 
Was certainly in progress. Of this, information 
had reached them from various quarters : he 
must, therefore, absolutely abstain from visitmg 
his brother, at least for that day. Indeed it wa$ 
advisable, they added, to anticipate, without 
delay, the meditated blow ; for which purpose 
the prince need only excuse himself, on the plea 
of indisposition, from visiting Aureng-Z6be, who 
would thus be induced to coine to Mor&d-Bakche 
Attended, as usual, with very few persons. 

But nrither argument nor entreaty could 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMn&Bb 99 

remove the spell by which he appeared bound. 
The feigned and fulsome adulation of Aureng* 
Z&be had indeed enchanted the unhappy prince ; 
and^ notwithstanding the strenuous efforts of his 
friends, he accepted an invitation from his brcH;her 
for supper. The latter expected him, and had 
conc^ted his measures with Mirkhan and three 
or four other of his minions. Mor^-Bakche 
was greeted With even more external courtesy 
and respect than had been usual since Aureng«> 
Z£be had marked him fcur his victim ; tears of joy 
seined to flow, and his brother wiped, with a 
gentle hand, the perspiraticm and dust from th^ 
&ce of the devoted and credulous prince. During 
supper, the utmost good humour and conviviality 
apparently prevailed; the conversation was ear 
livening and incessant, and at the end of the 
repast, a large quantity of the delidous wines of 
Schiraz and Cabul was introduced. Aurengn 
Zthe then rose softly, and with a countenance 
that bean^d affection and delight, said, '^ I need 
not inform your majesty of the serious turn of 
my mind, and that, as a musselman, I feel scruples 
which do notpermitme to indulge in the pleasures 
of the table ; buj/though I deem it my duty to 
retire, yet I leave you in excellent company* 
Itfirkhan, and my other friends, will entertain 
your majesty.'" An extravagant fondness fbr 
wine was among Mordd-Bakche's foibles, and 
upon the present occasion, finding it peculioclj^ 
good, he dtmk to sudi excess that he became 



Digitized by 



Google 



80 TRAVELS IN THE 

intoxkated, and fell into a deep sleep. This was 
precisely the effect which Aureng-Z^be intended 
the wine should produce. His servants were 
ordered to withdraw that their master might not 
be disturbed ; and Mirkhan took away both his 
sword and jemder (poinard). It was not long 
before Aureng-Z^be came to rouse him from this 
disgraceful sleep. He entered the room, and 
pushing the inebriated prince rudely with his feet, 
until he opened his eyes, the arch hypocrite 
uttered his short and insolent reprimand. ^' Oh^ 
shame and infamy t Thou a king, and yet pos- 
sessing so little discretion ? What will the wotld 
now say of thee, and even of me ? Let this 
wretched and drunken man be bound hand and 
foot, and dragged into the closet, there to sleep 
Bway his shame." The command was no sooner 
given than executed ; five or six soldiers rushed 
upon Morid-Bakche, and in spite of his cries and 
Tesistance, fetters and hand-cuffs were applied, 
and he was carried to his place of confinement. 
This violence could not be perpetrated without 
the knowledge, indistinct as it might be, of 
Morid-Bakche's dependents by whom he was at- 
tended; they wished to sound an alarm, and 
attempted to break into the apartment ; but they 
were silenced and over-awed by AUah-Couly, the 
chief officer in M orM-Bakche's artillery, who had 
long been corrupted by the gold of Aureng-Z6be. 
Some agitation soon began, however, to manifest 
itself mnong the troops ; and to prevent the con- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 81 

sequences of any sudden movement^ emissaries 
^ere busily employed during the night in repre- 
senting the occurrences in Aureng-Z6be*s tent, as 
perfectly trifling and unimportant : they were 
present (they pretended) and Mor^d-Bakche 
having drunk to excess, had lost his self pos- 
session, and made use of very intemperate lan- 
guage. There was no acquaintance upon whom 
he had not cast injurious reflections, and he had 
even loaded Aureng-Z^be himself with the foulest 
abuse. In short, he had grown so quarrelsome 
and ungovernable, that it became necessary td 
confine him apart : but in the morning, when 
recovered from his night*fi debauch, he would be 
again set at liberty. In the mean time, large 
bribes and larger promises were given to all the 
superior officers ; the pay of the whole army was 
immediately augmented ; and, as there were few 
who had not long foreseen the downfall of Morid- 
Bakche, it is not surprising that when the day 
dawned scarcely a trace of the late partial com- 
motion existed. Aureng-Zfebe felt that he might 

/venture to shut his brother up in a covered 
amari, a kind of closed house in which women 

^are carried on elephants ; and in this maimer the 
prince was conveyed to Delhi> and incarcerated in 
the citadel of Slinger, which is situated in the 
middle of the river.* 

The army submitted to this new order of 

^ See note B at the end of the voluBoe. 



Digitized by 



Google 



82 TRAYIUUS IN X0K 

thlPgfii vHh tl^ e^qeptiQp of tl)^ eunuch Shah. 
Abas^ .whf) occasioned much trouble. Aureng- 
g^be received the ti;oops, lately under the com- 
94and of IMorftd'-Bal^iche, into his pcirvice ; and 
f^um^d |)ie pursuit of Dara^ who was advancii^ 
with th^ utmo£it expedition on Lahore^ with the 
ifttentiqn ,9f fortifying himself in that city, and 
B^ering it th^ rendf^zvous for his friends and .ad- 
herent?. 5nt h^ Wfts pressed ^ riosely by hi? 
ft^ge^r enemy, that he found it impossible to for- 
4ify that position; he therjefore continued his 
l^treat on the ro^d to Ajtoultan ; but here agajin 
the wgourof hisbi;9th?r> movements disappoipti^ 
any expectation he might h^ve formed of mw^" 
twining >that post. Nothing, indeed, could exceed 
the ardour and activity of Auren^-^^be. Not- 
withstanding ^e great heat of the weather, ^ 
army marched day and night ; and, with a vi^w ,9f 
eneom^ging thc> troo^, be was ofte^ two or thr§,e 
loagues in advaneo^ nearly un^^tended. Nor didhp 
ttm better lha^ ik^ pnv^fs m^n : his meal coipi- 
abted of dry bread and fetid water, and his bfid 
was the bare ground. 

Dara is blamed by the statesman of t^^ 
eountry, &>r not having taken the route to the^ 
kingdom of Cahul^ iffhes he abapdop^d Lah<ffje. 
He was storongly advised to adopt that c^mrse, apd 
his reasons for refusing such s^e couppe} m^^ 
always be enigmatical. The goverpo^r of Cabnl 
was Moh&bet-Khan, one of the most ancient and 
powerful omrahs of Hindostan, who had never 



Digitized by 



Google 



hem on ^ndly terms with Aiireiig-2!^ ; mA 
tbare were assembly m th^t kingdom itbove 
ten thousand troqpg dec^iQ^d to act against the 
Afghans^ the Persians, und the Uabecs. Bara was 
lUBply supplied wkh m(Hiey^ and there x^m be little 
doubt that the military force of that country and 
M^hdhet-Khan himself would willingly faaire 
espoused his cause* It should also be obsenred, 
that in Cabul^ Dara would have been aa the 
borders of Persia and Usbee, from wluch countri<^ 
he might hfive derived considerable support. He 
ought indeed to have recollected how Humaioon 
was restored to his kingdom by the power of his 
Persians, notwithstanding tl^ opposition of Zaher- 
KhaUj King of Patan, by whom he had been 
ajLpelled. But it was generally the fate of Ae 
unhappy Dara to undervalue tile opinbns of the 
wisest counsellors ; and upon this oecasion, iutMd 
q( throwing faimsc^ into Cabul, be propeedad 
towards Sindy, Md sought xefiige in the fortress 
of Tatta ; that strong and oelebratod place situated 
in the middle of the rivfr Indus. 

When Aurei^2i£be knew the point on whiA 
Dara was directing his retreat^ he felt it quite 
wnecessary to continue the pursuit. Havwg 
asQ^t^ined that Cabul was not within the plan of 
)4b brother's operatims^ his mind was rdiaved 
from any serious apprehension ; jnd sending only 
nev^d or eight thousand men un^r the command 
of l^ir-B^^ba^ his foster-brother^ to watch the 
movements of Dara^ he retmced hk steps towards 



Digitized by 



Google 



84 TRAVELS IN THfi 

Agra with the same expedition he had used in 
the pursuit of his brother. His mind, indeed, 
was harassed by fears of what might happen in 
the capital during his absence : some powerful 
rajah, such as Joy-Singh or Jesswint-Singh, would, 
perhaps, he thought, release Shah-Jehan from 
prison; Solim^-Shek6, and the rajah of l^rin- 
agur, might descend as a torrent from their 
mountains ; or, in fine, Sultan-Sujah would now 
probably, venture to approach Agra. — A slight 
incident now occurred, which, as it was occasioned 
by it, may serve to give an idea of Aureng-Zfe^ie's 
precipitate mode of acting. 

While on his return from M oultan, and when 
marching with his accustomed rapidity, he was 
astonished to see the rajah Joy-Singh, at the head 
of four or five thousand well appointed rajaputs, 
advancing towards him. Aureng-Z^be had, as 
usual, preceded his army ; and being aware of the 
rajah's strong attachment to Shah-Jehan, it may 
easily be imagined that he considered his situation 
one of extreme peril. It was natural for him to 
conclude that Joy-Singh would seize upon so 
happy an occasion of at once rescuing his venerated 
sovereign from the iniquitous thraldom under 
which he groaned, and of inflicting condign 
punishment upon the unfeeling son from whom he 
had experienced so much unprovoked outrage 
and cruelty. It is indeed conjectured that the 
rajah undertook this expedition with no other 
design than the capture of Aureng-Z^be, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EHFIRE. 85 

there appears grcnind for the opinion from the 
fact of his having been met on the road leading 
from Lahore to Moultan, when the information 
just before received by the prince left no donbt 
upon his mind that the rajah was still at Delhi ; 
with such astonishing speed had he conducted this 
long march ! But the self-possession of Aureng- ^ 
Z^be and his decision of character carried him 
safely through the impending danger. He be- 
trayed no symptom of agitation or alarm, but 
assuming a countenance expressive of pleasure 
at the sight of Joy-Singh, rode directly toward 
him, making signs with his hand to the rajah to 
hasten his pace, and calling out, '^ Salamet 
Bached Rajagi ! Salamet Bached Baba-gi ! My 
lord rajah ! my lord and father f* When they 
approached, he said : '* Welcome, my lord; 
I cannot describe how impatiently I have wait- 
ed to see you. The war is at an end: Dara 
is ruined and wanders alone. I have sent Mir- 
Baba after the fugitive; he cannot possibly 
escape.'' He then took off his pearl necklace, and, 
as an act of the utmost courtesy and condescen- 
sion, placed it round the neck of Joy-Singh. '^ My 
army is fatigued, I am anxious you should imme- 
diately proceed to Lahore, for I am apprehensive 
of some movement there. I appoint you governor 
of the city, and commit all things to your hands. 
I shall soon join you ; but before we part, I 
cannot avoid returning my thanks for your numner 
of disposing of Solim&n-Shek6. Where have you 



Digitized by 



Google 



left Dfebere^Khatt ? I shuU litow how to puradi 
him^ Hadten to Lahore. SftliEtmet^Bacheilt^ fate^ 
welir 

Dara, when atrived at Tdtta> nominated an 
eumich distinguished for hid intelligence and resou 
Inl^n, governor o{ the fortress, and formed an 
exe<dllent garrison of Patans^ Siaps, Portuguese^ 
Ettg^liih, Fi^eiich, and Germans. These Euro-^ 
pMns were employed in the artillery, and had been 
induced by his magnificent promises to enter into 
the prince's service. In the event of his ascend- 
it/g the throne, it was^ intended to promote tliem 
to the tank of omrahs. Depositing his treasure 
^n Tatta, for he still possessed a large quantity of 
gold and silver, Dara pursued his march without 
delay along the banks of the Indus at the head 
of three thousand men ; and traversing with in^ 
credible speed the territories of the Rajah-Katche 
soon reached the province of Guzerat, and pre« 
sented himself before the gates of Ahmedabftd. 
The governor of the city was Shah-Nawfiz-Khan, 
Aurcng*Zebe's fftther-inJaw, descended from the^ 
andent princes of Mascat, a man of no military re« 
putation, but accomplished, polite, and addicted 
to pleasure. The city of Ahmedab&d contained a 
strong garrison, and was in a condition to oppode 
a vigorous resistance ; but whether from failure of 
courage in the governor, or from his having been 
taken hy surprise, the gates were opened to Dara 
and he was received by Shah^Nawftz vnth every 
mark of honour. It teems indeed that thidman 



Digitized by 



Google 



Was to assidUou» in paying toixttto Dara> tMt lie 
sadceeded in ithpressing his mind with an opihibh 
of his devotedness and esteeth; ahd although 
Wmmed of his treacherous character, the ddltided 
prince had the imprudence to confide in the gbirei'^ 
nor's professions, communicating to him the whole 
of his plans, and shewing him the letters frdih 
the Rajah J^^swint-Singh, and several faithful 
adherents, who were making preparatidns to jditi 
lAta with all the forces they could muster. 

Aureng-ZAbe was equally surprised and pi^ 
plexed when he heard that Dara was master dt 
Ahmedabdd. He knew that his pecuniary re-i 
sources were still considerable^ and he could enter= 
tain no doubt that not only his brother'^ friendi^, 
but malcontents from all parts of Hihdost^n, woUlcl 
fi6ck around his standard. He was not ins^n^ibld 
of the importance of following Dark in person 
and dislodging him from so advant^eoUs a posii- 
tion: but at the s^m6 timd he Saw the danger ot 
itithdrawing so f^r from Agra and Sliah^Jehsin, 
and of marching his army into provindes which 
comprehended the territories of Joy-lSirigh, Jes§- 
wiiit4Singh, and other powerful rajahs. His atteii- 
tion was alsd dii^irat^ted by the rapid advaride ot 
Stdtan Sujah with A powerful army, and by thiEJ 
preparations Which he understood were beting niads 
by Sofixrislft^Shek^, in conjunction with the rajfth 
of Seriiikglir, to take an active part in the war. 
H6"W^^ placed in a critlda) and iiil^icitte situation; 
but hii5 hm tcmt&e, hethbtight, WAS to lekve Dara 



Digitized by 



Google 



88 TRAVELS IN THE 

for the present with Shah-Nawaz, and to march 
toward Sultan Sujah, who had already crossed 
the Ganges at AllahabM. 

Sultan Sujah encamped at a small village 
called Kidgw6» a situation which on account of a 
large talab, or reservoir of water, was judiciously 
chosen. There he determined to await the attack 
of Aureng-Z6be, who, on bringing up his army, 
took up a position on the banks of a small river, 
distant about a league and a half. Between the 
two armies was a spacious plain well adapted for 
them to . engage. Aureng-Z^be felt impatient 
to finish the contest, and on the day after his 
arrival, leaving his baggage on the other side of 
the river, proceeded to the attack. The Emir- 
Jemla joined him on the morning of the action 
with the forces he could collect; the flight of the 
unhappy Dara having released his wife and chil- 
dren from captivity, and his own imprisonment 
being no longer necessary to the promotion of 
Aureng-Z6be's designs. The battle was warmly 
contested, and the eflForts of the assailants were 
almost incredible; but Sultan Sujah maintained 
his ground, repulsing every assault with great 
slaughter, and increasing Aureng-Zebe's embar- 
rassment by steadily adhering to his plan of not 
advancing into the plain. To defend the advan- 
tageous and well fortified position he had selected, 
was for the present his sole object, foreseeing that 
the heat of the weather would very soon compel 
his enemy to retreat to the river, and that it would 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 89 

then be the time to fall with eflfect upon his rear- 
guard. Aureng-Z6be was very sensible of the 
reasons which actuated his brother, and became 
the more intent on pressing forward : But a new 
and unexpected source of uneasiness now presented 
itself. 

He was informed that the Rajah Jesswint- 
Singh, who had, with apparent sincerity, entered 
into terms of amity, had fallen suddenly upon the 
rear guard, routed, and put it to flight, and that 
he was now employed in pillaging the baggage and 
treasure. The news soon spreaid ; and, as is com- 
mon in Asiatic armies, the fears of the soldiers 
multiplied the danger. But Aureng.Z^be did not 
lose his presence of mind, and being aware that 
retreat would be ruinous to his hopes, he deter- 
mined, as on a former occasion, not to recede, but 
await with firmness the progress of events. The 
disorder spread more and more among the troops, 
and Sultan Sujah availing himself of so unlooked 
for an opportunity, commenced a. furious attack. 
An arrow killed the man who guided Aureng- 
Z6be's elephant; the animal became unmanage- 
able, and the danger growing more appalling, the 
king was about to dismount, when Emir-Jerala, 
who was near him, and whose conduct the whole 
of this day excited the admiration of every be- 
holder, ejaculated with a loud voice, Decankou! 
Decankou !'*' and prevented him from accomplish- 
ing his fatal purpose. Aureng-Z6be was now to 

• Where is the Deccan ? 



Digitized by 



Google 



90 tKAVlLS IN TUB 

all uppeardticd tedlieed to the last extremity : Mt 
situation seemed irremediable, and he was evwjr 
dioment expecting to fall into the etlemy's handff; 
Yet such is the caprice of fortune, that he was iti 
a fbw minutes crowned with victory ; and Sult»i 
Sujah was obliged, like Dara at the battle of Sflh 
mpnguer, to fly for his life^ 

Sultan Sujah owed his discomfiture to the 6am6 
trifling circumstance as occasioned the defeat of 
Ufl eldest brother, — that of descending from his 
dephant for the sake of more eiipeditiously fol^^ 
lowing the retreating foe : but it may be doubted 
whether the man by whose advice he aeted was 
influenced by an honest or a perfidious intenfian. 
Allah-verdi-KhaUj one of his principal oMcers^ 
earnestly entreated him to mount a horse, and it 
is remarkable that he made use of language very 
similar to that of Calil*ullah-Khan at the bMtte 
of Samonguer. Joining his hands in the manner 
of fervent entreaty^ he said : *' Why, my prince> 
incn^ unnecessary risk on this esialted elephant t 
do you not see that the enemy is in complete dii^ 
order, and that it Were an unpardonable fault Hbt 
to pursue him with alacrity ? Mount your hori^ 
and you are king of India.'' As in the case dl 
Dara, the sudden disappearance of the prince frdtot 
the view of the whole armyi induced a general ide* 
thtft he WHS either killed or betrayed ; the trMpi 
Ml into disorder, and disfperded, wifthdAt th&ptH^ 
HibiHty of restoring their ranksi 
Jesswint*Singh perceiving the strange turn that the 



Digitized by 



Google 



action hiad tekitk, c6ntented himself with sectirifig 
the ftmts of his plunder, and without loss of time 
rettiimed to Agfa, intending to continue his retreat 
thence to his own dominions. The rumour had 
already reached the capital that Aureng-Z£be had 
Idstthe battle; that he and Bmir-Jfemk Were taketl 
prisoners, and that Sultan Sujah was advancing 
at the head of his victorious army. Shaista-Khan^ 
the governor, so fully believed the report, that 
when he saw Jesswint Singh, of whose treason he 
had been apprized, approach the gate of the city> 
h^ grasped, in his despair, a cup of poison. He 
WdS prevented, however, from swallowing it by 
the promptitude of his women, who threw them- 
selves upon him, and dashed the cup to the 
ground. Two days elapsed before the inhabitants 
of Agra were undeceived ; atid it is not doubted 
that the rajah would have succeeded in releasing 
Shah-Jehan from confinement had he acted with 
vigour and decision ; — had he threatened with bold- 
ness, and promised with liberality : but as he was 
acquainted with the actual state df atfairs, he 
would neither venture to prolong his stay in the 
capital, nor to undertake any daring enterprise : 
he merely marched through the town, and pro- 
ceeded homeward, agreeably to his original inteii- 
tioti. 

Aureng-Z^be was full of inquietude as to 
the probable proceedings of Jesswint-Singh, 
and expected to hear of a revolution at 
Agra. He therefore scawely followed SijltAU 



Digitized by 



Google 



92 TRAVELS IN THB 

Sujah in his retreat^ but directed his rapid 
steps to the capital with the whole of his army. 
He soon learnt^ however^ that the troops whom he 
had just encountered, and who suffered little or no 
diminution of numbers in the late action, were 
daily receiving considerable accession of strength 
from the different rajahs whose territories were 
situated on both sides of the Ganges, and who 
were induced to give their assistance by an opinion 
generally entertained of the sultan's riches and 
liberality. He found also that his brother was 
establishing himself in Allahabad, that important 
and celebrated passage of the river, and justly 
considered the key of Bengal. 

Under these circumstances, it occu!red to 
Aureng-Z&be that he had two persons near him 
very capable of rendering him assistance— his 
eldest son, and Emir-Jemla ; but he knew that 
those who have rendered essential service to their 
prince, often become inflated with the idea that 
no recompense is too great for them. He already 
perceived that Sultan Mahnlud betrayed im- 
patience of paternal control, and was continually 
presuming on the skill and prowess he had displayed 
in the capture of the citadel of Agra, whereby all the 
plans of Shah-Jehan had been baffled. In regard 
to Jemla, the prince fully appreciated his tran- 
scendert talents, his conduct, and his courage ; but 
these very excellencies filled him with apprehension 
and distrust : for the emir's great riches^ and the 
reputatipn he possessed of being the chief adviser 



Digitized by 



Google 



MdGUL EMPIRE. 93 

in all affairs of importance and the most acute 
statesman in India, left no doubt on the mind of 
Aureng-Zfebe that the expectations* of this extra- 
ordinary man were as high as those of Sultan 
Mahmud. 

These considerations would have disconcerted 
an ordinary mind ; but Aureng-Zfebe knew how 
to remove these two personages to a distance 
from the court, with so much address that neither 
the one nor the other felt any cause of complaint. 
He sent them at the head of a powerful army 
against Sultan Sujah, giving the emir to under- 
stand not only that the valuable government of 
Bengal was intended for him during life, but that 
he should be succeeded therein by his son. He 
added that this was but one mark of the sense he 
entertained of his great services : 'when he had 
defeated Sujah he should be created Mir-ul 
omrah; the first and most honourable title in 
Hindostan, signifying Prince of the Omrahs. 

To Sultan Mahmud the king addressed only 
these few words : *' Remember that you are the 
eldest of my children, and that you are going to 
fight your own battles. You have done much ; 
and yet, properly speaking, you cannot be said to 
have done any thing until the projects of Sultan 
Sujah be defeated, and you become master of 
his person: he is the most formidable of our 
adversaries." 

Aureng-Z6be then presented both the emir 
and Sultan Mahmud, with the customary serapaho. 



Digitized by 



Google 



QX rich ye^ia, a few horses and elepliwts>tmp<»rbly 
C9pari99ned, and contrived to retain at court the 
wife of his son (the l^ing of Golconda*s daughter) 
aud Jemla's son Mahmet Emir-Khan ; the former, 
because the presence of so distinguished a woman 
might embarrass the operations of the army ; the 
lMter> because he wfts partial to the youth^ and 
wished to superintend his education : but he 
viewed them doubtless in the light of hostages for 
th^ fidelity of the two commanders. 

Sultfin Sujah was continually in dread that the 
riyahsi of Lower Bengal^ who had reason to com- 
plaiii of his exactions, would be excited to insur- 
rection against his authority. He was, therefore^ 
90 sooper apprijied of these arrangements than hf^^ 
broke up his camp at AUahabid^ and marched t9 
Senares and Patna^ and afterwards to Mongeer^ ^ 
avoall town on the Ganges, commonly called the 
j^ey of Bengal, forming a species of strait betw€ifa;i 
the mountains and a forest which is contiguous to 
the town. He made this movement from an ap- 
prehension that it was meant to cut off his retreats 
and that the emir would cross the river &ti^ 
above or below Allahab&d. Inteciding to mi^e 
a iptand at Mongeer^ he threw up fortifications^ 
and cut a deep trench (which I saw some yeais 
adfterwards) extending from the town and tbe 
river to the mountains. In this strong position 
he resolved to wait the approach of his enemy^ 
and dispute the passage of the Ganges. He was, 
howev^j grei^ly iportifiad when iolormed that 



Digitized by 



Google 



the trppps which were slowly descending the 
hanks of the river, were designed merely for 9 
feint ; that Emir-J^mla was not with them ; hut 
that having gained over the rajahs whose territo- 
ries lay among the mountains on the right of the 
river, he and Sultan Mahmud were marching 
with the utmost speed across those mountains 
toward Raja-M&hil accompanied hy the flower of 
the army, evidently with the object of shutting him 
9Ut from Bengal. He was conatrained, therefore, 
tp 9thandon all the fortifications erected with so 
niuch q^re : yet notwithstanding that his march was 
much lengthened by the necessity of following 
the various sinnations of the Ganges, still he ar- 
4yed at Raja-M&hil some day§ before the emir. 
Time was afforded him to throw up entjrench- 
pents ; because, when the combined conimanders 
pe)i;ceived that Sultan Sujah could not he pr^ 
yented fropx occupying Raja-M^hil, tibey inclined 
gjifi the left tows^rdthe Ganges, through ahnost ini- 
prac^ticable paths^ for the purpose of receiving the 
Iroops, heavy artillery and baggage, wWeh were 
f9nUng down the river. When this phjept was 
(^omplished^ they proceeded tq the attach: pf 
)^^tan Sijjah^ who defended his positipn during 
five or six d^s with considerable success ; but 
perceiving that the ceaseless fire of the epiir's 
^ill.^ry rujlned his fortifiq^ipns, which consisted 
only of mpving earthy sand, and fos^nesyj and thait 
the appro^hing r^ins would render Ins position 
still less tenable, he withdrew under £^VQur of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



96 TRAVELS IN THE 

night, leaving behind him two large pieces of 
ordnance. The fear of some ambuscade deterred 
the enemy from pursuing him that night, and 
before break of day the rain descended so violently 
that no idea could be entertained of quiting Raja- 
Msthil. Happily for Sultan Sujah, the shower 
that fell so opportunely, was the commencement 
of those incessant and heavy rains with which the 
country is visited in the months of July, August, 
September and October. They render the roads 
so difficult that no army can act offensively during 
their prevalence ; and upon the present occasion 
the emir was obliged to put his troops into win- 
ter-quarters at Raja-Mahil ; while Sujah remained 
at liberty to choose the place of his retreat, and to 
reinforce his army. A large number of Portuguese 
came to him from Lower Bengal, bringing with 
them several pieces of cannon. The great fertility 
of the soil attracts many Europeans to this part of 
India, and it was Sultan Sujah's policy to en- 
courage and conciliate the foreigners settled in 
this province. He particularly caressed the Por- 
tuguese missionaries, holding out a prospect of 
future wealth to them all, and promising to build 
churches wheresoever they might desire to have 
them erected. Indeed these people were capable 
of rendering the prince essential service ; the 
Portuguese familiei^ residing in the kingdom of 
Bengal, whether half-cast or European, amount- 
ing to eight or nine thousand, at the lowest 
computation. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE^ 97 

During this interval, there arose a serious dis- 
agreement between Sultan Mahmud and Emir- 
Jemla. The former aspired to the absolute and 
undivided command of the army, and behaved to 
the flatter with studied insolence and contempt. 
He even allowed expressions to escape him that 
denoted a total disregard of the affection and 
respect due to his father ; spoke openly of his 
achievement in the fortress of Agra, and boasted 
that it was to him Aureng-Z^be should feel in- 
debted for his crown. He was at length informed 
of the anger he had excited in his father's breast ; 
and, fearing lest the emir should receive orders to 
seize his person, he withdrew from Raja-M^hil, 
attended by very few followers, and^ retiring 
towards Sultan-Sujah, made that prince a tender 
of his services. But Sujah, suspecting this to be a 
device of Aureng-Zfebe and of Emir-Jemla to 
entrap him, placed no confidence in his splendid 
promises, or in his oaths of undeviating constancy. 
He therefore intrusted him with no command of im- 
portance, andkept aneyeuponhis conduct. Sultan- 
Mahmud was soon disgusted with this treatment, 
and, after the absence of a few months, in despair 
of what might befall him, abandoned his new 
master, and ventured to appear in Jemla's pre- 
sence. The emir received him with some degree 
of courtesy, promising to intercede with Aureng- 
ZSbe in his behalf, and persuade him to pardon 
this great transgression. 

Many persons have told me that all this 



Digitized by 



Google 



98 THAVfiLS IN THE 

strange conduct of Sultan-Ma1|mud^ was planned 
by Aureng-Z6be, who was very wQling to see Ws 
son engage in any enterprise, however hazardous, 
which had for its object the ruin of Sultan Sujah. 
Whatever the event might be, he hoped to gain 
some specious pretext for having Sultan Mahmud 
conveyed to a place of security. Accordingly, 
when informed of his son's return to Raja-M4hil, 
feeling, or feigning to feel, the utmost indig* 
nation, he sent a letter, commanding him in pe- 
remptory terms to repair to Delhi. The unhappy 
prince dared n6t disobey ; but he had scarcely set 
foot on the opposite shore of the Ganges, when a 
company of armed men seized and forced him into 
an amari : he was then conducted to Gualior, in 
which fortress he will probably end his days.* 

Having thus disposed of his eldest son^ 
Aureng-Z^be advised Sultan Mazum not to 
imitate the lofty and unyielding spirit of his 
brother. *' The art of reigning,'* he told him, 
'' is so delicate, that a king's jealousy should be 
awakened by his very shadow. Be wise, or a 
fate similar to that which has befallen your bro^ 
ther awaits you. Indulge not the fatal delusion 
that Aureng-Z^be may be treated by his children 
as was Jehan-Guire by his son Shah-Jehan ; or 
that, like the latter, he will permit the sceptre ^o 
£Eill from his hand." 

Here, however, I may observe that, judging 

* See note C at the end of the volume. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 99 

from the whole tenour of Sultan Mazum's con- 
duct, his father has no reason to suspect him of any 
evil design : the most abject slave cannot be more 
tractable or obsequious; nor is it possible that 
the language and behaviour of the lowest menial 
should discover less of the workings of a discon- 
tented and ambitious mind. Aureng-Z^be never 
appeared more careless of power and dignity, or 
more devoted to the cause of religion and charity. 
There are many shrewd persons, however, who 
believe that the father's character is, in every 
respect, the archetype of the son's, and that the 
heart of Sultan Mazum is set upon sovereign 
authority.* 

The war languished on the side of Bengal. 
Sultan-Sujah resisted, to the best of his ability, 
his skilful opponent, passed, as he judged it expe- 
dient, from one bank of the Ganges to the other, 
and crossed alternately the rivers and canals with 
which this part of the country abounds. Mean- 
while, Aureng-Zfebe remained stationary in the 
neighbourhood of Agra. At length, after having 
moved Mor&d-Bakche to Gualior, he went to 
Delhi, where he began in good earnest and, un- 
disguisedly, to assume all the acts, and exercise all 
the prerogatives,of a legitimate king. His attention 
was principally engaged in the formation of plans 

* Aureng-Z^bey at this time about forty-one years old, 
lived and reigned to the age of ninety, and was succeeded by 
his son. Sultan Mazum, who survived his father only five 
years. — Transl4ii6r. 



Digitized by 



Google 



100 TRAVELS IN THE 

for expelling Dara from Guzerat; an object very 
near his hearty but fgr the reasons already stated, 
difficult of accomplishment. Nevertheless^ his 
extraordinary skilly and continued good fortune 
overcame every impediment. 

Jesswint-Singh was no sooner returned to his 
own country than he employed the treasure plua- 
dered at the battle of Kidgwi in raising a strong 
army. He then informed Dara that he would 
join him, with all his forces, in the road leading to^ 
Agra, on which city he advised him to march 
without delay. The prince had himself contrived 
to assemble a large number of troops, though not 
perhaps of the choicest description ; and being san- 
guine in his expectation that as he approached the 
the capital, accompanied by this distinguished rajah, 
his friends would be encouraged to crowd around 
his standard, he quitted Ahmedabad.and hastened 
to Agimere, a city seven or eight days' journey 
from Agra. But Jesswint-Singh violated his, 
promise. The Rajah Joy-Singh, considering that 
the chances of war were decidedly in favour 
of Aureng-Z^be, and that it was his best policy 
to conciliate that prince, exercised his influence 
with Jesswint-Singh to deter him from espousing 
the cause of Dara. " What can be your induce- 
ment," he wrote to him, ^* to endeavour to sustaiii 
the falling fortunes of this prince ? Perseverance 
in such an undertaking must inevitably bring ruia 
upon you and your family, without advancing the 
interests of the wretched Dara. From Aureng- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE, 101 

Z^be you will never obtain forgiveness. I, who 
am also a rajah, conjure you to spare the blood of 
the rajaputs. Do not buoy yourself up with the 
hope of drawing the other rajahs to your party ; 
for I have means to counteract any such attempt. 
This is a business which concerns every Hindoo, 
and you cannot be permitted to kindle a flame that 
would soon rage throughout the kingdom, and 
)vhich no effort might be able to extinguish. If, on 
the other hand, you leave Dara to his own resources, 
Aureng-Zfebe will bury all the past in oblivion ; 
will not reclaim the money you obtained at KidgwS, 
but will at once nominate you to the government of 
Guzerat. You can easily appreciate the advan- 
tage of ruling a province so contiguous to your 
own territories : there you will remain in perfect 
quiet and security, and I hereby offer you my 
guarantee for the exact fulfilment of all I have 
mentioned.** To be brief, Jesswint-Singh was 
persuaded to remain at home, jvhile Aureng- 
Z^be advanced with the whole of his army on 
Agimere, and encamped within view of Dara. 

Who that reads this history can repress an 
emotion of pity for the misguided and betrayed 
Dara? He now discovered the bad faith of 
Jesswint-Singh; but it was too late to provide 
against its fatal consequences. Willingly would 
he have conducted the army back to Ahmedab^d, 
but how could he hope to effect this desirable 
object in the heat of summer, and during the 
drought that prevails at this season; having a 

• Digitized by Google 



102 TRAVELS IN THE 

march of fire and thirty days to accomplish 
through the territories of rajahs, friends or 
allies of Jesswint-Singh, and closely pressed by 
the eager Aureng-Z^be at the head of a fresh and 
numerous army; *' It is better," he said, *' to die 
at once the death of a soldier; the contest is 
sadly unequal, but on this spot I must conquer or 
perish." He did not, however, comprehend the 
full extent of his danger : treason was lurking 
where he least expected it ; and he continued to con- 
fide in the perfidious Shah-Naw&z-Khan, who kept 
up a regular correspondence with Aureng-Z6be, 
putting him in possession of all Dara's designs. 
As a just retribution for his faithlessness, this 
man was slain in the battle, either by the hand of 
Dara himself, or, as is thought more probable, by 
the swords of persons in Aureng-Z^be's army, 
who, being the secret partisans of Dara, felt 
apprehensive that Shah-Naw&z-Khan would de- 
nounce them, and make mention of the letters 
they had been in the habit of writing to that 
prince. But what now availed the death of the 
traitor ? It was from the first moment of his taking 
possession of Ahmedabad that Dara ought to 
have listened to the sage advice of his best fiiends, 
and treated Shah-Naw^ with the contempt and 
distrust he merited. 

The action commenced between nine and ten 
in the morning. Dara's artillery, which was ad- 
vantageously placed on a small eminence, made 
noise enough; but the pieces, it is supposed. 



Digitized by 



Google 



HOQUL EMPIRE. 103 

were charged only with blank cartridges, so widely 
was the treachery extended. It is unnecessary to 
enter into any particular detail of this battle, if 
battle it should be called ; it was soon a complete 
rout. I shall simply state that the first shot was 
scarcely fired, when Joy-Singh, placing himself 
within sight of Dara, sent an officer to inform him 
that if he wished to avoid capture he must 
instantly quit the field. The poor prince, seized 
with sudden fear and surprise, acted upon this 
advice, and flew with so much precipitation that 
he gave no directions concerning his baggage: 
indeed, considering the critical situation in which 
he was placed, he had reason to congratulate 
himself on being allowed time to secure his wife 
and family. It is certain that he was in the 
power of Joy-Singh, and that it was to his 
forbearance he was indebted for his escape : but 
the rajah, aware of the danger that would attend 
any insult offered to a prince of the blood, has 
upon all occasions shewn respect to every branch 
of the royal family.* 

The miserable and devoted Dara, whose only 
chance of preservation was to regain Ahmedabad, 
was constrained to pass through a long range of 
what might be considered hostile territory, desti- 
tute of tents and baggage. The country between 
Agimeer and AhmedabM consists almost entirely 
of territories belonging to rajahs. The prince 

* Note D at die end of the volume. 



Digitized by 



Google 



104 TRAVELS IN THE 

was accompanied by two thousand men at most ; 
the heat was intolerable ; and the coolies followed 
him day and night, pillaging and assassinating 
so many of his soldiers that it became dangerous 
to separate even a few yards from the main body. 
These coolies are the peasantry of this part of the 
country, and are the greatest robbers, and altoge- 
ther the. most unprincipled people in Hindostan. 
Notwithstanding every obstruction, Dara contrived 
to advance within a day's journey from Ahme< 
dabad, expecting to enter the city on the following 
day, and to assemble an army ; but the hopes of 
the vanquished and unfortunate are seldom 
realized. 

The governor whom he had left in the castle 
of Ahmedabad, alarmed by the menaces, or allured 
by the promises of Aureng-Z^be, had basely 
deserted the cause of his master ; and sent a letter 
to Dara by which he desired him not to advance 
nearer to the.city, whose gates were shut and whose 
inhabitants were armed to oppose his entrance. I 
had now been three days with Dara, whom I met 
on the road by the strangest chance imaginable ; 
and being destitute of any medical attendant, he 
compelled me to accompany him in the capacity of 
physician. The day preceding that on which he 
received the governor's communication, he ex- 
pressed Ms fear lest I should be murdered by the 
coolies, and insisted upon my passing the night 
in his caravansary. The cords of the kanates, or 
screens, which concealed his wife and women, (for 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOQUL EMPIRE. 105 

he was without even a tent) were fastened to the 
wheels of the carriage^ wherein I reposed. This 
may appear almost incredible to those who know 
how extremely jealous the great men of Hindostan 
are of their wives, and I mention the circumstance 
as a proof of the low condition to which the 
fortunes of the prince were reduced. It was at 
break of day that the governor's message was 
delivered, and the shrieks of the females drew 
tears from every eye. We were all overwhelmed 
with confusion and dismay, gazing in speechless 
horror at each other, at a loss what plan to 
recommend, and ignorant of the fate which 
perhaps awaited us from hour to hour. We 
observed Dara stepping out, ipore dead than 
alive, speaking now to one, then to another; 
stopping and consulting even the commonest 
soldier. He saw consternation depicted in every 
countenance, and felt assured that he should be 
left without a single follower ; but what was to 
become of him ? whither must he go ? to delay 
his departure was to accelerate his ruin. 

During the three days that I remained in this 
prince's retinue, we marched, nearly without inter- 
mission, day and night ; and so insupportable was 
the heat, and so suffocating the dust, that of the 
three large oxen of Guzerat which drew my car- 
riage, one had died, another was in a dying state, 
and the third was unable to proceed from fatigue. 
Dara felt anxious to retain me in his service, espe- 
cially as one of his wives had a bad wound in her 



Digitized by 



Google 



106 TRAVELS IN THB 

leg ; yet neither his threats nor entreaties could 
procure for me a single horse, ox, or camel ; so 
totally destitute of power and influence had he 
become I I remained behind^ therefore, because 
of the absolute impossibility of continuing the 
journey, and could not but weep when I beheld the 
prince depart with a force diminished to four or 
five hundred horsemen. There were also a couple 
of elephants laden, it was said, with gold and 
silver. Dara, I understood, intended to take the 
road to Tatta, and under all circumstances this 
was not perhaps an unwise selection. There was 
indeed only a choice of appalling difficulties, and I 
could not cherish the hope that the prince would 
succeed in crossing the sandy desert which sepa- 
I'ated him from Tatta. In fact, nearly the whole 
of the men, and many of the women, did perish f 
some dying of thirst, hunger, or fatigue, wMle 
others were killed by the hands of the merciless 
coolies. Happy would it have been for Dara had 
he not himself survived this perilous march ! but 
he struggled through every obstacle, and reached 
the territory of the Rajah-Kutch. 

The rajah received him with the utmost hos- 
pitality, promising to place the whole of his army 
at Dara's disposal, provided that prince gave his 
daughter in marriage to his son. But the intriguea 
of Joy-Singh were as successful with this rajah 
as they had been with Jesswint-Singh ; a change 
in his conduct was very soon perceptible, and Dara 
havmg reason to apprehend that the barbarian had 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 107 

a design against his life^ departed without a mo- 
ment's hesitation for Tatta. 

0- 

I should, I fear, only tire my readers were I ta 
enter upon a long narration of my own adventures 
with the infamous coolies ; relating how I moved 
their compassion, and hy what means I preserved 
the little money which was ahout my person. I 
made a grand display of my professional skill ; and 
my two servants, who experienced the same terror 
as myself, declared I was the most eminent phy- 
sician in the world, and that Dara's soldiers had 
used me extremely ill, depriving me of every thing 
valuable. It was fortunate for me that we suc- 
ceeded in creating in these people an interest in 
my favour ; for after detaining me seven or eight 
days, they attached a bullock to my carriage, and 
conducted me within view of the towers of Ahme- 
dabM. In this city I |met with an omrah who 
was proceeding to Delhi, and I travelled under 
his protection. On the road our eyes were too 
often offended with the sight of dead men, ele- 
phants, oxen, horses, and camels ; the wrecks of 
poor Dara's army. 

While Dara pursued his dreary way towards 
Tatta, the war was still raging in Bengal; Sul- 
tan Sujah making much greater efforts than had 
been foreseen by his enemies. But the state of 
affairs in this quarter occasioned little inquietude 
to Aureng-Z6be, who knew how to appreciate the 
talents and conduct of Emir Jemla; and the 
distance of Bengal from Agra lessened the imme- 



Digitized by 



Google 



108 TRAVELS IN THE 

diate importance of the military operations in that 
country. A source of much greater anxiety was 
the vicinity of Solimdn-Shek6, and the apprehen- 
sion which seemed generally to prevail that he 
and the Rajah were about to descend with a 
hostile force from the mountains of Serinagur, 
distant scarcely eight days' journey from Agra. 
This enemy Aureng-Zfebe was too prudent to 
despise^ and how to circumvent Solim^-Shekd 
became now the chief object of his attention. 

The most likely method of attaining that ob- 
ject was, he conceived, to negotiate with the 
Rajah of Serinagur, through the medium of Joy- 
Singh : who accordingly wrote to him letter upon 
letter promising the most splendid remuneration if 
he delivered up Solim^n-Shekd, and threatening 
the severest punishment should he refuse to com- 
ply. The rajah answered that the loss of his 
whole territory would affect him less than the idea 
that he had been guilty of so base and ungenerous 
an action. When it became evident that neither 
solicitation nor menace could move the rajah, 
from the path of honour and rectitude, Aureng- 
Zfebe marched his army to the foot of the moun- 
tains of Serinagur, and there employed an im- 
mense number of pioneers in levelling huge rocks 
and widening narrow ways : but the rajah laughed 
at these vain and puerile attempts to gain an 
ingress into his country ; the mountains would 
have been inaccessible though assailed by four 
such kings as Aureng-Zebe ; so that after all this 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 109 

display of impotent resentment, the army was 
withdrawn. 

Meanwhile Dara approached Tatta; and 
when only two or three days' journey from the 
place^ he received intelligence (as I have been 
since informed by Frenchmen aiid other Euro-i 
peans who formed part of the garrison) that Mir- 
Baba^ by whom the fortress had been long besieged, 
had at length reduced it to the last extremity. 
Rice and meat sold for upwards of a crown per 
pound, and other necessaries in the same pro- 
portion. Still the governor continued undaunted; 
making frequent and successful sorties, and in 
every respect approving himself a prudent, brave, 
and faithful soldier ; opposing, with equal calm- 
ness and resolution, the vigorous assaults of Mir- 
Baba, and deriding both the threats and the pro^ 
mises of Aureng-Z^be. 

That such was the praise-worthy conduct 
of the governor I have been well assured by many 
Europeans who were his companions in arms. I 
have heard them say that w^en he received news 
of Dara's approach, he increased his liberal dona- 
tions ; and that the whole garrison would cheer- 
fully have sacrificed themselves in an effort to 
drive the enemy from the walls, and open a 
passage for the entrance of Dara ; so well did 
this valiant commander understand how to gain 
the hearts of his soldiers. He had moreover 
so judiciously managed^ by means of numerous 
and intelligent spies, whom he contrived, by 



Digitized by 



Google 



110 TRAVELS IN THE 

various dexterous schemes^ to introduce in Mir- 
Baba's camp, as to impose upon the besiegers 
a firm belief that Dara was coming up with a for- 
midable body of troops for the purpose of raising 
the siege. These spies pretended they had them- 
selves seen him and his army ; and this stratagem 
produced all the effect which the governor antici- 
pated ; terror seized the enemy's troops, and no 
doubt was entertained that, if Dara had arrived at 
the time he was confidently expected, Mir-Baba's 
army would partly have disbanded, and partly 
joined the prince's party. 

But Dara seemed doomed never to succeed in 
any enterprise. Considering it impossible to raise 
the siege with his handful of men, he was at one 
time resolved to cross the river Indus, and make 
the best of his way to Persia ; although that plan 
would likewise have been attended with nearly in^ 
surmountable obstacles : he would have had to 
traverse the lands of Patans, inconsiderable rajahs 
who acknowledge neither the authority of Persia 
nor of Hindostan ; and a vast wilderness inter- 
posed in which he could not hope to find whole- 
some water. But the Sultana persuaded him 
to abandon the idea of penetrating into that king- 
dom, alleging a much weaker reason than those I 
have mentioned. If he persevered in his intention, 
he must make up his mind, she told him, to see 
both her and his daughter slaves of the Persian 
monarch, an ignominy which no member of his 
family could possibly endure. She and Dara for- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE* 111 

got, or seemed to forget, that the wife of of Hu- 
maioon^ when placed under similar circum" 
stances, was subjected to no such indignity, but 
treated with great respect and kindness.* 

While Dara's mind was in this state of per- 
plexity and indecision, it occurred to him that he 
was at no considerable distance from Jihon-Khan, 
a Patau of some power and note, whose life he had 
been twice the means of preserving, when con- 
demned by Shah-Jehan to be thrown under the 
elephant's feet, as a punishment for various acts of 
rebellion. To Jihon-Khan Dara determined to 
proceed, hoping to obtain, by his means, forces to 
enable him to drive Mir-Baba from the walls of 
Tatta. The plan he now proposed to himself was 
briefly this:— after raising the siege of Tatte 
with the troops supplied by the Patau, he intended 
to proceed, with the treasure deposited in that city, 
to Candahar, whence he might easily reach the 
kingdom of Cabul. When in Cabul he felt quite 
sanguine in the expectation that M ohdbet-Khan 
would zealously and unhesitatingly embrace his 
cause. It was to Dara this officer was indebted 
for the government of that country, and being pos- 
sessed of great power and influence, and very po- 

♦ When Humaioon was driven from his empire by Sheer- 
Khan, he resided with Shah-Tamasp, of Persia, who aided 
him in the recovery of it ; and in the early part of his exile, 
he recovered possession of the provinces beyond the Indus. 

Translator. 



Digitized by 



Google 



112 TRAVELS IN THE 

pular in Cabul, the prince was not unreasonable 
in the hope that he would find in Moh^bet-Khan 
a sincere and efficacious ally. But Dara's family, 
agitated by dismal forebodings, employed every 
entreaty to prevent him from venturing in Jihon- 
Khan's presence. His Sultana, daughter, and son 
Sipper-Shekd, fell at his feet, endeavouring, with 
tears in their eyes, to turn him aside from his 
design. The Patau, they observed, was notori- 
ously a robber and a rebel, and to place confidence 
in such a character was at once to rush headlong 
into destruction. There was no sufficient reason, 
they added, why he should be so pertinaciously bent 
upon raising the siege of Tatta; the road to 
Cabul might be safely pursued without that ope- 
ration, for Mir-Baba would scarcely abandon the 
siege for the sake of interrupting his march. 

Dara, as if hurried away by his evil genius, 
could not perceive the force of these arguments ; 
remarking, what indeed was the truth, that the 
journey to Cabul would be full of difficulty and 
danger ; and that he did not believe it possi- 
ble he should be betrayed by a man bound to him 
by such strong ties of gratitude* He departed, 
notwithstanding every solicitation; and soon af- 
forded an additional and melancholy proof that 
the wicked feel not the weight of obligations when 
their interests demand the sacrifice of the bene^ 
factors. 

Jihon-Khan, who itnagined that Dara was 
attended by a large body of soldiers, received the 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 1 13 

prince with apparent respect and cordiality, quar-' 
tering his men upon the inhabitants, with parti-* 
cular injunctions to supply all their wants, and 
treat them as friends and brethren. But when 
the Patau ascertained that Dora's followers did 
not exceed two or three hundred men, he threw 
off all disguise. It is still doubtful whether 
Jihon-Khan had been tampered with by Aureng* 
Z^be, or whether he were suddenly tempted to the 
commission of this monstrous crime. The sight 
of a few mules laden with the gold, which Dara hiad 
saved from the hands of the robbers, by whom 
he had been constantly harassed, very probably 
excited his cupidity. Be this as it may, the 
Patau having assembled, during the night, a con<- 
isiderable number of armed men, seized this gold, 
together with the women's jewels, and fell upon 
Dara and Sipper-Shekd, killed the persons who 
attempted to defend them, and tied the prince oid 
the back of an elephant. The public executioner 
was ordered to sit behind, for the purpose of cutting 
off his head, upon the first appearance of resistance, 
either on his own part or on that of any of his 
adhierents; and in this degrading posture Dara 
was carried to the army before Tatta, and deli- 
vered into the hands of Mir-Baba. This officer 
then commanded Jihon-Khan to proceed with hits 
prisoner, first to Lahore, and afterwards to Delhi. 
When the unhappy prince was brought to the 
gatcfs of Delhi, it became a question with Aureng- 
2Iibe whether, in conducting him to the fortress of 



Digitized by 



Google 



114 TRAVELS IN THE 

Gualior^ he should be made to pass through the 
capital. It was the opinion of some courtiers tlmt 
this was by all means to be avoided, because not 
<mly would such an exhibition be derogatory to 
the royal family, fc^t it might become the sigaal 
fbf revolt^ and the rescue of Dara might be suc^ 
cessfuUy attempted. Others maintained, cm the 
contrary, that he ought to be seen by the whole 
dty ; that it was neeessary to strike the people 
with terror and astonishment, and to impress tJieir 
minds with an idea of the absolute and irresistiUe 
pow^ of Aureng-Z^be. It was also advisable, 
thky added, to Hudeceive the omrabs and die 
people, who still entertained doubts of Dara^ 
captivity, and to extinguish at once the hopes ^ 
hk secret partisans. Aureng-Zi^e viewed (he 
matter in the same light; the wretched pmonar 
iras there£t)re secured on an elephant ; his aeb, 
(Sipper-Shek6, placed at his side, and behkidtheab 
iMtead of the exe<iUtioner, tvas seated fihAdul>- 
i&ban. This was not one of the mqastic idephaate 
of Pegu or Oeyloo, whidi I>ara had been ki Ae 
hklAt of onountit^, pompously capaarisoned> tt)ie 
harness gilt, and trappings decorated with 
-figured work; and darrying a beautifully fainlied 
<iiBk, inlaid with ^old^ and a magnificent canopy 
to shelter the pi3kioe 'ftom the fiun: Dara was 
now seen seated ^n a miselmUe and Vfon^^ont 
animal, covered vrith filth ; he no longer wore the 
neddace of large pearls which distingmsh the 
princes of Hindostan, nor the rich turban ittid 



Digitized by 



Google 



cabifieSf of cmlipidere^ y^t ; l^e b^^ ]^k spjj ^pirg 
«GW habil^d in dfxtf cloth of ii^ cpape^ textiii:^ 
and hi? sorry poxhq^ wa§ wr^pf; foijii^ lyit^ ;? 
scarf of Kashmire-wool, re^eipljling that ^or^ % 
the meanest of the people. 

Such vas tjie appearance of Para \yhen 1^ 
through the bazaar^ and ^ypry q^^jartef of t]ie 
xjity. I could not d^ye^t iRy^idf of tl^e idea th^ 
some dreadful execution was about to ta]c(& plac^ 
and Iblt surprise that goyprn^eiit ^ould have the 
hardihood to commit all thei^e ipdjgn^t^s upoq ^ 
prince confessedly popular ^n^iong the l^^y^Of 
opsders^ especially as I saw scarcely any arpe^ 
force. The people had for some timp inyeigj^pd 
bitterly against the unnatural conduct of ^li^^g- 
Z^be : the imprisonment of his father^ of his ^oji 
Sultan Mahmud, ^nd of his bro^he^r Mq^44- 
Bakche, filled eyery bospm w,ith If^ifTpi fji^ 
disgust. Thp crowd apgejmWfid upqn ^%}:^}s ,dig- 
^aceful occas^n wa^ immense ; f^ .ey^ry wh^e 
I observed the i^cfple /peeping, ^d lai^fien^^i^g 
the fate of Dairfi in the mpst tq^^g language* 
I took my station in one of Ijie most conspjc^i^qjos 
psifts of the city^ in the midst of this larg^^t 
bazaar; was u^unted on ^ good .horse, aqd 
j^cc^ompani^d by two servfint^ ^nd twp injtimate 
v^ri^ds. From eyery qu§kr;(er ^ l^eard {u^rcing 
.#n4 distressing Jihwk?; xsip^, iVQWPn, and ,chil- 
drien, wailing as if some mighty calamity had hap- 
pened to themselyes. Jihqn-Kh^ rode near tl^e 
wretcdied Bara ; md thie labiwiiye and indignant 



Digitized by 



Google 



116 TRAVELS IN THE 

cries vociferated a6 the traitor moved along, wert 
absolutely deafening. I observed some faldri^ 
iand several poor people throw stones at the infa- 
mous Patau; but not a single movement was 
made with a view of delivering the beloved and 
compassionated prince. When this disgrace&l 
procession had passed through every part of 
Delhi, the poor prisoner was shut up in onex)f his 
own gardens, called Heider-Abad. 

Aureng-Zebe was immediately made acquaint- 
ed with the impression which this spectacle pro- 
duced upon the public mind, the indignation ma- 
nifested by the populace against Jihon-Khan, the 
threats held out to stone the perfidious man, and 
with the fears entertained of a general insurrec- 
tion. A, second council was consequently con- 
vened, and the question discussed, whether it were 
more expedient to conduct Dara to Gualior, 
agreeably to the original intention, or to put him 
to death without further delay. By some it was 
maintained that there was no reason for proceed- 
ing to extremities, and that the prince might 
safely be taken to Gualior, provided he were at- 
tended with a strong escort : Danechmend-Khan, 
although he and Dara had long been on bad terms, 
enforced this opinion with all his powers of argu- 
ment >. but it was ultimately decided that Dare 
should die, and that Sipper-Shek6 should be con- 
fined in Gualior. At this meeting Rochinara- 
Begum betrayed all her enmity against her hap- 
less brother, combatting the argumente of 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 117 

Danechmendy and exciting Aureng-Z6be to tfai^ 
foul and unnatural murder. Her efforts were 
but too successfully seconded by Calil-uUab-Khan 
and Sbaist^-Kban^ both of them old enemies of 
Dara ; and by Takarrub-Khan, a wretched 
parasite recently raised.to the rank of omrah, and 
formerly a physician. He was originally distin- 
guished by the appellation of Hakim-Daoud^ and 
had been compelled to fly from Persia. This 
man rendered himself conspicuous in the council 
by his violent harangue. *' Dara ought not to 
live," he exclaimed ; *' the safety of the state 
depends upon his immediate execution; and I 
feel the less reluctant to recommend his being put 
to deaths because he has abjured his religion^ and 
avowed himself a kafer. If it be sinful to shed 
the blood of such a person, may the sin be visited 
upon my own head !*' an imprecation which was 
not allowed to pass unregarded ; for divine justice 
overtook this man in his career of wickedness : 
he was soon disgraced, declared infamous, and 
sentenced to a miserable death. 

The charge of this atrocious murder was 
entrusted to a slave of the name of Nazir, who 
had been educated by Shah-Jehan, but experienced 
some ill-treatment from Dara. The prince, 
apprehensive that poison would be administered to 
him was employed with Sipper-Sheko in boiling 
lentils, when Nazir and four other ruffians entered 
his apartment ^* My dear son,*' he cried out^ 
** these men are come to murder us !'' He then 



Digitized by 



Google 



118 TkAVEL? IN THE 

seized a small kitblien knife^ the only weapon ih 
his possession. One of the murderiers having 
secured Sipper-Shieko, the rest fell upon Dara^ 
threw him down, arid while (three of the a^sassittfe 
held him, Nazit decapitated his wretched victim. 
The head was instantly carriied to Aureng-Z6b(^, 
who commanded that it should be placed in a 
di^h and thdt water Should be bkioUght. thfe 
blood was thien washed from khe fate, iahd when 
it could ho longier Be doubted that it was indeed 
the head of Dara, he shed tears, ihd said '' Ah 
Bed-bakt ! unhappy man ! hi this shdteking sigfet 
ho more offend my eyes, but takfe away the htead, 
*dM bury it in Hilimiioori's septilchte." 

Data's da^jghteV ^'aS taken that satAe evening to 
the seraglio, but afterwards sent to Shah-Jehflh 
arid Begum-Saileb ; who Bej^gied of Aureng Z^e 
to commit th'e yotthg princtess to their tare* 
0ara's wife, fore^fe^eTng the 'calamities #hfch 
a^iited her "and her htrsfeand, had already put a 
peHod to her existeticfe, by shallowing pfdii^oh 
at Lahore. Sipper-Sftek^ wt^ immured in the 
if6rtresS '6f Ouaitbr ; and sobn ^ft€r these tragical 
'events Jihon-Khan ^as jsulnitioned befcre the 
cbuncil, ^atid then dismisscfd from Delhi with 
a few presents. He did not escape the fate, 
%[oWeVer, wliich lie merited, Keftig wiy-laM atid 
assa(sinated % a forest, within a feW leagues of 
*his own teititory. THis b^rbafrfem had not suflfr- 
ciently teiflected, ^at *fflioufgh tyrants apji^r tb 
cotmtenance the bladkest trrimels while lihey 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL SICPIRB. 119 

conduee to their interest^ or promote a favourite 
object^ they yet hold the perpetrators ia 
abhorrence^ and will not scruple to punish them 
when they can no longer be rendered subservient 
to any iniquitous project. 

In the mean time, the brave governor o£ 
Tatta, was compeUed to surrender the place, an 
Qrder for its immediate surrender, exacted from 
Dara himself, having been sent to the faithful 
euauch ; who insisted, however, on honourable 
terms of capitulation. The perfidious enemy, 
intending to violate every promise, readily 
assented to the conditions proposed, and Mirr 
Baba was admitted into the town. 

The governor proceeded to Lahore, where he 
a|id the feeble remains of his intrepid garrison, 
were miserably slaughtered by Calil-ullahrKbaa> 
who commanded in that city. The reason for thi^ 
atrx)cbus act was, that although the eunuch pro? 
fessed bis intention of visiting the king at Delhi, 
to gratify the desire expressed by Aureng-Z6he 
to Qonverse with so brave a soldier, yet he really 
meditated a rapid march to Serinagur, ' with all 
Ids followers, for the purpose of making oommoa 
cftiise with Solimftn^bek6. Among th^se follow- 
ers, (many of whom were Europeans) he distribur 
ted money with a liberal hand. 

Of Dara's £amily, there now sDemained only 
Solim&n-£hek6, whom it would not have been 
^asyto draw from Serinagur, if the rqofa had 



Digitized by 



Google 



120 TRAVELS IN TH£ 

been faithful to his engagements. But tl^ in- 
trigues of Joy-Singh, the promises and threats of 
Aureng-Z^be^ the death of Dara, and the hostile 
preparations of the neighbouring rajahs^ shook the 
resolution of this pusillanimous protector. Soli- 
m^-Shekdt felt that he was no longer in safety, 
and endeavoured to reach the Great Thibet, 
His rout lay across she most dreary country, 
consisting of nothing but sterile and mountainous 
tracts. He was pursued by the rajah's son, 
overtaken and wounded ; and being conveyed to 
Delhi was shut up in Slinger, the fortress in which 
Mor4d-Bakche was imprisoned. 

Aureng-Zebe acted upon this occasion as he 
had done in the case of Dara. That Solim&n- 
Shek6*s identity might be established^ the king 
commanded that he should be brought into the 
presence of all the courtiers. I could not repress 
my curiosity, and witness the whole of this dismal 
scene. The fetters were taken irom the prince's 
feet before he entered the chamber wherein the 
omrahs were assembled, but the chains which 
were gilt, remained about his hands. Many of 
the courtiers shed tears at the sight of this 
mteresting young man, who was tall and ex- 
tremely handsome. The principal ladies of the 
court had permission to be present, concealed 
behind a lattice work, and were also greatly 
moved. Aureng-Z^be too, affected to deplore 
the fate of his nephew, and spoke to him with 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE, : 121 

apparent kindness* • ^' Be comforted/' the king 
told him ; '' no harm shall befall you. You shall 
be treated with tenderness. God is great, and 
you should put your trust in him. Dara, your 
father, was not permitted to live only because he 
was become a kafer, a man devoid of all religion.*^ 
Whereupon the prince made the salaam, or sign of' 
grateful acknowledgement, lowering his hands to 
the ground, and lifting them, as well as he was 
able, to his head, according to the custom of the 
country. He then told the king, with much self-* 
possession, that if it were intended to give him the 
poust for drink, he begged he might be immediately 
put to death. Aureng-Z^be prcHuised in a solemn 
manner, and in a loud voice, that this drink 
should most certainly not be administered, and 
that his mind might be perfectly easy. The 
prince was then required to make a second salaam ; 
and when a few questions had been put to him, by 
the king's desire, concerning the elephant laden 
with golden rupees, which had been taken from 
him during his retreat to Serinagur, he was taken 
out of the chamber, and conducted on the following 
day to Gualior. 

The poust is nothing but poppy expressed and 
infused into water. This is the potion generally 
given to princes confined in the fortress of Guar 
lior, whose heads the monarch is deterred by pru* 
dential reasons from taking off. A large cup of 
this beverage is brought to them early in the 
morning, and they are not permitted to e^t untiji 



Digitized by 



Google 



122 TRAVELS IN TSX 

it be swallowed. This diuik emaciates the 
wretched victims ; who lose their strength and 
intellect by slow degrees, become torpid and senses 
less, and at length die. It was probably by means 
of the poust, that Sipper-Shek6, Mor&d^Bakche's 
grandchild, and Solim&n*Shek6, were sent out of 
the worlds 

Mor&d-Bakche was put to death in a more 
violent and open manner. Though in prison, he 
was yet very popular, and verses were continu- 
ally composed in praise of his courage and conduct. 
it was essential, according to Aureng-Z^be's po- 
licy, tbat no secret expectation should be enters 
tained of his being alive; which might be the case, 
if he were d^troyed in private by the poust It 
was determined, therefore, that he should undei^ 
a{niblic condemnation, and it was not difficult to 
fykd or invent some charge which night be 
visited as a capital offence against the devoted 
prince. 

At die period when Mor&d-Bakclie was imak^ 
ing extensive peparations for war, in his govem*- 
mentof tGruzemt, he put to death a certain j^iad 
at Ahmed-Ablkd, that he might obtain possession 
of his great wealth. The diildren of the mur- 
dered siad now presented themselves before a &1II 
assembly, <;alling loudly for jvistiee, and demanding 
1^ head of Mordd-Bakche. No omrah would 
venture to reprove or silenoe this procedure ; both 
because the person whose innocent blo^d had been 
«faed was b siad, or desoe&dant of the prophet, to 



Digitized by 



Google 



whbUi ubbounded veneration is doe^ and became 
it could not but be evident to every person ifaifc 
this was a mode desig^ned by tbe king to rid bkn^ 
self of a dangerous rival under the cloak of jus*- 
iice. The demand of the sons was granted, aad 
without tiny other form of process, an order was 
given for the head of the murderer ; with whi^ 
th*y immediately repaired to Gualior. 

There now existed only one taember rf his 
fediily who created anxiety or apprehension in 
th6 mind of Aureng-Z6be> and this was Sultaii 
Sujah. Hitherto he had dfeplayed much resolu- 
ti^ and vigour^ but nc^w felt the necessity of jrield- 
Ing to the power and fortune of his brother. RetA- 
fbrcements continued to be sent to Emir-Jemia^ 
biHil thie pl*ince^ encompassed on all sides> vm!^ 
compelled to fly for his pei^sonal safety to Dacca, 
the last town in Bengal on the sea side. We are 
k)OW come to the conclusion of this k>iig aCid event- 
ftil tragedy. 

The prince being destitute of ships to put to 
sea, and not knowing whither to fly for refuge, 
sent his eldest son. Sultan Banque, to the king of 
Artacto, or Mug, a heathen, to asoertam if he 
"Wottld grant hitai a temporary asylum, and a pas- 
sage to Mokha, when the favourable season alt- 
rived ; it being his wish to proceed thefnce to 
Mecca, and afterward take up his residence in 
Turkey or Persia. The king's answer was in the 
^ffirftiative, tod 'expressed in tbe kindest teDms. 
Sultan Banque returned to Dacca with a hitgd 



Digitized by 



Google 



124 TRAVBLa m the 

miinber of galliasses (a species of galley) planned 
with Europeans^ fugitive Portuguese^ and other 
wandering Christians^ who had entered into the 
king^s service^ and whose chief occupation was to 
ravage this part of Lower BengaL On bpard 
these galliasses. Sultan Sujah embarked with his 
family^ consisting of his wife^ his three sons and 
daughters.* The king of Arracan gave them ^ 
tolerable reception^ and supplied them with every 
necessary of life* Month after month passed ; the 
fevourable monsoon blew ; but no mention was 
made of vessels to convey them to Mokha/ al- 
though Sultan Sujah required them on no other 
terms than the payment of the hire ; for he yet 
wanted not rupees of gold and silver^ or gems. He 
had indeed too great a plenty of them ; his great 

♦ Colonel Dow, speaking of Sultan Sujah's flight from 
Dacca, says, that he directed his march from that town to- 
ward the frontiers of Assim, with fifteen hundred horse ; that 
Jemla was close at his heels; but Sujah. having crossed the 
Baramputre, which, running through the kingdom of Ass&m, 
falls into Bengal, entered the mountains of Rangam^ti. 
Through almost impervious woods, over abrupt rocks, across 
deep vallies and headlong torrents, he continued his flight 
toward Arracan. Having made a circuit of nearly five hun- 
dred miles through the wild mountains of Tippera, he entered 
Arracan with a diminished retinue* 

But, as is well observed by Mr. George Forster, Colonel 
Dow could not have attained the possession of more authen- 
tic documents than Bernier, who was himself brought for- 
ward into the action of the day, and whose writing^, for the 
space of one hundred and forty years, have borne the test of 
truth. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 125 

wealth being probably the cause of, Or at least 
very much contributing to, his ruin. Barbarian^ 
kings are devoid of true generosity^ and little 
restrained by miy promises which they have made. 
Seldom guided by considerations of good faiths 
their present interest is the sole guide of their con- 
duct^ and they appear insensible of the mischief 
which may accrue to themselves from their per- 
fidiousness and cruelty. To escape out of their 
hands^ either you must have nothing to tempt 
their avarice, or you must be possessed of supe* 
rior strength. It was in vain that Sultan Sujah 
evinced the utmost solicitude to depart for Mokha; 
the king turned a deaf ear to his entreaties ; be-^ 
came cool and uncivil^ and reproached the prince 
for not visiting him. I know not whether Sultan 
Sujah considered it beneath his dignity to asso<^i« 
ate with this idolater, or whether he apprehended 
that his person would be seized, and his treasure 
plundered, if he ventured into the palace. Emir« 
Jemla had offered the king, in the name of Aureng- 
ZSbe, large sums of money, and other considerable 
advantages^ on condition of J his delivering up the 
prince. Though Sultan Sujah would not himself 
venture into the royal residence, yet he sent his son^ 
Sultan Banque, who, as he approached the palace^ 
threw a considerable quantity of rupees of gold 
and silver among the people ; and, when he came 
before the king, presented him with various rich 
Inrocades and rare pieces of goldsmith's work, set 
with precious stones of great value; and apolo- 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



I2< T&ATELS IN THB 

ginng for the unaFoidaUe absence of his ffrther^ 
who was indisposed^ entreated the king to pronio 
the vessel so long and so solemnly promised. 

This ¥isit proved as unavailing as every pre* 
ceding effort to induce the barbarian to fulfil 
his engagements ; and to add to the mortification 
and perplexity of the illustrious fugitive^ the king, 
five or six days after this interview, made a formid 
demand of one of his daughters in marriage. 
Sultan Sujah's refusal to accede to this request 
^casperated him to such a degree that the princess 
situation became quite desperate. What tfaeo 
ought he to do? To remain inactive was osij 
quietly to await destruction. The season for de- 
parture was passing away ; it was therefore 
necessary to come to a decision of some kind. He 
meditated, at length, an enterprise which never vrm 
exceeded in extravagance, and which proves tl^ 
hopelessness of llie situation to which he WM 
reduced. 

Although the king of Arracan be a pagan, yet 
there are many Muhammedans mixed with ih^ 
people, who have either chosen to retire among 
them, or have been enslaved by the Portuguese 
before mentioned, in their expeditions to the 
neighbouring coasts. Sultan Sujah secretly gained 
over these men, whom he joined with two or thre^ 
hundred of his own people, the remnant of those 
who followed him from Bengal; and with this 
force resolved to surprise the house <^ the king, 
put his family to &e swwd> and make himself sove- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MO0UL J^MPIRB; 127 

Toign of tke couatry. This bold attempt wliidi 
resemUed more the enterprise of a desperado tbi^ 
that of a prudent man, had nevertheless a oertaifi 
fusibility in it, as I was informed by several 
Muselmaos, Portuguese, and Hollanders, whb 
were then on the spot. But the day before tltie 
blow was to be struck, a discovery was made of the 
design, which altogether ruined the affiurs of 
Sultan &ijah and involved in it^the destructJmi of 
his £unily* 

The prince endeavoured to escape into Pegu ; 
m purpose scarcely poc^sible to be effected, by 
reason of the vast mountains and forests that lay 
in the route ; for there is not now, as formerly, a 
regular road in that direction. He was pursued 
and overtaken, within twenty-four houis after Ids 
fight: he defended himself with an obstinacy 
nf courage sudi as might have been expected, and 
fAe numb^ of barbarians that fell under his 
sword was incredible ; but at length, overpowered 
i^ the increasing host of bis assailants, he was com- 
pelled to give up the unequal combat. Sultan 
JBttique, who had not advanced so feur a5 his 
father, fough^t also like a hero, until covered with 
4he blood of the wounds he received from tl^ 
^atones that had been showered upcm him firom all 
aides, he was seized on, and ccuried away^ with his 
vootfaer, two young brothers, and his siflybers. 

Xo other particulars, on which much depen- 
dence m»y beqpiaced, are known of Sultan Sujafa. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



128 TRAVELS IN THE 

It is said that he reached the summit of the: 
mountain, accompanied by an eunuch^ a woman> 
and two other persons ; that he received a wound 
on the head from a stone^ which brought him to 
the ground; that the eunuch having bound up 
the prince's head with his own turban he aros^ 
again^ and escaped into the woods. 

I have heard three or four totally different ac-^ 
counts of the fate of the prince, from those even 
who were on the spot. Some assured me that he 
was found among the slain, though it was difficult 
to recognise his body ; and I have seen a lettef 
from a person at the head of the Dutch factory, 
mentioning the same thing. Great uncertainty 
prevails, however, upon the subject, which is the 
reason why we have had so many alarming ru« 
mours at Delhi. It was reported, at one time* 
that he was arrived at Masulipatam^ and that the 
kings of Golconda and Visiapour engaged to sup- 
port his cause with ^11^ their forces. It was confi* 
dently said, at another period, that he had passed 
within sight of Surat, with two ships bearing 
red colours, with which he had been presented 
either by the king of PegA or of Siam. Again, we 
were told that the prince was in Persia ; that he 
had been seen in Shiras, and soon afterwards 
in Candahar, ready to invade the kingdom of 
^abul. Aureng-Z^be once observed, perhaps by 
way of joke, that Sultan Sujah was become at 
last an hadji, or pilgrim ; insinuating that he had 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOQUL EMPIRE. 129 

visited Mecca ; ♦ and even at this day, there are a 
great many persons fully persuaded that he is re- 
turned to Persia from Constantinople, having ob- 
tained large supplies of money in that city. But in 
my opinion there never existed ground for any of 
these reports. I attach great importance to the 
letter from the Dutch gentleman, which states 
that the prince was killed in his attempt to 
escape; and an eunuch of Sultan Sujah, with 
whom I travelled from Bengal to Masulipatam, 
and his former commandant of artillery, now in 
the service of the king of Golconda, both assured 
me that their master was dead, although they 
were reluctant to communicate any farther infor- 
mation. The French mei:cbants whom I saw 
at Delhi^ and who came direct from Ispahan, had 
jiever heard a syllable of Sultan Sujah's being in 
Persia. It seems also that his sword and dagger 
were found soon after his defeat : and if he reached 
the woods, as some people pretend, it can scarcely 
be hoped that he escaped ; as it is probable he 
must have fallen into the hands of robbers, or have 
become a prey to. the tigers and elephants which 
very greatly infest the forests of that country. 

But whatever doubts may be entertained of 
.the fate Sultan Sujah, there are none as to the ca- 
tastrophe which befel his family. When brought 
J>ack, men, women, and children, were all thrown 
into prison, and treated with the utmost harshness. 

* Persons who have made the pilgrimage of Mecca are 
termed hadji. — Translator, 

K 



Digitized by 



Google 



130 TRAVELS IN TfflB 

Sometime after, however, ihey were sat at iibertj', 
and used more kindly : the king of Arraean then 
married the eldest princess, and the queen^moiher 
evinced ^ strong desire to he united to SuHm 
Banque, 

Whil^ these events were passing, some sen 
vants of Sultan Banque joined the muhammedaM* 
of whom I have spoken, in a plot similar to 
the last. The indiscreet zeal of one of the oon^ 
spirators, who was prphahly heated with wine^ led 
to the discovery of the design on the day on whieh 
it was to he ^s^ecuted. In regard to this afl&ir^ too* 
I have heard a thousand different tales ; and the 
only fact I can relate with confidence ig, that the 
king felt so exasperated agmnst the family of 
Si^ah, as to give orders for its total extermination. 
Even the princess whom he had himself espoused, 
and who, it is said, was advanced in pregnmcyt 
^ifM aacsificed according to his hrutal mandate. 
Sultoi Banque and his brothers were decapitated 
with blunt axes, and the female members of this 
ilkfkted family were closely confined in thdbnaparfr- 
mexxiBi and tefi to die of hunger.* 

In thidi manner tenmnated the war, whioh the 
lust of domination had kindled among four bro- 
thers. It coi^inued between five and six years ; 
that is to say, from about the year 165S to the 
year 1660 or 1661 ; and it left Aureng-Z^be the 
cmdaiputed master of this m%hty empire. ^ 

* See qote £| at the -^p/^ of the volume* 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL BHPIRB. I3tt 

kEMAltKABLE EVENTS SUBSEQUENT TO ^HEl CIVIL 
WAR. 

The war being ended^ the Tartars of Usbec 
eagorly despatched amhasaador^ to Ai;re^g-» 
Z£be. These people had been witnesses of hiei 
cmiduct and valeiur in jnany battbs, wben in com? 
mand of the corps which ShahTJeban< sent to th^ 
assistance of: the Khanof Samftrcand^ ^ben enr 
gaged in hostilities with the Khan of Ba,lk; and 
thdy had reason to apprehend that Aureng-Z^be 
did not forget the • treachery of whicli they had 
been guilty when he was on thepointofcapturiqg* 
Bdk^ the capital dty dF the enemy* Upon that 
ooeasion^ the two khans made up their diflSsrences^ 
and united in one common efifort to drive him bao}E^ 
kst he should seise upcNQ both their territories^ ia 
the same manner as Acbar had ob^ainiad : ppsses* 
sion of the kingdom: of Kashmire. The Usbec 
Tartars were not ignorant of tibie oecurreuices 
which had taken place in Hindostap* of the victo- 
ries gained by Aureng-Zdbej aad of thie total dis- 
comfiture and death of the other competitors Ich: 
the crown* They were a^ware that although Sh#h- 
Jofaan still livedo yet his son was> in reality, the 
recognised and established king of India. Whether^ 
then, they dreaded his just resentment or hoped, 
in their inbred avarice and sordidness^ to obtain 
some considerable present^ the two khans sent a^m- 
bassadors, with a proffi^r of their sendees, and with 
injunctions to perform the ceretmony of the mo- 
barek : that is, to express in a solemn manner their 



Digitized by 



Google 



132 TRAVELS IN THE 

wishes that his reign might be long and auspicious. 
Aureng-Z6be knew how to estimate an offer of 
service made at the conclusion of a war : he knew 
the fear of punishment, or the expectation of 
advantage had induced the khans to send their 
ambassadors. They were received, however^ 
with due form and politeness, and as I happened 
to be present at the audience, I can relate the 
particulars with accuracy. 

The ambassadors, when at a distance, made 
the salaam, or Indian act of obeisance ; placing 
the hand thrice upon the head, and as often 
dropping it down to the ground. They then 
approached so near that Aureng-Z^be might 
easily have taken the letters from their own 
hands ; but this ceremony was performed by an 
omrah : the letters were received and opened by 
him, and then presented to the king, who, after 
having perused the contents with a grave counte- 
nance, commanded that there should be given. to 
each of the ambassadors a serapah, or vesture 
from head to foot ; namely, a vest of brocade, a 
turban, and a sash of silk in embroidery. This 
done, the presents from the khans were brought 
before the king, consisting of some boxes of the 
choicest lapis-lazuli ; a few long-haired camels; 
several horses of great beauty, although the 
Tartar horses are generally more admired. for 
goodness ; some camel-loads of fresh fruit, 
such as apples, pears, grapes, and melons; 
Usbec being the country which principally 



Digitized by 



Google 



m66ul empire. 139 

{supplies Delhi with these fruits, which are tlierfe 
eaten all the winter, and many loads of dry fruit; 
as Bokaria plums, apricots, kichmiches, or gi'ape 
apparently without stones, and two other kinds 
of grape, black and white, extremely large and 
delicious. 

Aureng-Z6be expressed himself well pleased 
with the liberality of the khans; extoUmg in ex- 
aggerated strains the beauty and rareness of the 
fruits, horses, and camels ; and when he had 
spoken a few words on the fertility of their coun- 
try, and asked two or three questions concerning 
the academy at Samarcand, he desired the ambas- 
sadors to go and repose themselves, intimating^ 
t hat he should be happy to see them often. 

They came away from the audience delighted 
with their reception, without any feeling of mor- 
tification on account of the Indian salam, which 
certainly savours of servility, and not at all dis- 
pleased that the king had refused to receive the 
letters from their own hands. If they had been 
required to kiss the ground, or to perform any 
act of still deeper humiliation, I verily believe 
they would have complied without a murmur. 
It should indeed be observed that it would Lave 
been unreasonable to insist upon saluting Aureng- 
Z6be according to the custom of their own 
country, or to expect that the letters would be 
delivered without the intervention of an omrah : 
these privileges belong exclusively to Persian 



Digitized by 



Google 



134 yjElAVELS JN THE 

ambassadors ; nor are they granted>eyen tothem^ 
without nmch hesitation and di£Sculty* 

These people remained more than four months 
at Delhii notwithstanding all their endeayours to 
obtain their dismission. This long detention proved 
extremely injurious to their health ; they and 
their 6uit sickenedj andj many of them died. It 
is doubtful wheth^ they suffered more from the 
iieat of the weather^ to which they are unac- 
isustomed> or from the filthiness of their perscma, 
and the insufficiency of their diet. There aare 
probably no people more narrow-minded^ sordid 
4>r uncleraly^ than the Usbec Tartars. The 
individuats who composed this embassy hoarded 
the money allowed them by Aureng-Z&be for 
their expences, wbA lived /on a miserable pittance, 
in a style quite unsiutaUe to their station. Yet 
they were dismissed with great form and parade. 
The kii^, in the presence t>f aU his omrdbs^ 
invested each of them with two rich serapahs^ and 
commanded that eight thousand rupees shoqld 
be carried to their respective houses. He also 
sent by them^ as presents to the two khsms> 
their masters, very handsome serapahs^ a large 
number of the richest and most exquisitely 
wrought brocades^ a quantity of fine lineds^ ala- 
chas, ^or silk stuffs interwoven with gold and 
silver, a few caipets, and two poinards set with 
precious stones. 

During their stay I paid them three visiti^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRB. 135 

bayii^been introduced as a physiciaa by one of my 
friends^ the son of an Usbec^ who has amassed a 
fiurtune at this court. It was my design to col- 
lect such useM particulars concerning theii^ coun- 
try as they might be able to supply/ but I found 
them ignorant beyond all conception. They were 
tmacquainted even with the boundaries of UsbeCi 
and could give no information respecting the Tar^ 
tars who a few years ago subjugated China. Ill 
Aott I could elicit by my conversation with th^ 
ambassadors scarcely one new fact Once I was 
desirous, of dining with them^ and as they werd 
persons of rery little ceremony, I did* not find it 
diffi(^t to be admitted at their tables The me^l 
appeared to me very strange % it consisted 6nly of 
horse-fiesh. I dotitrived^ however, to dine. Thercr 
Uras a ragout which I thought eatable, and i 
should have considered myself guilty of a breach 
of good manners if I had not praised a dish so 
pleai^ng to their palate. Not a word \tas uttered 
during dimier; my elegant hosts were fully em- 
ployed ki cramming their mouths with as much 
ii^se-flesh as they eould contain ; fdr with the m6 
of spoOns' these people are uiiacqudnted. But 
#hen their stomachs were sated with the dainty 
repast, they recovered their speech, and would 
^n hate persuaded me that the Usbecs surpass 
all other mm in bodily strength, and that tio 
naition equals them in the dexterous m^n&^e<- 
meat of the bow. This observation was no soonest 
made tihan they called for bows and arrows, whldh 
were of a much larger size than those of Wiir 



Digitized by 



Google 



136 TRAVELS IN THE 

dost&n, and 6flfered to lay a wager thai the^ wouldl 
pietce an ox or a horse> through and throu^} 
They proceeded to extolthe strength and valour 
of their country-women, in comparison with whbm' 
the Amazons Were soft and timorous. The tales 
they related of female feats were endless: on0 
especially excited my wonder and admiration, and 
I only regret that I cannot recite it with genuine 
Tartar eloquence. It seems that when Aureng- 
Z6be was prosecuting the. war in their country, a 
party of five and twenty or thirty horsemen entered 
a small village ; and while employed in pillaging 
the houses, and binding the inhabitants whom 
they intended to carry away as slaves, an old 
woman said to them : *' Children, listen to my 
counsel, and cease to act in this mischievous man- 
ner. My daughter happens just iiow to be absents 
but she will soon return. Withdraw from this 
place, if you are prudent ; jshould she light upon 
you, you are undone." They made contemptuous 
sport of the good lady, continuing to plunder the 
property, and to secure the persons of individuals, 
until having fully laden their beasts, they quitted the 
village, taking with them many of the inhabitants 
and the old woman herself. They had not gone 
half a league, however, before the aged mother, 
who never ceased to look behind, cried out in an 
extasy of joy. My daughter ! my daughter ! Her 
person was indeed hid from view ; but the extra- 
ordinary clouds of dust, and the loud trampling of 
the horse, left no doubt on the mind of the anxious 
j)ar^nt, that her heroic child was at hand to rescue 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 137 

)ier and her friends from th^ power of their cruel 
eti^^mies. Presently the maid was seen mounted 
on a fiery steed, a bow and quiver hanging at her 
side ; and, while yet at a considerable distance, 
she cried out that she was still willing to spare 
their lives, on condition that they restored the 
plunder, released their captives> and retired peace- 
ably to their own country. The Indians turned 
as deaf an ear to the words of the young heroine 
as to the entreaties of her aged parent ; but were 
astonished when they saw her, in a moment let 
fly three or four arrows, which brought to the 
ground the same number of men. They had in- 
stant recourse to their own bows, but the damsel 
was much beyond the reach of their arrows, and 
laughed at such impotent efforts to avenge the 
death of their companions. . She continued toper- 
form dreadful execution among them, with an 
accuracy of aim, and strength of arm, that seemed 
quite marvellous to the affrighted Indians ; until 
having killed half of their number with arrows, she 
fell sword in hand upon the remainder, and cut 
them in pieces. 

The ambassadors from Tartary were still in 
Delhi, when Aureng-Z^be was seized with a 
dangerous illness.* He was frequently delirious 
jfrom the violence of the fever, and his tongue be- 

* On the 25th of'May, 1664, Aureng-Z6be fell into a 
ferer. His distemper was so violent that he was almost 
deprived of his reason. His tongue was seized with a paUjr, 
and he lost his speech*— Doto. 



Digitized by 



Google 



138 TRAV£L3 IM THE 

isame so palsidd that he could ncaroely i^rticuliitei 
The physicians despaired of his reeoTery, and it 
Was generally believed he was dead^ though the 
event was concealed by Rochinaf a^Begum fixMS 
interested motives* It was ev^ rumoured that the 
Rajah Jesswint-Singh, governor of Gweerat^ was 
ndvanckig to release Shah-Jehan from captiidty ; 
that Mohl^bet-Khan^ who had at length acknow*^ 
ledged Aureng-Z^be's authority^ had quitted the 
government of Cabul^ passed already through 
Lahore, and was rapidly marching on Agra> at the 
head of three or ibur thousand horse^ with the 
wme design as Jesswint-Singh; and that <he 
eunuch Etab^-Khan, under whose custody the 
aged monarch was placed, felt impatient for the 
honour of opening the docwr of his prison. ' 

On the one hand. Sultan Mausukn^ intrigu^ 
with the omrahs, and endeavoured by bribes and 
promises to attach them to his interest. He even 
went one night in disguise to the Ra[|ah Joy-^Stngfa, 
tod entreated him, in the most respectftd and 
humble language, to declare in his favour. On 
the other hand, a party formed by tloehinara- 
Begum was supported by several omrahs^ and 
Feday-Khan, grand master of the artillery, in 
behalf of the young prince Sultan Acbar, Aurelig*- 
Z^be's third son, a boy only seven or eight years 
of age. 

It was pretended by both these parties, anjl 
believed by the people, that the sole object they 
had in view was to set Shah-Jehan at liberty ; but 



Digitized by 



Google 



: MOGUIi EMPtRE. 139 

this Wds merely for the sake of gaining popularity, 
and to save appearances^ in case he should be 
Hberated by Etabir, or by means of any secret 
intrigues on the part of other grandees. Th^e 
was in fact scarcely a person of rank or influence 
who entertained the wish of seeing Shah-Jehan 
xestored to the throne. With the exception, 
perhaps, of Jesswint^Singh, Moh&bet-Khan, and a 
isW others who had hitherto refrained from act- 
ing, flag^rantly against him, there was no omrah 
who had not basely abandoned the cause of 
the legitimate monarchy and taken an active 
jpart in favour of Aureng*-Z6be. They were aware 
that to open his prison door would be to unchain 
an enraged lion. The possibility of such an 
^vent appalled the courtiers^ and no one dreaded 
it more than Etab4r, who had behaved to his 
wretdied victim with unnecessary rudeness and 
severity. t 

But Aureng^Zebe, notwithstanding his serious 
indisposition, continued to. occupy his mind witib 
the affdrs of government^ and the safe custody of 
jiis Irther. He eamestiy advised Sultan Mawum, 
in the .event of his deaths to release 4he king from 
confinement; but he was constantly dictating 
letters to Etabir, urging hini to the, £Mthful 
and r^id disehadrgeof his duty ;: »Bd on the. fifth 
Any cf 4ns; illness; during thei crisis .ofihe -^orderi 
he caused himself to be carried into the assembly 
0f die omrahs for the purpose of undeceiving thos» 
wlian%fat believe he was dead, and of preventing 



Digitized by 



Google 



140 TRAVELS IN T&E 

« public tumult, or any accident by which Shalt- 
Jehan might effect his escape. The same reasons 
induced him to visit that assembly on the seventh^ 
ninth, and tenth days ; and, what appears almost 
incredible^ on the thirteenth day, when scarcely 
recovered from a swoon so deep and long that 
his death was generally reported, he sent for the 
Rajah Joy-Singh, and two or three of the prin- 
tjipal omrahs, for the purpose of verifying his 
existence. He then desired the attendants to 
raise him in the bed ; called for paper and ink 
that he might write to Etabir, and despatched a 
messenger for the great seal, which was placed 
under Rochinara-Begum's care, enclosed in a 
small bag, and impressed with a seal which he 
always kept fastened to his arm. Of course, he 
wished to satisfy himself that the princess had 
not made use of this instrument to promote any 
sinister design. I was present when my aga 
became acquainted with all these particulars, 
and heard him exclaim, *' What strength of mind f 
What invincible courage! Heaven reserve thee, 
Aureng-Z6be, for greater achievements ! Thou art 
not yet destined to die." And indeed after this 
fit, the king improved gradually in health. 

As soon as Aureng-Zebe became convalescent, 
he endeavoured to withdraw Dara's daughter 
from the hands of Shah-Jehan and Begum-Saheb, 
with the design of giving her in marriage to his 
third son. Sultan Acbar. This is the son whom, 
it is supposed, he intends for his successor, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. |41 

such an alliance would strengthen Acbar's authd-^ 
rity and corroborate his right to the throne. He 
is very youngs but has several near and powerful 
relations at court, and being born of Nawftz- 
Khan's daughter, is descended from the ancient 
sovereigns of Mascat. The mothers of Sultan 
Mahmud and Sultan Mausum were daughters 
only of rajahs ; for though the kings of Hin- 
dostan are muhammedans, they do not scruple to 
marry into heathen families, when such a measure, 
may promote their interests, or when they may 
thus obtain a beautiful wife. 
^ But Aureng-Z^be was frustrated in his in- 
tention. Shah-Jehan and Begum-Saheb rejected 
the proposition with disdain, and the young 
princess herself manifested the utmost repugn 
nance to the marriage. She remained Incon- 
.solable during many days from an apprehension 
that she might be forcibly taken away, declaring 
it was her firm purpose to die by her own hand^ 
rather than be united to the son of him who 
.murdered her father. 

He was equally unsuccessful in his demand to 
Shah-Jehan, for certain jewels, with which he wa$ 
desirous of completing a piece of workmanship 
that he was adding to the celebrated throne, so 
universally the object of admiration. The .captive 
monarch indignantly answered that Aureng-^Z^be 
should be careful only to govern the kingdom 
with more wisdom and equity: he commanded 
him not to meddle with the throne; and d^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



14i TRAVELS IM fHfi 

dared that he would be no more plagued abdui 
these jewels, for that hammers were provided to 
beat them into powder the next time he should be 
importuned upon the subject. 

The Dutch would not be last to present Au- 
reng-Z^be with the mobarek. They determined 
to send an ambassador to him, and made choice of 
Mr. Adrican, chief of the Dutch factory at Sufat. 
This individual possesses integrity, abilities, and 
sound judgment ; and as he does not disdain th6 
advice offered by the wise and experienced, it is 
not surprising that he acquitted himself to the 
satisflaction of his countrymen. Although in his 
general deportment, Aureng-Z^be be remarkably 
high and unbending, affects the appearance of a 
zealous muselman, and consequently despises Eu- 
ropeans or Christians, yet upon the occasion rf 
this embassy, his behaviour was most courteous 
and condescending. He even expressed a desire 
that Mr. Adrican, after that gentleman had per- 
formed the Indian ceremony of the salam, should 
approach and salute him according to the custom 
of his country. The king, it is true^ received the 
letters through the medium of an omrah, but tins 
could not be considered a mark of disrespect^ since 
he had done the same thing in regard to the let- 
ters brought by the Usbec ambassadors..* 

The preliminary observances being over, Au- 
ireng^ZSbe intimated that Mr. Adrican might pro- 
duce his presents ; at the same time investing him, 
and a few gentlemen in his suite, with a serapah 



Digitized by 



Google 



MQGUIi EBfFIBE. 143 

of brocade. The presents consisted of a quantitjr 
of very fine broad cloths^ scarlet and green ; smne 
large looking-glasses ; and several articles of Chi"* 
neae and Japan workmanship ; among whichwere 
A palanquin and a tucktravan, or field-throne,^ of 
e^iquii^te beauty, and much admired. 

The Great Mogul is in the habit of detainmg 
all ambassadors as long as can reasonably be done^ 
from an idea that it is becoming his grandeur 
and power to reeeiw the homage of foreigners, 
and to number them amcrngthe id;tendants of his 
^ourt. Mr, Adrican was not dismijssed, therefore, 
so expeditiously as he wished, though much 
sooner than the ambassadors from Tartary. His 
se^etary died, and the other individuals in his 
retinue w^e falling sick> when Aureng-Z6be 
granted him permission to d^art. On taking 
leave, the king again presented him With a 
serapah of brocade for his own use, and another 
very rich one for the governor of Batavia, 
together with a poinard set with jewels; the 
whole accompanied by an obliging letter. 

The chief aim of the Dutch in this embassy, 
was to ingratiate themselves with the Mogul, and 
to impart to him some knowledge of their nation, 
in order that a beneficial influence might thus be 
produced upon the minds of the governors of 

* The tucktravan, a vehicle used by travellers in Asi^, 
is composed of the words tuckt, a seat, and rawan, the par- 
ticiple of the verb rufteen, to go, move, proceed, &c. — Trans- 
latar. 



Digitized by 



Google 



IM TRAVELS IN TfiB 

sea ports, and other places^ where tliey have' 
established factories. They hoped that. those 
governors would be restrained from offering 
insult, and obstructing their commerce^ by the . 
consideration that ^the Dutch belonged to a 
powerful state, that they could obtain access, to 
the king of India to induce him to listen to their 
complaints, and to redress their grievances. They 
endeavoured also, to impress the government 
with an opinion, that their traffic with Hindostan 
was most advantageous to that kingdom; ex- 
hibiting a long list of artides purchased by their 
countrymen from which they shewed that the 
gold and silver brought by them every year into 
India amounted to a considerable sum : but 
they kept out of sight, the amount of those 
precious metals extracted by their constant im- 
portations of copper, lead, cinnamon, clove, nut- 
meg, pepper, aloes wood, and elephants. 

It was about this period that one of the most 
distinguished i omrahs ventured to express to 
Aureng-Z6be his fears lest his incessant occu- 
pations should be productive of injury to his 
health, and even impair the soundness and vigour 
of his mind. The king, affecting not to hear, 
turned from his sage adviser, and advancing 
slowly toward another of the principal omrahs,* a 
man of good sense and literary acquirements, 
addressed him in the following terms. The speech 
was reported to me by the son of that omrah, 
a young physician, and my intimate friend. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 145 

« There can surely be but one opinion among 
you learned men, as to the obligation imposed 
upon a sovereign^ in seasons of difficulty and 
danger, to hazard his life, and, if necessary, to 
die sword in hand, in defence of the people 
committed to his care. And yet this good and 
considerate man would fain persuade me that the 
public weal ought to cause me no solicitude ; that, 
in devising means to promote it, I should never 
pass a sleepless night, nor spare a single day from 
the pursuit of some low and sensual gratification. 
According to him, I am to be swayed by 
considerations of my own bodily health, and 
chiefly to study what may best administer to my 
personal ease and enjoyment. No doubt he 
would have me abandon the government of this 
vast kingdom to some vizier : he seems not to 
consider that, being born the son of a king, and 
placed on a throne, I was sent into the world by 
Proiddence to live and labour, not for myself, but 
for others ; that it is my duty not to think of my 
own happiness, except so far as it is inseparably 
connected with the happiness of my people. It 
is the repose and prosperity of my subjects that 
it behoves me to consult ; nor are they to be 
sacrificed to any thing besides the demands of 
justice, the' maintenance of the royal authority, 
and the security of the state. This man cannot 
penetrate into the consequences of the inertness 
he recommends, and he is ignorant of the evils thai 
attend upon delegated power. It was not 



Digitized by 



Google 



146 TEAYRLS IN TftS 

without reason that our great Sadi emphaticdly 
exdauned *^ Cease to be kings ! O cease t6 be 
kings I or determine that your dominions shall be 
governed only by yourselves.** Go, tell thy friend, 
that if he be desirous of my applause, he must 
acquit himself well of the trust reposed in him ; 
but let him have a care how he again obtrudes 
such counsel as it would be unworthy of a king to 
receive. Alas! we are sufficiently disposed by 
nature to seek ease and indulgence, and to banish 
the corrosive cares consequent upon a heartfelt 
desire to promote the well-being of others. We 
need no such officious counsellors. Our wives too, 
are sure to assist us in treading the flowery path 
of rest and luxury .** 

A melancholy circumstance happened at ihisr 
time which excited a great deal of interest m 
Delhi, particularly in the seraglio, and whk^ 
^r^ved the fallacy of an opinion entertained by 
myself, as well as by others, that he who is 
entirely deprived of virility cannot feel the pas^ 
'sion of love. 
' Didar-Khan, one of the principal eunuchl^ of 
the seraglio, had built a house, to which he some^ 
times resorted for entertainment, and where he 
often slept. He became enamoured of a beautiful 
woman, the sister of a neighbour, a pagan, and a 
scrivener^ by profession. An illicit intercourse con- 
linued for some time between them, without 
irMting much suspicion Didar^-Khan was an 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOOUL EMPIRE. 147 

eohudi, and eunuchs are never denied the right of 
entrance.* 

The familiarity between the two lovers became 
at length so remarkable, that the scrivener received 
various intimations of the doubts entertained as to 
hiB sister^s chastity. The man felt exasperated, 
and threatened to put both his sister and the 
eunuch to death if his suspicion of their guilt 
should be verified. Proof was not long wanting : 
they were one night discovered by the brother in 
the same bed, who stabbed Didar-Khan to the 
heart, and left his sister for dead. 

Nothing could exceed the horror and indigna- 
tion of the whole seraglio. Women and eunuchs 
entered into a solemn league to kill the scrivener; 
but their machinations excited the displeasure 
of Aureng-Z^be^ who considered that the mur- 
derer had made a sufficient atonement for his 
crime by turning muselman. 

It seems nevertheless to be the general opinion, 
that this rash man cannot long escape the power 
and malice of the eunuchs. Emasculation, say the 
Indians, produces a different effect upon men than 
upon the brute creation; it renders the latter 
gentle and tractable ; but who is the eunuch, they 
ask, that is not vicious, arrogant and cruel ? It is 
in vain to deny, however, that many among these 
people are faithful, generous and brave. 

Much about the same time, Rochinara>Begum 
incurred the displeasure of Aureng-ZSbe; the 
pnocegs having been suspected of admitting two 



Digitized by 



Google 



148- TRAYf^LS IN THB 

men into the seraglio. As it was only suspicion, . 
however, the king was soon reconciled to IKs sbter. 
Nor did he exercise the same cruelty toward the 
two men, who were caught and dragged into his 
presence, as Shah-Jehan had done upon a similar 
occasion toward the unhappy gallant concealed in 
the cauldron. I shall relate the whole story ex- 
actlj^ as I heard it from the mouth of an old 
woman^ a half-cast Portuguese, who has been 
many years a slave in the seraglio, and possesses 
the privilege of going in and out at pleasure. 
From her I learnt that Rochinara-Begum, after, 
having for several days enjoyed the company of 
one of these young men, whom she kept hidden, 
committed him to the care of her female at- 
tendants, who promised to conduct their charge 
out of the seraglio under cover of the night. But 
whether they were detected or only dreaded, a 
discovery, or whatever else was the reason, th6 
women fled, and left the terrified youth to wander 
alone about the gardens: here he was found, 
and taken before Aureng-Zdbe; who, when he 
had interrogated him very closely, without being 
able to draw any other confession of guilt from 
him than that he had scaled the walls, decided 
that he should be compelled to leave the seraglio 
in the same manner. But the eunuchs, it is pro^ 
bable, exceeded their master's instructions, for 
they threw the culprit from the top of the wall to 
the bottom. As for the second paramour, the. old 
Portuguese informed me that he too was seen 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 14^ 

roving about the gardens, and that having told thet 
king he had entered into the seraglio by the 
regular gate, he was commanded to quit the place 
through that same gate. Aureng-Z6be deter- 
mined, however, to inflict a severe and exemplary 
punishment upon the eunuchs ; because it was 
essential, not only to the honour of his house, but 
even to his personal safety, that the entrance 
into the seraglio should be vigilantly guarded. 

Some months after this occurrence five ambas- 
sadors arrived at Delhi, nearly at the same time. 
The first was from the scharif of Mecca, and the 
presents that accompanied this embassage, con- 
sisted of a small number of Arabian horses, and 
a besom which had been used in the small chapel 
situated in the centre of the Great Mosque ^t 
Mecca ; a chapel held in great veneration by 
muselmans, and called by them Beit-Allah, or the 
House of God. They believe this was the first 
temple dedicated to the true God, and that it was 
erected by Abraham. 

The second ambassador was sent by the king 
of Yemen, or Arabia Felix ; and the third by the 
prince of Bassora ; both of whom also brought 
presents of Arabian horses. 
. The two other ambassadors came from the 
king of Habesh, or Ethiopia. 

Little or no respect was paid to the first 
three of these diplomatists. Their equipage was 
so ' miserable that every one suspected they 
came merely for the sake of obtaining money in 



Digitized by 



Google 



150 TBJLYELS IN THE 

return for their presents, and of gaining still more 
considerable sums by means of the namerous 
horses, and different articles of merchandise, which 
they introduced into the kingdom free of all duty, 
as property belonging to ambassadors. With the 
produce of these horses and merchandise, they 
purchased the manufactures of Hindostan, which 
they also claimed the privilege of taking out of the 
kingdom without payment of the impost charged 
on all commodities exported. 

The embassy from the king of Ethiopia, may 
deserve a little more consideration. He was well 
informed oh the subject of the revolution in India, 
and determined to spread his fame throughout 
this vast region, by despatching an embassy that 
should be worthy of his great power and mag^:ufi- 
cence* The whispers of slander, indeed, if not 
rather the voice of truth, will have it that in 
sending these ambassadors, the African had an 
eye only to the valuable presents which might 
be received from the liberal hand of Aureng* 
Z^be. 

The Ethiopian monarch chose for his ambassa- 
dors two personages who doubtless enjoyed the 
greatest distinction at court, and were best quali- 
fied to attain the important ends he had in view. 
One of these was a muhammedan merchant, 
whom I met a few years before at Mokha, when 
on my way from Egypt up the Red Sea. He had 
been sent thither by his august sovereign for the 
purpose of selling a large number of slaves, and p£ 



Digitized by 



Google 



HOdtJL EMPIRS. 161 

piurohacdng India goods with the money thus com- 
mendably obtained. 

Such is the honourable traffic of this great and 
Christian king of Africa ! 

The other ambassador was an Armenian and 
Christian merchant ; born and married at Aleppo^ 
and known in Ethiopia by the name of Murat. I 
saw him also at Mokha^ where he not only accom- 
modated me with half his apartment, but gave me 
such advice as deterred me from visiting Ethiopia, 
as was observed at the commencement of this 
histwy. Murat is likewise sent every year to 
Mokha for the same object as the muhammedan 
merchant, and always takes with him the annual 
presents from his master to the English and Dutch 
East-India companies, and conveys those which 
tiiey give in return, to Gondar. 

The African monarch, anxious that his ambasi- 
sadors should appear in a style suitable to the oc- 
casion, contributed liberally toward the expences 
of the embassy. He presented them with thirty- 
two young slaves, boys and girls, to be sold at 
Mokha ; and the money raised by this happy ex- 
pedient was to supply the expences of the mis- 
sion. A noble largess indeed ! for let it be recol- 
lected that young slaves sell at Mokha, one with 
another, at five and twenty or thirty crowns per 
head. Besides these, the Ethiopian king sent to 
Aureng-Z6be twenty-five choice slaves, nine or ten 
of whom were of a tender age and in a state to be 
made eunuchs. This was, to be sure, an appro* 



Digitized by 



Google 



162 TRAVELS IN THE 

priate donation from a Christian to a muham- 
medan king, and shews the pure state of religioii 
in Ethiopia ! The ambassadors also took charge of 
other presents for the Great Mogul ; fifteen 
horses, esteemed equal to those of Arabia, and a 
small species of mule, whose iskin I have seen : no 
tiger is so beautifully marked, and no alacha of the 
Indies, or silken stuff*, is more finely and variously 
streaked : A couple of elephants' teeth, of a size 
so prodigious that it required, it seems, the utmost 
exertion of a strong man to lift either of them 
from the ground ; and lastly, the horn of an ox^ 
filled with civet, which was indeed enormously 
large ; for I measured the mouth of it at Delhi> 
and found that it exceeded half a French foot in 
diameter. 

The ambassadors, thus royally and munificently 
provided, departed from Gondar, the capital city 
of Ethiopia, situated in the province of Dembea* 
They traversed a desolate country, and were more 
than two months travelling to Beiloul, an unin- 
habited sea-port, near Babelmandel and opposite 
toMokha. For reasons which I shall perhaps 
disclose in the course of my narrative, they dared 
not take the usual and caravan road from Gondar 
to Arkeeko, a journey easily performed in forty 
days. From Arkeeko it is necessary to pass over 
to the island of Masuah, wherp the Turks have a 
garrison. 

While waiting at Beiloul for a Mokha vessel 
to cross the Red Sea^ the party wer« in want of 



Digitized by 



Google 



UOQVh EMPIRE. 153 

maay of the necessaries of life^ and some of the 
slaves died. 

On arriving at Mokha^ the ambassadors found 
that the; market had been that year overstocked 
with slaves. The boys and girls, therefore, Bold 
«t a reduced price. As soon as their sale was 
effected^ they pursued their voyage, embarking 
on board an Indian vessel, bound to Surat, where 
they arrived after a tolerable passage of five and 
twenty days. Several slaves, however, and many 
horses died ; probably from want of proper nou- 
rishment, the fuads of this pompous embassy being 
evidently insufficient to supply all its wants. The 
mule also died, but the skin, which I saw at Delhi, 
was preserved. 

They had not been many hours on shore at 
Surat, when a certain rebel of Visiapour, nltmed 
Sevajee, entered the town, which he pillaged and 
burnt. The house of the ambassadors escaped 
not the general conflagration ; and all that they 
succeeded in rescuing from the flames, or the 
ravages of the enemy, was their credentials ; a few 
slaves that Sevajee could not lay hold of, or whom 
he spared because they happened to be ill ; their 
Ethiopian apparel, which he did not covet ; the 
mule*s skin, to which he took no particular fancy; 
and the ox's horn that had already been emptied 
of its civet. 

These exalted individuals spoke in exaggerated 
terms of their sad misfortunes ; but it was in- 
sinuated by the malicious Indians, who witnessed 



Digitized by 



Google 



154 TRAVELS IN THB 

their deplorable conditioii on landings — witbirat 
decent clothing, destitute of money or bilk, 
and half famished, that the two ambassa- 
dors, were, in fact, lucky people, who ought 
to number the ransacking of Surat among the 
happiest events of their lives, since it saved them 
from the mortiBcation of conducting their wretched 
presents as far as Delhi. Sevajee, the Indians 
said, had furnished these worthy representatives 
of the Ethiopian king, with an admirable pretext 
for appearing like a couple of mendicants, and fbr 
soliciting the governor of Surat to supply them 
with the means of living, and with money and 
carts to enable them to pr6ceed to the capital. 
The attack upon Surat had also covered their 
misdeeds, in disposing, for their own benefit, of 
the civet, and many of the slaves. 

My excellent friend Mr. Adrican, chi^of the 
Dutch factory, gave Murat,the Armenian, a letter 
of introduction to me, which he delivered into my 
hands at Delhi, without being aware that I had 
been his guest at Mokha. It was an agreeable 
surprise to meet thus unexpectedly, after an 
absence of five or six years. I embraced my old 
friend with aflfection, and promised to render him 
all the service in my power. Yet, though my 
acquaintance among the courtiers was pretty 
extensive, I found it di£Bcult to be useful to these 
empty-handed ambassadors. The mule's skin 
and the ox's horn, wherein was kept arrack, 
or brandy extracted from black sugar, of which 



Digitized by 



Gb^k 



Mooui^ BifrutE. 155 

^ey mre excessively fond, constituted the whole of 
their presents; and the contempt which the 
ahsence of valuable presents would alone inspire # 
was increased by their miserable appearance' 
They were seen about the streets without palan* 
quins, clad in the true Bedouin fashion, and 
followed by seven or eight bare-footed and bare- 
headed slaves, who had no raiment but an ugly 
scarf round their middle, and the half of a ragged 
sheet over the left shoulder, which passed under 
tiie right arm« in imitation of a summer cloak* 
Nor had the ambassadors any other carriage than 
a hired and broken down cart; and they were 
without any horse besides one belonging to our 
father the missionary, and one of mine that they 
sometimes borrowed, and which they nearly 
killed. 

In vain did I for a long time exert myself in 
behalf of these despised personages; they were 
regarded as beggars, and could excite no interest. 
One day, however, when closetted with my ag^ 
Danechmend-Khan, who is minister for foreign 
affairs, I expatiated so successfully upon the graor 
deur of the Ethiopian monarch, that Aureng-ZSbe 
was induced to grant the ambassadors an audience^ 
and to receive their letters. He presented both 
with a serapah, or vest of brocade, a silken and 
embroidered girdle, and a turban of the same 
jnaterials and workmanship ; gave orders for 
their mwntenance, and on their dismission from 



Digitized by 



Google 



156 TRAVELS IN THE 

Delhi^ which soon took place, invested each with 
another serapah, and made them a present of six 
thousand rupees, equal to nearly three thousand 
crowns : but this money was unequally divided^ 
the muhammedan receiving four thousand rupees, 
and Murat, because a Christian, only two 
thousand. 

Aureng-Zebe sent by them, as presents to 
their royal master, an extremely rich serapah; 
two cornets, or trumpets, of silver gilt; two 
silver kettle drums ; a poinard studded with 
rubies ; and gold and silver rupees to the amount 
of about twenty thousand francs: hoping, as he 
kindly expressed, that this last gift would be 
peculiarly acceptable, and considered a rarity; 
the king of Ethiopia not having any coined money 
in his country. 

The Mogul was well aware that not one of 
these rupees would be taken out of Hindostan, 
and that the ambassadors would employ them in 
the purchase of useful commodities. It turned 
out just as he foresaw. They bought spices; 
line cotton cloths, for shirts for the king and 
queen, and for the king's only legitimate son, who 
is to succeed to the throne; alachas or silken 
stuflPs striped, some with gold and some with 
silver, for vests and summer trowsers ; English 
broad cloths, scarlet and green, for a couple of 
abbs, or Arabian vests, for their king; and lastly^ 
quantities of cloth less fine iu their texture .for 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE^ 167 

several ladies of the seraglio and their children. 
All these goods they were privileged, as ambassa- 
dors, to export without payment of duty. 

Notwithstanding all my friendship for M urat^ 

there were three reasons why I. almost repented 

of having exercised my influence in his behalf* 

The first was» that after he had promised to. 

sell me his son for fifty rupees,, he sent word he 

would not part with the boy for less than three 

hundred. I felt almost disposed to give him his 

price, that I might have it in my power to say a 

father had sold me his own child. The lad was 

remarkably well made, and his skin of the clearest 

black ; the nose was not flat, nor the lips thick^ 

as is commonly the case among the Ethiopians* 

I was certainly angry with Murat for having 

violated his engagement* 

I had, in the next place, ascertained that my 
friend, as well as his muhammedan companion^ 
had solemnly promised Aureng-Zebe to urge his 
king to permit the repair of a mosque in Ethiopia 
which had been in ruins since the time of the 
Portuguese. The Mogul gave the ambassadors 
two thousand rupees in anticipation of this 
service. The mosque^ erected as the mausoleum 
of a certain sheik, or dervise, who left Mecca for 
the purpose of propagating muhammedanism in 
Ethiopia, was demolished by the Portuguese^ 
when they entered the country with troops from 
Goa^ as alUes of the lawful sovereign, who had 



Digitized by 



Google 



158 TRAVELS IN THE 

embraced Chmti^iity, and been driven from the 
tfaorone hj a muhammedan prince. 

My third objection to Murafs conduct arose 
from the part he took in entreating Aureng-Z^be» 
in the name of the Ethiopian king, to send the 
latter a Koran and eight other books^ with the 
names of which I am familiar^ and which are of 
the first r^ute among the treatises written in 
defence of the muhammedan creed. 

There seemed to me something extremely base 
and wicked in these proceedings^ on the part of a 
Christian ambassador^ acting in the name of a 
Christian king. They afforded but too satis- 
&ctory a confirmation of the account I had 
received at Mokha of the low ebb to which 
Christianity is reduced in the kingdom of Ethiopia. 
Indeed all the measures of its government, and 
the character of the people, savour strongly of 
muhammedanism, and it cannot be doubted that 
the number, even of nominal Christians, has been 
on the decline since the death of the king, who 
was maintained on the throne by the troops from 
Goa. Soon after that event, the Portuguese, in 
consequence of the intrigues of the queen-mo- 
ther, were either killed or driven out of the 
country. The Jesuit patriarch, whom his country- 
men had brought from Goa, was compelled to fly 
for his life« 

f During the stay of the ambassadors at Delhi, 
iny ^^ f^^^ eager in^ searcb of knowledge^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE* 159 

intited them frequently to his house. He asked 
many questions concerning the condition of their 
country and the nature of its gorernment ; but 
Danechmend's principal object was to obtain infor- 
mation respecting the source of the Nile. They 
knew this river by the name of Abbabile, and its 
source, they say, is perfectly ascertained. Murat 
and a Mogul, who travelled with him from Ethi- 
opia, have visited the source, and the particulars 
given by them both, are substantially the same as 
those I had learnt at Mokha. They informed us 
that the Nile has its origin in the country of the 
Agows, rising from two bubbling and contiguous 
springs, which form a small lake of about thirty, 
or forty paces in length ; that the water running 
out of this lake is already a pretty considerable 
river; which continues, however, to increase ia 
siae by reason of the small tributary streams which, 
from space to space/ flow into it. They added 
that the river went on in a circuitous course, form- 
ing, as it were, a large island ; and that after fall- 
ing from several steep rockis, it entered into a 
great lake wherein are several fertile islands, 
quantities of crocodiles, and, what would be much 
more remarkable, if true, numbers of sea-calvea 
which have no other means of ejecting their excne^ 
ment than the mouth. This lake is in the country 
of Dembea, three short journies from Gondar, and 
four or five from the source of the Nile. The river, 
they continued, when it leaves the great lake, is 
much augmented by the numerous rivers and tor- 



Digitized by 



Google 



160 TRAVELS IN THE 

rents which fall into that lake, especially in the 
rainy season ; which is as periodical as in India> 
commencing towards the end of July. This, by 
the way, is an important consideration, and ac- 
counts for the overflowing of the Nile. From the 
lake just mentioned, the river runs by Sennaar, 
the capital city of the king of Fungi (tributary to 
the king of Ethiopia) and continues its course 
until it reaches the plains of Misser or Egypt. . 

The two ambassadors dilated more copiously 
than was agreeable either to Danechmend or 
myself on the magnificence of their sovereign, and 
the strength of his army; but their travelling 
companion, the Mogul, never joined in these 
panegyrics, and told us, during their absence, that 
he had twice seen this army in the field, com- 
manded by the king in person, and that it is im- 
possible to conceive troops more wretched and 
worse disciplined. 

The Mogul gave us a great deal of informa- 
tion about Ethiopia, the whole of which is noted 
in my journal, and may one day be given to the 
piiblic. At present I shall content myself with 
noticing three or four facts related by Murat, and. 
whichf considering that they occurred in a Chris- 
tian land, will be deemed sufficiently extravagant* 

He said that in Ethiopia there are few men 
who do not keep several wives; nor was he 
ashamed to confess that he himself had two, be- 
sides the wife to whom he was legally married, 
and who resided in Aleppo. The Ethiopian. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 161 

women, he observed, do not hide themselves as in 
India among the muhammedans and even pagans ; 
and nothing is more common than to see females 
of the lower ranks, whether single or married, 
bond or free, mingled together, day and night, in 
the same apartment ; the whole of them perfectly 
unacquainted with those feelings of jealousy so 
prevalent in other nations. The women, or wives 
of grandees, are at no great pains to conceal their 
attachment to any handsome cavalier, whose house 
they enter without fear or scruple. 

If I had visited Ethiopia, I should have been 
compelled, they told me, to marry. A few years 
ago, a wife was forced upon an European, a monk, 
who passed for a Greek physician; and it is curi- 
ous enough that the woman whom they obliged 
him to wed was the same that he designed for his 
son. 

A man, eighty years of age, having presented 
to the king four and twenty sons, all of mature 
age, and able to carry arms was asked by his 
majesty whether those were the only children he 
could exhibit ? The old gentleman answered that 
they were indeed the whole of the male part of 
his family, but that he was also the father of a 
few daughters. ** Out then from my presence, 
thou old calf,'* was the king's rejoinder. " I am 
astonished that instead of feeling shame, thou pre. 
sumest to appear before me. Is there a lack of 
women in my dominions that thou, a man well 
stricken in years, canst boast of only two dozen 

M 



Digitized by 



Google 



162 TRAVELS IN THE 

SODS Y' The Ethiopian king himself has at least 
eighty children, yiho are met running about in all 
parts of the seraglio. They are known by a round 
stick varnished, resembling a small mace, which 
the king puts into their hands, and which they 
carry about with great delight, as a sceptre, to 
distinguish them from other children. 

Aureng-ZSbe sent twice for the ambassadors. 
He hoped, like my aga, to increase his stock of 
knowledge by their conversation; but his chief 
anxiety was to be made acquainted with the state 
of muhammedanism in their country. He ex- 
pressed a desire to see the mule's skin, which some- 
how or other, remained afterward in the fortress, 
in possession of the officers ; much to my disap- 
pointment, for it was promised me in return for 
my good services. I flattered myself I should one 
day present it to one of our "virtuosi in Europe. 
I strongly recommended the ambassadors to shew 
the great horn to the king, as well as the skin : 
but this might have subjected them to a very em- 
barrassing question : how it happened that in the 
the ransacking of Surat, they lost the civet, and 
yet retained the horn ? 

The Ethiopian embassy was still in Delhi, 
when Aureng-ZSbe assembled his privy-council, 
together with the learned men of his court, for the 
purpose of selecting a suitable preceptor for his 
third son, Sultan Acbar, whom he designs for his 
successor. He evinced upon this occasion the ut- 
most solicitude that this young prince should 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 163 

receive such an education as might justify the hope 
of his becoming a great character. No person can 
be more aKve than Aureiig-Z^be to the necessity 
of storing the minds of princes, destined to rule 
nations, with useful knowledge* As they surpass 
others in power and elevation, so ought they, he 
says, to be pre*eminent in wisdom and virtue. He 
is very sensible that the cause of the misery which 
afflicts the empires of Asia, of their misrule, and 
consequent decay, should be sought, and will be 
found, in the deficient and pernicious mode of in- 
structmg the children of kings. Entrusted from 
Infancy to the care of women and eunuchs, slaves 
firom Russia, Circassia, Mingrelia, Georgia, or 
Ethiopia, whose minds are debased by the very 
nature of their occupation ; servile and mean to 
superiors, proud and oppressive to dependents ; — 
the princes, when called to the throne, leave the 
walls of the seraglio, instructed only in crime, and 
awfully ignorant of the duties imposed upon them 
by their new situation. They appear on the stage 
of life, as if they came from another world, or 
emerged, for the first time, from a subterraneous 
cavern, and stare, like simpletons, at every object 
they see. Either like children, they are credulous 
in every thing, and in dread of every thing ; or, 
with the obstinacy and heedlessness of folly, they 
are deaf to every sage counsel, and rash in every 
stupid enterprise. According to their natural 
temperament, or the first ideas impressed upon 
their minds, such princes, on ^succeeding to a 



Digitized by 



Google 



16^ TRAVELS IN THE 

crown, a£Pect to be dignified and grave, though it 
]be easy to discern that gravity and dignity form 
no part of their character, that the appearance of 
those qualities is the effect of some ill-studied 
lesson, and that they are in fact only other names 
for savageness and vanity ; or else they assume a 
disgusting politeness in their demeanour, disgust- 
ing because unnatural and constrained. Who, 
that is conversant with the history of Asia, can 
deny the faithfulness of this delineation ? Have not 
her sovereigns been blindly and brutally cruel, — 
cruel without judgment or direction ? Have they, 
not been addicted to the mean and gross vice of 
drunkenness, and abandoned to an excessive and 
shameless luxury, ruining their bodily health, and 
impairing their understanding, in the society of 
concubines ? Or, instead of attending to the cour 
cems of the kingdom, have not their days been 
consumed in the pleasures of the chace ? A pack 
of dogs will engage their thoughts and affection, 
although indifferent to the sufferings of so many 
poor people who, compelled to follow the unfeel- 
ing monarch in the pursuit of game, are left to die 
of hunger, heat, cold, and fatigue. In a word, 
the kings of Asia are constantly living in the in- 
dulgence of monstrous vices, those vices varying, 
indeed, as I said before, according to their 
natural propensities, or to the ideas early instilled 
into their minds. It is indeed a rare exception 
when the sovereign is not profoundly ignorant of 
the domestic and political condition of his empire. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 165 

The reins of government are often committed to 
the hands of some vizier, who, that he may reign 
lord absolute, with security and without contra** 
diction, considers it an essential part of his plan 
to encourage his master in all his low pursuitisr, 
and divert him from every avenue of knowledge. 
If the sceptre be not firmly grasped by the first 
minister, then the country is governed by the 
king's mother, originally a wretched slave, and by 
a set of eunuchs, persons who possess no enlarged 
and liberal views of policy, and who employ their 
time in barbarous intrigues ; banishing, imprison- 
ing, and strangling each other, and frequently the 
grandees and the vizier himself. Indeed, under 
their disgraceful domination, no man of any pro- 
perty is secure of life for a single day. 

When Aureng-Z^be had received the different 
embassies I have described, news at length reached 
the court that oqe from Persia had arrived on the 
frontier. Persian omrahs, and others of that na- 
tion, in the service of the Mogul, spread a report 
that affairs of the utmost moment brought the 
ambassador to Hindostan. Intelligent persons, 
however, gave no credence to the rumour: the 
period for great events was gone by, and it was 
clear that the Persians had no other reason for 
saying their countryman was entrusted with an 
important commission, than a vain and overweening 
desire to exalt their nation. It was also pretended 
by the same individuals, that the omrah appointed 
to meet the ambassador on the frontier, and to 



Digitized by 



Google 



166 TRAVELS IN THE 

provide for his honourable treatment during his 
journey to the capital, was strictly enjoined to 
spare no pains to discover the principal object 
of the embassy. He was instructed^ they said> 
to prepare, by degrees, the haughty Persian 
for the ceremony of the salara, which was to be 
represented, as well as that of delivering all letters 
through the medium of a third person, as a custom 
that has invariably obtained from time immemorial. 
It is sufficiently evident, however, from what we 
witnessed, that these were idle tales. Aureng- 
Z^be is raised much above the necessity of recur- 
ring to such expedients. 

On his entry into the capital, the ambassador 
was received with every demonstration of respect. 
The bazaars through which he passed were all 
newly painted, and the cavalry lining both sides 
of the way extended beyond a league. Many 
omrahs, accompanied with instruments of music^ 
attended the procession, and a salute of artillery 
was fired upon his entering the gate of the 
fortress, or royal palace. Aureng-Z^be welcomed 
him with the greatest politeness ; manifested no 
displeasure at his making the Persian salam, 
and unhesitatingly received from his hands, the 
letters of which he was the bearer ; raising them, 
in token of peculiar respect, nearly to the crown 
of his head. An eunuch having assisted him 
to unseal the letters, the king perused the 
contents with a serious and solemn countenance^ 
and then commanded that the ambassador should 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 167 

be clad^ in his presence^ with a serapah ; that is, 
a vest of brocade^ a turban^ and a silken sash, 
embroidered with gold and silver. This part of 
the ceremony over, the Persian was informed that 
the moment was come for the display of the 
presents; which were composed of five and 
twenty horses, as beautiful as I ever beheld, 
with housings of embroidered brocade ; twenty 
highly bred camels, that might have been mis- 
taken for small elephants, such was their size 
and strength; a considerable number of boxes, 
containing excellent rose-water, and another sort 
of distilled water, called beidmchk, a cordial 
held in the highest estimation and very scarce ; 
five or six carpets of extraordinary size and 
beauty ; a few pieces of brocade extremely rich, 
wrought in small flowers, in so fine and delicate a 
style that I doubt if any thing so elegant was ever 
seen in Europe; four Damascus cutlasses, and 
the same number of poinards, the whole covered 
with precious stones ; and lastly, five or isix sets of 
horse-furniture, which were particularly admired. 
The last were indeed very handsome and of supe- 
rior richness; ornamented with superb embroidery 
and with small pearls, and turkoises of great value 
from the old mine ♦ 

• The author calls them turkois de la vielle roche; a term 
"which^ in speaking of diamonds, is used by the French to 
describe those of the finest water, but which, in speaking 
of turkois, (so called from being found in Turkey Proper, or 
the country from which the Turks origiually came) meant 



Digitized by 



Google 



168 TBAVEIiS IN THE 

It was remarked that Aureng-ZSbe seemed 
unusually pleased with this splendid present;^ 
he examined every part minutely^ noticed its 
elegance and rarity, and frequently extolled the 
munificence of the king of Persia. He assigned 
the ambassador a place among the principal 
omrahs ; and after speaking about his long and 
fatiguing journey , and expressing his desire to 
see him every day^ he dismissed this august and 
highly favoured personage. 
. He remained at Delhi four or five months^ 
living sumptuously at Aureng-Zdbe's expence, 
and partaking of the hospitality of the chief 
omrahs, who invited him by turns to grand 
entertainments. When permitted to return to 
his country^ the king invested him with a second 
rich serapah^ and put him in possession of other 
valuable donations^ reserving the presents intended 
for the Persian monarch for the embassy that 
he determined to send, and which was very soon 
appointed. 

Notwithstanding the strong and unequivocal 
marks of respect conferred by Aureng-Z6be upon 
this last ambassador, the Persians at Delhi endea- 
Touried to impose a belief that the king of Persia, 
in his letters, reproached him keenly with the 

Aose of the old mine, to distinguish them from the turkois 
of a new mine, which are not nearly so much esteemed. The' 
turkois of the old mine were, according to Chardin, reserved 
exclusively for the king of Persia. That mine has long sinco 
beea exbaasted«~rraiu(ator. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 169 

d^th of Dara, and the incarceration of Shah- 
Jehanj representing such actions as unworthy a 
brother^ a son^ and a faithful muselman. He alsa> 
they said, reproved him for having assumed the 
name of AUum-guire, or Conqueror of the World, 
and for causing it to be inscribed on the coins of 
Hindostan. They went so far as to affirm that 
these words formed part of the letters : " Since 
then thou art this Allum-guire Besm-Illah^ I send 
thee, in the name of God, a sword and horses. 
liCt us now, therefore, approach each other.'* 
This would indeed have been throwing down the 
gauntlet. I give the story as I received it : t9 
contradict it is not in my power; easy as any 
person finds it in this court to come to the 
knowledge of every secret, provided he be ac- 
quainted with the language, possess good friends; 
und be as profuse of money as myself for the sake 
of gratifying his curiosity. But I cannot be 
easily persuaded that the king of Persia made use 
of the language ascribed to him : it would savour 
too much of empty bluster and menace, though it 
cannot be denied that the Persians are apt to 
assume a lofty tone when they wish to impress an 
idea of their power and influence. I rather 
incline to the opinion entertained by the best 
informed, that Persia is not in a condition to act 
aggressively against such an empire as Hindostan. 
She will be sufficiently happy if she retain Can- 
daher, on the ^ side of India, and preserve the 
integrity of her frontier on the side of Turkey. 



Digitized by 



Google 



170 TRAVELS IN THE 

The wealth and istrength of that nation are accu- 
rately estimated. Her throne is not always filled 
by a Shah-Abas^ a sovereign intrepid^ enlightened 
and politic ; capable of turning every occurrence 
to his benefit^ and of accomplishing great designs 
with small means. If her government meditate 
any enterprise against this kingdom^ and be 
animated with a feeling of abhorrence on account 
of some recent transactions, who can explain why, 
during the late civil wars, she remained a quiet 
and apparently an unconcerned spectator of the 
heart-rending calamities with which they were 
attended. She was unmoved by the entreaties of 
Dara, Shah-Jehan, Sultan Sujah, and perhaps of 
the governor of Cabul; although she might, with a 
comparatively small army, and at an inconsiderable 
expence, have gained possession of the fairest part 
of Hindostan, from the kingdom of Cabul to the 
banks of the Indus, and even beyond that river ; 
thus constituting herself the arbitress of every 
dispute. 

The king of Persia's letters, however, ^her 
contained some offensive expressions, or Aurrag- 
Zebe took umbrage at the conduct or language of 
the ambassador; because the king complained, 
two or three days after the embassy had quitted 
Delhi, that the hamstrings of the horses presented 
in the name of the Persian monarch, had been cut 
by order of the ambassador. He commanded, 
therefore, that he should be intercepted on the 
frontier, and deprived of all the Indian slaves he 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 171 

was taking away. It is certain that the number 
of these slaves was most unreasonable ; he had 
purchased them extremely cheap on account of 
the famine^ and it is also said that his serrants 
had stolen a great many children. 

Aureng-Zebe, during the stay of this embassy 
at Delhi, was careful to demean himself with 
strict propriety ; unlike his father^ Shah-Jehan, 
who^ upon a similar occasion^ either provoked the 
anger of the ambassador of the celebrated Shah- 
Abas, by an ill-timed haughtiness, or excited his 
contempt by an unbecoming familiarity. 

A Persian, who wishes to indulge in any 
satirical merriment at the expence of the Indians, 
relates a few such anecdotes as the following. 

When Shah-Jehan had made several fruitless 
attempts to subdue the arrogance of the ambassa- 
dor, whom no arguments or caresses could induce to 
salute the Great Mogul according to the Indian 
mode, he devised this artifice to gain his end. He 
commanded that the grand entrance of the court 
leading to the Am-kas, where he intended to 
receive the ambassador, should be closed, and the 
wicket only left open; a wicket so low that a man 
could not pass through without stooping, and 
holding down the head as is customary in making 
the Indian salam. Shah-Jehan hoped by this 
expedient to have it in his power to say that the 
ambasador, in approaching the royal presence, 
bowed the head even nearer to the ground than is 
Itisual in his court ; but the proud and quick^ghted 



Digitized by 



Google 



172 TRAVELS IN TBB 

Persian, penetrating into the Mogul's design^ 
entered the wicket with his back turned toward 
the king. Shah-Jehan vexed, to see himself 
overcome by the ambassador's stratagem, said 
indignantly, '* Eh-bed-bakt, Wretch! didst thou 
imagine thou wast entering a stable of asses like 
thyself r *' I did imagine it," was the answer. 
^ Who^ on going through such a door, can believe 
he is visiting any but asses T* 

Another story is this : — Shah-Jehan, displeased 
with some rude and coarse answer made by the 
Persian ambassador, was provoked to say, ^^ Eh- 
bed-bakt ! has then Shah-Abas no gentleman in his 
court that he sends me such a hare-brained fel- 
low?*'' 0,yes! the court of my sovereign abounds 
with polite and accomplished men ; but he adapts 
the ambassador to the king.** 

One day, having invited the ambassador to 
dine at the royal table, and seeking, as usual, an 
occasion to discompose and vex him ; while the 
Persian was busily employed in picking a great 
many bones, the king said coolly, '^ Eheltchygy, 
my lord ambassador, what shall the dogs eat ?" 
'* Kichery " was the prompt answer; afavourite dish 
of Shah-J^an, and which he was then devouring 
with avidity* Kichery is a mess of leguminous 
plants, the general food of the common people. 

The Mogul enquiring what he thought of his 
new Delhi, then building, as compared to Ispahan ; 
he answered aloud, and with an oath, '' Billah ! 
billah! Jlspahan cannot be compared to the dust 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 173 

of ydur Delhi:" which reply tlw king took as a 
Jiigh encomium upon his favourite city/though 
the ambassador intended it in sportive derision^ 
the dust being intolerable in Delhi. 

Lastly^ the Persians pretended that their 
countryman being pressed by Shah-Jehan to tell 
him candidly how he estimated the relative power 
of the kings of Hindostan and Persia ; he observed, 
that he likened India to a full moon fifteen or six- 
teen days old, and Persia to a young moon of two 
or three days^ This ingenious answer was at first 
very flattering to the Great Mogul's pride, but 
became a source of deep mortification when he 
had rightly interpreted the ambassador's mean- 
ing; which was that the kingdom of Hindos^ 
tan is now on the decline, and that of Persia 
advancing, like the crescent, in splendour and 
magnitude. 

Such are the witticisms so much vaunted by 
the Persians in India, and which they seem never 
tired of repeating. For my part, I think a dig- 
nified gravity and respectful demeanour would 
better become an ambassador than the assumption 
of a supercilious and unbending carriage, or the 
indulgence of a taunting and sarcastic spirit. 
Even if he possessed no higher principle to regu- 
late his conduct, it is surprising that Shah-Abas's 
ambassador was not constrained by common con-, 
siderations of prudence ; and how much he had 
to fear from the resentment of a despot, whomhe 
foolishly and unnecessarily provoked, was seen by 
the danger he narrowly escaped, Shah-Jehan's 



Digitized by 



Google 



174 TltAVELS IN THE 

malignity grew so violent and undisguised that 
he addressed him only in the most opprobrious 
terms^ and gave secret orders that when the 
ambassador entered a long and narrow street in 
the fortress^ leading to the Hall of Assembly^ a 
^cious elephant should be let loose upon him. A 
less active and courageous man must have been 
killed ; but the Persian was so nimble in jumping 
out of his palanquin, and, together with the 
attendants, so prompt and dexterous in shooting 
his bows, that the animal was scared away. 

MooUah Sal6's celebrated reception at court 
took place in the same month that the Persian 
ambassador returned to his own country. This 
old man had been Aureng-Z6be's preceptor, and 
had resided during several years on an estate pre- 
sented to him by Shah*Jehan, when he was made 
acquainted with the termination of the civil war, 
and the complete success which had attended the 
ambitious projects of his former pupil. He 
hastened to Delhi, sanguine in his expectation of 
being immediately advanced to the rank of omrah. 
There was no person of influence whom he did 
not engage in his favour, and Rochinara-Begum 
was among those who reminded the king that his 
venerable and faithful tutor had become a can- 
didate for honours and preferment. Three months 
elapsed before Aureng-Z^be would seem to know 
that such a person was within the purlieus of Ae 
court; but weary at last with seeing him con- 
stantly in his presence, the Mogul commanded 
ihat he should come to him in his closet, where only 



Digitized by 



Google 



UQOVh EHPIKE. 175 

Hakim-ul-Moulak^ Danechmend-Khan, and three 
or four other grandees who enjoy a reputation 
for science were present. He then spoke in 
nearly the following words. I say nearly, because 
it is impossible to transcribe so long a discourse 
precisely in the terms in which it was delivered. 
Had I been present myself, instead of my aga, 
from whom I received a report of the speech, I 
could not hope to be verbally correct. There can 
be no doubt, however, that what Aureng-Zfebe 
said, was substantially as follows :-4". Pray what 
is your pleasure with me, Moollah-gy, noble 
doctor? Do you pretend that I ought to exalt 
you to the first honours of the state? Let us 
then examine your title to any mark of distinc-* 
tion. I do not deny you would possess such a 
title if you had filled my young mind with suit* 
able instruction. Shew me a well educated youth, 
and I will say that it is doubtful who has the 
stronger claim upon his gratitude, his father or 
his tutor. But what was the knowledge I de- 
rived under your tuition ? You taught me that 
the whole of Frangistan,''^ was no more than 
some inconsiderable island, of which the most 
powerful monarch was formerly the king of Por- 
tugal, then the king of Holland, and afterward 
the king, of England. In regard to the other 
sovereigns of Frangistan, such as the king of 
Finance and the king of Andalusia, you told me 

• Europe. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



176 TRAVELS IN Mti 

they resembled our petty rajahs, and that the 
potentates of Hindostan eclipsed the glory of all 
other kings ; that they alone were Humaioons^ 
Acbars^ Jehan-Guires, or Shah-Jehans; the Happy, 
the Great, the Conquerors of the World, and the 
Kings of the World; and that Persia, Usbec, 
Kashgar, Tartary, Pegu, Siam, China, and Man- 
chew China, trembled at the name of the kings 
of India. Admirable geographer! deeply read 
historian! Was it not incumbent upon my pre- 
ceptor to make me acquainted with the distin- 
guishing features of every nation of the earth ; 
its resources and strength ; its mode of warfare, 
its manners, religion, form of government, and 
wherein its interests principally consist ; and, by a 
regular course of historical reading, to render me 
familiar with the origin of states, their progress 
and decline; the events, accidents, or errors, 
owing to which such great changes and mighty 
revolutions, have been effected ? Far from having 
iniparted to me a profound and comprehensive 
knowledge of the history of mankind, scarcely did 
I learn from you the names of my ancestoi^, the 
renowned founders of this empire. You kept me 
in total ignorance of their lives, of the events which 
preceded, and the extraordinary talents that 
enabled them to achieve, their extensive conquests. 
A familiarity with the languages of surrounding 
nations may be indispensible in a king ; but you 
would teach me to read and write Arabic ; doubt- 
less conceiving that you placed me under an 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 177 

tiveriasting obligation for sacrificing so large a 
portion of time to the study of a language wherein 
no one can hope to become proficient without ten 
or twelve years of close application. Forgetting 
how many important subjects ought to be em- 
l>raced in the education of a prince^ you acted as 
as if it were chiefly necessary that he should pos- 
sess great skill in grammar^ and such knowledge 
as belongs to a doctor of law ; and thus did you 
waste the precious hours of my youth in the dry, 
unprofitable, and never ending task, of learning 
words!" 

Such was the language in which Aureng^ 
Z^be expressed his resentment ; but some of the 
learned men, either wishing to flatter the monarch 
and add energy to his speech ; or actuated: by 
jealousy of Moolah-Sal6, affirm that the king's 
'reproof :did not end here, but that, when he had 
•spoken for a short time on indifferent subjects, he 
resumed his discourse in this strain : '' Were you 
not aware that it is during the period of infancy, 
when the memory is commonly so retentive, that 
-the. mind may receive a thousand wise precepts, 
and be easily furnished with such valuable in- 
struction as will elevate it with lofty conceptions^ 
and render the individual capable of glorious 
deeds ? Can we repeat our prayers, or acquire 
a knowledge of law and of the sciences, only 
through the medium of Arabic ? May not our 
devotions be offered up as acceptably, and solid 

N 



Digitized by 



Google 



178 TRAVELS IN THE 

information communicated as easily in our moth^ 
tongue ? You gave my father, Shah-Jehim, to 
understand that you instructed me in philosophy ; 
and^ indeed, I have a perfect remembrance of 
your having, dming several years, harassed my 
brain with idle and foolish propositions, the solu- 
tion of which yield no satisfaction to the mind ; — 
propositions that seldom enter into the business of 
life; wild aiid extravagant reveries conceived With 
great labour, and forgotten as soon as conceived ; 
whose only eflfect is to fatigue and ruin the intel- 
lect, and to render'a man headstrong and insuffisar- 
able.* O yes, you caused wsd to devote the most 
valuable years of my life to your favourite hyjpo- 
theses or systemil atid when I left you, I could boast 
of no greater attainment in the sciences, than the 
use of many obscure and uncouth tetins, calculated 
to discourage, confound, and appal a yoiith of the 
most masculine understanding : terms invented to 
cover the vanity and ^norance of pretenders to pbi- 
losophy ; of men who, like yourself, would impose 
the belief that they transcend others of their 
species in wisdom, and that their dark and ambi- 
guous jargon conceals many prbfound mysteries 
known only to themselves. If you had tai^ht 
me that philosophy which adapts the mind to 
reason, and will not suffer it to rest siettisfied 
with any thing short of the most solid mrgumwts; 
if you had inculcated lessom which elevate the 

* Their philosophy abounds with etciti more abiurd and 
obsoure notiois than our own.— JBemter. 



Digitized by 



Google 



HOQITL EHPUtEt 179 

soul^ and fortify it agmnst the assaults of fortune, 
tending to produce that enviable equanimity 
which is neither insolently elated by prosperity, 
nor basely depressed by adversity ; if you had 
made me acquainted with the nature of man; 
accustomed me always to refer to first principles, 
and given me a sublime and adequate conception 
of the universe, and of the order and regular 
motion of its parts ; — if such, I say^ had been 
the nature of the philosophy imbibed under your 
tidtion, I should be more indebted to you than 
Alexander was to Aristotle, and should consider it 
my duty to bestow a very different reward on 
you than Aristotle received from that prince. 
Answer me sycophant, ought you not to have 
instructed me on one point at least, so essen- 
tial to be known by a king ; namely, on the 
reciprocal duties of a sovereign and his subjects, 
and of subjects towards their sovereign ? Ougl^ 
you not also to have foreseen that I might, 
at some future period, be compelled to contend 
with my brothers, sword in hand, for the crown, 
and for my very existence ? Such, as you must 
well know, has been the fate of the children of 
almost every king of Hindostan. Did you ever 
instruct me in the art of war, how to besiege 
a town, or draw up an army in battle array ? 
Happy for me that I consulted wiser heads than 
thine on these subjects! Go; withdraw to thy 
yfllage. Henceforth let no person know either 
who thou art, or what is become of tfiee«" 



Digitized by 



Google 



180 TRAVELS IN THE t^ 

An event occurred at this period not very ere-* 
ditable to the astrologers. The large majority of 
Asiatics are so infatuated in favour of judicial 
astrology, that, according to their phraseology, no 
circumstance can happen below, which is not 
written above. In every enterprise they consult 
their astrologers. When two armies have com- 
pleted every preparation for battle, no consider- 
ation can induce the generals to commence the 
engagement until the sahet be performed ; that 
is, until the propitious moment for attack be as«^ 
certained. In like manner no commanding offi- 
cer is nominated, no marriage takes place, and no 
journey ' is undertaken, without consulting these 
seers. Their advice is considered absolutely neces* 
sary even on the most trifling occasions ; as the pro- 
posed purchase of a slave, or the first wearing of 
new clothes. This silly superstition is so general 
an annoyance, and attended with such important 
and disagreeable consequences, that I am astonished 
it has continued so long : the astrologer is neces- 
.sarily made acquainted with every transaction 
public and private, with every project common and 
extraordinary. 

Now it happened that the king's principal 
astrologer fell into the water and was drowned. 
' This ^itielalicholy accident caused a great sensa- 
tion nt court, and proved injurious to the reputa- 
;tion of these professors in divination. The man 
who had thus lost his life always performed the 
sahet for the king. (\nd the omrahs; and the 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. l&l 

people naturally wondered that an astrologer of 
such extensive experience, and who had for many 
years predicted happy incidents for others, should 
have been incapable of foreseeing the sad catas^ 
tirophe by which he was himself overwhelmed. It 
was insinuated that in Fr^ngistan,* where the 
sciences flourish, professors in astrology ^re con- 
sidered little better than cheats and jugglers, tha^ 
it is there much doubted whether the science be 
founded on good and solid principles, and whether 
it be not^ used by designing men as a mean of 
gaining access to the great, of making them feel 
their dependence, and their absolute need of these 
pretended soothsayers. 

The astrologers were much displeased with 
these and similar observations,- and particularly 
with the following anecdote, which was univer- 
sally known and repeated. — Shah- Abas, the great 
king of Persia, having given orders that a small 
piece of ground within the seraglio should be pre- 
pared for a garden, the master-gardener, intended 
to plant there several fruit trees on a given day * 
but the astrologer, assuming an air of vast conse- 
quence, declared that unless the time of planting 
were regulated by the sahet, it was impossible 
that the trees should thrive. Shah-Abas having 
acquiesced in the propriety of the remark, the as.- 
•trologer took his instruments; turned over the 
pages of his books, made his calculatipns and con- 

^ , * Europe. 



Digitized by 



Google 



182 TRAVELS IN THE 

eluded that, by reason of this or that conjimction 
of the planets, it was necessary to plant the trees, 
before the expiration of another hour. The gar- 
dener, who thought of nothing less than an appeal 
to the stars, was absent when this wise determi-^ 
nation was formed ; but persons were soon pro- 
cured to accomplish the work : holes were dug, 
and all the trees put into the ground, the king 
placing them himself that it might be said they 
were all planted by the hand of Shah-Abas, The 
gardener returning at his usual hour in the after- 
noon, was greatly surprised to see his labour anti- 
cipated ; but observing that the trees were hot 
ranged according to the order he had originally 
designed, that an apricot, for example, was placed 
in the soil intended for an apple tree, and a pear 
tree in that prepared for an almond, he pulled up 
the premature plantation, and laid down the trees 
for that night on the ground, covering the roots 
with earth. In an instant the astrologer was ap- 
prised of the gardener's proceedings, and he was 
equally expeditious in complaining to Shah-Abas, 
who, on his part, sent immediately for the culprit. 
'^How is it,** cried the monarch indignantly, " that 
you have presumed to tear up trees planted by my 
own hands ; trees put into the ground after the 
solemn performance of the sahet? We cannot 
now hope to repair the mischief. The stars had 
marked the hour for planting, and no fruit can 
henceforth grow in the garden." The honest rustic 
had taken liberal potations of Schiraz wine, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOiHJL BMPias. 183 

looking askance at the astrologer^ observed iifter 
an oafli or two, " Billah^ billah^ an admirable 
sahet certainly ! tbou augur of evil ! Trees planted 
under thy direction at noon, are in the evejuDg 
torn up by the roots." Shah-Abas^ hearing this 
unexpected piece of satirical djcoUery, laughed 
heartily^ .turned his back upon the astrploger ^d 
walked away in silence. 

I shall mention two other c|rc^^Istance?, al- 
though they happened during the reign of Shiah- 
Jehan. The narration will be useful in shewing 
that the barbarous and ancient custom obtains in 
this country^ of the king's constituting himsdif 
sole .heir, of the. property of those who die in his 
service. 

Neiknam-Khan was one of. the most dis- 
tinguished omra^ at courts and during forty or 
fifty years w,hile he held important offices had 
amassed an immense treasure. This lord always 
viewed with di^ust the odious and tyrannical 
custom abovementioned, a custom in consequence 
of which the widows of so many great omrahs are 
plunged suddenly into a state of wretchedness and 
destitution, compelled to solicit the monarch for 
a scanty pittance, while their ^pns are driven to 
the necessity of. enlisting as private soldiers under 
the command of some omrah. Finding his end 
approaching, the old man secretly distributed the 
whole of his treasure among distressed widows and 
poor cavaliers, and afterwards filled the coffera 
with old iron, bonesj worn out shoes and tattered 



Digitized by 



Google 



184 TRAVELS IN THE 

clothes. When he had securely closed and sealed 
them, he observed that those coffers contained 
property belonging exclusively to Shah-Jehan. On 
the death of Neiknam-Khan, they were convey^ 
to the king, who happened to-be in the assembly, 
and who, inflamed with eager cupidity, com- 
manded them to be instantly opened in the 
presence of all his omrahs. His disappointment 
and vexation may easily be conceived ; he started 
abruptly from his seat and hurried from the hall. 
• Some years after the death of a wealthy 
banian, or pagan merchant, who had always been 
employed in the king's service, and, like the 
generality of his countrymen, had been a notorious 
usurer, the son became clamorous for a certain 
portion of the money. The widow refusing to 
comply with the young man's request, on account 
of his profligacy and extravagance, he had the 
baseness and folly to make Shah-Jehan acquainted 
with the real amount of the property left by his 
father, about two hundred thousand crowns. The 
Mogul immediately summoned the old lady, and-, 
in presence of the assembled omrahs, commanded 
her to send him immediately one hundred thousand 
rupees, and to put her son in possession of fifty 
thousand. Having issued this peremptory injunc- 
tion, he ordered the attendants to turn the widoi*^ 
out of the hall. i 

Although surprised by so sudden a request, 
and' sctoewhat^ offended at being rudely > forced 
from the chamber without an oj^ortunity of 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUIi BMPIRE. 185 

assigning the reasons of her conduct, yet this, 
courageous woman did not lose her presence 
of mind ; she struggled with the servants, 
exclaiming that she had something further to 
divulge to the king. ^' Let us hear what §he has 
to say," cried Shah^ehan. ^' Hazret-Salamet 1 
Heaven preserve your majesty ! It is not perhaps 
without some reason? that my son claims^ the 
property of his father ; he is our son, and 
(Consequently our heir. But I would hunibly 
enquire what consanguinity there may have been 
between your majesty and my deceased husband 
to warrant the demand of one hundred thousand 
rupees?" Shah-Jehan was so well pleased with 
this short and artless harangue, and so amused 
with the idea of a banian, or idolatrous trades^ 
man, having been related to the sovereign of 
India, that he burst into a fit of laughter, and 
commanded that the widow should be left in the 
lindisturbed enjoyment of the money of her 
deceased husband. 

I shall not now relate all the considerable 
events which took. place, from the conclusion of 
the war in or about the year 1660, to the period 
<rf my departure, more than six years afterwards. 
J. doubt not that the account would very much 
promote the object I had in view in recorditag 
some of them ; namely, sm acquaintance. with the. 
manners and genius of the Moguls and; Indians^ 
and I may, therefore, notice the whole of those 
events in:; another place. At present, however, I 



Digitized by 



Google 



1B6 amAVfiiiS w tbe 

s^all confine my narration to a few important 
circumstances which regard personages wtdi 
whom my readers are become famUiar ; beginning 
with Shah-Jehan. 

I. Although Aureng-Z6be kept his father 
closely confined in the fortress of Agra and 
neglected no precaution to prevent his escape, 
yet the deposed monarch was otherwise treated 
with indulgence and respect. He was permitted 
to occupy his former apartments, and to enjoy 
the society of Begum-Saheb and the wh<^ of 
his female establishment, including the singing 
and dancing women, cooks, and others. In these 
respects no rei^uest was ever denied him ; and as 
the old man became devout, certain moolkhs 
were allowed to enter his apartment a^d read the 
Koran. He possessed also the privilege of sendmg 
for all kinds of animals, horses of stat^^ fowling 
birds and tame antelopes, which last were made 
to fight before him. Indeed, Aureng-ZSbe's 
behaviour was throughout kind and respectful, 
and he paid attention to his aged parent in every 
possible way. He loaded htm with presents, 
consulted him as an oracle, and the frequent 
letters of the son to the father were eiq^Hressive of 
duty and submission. By these means Shah- 
Jdian's anger and haughtiness were at length 
subdued, insomuch that he frequently wrote to 
Aureng-Z^be on political affairs, sent him Dara's 
daughter, and begged his acceptance of some of 
those precious stones, whidi be bad threatened to 



Digitized by 



Google 



I«)0UL EMPIRE. 187 

grind to powder if again importuned to resign 
them. He even granted to his rebellious son the 
paternal pardon and benediction which he had 
often with vehement importunity in vain so- 
licited. 

It should not be inferred from what I have 
said^ that Shah-Jehan was always soothed with 
compliant submission. I was convinced by one 
of Aureng-Z6be*s letters, that he could adress his 
father with energy and decision, when provoked 
by the arrogant and authoritative tone sometimes 
assumed by the aged monarch. I obtained a sight 
of a portion of the letter, which ran in these 
words : — " It is your wish that I should adhere 
rigidly to the old custom, and declare myself heir 
to eVery person who dies in my service. We have 
been accustomed, as soon as an omrah, or a rich 
merchant has ceased to breathe, nay sometimes 
before the vital spark has fled, to place seals on 
his coffers, to imprison and beat the servants or 
officers of his household, until they made a &11 dis^ 
closure of the whole property, even of the most 
inconsiderable jewel. This practice is advantage- 
ous, no doubt.; but can we deny its injustice and 
cruelty ; and should we not be rightly served if 
every omrah acted as Neiknam-Khan, and if 
like the Hindoo merchant's widow, every woman 
concealed her wealth ? 

'* I wish to avoid your censure, and cannot 
endure that you should fortn a wrong estimate of 
my character. My elevation to the throne has 



Digitized by 



Google 



188 TRAVELS IN THE 

not, as you imagine, filled me with insolence and 
pride. You know by more than forty years 
experience, how burthensome an ornament a 
crown is, and with how sad and aching a heart a 
monarch retires from the public gaze. Our great 
ancestor Acbar, anxious that his successors should 
exercise their power with mildness, discretion and 
wisdom, recommended to their serious attention, 
in the excellent memoirs left behind him, a fine 
trait of Mir-Timour. He recounts that on the 
day on which Bajazet was made prisoner, when 
he was brought into the presence of Timour, the 
latter, after attentively fixing his eyes upon the 
haughty captive, laughed in his face. Bajazet, 
much oflFended at this rudeness, told the conqueror 
not to exult too extravagantly in his good fortune ; 
' It is God,' said he, * who exalts or debases kings, 
and though you are victorious to day, you may be 
in chains to-morrow.' ' I am very sensible,' an- 
swered Timour, ' of the vanity and mutability of 
earthly possessions, and Heaven forbid that I 
should insult a fallen enemy. My laughter 
proceeded} not from any wish to wound thy feelings^ 
Bajazet ; it escaped involuntarily, while I was 
indulging a series of ideas suggested by the un- 
comeliness of both our persons, I looked at thy 
countenance, rendered unsightly by the loss of a^ 
eye ; and then considering that I am myself a 
miserable cripple, was led into a train of reflections, 
which provoked me to laughter. What can there 
be within the circle of a crown,' I asked, * which 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 189 

ought to inspire kings with inordinate self-esteem, 
since Heaven bestows the bauble upon such ill- 
favoured mortals !' 

'^ You seem to think, that I ought to devote 
less time and attention to measures, which I 
conceive essential to the consolidation and security 
of the kingdom, and that it would better become 
me to devise and execute plans of aggrandize- 
ment. I am indeed far from denying that con- 
quests ought to distinguish the reign of a great 
monarch, and that I should disgrace the blood of 
the great Timour, our honoured progenitor, if T 
did not seek to extend the bounds of my present 
territories. At the same time, I cannot be justly 
reproached with inglorious inaction, and you 
cannot with truth assert that my armies are 
unprofitably employed in the Deccan and in 
Bengal. I wish you to recollect that the greatest 
conquerors are not always the greatest kihgiSV 
The nations, of the earth have often been sub- 
jugated by mere uncivilized barbarians, and the 
most extensive conquests have in a few short 
years crumbled to pieces. He is the truly great 
king who makes it the chief business of his life to 
govern his subjects with equity." The remainder 
of this letter was not put into my hands. 

- n. I shall now say afew words of the celebrated 
Emir-Jemla, recur to some of the incidents wherein 
he was concerned after the termination of the 
civil war, and mention the manner in which he 
closed his brilliant career. 



Digitized by 



Google 



190 TRAVEU IN THE 

In effecting the subjugation of Bengul that 
great man did not behave to Sultan Sujah witk 
the cruelty and breach of faith practised by Jihon^ 
Khan towards Dara, or by the rajah of Seyinagur 
towards Solim&n-Shek6. He obtained possession 
of the country like a skilful captain, and disdain* 
ing any unworthy stratagem to secure Sujah's 
person, contented himself with driving the dis- 
comfited prince to the sea, and compelling him to 
kave the kingdom. Emir-Jemla then sent an 
eunuch to Aureng-ZSbe with a letter, supplicating 
the king to permit his family to repair to Bengal 
under the eunuch's care, " The war is happily 
at an end," he said, '^ and as I am enfeebled and 
brc^en down by age, you will not, you surely 
eannot refuse me the consolation of passing tht 
remainder of my days with my wife and children." 
But Aureng-Z^be penetrated at once into the 
design of this expert politician ; he knew that if 
his son Mahmet Emir-Khan were permitted to 
visit Bengal, Jemla would aspire to the inde* 
pendent sovereignty of that kingdom, if indeed 
such an acquisition would have satisfied the 
pretensions of that extraordinary man. He wa6 
intelligent, enterprising, brave and wealthy ; at 
the head of a victorious army ; beloved and feared 
by his soldiers, and in possession of the finest 
pi^ovince in Hindostan. The transactions in which 
i^ had been engaged in Golconda proved Ms 
impatient and daring spirit, and directly to refuse 
compliance with his request would unquestionaUy 



Digitized by 



Google 



UoaVL fiMFIl^. 191 

hare been attended with danger. Aureng-Zdbe acted 
upon this occasion with his wonted prudence and 
address. He sent to the emir his wife and daugh- 
ter, together with his son*s children ; created him 
mir-ul-omrah, the highest rank that can be con* 
ferred by the kmg of India; and a{^ointed 
Mahmet Emir-Khan Grand Bakchis, or Grand 
Master of the Horse* the second or third situation 
in the state, which, however, confines the pos-- 
sessor to the court, rendering it difficult, if not 
impossible, for him to remain at a distance from 
the king's person. Jemla was also fixed in the 
goremment of Bengal. 

Foiled in his object, the emir felt that a 
second demand for his son could not be made 
without offending the king, and that his wisest 
course was to express gratitude for all these marks 
of royal favour. ' 

Affairs had remained in this state nearly a 
twelvemonth, when the Mogul offered to Jemla 
the management of a war against the rich ^and 
powerful Rajah of Assam^ whose territories lie 
north of Dacca, on the gulf of Bengal. Aureng^ 
ZSbe justly apprehended that an ambitious soldier 
eould not long remain in a state of repose, and 
tiiat, if disengaged from foreign war, he would seek 
occasion to excite internal commotions. 

The emir himself had been long meditating 
this enterprise, which he hoped would enable him 
to carry his arms to the confines of China, and 
secure to himself immortal feme. Aureng^Zdbe's 



Digitized by 



Google 



192 TRAVELS IN THE 

messenger found him perfectly prepared for thd 
expedition. A powerful army was soon embarked 
at Dacca, on a river flowing from the dominions 
about to be invaded, and Jemla and his troops 
ascended the stream in a north-east direction, until 
they reached a. fortress named Azo, distant about 
one hundred leagues from Dacca, which the Raj4h 
of Assam had wrested from a former governor of 
Bengal. Azo was besieged and taken in less than 
a fdrtnight. The emir then proceeded toward 
Chamdara, the key of the rajah's dominions, which 
he. reached after a long march of eight and twenty 
days. Here a battle was fought to the rajah's 
disadvantage, who retired to Kirganu, his capital 
city, forty leagues from Chamdara; but being 
closely and vigorou3ly pressed by Jemla, he had 
not time to fortify himself in that place, and waa 
therefore compelled to continue his retreat to the 
^louQtains of ^ the kingdom df Lassa. Chamdara 
and Kirganu.were given up to pillage. The latter 
contained an infinite booty for the captors. • It^ is 
a l^rge and well-built city, very commercial, and 
celebrated for the beauty of its women. ^ , iUio.t 
;.The progress of the invaders was checkedtby 
the rains which fell sooner than is customary; hnd 
which in this country are very heavy, jntQi^^iyii^ 
every spot of ground, with the exceptiqn^ofiyjlitggs 
built . on eminences. In the mean timeV(.the:; raj ah 
cleared the whole country, rolled, t|je,jepiir's, posi- 
tion, of cattle^ and every kind ^of provision, so that 
ere the rains ceased the army walsreduced to great 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 193 

and urgent distress, notwithstanding the immense 
riches which it had accumulated. Jemla found 
it equally difficult to advance or to recede. The 
mountains in front presented impracticable bar- 
riers, while a retreat was prevented not only by 
the waters and deep mud, but also by the pre- 
caution taken by the rajah to break down the 
dike which forms the road to Chamdara. The 
emir therefore was confined to his camp during 
the whole of the rainy season, and, on the return 
of dry weather, his men were so. dispirited by 
their incessant fatigue and long privations, that 
he abandoned the idea of conquering Assam. 
Under a less able commander, the army could not 
have hoped to reach Bengal : the want of pro- 
visions was severely felt; the mud being still 
thick, greatly impeded the motions of the troops, 
and the rajah was active and indefatigable in 
pursuit ; but Jemla conducted the movements of 
his army with his usual skill, and by his admirable 
retreat added greatly to his reputation. He 
returned laden with wealth. 

The emir, having improved the fortifications of 
Azo, left a strong garrison in that fortress, in- 
tending to renew, early in the following year, the 
invasion of Assam ; but this illustrious man fell 
B victim to the dysentery which attacked the 
army soon after their arrival in Bengal. 

His death produced, as might be expected, 
a great sensation throughout India. ^ It is now/' 

o 



Digitized by 



Google 



194 TRAVELS IN THE 

observed many intelligent persons^ *' that Ajureng- 
Zebe is king of Bengal." Though not insensible 
of his obligations of gratitude^ yet the Mogul was 
perhaps not sorry to have lost a vicegerent whose 
power and mental resources had excited so much 
pain and uneasiness. ^* You mourn," he publicly 
said to Mahmet Emir-Khan, '' you mourn the 
death of an affectionate parent, and I the loss of 
the most powerful and most dangerous of my 
friends." He behaved, however, with the utmost 
kindness and liberality to Mahmet ; assured the 
young man that in himself he should always find 
a second father ; and instead of diminishing his 
pay, or seizing upon Jemla's treasures, Aureng- 
Zdbe confirmed Mahmet in his office of Bakchis, 
gave him an additional salary of a thousand 
rupees per month, and constituted him sole heir 
to his father's property. 

III. I shall now bring before the notice of 
my readers, Aureng-Zdbe's^ uncle, Shaista-Khan, 
who, as I have already said, contributed in aa essen- 
tial degree by his eloquence and intrigues to the 
exaltation of his nephew. He was appointed, as we 
have seeo^ governor of Agra^ a short time before 
the battle of Kidgw&, when Aureng-ZSbe quitted 
the capital to meet Sultan Sujah. He was 
afterwards nominated governor of the Deccan, and 
commander in chief of the forces in that province ; 
and, upon Emir-Jemla's decease, was transferred 
to the government of Bengal, appointed general 
of the army in that kingdom, and elevated to the 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 195 

ritnk of Mir^ul*omrah; which had become vacant 
by the death of Jemla. 

I owe it to Shaista's reputation to relate the 
important enterprise in which he was engaged, 
soon after his arrival in Bengal; an enterprise 
rendered the more interesting by the fact that it 
was never undertaken by his great predecessor, 
for reasons which remain unknown. The narrative 
will elucidate the past and present state of the 
kingdoms of Bengal and Arracan, which have 
hitherto been left in much obscurity, and will 
throw light on other circumstances which are de- 
serving of attention. 

To comprehend the nature of the expedition 
meditated by Shaista, and form a correct idea of 
the occurrences in the Gulf of Bengal, it should 
be mentioned that the kingdom of Arracan, or 
Mug, has contained, during many years, se*- 
veral Portuguese settlers, a great number of 
Christian slaves, or half-cast Portuguese, and 
other Europeans collected from various parts of 
the world. That kingdom was the place of 
retreat for fugitives from Goa, Ceylon, Cochim 
Malacca and other settlements in India, held 
formerly by the Portuguese; and no persons 
were better received than those who had deserted 
their monasteries, married two or three wives, or 
committed other great crimes. These people 
were Christians only in name ; the lives led by 
them in Arracan were most detestable, massacr- 
ing or poisoning one another without compunction 



Digitized by 



Google 



i96 TRAVELS IN THE 

or remorse^ and sometimes assassinating even their 
priests^ who, to confess the truth^were too often 
no better than their murderers. 

The king of Arracan, who lived in perpetual 
dread of the Moguls kept these foreigners, as a 
species of advanced guard, for the protection of 
his frontier, permitting the^ to occupy a sea-port 
called Chittagong, and making them grants of 
land. As they were unawed and unrestrained by 
the government, it was not surprising that these 
runagates pursued no other trade than that of 
rapine and piracy* They scoured the neighbour- 
ing seas in light gallies, called galliasses, entered 
the numerous arms and canals of the Ganges, 
ravaged the islands of Lower Bengal, and, often 
penetrating forty or fifty leagues up the countiy, 
surprised and carried away the entire population 
of villages, on market days, and at times when the 
inhabitants were assembled for the celebration of 
a marriage, or some other festival. The marau- 
ders made slaves of their unhappy captives, and 
burnt whatever could not be removed. It is 
owing to these repeated depredations that Ive see 
so many fine islands in the mouth of the Ganges, 
formerly thickly peopled, now entirely deserted 
by human beings, and become the desolate recep- 
tacles of tigers, and other wild beasts. 

Their treatment of the slaves thus obtained 
was most cruel; and they had the audacity to offer 
for sale, in the places which they had but recently 
ravaged, the aged people whom they could turn 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL BMPIUL 197 

to no better account It was usual to see young 
persons, who had saved themselves by timdy 
flighty endeavouring to^ay to redeem the parent 
who had been made captive yesterday. Those who 
were not disabled by age, the pirates either kept in 
their service, training them up to the love of 
robbery and practice of assassination ; or sold to 
the Portuguese of Goa, Ceylon» St. Thomas, and 
other places. Even the Portuguese of Hoogly, 
in Bengal, purchased without scruple these 
wretched captives, and the horrid traffic was trans«* 
acted in the vicinity of the island of Oalles, near 
Cape das Palmas. The pirates, by a mutual un- 
derstanding, waited for the arrival of the Portu- 
guese, who bought whole cargoes at a cheap rate ; 
and it is lamentable to reflect that other Europeans^ 
since the decline of the Portuguese power, have 
pursued the same flagitious commerce with the 
jpirates of Chittagong, who boast that they con- 
vert more Hindoos to Christianity in a twelve- 
month, than all the missionaries in India do 
in ten years. A strange mode this of propagat- 
ing our holy religion by the constant viola- 
tion of its most sacred precepts, and by the 
open contempt and defiance of its most awful sanc- 
tions! 

The Portuguese established themselves at 
Hoogly under the auspices of Jehan^Ouire, the 
grandfather of Aureng-Z^be. That prince was 
free from all prejudice against Christians^ and 
hoped to reap great benefit from their commerce. 



Digitized by 



Google 



198 TRAVELS IN THE 

The new settlers also engaged to keep the gulf of 
Bengal clear of pirates. 

Shah-Jehan^ a more rigid muselman than hk 
father, visited the Portuguese at Hoogly with a 
terrible punishment. They provoked his displea- 
sure by the encouragement afforded to the depre- 
dators of Arracan, and by their refusal to release 
the numerous slaves in their service, who had all 
of them been subjects of the Mogul. He first 
exacted, by threats or persuasion, large sums of 
money from the Portuguese, and when they 
refused to comply with his ultimate demands, he 
besieged and took possession of the towfa, and 
commanded that the whole population should be 
transferred as slaves to Agra. 

The misery of these people is unparalleled in the 
history of modern times : it nearly resembled the 
grievous captivity of Babylon ; for even the chil- 
dren, priests, and monks shared the universal doom. 
The handsome women,as well married as single, be- 
came inmates of the seraglio ; those of a more ad- 
vanced age, or of inferior beauty, were distributed 
among the omrahs ; little children underwent the 
rite of circumcision, and were made pages ; and 
the men of adult age, allured for the most part, 
by fair promises, or terrified by the daily threat 
of throwing them under the elephant's feet, re- 
nounced the Christian faith. Some of the monks, 
however, remained faithful to their creed, and 
were conveyed to Goa, and other Portuguese set- 
tlements, by the kind exertions of the Jesuits and 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 199 

miision^es at Agra^ who, notwithstanding all 
this calamity, continued in their dwelling, and 
were enabled to accomplish their benevolent pur- 
pose by the powerful aid of money, and the warm 
intercession of their friends. 

Before the catastrophe at Hoogly, the mission- 
aries had not escaped the resentment of Shah- 
Jehan : he ordered the large and handsome church 
at Agra, which, together with one at Lahore, had 
been erected during the reign of Jehan-Guire, to 
be demolished. A high steeple stood upon this 
church, with a bell whose sound was heard in 
every part of the city. 

Some time before the capture of Hoogly, the 
pirates made a formal offer to the viceroy of Goa, 
to deliver the whole kingdom of Arracan into his 
hands. Bastian Consalve was then diief of the 
pirates, and so celebrated and powerful was he, 
that he married the king of Arracan's daughter. 
It is said that the viceroy, was too arrogant and 
envious to listen to this proposal, and felt unwilling 
that the king of Portugal should be indebted to a 
man of low origin for so important an acquisition. 
There was nothing, however, in the proposal to 
excite surprise ; being consonant with the general 
conduct of the Portuguese in Japan, Pegu, Ethio- 
pia, and other places. The decay of their power 
in India is fairly ascribable to their misdeeds and 
may be considered, as they candidly allow, a proof 
of 'the divine displeasure. Formerly their name 
was a tower of strength ; all the Indian princes 



Digitized by 



Google 



200 TRAVELS IN THE 

courted their, friendship, and the Portuguese were 
distinguished for courage, generosity, zeal for 
religion, immensity of wealth, and the splen- 
dour of their exploits : but they were not then, 
like the Portuguese of the present day, addicted 
to every vice, and to every low and grovelling 
enjoyment.* 

The pirates, about the time of which I am 
speaking,^ made themselves masters of the island 
of Sondiva, an advantageous post, commanding 
part of the mouth of the Ganges. On this spot, 
the notorious Fra Joan, an Augustine monk, 
reigned, as a petty sovereign, during many years ; 
having contrived, by what means is unknown, to 
rid himself of the governor of the island. 

These also are the identical freebooters who, 
as we have seen, repaired in their galliasses to 
Dacca, for the purpose of conveying Sultan Sujah 
to Arracan. They found means of opening som« 
of his chests, and robbing him of many precious 
stones, which were offered secretly for sale at 
Arracan and disposed of for a mere trifle. The 
diamonds all got into the hands of the Dutch and 
other Europeans, who easily persuaded the igno- 
rant thieves that the stones were soft, and conse- 
quently of no real and intrinsic value. 

I have said enough to give an idea of the 
trouble, vexation and expence, to which the 
Mogul was for many years exposed by the unjust 

* See note F at the end of the volume. . ■■, ■ 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 201 

and violent proceedings of the pirates established 
in Arracan. He had always been under the neces- 
sity of guarding the inlets of the kingdom of 
Bengal, of keeping large bodies of troops and 
a fleet of galliasses on the alert. All these 
precautions, however, did not prevent the ravaging 
of his territories ; the pirates were become so bold 
and skilful that with four or five galliasses they 
would attack, and generally capture or destroy^ 
fourteen or fifteen of the Mogul's galleys. 

The deliverance of Bengal from the crufel 
and incessant devastations of these barbarians 
was the immediate object of the expedition con- 
templated by Shaista-Khan upon his appointment 
to the government of that kingdom. But he had 
an ulterior design, — that of attacking the king 
of Arracan, and punishing him for his cruelty to 
Sultan Sujah and family. Aureng-Z^be is deter- 
mined to avenge the murder of those illustrious^ 
personages, and, by a single example, to teach his 
neighbours, that princes of his blood, in all situa- 
tions and under all circumstances, must be treated' 
with humanity and reverence. 

The governor of Bengal has accomplished his 
first plan with consummate address. It was 
^scarcely practicable to march an army into the 
kingdom of Arracan owing to the great number 
of rivers and canals that intersect the frontiers ; 
and the naval superiority of the pirates rendered it 
still more difficult to transport an invading force 
by sea. It therefore occurred to Sbaista to apply 



Digitized by 



Google 



209 TRAVELS IN THE 

to the Dutch for their co-operation^ and with this 
view he sent an envoy to Batavia^ with power to 
negociate^ on certiun conditions, with the general 
commandant of that colony^ for the joint occupa- 
tion of the kingdom of Arracan; in the same 
manner as Shah-Abas treated formerly with the 
English in regard to Ormuz. 

The governor of Batavia was easily persuaded 
to enter into a scheme that offered an opportunity 
of still further depressing the Portuguese influence 
in India, and from the success of which the Dutch 
company would derive important advantages* 
He despatched two ships of war to Bengal for 
the purpose of facilitating the conveyance of the 
Mogul's troops to Chittagong; but Shaista, in 
the mean time, had collected a large number of 
galliassea and other vessels of considerable 
tonnage, and threatened to overwhelm the pirates 
in irremediable ruin if they did not immediately 
submit to the Mogul's authority. '* Aureng-Z^be 
is fixed in the resolution,'' said he to them, ^' of 
chastising the king of Arracan, and a Dutch fleet, 
too powerful to be resisted, is near at hand. If 
you are wise, your personal safety and the care 
of your families will now engross all your at- 
tention ; you will quit the service of the king of 
Arracan, and enter into that of Aureng-Z^be. 
In Bengal you shall have as much land allotted 
as you may deem necessary, and your pay shall be 
double that which you at present receive." 

The pirates about this period had asi|bsinated 



Digitized by 



Google 



MoauL £MriR£. 203 

one of the king of Arracan's principal officers, and 
it is not known whether they were more struck 
with terror by the punishment awaiting them 
for that crime, or moved by the promises and 
threats contained in Shaista's communication. 
Certain it is, however, that these unworthy 
Portuguese were one day seized with so strange a 
panic as to embark in forty or fifty galliasses 
and sail over to Bengal, and they adopted this 
measure with so much precipitation that they 
had scarcely time to take their families and 
valuable effects on board. 

Shaista received these extraordinary visitors 
with open arms ; gave them large sums of money ; 
provided the women and children with excellent 
accommodations in the town of Dacca^ and after 
he had thus gained their confidence, the pirates 
evinced an eagerness to act in concert with the 
Mogul's troops , shared in the attack and capture 
of Sondiva, which island had fallen into the hands 
of the king of Arracan, and accompanied the 
Indian army from Sondiva to Chittagong. Mean- 
while the two Dutch ships of war made their 
appearance, and Shaista having thanked the 
commanders for their kind intentions, informed 
them that he had now no need of their services. 
I saw the vessels in Bengal, and was in company 
with the officers, who considered the Indian's 
thanks a poor compensation for the violation 
of his engagements. In regard to the Portuguese, 
Shaista treats them, not perhaps as he ought, but 



Digitized by 



Google 



204 TRAVELS IN THE 

certainly as they deseire. He has drawn them 
from Ohittagong ; they and their families are in 
his power : an occasion for their services no longer 
exists ; he considers it, therefore, quite unnecessary 
to fulfil a single promise. He suffers month after 
month to elapse without giving them any pay ; 
declaring that they are traitors^ in whom it is 
folly to confide; wretches, who have basely 
betrayed the prince whose bounty they had 
experienced. 

In this manner has Shaista-Khan extinguished 
the power of the Portuguese in Chittagong ; of 
those Portuguese who had depopulated and ruined 
the whole. of Lower Bengal. Time will show 
whether his enterprise against the king of Arracaiji 
will be crowned with similar ^success.* 

IV. Respecting the two sons of Aureng-ZSbe, 
Sultan Mahmud and Sultan Mauzum, the former 
IS still confined in Gualior; but, if we are to 
believe the general report, without being made to 
drink poust, the beverage usually given to the 
inmates of that fortress. Sultan Mauzum appears 
to comport himself with his accustomed prudence 
and moderation, although the transaction I am 
about to relate is perhaps an evidence that this 
prince during the dangerous illness of his father 

* Shaista-Khan assembled ten thousand horse and foot 
at Dacca, with the command of which he invested his son 
Ameid-Khan. With this force the capital of Chittagong (which 
contained twelve hundredj and twenty pieces of cannon) 
was taken, and the whole province was annexed to the king- 
dom of Bengal.— -Doto. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 205. 

had carried on secret intrigues, or that the 
displeasure of Aureng«*ZSbe was excited by some 
other circumstance nnknown to the puhiic. It 
may be^ however, that, without any reference 
to the past, the king was only anxious to obtain a 
memorable proof both of hb son's obedience and 
of his courage, when he commanded him, in a full 
assembly of omrahs, to kill a lion which had 
descended from the mountains and was then lajring 
waste the surrounding country. The Grand 
Master of the Hunt ventured to hope that Sultan 
Mauzum might be permitted to avail himself of 
those capacious nets which are ordinarily made use 
of in so perilous a chase. ^* He shall attack the 
lion without nets," sternly replied the king, *' When 
I was prince I thought not of such precautions." An 
order given in so decisive .a tone could not be dis- 
obeyed. The prince declined^not the fearful under*" 
taking; he encountered and overcame thetremend* 
ous beast with the loss of only two or three men ; 
some horses were mangled, and the wounded lion 
-bounded on the head of the Sultan's elephants 
Since this strange adventure Aureng-Z^be has 
liehaved to his son with the utmost affection, and 
has even raised him to the government of Deccan» 
It must be owned, however, that Sultan Mauzum 
jA so limited in authority and circumscribed in 
pecuniary means, that he cannot occasion much 
uneasiness to his father. 

V. The next personage I would recal to the re- 
collection of my readers is Mohabet-Khan, the 



Digitized by 



Google 



206 TRAVELS IN THfi 

governor of Cabul. He was induced at length to 
resign the government of that province, and 
Aureng-ZSbe generously refused to punish him, 
declaring that the life of such a soldier was in- 
valuable, and that he deserved commendation for 
his fidelity to. his benefactor Shah-Jehan. The 
king even nominated him governor of Guzerat, 
instead of Jesswint-Singh, who was sent to the 
seat of war in Deccan. It is true that a few 
costly presents may have disposed the Mogul's 
mind in Mohabet's favour ; for besides what he gave 
to Rochinara-Begum, he sent the king fifteen or 
sixteen thousand golden rupees and a considerable 
number of Persian horses and camels. 

The mention of Cabul reminds me of the 
adjacent kingdom of Candahar, at present tri- 
butary to Persia ; to the subject of which I ought 
to devote one or two pages. Much ignorance 
prevails concerning that country, as well as on 
the political feelmg which it creates between the 
governments of Persia and Hindostan. The name 
of the capital is also Candahar, which is the strong 
hold of this rich and fine kingdom. The desire 
of possessing the capital has been, for some ages, 
i^e cause of sanguinary wars between the Moguls 
and Persians. The great Acbar wrested it from 
the latter, and kept it during the remainder of his 
reign. ShahrAbas took the city from Jehan-Guire, 
the son of Acbar ; and the treachery of the go- 
vernor Ali Murdan-Khan, delivered it into the 
hands of Shah-Jehan, the son of Jehan-Gmre. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 20T 

Ali Murdan immediately placed himself under the 
protection of his new sovereign ; he had many 
enemies in his own country^ and was too prudent 
to obey the summons of the Persian monarch, 
who called upon him to give an account of his 
government.* Candahar was agfun besieged and 
captured by the son of Shah-Abas^ and afterwards 
twice unsuccessfully attacked by Shah-Jehan. 
The first failure was owing to the bad conduct 
or the perfidy of the Persian omrahs in the Great 
Mogul's service, the most powerful noblemen of 
his court and strongly attached to their native 
country. They betrayed a shameful lukewarm- 
ness during the siege, refusing to follow the Rajah 
Roup who had already planted his standard on the 
wall nearest to the mountain. Aureng-Zdbe's 
jealousy occasioned the second failure. He would 
not storm the breach which the cannon of the 
English, Portuguese, Germans, and French, had 
rendered sufficiently practicable ; because the en« 
terprise had originated with Dara, at that time 
with his father in the city of Cabul, and he felt 
unwilling that his brother sho^ld have the credit 
of so valuable an acquisition. Shah-Jehan, a few 
years before the late civil war, seemed on the 
point of besieging Candahar for the third time^ 
-but was deterred from the enterprise by Emir*^ 
Jemla, who, as we have stated, advised the 
Mogul to send his army to the Deccan. Ali 

* See note O at the end of the volume. 



Digitized by 



Google 



^OS TRAVELS IN TttE 

Murdan seconded with great earnestness the 
emir's arguments, and addressed the king in these 
extraordinary words :— *' Your majesty will never 
' succeed in taking Candahar, unless her gates be 
opened by such a traitor as myself; or unless you 
determine to exclude all Persians from the be- 
sieging army, and issue a proclamation promising 
entire freedom to the bazaars ; that is, exempting 
them from the payment of any duty on provisions 
brought for the use of the army." A few years 
ago Aureng-Zebe, following the example of his 
predecessors, made preparations for the attack of 
this jcelebrated city, being offended with the letter 
written by the king of Persia, or with the un* 
gracious reception experienced by his ambassador, 
Tarbiet-Khan, at the Persian court : but he heard 
of the king's death, and abandoned the project; 
feeling reluctant, as he pretended, to act with 
hostility against a child just seated on the throne ; 
although Shah-Soliman, who succeeded his father^ 
cannot, I think, be less than five arid twenty year$ 
of age. 

VI. I would now say something of the warm 
partisans of Aureng-Z6be, most of whom have 
been promoted to situations of high trust and 
dignity. His uncle Shaista-Khan was placed/ aa 
we have mentioned, in the goveriiment of Deccan^ 
and at the head of the army acting. in that pro- 
vince ; subsequently this nobleman was made go- 
vernor of Bengal. Mir-Khau obtained the govern- 
ment of Cabul ; Calil-ullah-Khan that of Lahore ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



lGr-faida,afA]lafaa!»&d; l4fibei^iai«i,<>f P«tM; 
and die soa of that AIbtk>-TerdKKh«a, wliose 
mdmat cost Sultan Siijah die batde of Kiagwi, 
was flnde .governor of Sindy. Faid-Khan, whose 
comtsds and address liad beaa essentially i:^efQl 
to Anrei^sZebe, was invested with tlie office of 
Kane-Saman, or Grand Chamberlmn of the roynl 
Iwoeholi, DaiiecbmeDd^han was appomt<>d 
gcfvtnkar of Delhi ; and, in consideration of his 
studioiis halnts, and die time which he r^ccssarily 
devotes to ihe afiairs of the ficMreigri department, 
he is exempted from the ancient ceremony of re* 
pairing twice a-day to the assemhly, for the put* 
pose of saktting the king; the omission of which 
suhjects other omrahs to a pecuniary penalty. 
To Dianat-Khan^ Aureng-Z^be has entrusted the 
gOYcrnment of Kashmire, a little kingdom nearly 
inaccessible, and considered the terrestrial para- 
dise of India. Acbar became possessed of that 
delightful country by stratagem. It boasts of au- 
thentic histories^ in its own vernacular tongue^ 
containing an interesting account of a long 
succession of ancient kings ; sometimes so power- 
ful. as to have reduced to subjection the whole. of 
Hindpstan, as far as the island of. Ceylon. Of 
these histories. Jehan-Guire procured an abrifdg- 
ment to be made in the Persian language ; and 
of .this I procured a copy. — It is proper to men- 
tion in this place that Aureng-Z^he cashiered 
Nejabat-Khan, who greatly distinguished himself 
in the battles, of Samonguer and Kidgvvd ; but he 



Digitized by 



Google 



210 TltAVELS IN THE 

iBetms to haw broi^bt <ihat Aiagraob vnftin 
lumself by eontinually dweUittg upon the aerviees 
he had rend^ed the king. As to <3lioie mfianoiui 
indiyiduals, Jihon-Khfila and Nan^> tha WicUrd^- 
served fate of the former has been reeountid ; hut 
what subsequently beoame of Naz^ is not ascer- 
tained. 

In regard to J^jtwintrSingh ^d Joy^Sui^fa, 
there is some obscurity which I shall endeavour to 
olear. A revolt had takcA place> headed by a 
pagan of Visiapour, who made himself mastor ^ 
several important fortresses and a &w sea-pwts 
belongbg to the king of ^lat country. The 
Wme of this bold adventurer is Sevajee^ or the 
lord Seva. He is vigilant enterprising aad 
wholly regardless oi personal safety. Shaista- 
Khan^ whc^ in the Deccan, found in htm an eme^- 
my m<Mre formidable than the king pf Visiapoiir 
at the head of his whole army and joined by 
those rajahs who usually unite with that pr^nee 
for their common defence. Some idea may be 
formed of Sevajee's intrepidity by his attempt to 
seize Shaista's person, together with all his trea- 
sures, in the midst of his troops, and surrounded 
by the walls of AurengabAd* Attended by a few 
gddiers he one night penetrated into Sha»ta^ 
i^rtnE^enty and would have succeeded in bis 
object had he remained undetected a short tin^ 
longer. Shaista was severely wounded, and 
his son was killed in the act of drawing his 
sword. Sevajee soon ei^aged in another dwring 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOaUL EMPIRE. 211 

expeditkoi^ vrUek proved more sbcoessfuL Placing 
kimaelf at the head of two or three thouund 
mm, the flower of his army^ he silently with^ 
drew from hi$ camp, and pretended during the 
march to he a rajah going to the Mogul's court. 
When within a short distance of Surat^ he met 
the Grand Prorost of the country, on whom he 
knposed the belief that he intended to prosecute 
hie journey without entering the town : but the 
plunder of that famous and wealthy port was the 
principal object of the expedition ; he rushed 
into the place sword in hand, and remahied 
nearly three days^ torturipg the population to 
eompel a discovery of their concealed riches. 
Burning what he could not take away, Serajee 
returned without the least Oppomtion, laden with 
gold and silver to the amount of several millions; 
wbh pearls, silken stuffii, fine linens, and a variety 
of other costly merchandize* A secret understand^ 
ing, it was suspected, existed between Jesswint* 
Sin^ and Sevajee, and the former was supposed 
to have been accessary to the attempt on Shaista 
as well as to the attack of Surat. The rajah was 
therefore recalled from the Decean, but instead of 
gmng to Delhi, he returned to his own territories. 
I forgot to mention that during the pillage of 
Sorat, Sevajee, the holy Sevajee ! respected thd 
habitation of the Reverend Father Ambrose, the 
capuchin missicmary. '' The Frangms padrys are 
good men^** he said, " and shall not be molested.*" 



Digitized by 



Google 



212 TRAVELS IN THE 

He spared also the houi^e of Delale^ the Dutch 
broker, ai pagan, because he enjoyed the reputation 
of being charitable. The dwellings of the English 
and Dutch likewise escaped Sevajee's visits, not 
in consequence of any reverential feeling oh his 
part, but because those people had displayed 
a great deal of resolution, and defended themselves 
well. The English especially, assisted by the 
crews of their vessels, performed wonders, and 
saved not only their own houses but those of their 
neighbours. The pertinacity of a Jew, a native of 
Constantinople, astonished every body. Sevajee 
knew that he was in possession of most valuable 
rubies, which he intended to sell to Aureng- 
Zebe; but he persevered in stoutly denying the 
fact, although three times placed on his knees to 
receive the stroke of a sword flourished over his 
head. This conduct was worthy of a Jew, whose 
lofe of money generally exceeds his love of life. 

Aureng-Zebe prevailed with Joy-Singh to 
take the command of the army in the Deccan, 
attended by Sultan Mauzum, who, however, was 
not invested with any authority. The rajah's 
first operation was vigorously to attack Sevajee's 
principal fortress ; but he had recourse, at the 
same time, to his favourite art, negociation; which 
he brought to a favourable issue, as the place 
surrendered by capitulation long before it was 
reduced to extremity. Sevajee having consented 
to make common cause with the Mogul against 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL BMPIRE. 213 

Visiapour, AurengrZSbe proclaimed. him a rajah, 
took him under his protection, and granted an 
Qmrah's pension to his son. Some time afterward, 
the king meditating a war against Persia, wrote 
to.Sevajee in such kind and flattering terms, and 
extolled his generosity, talents and conduct so 
highly, as to induce him to meet the Mogul at 
Delhi, Joy-Singh having plighted his faith for 
the chieftain's security. Shaista's wife happened 
to be then at court, and never ceased to urge the 
arrest of 4 man who had killed her son, wounded 
her husband, and sacked Surat. The result was 
that Seyajee, observing that his tents were watched 
by three or four omrahs, effected his escape in 
disguise under favour of night. This circumstance 
caused great uneasiness in the palace, and Joy- 
Singh's eldest son, being strongly suspected of 
having assisted Sevajee in his flight, was forbids 
den to appear at court. Aureng-Z6be felt, or 
seemed to feel, equally irritated against the father 
and the son, and Joy-Singh apprehending that 
he might avail himself of tins pretext to seize 
his territories, abandoned his command in the 
Deccan and hastened to the defence of his domi- 
nions but he died on his arrival at Brampour. 
The kindness shewn by the Mogul to the 
rajah's son, when apprized of this melancholy 
vent; his tender condolences, and the grant to 
him of the pension enjoyed by the father, confirm 
many persons in the opinion that Sevajee did not 
escape without the connivance of Aureng-Z$be 



Digitized by 



Google 



it4 TitAVlSLS IK TH^ 

kfs^sielf. His {>res6nce at court must indeed hM& 
g;reatly embatrased the kitig^ stnee the hatre^l ^ 
Ae women Was most fierce and rancorous agaiMt 
him ; they Cohsid^red him as k monster who h^ 
imbrued his hands in the blood of i^ietids an^ 
kinsmen. 

fiiit here let us take a cursoi^y review dt tfce^ 
history of Deccan^ a kingdom that, during ta^OM 
than fbrty years, has constantly been the th^fre 
6f wdr, and owing to which the Mogul is so fre- 
quently embroiled with the king of Gokonda, tfa^ 
king of Visiapour, and several other less {w)i*^rftol 
sJovereigns. The nature of the quarrds ih lihat 
|>art of Hindostan cannot be well ttndersfodil 
while we remain ignori^t of the chief oceurre^icear 
and have only an imperfijct knowledge of tihe 
condition of the princes by whom the c6untry t» 
governed. 

Two centuries have scarcely elided since thef 
great peninsula* of India, stretching from the GuM 
of Cambay on the west to the Gulf 6f B^ngai 
near «fagganat on the east, and extending souths 
erly to Cape Comorin, Was, with the exception 
perhaps of a few mountainous ttaets, under the 
domination of one arbitrary despot. The indi». 
cretion of rsgah, or ting, Ram-ras, the last pritoce 
ikider.whom it was united, caused the dismein^ 
berinent of this vast monarchy, and^this is the rea- 
son why it is now divided among many sovereignti 
professing different religions. Ham-ras had three 
^orgian slaves in his servids, whom he distiti- 



Digitized by 



Google 



gobbed by eirery mark of fotoilr, and at leng^ 
fiaminated to the go^enm^nt of thrte <tonBider<« 
able diBtriota. One was appointed governor of 
nearly the whole of the territory hb the Deoeail 
which is now in the ppssestion of Ae Mogul ; 
Dowktabad was the capital of that goTetnment^ 
Wfaieh extended from Bider^ Paranda asd SnriM 
tb Nirbidda. The territory now formiog th« 
kingdom of Yisia^ur was the portion of tiie 
second fiiTourite; and the thhd obtained the 
country eompreheiided in the present Idngdom of 
Otfkonda. These three slaves became extremefy 
rich and powerfel^ and as they professed the 
muhammedan faith aad deolated thiimselves c^ 
the Schias ieet^ which is that efthe> Persians^ they 
received the dountenande and support of a great 
nnmborof Moguls in the service]ofRara**ras. They 
eoaid not, even if so disposed, have embraced the 
rdngion ef the Hindoo!, because {he pagans of 
IhcUa admit no stranger to the participition of 
diiftr mysteries. A rebdlion, in which the threo 
Oeorgian slaves united, terminated in the mur- 
der of Ram-^ras, after whidi they returned to 
their respective govemmentSi and usurped the 
tide of shah, er kii^. Ram^^ras^s i^fldrea^ ii^ 
capnble of contending with these men, remmned 
quietly in the country kncnim cmnmonly by the 
name cat the Caitoatie, and called in our chortd 
BoMgtier, where thehr posterity are rajahs to Ab 
day. The remainder of the Peninsuia vfM^ splH 
at the same thne into all those smaller states s^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



216 TRAVELS IN THE 

ekisting^ governed by rajahs, naiques, of petty 
kings. While the successors of the three usurpers 
preserved a good understanding with each other^ 
they were able to defend their kingdoms^ and to 
maintain serious wars against the Moguls ; but 
when the seeds' of jealousy were sown among 
them, and they chose to act as independent 
sovereigns who stood in no need of foreign assist- 
ance, they experienced the fatal effects of disunion. 
Thirty-five or forty years ago, the Mogul availing 
himself of their differences, invaded the dominions 
of Nejam-Shab, or king Nejam, the fifth or »zth 
in succession from the slave and made himself 
master of the whole country. Nejam died apri* 
sonier in Dowlatabad, his former capital. 

Since that period, the kings of Golcdnda. have 
been preserved from invasion, nob in consequence 
of their great strength, but of the employment 
given to the Mogul by the two sister kingdoms, 
and of the necessity he was under to capture their 
strong places, such as Amber, Paranda and* Btder^ 
before Golconda could be prudently attacked. The 
safety of those kings may also be ascribed to 
the wisdom of their policy. Possessing great 
wealth, they have always secretly supplied the 
monarch of Visiapour with money, to enable' him 
to defend his country ; so that whenever the 
latter is threatened, the king of Golconda inva- 
riably marches an airmy to the frontiers, to shew 
the Mogul not only that preparations are made for 
internal defence, but that an ally is at hand to 



Digitized by 



Google 



mogul: EMFIRE. 217 

assist Visiapour, if driven t6 extremity. It appears 
likewise that the government of Golconda employs 
large sums as bribes to the generals of the Mogul's 
army^ who therefore constantly give it as their 
opinbn that Visiapour ought to be attacked raiher 
than Golconda^ on account of its greater proximity 
to Dowlatabad. Indeed^ after the convention 
concluded^ as we have seen, between Aureng-^Z6be 
and the present king of Golconda, the former has 
Ho great inducement to march troops into > that 
kingdom, which he probably considers as his own* 
It has been long tributary to the Mogul, to whom 
it presents annually a considerable quantity of 
hard cash, home manufactured articles of exquisite 
workmanship, and elephants imported from Pegu, 
Siam and Ceylon. There is now no hostile fortress 
between Dowlatabad and Golconda; and Aureng- 
Z6be feels confident, therefore, that a single cam- 
paign would suffice to conquer the country. In 
my own opinion, nothing has restrained him from 
l^ttempting that conquest, but the apprehension of 
having the Deccan overrun by the king of 
Visiapour, who knows that if he permits his neigh- 
bour to fall, his own destruction must be the neces- 
sary consequence. 

From what I have said,, some idea msty be 
formed of the present state of the king of Gk)lconda 
in relation to the Mogul. There can be no dOubt 
that his power is held by a most uncertain, tenure. 
Since the nefarious transaction in Golconda, 
planned by £mir*JemIa and executed by Aureng- 



Digitized by 



Google 



tl8 TRAVBL8 IN THB 

Bitkey^^Mkiug has k»t all metitid energy^ imd has 
CMJted to hold thd l^ilis vi go v ci'n mtft i t > Ho nerM 
git^peafi iti:piiblie to give airdiente and BdnnnisM 
jimiico aecording to the custom of the oountfy; 
nolrdodS' be nmtute dut^ide the wails of thd fintross 
of GoioondA^ CdnfosioD and iinistule air^ ds^ 
nabiral and isaayoidable consequences of this stat^ 
of tluogs. The grandees, totailjr disFeg^trdfao^ tho 
oottmiaiids of a monaiteh, for whom they no longer 
hA eiA»r afifection or respect^ exercise a disgust* 
iiig tyranny; and l^e people^ inpatient to ibrow 
off the galling ycke, wonld gladly subont to iht 
taoie ^qattaUe gortsmment of Avreng-iSdbe, 

I shall adrett to five or six £Mt8 that prore thit 
low state ^^f degradation to which this wretched 
Ui^ h rcNiuoedu 

L When I visited Qdloonda^ in the year 1667> 
asi ambassador extraordinary arrived from Anrettgw 
2i6be, for the purpose of declaring war, unless the 
Img supplied the Mogvl witJk ten thousand cavahry 
to act against Visispout. Thk force Waa itM 
faideed granted ; but, what pleased AurenguZ^oii 
sim better, as mndb money waa given as is €00- 
sidered sufficient for the maintenance of such 4 
body of cavalry. The king paid extravagant 
h4nouM to (this and}as8ador aAd loidEed him with 
▼iduaUo presenfal, both £mr haisadf and the Mogul 
hibnlaster* 

II* Anteng-Zlbe's orditiaary amlMMsadpr att^ 
ocNurt 6f Golconda issnes his commands, grants 
passpovts,. mraaces and iD-treats the people, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOQUL EMPIRE. 219 

ifidtort, il^ksm^Juttswiihtb^tincoatrdQcdiEiii^ 
ikcgnbf of an absokite soveiragn. 

IIL Emir^emla's ton, MidiiMt-Bm^fiiuiti^ 
dltkou^ nothing m^^ than one of Aaten|^*Z&Ws 
omahB, is so mneh ^ipected in 6okoncbi» thart 
the tapta, his agent or broker at Mmsiili{mlaili^ 
aiets as master of tiie port. He buys and ielk^ 
a^ihnts and elears ^ut dargoes, free of eVerj impost 
bsdA without any person's inteartention. So bowadk 
less was the father's ikiftnence formerly ns tlw 
dovntry, &at it has descended to the son ae H 
mditter of right or necessity. 

IV. Sometimes idle Dutch presnme ixihlof mA 
osbbavgo on all the Golconda nerohant^TesSeis m 
^be port of Misnlipatatn; nor will tbey msSkx 
them to dc^rt until die Isktug^ comply with tbritt 
demands. I have known tbtoi e^en proteal 
a^^atnst tl^ king because the governor of Maaoii* 
patam prevented them from taking fofciUe 
possessioik of axk Engliah ship in the port, by arm- 
ing the whole population, threa/teaing ta bum the 
Biiibck &cteryt and to p«i all these insolent 
Isteigntea to the sWord. 

y . Anotiier symptom of decay in thk kingdom 
is the debas^ state of the clirnnt com ; whidr ii 
extremely prejii^cial far the commerM of the 
cowttry. 

y I. A sixth instance I would adduce of the faUen 
power of the king of Goloonda, is dkat the Pet* 
taguese, wretched, poor a»i despimd as they-ttfi 
become, sctuple not to menace him wit^ wnr, 



Digitized by 



Google 



220 TRAVELS IN THE 

aad with the cf^ure and pillage of Ma8i4ipa£am 
and other towns if he refase to cedeSt.. Thomas^ a 
place which these san^e Portuguese^ a few years 
ajgo^ voluntarily resigned into his. hands to ayx>id 
the disgrace of yielding it to the. superior/pow^ 
of r the Dutch. 

. Many intelligent persons^ however, assured 
me^ when I was in Golconda^ that the king is hy 
no means devoid of understandiij^g ; that this ap- 
pearance of weakness and indecision and of in- 
difference to the affitirs of government/ is assumed 
for the purpose of deceiving his enemies ; that he 
has a ' son concealed from the public eye^ of an 
ardent and aspiring spirit^ whom he intends to 
place on the throne at a favourable juncture, and 
then to violate his treaty with Aureng-Zdbe. Leav- 
ing it to time to decide upon the soundness of these 
opinions, we shall proceed to say a few words 
about Visiapour. 

ThattCountry, though it has to contend fre- 
quently with the Mogul/still preserves the name 
of an independent kingdom. The . truth is, that 
the generals employed against Visiapour, like com- 
manders employed in every other service, are 
delighted to be at. the head of an army, ruling 
at a distance from the court with the authority 
of kings. They conduct every operation, therefore, 
witii languor, and avail themselves of any pretext 
for the prolongation of war which is alike the 
source of their emolument and dignity. It i^ 
become a proverbial saying in Hindostan, that 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE, 22 1 

the^DdGCsm is the Indian soldiefs .te'ead; and 
support. It should also be observed, that : the 
kingdom of 'Visiapour>> abounds with almost im- 
pregnable fortresises in mountainous situations, 
and that the country on the side of the Great 
Mogul's territories k of a peculiarly difficult 
aecess> owing to the scarcity both .of forage and 
of good wholesome water. The ^ capital is ex- 
tremely strong; situated in an arid and sterile soU, 
and pure and palatable water is found only within 
the gates. 

Visiapour, however, is verging toward disso- 
lution. The Mogul has made himself master of 
Paranda, the key of the kingdom; of Bider, a 
strong ■ and handsome town, and of other impor- 
tant places. The death of the king without male 
issue must also operate unfavourably on ' the fu- 
ture concerns of this country. The throne is 
filled by a young man, educated, and adopted as 
her son, by the queen, sister of the king of 
Golconda, who, by the by, has been. ill requited 
for her kindness. She returned recently/ from 
Mecca, and experienced a cold and insulting 
recepition ; the young monarch pretending that 
her conduct on board the Dutch vessel which con- 
veyed her to Mokha, was unbecoming both : her 
sex and rank. It is even said that she was crimi- 
nally' connected with two or three of the crew; 
who abandoned the vessel at Mokha for the pur- 
pose of accompanying the queen to Mecca. 

Sevajee, the heathen leader lately spoken of, 



Digitized by 



Google 



ti22 TAAVILS III TH< 

fmAiSmghff the distracted^ stttteoftbi^khigdotti, 
has sdflEed upon many stoong kotds^ situated fot 
the most past in the mountains. This man is 
exeroising all the powers of an independent sore- 
irngBk ; kughs at the threats both of the Mogul 
and of the king at Visiapou^ ; makes freqneAt in- 
cursions^ and ravages the country on e^ery nde> 
itom Surat to the gates of Ooa. Yet it ^n* 
net be doubted that^ notwithstanding thp deep 
wounds which from time to time he inflicts ppdtt 
Yisiapour, the kingdom finds in this daring ohi^* 
tain a seasonaUe and powerful coadjutor. He 
distsa^ the attention of Aureng-Z^be by his 
bold and neycr-^eeasing enterprises, and affimte so 
BMieh emrployment to the Indian armies, that the 
Mogul cannot find the opportunity of achieving 
the conquest of Yisiapour. I{ow to put down 
Serine is become Ihe object of chief import- 
anoe. We have se^i hs success at; Surat; he 
afterwards captured the Portuguese settlement of 
Baniws, an island contiguous to Goa. 

I was still at Golcoada when I heard of Shdk- 
l^uin'sdeath. Aureng-Z&be seemed much ajifected 
by the event, and discovered all the mai^ of grief 
winch a son can express for the loss of his &thev. 
He set out immediately for Agra, where Begum- 
Saheb recaved him with distinguished honour. 
She hung the mosque with tapestries of rich 
boecades, and in the same manner decorated the 
place where the Mogul intended to dKght before 
he ^eced the fortress. On arriving at the 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOftUL EMPIRE. B2S 

women's apartment in the seraglio, the princess 
presented hitn with a large golden basin, fait of 
precious stones— her own jewels, and those which 
belonged to Shah4eha^, Moved by th^ Wf^i- 
&0nce of his vdceptioB, auid the nffedtionatii pro- 
testations of his sister, Aureng-Zfebe forgave her 
former conduct and has since treated her with 
Mildness an4 Ub^raliity. 

J have now brought this his^x)^ to % ^los^ 
]^j readers have no doubt condemned the i94W9 
by wluch the reigqing Mogul i^tained the summU 
of power. Those means wer^ indeed UQjwt and 
^ru^l ; but it is not p^rheips fair to judge hiift 
by the rigid rules which we^pply to the character 
of European princes^ In our c^u^artej of the globes 
thp succession to t\m crown isf settled ia favour of 
the eldest by wi«;e and fixed, laws; but in tiwr 
dostan the right of governing i$ usmilly diluted 
Ij all the sons <tf iko deceaued mon«rcb, e*cli <rf 
whom is reduced to the cruel alternative of M^j^ 
filing his broUier^ th»t he himself mi^ rejigs or 
of suffering his own life to be forfeited for ibp 
iiecuiity and stability of the domini<H]i of anotbiiv 
y^J; fiveja those who may maintain that the ciii?- 
cunista^ces pf cpuntry, birth and edncal^ ^ffwi 
no palliation of the conduct pursmed by AurM^ 
Zebe, must admit tb»t this prince is endow^ 
with a versatile and rare genius, that he is a con- 
summate statesman and a magnificent potentate. 



Digitized by 



Google 



224 TRAVBLS IN THE 

A LETTER TO THE MINISTER OF STA.TE COLBERT ; OK 
THE EXTENT OF HINDOSTAN ; ON THE CIRCULA- 
TION OF GOLD AND SILVER^ WHICH ARE FINALLY 
SWALLOWED UP IN THE COUNTRY", ON THE RICHES, 
STRENGTH, ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE ; AND ON 
THE PRINaPAL CAUSES OF THE DECLINE OF THE 
ASIATIC STATES. 

In Asia, my lord, the great are never approached 
empty-handed. When I had the honour to kiss 
the great Mogul's vest, I presented him with 
eight rupees, as a mark of respect; and I made 
a tender of a knife-case, a fork and a pen-knife 
mounted in amber to the illustrious Fazel-Khan,* 
a minister charged with the weightiest concerns of 
the empire, on whose decision depended the amount 
of my salary as physician. Though I presume not 
to introduce new customs into France, yet I can- 
not be expected, so soon after my return from Hin- 
dostan, to lose all remembrance of the practice 
just mentioned, and hope I shall be pardoned for 
hesitating to appear in the presence of a king who 
inspires me with very different feelings than did 
Aureng-Z6be; or even in that of his minister, 
deserving my respect much more than Fazel- 
Khan,' without some small offering, which may 
derive value from its novelty, if not from the hand 
that bestows it. The late revolution in India, 
so full of extraordinary events, inay be deemed 

♦ The perfect lord. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 225 

worthy the- attention of our great monarch ; and 
this .letter, considering the importance of its 
matter, may not be unsuitable to the rank you 
bear in his majesty's council. It seems, indeed, 
addressed with propriety to one whose measures 
have so admirably restored order in many de- 
partments which, before my departure from 
France, I feared were irremediably confused ; to one 
who has evinced so much anxiety to make known 
to ,the ends of the earth tthe character of our 
sovereign, and of . what the. French people are. 
capable, in the execution of whatever you project 
for their benefit and glory. 

It was in Hindostan, my lord, whither your 
fame extends, and from which country I am lately 
returned after an absence of twelve years, that 
I ; first. became acquainted with the happiness 
of France, and with the share which you have had 
in ptromofcing it, by your unwearied attention and 
brilliant abilities. This is . a theme .on which 
I could fondly dwell ; but why should I expatiate 
on .facts already and universally admitted, wlien 
my present purpose is to treat of those which are 
ne.w and unknown ? It will be more agreeable to 
you if I proceed, according to my promise, to 
furiiish such materials, as may enable your 
lordship to form some idea of the actual state 
of India. 

The. maps of Asia point out the. mighty extept 
of the Great Mogul's , empire, known commonly 
by the name of the Indies, or Hindo$ton, I have 

Q 



Digitized by 



Google 



mt' ip^itsftHred it with mathemai^ieal exactness ; btrt 
ji^dgingfimn the or^nary rate of travellings and 
qonsidering that it is a journey i^{ three months 
from the froaitier of the kingdom of Golconda to 
Hazni, or rather beyond it^ near to Candahar^ 
whieh is the first town in Persia, ihe distance 
between those two extreme points cannot be less 
ihmi five hundred French ki^ues^ or five times 
as far as from Paris to Lyons. 

It is important to observe^ that of this vast 
tract of country, a large portion is extremely 
fertile ; the large kingdom of Bengal, for instance, 
surpassing Egypt itself, not only in the production 
of rice, com, ^d other necessaries of life, but of 
innumerable articles of commerce which are not 
fiultivated in Egypt; such as silks, cotton, and 
indigo. There are also many pmrts of India, 
9¥liere llie population is sufficiently abundant, and 
the land pretty well tilled ; ap^ where the artist, 
although naturally indolent, is yet reduced to the 
Beoessfty of attending to his work, in manufae- 
Auring carpets, bf oeades, embroicteries, gold and 
iihrer cloths, and the various sorts of silk and 
cottmi gopds, which are used in the country or 
exported abroad. 

It should rn/^ escape notice that gold and 
silver, after eiirculating in every other quarter oif 
the globe, come at length to be absevbed in 
iiin(ks(an^ Of the quantity drawn Irom^ America, 
{od dispersed among the d^flferent Europeaa 
irtates, a part finda its way through variouis 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL £MI»WB. 2!^t 

channels^ td Turkey for the pay&ieilt of ctom- 
iQodities imported from that country i AhA it pari 
passes into Persia, by way of Smyrna,* for th^ silKs 
laden at that port. Turkey cktmot di^j^enliSe ^^ith 
the coffee^ whiehshe receives frOip Y^niefli orr Ar^Wa 
Felix ; and the productions of Ifidia^ £ite e^tially ti€^ 
cessary to Turkey^ Yemen, and Persia. Thils it 
happens that these countries are tihAbt the cte^es- 
sity of sending a portion of their g^}A afnd Hhbi 
to Mokha, on the Red Sea, near Babdrtiatidel ; W 
l^sora, at the top of the Persian Gtilf ; aihd W 
Bunder Abas, or Gombroon^ near Ormtii ; y^i&cb 
gold said silver are exported to Hindostan by the 
vessels that arrive every year, in the monsoon sea- 
son, at those three celebrated ports, )ad6n w'ith 
goods fronof that country. LM it aleor he borne iii 
mind that all the vess^, whethefT IndiaM, Datchy 
EngKsh, or Portnguetee, which ^e*y yea# datrry 
cargoes of lAdian merchandize to Pegu, Taftneste- 
rim, Siam, Ceylon, Acheen-, Makassar, the Al^- 
dives, Mosambique, and other pl^es> bring batek 
to Hindostan from those countri^^ a largef qualtf6it;f 
of the precious metals^ whick i^ar^ the fat6 6f 
those brotight from Mokha, Bassora, ^tti Bunder 
Abas. And in regard .to the gold and" silv'er whi^h! 
tlw Dutch draw from the mines .of SapHA, a p^t 
isp sooner or later, introduced into liindostdA;: 
and whatever is brought directly by sea^, eithei^ 
from Portugal or fi^om France^ fklHtjIm leaves 
fedia, returns being made to Euvo^ m lilerchafA- 
diie. 



Digitized by 



Google 



228 TRAILS IN THB- 

I am aware it may be Baid, that Hindostaitis 
in want of copper, cloves, nutmegs> cinnamon^ 
elephants, and other things, with which she is 
supplied by the Dutch from Japan, Molucca, 
Ceylon, and Europe;— that she obtains lead from, 
abroad, in part from England; broad cloths. and 
other articles from France;— that she is in need r 
of a considerable number of foreign horses, re- 
ceiving annually more than five and twenty: 
thousand from Usbec, a great many from Persia 
by way of Candahar, and several from Ethiopia, 
Arabia and Persia, through the ports of Mokha,: 
Bassora and Bunder Abas. It may also be 
observed that Hindostan consumes an immense 
quantity of fresh fruit from Samarcand, Bali, 
Bukharia, and Persia; such as melons, apples,, 
pears and grapes, eateif at Delhi and purchased, 
at a very high price nearly the whole winter ;-^ 
and likewise dried fruit, such as almonds,* pistachio, 
and hazel nuts, plums, apricots and raiisdns, which 
mfiy be procured the whole year round ;— ^that she. 
imports a small sea shell from the Maldives, used 
in Bengal, and other places, as a species of small 
money ; an^bergris from the Maldives and Mosam- 
bique ; rhinoceros' horns, elephants' . teeth, . and- 
slaves from Ethiopia ; musk and porcelain from 
China, and pearls from Beharan and Tuticorin,. 
near Ceylon. 

The importation of all these articles into 
Hindostan does not, however, occasion the export 
of gold and silver ; because the merchants who 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL £MPmE. 229 

bring tbem/ find it advantageous to take back^ 
in exchange^ the productions of the country. 

Supplying India with articles of foreign growth 
or manufacture^ does not, therefore, prevent that 
country from absorbing within itself a large 
portion of the gold and silver of the world, 
admitted through a variety of channels, while 
there is scarcely an opening for its return. 

It should also be recollected, that the Great 
Mogul constitutes himself heir of all the omrahs^ 
or lords, and* likewise of the manseb-dars, -or in- 
ferior lords, who are in his pay ; and, what is of the 
utmost importance, that he is proj)rietor of every 
acre of land in the kingdom, excepting, perhaps, 
some houses and gardens which he sometimes 
permits his subjects to buy, sell and otherwise 
dispose of. 

I think I have shewn that the precious metals 
must abound in Hindostan, although the country 
be destitute of mines ; and that the Great Mogul, 
lord and master of the greater part, must ne- 
cessarily be in the receipt of an immense revenue^ 
and possess incalculable wealth. 

But there are many circumstances to be con- 
sidered, as forming a counterpoise to these riches. 

I. Of the vast tracts of country constituting 
the empire of Hindostan, many are little more 
thi&n sand, or barren mountains, badly cultivated^ 
and thinly peopled ;* and even a considerable 
portion of the good land remains untilled from 
want of labourers; many of whom perish in 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



930 TK^VBiifii w Tn% 

cpp^equf ncc; of the bad treatment they ?}^ri^(iQe 
from th^ governors. These poor people^ wh^ 
iqqapahl^ of discharging the d^pxands of th^ 
rapacious lords, are not only oft^n deprived of the 
means of subsistence, but are bereft of th^i^ 
obildren, who are carried a^ay as slav^. Thu^ 
it happens that many of the pe^sai^try, driv^. to 
despair by so execrable a tyranny, abandon the 
country, ai^ seek a more tplerable mode of ex- 
istence, eithe? in the towps, Qr camps j as portert^ 
cBxriexfi of water^ or cavalry servant! • Sometimc^i 
they fly to the territories of a rajahjt b^cav^ then? 
they find le^s oppiression, and are ^owed a 
^^eate^ degi^ee of comfort. 

II. The empire of the Gre^ Mogul compT^ 
h^nds several nattions, over which he is not abw* 
lute master. Most of them still retain their own 
peculiar ch^e^ or sovereign^,] who ob^ the Mogul 
(K pay him tribute oAly for compulsioii. In 
m^i^j instances this tribute is pf trifling amount ; 
in otheri;, ^one is pa^d ; 9^d I shall adduce in* 
st^Aces of vatjion^i wbicjh, ip&tead of paying, i»ceii^ 
tribute. 

Tb^e pet<iy sqyereignties bordering the Persian 
frowtier?^ fpr cflcapfipl^, seWom p?y tribute eitha 
to the IM[pgul qir to the kujig of Persia. Nor can 
the fo;i;DftBr b? sa^d to r^^^ye wy l^ing coB4id«(-' 
ajbl^ from the people of BaloocUstan, Afghanistafl^ 
%fld othei^ mountai^i^ers^ who ipcU^ se«m to fe^ 
W9?ly W^pend^njt of hgs^ as; %^ prov^ by thjwr 
Wnc^mc^ wbwk <*e Mogirt maijqtei ft«n. A^bMfc 



Digitized by 



Google 



Mt the Inditti to Cabul $ for tbe pi»p9i9 <iC beskg^^ 
ing Candahar. By stopping the supply of watet 
from the monntafais, and pi eventing vtB descent 
istd the fields contiguous ta the^ public ready they^ 
completely arrested the army on i4& maireh, unttt 
the mountaineers received from the Mogul the pre>^ 
sents which they had solicited in the wsrf of almi. 
The Patans bIso are an iitfractabtd tM0/^ 
They are miuhammedaitis^ who fomierly habited 
a country in the vicinity of the Ganges, tcwatd 
Bengal. Before the invadion of Undiia by 1^ 
Mc^pzls> the Patans^ bad rendei!rad themsd^es^ Ibr- 
H^dable in several pkees. Their pow^ wai? Mi 
p(rincipalty at Delhi^ many of tibe ndghboorifi^ 
tB^jaia being their tributaries. EveA^ Ibe meniab 
aid carriers of water bekNigkig to Idiat naticmj-atie^ 
high spirited and warlike. ^' If it be ilot so, laay 
I never ascend the throne of Dd9uy' is 1^ usica) 
j^aseology of a Patau, when* wiskmg to cohlbrce 
tbe truth of any assertion. They held tbc Indians^ 
both pagans and Moguls^ in the utmolst contein)»t i 
and reeoUectiiig thet consid^ation iti whidi thejr 
were formeriy hdd in hiAvi^ ihtf mortally hate> 
the Moguls by whom tiveir ffttherer wese di^poiM 
sessed of great principalities, and driven ta thei 
moMQtaiiKi £ir from Delhi and Agva. In these 
mouatains seme Patans estabHdbed themselveB asi 

* The race of Afghans are commonly known in India by 
t&e name of Patans, the nieanhig or etymofogy of which de^ 
signtttioii dbes not seem td be mMttmnedl.—thM^tati^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



232 TRAVELS IN THE 

petty fik)yereigiis,or rajahs; but without any greltt 
power. 

The king of Visiapour, so far from paying 
tribute to the Moguls is engaged in perpetual 
war with him, and contrives to defend bis domi-^ 
nions. He owes his preservation kss to the 
strength of his arms than to many peculiar cir- 
cumstances. His kingdom is at a great distance 
from Agra and Delhi, the Mogul's usual places bf 
residence; the capital city/ called also Visiapour, 
is strong, and not easily accessible to an invading 
army, because of the bad water and scarcity of 
forage in the surrounding country ; and several 
rajahs for the sake of mutual security join' hiin, 
when attacked, with their forces. The celebrated 
Sevajee not long: ago made a seasonable diver* 
sion in his favour, by plundering and burning the 
rich sea7port of Surat.^ 

' There is again the wealthy and powerful king 
of Golconda, who secretly supplies the king of 
Visiapour with money, and constantly keeps an 
army on the frontiers, with the double object of 
defending his own territories and aiding Visia- 
pour^ in the event of that country being dosely 



' Finally, . among those not paying tribute may 
be numbered more than a hundred rajahs, or 
pagan sovereigns of considerable strength, dis- 
persed over the whole empire, some near and some 
at a distance from Agra and Delhi. Fifteen.or 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUIi EMPIRE. 233 

sixteen of these rajahs are rich and fprmidable^ 
particularly Rana^ formerly considered emperor 
of the rajahs^ and supposed to be descended from 
king Porus, Joy-Singh and Jesswint-Singh. If 
these three chose to enter into an offensive league^ 
they Would prove dangerous opponents to the 
Moguls each of them having. at all times the means 
of taking . the field with twenty thousand ca- 
valry ; better than any that could be opposed 
to them. These horsemen are called rajaputs^ 
br sons of rajahs. Their military occupation de- 
scends from father to son ; and every man receives 
a grant of land/ on condition that he bealwiays 
prepared to mount his horse and follow the rajah, 
whither he shall command. These men endure a 
great deal of fatigue, and require only discipline 
to become excellent soldiers. 

: III. It is material to remark that the Ghreat 
. Mogul is a muhammedan, of the same sect as the 
Sounnys, who, believing with the Turks that 
Osman was the true successor of Muhammed; 
are distinguished by the name of Osinanlees. The 
majority of his courtiers, however, being Persians, 
are of the party known by the appellation^ of 
Schias, believers in the real succession of All. 
Moreover, the Great Mogul is a foreigner in Hin- 
dostan, a descendant of Tamerlane, chief of those 
Moguls from Tartary, who in the year 1401 
overran and conquered India. CcmseqUently he 
finds himself in an hostile country, or nearly so ;:> 
a country containing hundreds of pagans to one 



Digitized by 



Google 



234 TRAVBLS IN THE 

Mogulj or even to one muhammedan. To main** 
tain himself in snch a country, in the midat of 
domestic and powerful enemies, and to be always 
prepared against any hostile .movement on the 
side of Persia or Usbec, be is under the necesnty 
of keeping up numerous armies^ even in time of 
peace. These armies are composed either of 
natives, such as riyaputs and patans, or of ge^ 
Auine Moguls and people who, though less 
erteemed, are called Moguls because white men^ 
foreigners, and mubajnmedans. The court itself 
does not now consist, as originally, of teal Moguls ; 
but is a medley of Ufibecs, Pearsiansw Arabs and 
Turks, GOT descendants from all these people; 
known, as^I said before, by the geaerai appdla^ 
tion of IMtoguIs* It shoold be added, however^ 
that children of the third or fcMortb geoenrtion, 
who have the brown complexion, and the laiguid 
mamier of the native Imdiansy aie held in much 
loss reltpect than new coiners, and are seldont in- 
vested with official ntuations i they consider them* 
selves hq>py if permitted to serve $» private sdU 
dieis in ihe in&ntry or cavafary.— But it k time 
to give your lordship some idea of the armies of 
the Gveat Mogul, in order that you may judge^ 
by the vast expenditure to which they subjeei 
hkn^ what are seally his efickive memus and sen 
dDWces. 

i shall first speak o£the]wkivelbrce> whiidi be 
canxet atvoid keeping in pay ^ 
Under ths head aie comprehended the mje^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



UOQVh GM?I}t£U 235 

puto of Joy-Singh and of JesswintrSingh ; to 
whoffli and, to a^veral other rajahs^ the Mogul 
^rant$ large mvas for the service of a certain 
pumber of their rajaputs, to be kept always 
ready and at his disposal. Rajahs bear an ^nal 
rmk with the foreign or mnhammedan omrahs^ 
whether employed in the army which the king 
retains at all times near his person, or in those 
^taAioned in theprovincea. They are also gene* 
9*ally subjected to the same regulations as the 
omrahs, even to mounting gu^d ; with this di£fer^ 
ence, however^ that the rajahs never mount, within 
a fortress, but invariably without the walls, under 
their own tents, not enduring the idea of being 
confined during four and twenty hours^ and always 
refusing to enter any fortress unless attended by 
rajaputs, men detenmned to sacrifice their lives 
for their leaders* This self-^evotioii has been su& 
ficiently proved wh^n^ttemp4;s have been made to 
d^al treacherously with a rajah. 

There are n^tiny reasons why the Mc^l is in* 
duced to retain rajahs in his service* 

L Rajaputs are not only excellent soldiieis> 
but, as I have said, some rajahs can in any o»e 
day bring more than tw^ity thousand to the 
field. 

II. They are necessary to keep ia check su^h 
rajahs as are UQt m %h» Mogul's pay ; te; seduce to 
submi^ion thpse ii^ho take «p amns ratlisr> than 
pay tnbut^j or refuse to joia i^ aatmy when Mtt»* 
nwpedby thfrking. 



Digitized by 



Google 



236 TRAVELS IN THE 

' IIL It enters into the king's policy to foment 
jealousy: and discord among the rajahs, and by 
caressing and favouring some more than others, 
he often succeeds/ when desirous of doinjg^ so, in 
kindling wars among them. 
' IV. They are always at hand to be employed 
against the Patans, or against any revolted omrah 
or governor. 

' ' ^ V, 'Whoever the king of Golconda withholds 
his tribute/ or evinces an inclination to defend 
the king of Visiapour or any neighbouring rajah 
whom the Mogul wishes to despoil or render tri- 
butary, rajahs are sent against him in preference 
to ;omrahs> who being for the most part Persians^ 
profesa the same religion, and belong to the same 
sect as the king of GolcOnda. 

VI. But the Mogul never finds the rajahs 
more useful than when he is engaged in hostility 
with the Persians. His omrahs, as I have just re- 
marked, are generally of that nation, and shudder 
at' the idea of fighting against* their natural king; 
especially because they acknowledge him' as their 
imam, their caliph or sovereign pontiff, and the 
descendant of Ali ; to bear arms against whom 
they therefore <;onsider a great crime. 

The Mogul is also compelled to engage Patans 
in his service by reasons very similar to those I 
have assigned for employing rajaputs. ' 

In;fine,lie is reduced to the neciessity of sup- 
poo^iog those troops of foreigners, or Moguls, 
which we have noticed; and as they form the 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL empire; 237 

principal force of the khigdomy and are maintained' 
at an incredible expense^ a detailed description of 
this force may not be unacceptable. 

These troops, both cavalry and infantry, may 
be considered under two heads ; one part as always 
near the Mogul's person ; the other, as dispersed 
in the several. provinces. . In regard to the cavalry 
retained near the king, I shall speak,, first of the 
omrahs, , then, of the .manseb-dars, next of the 
rouzin-dars ; and, last of all, of the common cava- 
liers. I shall then proceed to the infantry, and 
describe the musketeers and all the foot .soldiers 
employed in the artillery of both kinds. '. 

It must not be imagined that the omrahs or 
lords of the Mogul's court are members of ancient 
families, as our nobility in France. The king 
being proprietor of all the lands in the: empire, 
there can exist neither, dukedoms nor marquisates ; 
nor can any family be found possessed of wealth 
arising from a domain, and living upon its own* 
patrimony. The courtiers are often not even de-^ 
scendants of omrahs, because the king being heir 
of aU their possessions^ no family can long main-- 
tain its distinction, but, after the omrah's death/ 
is soou extinguished^ and the sons, .or at least the 
grandsons, reduced generally to a state bordering: 
on mendicity, and compelled to enlist as common 
^len in the cavalry of some omrah. . The king, 
however, usually bestows a small pension on the^ 
widow> and often on the family ; and if the omrahV 
life be sufficiently prolonged, he may obtain thej 



Digitized by 



Google 



238 TftAVBLS IN THfi 

adyancement of his children by royal htcmr, par«- 
tieularly if their persons be well formed^ and their 
complexions sufficiently fair to enable them to 
pass for genuine Moguls. But this advancement 
through special favour proceeds slowly^ for it is 
an almost invariable custom to pass gradually 
from small salaries^ and inconsiderable offices^ to 
situations of greater trust and emolument The 
omerahs^ there£3re> mostly consist of adventurers 
from different nations^ who entice one another to 
the court; and are generally persons of low 
descent^ some having been originally slaves, and 
the majority being destitute of education. The: 
Mogul raises them to dignities, or degrades them 
to obscurity, according to his own pleasure Md 
caprice. 

Some of the onurahs have the title of hazs^y, 
or lord of a thousand horse ; some, of doxAisaary, 
lord of two thousand horse ; soxm ol penge, lord 
of five thousand horse ; some of hecht, lorJ ot 
seven thousand horse ; some of dehhazary, lord of 
ten thousand horse ; and sometimes an omrah has 
the title of douazdeh haaary, lord of twelve libou^ 
SMid horse ; as was the case with the king's eldest 
son; Their pay is proportionate, not to the 
mnhber of mea, but to the number of horses> dnd 
tmof horsea are generally allowed to one cavalier, 
h^ order lliat the service may be better performed;^ 
Ibf in those hot countries it is usual to say that M 
sddier with at single horse has one foot on' the 
gsrdund. But let it not be sa^Kwd. that an 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOOUL^lfPIRB. 239 

omtah is expected to keep, or indeed that the 
king would pay for, such a body of horse as is 
implied by the titles of douazdeh and hecht hazary; 
high sounding names intended to impose on the 
credulous, and deceive strangers. The Mogul 
himself regulates as well the effective number 
that eaqh omrah is to maintain, as the nomini^ 
number which he need not keep, but which is also 
paid for, amd usually forms the principal part 
of his salary. This salary is increased by the 
money that the omrah retains out of every man's 
pay, and by what accrues from his &lse returns 
of the horses he is supposed to provide : all which 
renders the omrah's income v^y considerably 
particularly when he is so fortunate as to have 
sonae jagieer, or good land, assigned to him for 
the payment of his salary: for the omrah under 
whom I served, a penge-ha^sary, or lord of five 
theusmid, though without a jagieer, and paid out 
ol the treasury, was yet in the receipt of neaarly 
five thoussmd crowns per month, after the pagr-* 
meat of all« expences for the five hundred horse, 
at which his quota was fixed. Notwithatniding 
these large kioomes^ I was acquamted with very 
&« wealthy omrahs; on the contrary, most of 
tiiem Bxe in endiarrassed circumstances, and deeply 
m debt ; not that they cu*e ruined, like the nofailiiy 
of other countries, by the extravagance of their 
table^ but by the costly presents madis to the 
king fit certain annual festivals, ami by their 



Digitized by 



Google 



240 TRAVBLS^ IN THE 

large establishments of wires^ servants^ camels, and 
hors^. 

Theomrahsin the provinces, in the armies, 
and at court, are very numerous ; but it was not 
in my power to ascertain their number, which is 
not .fixed. I never saw less than five and twenty 
to thirty at court, all of whom were in the receipt 
of the large incomes already mentioned, dependant 
for the amount upon their number of horses, from 
one to twelve thousand. 

It is these omrahs who attain to the. highest 
honours and situations of the state, — at court, in 
the provinces, and in the armies; and who are, 
as they call themselves^ the pillars of the empire. 
They maintain the splendour of the court, and. are 
never seen out of doors but in the most superb 
apparel ; mounted sometimes on an elephant^ 
sometimes on horseback, and not unfrequently. in 
a palanquin attended by many of their cavalry, 
and by a large body. of servants on. foot, who 
take their station in front, and at either side, of 
their lord, not only to clear .the way, but to flap 
off the flies and brush the dust with tails of pea- 
cocks; to carry, the toothpick and salivary-box, 
water to allay the omrah's thirst, and sometimes 
story-books or papers. Every omrah at court, is 
obliged, under a certain penalty, to repair twice 
a day to the assembly, for the purpose of paying 
his^respects to the king, at ten or eleven . o'clock 
in the morning, when he is there seated to dis-. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 241 

pense ju3ilce> and at six in the erening. An 
^mrah must also, in rotation^ keep guard in the 
fortress once every week, during four and twenty 
hours. He sends thither his bed, carpet, and 
other' furniture ; the king supplying him with 
nothing but his meals. These are received with 
peculiar ceremony. Thrice the omrah performs 
thetaslim, or reverence, the face turned toward 
the royal apartment; .first dropping the hand 
down to the ground, and then lifting it up to the 
liead. 

Whenever the king takes an excursion in his 
palanquin/ on an elephant, or in a tucktravan, all 
the omrahs who are not confined by illness, dis- 
abled by age, or exempted by a peculiar office, 
are bound to accompany him on horseback, ex- 
posed to the inclemency of the weather and to 
suffocating clouds of dust. On every occasion the 
king is completely sheltered, whether taking the 
diversion of hunting, marching at the head of 
his troops, or making his progresses from one 
city to another. When, however, he confines 
his hunting to the neighbourhood of the city, 
visits his country house or repairs to the mosque, 
he sometimes dispenses with so large a retinue, 
and prefers being attended by such omrahs only 
as are that day on guard. 

Mansebdars are horsemen with manseb pay 
which is a peculiar pay, both honourable and 
considerable ; not equal to that of the omrahs, 

R 



Digitized by 



Google 



24i4 TRAVEL!^ IN mz 

but much greater tihan the eoibnion piqr^ Heme 
tBey are Idoked on as petty omrahs^ afad as 
being of the rank from which the tnnrahs are 
taken. They acknowk%e no o^er chief but 
the king, and have much ihe same duties imported 
upon them as the omrahs, to whom they would be 
equal if they had horsemen under them, as 
formerly was sometimes the case ; but now they 
have only two, four, or six horses of service, 
that is such as bear the king's mark ; and their pay 
is, in some instances, as low as one hundred^ aikd 
fifty rupees per mon^ - and riever lesceed^ sfeven 
huildred. Their numbte' is liofci fixed, » but they 
are mUch more namerow than the. omralrii: 
besides thdse in the provinces and armies, tbere 
are never less than two. or three hundrdd at 
court; 

Rouzlndars are also davaii^s, who ; receive 
ttteiir {)^y dail^^ as tbe^ wdrd imports r but their 
pajr is g^at^r, in heme instances, than that of 
m^ny^of the^mansebdar&t It is, however, of a dififei*- 
etit kind, and not thought so honourable. But the 
rouzindarK^ate not sdbject, like the manseb- 
dars, to the agenas^ that is are not bound to 
td;ke,at a Valuation, carpets^ and) other i pieces e(f 
furnitUrei^that have been vusetd in the king^s palace, 
and on which an unreasonable value is sdmetimes 
set. Their number is very, great They fill the 
iriferidi^* oflBces ; mahy being clerks rand nnd^^^ 
clerks ; while some are employed to affix the^ng's 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL SHPU^. 248 

s^et ta bartttes^ or orders for thiqf pffymeti^ 
of money. ; and they scruple not to receive bribes 
for the iquick issuing of t^iese docmnents. 

The common horsemen serve under the omr 
rahs : they are of two classes ; the first €on^ 
sists of those who keep a pair of the hawses whioh 
the omrah is bound to main^tain for the kija^'s 
service^ and which bear the omrah's mark on th^ 
thighs and the second of those who keep oiily <^e 
horse. The former are the more esteemed^ and 
receive the greater pay. The pay of the <savaliel» 
depends^ in a fifreat measure, on the generosity of 
the omrah, who may favour whom he pleases.; 
although it is understood % th^ Mogul thM 
he that keeps only one horse shall not receive Ijeas 
than five and twenty rupees a month, and on 
that footing he calculates his accounts with tibe 
omrahs. 

The foot soldiers receive the smallest ,pay; 
and to be sure the muiiketeers cut a soi^y figure 
at the best of times; which may be said to 
be when squatting on the ground, and r^#Ung 
their muskets on a kind of wooden fork wl^^ 
hangs to them- Even then, they are terribly afraid 
of burning their eyes or their long beards, dud 
above all lest some dgen, or evil s^pirit, should dause 
the bursting of their musket. Some have twenty 
rupees a month, some fifteen, some ten; but 
there are artillerymen who receive gr^t pay, 
particularly all the Franguisj or Europeans^-r 
Portuguese, English, Dutch, Germans, \ and 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



^44 T&AYELS IN THB 

French; fugitives from Goa» and from the Dutch 
and English companies. Formerly, when the 
Moguls were little skilled in the management 
of artiUery, the pay of the Europeans was more 
liberal, and there are still sonie remaining 
who receive two hundred jrupees a month : but 
now the king admits them with difficulty into 
the service, and limits their pay to thirty-two 
rupees. 

The artillery is of two sorts, the heavy and 
the light, or, as they call the latter, the artillery 
of the stirrup. With respect to the heavy artil- 
lery, I recollect that when the king, after his 
illness, went with hb army to Lahore and Kash- 
mire, to pass the summer in that ^^ paradise of 
India,** it consisted of seventy pieces of cannon, 
mostly of brass, without reckoning from two to 
three hundred light camels, each of which carried 
asmall field-piece of the size of a double musket, 
attached on the back of the animal, much in the 
same manner as swivels are fixed in our barks. 
1 shall relate elsewhere this expedition of Kash- 
mire, and describe how the king, during that 
long journey, amused himself, almost every day, 
with the sports of the field, sometimes letting his 
birds of prey loose against cranes; sometimes 
hunting the nilgaus, or grey oxen (a species of 
elk); another day hunting antelopes with tame 
leopards; and then indulging in the exclusively 
jroyal hunt of the lion. 

The artillery of the stirrup, which also acco in- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL BMPIEE. 24& 

panied the Mogul in the journey to Lahore and 
Kashmire^ appeared to me extremely well ap- 
pointed. It consisted of fifty or sixty small field- 
pieces^ all of brass ; each piece mounted on a well- 
made and handsomely painted carriage^ contain* 
ing two ammunition chests, one behind and 
another in front, and ornamented with a variety 
of small red streamers. The carriage, with the 
driver, was drawn by two fine horses, and at- 
tended by a third horse, led by an assistant driver, 
as a reI4y. The heavy artillery did not always 
follow the king, who was in the habit of diverging 
from the high road, in search of hunting ground, 
or for the purpose of keeping near the course of 
the waters. It could not move along difficult 
passes, or cross the bridges of boats thrown over 
the rivers. But the light artillery is always 
intended to be near the king's person, and cm 
that account takes the name of artillery of the 
stirrup. When he resumes his journey in the 
morning, and is disposed to shoot or hunt in game 
preserves, the avenues to which are guarded, it 
moves straight forward, and reaches with aU 
possible speed the next place of encampment, 
where the royal tents and those of the principal 
omrahs have been pitched since the preceding 
day. The guns are then ranged in front of the 
king's quarters, and by way of signal to the army, 
fire a volley the moment he arrives. 

The army stationed in the provinces diffars 
in nothiiig from that about the king'a person. 



Digitized by 



Google 



246 TJU»VBIi6 IN THE 

exicept iix its superior numbers. In every place 
there are omrahs, mansebdars> rpu2dnd«rs, 
comxnon cayaliers, infantry and artillery. In the 
Deccan alone the cavalry amounts to twenty or 
fire, and twenty, and jometimes to thirty thou* 
sand ; a force not more than sufficient to overawe 
the powerful king of Golconda, and to maintain 
the war agamst the king of Visiapour and the 
nyahs who, for the sake of mutual protection, join 
their, forces with his* The number of troops in 
the kingdom of CabuU which it is necessary to 
quarter in that country to guard against any 
hostile movement on the part of Persia, Baloodiis- 
tan, Afghanistan^ and other mountainous regions, 
timnot be less than twelve or fifteen thousand. 
bi the kingdom of Kashmire liiere are n»>re than 
feur thousand. In Bengal, so frequently the 
aeat of war, the nprnher is much greater ; and as 
thdre is no province which can dispense widi 
aknilitaiy fovee, mmreor less numerous, according 
to its extent and particular situation, the 
total amount of troops in Hindostan is almost 
incredible. 

Lciavmg out of o|ir present caleuiation the 
in^Mitry, which » of small amount^ and the 
number of horses, which is nicely noounal, and* is 
apt to deceive a siKperficial •ebserver, I should 
tb^^k, with 1M0J persons ;well conversinvt with 
this matter, th»t the effective cavalry, coouBo&ly 
iabout the kh»g^l; person, indudingri^pitts and 
Patans, amount to tfairky^fife er fbrty jdmisand ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



l!iihkb» added to thCKse i» th^ pTOvinc^g, iwjm:^ 
total of more than two hundred thousand horse. 

I have said that the infantry was incon- 
siderable. I do not think j;hat in the army 
immediately about the king, the number can 
exceed fifteen thousand, including Baiuasketeers, 
ftwt artillery, and generaUy eyery person con- 
nected with that artillery. From this, an estimate 
may be foj'med of the number of infantry in the 
pj'ovinces, I cannot account for the prodigious 
amount of infantry with which some peo|)b ftW^U 
the armies of the Gre^ Mogul, otherwise than by 
supposing that with the fighting men, they mu- 
feund serTjants> sutlers, jtradjesmen axid all tho^ 
individuals belonging to bi^»aars,^hq accompany 
.the troops* Including these followers, I can WfeU 
^CDHceiye that the army immediately about the 
Mng*s person, ipaxticularly when it is known that 
he intends to absent himself £or some time from 
his capital, may amount to ^wjo, or ev^en thi^ee 
hundred thousand infantry. This will nat he 
deemed an extravagant computation, if we beicr 
in mind tlm iipmense quantity of 'teats, kitchens, 
baggage, furniture ^nd .even women, usuafiy at- 
tetndant «on ;the army, fior the convey ^nce of all 
l^ese are, again required many elephants, cainels, 
jo^en, horses and porters. Your lordship will beiar 
M mind that, fmm the nature andgoyemm^:it x)f 
rj^is oms^y, where ^he king is sole propidetor .of 
;9^ tk^ lai^ in (the empire, a capital ^ity, stiak as 
I^Ihi or Agre|| de(^ipe3 ite chief fupport firom the 



Digitized by 



Google 



248 TRAVELS IN THE 

presence of the army, and that the population 
is reduced to the necessity of following the Mogul 
whenever he undertakes a journey of long con- 
tinuance. Those cities resemble any place rather 
than Paris ; they might more fitly be compared 
to a camp, if the lodgings and accommodations 
were not a little superior to those found in the 
tents of armies. 

It is also important to remark the absolute 
necessity which exists of paying the whole of this 
army every two months, from the omrah to the 
private soldier ; for the king's pay is the only 
means of sustenance. In France, when the exi- 
gences of the times prevent the government from 
immediately dbcharging an arrear of debt, an 
oflScer, or even a private soldier, may contrive to 
live for some time by means of his own private 
income ; but in India, any unusual delay in the 
payment of the troops is sure to be attended with 
fatal consequences ; after selling whatever trifling 
articles they may possess, the soldiers disband and 
die of hunger. Toward the close of the late civil 
war, I discovered a growing disposition in the 
cavaliers to sell their horses, which they would, 
no doubt, soon have done if the war had been pro- 
longed. And no v^onder ; for consider, my lord, 
that it is diflScult to find in the Mogul's army, a 
soldier who is not married, who has not wife, 
children, servants, and slaves, all depending upon 
him for support. I have known many persons lost 
in amazement while contemplating the millions of 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 249 

pay. Is it possible^ they have asked^ that any 
revenue can suffice for such incredible expenditure? 
seeming to forget the riches of the Great Mogul, 
and the peculiar manner in i¥hich Hindostan is 
governed. 

But I have not enumerated all the expences 
incurred by the king of India. He keeps in Delhi 
and Agra from two to three thousand fine horses^ 
always at hand in case of emergency : eight ot 
nine hundred elephants and a large number of bag* 
gage horses, mules and porters, intended to carry 
the numerous and capacious tents, with their 
cabinets ; his wives and women, furniture, kitchen 
apparatus, Ganges'-water, and several other things 
which the Mogul has always about him, whether 
in the field or in his capital, although never thought 
of in Europe. 

There are also the enormous expences of the 
seraglio, where the consumption of fine linens, 
gold cloths, brocades, silks, embroideries, pearls, 
musk, amber and sweet essences is greater than 
can.be conceived. 

Thus, although the Great Mogul be in the 
receipt of an immense revenue, his expenditure 
being much in the same proportion, he cannot pos- 
sess the vast surplus of wealth that most people 
seem to imagine. I admit that his income exceeds 
probably the joint revenues of the Grand Seignior 
and of the king of Persia, but if I were to call 
him a wealthy monarch, it would be in the 



Digitized by 



Google 



260 TRAYBLS IN THB 

sense that ^ treasurer is to be considered ffrealthy 
who pays with one hajid the laifge sums which 
he receives with the other. I should call that 
king eflfectively rich who, without oppressing or 
impoverishing his people, possessed revenues suf- 
fidi^nt to si^port the expences of a numerous and 
magnificent court — to erect grand and u&ieful edi- 
fices — to indulge a liberal and kind disposition — 
to maintain a military fQrce for the defence of his 
dominions — and, besides all this, to reserve an accu- 
mulating fund that would provide against any 
unforeseen rupture with his neighbours, although 
it should prove of some years' duration. The 
sovereign of India is doubtlesjs possessed pf many 
of these advantages, but not to the degr^ gp^^'^' 
rally supposed. What J have said pn tibje si^ject 
of the great expences to which he is unjavoidt^l^ly 
exposed, has perhaps inclined yoi| to ;this opiiiion ; 
and the two facts I am about to rela)(e> of which I 
had an opportunity to a$icertatfi the pprrectpiess^ 
will convince your lordship that the pecujniary 
resources of the Great Mogul hups^lf r^y }}p 
exaggexated. 

I. Txmard ihe conclusion f^ the late w^. 
Ai^eng-Z^he was perplexed how to pay and ^p- 
cply his lurmies, notwithstanding thftt ihe war h$td 
^continued but five years, that the pay of the 
{troops was less than usual, that, with the exception 
of Bengal where Sdltan iSujah stijl held pul;, a 
^oofound tranquillity reigned in every par^ ^f 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 251 

Hindostan^ and that he had so lately appropriated 
to himself a large portion of his father's trea- 
sures. 

II. Shah-Jehan^ who was a great economist, 
and reigned more than forty years without being 
involved in any considerable war, never amassed 
six crores of rupees.* But I do not include 
in this sum a great abundance of gold and silver 
articles, of various descriptions, curiously wrought, 
and covered with precious stones ; or a prodigious 
quantity of pearls and gems of all kinds, of great 
size and value. I doubt whether any other 
monarch possesses more of this species of wealth; 
a throne of the great Mogul, covered with pearls 
and diamonds, being alone valued, if my memory 
be correct, at three crores of rupees. But all these 
precious stones, and valuable articles, are the spoils 
of ancient princes, Patans and rajaputs, collected 
during a long course of years, and, increasing regu- 
larly under every reign, by presents which the om- 
rahs are compelled to make on certain annual 
festivals.f The whole of this treasure is considered 

* A crore of rupees is a hundred lacks, or a million 
Sterling. 

t The largest diamond probably ever heard of is one 
mentioned by Tavemier, who saw it in the possession of 
of Aureng-Z^be* It was about as big as a hen's ^egg, and 
weighed nine hundred carats in the rough. This was per- 
lutps the ** unparalleled" diamond which Bernier informs us 
(paf^ 23) Emir Jeinla presented to %ah-Jehan. 

The largest diamond bronglit to VEttrope is now in the 



Digitized by 



Google 



252 TRAVELS IN THE 

the property of the crown^ which it is criminal to 
touchy and upon the security of which the king, ia 
a time of pressing necessity, would find it ex- 
tremely difficult to raise the smallest sum. 

Before I conclude, I wbh to explain how it 
happens that although the gold and silver in- 
troduced into the empire centre finally in 
Hindostan, they still are not in greater plenty 
than elsewhere, and the inhabitants have less the. 
appearance of a monied people than those of many 
other parts of the globe. 

In the first place, a large quantity is melted^ 
remelted, and wasted, in fabricating women's 
bracelets, both for the hands and feet, chains^ 
ear-rings, nose and finger-rings, and a still 
larger quantity is consumed in manufacturing 
embroideries; alachas, or striped silken stuffi; 
touras, or tufts of golden nets, worn on turbans ; 
gold and silver cloths; scarfs^ turbans and, 
brocades. The quantity of these articles, made ia 
India, is incredible. All the troops^ from the 
omrah to the man in the ranks, will wear gilt 
ornaments ; nor will a private soldier refuse them 
to his wife and children, though the whole family 
should die of hunger ; which indeed is a common 
occurrence. 

The king, as proprietor of the land, makes 
over a certain quantity to military men, as an 

p088Q8sioi^ of the emperor of Russia. It weighs one handred 
and ninety-five carats, and was long employed a& the eye of 
a Brs^minical idoh-^Translator. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. ^53 

^uivalent for their pay ; and this grant is called 
jagieer^ or, as in Turkey, timar ; the word 
jagieer signifying the spot from which to draw, 
or the place of salary. Similar grants are made 
to governors, in lieu of their salary, and also for 
the support of their troops, on condition that they 
pay a certain sum annually to the king out of any 
surplus revenue that the land may yield. The 
lands not so granted are retained hy the king as 
the peculiar domains of his house, and are seldom, 
if ever, given in the way of jagieer ; and upon 
these domains he keeps farmers, who are also 
bound to pay him an annual rent. 

The persons thus put in possession of the land, 
whether as timariots, governors or farmers, have 
an authority almost absolute over the peasantry, 
and nearly as much over tlie artisans and mer^ 
chants of the towns and villages within their 
district ; and nothing can be imagined more cruel 
and oppressive than the manner in which it is 
exercised. There is no one before whom the 
4njured peasant, artisan or tradesman, can pour 
out his just complaints ; no great lords, parlia- 
ments or judges of presidial courts exist, as in 
France, to restrain the wickedness of those merci- 
less oppressors, and the cadis, or judges, are not 
invested with sufficient power to redress the 
»wrongs of these unhappy people. This sad abuse 
of the royal authority may not be felt in the same 
degree near capital cities, such as Delhi and 
Agra, or in the vicinity of large towns and sea- 



Digitized by 



Google 



254 TRAVELS IN THE 

ports, because in those places acts of gross injiUK 
tice cannot easily be concealed from the court 

This debasing state of slavery obstructs ti^ 
progress of trade and influences the manners and 
mode of life of every individual. There can be 
little encouragement to engage in commereial 
pursuits, when the success with which they may 
be attended, instead of adding to the enjoyments 
of life, provokes the cupidity of a neighbouring 
tyrant possessing both power and inclination to 
deprive any man of the fruits of his industry. 
When wealth is acquired, as must sometimes be 
the case, the possessor, so far from living with 
increased comfort and assuming an air of indepen- 
dence, studies the means by which he may appear 
indigent : his dress, lodging and furniture, conti- 
nue to be mean, and he is careful, above all things, 
never to indulge in the pleasures of the table* In 
the mean time, his gold and silver remain buried 
at a great depth in the ground ; agreeable to the 
general practice among the peasantry, artisans 
and merchants, whether muhammedans or pagans, 
but especially among the latter who possess 
almost exclusively the trade and wealth of the 
country, and who believe that tlie mcmey con- 
c€ialed during life will prove beneficial to them 
after death. A few individuals alone who derive 
their income from the king or from the omrahs, 
or who are protected by a powerful patron, are 
at no pains to counterfeit poverty, but partake of 
the comfojts and luxuries of life. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 255 

I hare no doubt that this habit of secretly 
burying the precious metals, and thus witiidraur^ 
ing them froth circulation, is the principal cause 
of their apparent scarcity in Hindostan. 

From what I have said, a question will natu^ 
rally arise, whether it would not be more ad* 
yantageous for the king as well as for the people, 
if the former ceased to be sole possessor of tl^ 
laud, and the tight of private property were 
recognized in Indi^ as it is with us? I have 
carefully compared the condition of European 
states, where that right is acknowledged, wiih 
the condition of those countries where it is not 
known, and am persuaded that the absence of it 
among the people is injurious to the best interests 
of the sovereign himself. We have seen how in 
India the gold and sih^er disappear in consequence 
of the tyranny of timariots, governors and 
farmers — a tyranny which eveii the monarch, if so 
dispose, has lio means of controuling in provinces 
not contiguous to his capital — a tyranny often so 
excessive as to deprive the peasant and artisan of 
the necessaries of life and leave them to die of 
misery and exhaustion— a tyranny owing to 
wliich those wretched people either have no 
children at all or have them only to endure the 
agonies of starvation and to die at a tender age^ — 
a tyranny, in fitie, that drives the cultivator of the 
soil from his wretched home to some neighbouring 
state, in hopes of finding milder treatment, or to 
the army, where he become;^ the servant of a 



Digitized by 



Google 



266 TRAVBLS IN THE 

common horsetnah: Ai^ the ground is 'seldom 
tilled otherwise than by compulsion^ ^nd as no 
person 18 found willing and able to repair the 
ditches and canals for the conveyance of water^ 
it happens that the whole country is badly 
cultivated^ and a great part rendered unproductive 
from the want of irrigation. The houses^ tOQ> 
are left in a dilapidated condition, there bdng'few 
people who will either build hew ones, or repair 
those which are tumbling down. The peasant 
cannot avoid asking himself this question : *' Why 
should I ' toil for a tyrant who may come to- 
Inorrow and lay his rapacious hands upon all 
I possess and value^ without leaving me, if such 
should be his humdur^ the means to drag on 
nay miserable existence ?" — The timariots, gover- 
nors and^ farmers, on their part reason in this man- 
ner '' Why should the neglected state of this land 
create uneasinesid in our minds ? and why should 
we expend bur own money and time to render it 
fruitful ? we may be deprived of it in a single 
moment^ and our exertions would benefit nei- 
ther ourselves nor our children. Let us draw 
from the soil all the money we can> though the 
peasant should starve or abscond^ and we should 
leave it, when commanded to quit, a dreary 
wilderness.** 

The facts I have mentioned are sufficient to 
account for the rapid declension of the Asiatic 
states. It is owing to this miserable system of 
government that most towns in Hindostan are 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 

/ 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 2&? 

made up of earth, mud, and ^ther wretelied 
materials i^^baTlirer^ is no city or town^hich, 
if it be not already ruined and deserted, does 
not bear evident marks of approaching decay 
Without confining our remarks to so distant a 
kingdom, we may judge of the effects of despotic 
power unrelentingly exercised, by the present 
condition of Mesopotamia, Anatolia, Palestine, 
the once wonderful plains of Antioch, and so many 
other regions anciently well cultivated, fertile and 
populous, but now desolate, and in many parts 
marshy, pestiferous, and unfit for human habi- 
tation. Egypt also exhibits a sad picture of an en- 
slaved country. More than one-tenth part of that 
incomparable territory has been lost within the 
last eighty years, because no one will be at the 
expence of repairing the canals and confining the 
Nile within its banks. The low lands are thus 
violently inundated, and covered with sand, which 
cannot be removed without much labour and 
expence. Can it excite wonder, that under 
these circumstances, the arts do not flourish here 
as they would do under a better government,, 
or as they flourish in our happier France ? No 
artist can be expected to give his mind to his 
calling in the midst of a people who are either 
wretchedly poor, or who, if rich, assume an appear- 
ance of poverty, and who regard not the beauty 
and excellence, but the cheapness of an article: 
a people whose grandees pay for a work of art 
considerably under its value, and according to 



Digitized by 



Google 



^6 TRAVELS IN THE 

**^Sn h^)'*'-»*ign: Ai the ground is seldom 
puQisE^aii unportunate artis^y xft timxubus^, -^t^ 

the korrah, that long and terrible whip hanging 

at every omrah's gate. 1$ it not enongh Bko tp 

damp the ardour of any artist^ when he feels lluit 

he can never hope to attain to any distinction; 

that he shall not be permitted to purchase ei^r 

oflSce or land for the benefit of himself and family ; 

that he must at no time miake it appear he ia the 

owner of the most trifling sum; and that he never 

venture to indulge in good fare, or to dres^ itx fii^ 

apparel, lest he should Create a suspicioiji of his 

possessing money ? The arts in India would Joqg 

ago have lost their beai:|ty and delicacy, if the tmo^ 

narch and principal omr^hs did not keep in their 

pay a number of artists who work in their bioufeSk 

teach the children, and are stimulated to e:fmti0^ 

by the hope of reward and the fear of the kiprrah. 

The protection afforded by powerful patrons tp 

rich merchants and tradesmen who give the work<- 

men rather more than the usual wages, t^nds a|s9 

to preserve the arts. I say rather more wfige(s^ 

for it should not be inferred from the goodnf ps of 

the manufactures, that the workman is held in 

esteem, or arrives at a state of independepce. 

Nothing but sheer necessity pr blow^ from ^ 

cudgel keeps him employed; he i^ever ean 

become rich, and he feels it no trifling matter 

if he have the means of satisfying the cravi^g^ of 

hunger, and of covering his body with the coarsest 

raiment. If money be gained, it does not m any 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 25*^ 

^made up of earth, mud, and other wreten^ 
ereStefbe^'msttiSL t^llfe merchant wl^o, in his turti> 
is not a little perplexed how to guard against 
some act of outrage and extortion on the part of 
hb superiors. 

A profound and universal ignorance is the 
natural consequence of such a state of society as I 
have endeavoured to describe. 1$ it possible to 
introduce in Hindostan academies and eollegea 
properly endowed? Where shall we seek fine 
founders ? or, should they be found, where are the 
scholars ? Where the individuals whose property 
is su£Scient to support their children at college ? 
or, if such individuals exist, who would venture to 
display so clear a proof of wealth? Lastly, if any 
persons should be tempted to comiuit this great im*- 
prudence, yet where are the benefices, the employ- 
ments, the offices of trust and dignity, that require 
ability and science and are calculated to excite die 
emulation and the hopes of the young student ? 

Nor can the commerce of ^ country so 
governed be conducted with the activity and 
success that we witness in Eur(^; few are 
the men who vnll voluntarily endure labour and 
anxiety, and incur danger, for another person's 
benefit, — for a governor who may appropriate to 
his own use the profit of any speculation. Let 
lliat profit be ever so great, the man by whom it 
has been made, must still wear the garb of 
indigence ; and fare no better^ in regard to eat- 
ing and drinking, than his poorer neighbours. 



Digitized by 



Google 



260 TRAVELS IN THE 

In csaes, indeed, where the merchant, is protected 
by a military man of rank, he may be induced to 
embark in commercial enterprises; but still he 
must be the slave of his patron, who will exact 
whatever terms he pleases as the price of his 
protection. 

The king of India cannot select for his 
service, princes, noblemen and gentlemen of opu* 
lent and ancient families; nor the sons of his 
citizens, merchants and manufacturers ; men of 
education, possessing a high sense of propriety, 
affectionately attached to their sovereign, ready 
to support, by acts of valour, the reputation of, 
their family, and, as the occasion may arise, able 
and willing to maintain themselves, either at court 
or in the army, by means of their own patrimony ; 
animated by the hope of better times, and satis- 
fied with the approbation and smile of their 
sovereign* Instead of men of this description, the 
Great Mogul is surrounded by slaves, ignorant 
and brutal ; by parasites raised from the dregs of 
society; strangers to loyalty and patriotism; 
full of insufferable pride, and destitute of courage, 
of honour and of decency. 

The country is ruined by the necessity of 
defraying the enormous charges required to main- 
tain the splendour of a numerous court, and to 
pay a large army maintained for the purpose of 
keeping the people in subjection. No adequate 
idea can be conveyed of the sufferings of that 
people. The cane and the whip compel them to 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. ^61 

indessant labour for the benefit of others; arid 
driven to despair by every kind of cruel treatment^ 
their revolt or their flight is only prevented, by 
the presence of a military force. 

• Themiseryofthis ill-fated country is increased 
by the practice which prevails too much at all 
times, but especially on the breaking out of an 
important war, of selling the different govem- 
ments^for immense sums in hard cash. Hence it 
naturally becomes the principal object of the indi- 
vidual thus appointed governor, to obtain repay- 
ment of the purchase money, which he borrowed 
* ^s he could at a ruinous rate of interest. Indeed 
whether the government of a province have or 
have not been bought, the governor, as well as the 
timariot and the farmer of the revenue, must find 
the means of making valuable presents, every 
year, to a vizier, an eunuch, a lady of the seraglior, 
. and to any other person whose influence at court h6 
considers indispensable. The governor must also 
enforce the payment of the regular tribute to the 
-king ; and although he was originally a wretched 
slave, involved in debt, and without the smallest 
patrimony, he yet becomes a great and opulent 
lord. > 

Thus do ruin and desolation overspread the 
land. The provincial governors, as before ob- 
served, are so many petty tyrants^ possessing a 
boundless authority; and as there is no one to 
whom the oppressed subject may appeal, he 



Digitized by 



Google 



269 TBAVELS IN THE 

cannot hope for redress^ let his injuries be erer so 
grievous or ever so frequently repeated. 

It is true that the Great Mogul sends vakear 
nevis to the various provinces; that is> per- 
sons whose business it is to communicate every 
event that takes place ; but there is gene^ 
rally a disgraceful collusion between these officers 
and the governor^ so that their presence seldom 
restrains the tyranny exercised over the unhappy 
people. 

Governments also are not so often and so 
openly sold in Hindostan as in Turkey. I say^ so 
openly, because the costly presents^ made occ^i- 
sionally by the governors^ are nearly equivalent 
to purchase money. The same persons too, gene- 
rally remain longer in their respective governments 
than in Turkey^ and the people are gradually l^ss 
oppressed by governors of some standing than 
when, indigent and greedy, they first take posses- 
sion of their province. The tyranny of these men 
is also somewhat mitigated by the apprehension 
that the people, if used with excessive cruelty, 
may abandon the country, and seek an asylum in 
the territory of some rajah, as indeed happens very 
often. 

In Persia likewise are governments neither so 
frequently nor so publicly sold as in Turkey ; for it is 
not uncommon for the children of governors to suc- 
ceed their fathers. The consequence of this better 
state of things is seen in tibie superior condition 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL ClfPlRB. 263 

of the people, as compared to those of Turkey. 
The Persians also are more polite, and there are 
even instances of their devoting themselves to study. 

Those three countries, Turkey, Persia, and 
Hindostan, have no idea of the principle of meum 
and tuuro^ relatively to land or other real posses- 
sions ; and having lost that respect for the right 
of property, which is the basis of all that is good 
and useful in the world, necessarily resemUe each 
other in essential points: they fall into the sfitme 
pernicious errors^ and must^ sooner or later, expe^ 
rience the natural consequences of those errors — 
tyranny, ruin, and misery. 

How happy and thankful should we feel, my 
lord, that in our quarter of the globe, kings are 
not the sole proprietors of the soil. Were they 
so, we should seek in vain for countries well 
cultivated and populous, for well built and opulent 
cities, for a polite, contented, and flourishing 
people. If this exclusive and baneful right pr^ 
vailed, far dilferent would be the real riches of the 
sovereigns of Europe, and the loyalty and fidelity 
with which they are served. They would soon 
reign over solitudes and deserts, over mendicants 
and barbarians. 

Actuated by a blind and wicked ambition to 
be more absolute than is warranted by the laws of 
God and of nature, the kings bf Asia grasp at 
every thing, until at lengA they fose every 
thing; or, if they do not always find themselves 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



264 TRAVELS IN THE 

without pecuniary resources, they are invariabfy 
disappointed in the expectation of acquiring the 
riches which they covet. If the same system of 
government existed with us, where, I must again 
ask, should we find princes, prelates, nobles, opu- 
lent citizens, and thriving tradesmen, ingenious ar- 
tisans and manufacturers 7 Where should we look 
for such cities as Paris, Lyons, Toulouse, Rouen, or, 
if you will, London, and so many others ? Where 
should we see that infinite number of towns and 
villages ; all those beautiful country houses, those 
fine plains, hills and vallies, cultivated with so much 
care, art and labour ? and what would become of 
the ample revenues derived from so much in- 
dustry, an industry beneficial aUke to the sovereign 
and the subject! The reverse of this smiling 
picture would, alas ! be exhibited. Our large 
towns would become uninhabitable in conse- 
quence of the unwholesome air, and fall into ruins 
without exciting in any person a thought of 
preventing or repairing the decay; our fertile 
hills would be abandoned, and the plains would be 
overrun with thorns and weeds, or coveted with 
pestilential morasses. The excellent accommo- 
dations for travellers would disappear ; the good 
inns, for example, between Paris and Lyons, 
would dwindle into ten or twelve wretched cara- 
vansaries, and travellers be reduced to the 
necessity of moving, like the Bohemians, with 
ierery thing about them. The Eastern caravan 



Digitized by 



Google 



HfOGUL EMPIRE4 26£r 

i^es* resemble large bams, raised and paved all 
round, in the same mminer as our Pont-neuf. 
Hundreds of human beings are seen in them, 
mingled with their horses, mules, and camels. In 
summer these buildings are hot and sufiPocat- 
ing, and in winter nothing but the breath of so 
many animals prevents the inmates from dying of 
cold. 

But there are countries, I shall be told, such 
for instance as the Grand Seignior's dominions, 
where the principle of meum and tuum is 
unknown, which not only preserve their existence, 
but maintain a great and increasing power. 

An empire so prodigiously extensive as that 
of the Grand Seignior, comprising countries whose 
soil is so deep and excellent that even without due 
cultivation it will continue fertile for many years, 
cannot be otherwise than rich and powerful. 
Yet how insignificant is the wealth and strength 
of Turkey in comparison of its extent and natural 
advantages. Let us only suppose that country 
as populous and as carefully cultivated as it 
would become if the right of private property 
were recognized and acted upon, and we cannot 
doubt that it could raise and support armies as 
numerous and well appointed jis formerly: but 
even at Constantinople three months are now 

* Karavanserah is aPersee and Arabic compound of Kar, 
signifying business, Rawan the participle of the verb rufteen^ 
to go, move, proceed, &c. and of Serah, an habitation*-^ 
Trunslator, 



Digitized by 



Google 



266 THAVBLS M THE 

required to raise five or mx thottsitBd men. t haTe 
travelled through nearly every part of the empire, 
and witnessed how lamentably it is ruined and 
depopulated. Some support it undoubtedly de« 
rives from the Christian slaves brought from all 
quarters ; but if that country continue many 
years under the present system of government^ 
it must necessarily fall and perish from innate 
weakness, though, to all appearance, it is now 
preserved by that weakness itself; for there is no 
longer a governor, or any other person, possessed 
of pecuniary means to undertake the least en- 
terprise, or who could find the men he would 
require to accomplish his purpose. Strange 
means of pteservation ! Turkey seems to owe its 
tri^sient existence to the seeds of destruistioti 
in its own bosom! To remove the danger of 
commotion and put an end to all fears on that 
suliject, nothing more appears necessary than the 
measure adopted by a Brahmin of Pegu, who 
actually caused the death of half the population by 
famine, converted the country into forests and 
prevented for many years the tillage of the land. 
But all this did not suffice : even the Brahmin's 
plan was unsuccessful ; a division of the kingdom 
took place, and Ava, the capital, was very lately 
on the point of being captured by a handful of 
fugitives from China. We must confess, however, 
that there seems little probability of the total 
ruin and destruction of the Turkish empire in our 
day ; (it will be happyif we see nothing worse f) 



Digitized by 



Google "w 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 967 

because the neighbouring states, so far from being 
able to attack it, are not in a condition to defend 
themselves effectually, without foreign aid, which 
remoteness and jealousy will always render tardy, 
inefficient and liable to suspicion. 

If it be observed that there is no reason why 
eastern states hould not have the benefit of good 
laws, or why the people in the provinces may not 
complain of their grievances to a grand vizier, or 
to the king himself; I shall admit that they are 
not altogether destitute of good laws, which> if 
properly administered, would render Asia as 
eligible a residence as any other part of the world. 
But of what advantage are good laws when not 
observed, and when there is no possibility of 
enforcing their observance? Have not the provincial 
tyrants been nominated by the same grand 
vizkr and by the same king who ahme have 
power to redress the peopfe's wrongs ? and is it 
not a fact that they have no means of appointing 
any but tyrants to rule over the provinces 1 6iiber 
the vizier or the king has sold the place to the go- 
vernor. And even admitting that there existed a 
disposition to listen to a complaint, how is a poor 
peasant or a ruined artisan to defray the expences 
of a journey to the capital, and to seek justice 
at one hundred and fifty or two hundred leagues 
from home ? He would be waylaid and murdered, 
as frequently happens, or sooner or later fall into 
the govemor^a hands, and be at his mercy. 
Should he chance to reach the royal reddenoe^ he 



Digitized by 



Google 



268 TRAVELS IN THE 

wotild find the friends of his oppressor busy in 
distorting the truths and misrepresenting the 
whole a£&ir to the king* In shorty the governor 
is absolute lord^ in the strictest sense of the word. 
He is in his own person the intendant of justice^ 
the parliament, the presidial court and the asses- 
sor and receiver of the king's taxes. A Per- 
sian, in speaking of these greedy governors, 
timariots, and farmers of revenue, aptly describes 
them as men who extract oil out of sand. No 
income appears adequate to maintain them, with 
their crowds of harpies, women, children and 
slaves. 

If it be remarked that the lands which our 
kings hold as domains, are as well cultivated, and 
as thickly peopled as other lands, my answer is 
that there can be no analogy between a kingdom 
whose monarch is proprietor of a few domains, 
and a kingdom where the monarch possesses, in 
his own right, every acre of the soil. In France 
the laws are so reasonable, that the king is the 
first to obey them t his domains are held without 
the violation of any right ; his farmers or stew- 
ards may be sued at law, and the aggrieved arti- 
san or peasant is sure to find redress against injus^ 
tice and oppression. But in eastern countries, 
the weak and the injured are without any refuge 
whatever ; and the only law that decides all con- 
trov^sies, is the cane and the caprice of a governor. 

There certainly however, some may say, are 
wme advantages peculiar to despotic governments : 



Digitized by 



Google 



IffOGUL EMPIRE. 239 

they have fewer lawyers, and fewer law-suits, 
and those few are more speedily decided* We can-* 
not, indeed, too greatly admire the old Perraui 
proverh, " Na-hac kouta better-ez hac deraz :*" 
*' Speedy injustice is preferable to tardy justice/* 
Protracted law-suits are« I admits insupportable 
evils in any state, and it is incumbent upon a 
soverdgn to provide a remedy against them. It 
is certain that no remedy would be so effica- 
cious as the destruction of the right of pri- 
vate property. Do away with this meum and 
tuum, and the necessity for an infinite number 
of legal proceedings will at once cease, especially 
for those which are important, long and intricate : 
the larger portion of magistrates employed by 
the king to administer justice to his subjects, will 
also become useless, as will those swarms of attor- 
nies and counsellors who live by judicial contests. 
But it is equally certain that the remedy would 
be infinitely worse than the disease, and that there 
is no estimating the misery that would afflict the 
country. Instead of magistrates on whose pro^ 
bity the monarch can depend, we should be at 
the mercy of such rulers as I have described. In 
Asia, if justice be ever adminstered, it is among 
the lower classes, among persons who being equally 
poor, have no means of corrupting the judges, 
and of buying false witnesses ; witnesses always 
to be had in great nunbers, at a cheap rate, and 
never punished. I am speaking the language of 



Digitized by 



Google 



370 l^AYEL^ IN TttE 

sevmral gears' experience ; my information was oIh 
tallied from various quarters, and is the result of 
maoEkj careful enquiries^ among the natives, Eu- 
ropean merchants long settled in the country^ 
ambassadors, consuls, and interpreters. My tes- 
timony is I know at variance with the account 
given by most of our travellers. They happened, 
perhaps, in passing through m town, to see two 
poor men, the dregs of the people, in the presence 
of a cadi. Our countrymen may have seen them 
hurried out of court to receive either the one or 
the other, if not both, hard blows on the soles of 
the feet, unless the parties were immediately dis^ 
missed with a maybale^baba, or a few soft words 
which the magistrate socnetimes utters when he 
finds that no bribe can be expected. No doubt, 
this summary mode of proceeding excited the 
admiration of our travellers, and they returned to 
France, exclaiming, '' O, what an excellent and 
quick administration of justice ! O, the upright 
cadis of Hindostan! Models for the imitation of 
French magistrates !" not ccmsidering that if the 
party really in the wrong had possessed the 
means of putting a couple of crowns into the 
hands of the cadi or his clerks, and of buying 
with the same sum two false witnesses, he would 
indisputably have gained his cause, or prolonged 
it as long as he pleased. 

Yes, my lord, I must repeat it ; take away the 
right of private property in lands, and you intro- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MoauL empire:. 271 

duce^ as a sure and necessary consequence, tyranny > 
injustice, beggary and barbarism: the ground 
will cease to be cultivated and become a dreary 
wilderness ; in a word, the road will be opened to 
the ruin of kings and the destruction of nations. 
It is the hope by which a man is animated, that 
he shall retain the fruits of his industry and 
transmit them to his descendants, that forms 
the main foundation of erery thing exceHent and 
bcMficial in thk sublunary state ; and if we take 
a review of the different kingdoms in the worid, 
we shall find that they prosper dr decline accord*- 
iog as tias principle is acknowledged or contenmed : 
in a word, it is the prevalence or neglect of this 
priiiQ^e which chants and divetrsifies the face of 
the earth. 



Digitized by 



Google 



272 TRAVELS IN THE 

A LETTER TO MONSIEUR DE LA MOTHE LE VAYER ; 
CONTAINING THE DESCRIPTION OF DELHI AND AGRA ; 
AND DETAILS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE GREAT MOGUL's 
COURT, AND OF THE MANNERS AND GENIUS OF 
THE PEOPLE OF INDIA. 

SIR, Delhi, Ist July, 1663. 

I KNOW that your first enquiries on my return 
to France will be respecting the capital cities of 
thb empire. You will be anxious to learn if 
Delhi and Agra rival Paris in beauty^ extent and 
number of inhabitants. I hasten, therefore, to 
gratify your curiosity upon these points and 
I may perhaps intersperse a few other matters 
which you will not find altogether uninteresting. 
In treating of the beauty of these towns, I 
must premise that I have sometimes been asto- 
nished to hear the contemptuous manner in which 
Europeans in India speak of these and other 
places. They complain that the buildings are 
inferior in beauty to those of the western worlds 
forgetting that different climates require different 
styles of architecture ; that what is useful and 
proper at Paris, London or Amsterdam, would be 
entirely out of place at Delhi ; insomuch that if 
it were possible for any one of those great capitals 
to change place with the metropolis of India, it 
would become necessary to throw down the 
greater part of the city, and to rebuild it on 
a totally different plan. Without doubt, the cities 
of Europe may boast great beauties; these. 



Digitized by 



Google 



HOGUL EMPIRE. 273 

liGweYer^ are of an appropriate diaracter, suited 
to a cold climate. Thus Delhi also may possess 
beauties adapted to a warm climate. The heat is 
so intense in Hindostan^ that no one^ not even the 
king, wears stockings ; the only cover for the feet 
being babouches, or slippers, while die head is 
protected by a small turban, of the finest and 
most delicate materials. The other garments are 
proportionably light During the summer season, 
it is scarcely possible to keep the hand on the 
wall of an apartment, or the head on a pillow. For 
more than six successive months, every body lies in 
the open air without covering — the common peo- 
ple in the streets, the merchants and persons of 
condition sometimes in their courts or gardens, and 
sometimes on their terraces, which are first care- 
fully watered. Now, only suppose the streets of St 
Jaques or St. Denis transported hither, with their 
close houses and endless stories ; would they be 
habitable ? or would it be possiUe to sleep in them 
during the night, when the absence of wind 
encreases the heat almost to suffocc^on? Sup- 
pose one just returned on horileback, half dead 
with heat and dust, and drenched, as usual, in 
perspiration; and then imagine the luxury of 
squeezmg up a narrow dark staircase to the fourth 
or fifth story, there to remain almost choked with 
heat. In India, there is no such troublesome task 
to perform. You have only to swallow quickly a 
draught of fresh water, or lemonade; to undress ; 
wash face, hands and feet, and then immediately 



Digitized by 



Google 



374 TBAnriLS in imR 



drop tipoo a fofii in «Mie fldiady {Aaofi^ wince onb 
or two aenrants fim you with th^ir girealt pamhais 
or fiins. Sut I shdl now endtatyour lo giv^ you 
a^ aecurate description of DeUu, tkat you may 
Judge for yourself how far it has a ehioL toitb^ 
appeUatioH of a beaoldful city. 

It 18 about forty yw^s ago that Shfedi^eiHiD, 
father of the preseirt ti^^reat Mc^ul, Auretig»-Zdbe, 
conceiredibe design of itumoi^ildHg Usuame hy 
iJie eredtion of a city near Ihe site of the ancteait 
Ddhi« Tids new ^pital he called after his (Own 
name, ShahJehan*Abad, or, for hpe?i<g^ Jeham- 
^ad ; that is 'to ^, the ^dotfy of Shah^eluti. 
H»e he Teloked ix> 'fix hts c#urt, ^iHegiHg 08^406 
treason for its r^mo^al from Agra, that ihe c»- 
^eessive heat to wUeh that city is exposed daring 
atonrner, itendbred it tmfit for 4he Heskknee ^f a 
-maliateh. The materials for the tie^ tnty vtefe 
^Imidied^ rin grei^ ^measure, by the neigfahbufing 
ruiilis; and hence foreignert Ctefeund boikh icilieis 
teider tiie igenef al appellation of (Delhi^ though in 
India the nawtuipital is most frequently -oaHed by 
Ibhe name which it reteived from its founder^ F«r 
the aahe of cdnvenientoe, howemr, I chose iraidior 
to eomply wMi the ^snstom of Emrope. 

Delhi^ then, « an entirdly new city> skimted 
ISa a flat country^ on the banks of the JutDtlila,«a 
river which tmay be compared to 4he Loire, and 
buik on^one hnak dnty in sadh a manner Omt it 
terminates in tfaia piace Tery mucb in the fonn of 
a ett^eenty having ^but one biidge df bDate to^iaaDoas 



Digitized by 



Google 



(0 tiie OMntty. Exce{^tig the side mhtn it is 
defended by tbe m&r, tlie city is >^weomp£tB9ed %y 
uralls of brtek. The fortftficfftions, howewr, are 
very incomplete^ bs there are neither dHehes nor 
any other kind of additional defence, if we^&cept 
flanking towers of antiqiie dhape, at ititerrab of 
about one ^biindred paces, and a bank of eai^ 
forming a platform behind the walls, four t^it ^&re 
French feet in (^kness. Although these wotfss 
encompass not ^mly the city but the citadel, yet 
their extent is less than is generally sapposed. 
I have accomplished the cffcuit with *ease in tfee 
spaice of three hours, and notwithstanding I rode 
<ak horseback I do not thit& my progress ex- 
ceeded a French league per bout. In feis com- 
putation I do not however include th^ 9ub- 
«rb8, which are considerable, comprising « long 
diain of buildings on the iiidie of Lahore, the ex- 
tensive remains of the old city, and three hot four 
smaller suburbs. By these additions the extent 
of the city is so much encreased that a straight 
line may be traoed ifn it of imwe than a QPrench 
league and aiialf ; and 4hough I cannot undertake 
to define exaclSy the eireomfetence, becmiseiihese 
suburbs are interspersed with eKtefnsive gardens 
and open spaces, yet you must see %hat it is very 
^ great. 

The citadel, wluch contanis the mihil or 
seraglio, and the odier royal apartments «if 
wUch I shall have occaston^to^peak hereafter, is 
round, or mtiier semieircnlar. It commands a 
prospect of the river^ from which it is separated by 



Digitized by 



Google 



276 TRAVELS IN THE 

a sandy space of consideirable length and width. 
On these sands are exhibited the combats of 
elephants, and there the corps belonging to the 
omrahs or lords, and thoae of the rajahs or pagan 
princes, pass in review before the sovereign, 
who witnesses the spectacle from the windows of 
the palace. The walls of the citadel, as to their 
antique and round towers, resemble those of the 
city, but being partly of brick, and partly of a red 
stone which resembles marble, they have a better 
appearance. The walls of the fortress likewise 
excel those of the town in height, strength and 
thickness, being capable of admitting small' field 
pieces, which are pointed toward the city. Except 
on the side of the river, the citadel is defended by 
a deep ditch faced with hewn stone, filled with 
water, and stocked with fish. Considerable as 
these works may appear, their real strength is by 
no means great, and in my opinion a battery of 
moderate force would soon level them with the 
ground. 

Adjoining the ditch is a large garden, filled 
at all times with flowers and green shrubs, which, 
contrasted with the stupendous red walls, produce 
a beautiful effect. 

Next to the garden is the great royal square, 
faced on one side by the gates of the fortress, 
and on the opposite side of which terminate the 
two most considerable streets of the city. 

The tents of such rajahs as are in the king's 
pay, and whose weekly turn it is to mount guard^ 
are pitched in this square ; those petty sovereigns 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIKE. 277 

kaving an insuperable objection to be enclosed 
within walls. The guard within in the fortress 
is mounted by the omrahs and mansebdars. 

In this place also at break of day they exercise 
the royal horses, which "are kept in a spacious 
stable not far distant ; and here the kobat-khan^ 
or grand muster master of the cavalry, examines 
carefully the horses of those who have been received 
into the service. If they are found to be Turkish 
horses, that is from Turkestan or Tartary, and of 
a proper size and adequate strength, they are 
branded on the thigh with the king's mark, and 
with the mark of the omrah under whom the 
horseman is enlisted. This is well contrived to 
prevent the loan of the same horses for different 
review days. 

Here too is held a bazaar or market for an 
endless variety of things ; which, like the Pont- 
neuf at Paris, is the rendezvous for all sorts of 
mountebanks and jugglers. Hither, likewise, 
the astrologers resort, both muhammedan and 
pagan. These wise doctors remain seated in 
the sun, on a dusty piece of carpet, handling some 
old mathematical instruments, and having open 
before them a large book which represents the 
signs of the zodiack. In this way they attract 
the attention of the passengers, and impose upon 
the people, by whom they are considered as so 
miany infallible oracles. They tell a poor 
person his fortune for a payssa (a penny) ; and 
after examining the hand and face of the appti- 



Digitized by 



Google 



276 TRAVSIiS W XHB 

caxit, turning over the Uaves of tb^ large book» 
and pretending to make certain ealculationsji these 
impostors, decide upon the aahet» or propitioua 
moment of oommencing, the business he may have 
in hand. Silly women* wrapping themselves in. a 
white cloth from head to foot, flock to the astaco^ 
logers^ whisper to them all the transactions o£ 
tiieir lives, and disclose every secret with no more 
reserve thaa is practised by a scrupulous penitent 
in the presence of her conii^ssor. The ignorant 
and infatuated people really believe that the 
stars have an influence which the astralogisrs can 
control: 

The most ridiculous of these pretenders to dir 
vination, was a half-cast Portuguese, a fugitive 
from Goa. This fellow sat on his carpet as gravely 
as the rest, and had many customers notwith- 
standing he could neither read nor write» Hia 
only instrument was an old mariner's compass, 
and his books of astrology a couple of old Romish 
prayer books in the Portuguese langus^, the 
pictures of which he pointed out as the signs of 
the European aodiack. A tal bestiasy tal astro- 
kguo, he unblushingly observed to the Jesuit, 
the reverend father Buzk^ who saw him at his 
work, 

I am speaking only of the poor astrologera 
seen in the bazaars. Those who freqjuent the 
courts of the grajadees are considered by them 
eminent doctors^ and become wealthy. The whole 
of Asia is^ degraded by the same superstition* 



Digitized by 



Google 



MiB^i mi^ mUksi s^ant krge^ $aknriea to the^Q 
(un^y diimen^ mA newx <»giage in 1^ mmk 
%aStmg UmfiMiioii wit]im(t canaulting tlmnu 
The; i;^ wh^bcsireir b writAoft in h<^y€A ; fix 
w^^xk the i^t> aod adve eiery di^ubt bjropeimg 

HiQ %f(o pmncspai stiseeta of the cityv alreadf)! 
9M»l^(medr aftle^dii^ ibIq the square^ maj^ be &rd 
and twenty or thirty ordinary paces in widdit.. They 
mnm a atmiglik Um nmrly as &r as the eye can 
roa^k; but ^. (me loadix^ to theLahovegpate is 
»uob th^ longcur; Ia regard 1» huisea^ the^ two 
9tfl0et$ am Qsao% a$k«k Aa in oun PlaeeRoyde^ 
tber^ ar^ aroa^s on both »de$.; witkthis diffinrt 
^190^^ how^YOTi that th^y ace^ onily bcick^ and that 
the. tQp 3Qr¥«s lor a teusao^ and! has. noi ad^ 
tional building. They also diiffi^r hom. tha Plaoe 
IW>y4€r m mt bayiqg am lai^terrupfaed opening 
fmsA om to< &e Qtbcs^buti are^ generally) $apaanatad 
by: pe«titiMi0,.ia the tfiaiQes betwmn vihkh aore 
^pexk ahops, wheae^ duning lim day, artisaas* voas^ 
bank^da sit for the ^patcb cif th^ business aoui 
roerjtdmntft Q:^h)bit their wares. Within th^ arch 
ill a sm»i^ door^^ t^rang into & warehowK^ in 
wbisb these waros arer ofepo^ed for the night 

Tbo hoiftsas of the merchants are baik otot 
l^ae wardpLQUSM^ at the back of th^ areadea : 
they look handsome enough ficomi the street, and 
arppaai^ tekaraU^ wmmodibua leitihiE^ tiiey are 
airy^ at a dbtoacft from the dusl^ and commn* 



Digitized by 



Google 



280 TRAVfiLS IN TME 

nicate with the terrace, on which the inhabitant 
sleep at night : the houses, however, are not con- 
tinued the whole length of the streets. A few, 
and only a few other parts of the city have good 
houses raised on terraces, the buildings over the 
magazines being often too low to be seen from 
the street. The rich merchants have their dwell- 
ings elsewhere, to which they retire after the hours 
of business. 

There are five streets not so long nor so straight 
as the two principal ones, but resembling them in 
every other respect. Of the numberless streets 
which cross each other, many have arcades ; but 
having been built at different periods by in- 
dividuals who paid no regard to symmetry, very 
few are so well built so wide or so straight, as 
those I have described. 

Amid these streets are dispersed the habitations 
of mansebdars, officers of justice, rich merchants, 
and others; many of which have a tolerable ap- 
pearance. Very few are built entirely of brick or 
stone, and several are made only of clay and 
straw, yet they are airy and pleasant, most of them 
having courts and gardens, being commodious in- 
side, and containing good ftirniture. The thatched 
roof is supported by a layer of long, hahdsome 
and strong canes, and the clay walls are covered 
with a fine white lime. 

Intermixed with these different houses is an 
immense number of small ones, composed of earth 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



MOGUL IBMPIRE. 281 

and straw, in which lodge the common horsemen 
and all that vast multitude of servants and sutlers 
who follow the court and the army* 

It is owing to these thatched cottages that Delhi 
is subject to such frequent conflagrations. More 
than sixty thousand roofs were consumed this last 
year by three fires, during the prevalence of cer- 
tain impetuous winds which blow generally in 
summer. So rapid were the flames that several 
camels and horses* were burnt. Many of the in- 
mates of the seraglio also fell victims to the de- 
vouring element ; for these poor women arie so 
bashfal and helpless that they can do nothing but 
hide their faces at the sight of strangers, and those 
who perished possessed not sufficient energy to fly 
from the danger. 

It is because of these wretched clay and straw 
houses that I always represent to myself Delhi 
as a collection of many villages, or as a military 
encampment with a few more conveniences than 
are usually found in such places. The dwellings of 
the omrahs, though mostly situated on the banks 
of the river, and in the suburbs, are yet scattered 
in every direction. In these hot countries a house is 
considered beautiful if it be possessed of great con- 
veniences, and if the situation be airy and exposed 
on all sides to the wind, especially to the northern 
breezes. A good house has its court-yards, gar- 
dens, trees, basons of water, small jets d'eau iti 
the hall or at the entrance, and handsome subter- 
raneous apartments which are furnished with large 



Digitized by 



Google 



aa3 TltA'TSU M TBB 

&BS> and' on aooount of tbeir cookess ftb pkoM 
fiH* repose fi^om noon un*^ four of 6fe o'dook, 
when the air becomes sufibcatingly warm. in«< 
stead of these ca^res^ many persons prefer kas- 
kanays, that is^ small and neat houses made <^ 
straw or odoriferous root« plaeed commonly m 
the middle of a parterre, so near ta a reaer?oii^ 
of water^ that the servants may easily moisten the 
outside by mecms of water brought in skms* A 
house to be greatly admired must be seated in the' 
middle of a large flower garden, and should hanae 
four large divans, raided the height of a man from 
the ground, and exposed to the four- winds^ so 
that the coolness may be felt feom any quai4»r. 
Indeed no handsome dweUihg is ever seen withou* 
terraces on which the family may sleep duinD|^ 
the night. They always open intotat lavge cham- 
ber into which the bedstead is easily moieed^ m 
caee oi vain, when thick eloods of dust mvise> 
wh«ntibecoldaiv is felt atbreakof day,or wh^iit 
is fb«nd necessaiy to guard against those light but 
penetrating dews winch fi^equently cause a^mmib^ 
ness in the M{nb» and induce aspeoiea of paralysia. 
The interiof of a good house has the whole 
floor covered with a^ cotton mat four inches m 
thiekness, over which a fine white oktii is spread 
during the summer, and a silk carpet in the 
wintOT. At the most conspicnouf side of the 
chamber are one or two mattresses,^ with fine 
covNrkigs quilted in the form of flowers and oe« 
namented with' delicate silk embvddery, mte^* 



Digitized by 



Google 



speraed whk gdli(k ai^ silveF. These are intonded 
for ii» ma^ser of the house^ or any person^ of 
qualky who osay happea to calL Each mattreas 
baa a large cuabioa of brocade to lean upon^ and 
there i^e other cushions pkced round the room, 
covered with brocade, velvet or flowered satin^ 
fo£ the rest of the compcmy. Five or six feet 
from the floor, the sides of the room are fiiU of 
niches, cut in a variety of shapes,, tasteful and weU 
pDoportioned, in which are seen porcelain vases 
and flower pots. The ceiling is gilt and painted, 
but without pictures of man or beast, such repre^ 
sentations being forbidden by the religion of the 
country. 

This is a pretty just description of a fine 
howe in India ; nxA as there ace many ia Delhi 
possessing dl the properties: above mentioned, 
I diink it may be safely asserted, without dis- 
paragement to the towns in our quarter of the 
globe, that the cafntal of Hindostan is not deoti- 
tuie of haodaoone Imildings, although they bear 
no resemblance to those in Europe. 

That which so much contributes tathe beauty 
of European townsy the brillimit appearance of 
the shops, is wanting in Delhi. For though tins 
city be the seat of a powerful and magnificent 
courts where an infinite quantity o£ the richest 
commodities is necessarily collected, yet there are 
no streets like our St. Denis, which has ro# 
p^Ehaps its equal in^any; paH of Asiau Hmpethe 
eo^j merchandiae is genera%) kepi in wme- 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



284 TRAVELS IN THE 

houses, and the shops are seldom decked with rich 
or showy articles. For one that makes a display 
of heautifiil and fine cloths, silk, and other stuffs 
striped with gold and silver, turbans embroidered 
with gold, and brocades, there are at least five 
and twenty where nothing is seen but pots of oil 
or butter, piles of baskets filled with rice, barley, 
chick-peas, wheat, and an endless variety of other 
grain and pulse, the ordinary aliment not only 
of the Hindoos, who never eat meat, but of the 
lower class of muhammedans, and a considerable 
portion of the military. 

There is, indeed, a firuit market that makes 
some shew. It contains many shops which during 
the summer are well supplied with dry firuit from 
Persia, Bulkh, Bukharia and Samarcand ; such as 
almonds, pistachio and small nuts, raisins, prunes, 
and apricots ; and in winter, with excellent fi-esh 
grapes, black and white, brought from the same 
countries, wrapped in cotton; pears and apples of 
three or four sorts, and those admirable melons 
which last the whole winter. These firuits are 
however very dear; a single melon selling for 
a crown and a half. But nothing is considered 
so great a treat : it forms the chief expense of the 
omrahs, and I have frequently known my aga 
spend twenty crowns on firuit for his breakfast. 

In summer the melons of the country are 
cheap, but they are of an inferior kind : there are 
no means of procuring good ones but by sending to 
Persia for seed, and sowing it in ground prepared 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 285 

with extraordinary care, in the manner practised by 
the grandees. Good melons, however, are scarce, 
the soil being so little congenial that the seed de- 
generates after the first year. 

Ambaa, or mangoes, are in season during two 
summer months, and are plentiful and cheap ; but 
those grown at Delhi are indifferent. The best 
come from Bengal, Golconda and Goa, and these 
are indeed excellent, yielding to no sweetmeat in 
flavour and lusciousness. 

Pateques, or water-melons, are in great abun- 
dance nearly the whole year round ; but those of 
Delhi are soft, without colour or sweetness. If 
this fruit be ever found good, it is among the 
omrahs, who import the seed and cultivate it with 
much care and expence. 

There are many confectioners' shops in the 
town, but the sweetmeats are badly made, and 
full of dust and flies. 

Bakers also are numerous, but the ovens are 
unlike our own, and very defective. The bread, 
therefore, is neither well made nor properly 
baked. That sold in the fortress is tolerably good, 
and the omrahs bake at home, so that their bread 
is much superior. In its composition they are 
not sparing of fresh butter, milk and eggs ; but 
though it be raised, it has a burnt taste, and is 
too much like cake ; not to be compared to the 
^onnesse, and other bread, eaten at Paris. 

In the bazaars there are shops where meat is 
fiold roasted and dressed in a variety of ways. 



Digitized by 



Google 



286 TBATBL6 IN THE 

But tbeve is no inistidg to their dishes^ composed 
for aught I know, of the flesh ctf camels^ horses, 
or perhaps oxen which haTe died of disease. In- 
deed no food can he oonsidered wbrieseme which 
is not dressed at home. . " 

Meat is sold ia every part oi iht city; but 
instead of goat's flesh that of mutton is often 
palmed upon the bayer; an impMitton which 
ought to be guarded against, because mutton and 
beef, but particularly the feirnier, though not 
unpleasant to the taste, are heating, flatulent, and 
difficult of digestion. Kid is the best ^d, but 
being rarely sold in quarters, itnaiust be purchased 
idive, which is rery inconyeBsent^ as the meat will 
not keep from morning to night, jmd is generally 
lean and without flavour. The goats' flesh found in 
quarters at the butchers' shops, is firequeatly that 
of the she-goat, which is lean and tough* 

But it would be unreasonable in me to 
complain ; because since I have been fimiliairized 
with the manmers of the people, it seldom 
happens that I find fault either with my meat or 
my bread. I send my savant to the king's 
purveyors in the fortress, who aPe glad to sdl 
wholesome food» which costs them v«ry fitlfe, at 
the high price I am willing to pay. My aga 
smiled when I remarked that I had been fot 
years in the habit df living by fiteali^ and artifice, 
and that the one htmdsed and fifty crowns which 
he gave me monthly would not otherwise keep 
me from starving, althoiq^ m France I could, tor 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL BHPIRB. 287 

laM ^ ni|>ee, eat '^viery d&y 9b tgt»i meal as 
the king. 

As io cApoto^ mone txe seen m Delhi ; the 
people faein^ 'tendeivhidartod toward animus of 
every description, men only excepted; but these 
are tranted for their seraglios. The market^ 
however, are i^ply supplied with fowls, tel&dkif 
good a»id cheap . Among others, there is a sttiall 
hen, deiioate and tender, which I call Etiiiof)iaJb, 
the skin iieing qtdte black. 

i^igesBs 4are exposed for sale, but oiot youttg 
Dues, Idie Undians cousidarin^ them too small, and 
8#fing Ithat it wmild be eruel to deprive them of 
life at 1^ "tender an age. 

Tbere are partridgies which are ^md]»* dKm 
ma&, bat being caught witii netn, and brou£^ 
alive &om a distance, are not $o good as Ifowift. 
The smae thing «iay be rtematked of Avicks aid 
liares, which are brought dive in lerowded eages^ 

The ipeople of this n^g^ibixothood am hb- 
diflSsreiit fishei^en ; yet good fish may isotnetimes 
be bought, partiouhnrly two scats, called sing^ak 
andrau. The former aresembles our ptke^ the 
latter our i^rp. Whien the weather is >cold, the 
^ople will not fish at all i{ they can avoid it; 
for ihey have a much greater dread of odd than 
Europeans have of heat. Should any fish tb^i 
itappeB to be seen in tiheKnarket, it is immecfoiteSy 
bought up by the eunuchs wfaoare paftiiculorly 
fond of it ; why I cannot teU* 3[iie (mirahs alone 
coMrive to force the fid^nnon out at all titnes 



Digitized by 



Google 



288 TRAVELS IN THE 

by means of the korrah, the long whip always 
suspended at their door. 

You may judge from what I have said, 
whether a lorer of good cheer ought to quit Paris 
for the sake of visiting Delhi. Unquestionably 
the great are in the enjoyment of every thing ; 
but it is by dint of the numbers in their service, by 
dint of the korrah^ and by dint of money. In 
Delhi there is no middle state. A man must 
either be of the highest rank or live miserably. 
My pay is considerable, nor am I sparing of 
money ; yet does it often happen that I have not 
wherewithal to satisfy the cravings of hunger, the 
bazaars being so ill supplied, and frequently con- 
taining nothing but the refuse of the grandees. 
Wine, that essential part of every entertainment, can 
be obtained in none of the shops at Delhi, although 
it might be made from the native grape, were not * 
the use of that liquor prohibited equally by the 
Hindoo and Muhammedan law. I drank some at 
Ahmedabad and Golconda, in Dutch and English 
houses, which was not ill tasted. If wine be 
sometimes found in the Mogul empire, it is either 
Schiraz or Canary. The former is sent by land 
from Persia to Bunder Abas, where it is embarked 
for Surat, from which port it reaches Delhi in 
forty-six days. The Canary wine is brought by 
the Dutch to Surat ; but both these wines are so 
dear that, according to the saying of the country, 
the taste is destroyed by the cost. A bottle 
pontaming about three Paris pints (three English 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 289 

quarts) cannot be purchased under six or seven 
crowns. The liquor peculiar to this country is 
arac, a spirit drawn by distillation from un- 
refined sugar ; the sale of which is also strictly 
forbidden, and none but Christians dare openly to 
drink it. Arac is a spirit as harsh and burning as 
that made from corn in Poland, and the use of it 
to the least excess occasions nervous and incurable 
disorders. A wise man will here accustom 
himself to the pure and fine water, or to the 
excellent lemonade, which costs little and may be 
drunk without injury. To say the truth, few 
persons in these hot climates feel a strong desire 
for wine, and I have no doubt that the happy 
ignorance which prevails of many distempers, is 
fairly ascribable to the general habits of sobriety 
among the people and to the profuse perspiration 
to which they are perpetually subject. The 
gout, the stone, complaints in the kidneys, 
catarrhs and quartan agues are nearly unknown ; 
and persons who arrive in India afflicted with any 
of these disorders, as was the case with me, soon 
experience a complete cure. Even the venereal 
disease, common as it is in Hindostan, is not of so 
virulent a character, or attended with such in- 
jurious consequences, as in other parts of the 
world. But although there is a greater enjoy- 
ment of health, yet there is less vigour among the 
people than in our colder climates; and the 
feebleness and languor both of body and mind> 
consequent upon excessive heat, may be considered 

u 



Digitized by 



Google 



290 TRAVELS IN THBT 

8 Species of unremitting malady, which attacks aU 
perscms indiscriminately^ and' among the rest 
Europeans not yet inured to the heat. 

Workshops, occupied by skilful artisans, would 
be vainly sought for in Delhi ; which has very 
little to boast of in that respect. This is not 
owing to any inability in the prople to cultivate 
the arts, for there are ingenious men in every 
part of India. Numerous are the ins£anoes of 
handsome pieces of workmanship made by 
persons destitute of tools, and who can scarcely 
be. said to have received instruction from a 
master. Sometimes they imitate so perfectly 
articles of European manufacture, that the dif- 
ference between the original and copy can hardly 
be discerned. Among other things, the Indians 
mako excellent muskets, and fowling pieces^ 
and such beautiful gold ornaments that it may 
be doubted if the exquisite workmanship of those 
artides can be exceeded by any European g(4d- 
smith. I liave often admired the beauty, softness, 
and delicacy of their paintings and miniatures, and 
was particularly struck with the exploits of Acbar^ 
painted on a shidd by a celebrated artii^, who is 
said to have been seven years ia completipg the 
picture. I thoughtit a Wonderful performance. The 
Indian painters are chiefly defident in just propor- 
tions and in the expression of the face ; but tl^se 
defects would soon be corrected if they possessed 
good masters, and were instructed in the rules of 
art. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 291 

Want of genius^ therefore, is not the reason^ 
why works of superior art are not exhibited in 
the capital. If the artists and manufacturers 
were encouraged the useful and fine arts would 
flourish ; but these unhappy men are contemned, 
treated with harshness, and inadequately re- 
munerated for their labour. The rich will have 
every article at a cheap rate. When an omrah 
or mansebdar requires the services of an artisan, 
he sends to the bazaar for him, employing 
force, if necessary, to make the poor man work ; 
and after the task is finished, the unfeeling lord 
pays, not according to the value of the labour, 
but agreeably to his own standard of fair remu- 
neration ; the artisan having reason to congra- 
tulate himself if the korrah has not been given in 
part payment. How then can it be expected that 
any spirit of emulation should animate the artist 
or manufacturer? Instead of contending for a 
superiority of reputation, his only anxiety is to 
finish his work, and to earn the pittance that shall 
supply him with a piece of bread. The artists, 
therefore, who arrive at any eminence in their art 
are those only who are in the service of the king 
oar of some powerful omrah, and who work ex- 
clusively for their patron. 

The citadel contains the seraglio and other 
royal edifices ; but you are not to imagine that 
they are such buildings as the Louvre or the 
Bscurial. The edifices in the fortress have 
notfaiDg European in their structure ; nor ought 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



392 TRAVELS IN THE 

they, as I have already observed, to resemble the 
architecture of France and Spain. It is sufficient 
if they have that magnificence which is suited to 
the climate. 

The entrance of the fortress presents nothing 
remarkable besides two large elephants of stone, 
placed at either side of one of the principal gates. 
On one of the elephants is seated the statue of 
Jemel, the renowned rajah of Chitore ; on the 
other is that to his brother of Polta. These 
are the brave heroes who, with their still braver 
mother, immortalized their names by the extraor- 
dinary resistance which they opposed to the cele- 
brated Acbar ; who defended the towns besieged 
by that great emperor with unshaken resolution ; 
and who, at length reduced to extremity, de- 
voted themselves to their country, and chose 
rather to perish with their mother in sallies against 
the enemy, than submit to an insolent invader. 
It is owing to this extraordinary devotion on their 
part, that their enemies have thought them 
deserving of the statues here erected to their 
memory. These two large elephants, mounted 
by the two heroes, have an air of grandeur, and 
inspire me with an awe and respect which I can- 
not describe. 

After passing into the citadel through this 
gate, there is seen a long and spacious street^ 
divided in the midst by a canal of running water. 
The street has a long divan, or raised way, 
on both sides, in the manner of the Pont-neuf, 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 293 

five or six French feet high and four hroad. 
Bordering the divan, are closed arcades, which run 
up the whole way in the form of gates. It is 
upon this long divan that all the controllers, and 
other petty officers, exercise their functions 
without being incommoded by the horses and 
people that pass in the street below. The 
mansebdars or inferior omrahs mount guard on 
this raised way during the night. The water of 
the canal runs into the seraglio, divides . and 
intersects every part, and then falls into the 
ditches of the fortification. This water is brought 
from the river Jumna, by means of a canal opened 
at a distance of five or six leagues above Delhi^ 
and cut with great labour, through fields and 
rocky ground.* 

The other principal gate of the fortress also 
conducts to a long and tolerably wide street, 
which has a divan on both sides bordered by shops 
instead of arcades. Properly speaking, this street 
is a bazaar, rendered very convenient in the 
summer and the rainy season by the long and 
capacious arched roof with which it is covered. 
Air and lighjt are intromitted by several large 
and round apertures in the roof. 

Besides these two streets, the citadel contains 
many smaller ones, both to the right and to the 
left, leading to the quarters where the omrahs 
mount guards during four and twenty hours, in 

' * See note G at the end of the volume. 



Digitized by 



Google 



294 , TRAVELS IN THE 

regular rotation, once a week. The places where 
this duty is performed may be called splendid^ 
the omrahs making it a point to adorn them at 
their own expence. In general they are spa- 
cious divans or alcoves facing a flower garden, 
embellished by small canals of running water, 
reservoirs and jets d*eau. The omrahs on guard 
have their table supplied by the king. Every 
meal is sent ready dressed, and is received by the 
omrahs with all suitable ceremony, three times 
performing the taslim, or salute of grateful 
acknowledgement, by turning the face toward 
the king's residence, and then raising the hand to 
the head and lowering it to the ground. 

There are besides many divans and tents 
in different parts of the fortress, which serve as 
offices for public business. 

Large halls are seen in many places, called 
kar-kanays or workshops for the artisans. In one 
hall embroiderers are busily employed, superin- 
tended by a master. In another you see the gold- 
smiths ; in a third, painters ; in a fourth, varnishers 
in lacquer ; in a fifth, joiners, turners, tailors and 
shoemakers; in a sixth, mani^facturers of silk, 
brocade and those fine muslins of which are made 
turbans, girdles with golden flowers, and drawers 
worn by females^ so delicately fine as frequently 
to wear out in one night. This article of dress, 
which lasts only a few hours, may cost ten or 
twelve crowns, and even more, when beautifully 
embroidered with needle-work. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL £MPIRE. 205 

The artisans rc^>air every morning to their 
respective kar-kanays, where they remain em- 
ployed the whole day ; and in the evening return 
to their homes. In this quiet ami regular manner 
their time glides away ; no one aspiring after any 
improvement in the condition of life wherein he 
happens to be born.. The embroiderer brings up 
his son as an embroiderer, the s<m of a goldsmith 
becomes a goldsmith, au^ a physician of the city 
educates his son for a physician.* No one 
marries but in his own trade or profession ; and 
this custom is observed almost as rigidly by 
muselmans as by the Hindoos, to whom it is 
expressly enjoined by their law. Many are the 
beautiful girls thus doomed to live singly, girls 
who might marry advantageously, if their parents 
would connect them with a family less noble than 
their own. 

I must not forget the am-kas, to which you 
at length arrive, after passing the places just 
mentioned. This is really a noble edifice : it 
consists of a large square court of arcades, not 
p^Uke our Place Royale, with this difference, 
however, that the arcades of the am-kas have no 

* Many of the fences which marked the limits of the res- 
pective castes, are now broken down. The Brahmins of the 
Deccan and Puijab, observes Mr. Forster, have taken up the 
sword, and are seen crowding the ranks of an army ; the 
chehteree occasionally takes himself to traffic, and the 
fooder has become the inheritor of principalities.^^— rrani- 
lator. 



Digitized by 



Google 



296 TRAVELS IN THE 

buildings over them. Each arcade is separated 
by a wall, yet in such a manner that there is a 
small door to pass from one to the other. Over 
the grand gate, situated in the middle of one side 
of this court, is a capacious divan, quite open on the 
side of the court, called nagar-kanay. In this place 
which thence derives its name are kept the trumpets, 
or rather the hautboys and tymbals, which play in 
concert at certain hours of the day and night. 
To the ears of an European recently arrived, this 
music sounds very strangely, for there are ten or 
twelve Tiautboys, and as many tymbals, which 
play together. One of the hautboys, called karna, 
is a fathom and a half in length, and its lower 
aperture cannot be less than a French foot. The 
tymbals of brass or iron are some of them at least 
a fathom in diameter. You may judge, there- 
fore, of the roaring sound which issues from the 
nagar-kanay. On my first arrival it stunned me 
so as to be insupportable : but such is the power 
of habit that this same noise is now heard by me 
with pleasure ; in the night, particularly, when in 
bed and afar, on my terrace this music sounds in 
my ears as solemn, grand and melodious. This 
is not altogether to be wondered at, since it is 
played by persons instructed from infancy in 
the rules of melody, and possessing the skill of 
modulating and turning the harsh sounds of the 
hautboy and tymbal so as to produce a symphony 
far from disagreeable when heard at a certain 
distance. The nagar-kanay is placed in an ele- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 297 

vated situation, and remote from the royal apart- 
ments, that the king may not be annoyed by the 
proximity of this music. 

Opposite to the grand gate, which supports, 
the nagar-kanay, as you cross the court, is a large 
and magnificent hall, decorated with several rows 
of pillars, which, as well as the ceiling, are all 
painted and overlaid with gold. The hall is raised 
considerably from the ground and very airy, 
being open on the three sides that look into the 
court. In the centre of the wall that separates 
the hall from the seraglio, and higher from 
the floor than a man can reach, is a wide and 
lofty opening, or large window, where the mo- 
narch every day, about noon, sits upon his 
throne, with some of his sons at his right and left ; 
while eunuchs standing about the royal person, 
flap away the flies with peacocks' tails, agitate 
the air with large fans, or wait with undivided 
attention and profound humility to perform the 
different services allotted to each. Immediately 
under the throne is a divan, surrounded by silver 
rails, on which are assembled the whole body of 
omrahs, the rajahs, and the ambassadors, all 
standing, their eyes bent downward, and their 
hands crossed. At a greater distance from the 
throne are the mansebdars or inferior omrahs 
also standing in the same posture of profound 
reverence. The remainder of the spacious room, 
and indeed the whole court yard are filled 
with persons of all ranks, high and low, rich and 



Digitized by 



Google 



298 TRAVELS IN THE 

poor ; because it is in this extensive hall that <lie 
king gives audience iodiscriminately to all his 
subjects : hence it is called am*-kas, or audiei^e 
chamber of high and low. 

During the hour and a half, or two hours 
that this ceremony continues^ a certain number 
of the royal horses pass before the throne^ that 
the king may see whether they are well used 
and in a proper condition. The elephants 
come next, their filthy hides having been well 
washed and painted as black as ink^ with two 
Imrge red streaks from the top of the head 
down to the trunk, where they meet. The de- 
phants are covered with embroidered cloth; a 
couple of silver bells are suspended to the two 
ends of a massy silver chain placed over th^r 
back ; and white cow-tails from Great Thibet, of 
great value, hang from the ears like immense 
whiskers. Two small elephants, superbly capa- 
risoned, walk dose to these colossal creatures, 
like slaves appointed to their service. As if proud 
of his gorgeous attire and of the magnificence 
that surrounds him, every elephant moves with a 
solemn and dignified step ; and when in front of 
the throne, the driver who is seated on his 
shoulder, pricks him with a pointed iron, animates 
and speaks to him, until the animal bends one 
knee, lifts his trunk on high and roars aloud, 
which the people consider as the elephant's mode 
of performing the taslim or usual reverence. 

Other animals are next introduced; — tame 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 299 

antelopes^ kept for the purpose of fighting with 
each other ; nilgaus, or grey oxen, that appear to 
me to he a species of elk ; rhinoceroses ; large 
Bengal huffaloes with prodigious horns which 
enable them to contend against lions or tigers ; 
tame leopards^ or panthers^ employed in hunting 
antelopes ; some of the fine sporting dogs from 
Usbec, of every kind, and each dog with a small 
red covering ; lastly, every species of the birds of 
prey used in field sports for catching partridges, 
cranes, hares and even, it is said, for hunting 
antelopes, on whom they pounce with violenee, 
beating their heads and blinding them with their 
wings and claws. 

Besides this procession of animals, the cavalry 
of one or two omrabs frequently pass in review 
before the king; the horsemen being better 
dressed than usual, the horses furnished with, iron 
armour, and decorated with an endless variety of 
fantastic trappings. 

The king takes pleasure also in having the 
blades of cutlasses tried on dead sheep, brought 
before him without the entrails, and neatly bound 
up. Young omrahs, mansebdars and gourzcr 
berdars or mace-bearers exercise their skill, and 
put forth aU their strength,, to cut through the 
four feet, which are fastened, together, and the 
body of the sheep at one Wow. 

But all these things are so many interludes. to 
more serious matters. The king not only reviews 
his cavalry with peculiar attention, but ^ there is 



Digitized by 



Google 



300 TRAVELS IN THE 

not, since the war has been ended, a single cava- 
lier, or other soldier, whom he has not inspected, 
and made himself personally acquainted with, 
increasing or reducing the pay of some, and 
dismissing others from the service. All the 
petitions held up in the crowd assembled in 
the am-kas^ are brought to the king and read in 
his hearing ; - and the persons concerned being 
ordered to approach are examined by the mo- 
narch himself, who often redresses at the instant 
the wrongs of the aggrieved party. On another 
day of the week he devotes two hours to hear in 
private the petitions of ten persons, selected from 
the lower orders, and presented to the king by a 
good and rich old man* Nor does he fail to 
attend the justice chamber, called adalet-kanay, 
on another day of the week, attended by the two 
principal cadis, or chief justices. It is evident, 
therefore, that barbarous as we are apt to consider 
the sovereigns of Asia, they are not always unmind- 
ful of the justice that is due to their subjects. 

What I have stated of 'the proceedings in the 
assembly of the am-kas appears suflSciently ra- 
tional and even noble ; but I must not conceal 
from you the base and disgusting adulation which 
is invariably witnessed there. Whenever a word 
escapes the lips of the king, if at all to the pur- 
pose, how trifling soever may be its import, it is 
immediately caught by the surrounding throng ; 
and the chief omrahs, extending their arips to- 
wards heaven, as if to receive some benediction. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 30 1 

exclaim karamat ! karamat ! wonderful ! wonder- 
ful! he has spoken wonders! Indeed there is no 
mogul who does not know and does not glory in 
repeating this proverb in Persian verse : 

Aguer chah ronzra gouyed cheb est in 
Bubayed gouft inck mah ou peruin. 

If at noon day the king asserts that it is midnight^ you 
are to say, behold the moon and the stars ! 

The vice of flattery pervades all ranks. When 
a mogul for instance has occasion for my ser- 
vices, he comes to tell me by way of preamble, 
and as matter of course, that I am the Aristotalis 
the Bocrate, and the Abouysina ulzaman ; the 
Aristotle, the Hippocrates, and the Avicenna of 
the age. At first I endeavoured to prevent this 
fulsome mode of address by assuring my visitors 
that I was very far from possessing the merit 
they seemed to imagine, and that no comparison 
ought to be made between such great men and me ; 
but finding that my modesty only increased their 
praise, I determined to accustom my ears to their 
flattery as I had done to their music. I shall here 
relate an anecdote which I consider quite charac- 
teristic. - A Pundit Brahmin, or Hindoo doctor, 
whom I introduced into my aga's service, would 
fain pronounce his panegyric; and after com- 
paring him to the greatest conquerors the world 
has ever known, and making for the purpose of 
flattery a hundred nauseous and impertinent 
observations, he concluded his harangue in these 
words, uttered with all conceivable seriousness: 



Digitized by 



Google 



302 TUAVBLS IN THE 

*' When my lord, you place your foot in the stir- 
rup> marching at the bead of your cavalry^ the 
earth trembles under your footsteps; the eight 
elephants, on whose heads it is borne, finding it 
impossible to support- the extraordinary pressure.** 
The conclusion of this speech produced the effect 
t^ might be expected. I could not avoid 
laughing, but I endeavoured, with a grave coun- 
tenance^ to tell my aga, whose risibility was just 
as much excited, that it behoved him to be 
cautious how he mounted on horseback and 
created earthquakes, which often caused so much 
mischief. *' Yes, my firiend,** he answered without 
hesitation, '^ and that is the reason why I 
generally choose to be carried in a palanquin.'' 

The grand hall of the am-kas opens into a 
more retired chamber, called the gosel-kanay, or 
the place to wash in. Few persons are permitted 
to enter this room, the court of which is not so 
larg^ as that of the am-kas. The hall is, how- 
ever, very handsome, spacious, gilt and painted, 
and raised four or five French feet from the pave^ 
ment, like a large estrade. It is in this place that 
the king, seated in a chair, his omrahs standing 
around him grants more private audiences to his 
officers, receives their reports', and deliberates 
on, important afi^s of state. Every omrah 
incurs the same pecuniary penalty for omitting to 
attend this assembly in the evening, as for failing 
to be present at the am-kas in the morning. The 
only gran4ee whose daily attendance is dispensed 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 303 

with is my aga Danechmend-Khan, who enjoys thia 
esemptioD in consequence of his being a mau of let- 
tersj and of the time he necessarily devotes to his 
studies or to foreign affiiirs ; but on Wednesdays, 
the day of the week on which he mounts guard, 
he attends in the same manner as other omrahs. 
This custom of meeting twice a day is very 
ancient; and no omrah can reasonably complain 
that it is binding, since the king seems to con-* 
sider it as obligatory upon himself as upon his 
courtiers to be present; nothing but urgent 
business, or serious bodily affliction, preventing 
him from appearing at the two assemUies. In 
his late alarming illness Aureng-Zebe was carried 
every day to the one or the other, if not to both. 
He felt the necessity of shewing himself at least 
once during the twenty-four hours ; for his dborder 
was of ao dangerous a character that his absence, 
though only for one day, might have thrown the 
whole kingdom into trouble and insurrection and 
caused the closing of every shop. 

Although the king, when seated in the hall of 
gosel-kanay, is engaged about such affidrs as 
I have mentioned^ yet the same shows are exhibited 
for the most part as in the am-kas ; but being late 
in the day, and the adjoining court being small^ the 
cavalry of the omrahs does not pass in review.. 
There is this peculiar ceremony in the. evening 
assjsmbly, that all the mansebdars who are on 
guard pass before the king to salute him with 
much form« The kours move pompously in their 



Digitized by 



Google 



304 TRAVELS IN THE 

front : these are silver figures, beautifully made, 
carried at the end of large silver sticks : two of them 
represent large fish ; two others, a horrible and 
fantastic animal called eiedeha ; others are the fii- 
gures of two lions ; others of two hands ; and others 
of scales ; and several more which I cannot here 
enumerate, to which the Indians attach a certain 
mystic meaning. Among the kours and the man- 
sebdars^ are mixed many gourze-berdars, or 
macebearers, chosen for their tall and handsome 
persons, and whose business it is to preserve 
order in assemblies, and to carry the king's 
orders, and execute his commands with the utmost 
speed. 

It would afford me pleasure to conduct you to 
the seraglio, as I have introduced you into other 
parts of the fortress. But who is the traveller 
that can describe from ocular observation the 
interior of that building ? I have sometimes gone 
into it when the king was absent from Delhi, and 
once pretty far I thought, for the purpose of 
giving my professional advice in the case of a great 
lady so extremely ill that she could not be moved 
to the outward gate, according to the custom 
observed upon similar occasions ; but a kashmire 
shawl covered my head, hanging like a large 
scarf down to my feet, and an eunuch led me 
by the hand, as if I had been a bhnd man. 
You must be content, therefore, with . such a 
general description as I have received from some 
of the eunuchs. They inform me that the seraglio 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPniE. 305 

contains beautiful apartments^ separated> and more 
or less spacious and splendid, according to the 
rank and income of the females. Nearly every 
chamber has its reservoir of running water at the 
door; on every side are gardens^ delightful alleys, 
shady retreats, streams, jets d'eau, grottoes, 
deep excavations that afford shelter from the sun 
by day, lofty divans and terraces, on which to sleep 
coolly at night. Within the walls of this . en- 
chanting place, in fine, no oppressive or incon- 
venient heat is felt. The eunuchs speak with 
extravagant praise of a small tower, facing . the 
river, which is covered with plates of gold, in the 
same manner as the two towers of Agra; audits 
apartments are decorated with gold and azure, 
exquisite paintings and magnificent mirrors. 

Before taking our final leave of the fortress, I 
wish to recall your attention to the ani-kas, 
which I am desirous to describe, as I saw it dur- 
ing certain annual festivals ; especially on the oc- 
casion of the rejoicings that took place after the 
termination of the war. Never did I witness a 
more extraordinary scene. ' s 

The king appeared seated upon his throne, at 
the end of the great hall, in the most magnificent 
attire. His vest was of white and delicately 
flowered satin, with a silk and gold embroidery of 
the finest texture. The turban, of gold cloth, had 
an aigrette whose foot was composed of diamonds of 
an extraordinary size and value, besides an oriental 
topaz, which may be pronounced unparalleled, 

x 



Digitized by 



Google 



306 TRAVELS IN THE 

exhibiting a lustre like the sun. A necklace of 
immense pearls^ suspended from his neck^ reached 
to the stomachy in the same manner as many 
pagans wear their strings of beads. The throne 
was supported by six massy feet^ said to be of 
solid gold, sprinkled over with rubies^ emeralds^ 
and diamonds. 1 cannot tell you with accuracy 
the number or value of this vast collection of 
precious stones, because no person may approach 
sufficiently near to reckon them, or judge of their 
water and clearness ; but I can assure you that 
there is a confusion of diamonds, as well as other 
jewels, and that the throne, to the best of my 
recollection, is valued at four crores of rupees. I 
observed elsewhere that a lack is one hundred 
thousand rupees, and that a crore is a hundred 
lacks; so that the throne is estimated at forty 
millions of rupees. It was constructed by Shah- 
Jehan, the father of Aureng-ZSbe, for the purpose 
of displaying the immense quantity of precious 
stones accumulated successively in the treasury 
from the spoils of ancient rajahs and Patans^ and 
the annual presents to the monarch which every 
omrah is bound to make on certain festivals. 
The construction and workmanship of the throne 
are not correspondent with the materials ; but two 
peacocks, covered with jewels and pearls, are well 
conceived and executed. They were made by a 
workman of astonishing powers, a Frenchman by 
birth, who, after defrauding several of the princes 
of Europe, by means of false gems^ which he fftbri- 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 307 

cated with peculiar skill, sought refuge in the 
Great Mogul's court, where he made his fortune. 

At the foot of the throne were assembled all 
the omrahs in splendid apparel upon an estrade 
surrounded by a silver railing, and covered by a 
spacious canopy of brocade with deep fringes of 
gold. The pillars of the hall were hung with 
brocades of a gold ground, and flowered satin 
canopies were raised over the whole expanse of 
the extensive apartment fastened with red silken 
cords, from which were suspended large tassels of 
silk and gold. The floor was covered entirely 
with carpets of the richest silk, of immense length 
and breadth* A tent, called the aspek, was 
pitched outside, larger than the hall, to which it 
joined by the top. It spread over half the court 
and was completely enclosed by a great balus- 
trade covered with plates of silver. Its supporters 
were pillars overlaid with silver, three of which 
were as thick and as high as the mast of a bark, 
the others smaller. The outside of this magni- 
ficent tent was red, and th6 inside lined with ele- 
gant Masulipatam chintzes, figured expressly for 
that very purpose with flowers so natural and 
colours so vivid, that the tent seemed to be encom- 
passed with real parterres. 

As to the arcade galleries round the court, 
every omrah had received orders to decorate one 
of them at his own expense, and there appeared a 
spirit t)f emulation who should best acquit himself 
to the monarch's satisfaction. Consequently all 



Digitized by 



Google 



308 TRAVELS IN THE 

the arcades and galleries were covered from top to 
bottom with brocade, and the pavement with rich 
carpets. 

On the third day of the festival, the king^ and 
after him several omrahs, were weighed with a 
great deal of ceremony in large scales, which, as 
well as the weights, are, they say, of solid gold. I 
recollect that all the courtiers expressed much joy 
when it was found that Aureng-Z6be weighed 
two pounds more than the year preceding. 

Similar festivals are held every year, but never 
before were they celebrated with equal splendour 
and expence. It is thought that the principal in- 
ducement with the king for the extraordinary 
magnificence displayed on this occasion was to 
afford to the merchants an opportunity of dis- 
posing of the quantities of brocades, which the 
war had for four or five years prevented them 
from selling. The expence incurred by the om- 
rahs was considerable, but a portion of it fell 
ultimately on the common cavaliers, whom the 
omrahs obliged to purchase the brocades to be* 
made up into vests. 

An ancient custom attends these anniversary 
days of rejoicing, not at all agreeable to the 
omrahs. They are expected to make a handsome 
present to the king, more or less valuable accord- 
ing to the amount of their pay. Some of them^ 
indeed, take that opportunity of presenting gifts 
of extraordinary magnificence, sometimes for the 
sake of an ostentatious display, sometimes to 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 309 

divert the king, from instituting an enquiry into 
the exactions committed in their official situations 
or governments^ and sometimes to gain the 
favour of the king, and by that means obtain an 
increase of salary. Some present fine pearls, 
diamonds, emeralds or rubies; others offer vessels of 
gold set with precious stones ; others again give a 
quantity of gold coins, each worth about a pistole 
and a halt During a festival of this kind Au- 
reng-Z6be having paid a visit to Jafer-khan, not 
as his vizier but as a kinsman, on the pretext that 
he wished to see a house which he lately erected, 
the vizier made a present to the king of gold coins 
to the amount of one hundred thousand crowns^ 
some handsome pearls, and a ruby, which was 
estimated at forty thousand crowns, but which 
Shah-Jehan who understood better than any man 
the value of every kind of precious stone, disco- 
vered to be worth less than five hundred, to the 
great confusion of the principal jewellers, who in 
this instance, had been completely deceived. 

A whimsical kind of fair is sometimes held 
during these festivities in the mahil, or royal 
seraglio : it is conducted by the handsomest and 
most engaging of the wives of the omrahs and 
principal mansebdars. The articles exhibited are 
beautiful brocades, rich embroideries of the newest 
fashion, turbans elegantly worked on cloth of gold, 
fine muslins worn by women of quality, and other 
articles of high price. These bewitching females 
act the part of traders, while the purchases are 



Digitized by 



Google 



310 TRAVELS IN THE 

the king, the begums or princesses, and other dis- 
tinguished ladies of the seraglio. If any omrah's 
wife happens to *have a handsome daughter, she 
never fails to accompany her mother, that she may 
be seen by the king and become known to the 
begums. The charm of this fair is the most ludi- 
crous manner in which the king makes his bargains, 
frequently disputing for the value of a penny. 
He pretends that the good lady cannot possibly 
be in earnest, that the article is much too dear, 
that it is not equal to that he can find elsewhere, 
and that positively he will give no more than 
such a price. The woman, on the other hand, 
endeavours to sell to the best advantage, and 
when the king perseveres in offering what she 
considers too little money, high words frequently 
ensue, and she fearlessly tells him that he is a 
mere merchant of snow, a person ignorant of the 
value of merchandize; that her articles are too 
good for him, and that he had better go where he 
can suit himself better. The begums betray, if 
possible, a still greater anxiety to be served 
cheaply ; high words are heard on every side, and 
the loud and scurrilous qyarrels of the sellers and 
buyers create a complete farce. But sooner or 
later they agree upon the price, the princesses as 
well as the king buy right and left, pay in ready 
money, and often slip out of their hands as if by 
accident, a few gold instead of silver rupees, in- - 
tended as a compliment to the fair merchant or 
her pretty daughter^ The present is received in 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 311 

the same unconscious manner, and the whole ends 
amidst witty jests and good humour. 

Shah-Jehan was fond of the sex and intro- 
duced fairs at every festival, though -not always 
to the satisfaction of some of the omrahs. He 
certainly transgressed the bounds of decency in 
admitting at those times into the seraglio singing 
and dancing girls called kenchens, (the gilded, 
the blooming,) and in keeping them there for 
*that purpose the whole night; they were not 
indeed the prostitutes seetvin bazaars, but those 
of a more private and respectable class, who attend 
the grand weddings of omrahs and mansebdars, for 
the. purpose of singing and dancing. Most of 
these kenchens are handsome and well dressed, 
and sing to perfection ; and their limbs being 
extremely supple, they dance with wonderful agi- 
lity, and are always correct in regard to time ; 
after all, however, they were but common wo- 
men. It was not enough for Shah-Jehan that 
the kenchens visited the fairs ; when they came 
to him on the Wednesdays to pay their reverence 
at the am«kas, according to an ancient custom, he 
often detained them the whole night, and amused 
himself with their anticks and follies. Aureng- 
Zdbe is more serious than his father; he for- 
bids the kenchens to enter the seraglio ; but 
complying with long established usage, does not 
object to their coming every Wednesday to the 
am-kas, where they make the salam from a certain 
distance, and then immediately retire. 



Digitized by 



Google 



I 

312 TRAVELS IN THE 

While on the subject of festivals^ fairs, and 
kenchens, or kenchenys, I am tempted to relate 
an anecdote of one of our countrymen^ named 
Bernard. I agree with Plutarch, that trifling m- 
cidents ought not to be concealed, and that they 
often enable us to form more accurate opinions 
of the manners and genius of a people than events 
of great importance. Viewed in this light, the story, 
ridiculous as it is in itself, may be acceptable. 
Bernard resided at the court of Jehan-Guire, 
during the latter years of that king's reign, 
and was reputed, with apparent justice, to be 
an excellent physician and a skilful surgeon. He 
enjoyed the favour of the Mogul, and became hk 
companion at table, where they often drank toge- 
ther to excess. The king and his physician possessed 
congenial tastes ; the former thought only of his 
pleasures, and left the management of public 
affairs to his wife, the celebrated Noor-Mahil or 
Noor-Jehan-Begum a woman, he used to say, 
whose transcendent abilities rendered her com- 
petent to govern the empire without the inter* 
ference of her husband. Bernard's daily and 
regular pay was ten crowns ; but this was greatly 
increased by his attendance on the high ladies 
of the seraglio and on all the omrahs, who 
seemed to vie with each other in making him 
the most liberal presents, , not only because . of 
the cures he effected, but on account of his in- 
fluence at court. This man, however, disregarded 
the value of money; what he. received with one 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIEE. 313 

hand he gave with the other; so that he was 
much beloved by every body, especially by the 
kenchens, on whom he lavished vast sums* 
Among the females of this description who 
nightly filled his house, was a young and beau- 
tiful damsel, remarkable for the elegance of her 
dancing, with whom our countryman fell violently 
in love ; but the mother apprehending that the 
girl would lose her health and bodily vigour with 
her virginity, never for a moment lost sight of her, 
and she resisted all the overtures and inces- 
sant solicitations of the court physician. While 
in despair of obtaining the object of his affections, 
Jehan-Guire at the am-kas, once offered him a 
present before all the omrahs by Way of remune- 
ration for an extraordinary cure which he had 
effected in the seraglio. ** Your majesty/* said 
Bernard, *' will not be offended if I refuse the 
gift so munificently offered, and implore that in 
lieu thereof your majesty would bestow on me 
the young kencheny now waiting with others of 
her company to make the customary salam/* 
The whole assembly smiled at this refusal of the 
present, and at a request so little likely to be 
granted, he being a Christian and the girl a 
muhammedan and a kencheny ; but Jehan-Guire, 
who never felt any religious scruples, was thrown 
into a violent fit of laughter, and commanded 
the girl to be given to him, '' Lift her on the 
physician's shoulders," he said, " and let him carry 
the kenchen away." No sooner said than done. 



Digitized by 



Google 



314 TRAVELS IN THE 

In the midst of a crowded assembly the girl 
was placed on Bernard's back, who withdrew ^ 
triumphantly with his prize and took her to his 
house. 

The festivals generally conclude with an 
amusement unknown in Europe,— a combat be- 
tween two elephants ; which takes place in the 
presence of all the people on the sandy space near 
the river : the king, the principal ladies of the 
court and the omrahs, viewing the spectacle from 
different apartments in the fortress. 

A wall of earth is raised three or four French 
feet wide and five or six high. The two ponder- 
ous beasts meet one another face to face, on oppo- 
site sides of the wall, each having a couple of 
riders, that the place of the man who sits on the 
shoulders for the purpose of guiding the elephant 
with a large iron hook, may immediately be sup- 
plied if he should be thrown down. The riders 
animate the lelephants either by soothing words, 
or by chiding them as cowards, and urge them on 
with their heels, until the poor creatures ap- 
proach the wall and are brought to the attack. 
The shock is tremendous, and it appears sifrpris* 
ing that they ever survive the dreadful wounds 
and blows inflicted with their teeth, their heads 
and their trunks. There are frequent pauses dur* 
ing the fight ; it is suspended and renewed ; and 
the mud wall being at length thrown down, the 
stronger or more courageous elephant passes on 
and attacks his opponent, and putting him tonight. 



Digitized by 



Google 



liOGULEMnmE. 315 

pmsaes and fBtmsiqKin Inm with so much obsti- 
naej, dnt tlie animals can be separated only by 
means i3i€tMctkj% <»- fire-works, which are made 
\o exjdode between than ; ibr they are naturally 
timid, and haye a particular dread of fire, which is 
the reason why elephants have been used with 
so very Uttle advantage in armies since the 
use of fire-arms. The boldest come firom Cey- 
km, but none are employed in war which have 
not been regularly trained, and accustomed for 
years to the discharge of muskets close to their 
heads, and the bursting of crackers between their 
legs. 

The fight of these noble creatures is attended 
with much cruelty. It frequently happens that 
some of the riders are trodden under foot^ and 
killed on the spot , the elephant having always 
cunning enough to feel the importance of dis- 
mounting the rider of his adversary, whom he 
therefore endeavours to strike down with his 
trunk. So imminent is the danger considered, 
that on the day of combat the unhappy men take 
the same formal leaVe of their wives and children 
as if condemned to death. They are somewhat 
consoled by the reflection that if their lives should 
be preserved, and the king be pleased with their 
conduct, not only will their pay be augmented, 
but a sack of peyssas (equal to fifty francs) will be 
presented to them the moment they alight from 
the elephant. They have also the satisfaction of 
knowing that in the event of their death, the pay 



Digitized by 



Google 



316 TRAVELS IN THE 

will be continued to the widows, and that their 
sons will be appointed to the same situation. 
The mischief with which this amusement is at^ 
tended does not always terminate with the death of 
the rider : it often happens that some of the specta- 
tors are knocked down and trampled upon by 
^the elephants, or by the crowd; for the rush is 
terrible when, to avoid the infuriated combatants^ 
tnen and horses in confusion take to flight. The 
second time I witnessed this exhibition I owed my 
safety entirely to the goodness of my horse and 
the exertions of my two servants. 

But it is time we should quit the fortress, and 
return to the city, where I omitted to describe 
two edifices worthy of notice. 

The first is the principal mosque, which is 
conspicuous at a great distance, being situated 
on the top of a rock in the centre of the 
town. The surface of the rock was previously 
levelled, and around 'it a space is cleared suffi- 
ciently large to form a handsome square, where 
four fine long streets terminate, opposite to the 
four sides of the mosque ; one, opposite, to the 
principal entrance, in front of the building; a 
second, to the back of the temple ; and the two 
others, to the gates that are in the middle of the 
two sides. The ascent to the three gates, is by 
means of five . and twenty or thirty steps, of 
beautiful large stone, which jare continued the 
whole length of the front and ^ides. The back 
part is cased over to the height of the rock. 



Digitized by 



Google 



HCX2UL EMPIRE* 317 

with large and handsome hewn stone» which 
hides its inequalities, and tends to give a noble ap» 
pearance to the building. The three entrances, 
composed of marble, are magnificent^ and their 
large doors are overlaid with highly finished 
plates of copper or brass* Above the principal 
gate, which greatly exceeds die others in gran- 
deur of appearance, there are several small turrets 
of white marble that produce a fine efiect ; and at 
the back part of the mosque are seen three capa- 
cious domes, built also of white marble, within 
and without. The middle dome is much larger 
and loftier than the other two. The extre- 
mity of the mosque alone is covered : the space 
between the three domes and the principal en- 
trance is without any roof; the extreme heat 
of the climate rendering such an opening ab- 
solutely necessary. The whole is paved of 
large slabs of marble. I grant that this build- 
ing is not constructed according to those rules 
of architecture which we seem to think ought 
to be implicitly followed; yet I can perceive 
no fault that ofiends the taste ; every part appears 
well contrived, properly executed, and correctly 
proportioned. I am satisfied that even in Paris, 
a church erected after the model of this temple, 
would be admired, were it only for its singu- 
lar style of architecture and its extraordinary 
appearance. With the exception of the three 
great domes, and the numerous turrets^ which are 



Digitized by 



Google 



318 TRAVELS IN THE 

all of white marble, the mosque is of a red colour, 
as if built with large slabs of red marble ; although 
it consists of a species of stone cut with great 
facility, and apt to exfoliate after a certain time. 
The natives pretend that the quarries from which 
it is taken, reproduce the stone by degrees : 
this, if true, is very remarkable ; but whether 
or not they rightly attribute it to the water 
which fills the quarries every year, I cannot decide. 
The king repairs to the mosque every Friday, 
for the purpose of prayer ; that day correspond- 
ing in muhammedan Countries to our Sunday. 
The streets through which he passes are watered 
to lay the dust and temper the heat : two or three 
hundred musketeers form an avenue from the gate 
of the fortress, and as many more line both sides of 
a wide street leading directly to the mosque. The 
muskets of these soldiers are small but well 
finished, and have a sort of large scarlet covering 
with a little streamer on the top. Five or six 
horsemen, well mounted, are also ready at the 
fortress gate, and their duty is to clear the way 
for the king, keeping, however, at a consider- 
able distance in advance, lest he should be incom- 
moded by their dust. These preparations com- 
pleted, his majesty leaves the fortress, sometimes 
oti an elephant, decorated with rich trappings, 
and a canopy supported by painted and gilt pil- 
lars ; and sometimes in a throne gleaming with 
azure and gold, placed on a litter covered with 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 319 

scarlet or brocade, which eight chosen men, in 
handsome attire, carry on their shoulders. A body 
of omrahs follow the king, some on horseback, 
and others in palanquins ; and among the omrahs 
are seena ^reat number of mansebdars, and bearers 
of silver maces, whom I have elsewhere described. 
I cannot say that this train resembles the pompous 
processions, or (which is a more appropriate term) 
the masquerades of the Grand Seignior, or the 
martial retinues of European monarchs : its mag- 
nificence is of a different character; but it is 
not therefore the less -royal. The other edi- 
fice in Delhi to which I would draw your at- 
tention, is .what they call the caravansary of the 
princess, built by the celebrated Begum-Saheb, 
Shah-Jehan's eldest daughter, of whom I have so 
much spoken in my history of the late war. Not 
only this princess, but all the omrahs who wished 
to gain the favour of the old monarch, embellished 
the new city at their own expence. . The cara- 
vansary is a large square with arcades, like our 
Place Royale, except that the arches are separated 
from each other by partitions, and have small 
chambers at their inner extremities. Above the 
ai:cade3 runs a gallery all round the building, 
into which open the same number of chambers as 
there are below. This place is the rendezvous of 
the rich Persian, Usbec, and other foreign mer- 
ehants, who in general may be accommodated 
with empty chambers, in which they remain with 
perfect security, the gate of the caravansary being 
closed at night. If in Paris we had a score of 



Digitized by 



Google 



320 TilAVELS IN THE 

similar structures, distributed in different parts of 
the city, strangers on their first arrival would be 
less embarrassed than at present to find a safe and 
reasonable lodging. They might remain in tHeim 
a few days until they had seen their acquaintance, 
and looked out at leisure for more convenient 
apartments. Such places would become ware^ 
houses for all kinds of merchandize and the gene- 
ral resort of foreign merchants. 

Before I quit the subject of Delhi, I will an- 
swer by anticipation a question which I am sensible 
you wish to ask : namely, What is the extent of 
the population of that city, and the number of it^ 
respectable inhabitants, as compared with the capi- 
tal of France. When I consider that Paris consists of 
three or four cities, piled upon one another ; all of 
them containing numerous apartments, filled, for 
the most part, from top to bottom, that the streets 
are thronged with men and women, on foot and 
horseback ; with carts, chaises and coaches ; and 
that there are very few large squares, courts or 
gardens ; reflecting, I say, upon all these facts, Pa- 
ris appears to me the nursery-ground of nations, and 
I can scarcely persuade myself that Delhi contli,ins 
an equal number of people. On the other hand, if 
we take a review of this metropolis of India, and 
observe its vast extent and its numberless shops ; if 
we recollect that, besides the omrahs, the icity 
never contuns less than five and thirty thou- 
sand cavaliers, nearly all of whom have wives, 
children, and a great number of servants, who, as 
well as their masters, reside in separate houses ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 321 

that there is no house^ by whomsoever inhabited, 
which does not swarm with women and children ; 
that during the hours when the abatement of the 
heat permits the inhabitants to walk abroad, the 
streets are crowded with people, although many 
of those streets are very wide and, excepting 
a few carts, unincumbered with wheel carriages ; 
if we take all these circumstances into consider 
ration, we shall hesitate before we give a positive 
opinion in regard to the comparative popula- 
tion of Paris and Delhi ; and I conclude, that 
if the number of souls be not as great in the 
latter city as in our own capital, it cannot be 
greatly less. As respects the better sort of 
people, there is a striking diflference in favour of 
Paris, where seven or eight out of ten individuals, 
seen in the streets, are tolerably well clad, and 
have a certain air of respectability ; but in Delhi, 
for two or three who wear decent apparel, there 
may always be reckoned seven or eight poor, 
ragged, and miserable beings, attracted to the 
capital by the army. L cannot deny, how- 
ever, that I continually meet with persons neat 
iind elegant in their dress, finely formed, well 
mounted and properly attended. Nothing, for 
instance, can be conceived much more brilliant 
than the great square in front of the fortress at 
the hours when the omrahs, rajahs and manseb- 
dars repair to the citadel to mount guard, or 
attend the assembly of the am-kas. The manseb- 
dars flock thither from all parts well mounted 



Digitized by 



Google 



3£2 TaATSLS IN THE 

and equippecl^ und splendidly accompanied hy four 
servaQta, two behind and two before^ to dear tho 
itreet for their masters, Omrahs and ngahs ride 
thither^ some on borsebndkj some on majestic 
elephants ; but the greater part are conveyed on the 
shoulders of six men» in rich palanquins, leaning 
agmnst a thick cushion of brocade^, and chewing 
betel^ for the double purpose of sweetemng their 
breath and reddening their lips. On me side 
of every palanquin, is seen a servant with the 
omrah's toothpick and the salivary vessel of 
porcelain or silver which always aocompani^ the 
pipe; on the other side, two more servants 
hxi the luxurious lord, and flap away the jSieif 
or brush off the dust wilJi a peacock's tml; 
three or £3ur footmen march in fr<mt to clear 
the way, and a chosen number of the best 
formed and best mounted horsemen Ibllow in the 
rear. 

The oountry in the neighbourhood of Delhi b 
extimnely tortile. It produces corn, sugar, anil 
or hidigo, rice, millet, and liiree or four other 
kinds of pulse, the food of the common people^ in 
rreat abundance. Two leagues from the dty, 
on the Agra road, m a place which Uie nmhamh 
m^ans call Koia Kotubeddine, is a very old edi- 
fice, formerly a deura, or temple of idols, eontaia- 
ing inscriptions written in dbaracters diiBferent 
from those of any language spc^en in India, aixd 
so ancient that no one understands tfaem« 

In anoUier direction, and at s distance of two 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOaUL BMPtEl. 323 

er three leagues from Delhi isi the kingfs oountry 
house^ called Sha-limar^ a handsome and xatkie 
buildings but not to be compared to Fontaine- 
bleau. Saint GermiBii> or VetsaiUes.^ I as- 
sure you there are no such palaaes in tiie 
vicinity of Delhi} nor seats such as Sai^t 01oiid> 
Chantilly^ Meudon^ Liancovr, Vau tm Rn^, at 
tresa the smaller country houses bdonging to 
private gentlemen^ citizens or mordants; but 
this will create no surprise when it is coll8^> 
dered that no subject can hold landed pfoperty 
in h^ own right. Between Delhi and Agt a> a 
distatee of ^fty or sixty leagues^ there are no 
&ae towns, such as trayelleis pass through in 
France: the whole road is cheerless wad uniiN 
teresting; nothing is worthy observation but 
Muttra, where an ancient and magnificent pagan 
temple is still to be seen ; a few tolerably hand* 
some caravansaries, a day's journey from eadi 
other; and a double row of trees planAed by 
order of Jehan^Guire, and continued fer one 
hm^red and fifty leagues, with small pyr^onids of 
turrets, erected from cross to aross,f for the 
purpose of pointing out the di&rent roads. 
Wells are a^o frequently met with, afbrding 

*The gardens of Shalimk were begun in the foiuth 
]feaT of Shah^Jehan's reign, a^d were laid out with admira- 
ble taste. The money expended upon them amounted to 
one million sterlings — Dow, 

tTwo British miles may be giy«n to the average mea- 
surement of a ctOM.'^Translaior. 



Digitized by 



Google 



324 TRAVELS IK THfl 

drink to travellers, and serving to water the 
young trees. 

What I have said of Delhi may convey a 
correct idea of Agra, in regard at least to its 
situation on the Jumna, to the fortress or royal 
residence, and to most of its public buildings. 
But Agra having been a favourite and more fre- 
quent abode of the kings of Hindostan since the 
days of Acbar by whom it was built and named 
Acbar-abad, it surpasses Delhi in extent, in the 
multitude of residences belonging to omrahs and 
rajahs and of the good stone or brick houses 
inhabited by private individuals ; and in the 
number and conveniency of its caravansaries. 
Agra has also to boast' of two celebrated 
mausoleums, of which I shall speak by and by : 
it is, however, without walls, and inferior in some 
respects to the other capital ; for not having' been 
constructed after any settled design, it wants the 
uniform and wide streets that so eminently dis- 
tinguish DelhL Four or five of the streets, where 
trade is the principal occupation, are of great 
length, and the houses tolerably good : nearly all 
the others are short, narrow and. irregular, and full 
of windings and corners : the consequence is that 
when the court is at Agra there is often a strange 
confusion. I believe I have stated the chief 
particulars wherein the two capitals differ ; but I 
may add that Agra has more the appearance of a 
country town, especially when viewed from an 
eminence. The prospect it presents is rural. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 325 

varied and agreeable; for the grandees having 
always made it a point to. plant trees in their 
gardens and courts for the sake of shade^ the 
mansions of omrahs, rajahs^ and others^ are all 
interspersed with luxuriant and green foliage, in 
the midst of which the lofty stone houses of 
banians, or pagan merchants, have the appearance 
of old castles buried in forests. Such a landscape 
yields peculiar pleasure in a hot and parched 
country, where the eye seeks in verdure for refresh- 
ment and repose. 

You need not quit Paris, however, to contem- 
plate the finest, the most ijiagnificent view in the 
world ; for assuredly it may be found on the Pont- 
neuf. Place yourself on that bridge during the 
day, and what can be conceived more extraor- 
dinary than the throngs of people and carriages, 
the strange bustle, the various objects by which 
you are surrounded ? Visit the same spot at night, 
and what, I fearlessly ask, can impress the mind 
like the scene you will witness 2 The innumera- 
ble windows of the lofty houses seen from the 
bridge, exhibit their chastened and subdued lights, 
while the activity and bustle, observable in the day, 
seem to suffer no diminution until midnight. 
There honest citizens, and what never happens 
in Asia, their handsome wives and daughters 
perambulate the streets, without apprehension 
of quagmires or of thieves ; and to complete the 
picture, you see, in every durection, long lines 



Digitized by 



Google 



3S6 TRAVELS IN THE 

of brilUant lamps^ burning with equal con« 
ttancy in foul and fair weather. Yes, my 
fri^nd^ when you are on the Pontrneuf at Paris, 
you may boldly aver, on my authority, that 
your eyes behold the grandest of all the artifidal 
scenes in the world, excepting possibly some 
parts of China and Japan, which I have not vi- 
sited. What will this view be, what will be its 
beauty, wl^n the Louvre is completed ! when the 
Louvre, which it was thought would never be 
seen but in the design and on paper, shall have 
actual existence in fact! 

I have purposely introduced the word tLtiiSf 
cial; because, in speaking of fine prospects, ac- 
cording to the common acceptation of the term, 
we must always except that view of Constantino- 
ple, as viewed from the middle of the great canal, 
opposite the point du sertaiL Never shall I forget 
the overpowering delight I experienced when first 
I beheld that vast and, as it seemed to me, enchant- 
ed amphitheatre. The view of Constantinople, 
however, derives its chief beauty from nature; 
whereas in Paris every thing, or nearly so, 
is artificial; which, to my mind, gives more 
interest to the view of the latter ; because the 
work of man so displayed indicates the capital of 
a great empire, the seat of a mighty moaarch^ 
I may indeed say, without partiality, and after 
making every allowance for the beauty of Delhi, 
Agra and Constantinople, that Paris is the finest. 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOaUL EMPIKA. WSfl 

the richest and ahogiMher the fim city in the 
world. 

The Jei^uits have a church in Agra> and a 
building which they call a college^ where tl^ry 
privately instruct in the doctrines of otnr reli- 
gion, the children of five and twenty or thirty 
Christian families, collected, I know not how, in 
Agra, and induced to settle there by the )und 
and charitable aid which they receive from the 
Jesuits. This religious order was invited hii^r 
by Acbar, at the period when the power of the 
Pmtuguese in India was at the highest; and 
that prmoe not only gave them an imnual in- 
come for their miuntenance, but permitted them 
to build churches in the capital cities of Agra 
and Lahore^ The Jesuits found a still warmer 
patron in Jehan-Guire, the son and succesicHr 
of Acbar ; but they were sorely qipr^sed by 
Shah-Jehan, the son of Jehan-Guire, and father of 
the present king, Aureng-ZSbe. That monarch 
deprived them of their pension and destroyed tte 
church at Lahore and the greater part of that 
of Agra, totally demolishing the steeple wfaiGh 
contained a dock heard in every part of the 
city* 

The good fathers, during the reign df Jehii^ 
Ginre, were sanguine in their expectation of the 
progress of Christianity in Hindostan* Itisc^rtam 
that this prince evinced the utmost contempt for 
the laws of the Koran, Md expressed his admiration 
of the doctrines of oor creed. He p^nutted two 



Digitized by 



Google 



328 TRAVELS IN THE 

of his nephews to embrace the Christian faith, 
and extended the same indulgence to Mirza- 
Ziilkarmin, who had undergone the rite of circum- 
cision and been brought up in the seragtio. 
The pretext was that Mirza was born of Chris- 
tian parents, his mother having been wife of a 
rich Armenian^ and having been brought to the 
seraglio by Jehan-Guire's desire. 

The Jesuits say, that this king was so deter- 
mined to countenance the Christian religion, that 
he formed the bold project of clothing the whole 
court in the European costume. The dresses 
were all prepared, when the king having privately 
arrayed himself in his new attire, he sent for 
one. of his principal omrahs, whose opinion he 
required concerning the meditated change. The 
answer, however, was so appalling, that Jehan- 
Guire abandoned his design and affected to pass 
off the whole affair as a joke. 

They also maintain that when on his death- 
bed, he . expressed a wish to die a Christian, and 
sent for those holy men ; but that the message 
was never delivered. Many, however, deny this 
to, have been the case, and affirm that Jehan-Guire 
died, as he had lived, destitute of all religion, 
and that he nourished to the last a scheme which 
he had formed, after the example of his father 
Acbar, of declaring himself a prophet, and the 
founder of a new religion. 

I am informed by a muselman, whose father 
belonged to Jehan-Guire's household, that in one 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 329 

of that king's drunken frolics^ he sent for some of 
the most learned moollahs, and for a Florentine 
priest, whom he named father Atech, in allusion 
to his fiery temper ; and that the latter having, 
by his command, delivered an harangue in which 
he exposed the falsehoods of the muhammedan 
imposture, and defended the truths of his own 
persuasion, Jehan-Guire said that it was high time 
something should be done to decide the contro- 
versy between the Jesuits and mooUahs. *' Let 
a pit be dug,'* he added, ** and a fire kindled. 
Father Atech, with the gospel under his arm, and 
a mooUah, with the Koran, shall throw themselves 
into it, and I will embrace the religion of him 
whom the flames shall not consume." Father 
Atech declared his willingness to undergo the 
ordeal, but the mooUahs manifested the utmost 
dread, and the king felt too much compassion both 
for the one and the other to persevere in the 
experiment. 

Whatever credit this story may deserve, it is 
indisputable that the Jesuits during the whole of 
Jehan-Guire*s reign were honoured and respected 
at this court, and that they entertained what 
appeared a well-grounded hope of the progress 
of the gospel in Hindostan. Every thing, how- 
ever, which has occurred since the death of 
that monarch, excepting perhaps the close in- 
timacy between Dara and father Buzde, forbids us 
to indulge in any such expectation. But having 



Digitized by 



Google 



330 TBAVELS IN THE 

entered iitseiudbly iqxm the lubject of tnisdoKis^ 
you will perhaps allow me to make a £ew obeerra- 
tions, introductory to the long letter which I in- 
tend to write concerning that important topic* 

The design, indeed^ meets with my entire ap- 
probation ; nor ought we to withhold the meed of 
praise to those excellent missionaries in this part 
of the worlds especially the Capuchins and Jesuits, 
who meekly impart religious instruction to aU de- 
scriptions of men, without any mixture of indis- 
creet axid bigoted 2eal. To Christians of every 
denomination^ whether Catholics, Greeks, Arme- 
nians, Nestoriatis, or Jacobites, the demeanour of 
these good pastors k affectionate and charitdblf • 
They are the refuge and consolati(m of distress^ 
strangers and travellers, and by their great learning 
and exemplary lives expose to shame the ignorance 
and licentious habits of infidels. Some unhappily 
there are who disgrace the Christian professi<m 
by notoriously profligate conduct, and who ought, 
therefore, to be immured in their convents instead 
of being invested with the sacred character of 
mis^naries. Their religion is a mere mummery, 
and so &r from aiding the cause of Christianity, 
they become stumbling-Uocks in the way of those 
whom they were sent to enlighten and reclaim; 
but these are merely the exceptions to a genend 
rule which affect not the main argument* I am 
deeidedly favourable to this establishment of mis- 
sions, and the sending forA of learned and piow 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL SMHItB. 331 

mLssioiiaries. Thej are absolutely necessary; and it 
is the honocir as well as the peculiar prerogative of 
Christians to supply every part of the world with 
men bearing the same character and folk)wing the 
same benign object as did the apostles. You are 
not, however^ to conclude that I am so deluded by 
my love of missions, as to expect the same mighty 
effects to be produced by the exertions of modem 
missionaries as attended the preaching of a single- 
sermon in the days of the apostles. I have had 
too much intercourse with infidels, and am become 
too well acquainted with the blindness of thd 
human heart, to believe we shall hear of the 
conversion) in one day, of two or three thou* 
sand men. I despair especially of much success 
mnong muhammedan kings or muhammedan 
subjects. Having visited nearly all the missionary 
stations in the east, I speak the language of 
experience when I say, that whatever progress 
may be made among pagans, by the instruction 
and alms of the missionaries, you will be disap* 
pointed if you suppose that in ten years one 
muselman will be converted to Christianity. 
True it is that muhammedans respect the reli- 
gion of the New Testament: they never speak of 
Jesus Christ but with great veneration, or pro^ 
nounce the word Aysa, which means Jesus, without 
adding Azeret, or majesty. They even believe with 
us that he was miraculously begotten and both 
of a virgin mother, and that he is the Kelom-AUah 



Digitized by 



Google 



332 TRAVELS IN THi; 

and the Rouh-AUah, the Word of God and the 
Spirit of God. It is in vain to hope^ however, 
that they will renounce the religion wherein they 
were born^ or be persuaded that Muhammed 
was a false prophet. The Christians of Europe 
ought nevertheless to assist the missionaries by 
every possible means : their prayers, power and 
wealth, ought to be employed in promoting the 
glory of their Redeemer; but the expence of 
the missions should be borne by Europeans, 
for it would be impolitic to lay burthens on 
the people abroad ; and much care should be ha^ 
that want may not drive any missionary to acts of 
meanness. Missions ought not only to be liberally 
provided, but should be composed of persons of 
sufficient integrity, energy, and intelligence, 
always to bear testimony to the truth ; to seek 
with eagerness opportunities of doing good ; in 
a word, to labour with unwearied activity and 
unabated zeal, in their Lord's vineyard, whenever 
and wherever he may be pleased to give them an 
opening. But although it be the duty of every 
Christian state to act in this manner, yet there 
ought to be no delusion ; credence ought not to be 
given to every idle tale, and the work of conver- 
sion, which in fact is full of difficulty, should not 
be represented as a matter of easy accomplishment^ 
We do not adequately estimate the strong hold 
which the muhammedan superstition has over the 
minds of its votaries, to whom it permits the 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 333 

unrestrained indulgence of passions which the 
religion we require them to substitute in its stead 
declares must be subdued or regulated. M uham- 
medanism is a pernicious code> established by force 
of arms, and still imposed upon mankind by the 
same brutal violence. To counteract its baneful 
progress^ Christians must display the zeal^ and use 
the means I have suggested, however clear it 
may be that this abominable imposture can be 
effectually destroyed only by the special and 
merciful interposition of Divine Providence. We 
may derive encouragement from the promising 
appearances lately witnessed in China, in Japan 
and in the case of Jehan-Guire. Missionaries 
have to contend, however, with another sad im- 
pediment ; — the irreverent behaviour of Christians 
in their churches, so dissonant from their belief of 
the peculiar presence of God upon their altars, 
and so different to the conduct of muselmans who 
never venture, when engaged in the service of 
their mosques, even to turn the head, much less 
to utter a monosyllable one to the other; but 
seem to have the mind impressed with profound 
and awful veneration. 

The Dutch have a malt factory in Agra, in 
which they generally keep four or five persons. 
Formerly they carried on a good trade in that 
city by the sale of broad cloths, large and small 
looking glasses, plain laces, gold and silver laces, 
and iron wares ; likewise by the purchase of anil 
or indigo, gathered in the neighbourhood of Agra, 



Digitized by 



Google 



S84 TRAVBLS IN Tlil 

particularly at Bkmes, two days* jo«riiey finom die 
eity^ whither they go once erery year, hiring a 
house IB the place. The Dntch used also to make 
extensive purchases of cloths not only at Jelapour, 
but at Loknau, a seven or eight days* journey 
from Agra» where they also hove a bouse, and 
dispatch a few factors every season* It seems, 
however, that the trade of this people is not now 
very lucrative ; owing probably to the competi- 
tion of the Armenians, or to the great dbtance 
between Agra and Surat. Accidents continually 
befall their caravans, which, to avoid the bod 
roods and mountains in the direct road, through 
GuaUor and Brampour, travel by way of Ahmed- 
abid, over the territories of different rajahs. 
But whatever may be the discouragements, I do 
not believe the Dntch will follow the example of 
the English, and abandon their factory at Agra ; 
because they still dispose of their spices to great 
odvantage, and find it useful to have confidential 
persons near the court, always ready to prefer a 
oompldint against any governor, or other i^cer, 
who may have committed on act of injustice or 
tyranny in any of the Dutdi establishments at 
Bengid, Patna, Surat or Ahmedob^d. 

I shall finish this letter with a description of 
the two wonderful mausoleums, which constitute 
the chief superiority of Agra over Delhi. One 
was erected by Jehan^uire in honour of his 
father Acbar ; and Shah-Jehan raised the other to 
the memory of his wife Taje-M &hil, that ex- 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL BMPIBB. SS5 

feraordmary and celebrated hcmty, of whom her 
husband was so enamoured that it is i^d he wa^ 
oonatant to her during Ufe, and at her death was 
so affected as nearly to fdlow her to the grave. 

I shall pass Acbar^s monument without forth^ 
obsenration^ because all ita beauties are found in 
still greater perfection in that of Taje^Mihil, 
which I shall now endearour to describe. 

On leaiing Agra, toward the east^ you entefr 
a Iwgf wide, or paved street, on a gentle ascent, 
hamg on one side a high and long wall, which 
forms the side of a square garden, of much greater 
esiteiit than our Place Royale, and on the other 
side a row of new houses with arcades, re^ 
sembling those of the prind|>al streets in Delhi, 
which I have already described. After walk^ 
ixig half the length of the wall, you find ou 
the right, that is on the side of the houses, a 
Iwge gAte, tolerably well made, which is the 
entrance of a caravansary ; and on the opposite 
side that of the wall is seen the magnificent 
gate of a spacious and square pavilion, forming 
the ^trance into the garden, betwe^i two refear^ 
voirs, faced with hewn stone. 

This pavilion is an oblong square, and built of 
9, stone resembling red marble, but not so hard. 
Xhafrontseems to melonger, and much more grand 
Ie its construction, than that of St« Louis, in the rue 
St. Antoine, and it is equally lofty. The cdunms, the 
architraves and the cornices are, indeed, not formed 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



336 TRAVELS IN THE 

according to the proportion of the fire orders of 
architecture so strictly observed in French edi- 
fices. The building I am speaking of is of a 
different and peculiar kind ; but not without 
something pleasing in its whimsical structure; 
and in my opinion it well deserves a, place in oiir 
books of architecture. It consists almost wholly 
of arches upon arches^ and galleries, or divans, 
upon galleries; disposed and contrived in an 
hundred different ways. Nevertheless the edifice 
has a magnificent appearance, and is conceived 
and executed e£Pectually. Nothing offends the 
eye ; on the contrary it is delighted with every 
part, and never tired with looking. The last 
time I visited Taje-M&hil's mausoleum, I was in the 
company of a French merchant, who, as well as 
myself, thought that this extraordinary fabric 
could not be sufficiently admired. I did not ven- 
ture to express my opinion, fearing that my taste 
might have become corrupted by my long residence 
in India; and as my companion was come recently 
from France, it was quite a relief to my mind to 
hear him say, that he had seen nothing in 
Europe so bold and majestic. 

When you have entered a little way into the pa- 
vilion approaching toward the garden, you find 
yourself under a lofty cupola, surrounded above 
with galleries, and having two divans, or estrades 
below, one on the right, the other on the left; 
both of them raised eight or ten French feet from 



Digitized by 



Google 



MOGUL EMPIRE. 337 

the ground. Opposite to the entrance from the 
street is a large open arch, by which you enter 
a walk which divides nearly the whole of the gar- 
den into two equal parts. . 

This walk or terrace is wide enough to admit 
six coaches abreast; it is paved with large and 
hard square stones, raised about eight French 
feet above the garden; and divided the whole 
length by a canal faced with hewn stone- and 
ornamented with jets d'eau placed at certain 
intervals. 

After advancing twenty-five or thirty paces 
on this terrace, it is worth while to turn round 
and view the back elevation of the pavilion^ 
which, though not comparable to the front, is still 
very splendid, being lofty and of a similar style of 
architecture. On both sides of the pavilion, along 
the garden wall, is a long and wide gallery, 
raised like a terrace, and supported by a number 
of low columns, placed near each other. Into 
this gallery the poor are admitted three times a 
week during the rainy season to receive the alms 
founded in perpetuity by Shah-Jehan. 

Resuming the walk along the main terrace^ 
you see before you at a distance a large dome, in < 
which is the sepulchre ; and to the right and left 
of that dome on a lower surface you observe 
several garden walks covered with trees tand 
many parterres full of flowers. 

When at the end of the principal walk or 
terrace^ besides the dome that faces you,. are 

VOL. I. z 



Digitized by 



Google 



338 TRAVBLS IN THE 

^goovered two kqrgQ pavilkms, 0^9 to the right^ 
another to the left; both built with the same 
kind of stone, coiAspque^tly , of the same red 
colour as the first pavilion. These arc spacious^ 
square edifices, the parts of which are raised 
over each other in the form of balconies and 
terraces ; three arches leave openings which bav« 
the garden wall for a boundary, and you walk 
ilixder these pavilions as if they were lofty and 
wide gall^es. I shall not stop to speak of the 
interior ornaments of the two pavilions, because 
they scarcely differ in regard to the walls^ ceiling 
ox pavement from the dome which I am going to 
describe. Between the end of the principal walk . 
and this dome is an open and pretty large space^ 
which I call a wateif-parterre, because the stones 
cp which you walk, cut and figured in various; 
formb, represent the borders of ^ box in our par- 
terres. From the middle of this space, you have 
a good view of the building which contains the 
tomb and which we are now to examine. 

This building is a vast dome of white marble 
nearly of the saibe height as the Val de Grace of 
Paris, and endrcled by a number pf tuirrets,/also 
of ^hite marble, descending, the o^e bdow the 
othef in i^giilar succession. The whp}^ Mm^ i» 
supported by four great arches, three of which ar^^^ 
4inte open aild the other closed up by the wall 
of an apartment with a. g^Hety ^ attached , to itf^ 
Thete the£oran is continually read with appfi^ent 
devotion, in respectful meJuOry.pf X^j^-B(I^l»il by. 



Digitized by 



Google 



N 



I MOGUL EMPIRE. 339 

1 mooUah^ kept in the mausoleum -for that 
k e. The centre ofevery arch is adorned with 

larble slabs whereon are inscribed large/ 
^ characters in black malrble, which produce 

effect. The interior or concave part of 
ddme and generally the whole of the wall 
xrom tof) to bottom are faced with white marble r 
no part can be found, that is not skilfully wrought, 
or that has not its peculiar beauty. Every wjiere; 
we seen the jasper, hyacinth and jade, as yre\\ 
w other stones similar to those that enrich the 
W&Us of the Grand Dune's chapel at Florence, and 
9e!veral more of gre&t. value and rarity, set in an 
endless variety of modes, mixed and enchased in 
the.slabs of marble whi<?h faee the , body of the 
wall. Even the squarei^ of white and black mar- 
ble/ Which compose the pavemenjt are inlaid with 
tilese pre6ious stQjfiiesiin the, most beautiful and 
delicate manner imaginable. 

Under the dome is a small chamber, wherein 
is enclosed the tomb of Taje-M&hil. It is opened 
with much ceremony once in a year, and once 
only ; and as no Christian is admitted within, lest 
its sanctity should be profaned, I have not seen 
the interior ; but I understand that nothing can 
be conceived more rich and magnificent. 

It only remains to draw your attention to 
a walk or terrace, nearly five and twenty paces in 
breadth and rather more in height, which runs 
from the dome t6 the extremity of the garden. 
From this terrace are seen the Jumna, flowing 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



340 TRAVBLS. 

below*— a large expanse of luxuriant gardeuB^— a 
part of the city of Agra — the fortress — and all 
the fine residences of the omrahs, erected an 
the banks of the river. When I add that this 
terrace extends almost the whole length of one 
side of the garden, I leave you to judge whether 
I had not sufficient ground for asserting that 
the mausoleum of Taje-M&hil is an astonish- 
ing work. ' It is possible I may have imbibed an 
Indian taste ; but I decidedly think that this 
monument deserves much more to be num^ 
bered among the Vronders of the world than the 
pyramids of Egypt, those unshapen masses which, 
when I had * seen them twice, yielded me no 
satisfaction ; and which are nothing on the outside 
but heaps of large stones piled in the form of steps 
one upon another, while within there is very Httie 
that it is creditable either to human skill ^ or to 
human invention. 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 



Wklt^ Printtr, 
natCTovri* 



Digitized by VjOOQIC" 



CORRIGENDA. 

Vol. h vnge 41 i line 3B, iof * \n,* r^ad Mt/^- p. 47, 1. )fl^, Rar' o1>1^ot.' rMUl 'AhJiiFt^**.* 
p.RifKiidiit lercral otber pmr^S for ' U*bcr>* rftfiit Ui^ec,***!'* Wi I. J!l, tor * [i^wtrnf 
nK' r«d 'porter of thn/-..p. ^(IJ, 7* for 'ShT>i»' rcml '.Slw^h,*- -p. 1 11?* I. 3H, tor 'ofUiy 
rend 'of rbeir-'^p. 120, 1. 1% fof ' witoMi," rfn4 *wUi>f»6il.*— pi 171^* I ll'i tov * tm\' 
prociit dntliii of a Koverelirii ftiid hli subject'*, itnil of lEihjprtu tflhrftrdM tttrlr invurnlKii/ 
read' reclpmcftliJiitlf'i tietvrp*ii iTnj*f>\'erfinri «^nd iHi miiijff.tii,' - p Vi>t, \.'J\i, for *(!ii' 
(la/ r^Jifl *6lifnpil/---p. 2-48, list Ijfic ►MHtriiiJof ' iHiiIp {!nnl«mpU!hm Uiii inllil^im if 
fAy/ rr&tt 'while contcmplarln^ tlie imnibcr of prnnfin, Hitionniini^ tn rtillEt<ini, wli« 
depend JbrMrpoftfiolely on tb« k^n^'i paf*'*-.p, 2B4, »rfflud Ibc Fumn ^M<f|l,^J^^ fur ' Hfl 
heminus,' read ' ^iypsiei.'— p S**?? lof ' mitV if**d "mtftt-'-^p. '4^'::, IHf, r.ir *on thi 
«lh«r- It iMc ofTikf broker Potih," reiu] 'on tlip allierN the »UEtiM oT Kuliiit M» bro- 
ther,'— p,^S2a» L 33, for ' croifc' read ■ coti/ p. a^, I* iSi fil>r* Ibt fftlttl du »tFU)l/ *f*d 
nh« vcragMo liQAd bad^'-'-p. ^J,^^ dtldnall' 

Vol. If. p. 4(M1ne 38, for *apprebendfd, rend « apprehfai*'- p* M* l* W, for ' HU'int, 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



J 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



S>' 






P) 



Digitized by 



Google i 



^>i;;>,^ '^ "^'SJ'^i^Ji^i^ 



.'<^^i 



' ^Q 



cv^ 






^1 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 









Digitized by 



Goog 



" ,1 



— ^.^.w ^^ .^.. . -.' 



mm 



hi II — Tl 'TfVJM 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



% 



c 



y)>} 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 












^'^^ 



J^^S 



"? ->^ 












^.^ »*-.> 



.>*v 



L 



■"^^-'i.'.-^' 
-^•^.^<'i-> 







■!• 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



; 1 



TV 
