Suggestive Therapeutics (Hippolyte Bernheim, 1889)
==================================================
Hippolyte Bernheim — The Nancy school's manifesto — Bernheim's 'Suggestive Therapeutics' made hypnotism scientific. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (suggestivetherap00bern) — 1889 first English edition (Tuke translation).

mm

m
ma

r

ill

wsm

WÊÊmÊ^M-

KwiHta  H,  *3  K

BSnHR


mmmm

mm     '-mm

«wp

«iP3

Ml-  :    a»

YALE
MEDICAL  LIBRARY

HISTORICAL
LIBRARY

l>5

\i

a-

i

fei^^li^^

Edward  Sanford  Gaylord
Library

of  the

>2

m

New  Haven  Dental  Association     ®>é

1926


É     Title  V^W      'JU^M
I

No.

S

&i

t^SÊSsr:  Isfe^Er;  isfeSter  fefeâsr;  tsteàsr  tsfeàss  tsfeàsr  ^Ste;  îsîSs3

è*S  ****.++$%  New  Haven  Dental

^*\  .>|  Association

"^^VÉW.^j^  YALE    MEDICAL    LIBRARY

\   V

&a

m

t

â

V^i


-

"7*


Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Yale  University,  Cushing/Whitney  Medical  Library


Suggestive  Therapeutics

\   rREATISE  ON
THE    NATURE   AND   USES  OF    HYPNOTISM

H.  BERNHEIM,  M.D.

PROFESSOR   IN   THE    FACULTY    OK    MEDICINE    AT   NANCY

TRANSLATED   FROM   THE   SECOND    AND    REVISED    FRENCH    EDITION

CHRISTIAN   A.  HERTER,   M.D.

OF   NEW   YORK

('..   P.  PUTNAM'S  SONS

|RK  LOi


f  ht   ïlnklurboehtr   ^rtss

NI  AV    \  (IRK  i  ONDON

•7  WBST'TWBNTY-i  mi'ii      P.        »f  KING  WILLIAM  ST.»  MBAJIB

Zbc  "fcnicfcerbochcr  press,  flcvc  £}orfc

Electrotyped  and  Printed  by
G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons

CONTENTS.

CHAM  ER  I.

Manner  <>f  hypnotizing. — Sleep  and  hypnotic  influence. — Variable  aenritivi

subjects. — Classification  of  the  varions  degrees  <>f  sleep  according  to  M.
banlt  : — ist.  Drowsiness  ; — 2d.  Suggestive  catalepsy; — 3d.  Rotary  au-
tomatism ; — 41I1.  Auditory  relation  of  subject  with  the  operator  only  ; — 5th.
Light  somnambulism  ; — 6th.  Deep  somnambulism.  Author's  classification  :
A.  Memory  preserved  on  waking:  i>t.  Suggestibility  to  certain  acts  only  ;
— 2<J.  Inability  to  open  eyes  ;— 3d.  Suggestive  catalepsy  liable  to  be  broken  :
— 4th.  Irresistible  catalepsy  ; — 5th.  Suggestive  contraction  ; — 6th.  Automatic
obedience  ; — 15.  Memory  lo>t  on  waking,  or  Somnambulism  : — 71I1.  Without
susceptibility  to  hallucinations  ; — Sth.  Susceptibility  to  hallucinations  during
sleep  ; — 9th.  Susceptibility  to  hypnotic  and  post-hypnotic  hallucinations. —
Varieties: — Suggestion  without  sleep.  —  Definition  of  hypnotism. — Of  fasci-
nation.— Of  waking. — Proportion  of  subjects  susceptible  to  hypnotism         .    1-20

CHAPTER  II.

Phenomena  noticed  in  hypnotic  sleep. — Sensibility. — Spontaneous  or  suggested
anaesthesia. — Hypnotism  cannot  replace  chloroform. — Alterations  in  motili-
ty.— Suggestive  catalepsy. — Automatic  movements. — Movements  by  imita-
tion.— Suggestive  paralysis. — Somnambulism  with  forgetfulness  upon  waking.
— Automatic  obedience. — Sensorial  suggestions. — Suggested  hallucination-*.
— Acts,  sensorial  illusions,  and  hallucinations  suggested  for  the  time  which
follows  waking. — Negative  hallucinations.  —  Psychical  amaurosis  and  deaf-
Dess.  —  Hallucinations  to  be  realized  after  a  long  interval  (à  longue
échéance) .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .21-13

CHAPTER  III.

Observations  on  different  types  of  somnambulism. — Double  personality  in  certain
somnambulists. — Spontaneous  dreams  with  or  without  preservation  of  the
sense  of  reality  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    54    7 -

1    HAPTER    IV.

Circulation  and  respiration  in  hypnotism. — Changes  observed  by  authors  are  due
iie  emotion  of  the  subjects. — Influence  of  the  hypnotic  suggestion  on  the
functions  of  organic  life  :   retardation  and   acceleration  of  the   pulse  ;   influ-
ence upon   the  vaso-motor  circulation  ;  inflammation,  blisters,  hemorrhag
produced  by  suggestion     ..........   73_77

iv  Contents.

chapter  v.

PAGE

Suggestion  in  the  waking  condition. — Production  of  the  same  phenomena  by
simple  affirmation  in  subjects  who  can  be  hypnotized  and  in  those  who  can-
not be  hypnotized. — Transfer  of  hemianesthesia  in  a  case  of  hysteria. — Sen-
sorial suggestions. — Hallucinations. — Suggestive  modifications  of  the  visual
field. — Auto-suggestion  in  ecstacy. — A  question  of  priority        .         .         .   78-86

CHAPTER  VI.

Reply  to  critics. — The  three  phases  of  hypnotism  according  to  the  school  of  the
Salpêtrière. — Experiments  of  transfer. — Experimental  illusions. — The  real
image  and  the  hallucinatory  image  .......   87-104

CHAPTER   VII.

Historical  sketch, — Mesmer  and  mesmerism. — His  condemnation  by  the  learned
societies. — Husson's  report. — Abbot  Faria  and  sleep  by  suggestion. — Alex-
andre Bertrand's  doctrine. — Gen.  Noizet's  experiments  and  the  fiuidic  doc-
trine.— Second  Period  :  Braid  and  Braidism. — Analysis  of  the  doctrine. —
Grimes  and  Electro-biology  in  America  and  in  England. — Durand  de  Gros'
experiments  and  doctrine. — Dr.  Charpignon's  moral  medicine  :  his  fiuidic
doctrine. — Braidism  in  France  :  Prof.  Azam's  communication. — Application
to  surgical  anesthesia. — Experiments  and  doctrine  of  Dr.  Liébault  of  Nancy  :
hypnotic  sleep  compared  with  ordinary  sleep.  —  Hypnotism  in  animals  :  Kir-
cher,  Czermak,  Preyer,  Wilson,  Beard. — Induced  somnambulism  in  France  :
Chas.  Richet's  experiments. — Induced  sleep  in  cases  of  Hysteria  :  Charcot's
and  Dumontpallier's  experiments. — Hypnotism  in  man  in  Germany  :  experi-
ments of  the  Danish  magnetizer,  Hansen  ;  Rumpf's  physiological  theories  ;
Preyer's  chemical  theories  ;  Schneider's,  Berger's,  and  Heidenhain's  psycho-
physiological theories. — Prosper  Despine's  theory. — Recent  publications,  105-124

CHAPTER   VIII.

The  author's  theoretical  conception  of  the  interpretation  of  the  phenomena  of
suggestion. — Automatism  in  daily  life.— reflex  acts  ;  automatic  instinctive
acts. — Automatism  in  the  new-born  child,  and  in  the  adult. — Moderating
influence  of  the  mind. — Sensorial  illusions  rectified  by  the  mind. — A.  Maury's
experiments. — Hypnagogic  hallucinations. — Credulity.  — Sensorial  sugges-
tions by  imitation. — Automatic  obedience. — Influence  of  the  idea  upon  the
act. — Despine's  doctrine  :  Abolition  of  the  state  of  consciousnoss. — Contin-
uity of  the  state  of  consciousness. — Exaltation  of  reflex  ideo-motor,  ideo-
sensitive,  and  ideo-sensorial  excitability. —  Negative  suggestion. — Inhibition.
— Sleep  by  suggestion,  from  fatigue  of  the  eyelids,  from  occlusion  of  the  eyes,
from  monotonous,  feeble,  continuous  impressions. — Suggestion  without  sleep.
— Chambard's  classification  of  the  various  periods  of  hypnotic  sleep. — Ob-
jections.— Attempted  interpretation  of  latent  memories,  and  of  suggestions
à  longue  échéance. — Answer  to  M.  Beaunis's  objections  .  .  .    125-158

CHAPTER    IX.

General  applications  of  the  doctrine  of  suggestion. — Moral  and  psychological
standpoint. — Education. — Legal    standpoint. — Criminal    suggestions. — Ob-

Contents.

tivo  h.ilhii  inations. — The
imbecility.  —  Reply  to  If,  Paul  Janet     .        .        .        .        .        .        .   i

PART  II.

1  HI  Ali  i  .  ON  TO  THE!

I  li  IPTER    I.

Imagination  ai  ■  therapeutic  agent. — Talisman*  and  amulets. —  The  therap
effect  of  magnets.  —  Report  <>f  the  Royal  i  I  ipon  the  m

netotherapy  of  Abbot  Lenoble. —  Medicinal  magnetism  falls  into  discredit,
and  is  again  revived. — Varions  practices,  ancient  and  modern  ;  the  healers. —
serrations  upon  cures  effected  through  the  influence  of  the  imagination. —
serrations  upon  the  miraculous  cures  at  Lourdes  —The  rape.;  tion.

— The  hypnotic  condition  exalts  susceptibility  to  suggestion. — <  uns  obtained
by  the  ancient  magneti/ers. —  Braid's  doctrine  ;  his  theoretical  ideas  upon
the  mechanism  of  the  cures.  —  M.  I.iéhault's  method  ;  suggestion  by  speech.
— A  general  picture  of  the  results  obtained  ;  the  various  methods  of  sugges-
tion.—  Failure  inherent  in  the  disease   or  in   the   subject. — Auto-suggestion-

.    192-217

I  >BSERVATIONS.

I. — Organic  Affection  of  the  Nervous  System         .  .  .  .  .  .217

II.  —  Hysterical  Affections        ..........   260

III. — Neuropathic  Affections    ..........   300

IV.  —  New  ............  324

V. — Dynamic  Pareses  and  Paralyses         ........   353

VI. — Gastro-intestinal  Affections      .........  356

VII. — Various  Painful  Affections        .........   361

VIII. — Rheumatic  Troubles         ..........   370

IX.  —  Neuralgias        ............   392

X. — Menstrual  Troubles  ..........  399

CHAPTER   II.

Suggestive  therapeutics  acts  upon  function. — Rôle  of  functional  dynamism  in  dis-
ease.—  Dangers  of  Hypnotism.  —  Spontaneous  sleep.  —  Exaggerated  hypnotic
suggestibility. — Suggestion  corrects  these  inconveniences. — Can  hypnotism
injure  the  cerebral  faculties? — Abuse  of  induced  hallucinations. — Suscepti-
bility to  hallucination  in  the  waking  condition.  —  Medical  advice    .  .   4

INDEX 417

PREFACE  TO  THF.  LAST  EDITION.

THE  singular  facility  with  which  the  immense  majority  of  sub-
jects of  any  age,  of  both  sexes,  and  of  all  temperaments  may  be
hypnotized  always  astonishes  the  gentlemen  "who  honor  us  In-
coming to  our  clinic  to  verify  the  statements  contained  in  this
book.  They  imagine  the  hypnotic  state  to  be  the  exclusive  lot
of  rare  neuropathic  cases,  and  they  now  see  all  or  nearly  all  the
patients  in  a  ward  fall  under  the  dominion  of  suggestion  in  suc-
»ion.  "How  have  we  been  able  to  let  a  truth  so  easy  of
demonstration  pass  us  by  for  centuries,"  they  ask,  "  without  dis-
covering it  ?"

Some  of  the  subjects  whom  we  hypnotize  fall  into  a  deep
sleep  with  loss  of  memory  upon  waking  :  we  call  such  cases  som-
nambulists. According  to  M.  Liébault  one  fifth  or  one  sixth  of
all  subjects  are  somnambulists.  In  our  hospital  service,  where
the  physician  has  greater  authority  over  the  patients,  and  where
imitation  and  the  force  of  example,  perhaps,  form  a  veritable
suggestive  atmosphere,  the  proportion  of  somnambulists  is  much
larger,  and  we  sometimes  succeed  in  putting  half  if  not  a  larger
proportion  of  our  subjects  into  this  condition.

Although  the  other  patients  remember  everything  that  has
happened  upon  waking,  and  sometimes  imagine  that  they  have
not  been  asleep,  they  have  been  influenced  in  varying  degrees.
Suggestive  catalepsy,  induced  contracture,  automatic  movements,
the  suppression  of  pain,  etc.,  decisively  prove  the  existence  of
the  influence.

The  patients  in  deep  sleep  with  loss  of  memory  upon  waking
lie  quietly  like  natural  sleepers,  if  left  alone.  There  is  nothing
by  which  to  differentiate  this  induced  sleep  from  natural  sleep.
The  phenomena  of  sensibility,  motility,  ideation,  imagination,
illusions,  and  hallucinations,  do  not  appear  spontaneously,  but  are
brought  about  by  means  of  suggestion.  The  same  phenomena
may  be  induced  in  these  subjects  when  we  put  ourselves  into
relationship  with   them    in  their  natural  sleep;  the  same  passive

vii

viii  Preface  to  the  Last  Edition.

attitude  of  the  limbs  known  as  catalepsy,  the  same  automatic
movements,  the  same  illusions,  the  same  active  or  passive  hallu-
cinations. Hallucinations  are  only  suggested  dreams;  dreams  are
only  spontaneous  hallucinations.  Whether  spontaneous  or  sug-
gested, these  hallucinations  remain  passive  ;  that  is,  the  subject  is
motionless  as  in  the  normal  dream.  They  do  not  become
active;  that  is,  the  subject  does  not  move,  does  not  walk,  and
only  plays  an  animated  part  in  the  hallucination  induced,  when
roused  from  his  torpid  condition  by  suggestion.  In  like  manner
the  dreams  of  spontaneous  sleep  become  active  in  some  cases
and  constitute  natural  somnambulism.  The  fact  will  bear  repeti-
tion that  all  manifestations  realized  in  the  hypnotic  condition
may  be  realized  in  natural  sleep  in  the  same  subject.

No:  hypnotic  sleep  is  not  a  pathological  sleep.  The  hyp-
notic condition  is  not  a  neurosis,  analogous  to  hysteria.  No
doubt,  manifestations  of  hysteria  may  be  created  in  hypnotized
subjects  ;  a  real  hypnotic  neurosis  may  be  developed  which  will
be  repeated  each  time  sleep  is  induced.  But  these  manifesta-
tions are  not  due  to  the  hypnosis, — they  are  due  to  the  opera-
tor's suggestion,  or  sometimes  to  the  auto-suggestion  of  a  par-
ticularly impressible  subject  whose  imagination,  impregnated
with  the  ruling  idea  of  magnetism,  creates  these  functional  dis-
orders which  can  always  be  restrained  by  a  quieting  suggestion.
The  pretended  physical  phenomena  of  the  hypnosis  are  only
psychical  phenomena.  Catalepsy,  transfer,  contracture,  etc.,  are
the  effects  of  suggestion.  To  prove  that  the  very  great  majority
of  subjects  are  susceptible  to  suggestion  is  to  eliminate  the  idea
of  a  neurosis.  At  least  it  is  not  an  admission  that  the  neurosis
is  universal,  that  the  word  hysteria  is  a  synonym  for  any  nervous
impressionability  whatever.  For,  as  we  all  have  nervous  tissues,
and  as  it  is  a  property  of  such  tissues  to  be  impressionable,  we
should  all  be  hysterical.

The  sleep  itself  is  the  effect  of  a  suggestion.  I  have  said  that
no  one  could  be  hypnotized  against  his  will.  M.  Ochorowitz  has
opposed  this  proposition  energetically.  Perhaps  he  has  not  quite
grasped  my  idea.  It  is  certain  that  any  one  who  does  not  want
to  be  hypnotized,  and  who  knows  that  he  need  not  be  influenced
if  he  does  not  wish  to  be,  successfully  resists  every  trial.  It  is
also  true  that  certain  subjects  cannot  resist  because  their  will-
power is  weakened  by  fear,  or  by  the  idea  of  a  superior  power
which  influences  them  in  spite  of  themselves.     No  one  can  be  hyp-

Pre/act  /<>  the  Last  Edition,  ix

■i'i/tss  he  has  the  idea  that  he  is  going  to  be*  Looked  at  in
this  light  my  proposition  cannot  be  attacked.  The  idea  mj
the  hypnosis;  it  is  a  psychical  and  not  a  physical  or  fluid  influ-
ence which  brings  about  this  condition.  Il  ngular  thing
that  psychologists  like  M.  Janet  and  M.  Binet  have  tailed  to
recognize  the  purely  psychical  nature  of  these  manifestati<
M.  Delboeuf  has  not  been  deceived  in  the  matter.

The  experiments  Lately  made  by  M.  Bourru  and  M.  Bur<
Rochefort,  have  been  cited  in  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of
■■m.  I  have  reference  to  the  action  of  drugs  at  a  distance,
tain  subjects  in  the  hypnotic  <>r  waking  condition  are  sup-
posed to  have  a  singular  aptitude  for  being  influenced  by  a  sub-
stance contained  in  a  bottle  placed  by  their  side,  and  of  whose
contents  they  are  ignorant,  the  effect  being  as  if  the  substance
hail  been  injected.

I  confess  that  this  experiment  has  never  been  successful  in  my
best  cases  of  somnambulism,  and  I  will  frankly  state  my  opinion
irding  it,  though  perhaps  I  may  be  wrong.  I  was  present  at
an  experiment  of  this  kind  and  in  it,  at  least,  I  was  convinced
that  suggestion  was  the  explanation  of  the  phenomenon.  One
should  first  be  aware  of  the  fut  that  in  all  degrees  of  hypnosis
the  subject  hears  and  understands  everything  even  though  he  may
appear  inert  and  passive.  Sometimes  the  senses  are  particularly
sharp  in  this  state  of  special  concentration,  as  if  all  the  nervous
activity  were  accumulated  in  the  organ  of  which  the  attention
is  solicited.  These  subjects  think  that  it  is  their  duty  to  try  to
carry  into  effect  the  operator's  thought,  and  they  therefore  use
all  this  sensorial  hyper-acuteness,  all  this  concentrated  attention,
in  trying  to  guess  what  is  wanted  of  them.  Knowing  that  they
are  expected  to  feel  the  effect  of  a  substance  held  in  a  bottle,
they  suggest  to  themselves  vague  phenomena  such  as  discom.
fort,  anxiety,  agitation  and  nausea,  which  correspond  to  the
effects  of  most  poisons;  as  alcohol,  opium,  emetics,  valerian,
etc.  If  there  is  any  one  among  the  assistants  who  knows  what
the  substance  in  question  is,  and  who,  astonished  by  these
primary  manifestations  on  the  subject's  part,  betrays  his  senti-
ments by  word,  the  subject  hears  each  word,  though  spoken  in  a
low  voice,  and  seizes  upon  the  suggested  aid  held  out  to  him
If  no  one  speaks,  he  tries  to  find  some  indication  to  set  him  on
the  right  track,  in  the  faces  of  those  present,  in  the  gestures,  in
the     slightest    sign    of    approbation    or    disapprobation,    and    in

x  Preface  to  the  Last  Edition.

odors  ;  he  gropes  his  way,  and  sometimes  he  guesses  rightly.
If  there  is  no  sign,  if  none  of  the  assistants  and  not  even  the
operator  knows  what  the  bottle  contains,  the  subject  returns  to
his  passive  state  after  making  a  few  manifestations  which  are  not
very  sharply  defined,  and  the  experiment  has  failed.

I  hasten  to  add  that  good  reliable  observers  state  that  they
have  succeeded  under  conditions  such  that  suggestion  could  not
enter  into  the  result.  I  suspend  judgment  here.  The  facts
which  I  have  not  been  able  to  produce  in  my  subjects,  have
been  produced  by  others  in  their  subjects.  To  deny  them  with-
out fuller  information  would  be  acting  in  an  unscientific  spirit.

Facts  relative-  to  thought-transmission,  or  mental  suggestion
are  also  appealed  to.  Highly  enlightened  men  have  observed
facts  which  appear  conclusive.

Dr.  Gilbert  of  Havre,  M.  Pierre  Janet,  MM.  Myers  of  London,
Dr.  Perronnet  of  Lyons,  and  M.  Ochorowitz,  have  published  a
large*  number  of  observations.  I  have  tried  to  produce  phe-
nomena of  thought-transmission  in  hundreds  of  cases,  but  with-
out success.  I  have  found  nothing  definite,  and  here  also  I
remain  in  doubt.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  the  action  of  drugs  at  a
distance,  and  on  the  other,  thought-transmission  exist,  they  are
phenomena  of  another  order,  which  have  still  to  be  studied.
They  have  nothing  in  common  with  the  phenomena  of  sugges-
tion. In  this  book  I  only  consider  verbal  suggestion  and  its
application  to  therapeutics.

Susceptibility  to  suggestion  exists  in  the  waking  condition,
but  it  is  then  either  neutralized  or  restrained  by  the  faculties  of
reason,  attention  and  judgment.  In  spontaneous  or  in  induced
sleep  these  faculties  are  dull  and  weakened  ;  imagination  rules
supreme  ;  impressions  are  accepted  without  verification,  and  the
brain  transforms  them  into  actions,  sensations,  movements  and
images.  The  psychical  state  thus  modified  and  the  new  state  of
consciousness  induced,  render  the  brain  more  docile,  more  easily
moulded,  more  susceptible  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other
more  apt  to  react  upon  the  functions  and  organs  by  inhibition  or
dynamogeny.  It  is  this  susceptibility  increased  by  suggestion
which  we  employ  in  the  most  efficacious  way  for  a  therapeutic
end.

Such  are  the  principal  ideas  which  the  reader  will  find  devel-
oped in  this  book.

This  edition  is  not  simply  a  reproduction  of  the  old  one.     It

face  to  the  Last  Edition,  xi

contains  a  mm  classification  <>f  the  different  degrees  of  hypno-
tism, a  classification  which  at  the  same  time  si  ems  to  me  to  be
a  new  conception,  and  I  might  almost  say  .1  vivid  demonstration

of  the  psychical  nature  of  the  phenomena.

It  contains  beside  a  more  complete  study  <>f  a  phenomenon  of

the    highest    importance    from    the    social    and    judicial    point   of
view,    namely     the    phenomenon    of    retroactive     hallucinat:
which  I  was  the  fust  to  mention   and  which  was  observed  by  M.
1      geois,  at  the  same  time.

It  contains  also  a  large  number  of  new  observations  on  sugges-
tive therapeutics.

The  Nancy  School  placed  the  study  of  hypnotism  upon  its
true  basis,  suggestion,  and  thus  created  this  most  useful  and
most  fruitful  application,  an  application  which  is  the  cause  of
this  book's  existence.  To  M.  Liébault  belongs  the  honor  of  first
introducing  this  application  ;  an  honor  which  cannot  be  denied
him.  We  have  been  the  first  to  follow  him  in  this  path.  I  have
no  hesitation  in  saying  that  the  preceding  edition  of  this  work
was  a  real  revelation  to  many  physicians  who  desired  to  experi-
ment in  their  turn.

The  evidence  of  facts  will  finally  force  itself  upon  the  most
skeptical  minds,  and  suggestive  therapeutics,  accepted  and  prac-
tised by  all  physicians,  will  be  one  of  the  fairest  conquests  of
contemporary  medicine.

H.  Beknheim.

November,  1887.

IXTROnrCTION.

Tiif.  first  part  of  this  book  was  published  in  1884.  I  have
revised  it,   added  new  tacts   and   considerations,   and  answ

criticisms    sent    me.      The    scond    part    is    entirely  new    and    its

t  is  suggestive  therapeutics.

I  have  entitled  this  book  Suggestion.  The  word  magnetism,
born  of  an  erroneous  interpretation  of  the  phenomena,  has  no
longer  any  cause  for   existence.     Suggestion  rules   the  greater

part  of  hypnotic  manifestations,  and  in  my  opinion  the  phenomena
which  are  called  physical  are  only  psychical.  The  hypnotized
subject  grasps  the  operator's  thought.  His  brain  excites  and
carries  it  out  by  means  of  an  exalted  suggestion,  which  is  pro-
duced by  the  special  concentration  of  mind  in  the  hypnotic  con-
dition.    Suggestion  is  the  key  to  Braidism.

This  doctrine  has  led  us  to  follow-  M.  Liébault  in  his  method
of  suggestive  therapeutics.  I  owe  the  know  ledge  of  the  method
I  use  to  induce  sleep  and  to  obtain  certain  incontestable  thera-
peutic effects  to  M.  Liébault,  Doctor  of  Medicine  at  Nancy.

For  more  than  twenty-five  years  our  colleague  has  braved  the
ridicule  and  discredit  which  attaches  to  the  practice  of  what  is
called  animal  magnetism,  carried  on  his  researches  and  devoted
himself  to  the  treatment  of  disease  through  sleep.  The  idea  of
suggestion  put  forth  by  Faria  was  more  successfully  applied  by
Braid.  M.  Liébault  has  perfected  the  method  and  brought  it
to  its  most  simple  expression.  He  has  shown  like  Braid,  that
the  ver)*  great  majority  of  subjects  are  susceptible  of  being  influ-
enced, and  that  many  obtain  beneficial  results  by  means  of  the
psychical  condition  thus  induced.  The  first  researches  of  the
Nancy  physician  are  recorded  in  the  volume  entitled  :  Pu  Som-
meil et  des  états  analogues  considérés  surtout  an  point  de  vue  de
l'action  du  moral  sur  le  physique.      Taris,   1886.

M.    Liébault's    assertions    met    only   with    incredulity.      His
practices  appeared  so    stamped  with   oddity,  not  to  say  nar
that   the   physicians   rejected   them   without   fuller  examination.
M.  Liébault  lived  in  solitude  outside  of  the  medical  world,  giving

xiii

xiv  Introduction.

himself  up  entirely  to  his  patients  (almost  all  of  them  from  the
poorer  classes)  and  to  his  convictions.

Five  years  ago,  M.  Dumont,  chief  of  the  physical  works  of  the
faculty  of  medicine,  having  followed  M.  Liébault's  consultations,
was  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  observed.  He
experimented  successfully  in  the  Mareville  Asylum,  and  had  the
satisfaction  of  making  a  contracture  of  the  right  leg,  dating  back
three  years,  in  a  case  of  hystero-epilepsy,  and  attacks  of  hystero-
epilepsy  recurring  five  or  six  times  a  day,  disappear.

At  my  request  he  presented  to  the  Society  of  Medicine  at
Nancy  on  May  10,  1882,  four  subjects,  in  whom  he  produced  a
certain  number  of  experiments  which  greatly  astounded  the
members  of  the  society.  Since  this  time  I  have  experimented
myself,  with  great  scepticism  in  the  beginning  I  must  confess.
After  some  hesitation  I  have  not  delayed  in  stating  results  which
are  certain  and  striking,  and  which  force  the  duty  of  speaking
upon  me.

In  the  first  part  of  this  book  I  shall  state  first  the  method  em-
ployed in  inducing  hypnotism  and  the  different  manifestations
which  may  be  determined  in  hypnotized  subjects.

I  shall  then  give  a  short  historical  sketch  of  the  question.  I
shall  examine  into  the  theoretical  views  put  forth  upon  this
subject,  and  I  shall  state  my  personal  opinions  upon  the  psycho-
logical mechanism  of  the  phenomena.

Finally  I  shall  examine  the  applications  of  the  doctrine  of  sug-
gestion to  psychology,  to  legal  medicine,  and  to  sociology,  in  a
general  way.

In  the  second  part  I  shall  make  a  special  study  of  suggestive
therapeutics  and  I  shall  relate  my  personal  observations.

H.  Bernheim.
June,  1886.

TRANSLATOR'S    PREFACE.

I  PRESENT  this  volume  to  the  English-speaking  Medical  public
in  the  belief  that  it  throws  important  light  upon  a  subject  which
has  too  long  been  misunderstood  and  ignored.

Hypnotism  is  no  longer  one  of  the  curiosities  of  Science  ;  it  is
a  therapeutic  resource  of  unquestionable  value,  which  lies  at  the
hand--  of  every  medical  practitioner  who  is  willing  to  take  the
trouble  to  enquire  into  its  nature  and  the  manner  of  its  use.

It  is  very  generally  supposed  even  by  those  members  of  the
medical  profession  who  keep  abreast  with  the  times,  that  hyp-
notism is  a  pathological  state,  a  neurosis,  which  can  best  be
studied  in  the  subjects  of  hysteria.

This  belief  is  largely  the  consequence  of  the  teachings  of
the  Paris  School,  of  which  Charcot  is  the  chief  exponent,
and  one  of  the  principal  merits  of  Prof.  Bernheim's  work  is  the
conclusive  manner  in  which  he  shows  that  hypnotism,  far  from
being- a  neurosis,  is  a  phenomenon  closely  allied  to  natural  sleep.
This  is  a  fact  of  prime  importance,  for  upon  it  depends,  as  will
be  seen,  the  principles  which  are  to  guide  us  in  the  application
of  hypnotism  to  the  cure  of  disease.

Through  the  kindness  of  Prof.  Forel,  of  Zurich,  I  have  recently
been  able  to  study  the  effects  of  hypnotism  and  suggestion  in  a
large  number  of  persons,  in  health  and  in  disease.  These  studies
have  enabled  me,  with  few  exceptions,  to  confirm  Bernheim's
description  of  the  hypnotic  phenomena.

The  therapeutic  observations  made  at  Zurich,  though  smaller
in  number  and  narrower  in  range  than  those  published  by
Bernheim,  were  also  in  the  main  confirmatory.

Through  the  courtesy  of  M.  Charcot,  and  of  his  ckef-dt'
clinic,  I  have  also  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  some  of
the  most  typical  cases  of  the  "  Grand  hypnose  "  at  the  Sal-
petriere.  These  observations  only  strengthen  my  belief  in  the
correctness  of  the  views  as  to  the  nature  of  hypnotism  advanced
in  this  volume.

xv

xvi  Translator  s  Preface.

I  do  not  claim  that  this  work  is  perfect,  for  it  doubtless  has
many  imperfections  ;  but  it  appears  to  me  that  its  faults  are
faults  of  detail  rather  than  of  principle.  What  I  do  claim  for  it,
is,  that  being  based  upon  the  conscientious  and  well-directed
stud}'  of  an  enormous  number  of  cases  by  an  able  clinician,  it
ma}- justly  be  considered  the  most  scientific  and  important  con-
tribution to  our  knowledge  of  hypnotism  that  has  yet  been  made.

Christian  A.  Herter.
839  Madison  Ave.,  New  York.
July  9,  1888.

SUGGESTIVE   THERAPEUTICS.

CHAPTER  I.

Manner  of  hypnotizing. — Sleep  and   hypnotic   influence. — Variable   sensitivenea

iii_.iti.in  o!  the  various  degrees  ol  >ault:

—  i^t    Drowsiness; — 2d    Suggestive  catalepsy, — y\.   I  automatism; — ph

Audi)  not  subject  with  the  operator  only;  5th.  Light  somnambulism;

Deep  somnambulism.     Author's  classification:     A. — Memory  pi
wakin  itibiliry  t>>  certain   acts   only.     2d.  Inability  to   opei

stive  catalepsy  liable  to  be  broken,     .ph.  Irresistible  catalepsy.     5th.
contraction      uth.  Automatic  obedience.     15 — Memory  lost  on  wak-
ing,  or    Somnambulism.     7th.  Without    susceptibility    to    hallucinations.     8th.
lity  to  hallucinations  during  sleep.    9th.  Susceptibility  to  hypnotic  and
hypnotic  hallucinations.     Varieties- — Suggestion  without  sleep.     Definition
of  hypnotism — Of  fascination: — Of  waking — (Proportion  of  subjects  susceptible
to  hypnotism.

I  PROCEED  to  hypnotize  in  the  following  manner.

I  begin  by  saying  to  the  patient  that  I  believe  benefit  is  to  be
derived  from  the  use  of  suggestive  therapeutics,  that  it  is  possi-
ble to  cure  or  to  relieve  him  by  hypnotism  ;  that  there  is  noth-
ing either  hurtful  or  strange  about  it  ;  that  it  is  an  ordinary
sltt-p  or  torpor  which  can  be  induced  in  everyone,  and  that  this
quiet,  beneficial  condition  restores  the  equilibrium  of  the  ner-
vous system,  etc.  If  necessary,  I  hypnotize  one  or  two  subjects
in  his  presence,  in  order  to  show  him  that  there  is  nothing  pain-
ful in  this  condition  and  that  it  is  not  accompanied  with  any
unusual  sensation.  When  I  have  thus  banished  from  his  mind
idea  of  magnetism  and  the  somewhat  mysterious  fear  that
attaches  to  that  unknown  condition,  above  all  when  he  has  seen
patients  cured  or  benefited  by  the  means  in  question,  he  is  no
longer  suspicious,  but  gives  himself  up,  then  I  say,  "  Look  at
me  and  think  of  nothing  but  sleep.  Your  eyelids  begin  to  feel
y,  your  eyes  tired.  They  begin  to  wink,  the}-  are  getting
moist,  you  cannot  see  distinctly.  They  are  closed.'  Some  pa-
tients close  their  eyes  and  are  asleep  immediately.  With  others,
I  have  to  repeat,  lay  more  stress  on  what  I  say,  and  even  make

I

2  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

gestures.  It  makes  little  difference  what  sort  of  gesture  is
made.  I  hold  two  fingers  of  my  right  hand  before  the  patient's
eyes  and  ask  him  to  look  at  them,  or  pass  both  hands  several
times  before  his  eyes,  or  persuade  him  to  fix  his  eyes  upon
mine,  endeavoring,  at  the  same  time,  to  concentrate  his  atten-
tion upon  the  idea  of  sleep.  I  say,  "Your  lids  are  closing,  you
cannot  open  them  again.  Your  arms  feel  heavy,  so  do  your
legs.  You  cannot  feel  anything.  Your  hands  are  motionless.
You  see  nothing,  you  are  going  to  sleep."  And  I  add  in  a  com-
manding tone,  "  Sleep."  This  word  often  turns  the  balance.
The  eyes  close  and  the  patient  sleeps  or  is  at  least  in-
fluenced.

I  use  the  word  sleep,  in  order  to  obtain  as  far  as  possible  over
the  patients,  a  suggestive  influence  which  shall  bring  about  sleep
or  a  state  closely  approaching  it  ;  for  sleep  properly  so  called,
does  not  always  occur.  If  the  patients  have  no  inclination  to
sleep  and  show  no  drowsiness,  I  take  care  to  say  that  sleep  is
not  essential  ;  that  the  hypnotic  influence,  whence  comes  the
benefit,  may  exist  without  sleep  ;  that  many  patients  are  hyp
notized  although  they  do  not  sleep.     (See  farther  on.)

If  the  patient  does  not  shut  his  eyes  or  keep  them  shut,  I  do
not  require  them  to  be  fixed  on  mine,  or  on  my  fingers,  for  any
length  of  time,  for  it  sometimes  happens  that  they  remain  wide
open  indefinitely,  and  instead  of  the  idea  of  sleep  being  con-
ceived, only  a  rigid  fixation  of  the  eyes  results.  In  this  case,
closure  of  the  eyes  by  the  operator  succeeds  better.  After  keep-
ing them  fixed  one  or  two  minutes,  I  push  the  eye-lids  down,  or,
stretch  them  slowly  over  the  eyes,  gradually  closing  them  more
and  more  and  so  imitating  the  process  of  natural  sleep.  Finally
I  keep  them  closed,  repeating  the  suggestion,  "  Your  lids  are
stuck  together  ;  you  cannot  open  them.  The  need  of  sleep
becomes  greater  and  greater,  you  can  no  longer  resist."  I
lower  my  voice  gradually,  repeating  the  command,  "  Sleep,"  and
it  is  very  seldom  that  more  than  three  minutes  pass  before  sleep
or  some  degree  of  hypnotic  influence  is  obtained.  It  is  sleep  by
suggestion, — a  type  of  sleep  which  I  insinuate  into  the  brain.

Passes  or  gazing  at  the  eyes  or  fingers  of  the  operator,  are
only  useful  in  concentrating  the  attention.  They  are  not  abso-
lutely essential.

As  soon  as  they  are  able  to  pay  attention  and  understand,
children  are  as  a  rule  very  quickly  and  very  easily  hypnotized.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  3

It  often  suffices  to  close  their  eyes,  to  hold  them  shut  a  few
moments,  to  tell  them  to  sleep,  and  then  to  state  that  they  are
.i-leep.

Some  adults  go  to  sleep  just  as  readily  by  simple  closure  of
the  eyes.  I  often  proceed  immediately  without  making  use  of
passes  or  fixation,  by  shutting  the  eye-lids,  gently  holding  them
closed,  asking  the  patient  to  keep  them  together,  and  suggest-
ing at  the  same  time,  the  phenomena  of  sleep.  Some  of  them
fall  rapidly  into  a  more  or  less  deep  sleep.

Others  offer  more  resistance.  I  sometimes  succeed  by  keep-
ing the  eyes  closed  for  some  time,  commanding  silence  and
quiet,  talking  continuously,  and  repeating  the  same  formulas  ;
'•  You  feel  a  sort  of  drowsiness,  a  torpor  ;  your  arms  and  legs
are  motionless.  Your  eyelids  are  warm.  Your  nervous  system
is  quiet  ;  you  have  no  will.  Your  eyes  remain  closed.  Sleep  is
coming,  etc."  After  keeping  up  this  auditory  suggestion  for
several  minutes,  I  remove  my  fingers.  The  eyes  remain  closed.
I  raise  the  patient's  arms  ;  they  remain  uplifted.  We  have
induced  cataleptic  sleep.

Others  are  more  rebellious,  preoccupied,  unable  to  give  them-
selves up  :  they  analyze  their  own  feelings,  are  anxious,  and  say
they  cannot  sleep.  I  command  them  to  be  calm.  I  speak  only
of  drowsiness,  of  sleepiness.  "  That  is  sufficient,"  I  say,  "  to
gain  a  result.  The  suggestion  alone  may  be  beneficial  even
without  sleep.  Keep  perfectly  quiet  and  do  not  worry."  When
a  patient  is  in  this  frame  of  mind,  I  do  not  try  to  get  catalep-
tiform  effects,  because,  being  only  drowsy  yet  always  awake,
always  apt  to  regain  full  consciousness,  he  is  easily  roused  out  of
this  state.  Sometimes  then,  satisfied  with  a  doubtful  state  of
somnolence,  and  without  wishing  to  prove  if  the  patient  is  really
influenced,  I  leave  him  to  himself,  asking  him  to  remain  in  this
condition  for  some  time.  Some  remain  under  this  influence  for
a  long  period  without  being  able  to  say  whether  they  have  done
so  voluntarily  or  involuntarily.  Generally  during  the  second  or
third  séance  I  succeed  by  means  of  this  suggestive  education
which  the  patient  has  had,  in  inducing  a  more  advanced  stage  of
hypnotic  influence  which  is  no  longer  doubtful  but  accompanied
with  suggestive  catalepsy  or  even  with  somnambulism.

Whilst  with  some  patients  success  is  more  readily  obtained  by
acting  quietly,  with  others  quiet  suggestion  has  no  effect.     With

4  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

these,  it  is  better  to  be  abrupt,  to  restrain  with  an  authoritative
voice  the  inclination  to  laugh,  or  the  weak  and  involuntary
resistance  which  this  manœuvre  may  provoke.

Many  persons,  as  above  stated,  are  influenced  at  the  very  first
seance,  others  not  until  the  second  or  third.  After  being  hyp-
notized once  or  twice,  they  are  speedily  influenced.  It  is  often
enough  to  look  at  such  patients,  to  spread  the  fingers  before  the
eyes,  to  say,  "  Sleep,"  and  in  a  second  or  two,  sometimes
instantly,  the  eyes  close  and  all  the  phenomena  of  sleep  are
present.  It  is  only  after  a  certain  number  of  séances,  generally
a  small  number,  that  the  patients  acquire  the  aptitude  for  going
to  sleep  quickly.

It  occasionally  happens  that  I  influence  seven  or  eight  per-
sons successively,  and  almost  instantly.  Then  there  are  others
who  are  refractory  or  more  difficult  to  influence.  I  only  try  for
a  few  minutes.  A  second  or  third  séance  often  brings  the  hyp-
nosis which  is  not  obtained  at  first.

Patients  in  whom  hypnotic  suggestibility  is  very  well  devel-
oped, fall  asleep,  however  slight  may  be  the  idea  of  sleep  that  is
given  them.  They  can  be  hypnotized  by  correspondence, — for
example,  by  assuring  them  that  as  soon  as  they  have  read  a  let-
ter they  will  fall  asleep.  They  can  be  hypnotized  by  means  of
the  telephone,  as  M.  Liégeois  has  shown.  No  matter  what
voice  conveys  the  suggestion  it  produces  its  effect.

Some  people  can  be  hypnotized  with  chloroform  before  they
are  really  under  its  influence.  All  surgeons  have  seen  patients
go  to  sleep  suddenly  without  any  period  of  excitement,  after  a
few  breaths  of  the  anaesthetic  and  before  it  certainly  has  done
its  work.  I  have  noticed  this  fact  in  some  of  my  own  patients
whom  I  have  chloroformed  in  the  presence  of  the  dentist  in
order  that  a  tooth  might  be  extracted.  Profiting  by  this  obser-
vation, each  time  I  use  chloroform  I  take  care  to  suggest  to  the
patient  before  he  has  taken  the  first  inspiration  that  he  will  fall
asleep  quietly  and  quickly.  In  some  cases  the  hypnotic  sleep
thus  comes  before  the  anaesthesia.  If  it  is  deep  enough  to  cause
complete  anaesthesia,  as  I  have  seen  it,  the  operation  can  be  per-
formed without  delay;  if  not,  I  keep  on  giving  chloroform  until
the  anaesthesia  is  complete,  which  takes  place  more  rapidly,
because  aided  by  suggestion.  By  acting  in  this  manner,  I  also
prevent  the  period  of  excitement  in  these  cases.

çgestive    Therapeutics.  5

It  is  wrong  to  believe  that  the  subjects  influenced  are  all
weak-nerved,  weak-brained,  hysterical,  or  women.  Most  of  nu-
observations  relate  to  men.  whom  I  have  chosen  on  purpose  to
controvert  this  belief.  Without  doubt,  impressionability  varies.
Common  people,  those  of  gentle  disposition,  old  soldiers,  arti-
sans, people  accustomed  to  passive  obedience,  have  seemed  to
me,  as  well  as  to  M.  Liébault,  more  ready  to  receive  the  sug-
gestion than  preoccupied  people,  and  those  who  often  uncon-
sciously oppose  a  certain  mental  resistance.  Cases  of  insanity,
melancholia,  and  hypochondria  are  often  difficult  or  impossible
to  influence.  The  idea  of  being  hypnotized  must  be  present  ;
the  patient  must  submit  entirely  to  the  hypnotizer,  using  no
cerebral  resistance  ;  then,  I  repeat,  experience  shows  that  a  very
large  majority  of  people  are  easily  influenced.

I  have  hypnotized  very  intelligent  people  belonging  to  the
higher  grades  of  society,  who  were  not  in  the  least  nervous,  at
any  rate  in  the  sense  in  which  that  word  is  commonly  used.
Doubtless,  it  is  often  impossible  to  influence  people  who  make
it  a  point  of  honor  to  show  that  they  cannot  be  hypnotized,  that
they  have  minds  better  balanced  than  others,  and  that  they  are
not  susceptible  to  suggestion,  because  such  persons  do  not  know
how  to  put  themseves  into  the  psychical  state  necessary  to  real-
ize the  suggestion.  They  refuse  to  accept  it,  consciously  or
unconsciously  ;  in  fact  they  oppose  a  kind  of  counter-suggestion.

The  degree  of  influence  produced  varies  according  to  the
subject.  The  following  is  the  classification  of  the  various  de-
grees proposed  by  M.  Liébault.

Some  subjects  experience  only  a  more  or  less  pronounced
dulness,  a  heaviness  in  the  lids,  and  sleepiness.  This  occurs  in
the  smallest  number  of  cases  ;  it  is  the  first  degree  of  M.  Lié-
bault. This  sleepiness  may  vanish  as  soon  as  the  operator's
influence  is  withdrawn.  In  some  cases  it  lasts  for  several  min-
utes, in  others  longer,  an  hour,  for  instance.  Some  subjects
remain  motionless.  Others  move  a  little,  and  change  their  posi-
tion, but  still  remain  sleepy.  At  the  following  séances,  this  con-
dition may  pass  to  a  more  advanced  degree,  though  often  one
cannot  go  beyond  that  first  attained.  For  example,  in  the  case
of  a  woman,  I  induced  more  than  a  hundred  times  a  sleepiness
lasting  from  half  an  hour  to  an  hour,  but  only  this  somnolence
of  the  first  degree.

In    some    cases,    somnolence,    properly   so-called,    cannot    be

6  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

induced,  but  the  eyelids  remain  closed  and  the  patients  cannot
open  them.  They  speak,  answer  questions,  and  assert  that  they
are  not  asleep,  but  I  say,  '"You  cannot  open  your  eyes."  They
make  fruitless  efforts  to  do  so.  The  lids  are  as  if  cataleptic.  It
has  seemed  to  me,  though  I  cannot  state  it  as  a  fact,  that  this
form  of  hypnotism  is  more  frequent  in  women  than  in  men.
One  woman  made  strange  efforts  to  open  her  eyelids.  She
laughed  and  spoke  fluently.  I  repeated,  "  Try  to  open  them."
She  used  all  her  force  of  will  without  succeeding,  until  I  brought
the  charm  to  an  end  by  saying,  "You  may  open  them."

I  consider  this  also  a  variety  of  the  first  degree.

In  the  second  degree,  the  patients  keep  their  eyes  closed.
Their  limbs  are  relaxed,  they  hear  everything  that  is  said  to
them  as  well  as  what  is  said  around  them,  but  they  remain  sub-
ject to  the  inclination  to  sleep.  Their  brain  is  in  the  condition
called  by  magnetizers,  hypotaxic,  or  charmed.

This  degree  is  characterized  by  suggestive  catalepsy.

By  this  word  the  following  phenomenon  is  meant.  If,  as  soon
as  the  patient  falls  asleep,  the  limbs  being  relaxed,  I  lift  his  arm,
it  stays  up  ;  if  I  lift  his  leg,  it  remains  uplifted.  The  limbs  pas-
sively retain  the  positions  in  which  they  are  placed.  We  call
this  suggestive  catalepsy,  because  it  is  easy  to  recognize  that  it
is  purely  psychical,  bound  up  in  the  passive  condition  of  the
patient,  who  automatically  keeps  the  attitude  given  just  as  he
keeps  the  idea  received.  In  fact,  in  the  same  or  in  different
patients,  one  sees  the  phenomenon  more  or  less  marked  accord-
ing to  the  depth  of  the  hypnotic  influence  and  the  psychical
receptivity.  At  first,  this  cataleptiform  condition  is  hardly
apparent.  The  lifted  limb  remains  up  a  few  seconds,  but  falls
down  afterward  with  a  certain  hesitancy  ;  or  the  fore-arm  only
remains  lifted.  If  one  wishes  to  lift  up  the  whole  arm,  it  falls
down  again.  The  individual  fingers  do  not  keep  positions  into
which  they  are  put,  but  the  entire  hand  and  the  forearm  remain
fixed.

With  some  patients,  for  example,  if  one  arm  be  quickly  raised
and  let  alone,  it  falls  back  again,  but  if  it  is  held  up  for  a  few
seconds  to  fix  the  idea  of  the  attitude  in  the  brain,  so  to  speak,
then  it  remains  up.

Finally,  with  others,  catalepsy  is  only  obtained  through  a
formulated  verbal  suggestion.  The  person  hypnotized  has  to  be
told,  "  Your  arms  remain  up.     Your  legs  are   up."     Then  only

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  7

do  they  remain  so.  Some  keep  the  new  position  passively,  if
nothing  is  said  to  them,  but  if  they  arc  dared  to  change  it  they
regain  consciousness,  so  to  speak,  call  upon  their  dull  will  power,
and  drop  the  limb.  Then  they  often  wake  up.  These  cases
constitute  the  intermediate  phases  between  the  first  and  second
degrees.  Most  cases,  on  the  contrary,  in  spite  of  every  effort
cannot  alter  the  attitude  impressed  upon  them.

The  progressive  development  of  suggestibility  can  thus  be
traced  by  the  special  phase  of  the  cataleptiform  condition.  In  a
vast  number  of  cases  this  condition  is  very  pronounced  from  the
first.  After  a  patient  has  been  hypnotized  for  the  first  time,  the
limbs  keep  the  position  imposed  without  the  necessity  of  formu-
lated suggestion.  They  remain  fixed,  sometimes  as  long  as  the
hypnotic  condition  lasts,  sometimes  falling  down  again  slowly,
gradually,  at  the  end  of  a  few  minutes,  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
half  an  hour,  or  a  still  longer  period.

On  waking  again,  some  patients  who  have  not  gone  beyond
the  second  degree,  imagine  that  they  have  not  been  asleep
because  they  remember  everything  they  have  heard.  They
believe  that  they  have  been  influenced  from  a  wish  to  be  obliging,
but  if  the  experiment  is  repeated,  suggestive  catalepsy  again
appears.  If  this  is  not  sleep,  it  is  at  least  a  peculiar  psychical
condition  which  diminishes  the  force  of  cerebral  resistance,  and
which  renders  the  mind  receptive  to  suggestion.

In  the  third  degree  the  drowsiness  is  more  pronounced.  Tac-
tile sensibility  is  diminished  or  destroyed.  Aside  from  sugges-
tive catalepsy,  the  patient  is  capable  of  making  automatic  move-
ments. I  move  both  arms,  one  about  the  other.  I  say,  "  You
cannot  stop."  The  arms  keep  up  the  rotation  for  a  longer  or
shorter  time  or  indefinitely.  The  patient  hears  everything  that
is  said  around  him.

In  some  cases  this  automatic  rotation  follows  the  impulse
given  to  the  arms.  The  verbal  suggestion  is  not  necessary.
In  cases  of  this  degree,  suggestive  contracture  can  also  be
brought  about.

The  fourth  degree  is  characterized,  in  addition  to  the  preced-
ing phenomena,  by  the  loss  of  relationship  with  the  outer  world.
The  patient  hears  what  the  operator  says,  but  not  what  the
others  around  him  say.  His  senses  are  only  in  communication
with  the  operator.  They  are,  however,  susceptible  of  being  put
into  relationship  with  any  one.

8  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

The  fifth  and  sixth  degrees — characterized  according  to  M.
Liébault,  by  forgetfulness,  upon  waking,  of  all  that  has  happened
during  sleep — constitute  somnambulism.  The  fifth  degree  is
light  somnambulism.  The  patients  still  remember  in  a  vague
sort  of  way.  They  have  heard  some  things  confusedly  ;  certain
memories  awake  spontaneously.  Destruction  of  sensibility,
suggestive  catalepsy,  automatic  movements,  hallucinations
caused  by  suggestion, — all  these  phenomena  of  which  we  shall
speak  later  in  greater  detail,  reach  their  greatest  expression.

In  deep  somnambulism,  or  the  sixth  degree,  the  remembrance
of  all  that  has  happened  during  the  sleep  is  absolutely  de-
stroyed and  cannot  revive  spontaneously.

We  shall  see  later  that  these  memories  can  always  be  revived
artificially.

The  patient  remains  asleep  according  to  the  operator's  will,
becoming  a  perfect  automaton,  obedient  to  all  his  commands.

This  division  of  hypnotic  sleep  into  several  degrees,  is  purely
theoretical.  It  permits  us  to  classify  each  patient  influenced,
without  making  a  long  description  necessary.  There  are  varia-
tions and  cases  intermediary  between  the  several  degrees.  All
possible  transitions  may  be  noticed  from  simple  drowsiness  and
doubtful  sleep  to  the  deepest  somnambulism.

I  add  that  docility  to  suggestion  and  the  ease  with  which
diverse  phenomena  are  provoked,  are  not  always  in  proportion  to
the  depth  of  the  hypnotic  sleep.  Certain  patients  sleep  lightly,
answer  questions,  remember  everything  upon  waking.  Never
theless,  contracture,  insensibility,  automatic  movements,  ordered
or  communicated,  therapeutical  suggestions,  succeed  well  with
them.  This  will  be  easy  to  understand  when  I  have  spoken  of
suggestion  in  the  waking  condition.

Others,  on  the  contrary,  fall  into  a  deep,  heavy  sleep  and  re-
member absolutely  nothing  upon  waking.  While  they  are  asleep
they  can  be  questioned  in  vain, — tormented  with  questions,  yet
they  remain  inert.  Suggestive  catalepsy  is  very  difficult  to
induce  in  these  cases.  The  arms  are  held  up  only  for  a  short
time.  Suggestions,  actions,  illusions,  hallucinations,  commands
to  be  carried  out  upon  waking,  are  not  realized  ;  we  might  sup-
pose they  are  not  in  relation  with  the  operator  ;  however,  it  is
enough  to  pronounce  the  word,  "  awake,"  for  them  to  wake  spon-
taneously . — an  evident  proof  that  this  relationship  does  exist.
In  several  cases  where  sleep  was  such  as  I  have  just  described,  I

Suggestive   Therapeutics,  9

have  obtained  immediate  therapeutic  effects  through  auditory
suggestion.  Return  of  sensibility,  disappearance  of  melancholy,
increase  in  muscular  strength  measured  by  the  dynamometer,
prove  that  in  spite  of  their  apparent  inertia,  they  have  been  in
relationship  with  me  during  the  sleep.

Others,  finally,  answer  all  questions,  speak  fluently,  and  appear
wide  awake,  except  that  the  eyes  are  closed.  They  are  not  cat-
aleptic or  only  slightly  so.  Neither  hallucinations  nor  illusions
can  be  provoked  in  them,  but  nevertheless  on  waking,  amnesia
is  complete.

Each  sleeper  has,  so  to  speak,  his  own  individuality,  his  own
special  personality.  I  only  wish  to  emphasize  that  the  aptitude
for  realizing  suggestive  phenomena  is  not  always  proportional  to
the  depth  of  the  sleep.

Such  is  the  classification  of  the  various  degrees  of  induced
sleep  as  pointed  out  to  me  by  Dr.  Liébault  and  published  in  the
first  edition  of  this  book.  I  have,  indeed,  been  able  to  confirm
the  truth  of  the  facts  so  well  observed  by  my  colleague.

I  believe,  however,  that  it  is  interesting  to  consider  these  facts
from  a  wider  point  of  view,  and  to  give  to  the  word  hypnotism  a
more  extended  meaning  than  that  of  induced  sleep.

The  observations  I  am  about  to  make,  far  from  striking  a  blow
at  M.  Liébault's  idea,  really  go  to  confirm  it,  by  showing  that
suggestion  is  the  key-stone  of  the  arch  of  all  hypnotic  manifesta-
tions.

In  the  first  place,  investigation  reveals  the  following  :

Some  patients  influenced  by  hypnotism,  have  no  recollection
of  what  has  passed  as  soon  as  they  return  to  their  normal  con-
dition. Everything  is  a  dead  letter.  This  is  the  first  cate-
gory.

Others  retain  a  vague  or  incomplete  memory.  Certain  facts
remain,  others  are  obliterated.  Some  have  heard  talking,  but  do
not  remember  what  has  been  said  ;  or,  they  have  heard  the
remarks  of  the  operator,  but  not  those  of  others.  This  is  the
second  category.

Finally,  others  remember  everything  that  has  occurred.
Among  these,  some  are  conscious  of  being  stupid,  drowsy,  or
sleepy,  and  yet  they  may  have  heard  everything,  but  were  not
able  to  make  any  movements,  and  could  not  throw  off  their
drowsiness.  Others  have  no  consciousness  of  drowsiness.  They
say  that  they  have  been  aware  of  all  that  was  going  on,  and  that

io  Suggestive   TJicrapetUics.

their  minds  are  alive  to  all  that  has  been  said  and  done.  They
say  they  have  not  slept  and  in  fact,  the  particular  condition  in
which  they  have  been,  could  not  be  called  sleep  ;  at  least,  noth-
ing proves  that  there  has  been  a  real  sleep.  These  different  con-
ditions constitute  the  third  category.

It  is  with  patients  of  the  first  category,  with  those  who  have
lost  all  memory,  or  nearly  all,  upon  waking,  that  the  induced
hypnotic  phenomena  are  the  most  numerous  and  the  most  pro-
nounced ;  that  is  to  say,  with  these  cases  suggestibility  is  most
marked.  In  them  catalepsy,  automatic  movements,  analgesia,
sensorial  illusions,  hypnotic  hallucinations,  and  occasionally
even  post-hypnotic  hallucinations  can  often  be  determined.
Nevertheless,  this  is  not  constant.

I  have  seen  patients  (I  record  an  example  later)  sleep  quite
deeply,  or  at  least  be  so  profoundly  influenced  as  to  have  all
memory  destroyed  upon  waking  ;  nevertheless,  neither  catalepsy,
anaesthesia,  nor  hallucinations  could  be  induced.  Amnesia  upon
waking  was  the  only  symptom  which  appeared  to  indicate  this
sleep,  although  some  of  these  subjects  could  speak  fluently  while
in  the  hypnotic  condition.

On  the  other  hand,  I  have  seen  patients  in  whom  catalepsy,
anaesthesia,  and  hallucinations  could  be  induced  while  they  were
in  the  hypnotic  condition  and  who,  upon  returning  to  their
normal  state,  retained  the  recollection  of  everything.  But  such
cases  constitute  a  minority.  As  a  rule,  suggestibility  is  more
decided  if  there  is  amnesia  upon  waking.

All  patients  who  are  hypnotized  do  not  sleep.  In  some  cases
the  sleep  is  only  partial,  or  doubtful.  I  also  believe  that  it  is
better,  in  order  to  get  a  true  conception  of  the  phenomenon,  to
use  the  words,  hypnotic  influence,  instead  of  hypnotic  sleep,  and
to  say  that  this  influence  manifests  itself  in  different  patients  by
symptoms  varying  according  to  the  degree  and  individual  way  in
which  they  are  influenced  by  suggestion.  From  this  point  of
view  each  patient  represents  a  special  individuality  with  regard
to  suggestion,  and  the  number  of  divisions  or  degrees  correspond-
ing to  the  diverse  hypnotic  influences  can  be  multiplied  indefi-
nitely.

In  order  to  fix  the  ideas  by  a  slightly  schematic  classification
but  embracing  the  majority  of  the  facts,  I  shall  adopt  the
following  division  of  the  different  degrees  of  the  hypnotic  condi-
tion.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  I  i

First  Degree. — The  patient  does  not  exhibit  catalepsy,  anaes-
thesia, hallucinations,  nor  sleep,  properly  so-called.  He  says  he
has  not  slept,  or  that  he  has  been  only  more  or  less  drowsy.  If
sleep  is  suggested  to  him,  he  is  content  to  remain  with  his  eyes
closed.  He  must  not  be  dared  to  open  his  eyes,  however,
because  then  he  opens  them.  The  influence  obtained  may  ap-
pear as  naught  or  as  doubtful,  yet  it  exists  ;  because  if  neither
sleep,  catalepsy,  nor  any  other  manifestations  may  be  provoked,
suggestibility  can  nevertheless  assert  itself  through  other  influ-
ences. For  example,  a  suggestion  of  heat  on  a  determined  part
of  the  body  may  be  induced,  certain  pains  may  be  destroyed,  and
evident  therapeutic  effects  may  be  obtained.

I  have  succeeded  in  some  cases,  to  all  appearance  refractory,
in  inducing  all  the  regular  manifestations  of  hypnotism,,  by  sug-
gestion, causing  pains  of  a  muscular  or  inveterate  nervous  char-
acter to  disappear, — evident  proof  that  suggestibility  exists  for
certain  organic  activities.

Second  Degree. — The  patient  has  the  same  appearance  as  in
the  preceding  degree  and  presents  the  same  negative  symptoms.
If  sleep  is  suggested,  he  remains  with  his  eyes  closed  without
really  sleeping,  or  is  only  drowsy  ;  but  he  differs  from  the  sub-
jects of  the  preceding  degree  in  that  he  cannot  open  his  eyes
spontaneously  if  he  is  dared  to  do  so.  Here  the  influence  is
evident.

Third  Degree. — The  patient  is  susceptible  to  suggestive  cata-
lepsy whether  the  eyes  are  open  or  shut  and  whether  he  is  drowsy
or  wakeful.  As  we  have  already  stated,  this  catalepsy  varies  in
intensity.  In  the  degree  of  which  we  are  speaking,  the  patient
retains  the  position  induced  or  suggested,  unless  challenged  to
alter  it.  If  he  is  challenged,  he  regains  consciousness,  so  to
speak,  and  succeeds  in  changing  his  position  by  an  effort  of  the
will.  To  a  superficial  observer  the  influence  may  appear  doubt-
ful, but  this  is  no  longer  the  case,  if,  upon  repeating  the  experi-
ment, it  is  shown  that  the  patient  keeps  his  passive  position  from
inertia,  so  long  as  his  dormant  will  is  not  roused.

Fourth  Degree. — In  this  degree,  the  suggestive  catalepsy  is
more  pronounced  and  resists  all  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  subject
to  break  it.  The  influence  is  evident.  The  subject  may  be  con-
vinced that  he  is  influenced  by  showing  him  that  he  cannot  alter
the  position  induced.

Besides    this,    suggestive    catalepsy   and    automatic    rotatory

1 2  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

movement  in  the  upper  extremities  may  sometimes  be  induced,
which  may  continue  for  a  long  time.  In  some  cases  this  motion
is  obtained  by  simply  communicating  the  impulse.  In  others,
verbal  suggestion  is  necessary  to  continue  the  movement.  As  in
catalepsy,  some  patients  succeed  in  checking  the  motion  by  an
effort  of  the  will  if  they  are  dared  to  do  so  ;  others  do  not  suc-
ceed in  spite  of  all  effort.

Fifth  Degree. — In  addition  to  the  cataleptiform  condition,
accompanied  or  unaccompanied  by  automatic  movements,  con-
tractures varying  in  degree  may  be  induced  by  suggestion.  The
patient  is  dared  to  bend  his  arm,  to  open  his  hand,  to  open  or
shut  his  mouth,  and  he  cannot  do  it.

Sixth  Degree. — The  patient  exhibits  moreover  a  more  or  less
marked  docility,  or  automatic  obedience.  Though  inert  and  pas-
sive if  left  to  himself,  he  rises  at  a  suggestion,  walks,  stands  still
if  ordered,  and  remains  fixed  to  a  spot  when  told  that  he  cannot
advance.

As  in  the  preceding  degrees,  he  is  susceptible  neither  to  sen-
sorial illusions  nor  to  hallucinations.

The  subjects  in  these  different  categories  remember  everything
upon  waking.  Some,  however,  are  conscious  of  having  slept.
They  remain  inert,  passive,  without  spontaneity  and  without
initiative.  This  is  the  case  to  such  a  degree,  that  they  cannot
be  roused  from  their  torpid  state  until  the  intellectual  initiative
regains  the  upper  hand,  and  they  come  out  of  the  condition
spontaneously.  Some  do  not  know  whether  they  have  really
slept,  and  others  positively  state  that  they  have  not  been  asleep.
But  in  cases  included  under  the  last  three  degrees,  the  patients
can  be  convinced  that,  if  they  have  not  slept,  they  have  been  at
least  influenced.

Between  a  perfectly  conscious  condition  and  deep  sleep  all
transitions  exist.  It  is  certain  that  in  many  subjects  belonging
to  these  different  categories,  intelligence  and  sensibility  remain
active  during  the  hypnosis.  Others  have  only  certain  symptoms
of  the  sleep  :  the  lack  of  initiative,  inertia,  sensation  of  drowsi-
ness and  the  closed  eyelids,  or  their  minds  reacting  to  the  oper-
ator whom  they  answer  and  obey,  seem  uninfluenced  by  other
people  whom  they  do  not  appear  to  hear,  and  to  whose  questions
they  give  no  answers.

It  is  often  difficult  to  penetrate  the  psychical  condition  of  the
subjects  hypnotized.     Observation  requires  nicety,  and   analysis

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  13

is  subtle.  Some  cases  are  doubtful,  simulation  is  possible  and
easy,  and  it  is  still  easier  to  believe  in  simulation  where  it  does
not  exist.  Certain  subjects,  for  example,  keep  their  eyes  closed
while  the  operator  is  hypnotizing  them.  When  he  ceases  to
look  at  them,  their  eyes  open,  and  close  quickly  when  he  again
fixes  his  gaze  upon  them.  There  is  every  appearance  of  deceit.
The  assistants  believe  it  is  a  fraud.  They  pity  the  operator's
naive  credulity  and  think  the  subject  is  deceitful,  or  that  he  is
acting  to  oblige  the  operator.

This  occurs  daily  in  the  presence  of  my  pupils.  I  show  them,
however,  that  the  subject  is  not  deceiving  me,  and  that  I  am  not
imposed  upon,  by  hypnotizing  him  again  and  inducing  catalepsy
or  contracture  out  of  which  I  challenge  him  to  come,  requesting
him  at  the  same  time,  not  to  think  of  obliging  anyone.

This  tendency  which  certain  subjects  have  to  open  their  eyes
again,  and  come  out  of  their  inertia  as  soon  as  the  operator  ceases
to  influence  and  watch  them,  this  apparent  pretending  which  is
especially  frequent  in  children,  exists  even  in  certain  somnam-
bulists, and  one  would  swear  that  deception  had  been  practised  in
these  cases.  Nevertheless  the  subjects  remember  nothing
upon  waking.

The  majority  of  patients,  however,  remain  with  eyes  closed  for
some  time,  apparent!}'  or  actually  asleep.  They  only  open  their
eyes  after  the  influence  has  worn  off  or  when  they  are  told  to
awake.

Considering  these  facts,  I  cannot  repeat  too  often  that  the
hypnotized  subject  is  not  a  lifeless  corpse  or  a  body  in  a  state  of
lethargy,  for  even  though  he  is  inert  he  hears,  is  conscious,  and
often  shows  signs  of  life.  We  may  see  him  laugh  or  try  to
smother  a  laugh.  He  may  remark  upon  his  condition.  He
sometimes  pretends  that  he  is  cheating  or  that  he  is  trying  to  be
obliging.  Behind  the  doctor's  back  he  boasts  in  good  faith  that
he  has  not  slept  but  has  only  pretended  to  sleep.  He  is  not
always  aware  that  he  is  unable  to  pretend  and  that  his  disposi-
tion to  oblige  is  forced  upon  him,  and  is  due  to  a  weakening  of
his  will  or  of  his  power  of  resistance.  The  majority,  however,
finally  become  aware  of  this  want  of  power.  They  feel  that  they
are  influenced.  They  are  conscious  of  having  slept  even  when
memory  is  preserved  upon  waking.

In  the  degrees  of  which  I  shall  now  speak  there  is  no  longer

1 4  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

any  uncertainty  as  to  the  hypnotic  influence,  for  there  is
amnesia  upon  waking  which  is  sometimes  complete,  sometimes
partial.

The  subject  remembers  imperfectly.  He  knows  that  he  has
heard  voices  but  does  not  know  what  has  been  said.  He  recalls
some  things.  Other  incidents  of  his  hypnotic  life  are  obliter-
ated. These  degrees  of  hypnotism  in  which  memory  is  de-
stroyed upon  waking,  we  call  somnambulism.  In  certain  cases,
somnambulism  lasts  only  during  particular  moments  of  the  hyp-
nosis. Here  there  is  sleep  ;  if  by  sleep  we  mean  that  condition
of  the  mind  which  leaves  behind  it  forgetfulness  of  all  that  has
occurred  during  its  existence.  It  is  in  this  somnambulistic  con-
dition that  we  find  subjects  susceptible  to  hallucinations,  anal-
gesia, and  suggestions  of  acts.  Suggestibility  here  reaches  its
highest  development.  There  are  many  variations  however  in
this  condition.

Seventh  Degree. — Cases  in  which  there  is  amnesia  upon  wak-
ing, but  in  which  hallucinations  cannot  be  induced,  I  consider  as
belonging  to  this  degree.  Almost  all  somnambulistic  subjects
in  this  degree  are  susceptible  to  catalepsy,  contractions,  auto-
matic movements  and  automatic  obedience.  One  or  the  other
of  these  phenomena,  however,  may  be  wanting.  Sometimes  all
are  absent,  but  this  is  exceptional,  as  we  have  said.  Amnesia
upon  waking  is  the  only  symptom  characteristic  of  somnambu-
lism. The  eyes  may  be  open  or  shut  in  this  as  in  the  following
condition.

Eighth  Degree. — There  is  amnesia  upon  waking  as  well  as  a
great  number  of  the  phenomena  observed  in  the  preceding
degrees.  Susceptibility  to  hallucination  during  sleep  is  in-
creased, but  post-hypnotic  hallucinations  cannot  be  induced.

Ninth  Degree. — Amnesia  upon  waking  with  the  possibility  of
inducing  hypnotic  and  post-hypnotic  hallucinations.

These  hallucinations  are  more  or  less  complete  and  distinct.
They  may  succeed  with  certain  senses;  for  example,  the  olfac-
tory and  auditory,  but  not  with  others,  as  the  visual.  In  many
cases  all  the  most  complex  hallucinations  are  perfectly  carried
out.  Many  more  phases  could  be  mentioned,  according  to  the
power  of  mental  representation,  which  in  each  subject  calls  forth
images  with  greater  or  less  clearness  and  vividness.

More  or  less  complete  suggestive  anaesthesia  or  analgesia  may

Suggestive   Therapeutics  1 5

be  met  with  in  all  degrees  of  hypnotism.  It  is  generally  more
frequent  and  more  pronounced  in  instances  of  the  degrees  hist
mentioned  :  those  in  which  there  is  deep  somnambulism  and
where  there  is  great  aptitude  for  hallucinations.

By  stating  the  facts  in  this  way  1  believe  I  come  nearer  the
truth.  Hypnotism  manifests  itself  in  different  subjects  in  differ-
ent ways.  There  may  be  simply  drowsiness,  or  other  induced
sensations,  as  heat,  pricking,  etc.  This  is  the  lightest  influence.
We  have  more  marked  effects  when  suggestion  affects  motility  ;
develops  the  cataleptic  condition,  the  inability  to  move,  contrac-
tion and  automatic  movements.  It  is  still  more  decided  when  it
affects  the  will  and  causes  automatic  obedience.  All  these  mani-
festations of  motion,  will,  and  even  sensibility  can  be  affected
by  suggestion  with  or  without  sleep,  and  even  when  it  is  power-
less to  induce  sleep.  In  a  more  intense  degree,  suggestion  pro-
duces sleep  or  an  illusion  of  sleep.  The  subject  convinced  that
he  is  sleeping,  does  not  remember  anything  upon  waking.  In
general,  the  more  advanced  degrees  of  suggestion  affect  the  sen-
sorial and  sensory  spheres — memory  and  imagination.  Illusions
may  be  created  and  destroyed,  and  the  imagination  may  call
forth  the  most  varied  memory  pictures.

I  insist  upon  the  fact  that  all  or  some  of  these  suggestions
may  be  realized  with  or  without  sleep.  Other  suggestions  may
succeed  where  that  of  sleep  itself  remains  useless,  for  the  sleep
is  also  nothing  but  a  suggestion.  It  is  not  possible  in  all  cases,
and  it  is  not  necessary  in  cases  of  good  somnambulism  in  order
to  obtain  the  most  diverse  phenomena.  They  can  be  dissoci-
ated, so  to  speak,  from  sleep.  Catalepsy,  paralysis,  anaesthesia,
and  the  most  complex  hallucinations  may  be  realized  in  many
cases  without  the  necessity  of  preceding  these  phenomena
by  sleep.  Susceptibility  to  suggestion  occurs  in  the  waking
state.

To  define  hypnotism  as  induced  sleep,  is  to  give  a  too  narrow
meaning  to  the  word, — to  overlook  the  many  phenomena  which
suggestion  can  bring  about  independently  of  sleep.  I  define
hypnotism  as  the  induction  of  a  peculiar  psychical  condition
which  increases  the  susceptibility  to  suggestion.  Often,  it  is
true,  the  sleep  that  may  be  induced  facilitates  suggestion,  but  it
is  not  the  necessary  preliminary.  It  is  suggestion  that  rules
hypnotism.

I  have  tried  to  show  that  suggested  sleep  differs  in  no  respect

1 6  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

from  natural  sleep.  The  same  phenomena  of  suggestion  can  be
obtained  in  natural  sleep,  if  one  succeeds  in  putting  one's  self
into  relationship  with  the  sleeping  person  without  waking  him.

This  new  idea  which  I  propose  concerning  the  hypnotic  influ-
ence, this  wider  definition  given  to  the  word  hypnotism,  permits
us  to  include  in  the  same  class  of  phenomena  all  the  various
methods  which,  acting  upon  imagination,  induce  the  psychical
condition  of  exalted  susceptibility  to  suggestion  with  or  without
sleep.

Such  is  the  case,  for  example,  with  fascination  induced  by  a
brilliant  object,  or  by  the  gaze.  The  latter  form  of  fascination,
used  for  the  first  time  by  Donato,  has  since  been  described  by
Brémaud.  I  have  also  seen  it  applied  by  Hansen.  Donato,
who  operates  especially  upon  young  people,  proceeds  in  the  fol-
lowing manner.  He  asks  the  subject  to  lay  the  palms  of  his
hands  upon  his  own,  stretched  out  horizontally,  and  to  press
downward  with  all  his  might.  The  subject's  whole  attention
and  all  his  physical  force  is  absorbed  in  this  manœuvre.  All  his
inervation,  so  to  speak,  is  concentrated  in  this  muscular  effort,
and  so  the  distraction  of  his  thoughts  is  prevented.  "  The  mag-
netizer"  says  Brémaud,  according  to  Donato,  "looks  at  him
sharply,  quickly,  and  closely,  directing  him  by  gesture  (and  by
word,  if  need  be)  to  look  at  him  as  fixedly  as  he  is  able.  Then
the  operator  recedes  or  walks  around  the  patient,  keeping  his
eyes  fixed  upon  him  and  attracting  his  gaze,  while  the  subject
follows  him  as  if  fascinated,  with  his  eyes  wide  open,  and  unable
to  take  them  from  the  operator's  face.  If  once  carried  away  by
the  first  experiment,  the  simple  fixation  of  the  gaze  suffices  to
make  the  subject  follow.  It  is  no  longer  necessary  to  make  him
first  place  his  hand  on  the  operator's.

Here  we  have  to  do  with  simple  suggestion  by  gesture.
When  the  magnetizer  fixes  his  eyes  upon  the  subject's,  the  latter
understands  that  he  must  keep  his  eyes  fixed  and  must  follow
the  operator  everywhere.  He  believes  that  he  is  drawn  toward
him.  It  is  a  suggestive  psychical  fascination  and  not  physical  in
the  least.  I  have  seen  the  experiment  unsuccessful  with  the
best  somnambulists  when  they  did  not  understand  the  meaning
of  the  operator's  gesture.  In  such  cases,  the  experiment  may
be  made  to  succeed  by  imitation,  if  the  subject  has  seen  it  per-
formed successfully  in  his  presence  upon  someone  else.  This
then  is  suggestion  by  imitation.

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  i  7

Among  subjects  thus  fascinated,  some  submit  to  the  influence
without  sleep,  just  as  those  do  who  are  hypnotized  by  another
method.  They  are  susceptible  to  suggestions  in  the  waking
condition.  They  remember  afterward  what  they  have  done;
the>-  do  not  know  why  they  were  unable  to  keep  from  following
and  gazing  at  the  operator.  Others  remember  nothing  at  all
after  they  are  waked  by  blowing  upon  the  eyes  or  by  a  simple
word.  They  do  not  know  what  has  happened,  they  have  been  in
a  somnambulistic  condition  with  their  eyes  open.  In  this  som-
nambulistic fascination,  catalepsy  and  hallucinations  may  be
induced.  In  these  same  subjects,  catalepsy  or  hallucination
may  often  be  induced  by  a  simple  word,  a  gesture,  or  a  position
communicated  to  them  without  any  previous  fascination.

Fascination,  then,  does  not  exist  as  a  special  condition.  It  is
always  hypnosis,  that  is  to  say,  an  exalted  susceptibility  to  sug-
gestion induced  by  an  influence  exercised  over  the  subject's
imagination.  Whether  this  influence  reaches  the  sensorium
through  eye,  speech,  or  touch,  etc.,  the  psychical  condition
obtained  is  always  the  same.  It  is  always  a  susceptibility  to
suggestion  which  varies  in  degree  in  different  individuals,  and
this  degree  depends  less  upon  the  method  employed  than  upon
the  special  impressionability  of  the  subject.

The  awaking  may  be  spontaneous.  Subjects  who  sleep  lightly
at  the  first  séance,  sometimes  have  a  tendency  to  awake  quickly.
It  is  necessary  to  hold  their  eyelids  closed,  or  to  say  from  time
to  time,  "  sleep,"  in  order  to  keep  them  under  the  charm.  The
habit  of  sleep  is  very  soon  acquired  by  the  organism.  The  sub-
ject no  longer  wakes  while  the  operator  remains  at  his  side  ;  he
may  awake  as  soon  as  the  operator's  influence  is  withdrawn.
The  majority  of  subjects  left  to  themselves  sleep  on  for  several
minutes,  for  half  an  hour,  or  even  for  one  or  more  hours.  I
allowed  one  of  my  subjects  to  sleep  fifteen  hours,  another  eight-
teen.

In  order  to  awake  the  subject  immediately,  I  use  verbal  sug-
gestion, in  the  same  manner  as  when  sleep  is  to  be  induced.  I
say,  "  It  is  over;  wake  up,"  and  this  suffices,  even  when  uttered
in  a  low  voice,  to  awake  subjects  who  have  already  been  hyp-
notized several  times,  immediately.

In  some  cases  it  is  necessary  to  add,  "  Your  eyes  are  opening  ;
you  are  awake."     If  that  is  not  enough,  blowing   once    or  twice
2

1 8  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

on  the  eyes  causes  the  subject  to  wake.  I  have  never  had  to
resort  to  other  methods,  such  as  sprinkling  cold  water  on  the
subjects.     The  awaking  has  always  been  easy.

At  times  there  is  nothing  so  strange  as  this  awaking.  The  sub-
ject is  in  deep  sleep.  I  question  him  and  he  answers.  If  he  is
naturally  a  good  talker,  he  will  speak  fluently.  In  the  midst  of
his  conversation  I  suddenly  say,  "  Wake  up."  He  opens  his
eyes,  and  has  absolutely  no  remembrance  of  what  has  happened.
He  does  not  remember  having  spoken  to  me,  though  he  was
speaking,  perhaps,  but  one  tenth  of  a  second,  before  waking.  In
order  to  make  the  phenomenon  more  striking,  I  sometimes  wake  a
patient  in  the  following  way.  "  Count  up  to  ten.  When  you
say  ten  aloud,  you  will  be  awake."  The  moment  he  says  ten,
his  eyes  open  ;  but  he  does  not  remember  having  counted.
Again  I  say,  "  You  are  going  to  count  up  to  ten.  When  you
get  to  six  you  will  wake  up,  but  you  will  keep  on  counting  aloud
up  to  ten.  When  he  utters  the  word  six,  he  opens  his  eyes  but
keeps  on  counting.  When  he  has  finished  I  say,  "  Why  are  you
counting?  "  He  no  longer  remembers  that  he  has  been  count-
ing. I  have  repeated  this  experiment  many  times  with  very
intelligent  people.

It  is  necessary  to  proceed  cautiously  with  certain  hysterical
subjects,  avoiding  touching  painful  points,  and  exciting  the  hys-
terogenic zones,  lest  an  hysterical  crisis  be  produced.  The  hyp-
notic sleep  may  in  this  way  give  place  to  hysterical  sleep,  and
the  operator  is  then  no  longer  in  relationship  with  the  subject.
Suggestion  has  then  no  effect.

Some  subjects  remain  sleepy  when  they  wake  up.  If  the
operator  waves  his  hand  once  or  twice  before  the  eyes,  he  may
dispel  this  drowsiness.  Others  complain  of  heaviness  in  the
head,  and  of  a  dull  headache  or  of  dizziness.  In  order  to  prevent
these  various  sensations  I  say  to  the  subject  before  waking  him,
"  You  are  going  to  wake  up,  and  you  will  be  perfectly  comfort-
able ;  your  head  is  not  heavy,  you  feel  perfectly  well,"  and  he
awakes  without  any  disagreeable  sensation.

Some  subjects  can  be  awakened  by  suggestion  after  a  specified
time.  It  is  enough  to  say,  "  You  will  awake  in  five  minutes."
They  wake  precisely  at  the  moment  suggested.  They  have  a
correct  idea  of  time.  Some  subjects  have  no  accurate  idea  of
time    and    awake    before  the    moment    suggested.      Some   too,

Suggestive   Therapeutics*  19

forget  to  awake.  They  remain  in  the  passive  condition  and
appear  unable  to  come  out  of  it  spontaneously.  It  is  necessary
to  say,  "  Wake  up  "  in  order  to  have  them  do  so.

Many  subjects  upon  waking  rub  their  eyes,  look  wildly  about,
and  are  conscious  of  having  slept  deeply.  Others  open  their
eyes  suddenly,  not  remembering  what  has  passed,  and  do  not
know  that  they  have  been  asleep.  They  are  like  epileptic
patients  who  have  been  unconscious  and  ignore  the  void  which
has  come  into  their  state  of  normal  consciousness.  "  Have  you
slept?  " — "  I  do  not  know,  I  ought  to  believe  it  if  you  say  so."
Or,  they  are  convinced  that  nothing  abnormal  has  happened  to
them,  and  deny  that  they  have  been  influenced.

The  following  table,  made  from  a  considerable  number  of
cases  and  presented  to  M.  Dumont  by  M.  Liébault,  gives  an  idea
of  the  proportion  of  patients  of  all  ages,  of  both  sexes,  and
of  all  temperaments  subdivided  into  the  different  categories  £>l
sleep.

YEAR    ISSO    IOI2    PERSONS    HYPNOTIZED.

Refractory 27  Very  deep  sleep 230

Somnolence,  heaviness  ....     35  Light  somnambulism,  31

Light  sleep 100  Deep  somnambulism,  131

Deep  sleep 460

It  is  doubtless  necessary  to  take  account  of  the  fact  that
M.  Liébault  operates  chiefly  upon  the  common  people  who  come
to  him  to  be  hypnotized  and  who,  convinced  of  his  magnetic
power  show  greater  cerebral  docility  than  more  intelligent
people.  Perhaps  the  number  of  cases  influenced  would  be  less
without  these  favorable  and  predisposing  conditions.  I  have
been  able  to  prove,  however,  that  refractory  subjects  constitute
a  small  minority,  and  I  succeed  in  hypnotizing  subjects  at  the
first  séance  daily  who  come  to  my  office  with  no  idea  what  the
hypnotic  sleep  is.

According  to  this  statistical  table  and  another,  also  covering
a  year's  time,  prepared  by  M.  Liébault  and  mentioned  by  M.
Beaunis,  the  number  of  somnambulists  in  one  hundred  sub-
jects chosen  at  random  may  be  considered  as  from  fifteen  to
eighteen.

Persons  who  can  be  hypnotized,  and  who,  when  they  wake,
have  no  recollection  of  what  has  happened  during  their  sleep,  we

20

Suggestive    Therapeutics.

call  somnambulists.  It  seems  to  me  that  this  proportion  may  be
considerably  increased  if  the  sleeping  subject  is  told,  "  When
you  wake,  you  will  remember  nothing."  In  a  certain  number  of
cases,  amnesia  is  thus  produced  by  suggestion.

From  this  same  table  of  M.  Beaunis,  it  appears  that  the  pro-
portions of  subjects  that  can  be  hypnotized  are  about  the  same
in  men  as  in  women,  and  particularly  that  the  proportion  is
nearly  the  same  as  regards  somnambulism,  contrary  to  current
opinion.

iS,  8  per  cent,  in  men  ;   19,  4  per  cent,  in  women.

The  following  table,  prepared  by  M.  Beaunis  from  the  above
mentioned  statistics,  shows  the  percentage  of  subjects  exhibiting
the  different  degrees  of  sleep  at  different  periods  of  life.

AGE.

Somnam-
bulism.

Very  Deep
Sleep.

Deep  Sleep.

Light  Sleep.

Somno-
lence.

No  Influ-
ence.

Up  to  7  years

26,5

4,3

13

52,1

4,3

From  7  to  14  years  . .

55,3

7,6

23

13,8

From  14  to  21  years.

25,2

5,7

44,8

5,7

8

IO,3

From  21  to  28  years.

I3>2

5,1

36,7

18,3

17,3

9,1

From  28  to  35  years.

22,6

5,9

'  34,5

17,8

l3

5,9

From  35  to  42  years.

10,5

n,7

35,2

28,2

5,8

8,2

From  42  to  49  years.

21,6

4,7

29,2

22,6

9,4

1  O    *?

From  49  to  56  years.

7,3

14.7

35,2

27-9

10,2

4,4

From  56  to  63  years.

7,3

8,6

37,6

18,8

13

14,4

From  63  and  onward

ii,8

8,4

38,9

20,3

6,7

13,5

M.  Beaunis  shows  that  the  striking  point  in  this  table  is,  the
great  proportion  of  somnambulists  in  childhood  and  youth.  (26,
5  per  cent.,  from  1  to  7  years,  and  55,  3  per  cent.,  from  8  to  14
years.)

It  is  noticeable  also  that  during  these  two  periods  of  life,  all
the  subjects,  without  exception,  have  been  more  or  less  influ-
enced. In  old  age,  on  the  contrary,  the  number  of  somnambu-
lists is  observed  to  decrease,  but  always  remains  at  a  relatively
high  figure  (7  to  1 1  per  cent.).

CHAPTER  IL   •

Phenomena  noticed  in  hypnotic  sleep. — Sensibility. — Spontaneous  or  suggested
anaesthesia.  —  Hypnotism  cannot  replace  chloroform. — Alterations  in  motility. —
Suggestive  catalepsy. — Automatic  movements. — Movements  by  imitation. — Sug
gestive  paralysis. — Somnambulism  with  forgetfulness  upon  waking. — Automatic
obedience. — Sensorial  suggestions. — Suggested  hallucinations. — Acts,  sensorial
illusions,  and  hallucinations  suggested  for  the  time  which  follows  waking. —
Negative  hallucinations. —  Psychical  amaurosis  and  deafness. — Hallucinations
to  be  realized  after  a  long  interval  (a  longue  échéance).

I  NOW  approach  a  rapid  study  of  the  phenomena  which  are
manifested  or  which  may  be  induced  in  hypnosis.  Sometimes
the  eyes  close  suddenly  before  anything  has  been  said  and  the
subject  falls  like  a  lifeless  mass.  Sometimes  the  sleep  comes
gradually.  The  eyelids  grow  heavy,  the  sight  becomes  con-
fused, the  eyes  get  watery,  open  and  shut  alternately  and  finally
close.  In  some  cases  the  eyelids  remain  motionless  when
closed.  In  others  they  quiver  as  long  as  the  hypnosis  lasts.  In
light  sleep,  the  eye-balls  retain  their  normal  position.  When
the  sleep  is  deep,  they  are  often  rolled  up  and  the  pupils  are
hidden  under  the  upper  eyelid.

Sometimes  nervous  subjects  have  muscular  twitching  of  the
limbs  and  fibrillary  contractions  of  the  face  while  asleep.  The
majority,  however,  are  inert,  or  become  so  after  suggestion.
Some  subjects  make  reflex  movements,  scratch  themselves,  for
example,  rub  their  hands  together  and  change  their  position.
Others,  on  the  contrary,  remain  perfectly  quiet.

Sensibility  in  its  different  forms,  is  more  or  less  modified.  It
is  preserved  in  light  sleep.  Tickling,  the  prick  of  a  pin,  or  the
touching  of  a  painful  spot  cause  reflex  movements  and  the  sub-
ject wakes.

In  deep  sleep,  sensibility  is  diminished  or  totally  destroyed.
According  to  M.  Liébault,  it  first  disappears  in  the  extremities,
and  the  periphery  of  the  body  is  always  the  most  anaesthetic  part.
"  Further  examination  of  the  organs  of  sensation  show  that  the
senses  of  sight  and  taste  are  the  first  to  become  dull.  The  sense
of  smell  comes  next,  while  hearing  and  touch  are  the  last  to  be
lost.     The  visual  sense  loses  its  function  last  when  the  methods

21

22  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

of  the  hypnotizers  are  employed, — (fixation  on  some  object  as,
for  instance,  the  operator's  fingers  or  eyes), — because  the  forced
attention  of  the  eyes  compels  them  to  remain  active  the
latest."

If  the  anaesthesia  is  complete,  a  pin  may  be  stuck  into  the  skin,
electricity  may  be  applied,  objects  may  be  pushed  up  into  the
nostrils,  ammonia  may  be  held  under  the  nose  and  the  subject
will  not  even  wince.  This  complete  anaesthesia  may  be  sponta-
neously developed  by  simple  hypnotization.

In  other  subjects  it  is  not  spontaneous,  but  may  be  induced
more  or  less  perfectly  by  suggestion.  I  prick  a  hypnotized  sub-
ject with  a  pin  :  he  reacts  quickly.  I  uncork  a  bottle  of  ammo-
nia under  his  nose  :  he  contracts  his  nostrils  and  shows  that  he
feels  it.  Then  I  say  to  him,  "You  do  not  feel  anything  more.
Your  whole  body  is  insensible.  I  prick  you  and  you  do  not  feel
it.  I  hold  ammonia  under  your  nose  and  you  perceive  abso-
lutely nothing."  In  many  cases,  anaesthesia  thus  occurs  through
suggestion.  Sometimes  only  a  certain  degree  of  anaesthesia  of
the  skin  is  induced  while  the  mucous  membranes  of  the  nose
and  eyes  cannot  be  affected  by  suggestion.

In  a  certain  number  of  cases,  then,  the  hypnotic  insensibility
is  complete  enough  to  enable  the  most  difficult  surgical  opera-
tions to  be  performed.  But  this  is  not  true  of  the  majority  of
cases.  Hypnotism  cannot  be  generally  used  as  an  anaesthetic  in
surgery  ;  it  cannot  take  the  place  of  chloroform.  Moreover,  the
psychical  concentration  necessary  to  the  development  of  the
hypnotic  condition  is  often  hindered  by  the  subject's  anxiety  at
the  time  of  an  operation.

Changes  in  motility  are  more  usually  and  more  easily  induced
than  changes  in  sensibility.  All  hypnotic  subjects,  excepting
those  of  the  first  degree,  are  susceptible  to  suggestive  cata-
lepsy.

We  have  seen  that  this  phenomenon  is  manifested  in  different
ways,  according  to  the  manner  and  degree  of  the  susceptibility  to
suggestion.  The  mind  executes  the  suggestion  with  more  or  less
contraction  or  contracture.  Sometimes  the  catelepsy  is  flabby,
if  I  may  so  express  it,  and  the  upraised  limb  falls  at  the  least
pressure.  Sometimes  the  catalepsy  is  firmer  without  being  rigid;
— wax-like  rigidity.  The  limbs  yield  to  any  motion  communi-
cated to  them.  They  may  be  stretched  or  bent  like  soft  wax
{flexibilities  cercd),  certain  fingers  may  be  stretched,  others  bent,

S   çgestive    Therapeutics.  23

one  thigh  may  be  bent,  the  other  extended.  The  patient  may
be  seated  with  the  head  inclined  toward  one  shoulder,  the  differ-
ent parts  of  the  body  may  be  put  into  the  most  curious  positions.
They  remain  fixed  like  the  limbs  of  a  jointed  mannikin  in  the
positions  given.  The)-  take  the  posture  communicated  exactly.
Catalepsy  is  sometimes  rigid,  and  accompanied  by  a  real  con-
tracture which  only  disappears  by  suggestion.  For  example,  if
an  arm  is  lifted  vertically,  it  remains  fixed,  contractured.  If  we
wish  to  lower  it,  it  offers  a  strong  resistance  ;  if  this  resistance
is  overcome  and  the  limb  then  released,  it  recoils  like  a  spring
into  its  first  position.  It  is  a  true,  rigid  catalepsy  which  I  shall
call  tetanic  catalepsy.  As  soon  as  the  subject  is  asleep,  I  lift  his
arms  and  legs  without  speaking.  They  remain  fixed  as  if  teta-
nized,  in  the  attitude  communicated.  This  rigidity  is  generally
much  greater  in  the  upper  than  in  the  lower  limbs.  In  some  cases,
the  whole  body  may  be  thus  made  immovable,  and  tetanized  to
such  an  extent  that  the  head  can  be  put  on  one  chair,  and  the
feet  on  the  other,  and  the  body  pressed  against  without  the  con-
tracture being  overcome.

Suggestion  alone  always  succeeds  in  destroying  this  tetanic
condition.  I  say,  "  I  can  lower  your  arm  and  move  it  as  I  wish."
The  rigidity  then  vanishes  and  the  catalepsy  persists,  wax-like  or
flabby,  as  in  the  degrees  just  mentioned.

In  a  word,  all  the  forms  which  occur  in  pathological  conditions
may  be  observed  in  the  hypnotic  state,  and  if  the  many  observa-
tions published  on  spontaneous  catalepsy  were  to  be  re-read,  it
would  be  quickly  seen,  that  many  of  them  in  reality  are  related
to  cases  of  hypnotism  or  spontaneous  somnambulism.  When
Lasègue  induced  artificial  cataleptic  seizures  showing  the  special
characteristics  of  spontaneous  catalepsy  in  hysterical  patients  by
closing  the  eyes,  he  was  not  aware  that  these  patients  were  in
reality  hypnotized.      He  had  induced  suggestive  catalepsy.

I  repeat  that  in  the  majority  of  subjects  hypnotized,  it  is  not
necessary  to  formulate  the  suggestion  in  order  to  induce  cata-
lepsy in  the  limbs.  The  psychical  condition  is  such  that  all
ideas  received  by  the  brain  are  imprinted  there,  and  any  attitude
communicated  to  a  limb  is  maintained.  The  position  given  to
the  limb  by  the  operator  is  accepted  by  the  patient's  brain  like
an  imagined  suggestion.  There  is  not  enough  cerebral  initiative
to  modify  the  induced  muscular  condition  spontaneously.

•Many  pathological  conditions  may  be  accompanied  with  cata-

24  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

lepsy  because  the  cerebral  spontaneity  is  suppressed,  or  a  psy-
chical condition  is  produced  analogous  to  that  which  hypnotism
creates  artificially.  I  have  observed  this  a  number  of  times  in
typhoid  fever,  only  one  must  look  for  the  phenomenon  in  order
to  find  it.

I  will  mention  two  cases.  The  first  was  that  of  a  man  thirty-
five  years  old,  who  was  attacked  with  a  mild  form  of  typhoid
fever,  complicated,  during  defervescence,  from  the  fifteenth  to
the  thirty-fifth  day,  with  anxious  melancholia.  The  patient  was
motionless  and  insensible  to  all  that  was  going  on  around  him.
He  answered  questions  in  monosyllables,  remaining  silent  the
rest  of  the  time.  His  eyes  were  closed,  his  pupils  hidden  under
the  upper  eyelids.  The  reflexes  were  preserved.  Sensibility
was  markedly  diminished.  The  patient  seemed  to  hear  ques-
tions but  did  not  answer  them.  If  roused  a  moment  by  vigor-
ous and  repeated  commands,  he  opened  his  eyes  only  to  sink
again  immediately  into  his  former  motionless  condition.  His
arms  remained  indefinitely  in  any  position  into  which  they  were
put,  as  in  suggestive  catalepsy,  but  there  was  no  rigidity.
He  sat  up  for  an  indefinite  time  if  so  placed.  This  condition
lasted  six  days,  then  it  gave  way  to  active  delirium,  stiffness  and
trembling  of  the  limbs.  The  patient  refused  food,  and  the
oesophageal  sound  had  to  be  used.     Recovery  took  place.

The  second  case  was  that  of  an  Italian  mason  twenty-one
years  old,  who  had  a  fatal  attack  of  typhoid  fever,  of  a  dynamic
character.  He  died  on  the  eleventh  day.  From  the  eighth  day
on,  the  patient  was  prostrated  and  spoke  little.  He  answered
questions,  however,  clearly  but  slowly.  There  was  retention  of
urine  unrelieved  by  the  use  of  the  catheter.  Sensibility  was
preserved.

His  eyes  remained  open.  He  did  everything  he  was  told  to
do,  often  without  speaking.  If  he  was  asked  for  his  name  he
would  sometimes  give  it  in  a  low  voice.  If  his  arm  was  lifted,
he  would  keep  it  up  a  long  time  as  in  catalepsy,  his  face  remain-
ing expressionless  like  the  faces  of  hypnotized  subjects.  What-
ever the  attitude  in  which  the  limbs  were  put,  the  patient  had
not  enough  intellectual  initiative  to  change  it.  In  time,  how-
ever, they  dropped  from  fatigue.  This  cataleptiform  condition
lasted  three  days,  when  death  took  place  from  cardiac  failure.

The  cataleptic  condition  never  occurs  in  typhoid  fever,  nor  in
any   other  morbid    states   without   being    accompanied   by   this

Suggestive    Therapeutics.

-o

special  psychical  inertia  which  directs  it.  Artificial  and  sponta-
neous catalepsy  seem  to  me  to  be  essentially  of  a  psychical
nature.

The  following  phenomena  are  of  the  same  order.

For  example,  I  put  the  hypnotized  subject's  thumb  up  to  his
nose.  Then  I  put  the  thumb  of  the  other  hand  up  to  the  little
finger,  so  as  to  make  him  have  his  fingers  up  to  his  nose.  He
keeps  them  so.  and  the  expression  of  his  face  does  not  change.
If  I  say  to  him.  "  Your  thumb  is  stuck  fast,  you  cannot  pull  it
down  from  your  nose,  your  little  finger  is  stuck  to  the  thumb  of
the  other  hand,  you  may  try  your  best  to  pull  them  apart,  you
cannot  succeed,"  if  I  tell  him  that  he  is  exhausting  himself  in
vain  attempts,  his  thumb  remains  stuck  to  his  nose.  His  nose
follows  the  thumb  everywhere,  and  cannot  be  detached.  This
experiment  succeeds  with  the  majority  of  patients  who  have
reached  the  second  or  third  degree  of  hypnotic  sleep.

I  shut  one  of  his  hands  and  say  to  him,  "  You  cannot  open  it
again."  It  remains  contractured  sometimes  to  such  a  degree
that  it  cannot  be  reopened.  The  more  insistence,  the  more
stress  laid  on  the  demand,  "  Your  hand  is  shut,  no  one  can  open
it  again,"  the  more  force  the  patient  uses  in  contracting  it  and
resists  the  endeavors  made  to  open  it.

If,  on  the  contrary,  I  open  it  and  hold  it  open  for  several
instants,  and  if  the  patient  understands  that  this  action  implies
that  his  hand  should  remain  open,  he  stiffens  it  out  sponta-
neously and  resists  any  efforts  made  to  shut  it.  The  muscles  of
the  jaws  can  be  tetanized,  trismus  can  be  produced  and  the  jaws
can  be  kept  open.  Torticollis,  opisthotonos,  and  pleurosthot-
onos  may  be  also  induced.  The  phenomenon  is  simply  the
result  of  suggestion,  whether  the  eyes  are  open  or  shut,  whether
friction  is  used  to  contract  the  muscles  or  not.

In  cases  of  hypnotism  induced  in  this  manner,  I  have  never
succeeded  in  inducing,  by  pressure  exerted  upon  the  nerve,  the
contraction  of  muscles  enervated  by  this  nerve, — for  example,
the  ulnar  or  radial  attitude,  the  contortion  of  the  face,  etc., — ■
without  saying  something  to  the  patient  or  in  his  presence.

A  deeper  degree  of  hypnosis  seems  to  be  required  for  the  pro-
duction of  automatic  movements  than  for  simple  catalepsy.  In
many  cases,  however,  these  movements  are  induced  either  at  the
first  or  at  one  of  the  following  séances.     Both   arms  are  lifted

2  6  Suggestive    TJicrapeiUics.

horizontally  and  rotated  one  about  the  other.  The  patient
keeps  on  moving  them  spontaneously  or  in  obedience  to  a  com-
mand. Some  subjects  move  them  in  a  hesitating  way,  betraying
a  useless  endeavor  to  stop  them.  Others  who  sleep  more  deeply,
turn  their  arms  quickly,  regularly,  and  automatically.  I  say,
"  Do  all  you  can  to  stop  them."  Some  can  make  no  effort,
others  try,  uselessly  bringing  their  hands  together,  hitting  them
one  against  the  other,  but  unable  to  stop  this  perpetual  and  irre-
sistible movement,  which  dominates  what  remains  of  their  will  or
power  of  resistance.  If  I  stop  one  hand,  the  other  may  keep  on
turning  alone.  If  I  then  let  the  hand  go  again  it  may  remain
still,  the  subject  believing  that  I  wish  to  stop  it,  or  it  may  spring
back  to  its  companion's  side  and  turn  around  again,  faster  than
ever.  An  automatic  movement  of  the  legs  may  also  be  induced,
but  this  is  much  less  frequent.

In  some  cases  of  deep  sleep  these  automatic  movements  occur
through  imitation.  I  stand  in  front  of  the  patient  and  turn  my
arms  one  about  the  other.  The  subject  imitates  me.  I  make
the  movement  in  the  opposite  direction  ;  he  does  the  same.  I
put  my  fingers  to  my  nose  ;  he  imitates  me.  I  stand  on  one
leg;  he  stands  on  one  leg  also.  I  stamp  on  the  floor;  he  does
likewise.  The  movement  I  make  suggests  to  his  mind  the  idea
of  the  same  movement.

I  am  convinced  that  this  phenomenon  which  magnetizers  are
so  ready  to  call  an  effect  of  mesmerism,  that  is  to  say,  of  a  fluid
emanating  from  my  body  under  the  influence  of  my  will  and
acting  directly  upon  the  subject  magnetized,  is  nothing  else  than
a  phenomenon  of  suggestion.  The  subject  sees  through  his
half  closed  eyelids  or  hears  the  movement  I  make,  and  there-
fore imitates  me.  It  I  take  care  that  his  eyes  are  hermetically
closed  he  does  not  imitate  my  movements.  One  of  my  som-
nambulistic cases,  however,  whom  I  hypnotized  in  the  presence
of  my  colleague,  M.  Charpentier,  imitated  my  movements  with-
out seeing  them,  for  I  had  stood  behind  him.  I  turned  my
arms  ;  after  a  time,  he  did  the  same.  I  moved  my  foot  in  a  cer-
tain way  ;  in  a  few  moments  he  moved  his  foot  too,  but  not  imi-
tating me  exactly.  "  Was  there  any  fluid  influence  there  ?"  I
asked  myself.  But  we  may  be  sure  that  our  somnambulist
heard  the  movement  made  by  my  arms  and  my  feet,  and  that
the  idea  of  the  movement  to  be  imitated  was  transmitted  to  the

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  27

mind  by  his  auditor}-  sense  ;  because  if  I  moved  noiselessly  with-
out even  letting  my  clothes  rustle,  he  remained  motionless,  not
imitating  me.

We  must  add  that  a  subject  who  has  been  hypnotized  and
subjected  to  these  experiments  several  times,  executes  them
more  promptly  and  more  perfectly.  Sometimes  it  is  sufficient
to  lift  both  arms  horizontally.  He  suspects  what  is  wanted,  and
turns  them  one  about  the  other.  It  is  enough  to  close  his  hand
lightly  and  he  contracts  it  with  irresistible  force.  He  holds  his
arm  up,  rigid.  In  some  cases,  the  contracture  is  so  great  that
the  hand  can  hardly  be  opened  again  when  the  order  is  given  to
open  it.

Suggestion  induces  paralysis  as  well  as  contracture.  I  tell  a
patient  that  his  arm  is  paralyzed.  If  I  lift  it,  it  falls  motionless
while  the  other  arm,  which  I  have  not  paralyzed  by  suggestion,
remains  up  in  a  cataleptic  condition.  In  some  cases,  this  sugges-
tion disappears  quickly,  the  subjects  forget  it  in  a  few  min-
utes ;  in  others  it  lasts  a  long  time.  In  one  case,  I  suggested
paralysis  of  one  arm  and  catalepsy  of  the  other.  I  let  the
patient  sleep  forty  minutes,  then,  coming  quietly  up,  I  suddenly
lifted  both  arms.  The  one  remained  up,  the  other  fell  back.
The  idea  suggested  still  continued  in  the  mind.

The  paralyses  thus  induced  by  suggestion,  and  capable  of
being  developed  in  the  waking  condition  as  well,  as  I  shall  prove
later,  have  been  called  by  Charcot,  "  Experimental  psychical
paralyses,  "  and  resemble  the  paralyses  called  by  Russel-Rey-
nolds,  "  Paralyses  by  imagination,  depending  on  idea."  Accord-
ing to  P.  Richer  and  Gilles  de  la  Tourette  {Progrés  medical,
1884),  these  suggestive  paralyses  have  special  characters,  by
which  they  can  be  distinguished  from  other  paralyses,  of  organic
nature.  These  characters  are,  complete  laxity  of  the  limbs,  con-
siderable exaggeration  of  the  tendon  reflexes,  spinal  trepidation,
loss  of  muscular  sense,  exaggeration  and  modification  of  the
muscular  contraction  provoked  by  the  galvanic  current,  and
vasomotor  troubles.

I  have  not  been  able  to  prove  the  existence  of  these  special
characters.  The  exaggeration  of  the  tendon  reflexes,  and  the
spinal  trepidation  have  been  wanting  in  many  cases  of  suggestive
paralysis,  while  the  muscular  sense  was  present.  It  seems  evi-
dent to   me  that   these    suggested    psychical   paralyses   vary  in

28  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

character  according  to  individual  conception  and  the  manner
of  suggestion.  Each  subject  carries  out  a  suggestion  as  he  con-
ceives it,  as  he  interprets  it.

These  facts  and  those  which  I  shall  mention  later,  show  that
the  phenomena  of  so-called  animal-magnetism  are  simply  the
phenomena  of  suggestion.  In  hypnotism,  the  subject's  condition
is  such  that  the  idea  suggested  imposes  itself  with  greater  or  less
force  upon  the  mind,  and  induces  the  corresponding  action  by
means  of  a  kind  of  cerebral  automatism.  In  my  hypnotic  cases,
I  have  not  observed  a  single  act  which  cannot  be  thus  inter-
preted, without  calling  for  the  intervention  of  any  fluid  analo-
gous to  the  force  of  the  magnet,  or  electricity  escaping  from  cer-
tain organisms  to  react  upon  others.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  Braid
or  Braidism,  the  doctrine  of  suggestion  which  is  deduced  from
observation,  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  Mesmer  or  Mesmerism,
the  doctrine  of  a  mesmeric  or  magnetic  fluid.

The  mesmerists,  for  example,  give  the  following  facts  in  sup-
port of  their  fluid  theory.  They  say,  if  a  pass  is  made  over
a  limb  and  the  parts  lightly  touched,  the  muscles  contract  and
the  limb  may  be  raised.  This  is  a  mesmerizing  pass.  If  the  pass
is  then  made  over  the  limb  without  touching  it,  just  moving  the
air,  it  will  fall  back  again.  This  is  a  demesmerizing  pass.  If  the
air  is  agitated  at  one  side  of  the  head,  the  head  turns,  following
the  operator's  hand.  If  the  pass  is  made  on  the  opposite  side  of
the  head,  the  head  turns  back  to  that  side.  Pass  the  hand  quickly
over  the  subject's  hand  and  draw  it  away  suddenly.  If  this  is
repeated  several  times  the  hand  is  lifted  up  of  itself  and  remains
in  a  cataleptic  condition  ;  an  evident  proof,  the  mesmerists  say
that  the  operator's  hand  draws  the  magnetized  patient's  hand
after  it  as  the  magnet  attracts  iron  !

Braid  has  proved  that  this  is  in  reality  only  the  action  of
suggestion,  that  no  fluid  and  magnetic  influence  comes  into  play.
"  The  phenomena  arise  apart  from  the  operator's  will,  if  by
gesture  or  by  touch,  interpreted  by  the  subject's  mind,  he  mani-
fests a  desire  which  the  subject  cannot  resist.  The  same  passes,
accompanied  or  unaccompanied  with  touching  of  the  limb,  mes-
merizing or  demesmerizing  in  the  language  of  the  magnetizers,
may  induce  the  same  phenomenon,  the  raising  or  dropping  of
the  hand.  The  subject's  movements,  induced  by  a  certain  sen-
sorial impression,  are  instinctive  and  automatic.  The  patient's
brain  directs  the  movement  naturally  indicated  by  this  attitude.

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  29

A  muscle  in  repose  contracts;  a  contracted  muscle  relaxes
under  the  influence  of  the  same  manoeuvre.  If  an  impression  is
communicated  to  the  hand  or  the  arm  resting  on  the  knee,  this
arm  cannot  fall  ;  it  is  raised  of  itself  and  becomes  stiff.  If  the
same  impression  act  upon  the  lifted  arm,  it  causes  a  most  nat-
ural movement,  the  dropping  of  the  limb.  If  the  lifting  or  drop-
ping of  the  limb  is  prevented,  impressions  will  produce  lateral
movements."

We  must  add  that  a  subject  with  whom  the  same  experiment
has  been  repeated  several  times,  or  who  has  seen  it  performed
on  others  has  kept  in  his  memory  the  movements  or  muscular
acts  corresponding  to  each  impression.  He  is  instructed,  so  to
speak,  and  repeats  automatically,  by  cerebro-spinal  reflex  only,
the  same  acts  which  he  has  seen  executed  or  which  he  has  exe-
cuted himself  in  the  preceding  séances.

The  subjects  more  deeply  influenced  by  hypnotism,  pass  into
a  condition  known  as  somnambulism.  Then  new  phenomena
appear.  The  automatism  is  complete.  The  human  organism
has  become  almost  a  machine,  obedient  to  the  operator's  will.  I
say  "  Rise,"  and  he  rises.  One  subject  gets  up  very  quickly,
another  obeys  slowly,  the  machine  is  lazy,  the  command  must  be
repeated  in  an  authoritative  voice.  I  say  "  Walk,"  and  he
walks  ;  "  Sit  down,"  and  he  sits  down.

I  say,  "  You  cannot  walk  forwards  any  more,  you  can  only
walk  backwards."  His  efforts  are  fruitless.  He  walks  back-
wards.

"You  can  neither  go  forward  nor  backward."  He  remains
fixed  to  the  spot  in  spite  of  all  the  physical  efforts  he  makes  to
move.

"Your  legs  can  support  you  no  longer."  He  falls  as  if  para-
lyzed.

"  Your  right  leg  only,  is  paralyzed."     He  drags  the  right  leg.

I  touch  him  with  both  my  hands  stretched  out,  and  making
gestures  as  if  to  draw  him  towards  me,  I  walk  backwards.  He
follows  me  passively,  wherever  I  go.

I  order  him  to  dance.  He  dances,  and  stops  as  if  rooted  to
the  spot,  at  my  command.

General  sensibility  and  the  special  senses  may  be  modified,
increased,  diminished,  or  perverted  at  will.  I  put  salt  into  the
subject's  mouth,  telling  him  that  it  is  sugar.  Some  subjects  do
not   accept   this   suggestion   perfectly.     They   still   perceive   the

30  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

salt  taste,  more  or  less  clearly.  Many,  however,  suck  the  salt
with  pleasure,  finding  it  very  sweet.  I  make  a  subject  drink
water  or  vinegar  for  wine.  I  make  him  smell  ammonia  for
cologne.

I  induce  deafness.  The  subject  says  that  he  hears  nothing.
He  answers  nothing  and  does  not  react  to  the  most  deafening
noises.  I  make  him  mute  and  I  make  him  stutter.  The  most
curious  illusions  may  be  suggested.  A  pencil  put  into  his
mouth  takes  the  place  of  a  cigar,  the  aroma  of  which  he  draws
in  with  pleasure,  blowing  puffs  of  imaginary  smoke  into  the  air.

In  the  advanced  degrees  of  hypnosis  all  illusions  and  halluci-
nations are  successfully  carried  out  with  surprising  precision.

Moreover  all  actions  which  the  operator  commands  are  carried
out.  The  hypnotized  subject  walks  and  dances  at  the  word  of
command,  shows  his  fist  to  persons  pointed  out,  searches  their
pockets  more  or  less  adroitly,  steals,  and  carries  out  any  violent
acts  which  are  ordered.  One  subject  acts  with  a  certain  hesita-
tion ;  another  resolutely.

Somnambulists  can  write,  work,  play  the  piano,  and  converse
among  themselves.  Seeing  them  act  thus,  their  eyes  shut,  or
open  as  in  the  waking  condition,  one  would  swear  they  were  not
asleep.  When  left  to  themselves,  they  are  generally  passive  and
inert,  but  they  become  active  and  move  about  under  the  influ-
ence of  suggestion.

For  example,  there  is  a  woman  fifty-five  years  old  in  my  ser-
vice, who  was  a  housekeeper.  She  is  troubled  with  rheumatism
but  is  not  at  all  hysterical.  I  induce  the  somnambulistic  condi-
tion easily.  If  I  say  nothing,  the  somnambulism  is  passive.  She
sleeps  quietly  and  her  muscles  are  relaxed.  I  can  induce  anaes-
thesia,  catalepsy,  contracture,  and  hallucinations  and  make  her
come  out  of  her  passive  state  by  affirmation.  I  say,  "  Now  that
you  are  cured,  get  up,  do  your  work."  She  gets  up,  dresses,
looks  around  for  a  chair,  climbs  upon  the  window-sill,  opens  the
window,  dips  her  hands  into  a  pitcher  containing  some  medicine,
which  she  thinks  is  water  intended  for  domestic  use,  and  begins
to  wash  the  panes  of  glass,  conscientiously,  on  both  sides.
Then  she  makes  her  bed  or  sweeps  the  floor  of  the  room  with  a
broom  which  is  handed  to  her.  When  she  awakes,  she  remem-
bers nothing,  and  thinks  she  has  been  sleeping  quietly  in  a  chair.

These  are  not  exceptional  facts.  If  one  wishes  to  consider
this  side  of  the  question  carefully,  it  is  astonishing  to  find  in  any

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  3  1

hospital  ward  where  a  great  variety  of  subjects  are  assembled,  in
how  many  the  phenomena  of  active  somnambulism  can  be
induced.  In  a  room  of  twenty,  I  sometimes  have  three  or  four
women  at  work.  One  crochets,  the  other  sews,  the  third  with
her  eyes  shut  looks  for  old  linen  and  irons  with  which  to  iron  it.
Some,  susceptible  to  hallucinations,  perform  their  work  with
imaginary  utensils.  For  example,  one  of  them  takes  a  sheet,
turns  the  edge,  threads  an  imaginary  needle  and  sits  down  to  do
imaginary  sewing,  making  all  motions  of  hemming  precisely,
stitch  by  stitch,  without  mistake.  All  this  is  accomplished  by
means  of  suggestion.  The  eyes  may  be  open  or  shut,  and  all
memory  is  lost  when  the  subject  wakes.

In  order  to  further  ascertain  the  condition  of  somnambulistic
subjects  and  the  complex  manifestations  to  which  they  are
susceptible,  I  shall  relate  some  observations  later  which  are  more
eloquent  than  any  description  I  could  give.

But  first,  I  wish  to  call  attention  to  one  of  the  most  interesting
phenomena  of  somnambulism.  I  wish  to  speak  of  the  possi-
bility of  inducing  in  somnambulists  by  means  of  suggestion,  acts,
illusions  of  the  senses,  and  hallucinations  which  shall  not  be
manifested  during  the  sleeping  condition,  but  upon  waking.  The
patient  hears  what  I  tell  him  in  his  sleep  but  no  memory  of
what  I  said  remains.  He  no  longer  knows  that  I  spoke  to  him,
The  idea  suggested  arises  in  his  mind  when  he  wakes,  but  he  has
forgotten  its  origin,  and  believes  it  is  spontaneous.  Facts  of
this  kind  have  been  observed  by  A.  Bertrand,  Gen.  Noiset,
Dr.  Liébault  and  Chas.  Richet.  I  have  repeated  these  observa-
tions successfully  many  times  in  a  large  number  of  hypnotic
cases  and  am  convinced  of  their  accuracy.

The  following  are  instances  of  suggestive  acts.  I  have
selected  curious  cases  on  purpose,  in  order  to  make  the  experi-
ments more  conclusive.

I  suggested  to  D during  sleep  that  upon  waking  he  should

rub  his  sore  thigh  and  leg,  that  he  should  then  get  out  of  bed,
walk  to  the  window  and  return  to  bed.  He  performed  all  these
acts  without  suspecting  that  a  command  had  been  given  to  him
while  he  was  sleeping.

I  suggested  to  S on  one  occasion,  that  on  waking  he  should

put  on  his  hat,  bring  it  to  me  in  the  next  room  and  put  it  on  my
head.     This  he  did  without  knowing  why.

3  2  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

On  another  occasion  when  my  colleague,  M.  Charpentier,  was
present,  I  suggested  to  him  when  he  first  fell  asleep  that  as  soon
as  he  waked,  he  should  take  my  colleague's  umbrella,  which  was
lying  on  the  bed,  open  it,  and  walk  twice  up  and  down  the
piazza  on  which  the  room  opened.  It  was  some  time  afterward
when  I  waked  him.  Before  his  eyes  were  open,  we  went  quickly
out  of  the  room  so  that  the  suggestion  might  not  be  recalled  by
our  presence.  We  soon  saw  him  coming  with  the  umbrella  in
his  hand,  but  not  open  (in  spite  of  the  suggestion).  He  walked
twice  up  and  down  the  corridor.  I  said  to  him,  "  What  are  you
doing?  "  He  answered,  "  I  am  taking  the  air." — "  Why,  are  you
warm  ?  " — "  No,  it  is  only  my  idea  ;  I  occasionally  walk  up  and
down  out  here." — "What  is  the  umbrella  for?  It  belongs  to
M.  Charpentier." — "  What  !  I  thought  it  was  mine,  it  looks
something  like  mine.  I  shall  take  it  back  to  the  place  I  took  it
from."

Sometimes  the  subject  tires  himself  out  in  trying  to  find  a
reason  for  the  ideas  in  his  brain.  One  day  I  suggested  to  the
same  subject  that  as  soon  as  he  waked,  he  should  go  to  a  certain
patient  in  the  same  room  and  ask  how  he  was.  He  did  so  as
soon  as  he  awoke,  and  when  I  asked  him  why  he  did  it,  and
whether  he  was  especially  interested  in  that  patient,  he  replied,
"  No,  it  was  just  an  idea."  Then  after  thinking  a  moment,
added  "  He  would  not  let  us  sleep  last  night."  Thus  he  tried  to
explain  the  idea  to  himself  by  the  wish  to  know,  whether  the
sick  patient  would  allow  them  to  sleep  that  night  or  not.

On  another  occasion  I  suggested  that  as  soon  as  he  waked  he
should  put  both  thumbs  into  his  mouth,  which  he  did.  He
connected  this  necessary  act  with  a  painful  sensation  in  his
tongue,  owing  to  his  having  bitten  it  the  day  before  in  an
epileptic  attack.

One  morning  at  eleven   o'clock  I  suggested  to  C ■  that  an

hour  after  mid-day  he  would  be  seized  by  an  idea  he  could  not
resist,  namely,  to  walk  along  Stanislas  Street,  and  return,  twice.
At  one  o'clock  I  saw  him  go  out  into  the  street,  walk  along
from  one  end  to  the  other,  return,  and  stop,  like  a  lounger,  under
the  windows.  But  he  did  not  do  it  twice,  perhaps  because  he
did  not  understand  the  second  part  of  the  suggested  command,
perhaps  because  he  resisted  it.  On  another  occasion  I  suggested
that  at  the  same  hour  he  should  take  a  direction   I   traced   out

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  t>3

for  him,  pass  by  the  academy  to  a  stand  where  he  should  buy  a
paper,  and  return  another  way.  At  the  hour  appointed,  he  went
to  the  paper  stand  by  the  way  pointed  out,  bought  his  paper  and
then  returned,  but  by  another  way.

In  the  case  of  a  poor  boy  with  aortic  insufficiency,  I  suggested
that  five  minutes  after  waking  up,  he  should  take  the  book  lying
at  the  head  of  his  bed  and  read  the  100th  page.  A  quarter  of
an  hour  after  the  suggestion,  I  waked  him,  and  went  a  little  way
off.  Three  minutes  afterward  (he  lacked  an  exact  idea  of  time),
I  saw  him  take  up  his  book  and  read.  I  approached  ;  he  was
reading  the  iooth  page.  "  Why  are  you  reading  on  that  page  ?"
I  asked. — "  I  do  not  know,"  he  said,  "  I  often  open  the  book  and
read  here  and  there."

I  have  repeated  analogous  suggestions  in  a  large  number  of
cases.  For  example,  the  following  are  two  experiments  of  this
kind  which,  I  think,  offer  special  interest  from  a  psychological
point  of  view.

X is  a  sailor,  51  years  old,  formerly  an  employee  on  a  rail-

road.  He  is  troubled  with  chronic  articular  rheumatism  of  the
knees,  with  retraction  of  the  limbs  in  flexion.  He  is  an  intelli-
gent, well-balanced  man  of  considerable  culture  and  not  at  ail
nervous  or  credulous.  When  I  proposed  to  hypnotize  him  he
assured  me  that  I  would  never  succeed.  I  tried,  and  obtained
closure  of  the  eyes  in  the  first  séance.  He  pretended  not  to  have
slept  at  all.

In  the  second  séance,  I  obtained  suggestive  catalepsy.  He
pretended,  however,  not  to  have  slept  and  to  have  held  his  arms
up  because  he  wanted  to,  out  of  pure  complaisance.  I  had  to
put  him  to  sleep  again  and  dare  him  to  alter  the  different  atti-
tudes impressed  upon  his  limbs  before  he  would  confess,  when
he  waked,  that  he  had  been  really  influenced.  Several  days
later,  finding  him  sleeping  naturally,  I  came  up  quietly  and  said
to  him,  "  Continue  to  sleep — do  not  wake  up."  I  laid  my  hand
on  his  forehead  for  two  minutes,  then  I  lifted  his  arm,  and  it
remained  in  a  condition  of  suggestive  catalepsy.  The  natural
sleep  had  gone  over  into  hypnotic  sleep.  In  other  words,  I  had
been  able  to  enter  into  relationship  with  him  during  his  sleep,
by  means  of  the  organ  of  hearing.  Upon  waking,  he  did  not
remember  that  I  had  spoken  to,  or  touched  him.

Since  then,  that  is,  since  the  fifth  or  sixth  séance,  I  have  put
him  into  a  profound  sleep  with  loss  of     memory    on    waking.

34  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

In  the  waking  state,  I  induce  catalepsy  and  automatic  move-
ments. He  is  susceptible  to  complex,  post-hypnotic  hallucina-
tions. Acts  or  ideas  can  be  suggested  to  him  during  sleep
which  he  executes  or  formulates  upon  waking  in  the  belief  that
they  are  due  to  his  own  intellectual  initiative.  I  will  mention
only  the  following  suggestion  which  is  interesting  from  a  psy-
chological point  of  view.  Having  hypnotized  him,  I  saw  a
manual  of  chemistry  at  the  head  of  his  bed.  "  There  is  a  chem-
istry," I  said  ;  "  when  you  wake  the  idea  will  occur  to  you  to
read  the  chapter  on  gold.  You  will  look  for  it  in  the  table  of
contents.  You  will  read  this  chapter,  then  you  will  say  to  me,
'  Gold  !  if  I  had  any  I  would  give  you  a  great  deal  to  thank  you
for  your  pains!  Unfortunately,  I  have  none  at  all.  We  do  not
make  money  in  the  merchant  marine,  nor  in  the  railroad  service  '  ;
this  idea  will  come  to  you  while  you  are  reading."

Half  an  hour  afterward  I  waked  him,  went  away  and  watched
from  a  distance.  I  saw  him  look  for  his  spectacle  case,  take  out
his  glasses,  put  them  on,  take  up  the  book,  turn  over  the  pages
for  at  least  five  minutes  and  finally  find  a  place  and  begin  to
read.  I  came  up  ;  it  was  the  chapter  on  gold.  "  Why  do  you
read  this  article,"  I  asked. — "  It  is  an  idea,"  he  answered,  and
kept  on  reading  :  After  a  few  minutes  he  looked  at  me  and
said,  "  Gold  I  If  I  had  any  I  would  repay  you  well,  but  I  have
none."  He  turned  to  his  reading  again  and  after  a  while  added,
"  Railroad  Companies  do  not  enrich  their  employees."  Then  he
went  on  with  his  reading  in  a  natural  way.  He  would  have
been  greatly  astonished  to  learn  that  the  idea  he  expressed  had
been  introduced  into  his  mind  by  me.

X is  an  accountant,  forty-seven   years  old,  intelligent  and

well-balanced.  He  is  troubled  with  writer's  cramp,  but  is  natu-
rally vigorous.  The  therapeutic  observations  on  the  case  will  be
given  later.  The  first  time  I  hypnotized  him,  he  went  into  a
sleep  of  the  third  degree,  that  is,  suggestive  catalepsy  and
automatic  movements  were  induced,  and  he  retained  memory
upon  waking.  There  was  doubt  in  his  mind  as  is  the  case  with
all  subjects  who  remember  upon  waking.  He  did  not  know
whether  he  had  actually  slept,  and  asked  me  if  he  had  been
obliged  to  hold  his  arm  up.  He  believed  he  had  done  so  in
order  to  please  me.  He  had  undoubtedly  been  influenced,  how-
ever, because  at  the  séance  following,  I  put  him  into  a  deep
sleep  with  loss  of  memory  on  waking.  Then,  only,  was  he  con-
scious of  having  slept.

v';v    Therapeutics.  35

On  one  occasion  during  his  sleep,  I  suggested  the  following
act.  "  When  you  wake  you  will  go  to  my  office,  and  you  will
write  on  a  sheet  of  paper,  '  I  have  slept  very  well,'  and  you  will
place  a  cross  after  your  name."

I  waked  him  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  lie  went  to  the  office,
wrote  the  phrase  I  had  put  into  his  mind,  signed  it  and  made  a
cross  after  his  name.  "What  does  this  cross  mean,"  I  asked  ; —
"  Why  !  "  he  replied,  "  upon  my  word,  I  do  not  know  ;  I  made  it
without  thinking."  The  next  day  I  made  him  write  another
sentence  with  two  crosses  after  his  name,  the  day  after,  his  name
with  a  star  after  it.  On  the  following  day,  I  suggested  to  him
while  he  was  asleep,  "When  you  wake  up,  you  will  write,  '  I  will
go  to  M.  Liébault  while  you  are  away,'  and  you   will  sign  it,  but

you  will  make  a  mistake.     Instead  of  signing  your  name  H

you  will  sign  mine,  Bernheim,  then  you  will  see  you  have  made
a  mistake,  and  you  will  rub  out  mine  and  put  yours  instead."
This  he  did  when  he  woke  up,  and  seemed  very  much  puzzled
by  his  error.  Fie  made  excuses  to  me  but  did  not  suspect  that
the  responsibility  of  the  mistake  did  not  rest  with  him,  and  that
I  had  suggested  it.

I  repeat  that  he  is  an  intelligent  man  and  is  neither  hysterical
nor  nervous.  His  imagination  is  calm  and  his  mind  is  well
balanced.  I  insist  upon  this,  because  certain  people  who  are
not  sufficiently  enlightened  upon  this  subject,  persist  in  stating
that  only  those  of  a  neurotic  temperament  are  susceptible  of
being  put  into  the  somnambulistic  condition.

"The  manner  in  which  suggestions  manifest  themselves  in  the
subjects,"  says  M.  Reaunis,  "gives  valuable  information  as  to  the
state  of  the  will  in  somnambulism."  From  a  psychological
stand-point,  there  is  nothing  more  curious  than  to  trace  the
dawning  and  development  of  the  suggested  idea  in  the  faces  of
the  subjects.  For  example,  we  are  in  the  midst  of  a  light  con-
versation which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  suggestion.  All  at
once  the  hypnotizer,  who  is  alert,  and  watching  his  subject  with-
out appearing  to  do  so,  seizes  upon  a  given  indication,  a  sort  of
thought-interruption,  an  interior  shock,  which  manifests  itself  by
an  almost  imperceptible  sign,  a  look,  a  gesture,  a  wrinkle  in  the
face  ;  then  the  conversation  goes  on,  but  the  idea  again  comes
to  the  front,  though  still  weak  and  indecisive.  There  is  a  little
surprise  in  the  look.  We  feel  that  something  unexpected  comes
across  the  mind,   now  and   then,  like  a   flash.     The  idea   soon

.1

6  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

increases  in  strength,  little  by  little.  It  takes  more  and  more
hold  upon  the  intelligence,  the  struggle  has  begun  ;  the  eyes,  the
gestures,  all  speak,  all  reveal,  the  internal  combat.  The  subject
still  listens  to  the  conversation  but  in  a  vague  sort  of  way,
mechanically  ;  his  mind  is  elsewhere.  All  his  being  is  a  prey  to
a  fixed  idea  which  forces  itself  more  and  more  strongly  into  his
mind.  The  time  has  come  ;  all  hesitation  vanishes,  the  face  wears
a  remarkable  expression  of  resolution  and  the  subject  gets  up
and  performs  the  act  suggested.

"  This  internal  struggle  is  more  or  less  lasting,  more  or  less
energetic,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  act  suggested,  and
above  all  according  to  the  condition  of  the  somnambulist.
When  the  subject  has  been  hypnotized  often,  and  especially  by
the  same  person,  this  person  obtains  such  an  influence  over  him
that  the  most  eccentric,  the  most  grievous  and  even  the  most
dangerous  acts  are  performed  without  any  appreciable  endeavor
to  resist."  I  cannot  but  agree  with  these  observations  of  my
colleague.

The  effect  of  the  suggestion  of  post-hypnotic  acts  is  not  abso-
lutely inevitable.  Some  patients  resist  them.  The  desire  to
carry  out  the  act  no  doubt  is  more  or  less  imperative,  but  they
resist  it  to  a  certain  extent.

I  give  some  examples  of  more  or  less  complete  resistance.

In  the  following  cases  the  struggle  and  hesitation  before  obey-
ing the  idea  were  manifested  in  the  patient  until  the  suggestion
finally  got  the  upper  hand.

A  young  hysterical  girl  was  brought  to  the  Medical  Society  at
Nancy  by  M.  Dumont.  She  was  hypnotized  and  was  ordered,
when  she  woke,  to  take  the  glass  cylinder  off  the  gas  burner  over
the  table,  and  put  it  in  her  pocket  and  take  it  away  when  she  went.
After  she  was  waked,  she  turned  timidly  toward  the  table,  and
seemed  confused  to  find  everyone  looking  at  her.  Then  after
some  hesitation,  she  climbed  upon  her  knees  on  the  table.  She
kneeled  there  about  two  minutes,  apparently  ashamed  of  her
position,  looked  alternately  at  the  people  around  her  and  at  the
object  which  she  had  to  carry  away,  put  out  her  hand,  and  then
drew  it  back.  Then,  suddenly  taking  off  the  cylinder,  she  put  it
in  her  pocket  and  hurried  away.  She  would  not  consent  to  give
it  up  until  she  had  left  the  room.

In  the  case  of  A I  suggested  that  after  waking  he    should

walk  around  the  room  three  times;  he  only  did  it  once.

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  $7

I  suggested  to  young  G that  upon  waking,  he  should  stand

upon  the  table.  When  he  woke  up  he  looked  hard  at  the  table
but  did  not  get  upon  it.  Me  doubtless  w  ished  to  do  so,  but
regard  for  the  people  around  gave  him  strength  to  resist  the
desire.

Upon  one  occasion,  I  suggested  to  A that  when  he  woke  he

would  see  a  silver  spoon  on  a  chair  behind  him,  and  that  he
would  put  it  in  his  pocket.  He  did  not  turn  around  after  being
waked  and  did  not  see  the  spoon,  but  there  was  a  watch  on  a
table  in  front  of  him.  I  had  besides  suggested  to  him  the  nega-
tive hallucination  that  he  would  see  no  one  in  the  room  and
would  find  himself  all  alone,  and  this  came  true.  The  idea  of
the  suggested  theft  of  the  spoon  came  into  his  mind  in  relation
to  the  watch.  He  looked  at  it,  touched  it,  then  said,  "  No,  that
would  be  stealing,"  and  left  it  alone.  If  the  suggestion  of  steal-
ing the  spoon  had  been  repeated  forcibly  and  imperatively  I
have  no  doubt  that  he  would  have  executed  it.

Since  this  was  written  I  have  had  occasion  to  hypnotize  S— —
again.  I  suggested  the  same  thing  more  imperatively.  "  You  will
put  the  spoon  in  your  pocket,  you  cannot  do  otherwise."  Upon
waking  he  saw  the  spoon,  hesitated  an  instant,  then  said,
"  Heavens,  this  is  worse  yet!  "  and  put  it  in  his  pocket.

A  young  hysterical  girl  in  my  service  is  susceptible  to  post-
hypnotic suggestions,  illusions,  and  hallucinations  during  the
hypnotic  sleep.  For  example,  I  say,  "  When  you  wake  up,  you
will  walk  around  the  room  twice,  or  you  will  read  prayers  out  of
this  book."  She  wakes  up  and  sometimes  obeys,  but  often  pays
no  attention  to  the  suggestion.  The  idea  of  doing  so  and  so  is
probably  in  her  head  but  she  resists  it,  either  from  a  spirit  of
opposition,  or  from  false  modesty.  I  say  to  her,  "  I  know  what
you  are  thinking  about  ;  you  want  to  read  a  prayer  or  walk
around  the  room."  She  seems  perfectly  astonished  that  I  can
guess  her  secret  thoughts  and  believes  that  I  can   read  her  mind.

It  is  strange  that  suggested  actions  may  be  carried  out  not
only  during  the  time  immediately  following  the  sleep  but  after  a
greater  or  less  interval.  If  a  somnambulist  is  made  to  promise
during  his  sleep  that  he  will  come  back  on  such  and  such  a  day,
at  such  and  such  an  hour,  he  will  almost  surely  return  on  the
day  and  at  the   hour,   although    he  has  no   remembrance  of  his

promise  when  he  wakes  up.     I   made  A say  that  he  would

come  back  to  me  in  thirteen  days  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning.

$S  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

He  remembered  nothing  when  he  waked.  On  the  thirteenth  day
at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  he  appeared,  having  come  three
kilometres  from  his  house  to  the  hospital.  He  had  been  work-
ing in  the  foundries  all  night,  went  to  bed  at  six  in  the  morning
and  woke  up  at  nine,  with  the  idea  that  he  had  to  come  to  the
hospital  to  see  me.  lie  told  me  that  he  had  had  no  such  idea
on  the  preceding  days  and  did  not  know  that  he  had  to  come  to
see  me.  It  came  into  his  head  just  at  the  time  when  he  ought
to  carry  it  out.

Thus,  a  suggestion  given  during  sleep  may  lie  dormant  in  the
brain,  and  not  come  to  consciousness  until  the  time  previously
fixed  upon  for  its  appearance.  Further  research  is  necessary  to
explain  this  curious  psychological  fact,  and  to  determine  how
long  a  hypnotic  suggestion  may  thus  remain  latent.  It  goes  with-
out saying  that  all  somnambulists  are  not  susceptible  to  sugges-
tions which  take  effect  after  a  long  interval  of  time.

I  have  spoken  of  suggestions  which  give  rise  to  acts.  I  pro-
ceed to  consider  sensitivo-sensorial  suggestions.  Illusions  of  the
senses  and  of  sensation  maybe  suggested  in  the  majority  of  som-
nambulistic cases.  I  say,  "  When  you  wake,  you  will  experience
a  numbness  in  your  foot  or  a  cramp  in  the  calf  of  your  leg,  a
sharp  pain  in  a  tooth,  or  an  itching  of  the  scalp."  These  differ-
ent sensations  appear  in  all  or  almost  all  cases  of  deep  sleep.  A
patient  with  aortic  insufficiency  to  whom  I  had  suggested  itching
of  the  head,  scratched  himself  violently,  not  knowing  how  he
had  got  all  this  vermin  during  his  sleep.  A  consumptive  in
whom  I  induced  the  same  sensation  took  a  comb  and  drew  it
quickly  through  his  hair  from  behind  forwards  to  get  rid  of  the
imaginary  louse.

The  most  diverse  sensations  may  be  vividly  realized  after  wak-
ing ;  for  example,  thirst,  so  great  that  several  glasses  of  water
are  taken,  one  after  the  other;  hunger,  with  the  necessity  of  eat-
ing something  immediately  ;  the  need  of  micturition  or  of
defecation.  Without  knowing  why,  one  subject  feels  a  tick-
ling in  his  nose  and  sneezes  five  or  six  times  in  succession.
Another  yawns  several  times  simply  through  hypnotic  sugges-
tion. Another  will  see  everything  as  though  colored  green  for
several  minutes,  etc.  In  a  word  all  sensorial  illusions  com-
manded during  sleep  are  realized  upon  waking  by  many  persons
who  sleep  profoundly.

The   following    experiment,  which    I    have  several    times    re-

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  39

peated,  shows  that  the  suggestion  is  active  during  sieep  and
creates  the  sensorial  image  suggested.  It  is  not  the  spoken
word,  but  the  idea  conveyed  by  this  word  which  is  retained  in
the  mind.  In  the  case  of  a  very  intelligent  quiet  man  of  high
social  position,  I  gave  the  following  suggestion  after  hypnotiza-
tion.  "  When  you  wake,  you  will  be  conscious  of  a  very  strong
odor  of  cologne  ;  I  upset  a  bottle  of  it  on  your  clothes."  When  1
had  waked  him,  he  sniffed  several  times  and  said  to  me,  "  There
is  an  odor  about  you."

•What  odor?"  I  asked.  "  I  do  not  smell  anything,  I  have  a
cold  in  my  head."

"It  is  like  vinegar,"  he  said;  "did  you  not  upset  a  bottle
of  vinegar  in  the  fire?"

I  replied,  "  No,  there  is  no  odor  ;  it  is  a  suggestion  I  gave
you  during  your  sleep,  but  it  was  not  of  vinegar.  Try  to  think
what  it  was."

"  I  am  at  a  loss  to  say  what  it  is;  it  is  like  vinegar."

"  It  is  cologne."

"  It  is  really  something  like  that,  but  I  should  not  have
recognized  cologne."

"  Now,  that  you  know  it  is  a  suggestion  and  not  a  reality,
do  you  still  smell  it  ?"

He  put  his  hand  to  his  nose,  and  replied,  "  It  is  strange,
I  still  smell  it  distinctly."

Thus  the  word  cologne  had  not  been  retained.  The  olfac-
tory image  suggested  was  not  very  accurate  in  the  patient's
mind,  as  he  was  not  accustomed  to  using  cologne  frequently.
It  was  a  similar  odor,  reminding  him  vaguely  of  vinegar,  that
the  olfactory  centre  had  evoked.

In  support  of  this  idea  we  cite  the  following  fact.  During  the
artificial  sleep  I  said  to  a  patient  in  my  service,  who  had  a  car-
diac affection,  "  Upon  waking  you  will  take  the  book  which  is
lying  on  the  table  near  your  bed,  open  it  at  page  56  and  you  will
find  your  portrait  there,  very  well  executed."

When  he  woke  I  saw  him  take  the  book.  "  What  are  you
looking  for?  "  I  asked.

"  A  story  I  began  ;   I  think  I  left  off  at  page  56."

"Are  you  looking  for  some  particular  thing  on  this  page?  "

"  No,  only  a  continuation  of  the  story."

He  looked  for  the  page  and  when  he  found  it  seemed  aston-
ished.    "  Why,  what  is  that?     It  is  a  portrait."     He  looked  at

4<D  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

it  for  several  moments  and  only  then  recognized  himself.  "  It  is
I  !  "  He  did  not  know  when  he  was  looking  for  the  page  that
he  would  find  his  portrait,  and  he  did  not  recognize  the  portrait
as  his  own,  immediately.

The  hallucination  thus  provoked  may  be  as  vivid  as  reality.
The  patient  cannot  rid  himself  of  it  even  though  he  may  know
that  it  is  an  hallucination.  This  may  be  observed  in  experi-
menting on  very  intelligent  people.  I  recently  hypnotized  a
remarkably  intelligent  young  girl,  with  a  positive  mind,  who
was  not  in  the  least  flighty  and  whose  good  faith  I  can  guar-
antee. I  made  her  see  an  imaginary  rose  when  she  waked  up.
She  saw  it,  touched  it,  and  smelt  it.  She  described  it  to  me.
Then,  knowing  that  I  might  have  given  a  suggestion,  she
asked  me  if  the  rose  wras  real  or  imaginary.  "  It  is  perfectly
impossible  for  me  to  tell  the  difference,"  she  said.  I  told  her
that  it  was  imaginary.  She  was  convinced  of  this,  and  in  spite
of  it  was  certain  that  by  no  effort  of  the  will  could  she  make
it  disappear.

"  I  still  see  it,"  she  said,  "  and  touch  it  as  distinctly  as  if  it
were  real,  and  if  you  should  put  a  true  rose  in  its  place,  or  by  it,
I  should  not  know  how  to  distinguish  them."

I  made  her  see  it  for  ten  minutes.  She  moved  it,  changed  its
place,  etc.  She  was  wide-awake,  and  talked  coolly  about  the
phenomenon.  Then  I  said  to  her,  "  Look  at  it  for  the  last  time,
it  is  going  to  vanish."  Then  she  saw  it  grow  less  distinct,  fade,
and  vanish  insensibly.

Other  subjects  do  not  realize  these  sensorial  images  so  well,  for
they  are  less  vivid,  less  distinct.  The  hallucination  is  incom-
plete and  sometimes  obscure  ;  in  following  séances,  it  is  better
marked.  Others,  who  are  less  sensitive  to  suggestion,  remember
when  they  wake  what  they  were  expected  to  see,  feel,  and  hear  ;
what  had  been  suggested  to  them, — music,  for  example, — but  the
hallucination  is  not  evoked  ;  they  do  not  perceive  it.  I  shall
give  examples  of  this  farther  on.

A  few  words  more  on  this  suggestion  of  simple  or  complex
hallucinations.  Deep  somnambulism  is  often  characterized  by
the  possibility  of  inducing  hallucinations  upon  waking,  in  which
one  or  several  of  the  senses  take  part.  The  following  are  exam-
ples.

I    suggested    to    C ,  during    sleep,  that    upon    waking,  he

would   see  M.  S ,  a  colleague  present,  with  only  one  side  of

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  4r

his  face  shaved  and  with  a  big  silver  nose.  After  waking,  his
eyes  fell  by  chance  on  my  colleague  and  he  burst  out  laughing.
i  you  have  been  betting,"  said  he,  "  that  you  would  allow
only  one  side  of  your  face  to  be  shaved;  and  your  nose!  You
have  been  to  '  Les  Invalides  '  have  you  ?  "

At  another  time,  in  a  ward  full  of  sick  patients,  I  suggested
that  he  would  see  a  big  dog  in  each  bed,  instead  of  a  patient,
and  he  was  perfectly  astonished  upon  waking  to  find  himself  in
a  hospital  for  dogs.

On  one  occasion,  when  he  had  been  telling  me  that  his  pro-
prietor's wife  had  abused  him,  I  suggested  that  when  he  waked,
he  should  see  the  husband  come  into  the  room  and  would  remon-
strate with  him  upon  his  wife's  behavior,  and  that  after  spending
five  minutes  in  this  way,  he  would  go  to  sleep  again  spontane-
ously.    As  soon  as  he   waked,    he  actually  saw   the    proprietor,

and  going  up  to  him  he  said,  "Ah,  good-day,  M.  H ,  I  am

glad  to  meet  you  for  I  must  tell  you  what  is  in  my  mind.  Your
wife  is  a  bad  woman,  she  struck  me.  Such  things  cannot
continue  ;  I  will  speak  to  the  police,  etc."  After  scolding  vigor-
ously in  this  way  for  a  few  minutes,  he  sat  down  again  and  went
off  to  sleep.

I  suggested  to  S ,  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Christian,  Physi-
cian-in-chief at  the  Charenton  asylum,  "  When  you  wake  you
will  go  to  your  bed.  You  will  meet  a  woman  there  who  will
hand  you  a  basket  of  strawberries.  You  will  thank  her,  shake
hands,  and  then  eat  the  strawberries."  He  was  waked  half  an
hour  later,  went  to  his  bed  and  said,  "  Good  day,  madam,
thank  you  very  much."  Then  he  shook  hands.  I  came  up  and
he  showed  me  the  imaginary  basket  of  strawberries.  "  Where
is  the  woman?"  I  asked.  He  replied,  "She  is  gone.  There
she  is,  in  the  corridor."  He  pointed  her  out  to  me  through
the  window  which  opens  on  the  corridor."  Then  he  ate  the
strawberries,  one  after  the  other,  putting  them  daintily  into  his
mouth,  sucking  them  with  pleasure,  throwing  away  the  stems
and  wiping  his  hands  now  and  then,  with  an  appearance  of
reality  which  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  counterfeit.

I  have  also  made  the  same  subject  eat  cherries  or  peaches  or
imaginary  grapes,  or  when  he  has  been  constipated  I  have  made
him  take  an  imaginary  bottle  of  Seidlitz  water.  He  takes  the
fictitious  bottle,  pours  the  water  into  an  imaginary  glass,  drinks
three  or  four  glasses  full,   one   after  the   other,  making  all   the

42  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

movements  of  swallowing.  He  finds  it  bitter,  puts  back  the
glass  and  several  times  during  the  day,  four  or  five  times  some-
times, has  a  movement  induced  by  this  imaginary  purgative.
If  the  constipation  is  very  great,  however,  the  imagination  is  not
sufficient  to  provoke  the  desired  effect.

In  Mme.  G ,  whose  case  I  shall  mention  later,  an  intel-
ligent, impressionable,  but  not  at  all  hysterical  woman,  I
induced  the  most  complex  post-hypnotic  hallucinations,  in
which  all  the  senses  took  part.  I  made  her  hear  military  music
in  the  court-yard  of  the  hospital.  The  soldiers  came  up-stairs
and  into  the  room.  She  saw  a  drum-major  making  pirouettes
before  her  bed.  A  musician  came  up  and  spoke  to  her.  He
was  intoxicated,  and  made  unbecoming  proposals  to  her.  He
wished  to  embrace  her.  She  slapped  him  in  the  face  twice,  and
called  the  sister  and  nurse,  who  ran  up  and  put  the  drunken  man
out.  This  entire  scene,  suggested  during  sleep,  developed  itself
before  her,  both  spectator  and  actress,  as  vividly  as  reality.
She  had  not  been  able  to  experience  similar  hallucinations
before.  She  could  not  get  rid  of  this  one.  She  looked  around
and  asked  the  other  patients  if  they  had  not  seen  and  heard
what  was  going  on.  She  could  not  distinguish  between  the
illusion  and  reality,  When  it  was  all  over  I  said  to  her,  "  It
was  only  a  vision  I  gave  to  you."  She  understood  perfectly
that  it  was  a  vision,  but  insisted  that  it  was  more  than  a  dream
and  that  it  was  as  vivid  as  reality.

Another  case  was  that  of  a  young  girl.  I  made  her  see  a  ring
on  her  finger  or  a  bracelet  on  her  arm  upon  awaking,  or  I  gave
her  a  handsome  fan,  ornamented  with  the  portraits  of  people  she
knew.  She  was  very  happy  over  the  gift,  but  after  three  or
four  minutes  the  object  disappeared  from  her  mind,  and  since
the  experiment  taught  her  the  evanescent  character  of  these
presents,  she  has  begged  me  each  time  to  leave  them  with  her,
and  not  take  them  away.

With  others,  these  hallucinations  last  much   longer.     I  made

Mme.  L see    the    portrait    of   her   husband    upon   waking.

She  saw  it  even  the  next  day,  knowing  very  well  that  the  por-
trait did  not  exist.     On  another  occasion  I  said   to  her,  "  Upon

waking  you  will  see  Mme.  E sitting   in  that  chair."     (Mme.

R was   sitting  in  the    chair.)     When    she    awoke,  she    saw

Mme.    E and    spoke    to    the    person   supposed    to    be  she.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  43

After  a  conversation  of  ten  minutes,  I  said,  "  But  you  arc  mis-
taken,  it    is  not    Mme.    E but   Mme.  R who   is  before

you."   She  was  convinced,  then,  that   it  was   Mme.   R .      She

knew  that  it  was  a  sensorial  illusion  and  nevertheless  could  not
throw  it  off.  As  the  illusion  lasted,  it  was  disagreeable  to  her.
According  to  her  request,  I  again  hypnotized  her  at  the  end  of
half  an  hour  in  order  to  restore  Mme.  R her  own  features.

These  suggestions  of  hallucinations,  examples  of  which  I
could  give  ad  infinitum,  cannot  be  induced  in  all  cases  of
somnambulism.

I  assured  A that  when  he  woke   he   would  see  a  dog  in

his  bed  and  would  pet  it.  After  waking,  he  looked  under  the
down  spread  without  finding  anything,  saying  that  he  thought
he  had  dreamed  that  a  dog  was  in  his  bed.

In  another  case  I  said,  "  Upon  waking  you  will  see  that  I
have  a  bad  nose-bleed."  After  waking,  he  looked  at  me  and
said,  "  you  ought  to  be  having  a  bad  nose-bleed."  He  did  not
see  an}-  blood,  the  idea  of  a  nose-bleed  remained  (alone)  in  his
mind.

Thus,  among  somnambulists,  some  obey  the  suggestions  of
acts,  others  are  at  the  same  time  susceptible  to  more  or  less
perfect  sensitivo-sensorial  illusions.  These  subjects  may  be
affected  by  itching,  or  by  pain,  that  is  by  illusions  of  tactile  sen-
sibility, but  not  by  sensorial  illusions.  The  experiment,  for
example,  of  making  such  patients  eat  salt  in  place  of  sugar
during  their  sleep,  and  making  them  keep  the  taste  of  sugar  in
their  mouths,  does  not  succeed  at  all.  Upon  waking,  they  per-
ceive the  taste  of  salt  and  not  that  of  sugar.  They  cannot  be
made  to  see  objects  red  or  yellow.  The  sensorial  illusion  does
not  succeed  any  better  than  the  hallucination.

In  others,  suggestions  of  acts,  of  sensitivo-sensorial  illusions,
and  hallucinations,  all  succeed.  Moreover,  the  same  subject,
who,  in  the  first  séances  rebels  against  sensorial  illusions  and
hallucinations,  may  perfect  himself  by  practice  so  that  at  the
end  of  many  séances,  he  can  realize  all  the  hallucinatory  con-
ceptions which  are  suggested  to  his  mind.

In  certain  cases,  a  negative  hallucination  may  be  suggested
during  sleep.  This  succeeds  only  in  cases  of  deep  somnambu-
lism. One  day  when  I  was  with  Dr.  Liébault,  he  suggested  to
a  hypnotized  woman  (not  a  hysterical  case),  that  when  she  woke,

44  Suggestive   TJicrapcutics.

she  would  no  longer  see  me,  that  I  would  have  gone,  and  for-
gotten my  hat.  Before  going  away,  she  would  take  my  hat,
put  it  on  her  head  and  take  it  to  me  at  my  house.

When  she  woke,  I  stood  in  front  of  her.  She  was  asked,
"Where  is  Dr.  Bernheim  ?  "  and  she  replied,  "He  has  gone.
Here  is  his  hat."  I  said,  "  Here  I  am,  madam,  I  have  not
gone,  you  recognize  me  perfectly."  She  did  not  answer.  In
five  minutes,  having  allowed  the  first  impression  to  vanish,  I
sat  down  by  her  side  and  asked  her,  "  Have  you  been  coming
to  M.  Liébault  for  a  long  time  ?  "  She  remained  silent,  as  if
she  neither  saw  nor  heard  me.  Some  one  else  asked  her  the
same  question.  She  replied  immediately,  "For  fifteen  days."
Then  I  continued,  "  And  you  feel  better,  madam,  don't  you,
after  this  treatment  ?  "  The  same  silence,  but  again  a  reply  to
the  next  person.  I  held  my  hands  before  her  eyes  for  two
minutes.  She  did  not  wink  or  frown.  I  did  not  exist  as  far  as
she  was  concerned.  Finally,  when  about  to  go,  she  took  my
hat,  put  it  on,  and  departed.  M.  Liébault  went  out  after  her
into  the  street  and  asked  for  the  hat,  saying  that  he  would  take
it  to  me  himself.

I  have  repeated  this  experiment  relative  to  negative  hallucina-
tion, successfully,  upon  many  of  my  somnambulistic  cases.

I  will  mention  an  instance.     In  the  case  of  a  lady,  G ,  in

my  service,  I  suggested,  in  the  presence  of  two  ladies  who  had
come  from  the  town  to  visit  the  hospital,  that  when  she  waked
up  she  would  no  longer  see  nor  hear  me.  I  would  be  no  longer
there.  When  she  waked,  she  looked  for  me.  I  showed  myself
in  vain.  I'  whispered  in  her  ear  that  I  was  there,  and  pinched
her  hand,  which  she  drew  back  suddenly  without  discovering  the
origin  of  the  sensation.  The  ladies  present  told  her  that  I  was
there  and  that  I  had  spoken  to  her.  She  did  not  see  me  and
thought  the  ladies  wanted  to  make  fun  of  her.  This  negative
illusion,  which  I  had  induced  in  her  in  other  séances,  but  which
had  lasted  from  five  to  ten  minutes  only,  continued  this  time
all  the  while  I  remained  with  her, — more  than  twenty  minutes.

One  of  the  two  ladies  present  was  hysterical.  I  treated  her
for  hysterical  aphonia  by  hypnotism.  She  was  susceptible  both
to  hypnotic  and  post-hypnotic  hallucinations.  The  day  after  the
scene  at  which  she  had  been  present,  at  my  request,  I  put  her
into  a  somnambulistic  condition  and  said  to  her,  "You  know
that  when  you  wake  you  will  see  me  no  longer."     She  began  to

Suggestive    Therapeutic.;.  45

smile.  "You  laugh,"  I  said,  "because  you  remember  the
woman  here  yesterday,  who  did  not  sec  me  when  she  woke.
Well,  it  will  be  the  same  with  you,  only  you  will  not  see  me,  for
I  shall  have  really  gone.  As  soon  as  I  wake  you,  I  shall  go  away
and  remain  absent  ten  minutes.  You  will  see  me  come  in  again
at  the  opposite  door."  When  I  had  waked  her,  she  looked  for
me  in  vain,  and  seemed  much  put  out  at  not  finding  me.  "  I  am
here,"  I  said,  "you  see  me  perfectly  well  ;  I  am  touching  you,  I
am  tickling  your  forehead."  She  did  not  move.  "You  are
making  fun  of  me,"  I  added  :  "you  are  playing  a  game,  you  can-
not help  laughing,  you  are  going  to  burst  out  laughing."  She
did  not  frown.  As  she  showed  displeasure,  I  told  the  people
present  to  assure  her  that  I  had  been  called  away  hastily  to  a
patient  in  the  neighborhood.  She  continued  to  be  in  a  bad
humor  and  went  to  sleep  again  spontaneously.  Exactly  at  the
end  of  ten  minutes,  she  reopened  her  eyes,  looked  towards  the
door  as  if  she  saw  me  enter,  bowed  to  me,  appeared  glad  to  see
me  again,  and  attributed  her  discontent  to  the  fear  she  had  had
of  a  nervous  crisis  produced  by  the  waking  up  without  my  influ-
ence. I  then  confessed  to  her  that  I  had  been  present,  but  that
I  had  given  her  a  negative  suggestion,  like  the  one  she  had  wit-
nessed the  day  before  in  another  case.  She  assured  me  that  she
had  neither  seen  nor  heard  me.  The  disguise  of  my  presence
had  been  perfect.

The  expression,  negative  hallucination,  which  we  use  at  Nancy
for  this  phenomenon,  has  been  criticised  by  MM.  Binet  and
Féré.  "This  name  is  singularly  badly  chosen,"  say  these
authors,  "  because  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  hallucinations.  The
nature  of  this  sensory  trouble  can  be  well  understood  only  by
comparing  it  to  systematic  paralysis  of  movement.  For  the  eye
as  well  as  for  the  arm  it  is  a  question  of  a  phenomenon  of  inhibi-
tion, which  produces  systematic  paralysis."  {Revue  Philosophi-
que, Jan.  1885.)

It  seems  to  me  that  my  esteemed  opponents  deserve  the
reproach  which  they  have  cast  upon  me,  of  having  imperfectly
grasped  the  nature  and  the  signification  of  the  phenomenon.

When  I  make  a  hypnotized  subject  see  a  person  or  a  thing
which  is  not  before  his  eyes,  by  means  of  a  suggestion  given
in  the  hypnotic  or  in  the  waking  condition,  I  have  created
an  image  called  forth  by  his  mind  ;  I  have  caused  a  visual  hallu-
cination.

46  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

If  in  the  same  subject  and  by  the  same  method  I  have  made
invisible  a  person  or  a  thing  which  is  before  his  eyes,  I  have
not  produced  a  paralysis  of  the  eye.  The  patient  sees  all
the  objects  excepting  only  the  one  which  has  been  suggested
to  him  as  invisible.  I  have  obliterated  a  sensorial  image  from
his  mind.  I  have  neutralized  or  rendered  negative,  the  percep-
tion of  this  image.  I  call  such  a  phenomenon,  a  negative  hallu-
cination.

In  both  cases,  the  psychical  or  psycho-sensorial  phenomenon
is  of  the  same  order.  In  both  cases,  I  have  called  forth  a  hallu-
cination.

Besides,  in  all  the  complex  hallucinations,  such  as  are  artifi-
cially realized  and  spontaneously  developed,  the  two  phenomena
co-exist  :  a  lunatic  believes  himself  in  prison,  sees  his  cell,  the
jailer,  the  chain  which  binds  him.  These  are  sensorial  percep-
tions created  in  his  brain.  On  the  other  hand,  he  does  not  see
the  real  objects  before  him.  He  neither  sees  nor  hears
the  people  about  him.  These  are  real  sensorial  perceptions
effaced.

Will  anyone  say,  that  of  these  two  orders  of  phenomena,  the
first  alone  constitutes  hallucination,  and  not  the  second  ?  For
an  illegitimate  but  authorized  use  of  a  word  which  exists  in  our
language  (examples  :  negative  pressure,  negative  value,  negative
quantity,  etc.),  the  expression,  negative  hallucination,  seems  to
me  perfectly  well  chosen  to  express  the  psychical  mechanism  of
the  phenomenon  connected  with  that  which  causes  positive  hal-
lucination.

I  have  shown  elsewhere,  that  suggestive  amaurosis  as  well  as
hysterical  amaurosis  is  not  a  systematic  paralysis  but  a  purely
psychical  amaurosis  ;  a  neutralization  of  the  object  perceived  by
the  imagination.  It  is  a  negative  hallucination.  This  amaurosis
has  no  organic  substratum,  no  anatomical  localization.  The  sub-
ject sees  by  means  of  his  retina  and  by  means  of  his  brain.  The
first  receives  the  impression  ;  the  second,  by  means  of  the  cortical
visual  centre,  perceives  it.  But  the  subjects  who  are  amaurotic
by  suggestion,  or  who  are  hysterical,  unconsciously  neutralize  this
visual  image  by  their  imagination.  Ocidos  hcibent  et  non  vident.
They  see  with  their  material  eyes,  they  do  not  see  with  their
minds'  eyes.     The  amaurosis  is  only  a  negative  illusion.

I  have  remarked  that  of  the  subjects  to  whom  I  had  suggested
during  sleep  an  inability  to  see  me  upon  waking,  some  appeared

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  47

not  to  see  me  at  all,  but  others  began  by  looking  at  me,  as  if  the
memory  of  the  suggested  idea  no  longer  existed  ;  then  the
memory  being  revived,  their  expression  changed  suddenly  and
the}-  become  inert  as  far  as  I  was  concerned.  I  had  disappeared  ;
they  no  longer  saw  me,  and,  later  on,  when  the  effect  of  the  sug-
gestion had  worn  off,  they  believed  and  assured  me  that  they
had  not  seen  me  even  immediately  after  waking.

My  chef  de  clinique  M.  Ganzinotty,  wished  to  experiment  in
order  to  determine  whether  this  suggested  unilateral  amaurosis
was  real  or  feigned.  He  made  use  of  Stoeber's  apparatus  (of
which  I  shall  speak  later),  which  is  intended  to  baffle  any
attempt  at  deception.  He  stated  that  the  indications  given
by  the  patient  were  false.  He  was  inclined  to  believe  there
was  simulation.  I  explained  to  him,  that  as  the  amaurosis  was
purely  psychical,  that  is,  imaginary,  it  could  not  obey  optical
laws.

Later  on,  I  was  able  to  demonstrate  the  matter  experiment-
ally, in  regard  to  the  unilateral  amaurosis  of  hysteria,  which  acts
exactly  like  suggested  amaurosis.  The  following  is  an  observa-
tion which  I  have  made  upon  a  large  number  of  hysterical  cases
in  my  service.  The  patients  had  complete  sensitivo-sensorial
hemi-anaesthesia  of  one  side,  let  us  say  the  left  side,  including  a
complete  amaurosis  on  this  side.

Now,  the  right  eye  being  closed,  after  having  proved  that  the
patients  see  nothing  with  the  left,  and  are  totally  blind,  it  is
easy  to  assure  one's  self  that  this  blindness  is  purely  psychical.
For  this  purpose,  I  use  Dr.  Stoeber's  apparatus,  a  modification  of
Snellen's,  which  thwarts  any  simulation  of  amaurosis.  A  pair  of
spectacles  in  which  one  glass  is  red  and  the  other  green,  is  put
on  the  patient's  nose,  and  he  is  made  to  read  six  letters  on  a
black  frame,  alternately  covered  by  squares  of  red  and  green
glass.  Looking  at  them  with  both  eyes  open,  all  six  letters
can  be  read.  Looking  at  them  with  one  eye  only,  the  other
being  closed,  only  three  can  be  read:  those  covered  by  the  glass
corresponding  in  color  to  the  spectacle  glass  through  which  the
eye  is  looking  ;  the  letters  covered  by  red  glass  if  the  eye  is
looking  through  the  red  glass  in  the  spectacle,  and  green  letters
if  the  eye  is  on  the  side  of  the  green  glass.  This  occurs  because
green  and  red  mixed  make  black.  If  we  look  at  green  through
red,  we  see  black.

This  granted,  our  hysterical  patients  looking  at  the  six  letters

48  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

through  the  spectacles,  read  them  all  without  hesitating  a
moment.  They  read  those  which  they  were  supposed  not  to
see,  therefore  they  must  have  seen  with  the  left  eye  without
knowing  it.  If  the  left  eye  was  then  closed  they  only  saw  three
letters.

Another  most  simple  experiment  confirms  this  fact.  We
know  that  if  a  prism  is  held  before  the  eye,  the  corresponding
image  is  refracted  and  thus  diplopia  is  produced.  If  the  other
eye  is  closed  and  there  is  no  diplopia,  the  object  is  seen  single
and  not  double.

Hysterical  patients  with  unilateral  amaurosis  should  only  see
one  image  through  the  prism.  Now,  they  saw  two  without  any
difficulty,  hence,  the  amaurotic  eye  could  see.  Hysterical  and
suggestive  achromatopsia  are  psychical,  like  amaurosis.  The
following  is  an  experiment  we  owe  to  Dr.  Parinaud.  It  was
reported  in  M.  Grenier's  inaugural  thesis.  {Des  localisations
dans  les  maladies  nerveuses,  1886.)  For  example,  let  us  take  the
case  of  a  hysterical  patient  with  achromatopsia  of  the  left  eye.
When  looked  at  by  this  eye  a  square  of  green  paper  is  gray,  and
when  looked  at  by  the  other  eye,  green  ;  each  eye  being  alter-
nately closed.  If  a  prism  is  placed  base  upwards  in  front  of  the
normal  eye,  and  both  eyes  are  opened,  the  patient  will  see  two
squares  of  paper  and  will  see  them,  not  one  green  and  the  other
gray,  but  both  green  ;  that  is  to  say,  under  these  circumstances
the  achromatopic  eye  sees  the  color.  If  on  the  other  hand,  the
prism  is  held  before  the  achromatopic  eye,  the  majority  of
patients  will  see  both  squares  gray  ;  both  eyes  will  have  ceased
to  see  the  color.

The  author  explains  this  fact  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  ret-
ina puts  itself  into  relationship  with  the  opposite  hemisphere,  in
the  vision  of  each  eye  separately,  but  that  in  binocular  vision
both  eyes  can  put  themselves  into  relationship  with  one  or  the
other  hemisphere,  an  hypothesis  which  has  no  basis  either  in
experimental  or  anatomical  data.

It  is  a  question  of  a  purely  psychical  phenomenon,  that  is,  one
in  which  the  patient's  imagination  does  all  the  work.  If  I  put  a
green-colored  cardboard  before  the  normal  eye  of  the  subject
and  make  him  look  at  this  cardboard  through  a  prism,  instead  of
seeing  a  gray  image  (given  by  the  supposed  achromatopic  eye)
and  a  green  image  (given  by  the  normal  eye)  he  will  see  two
green    images    without    any    hesitation.     This    seems    to   prove,

Çgestive    Therapeutics.  49

that,  unknown  to  the  subject,  the  image  given  by  the  left  eye  i  i
green,  and  that  the  achromatopsia  is  purely  psychical.  If  I
hold  the  prism  before  the  achromatopic  eye  and  make  the
patient  look  at  the  card  again,  instead  of  seeing  a  gray  card
(image  given  by  the  achromatopic  eye),  and  a  green  card  (image
given  by  the  normal  eye),  he  sees  both  images  gray.

Why  is  this?  Because  he  knows  that  the  left  eye  sees  objects
gray  (or  at  least  he  believes  so),  because  he  is  aware  that  the
prism  causes  double  vision,  because  he  does  not  know  that  one
of  the  images  is  furnished  by  the  other  eye  and  thinks  that  the
prism  placed  before  one  eye  doubles  the  object  seen  by  that
'eye  :  because,  logically  and  unconsciously,  he  thus  suggests  to
himself  that  as  the  achromatopic  eye  sees  things  gray,  and  as
the  object  looked  at  is  doubled  by  the  prism,  both  images  ought
to  be  gray.

In  a  third  hysterical  case  in  my  service,  I  have  been  able  to
confirm  my  interpretation,  and  to  conclude  that  the  whole  phe-
nomenon is  subordinate  to  the  imagination.  The  patient's  left
eye  was  achromatopic.  A  red  object  appeared  gray  to  this  eye,
while  to  the  right  eye,  it  retained  its  red  color.

I  made  her  look  through  the  prism  with  both  eyes  open.  She
saw  the  object  double.  I  closed  the  left  achromatopic  eye  and
made  her  look  through  the  prism  with  the  right  eye.  She  saw  a
single  red  object,  which  is  exact,  and  agrees  with  optical  laws.

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  right  eye  was  closed  and  a  red  or
green  object  placed  before  the  left  achromatopic  eye,  she  saw  it
gray.  If  I  then  put  a  prism  before  the  eye,  instead  of  seeing  a
single  gray  object,  she  saw  it  doubled  and  in  its  own  color.

The  prism  had  re-established  the  true  color  in  spite  of  all  laws
of  physics  and  physiology.  It  had  effaced  the  illusion  by  hin-
dering the  play  of  the  diseased  imagination.  It  is,  then,  solely
a  question  of  phenomena  of  unconscious  auto-suggestion.

I  have,  then,  demonstrated  that  suggestive  and  hysterical
amaurosis  and  achromatopsia  do  not  exist  as  so  many  organic
material  troubles.  The  phenomena  are  due  to  a  mind  illusion.
The  blindness  of  hysterical  patients  is  a  psychical  blindness.

In  my  opinion,  neuro-pathologists  have  wrongly  given  the
name  of  psychical  blindness,  mind-blindness  {seelen  blindheit  of
the  Germans),  to  the  trouble  constituted  by  the  preservation  of
sight  with  loss  of  visual  memory.  The  patient  sees,  but  he  nc
longer  knows  what  he  sees.  He  has  lost  the  memory  of  what
4

^o  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

the  objects  seen  signify.  I  propose  to  give  this  trouble  the
name  of  visual  amnesia,  and  to  reserve  the  name  psychical
blindness  for  the  blindness  which  I  have  just  described.  Psy-
chical blindness  is  the  blindness  which  comes  through  imagina-
tion. It  is  due  to  the  destruction  of  the  image  by  a  psychical
agency.

I  add,  further,  that  in  all  my  hysterical  cases,  the  symptoms
of  psychical  amblyopia  and  achromatopsia  disappear  almost  in-
stantly upon  hypnotic  suggestion.

To  conclude  ;  hysterical  and  suggestive  amaurosis  have  no  an-
atomical localization.  Their  seat  is  not  in  the  retina,  nor  in
the  optic  nerve,  nor  in  the  cortical  centre  for  vision.  They  are
real,  but  exist  only  in  the  patient's  imagination.

It  is  doubtless  the  same  in  regard  to  the  other  suggestive  anaes-
thesias. This  is  easily  shown  in  the  case  of  deafness.  I  say  to
a  somnambulist  who  has  been  hypnotized,  "  When  you  wake
you  will  not  see  me  ;  you  will  not  hear  me  ;  you  will  be  deaf  and
blind."  I  wake  him;  I  speak  to  him,  and  whisper  in  his  ear.
He  does  not  show  any  signs  of  understanding  ;  his  face  remains
inert.  If  I  then  say  to  him  decidedly,  perhaps  once  or  several
times,  "  You  again  hear,"  his  face  shows  great  astonishment  ;  he
hears  and  answers  me.  It  is  in  vain  that  I  say,  "  You  must  have
heard  me  all  the  time,  since  your  pretended  deafness  vanished
when  I  assured  you  that  you  again  heard  me."  He  is  convinced
that  he  has  heard  nothing,  and  does  not  know  how  his  hearing
came  back.  I  repeat  the  experiment,  each  time  with  the  same
result.  A  person  who- is  really  simulating  does  not  allow  himself
to  be  played  with,  with  so  much  ingenuousness  ;  the  patient
deaf  by  suggestion  hears,  as  the  patient  who  is  blind  by  sugges-
tion sees,  but  each  instant  he  neutralizes  the  impression  per-
ceived by  his  imagination,  and  makes  himself  believe  that  he  has
not  heard.

I  shall  speak  of  another  variety  of  hallucinations  in  Chapter
IX.,  which  I  shall  call  retroactive  hallucinations,  and  I  shall  lay
particular  stress  upon  this  important  question.

Sensorial  and  hallucinatory  illusions,  like  suggestions  of  acts
may  be  ordered  to  be  carried  out  after  a  long  interval  of  time.

In  Mme.  G 's  case,  of  which  I  have  spoken,  I  suggested  that

in  five  days,  at  the  time  of  the  visit,  she  would  have  a  headache,
which  occurred.  On  another  occasion,  I  said  to  her,  "  Next
Thursday  night  "  (six  days)  "you  will  seethe  nurse  approach  your

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  51

bed.  and  she  will  upset  a  pail  of  water  over  your  feet."  The  fol-
lowing Friday,  at  the  time  of  the  visit,  she  complained  bitterly
that  the  nurse  had  thrown  water  over  her  legs  in  the  night.  I
called  the  nurse,  who  naturally  denied  it.  The  sister  knew  noth-
ing about  it.  I  said  to  the  patient,  "  It  is  only  a  dream  ;  Marie
has  done  nothing  to  you.  You  know  very  well  that  I  give  you
dreams."  She  asserted  that  it  was  not  a  dream,  but  that  she  had
seen  with  her  eyes,  that  she  had  felt  the  water,  that  she  had  been
wet.

In  some  cases,  suggestive  phenomena  are  obtained  at  the  end
of  a  still  longer  interval.     The  following  are  two  examples.

On    Saturday,   December  22,    1883,  after    hypnotizing    Mme.

G ,  I   suggested,  "Three   weeks  from  the  coming  Tuesday  "

(twenty-five  days),  "when  I  pass  your  bed  on  my  morning
rounds,  you  will  see  my  colleague,  M.  V.  P.,  with  me.  He  will
ask  you  how  you  are.  You  will  give  him  the  details  of  your
sickness,  and  you  will  converse  with  him  upon  topics  which
interest  you."  When  she  woke,  she  remembered  nothing.
I  never  made  the  slightest  allusion  to  this  suggestion  before
her,  and  I  had  not  told  any  of  my  pupils  of  it.  During
the  interval  she  was  hypnotized  several  times.  Other  sugges-
tions were  given.  Her  photograph  was  taken  in  different  hyp-
notic attitudes.  Tuesday,  January  15,  during  my  rounds,  I
stopped  as  usual,  in  a  casual  manner,  at  her  bed.  She  looked  to
her  left  and  bowed  respectfully.  "  Ah,  M.  V.  P."  In  a  few  min-
utes she  replied,  to  an  imaginary  question,  "  I  am  much  better;
I  have  no  more  pain  ;  unfortunately,  my  knee  is  still  dislocated,
and  I  cannot  walk  without  support."  She  listened  to  another
question  from  the  imaginary  speaker,  then  replied,  "  Thank  you
very  much;  you  know  that  I  nursed  the  children  of  M.  B.,  the
Mayor's  assistant,  your  colleague.  If  you  could  speak  to  him  of
me,  he  might  help  in  getting  me  into  an  hospital  for  the  infirm."
She  listened  again,  then  thanking  him,  bowed,  and  followed  the
image  of  my  colleague  to  the  door,  with  her  eyes.  I  said,  "  Did
you  know  that  M.  V.  P.  would  come  to  see  you  to-day?"
•'  No,"  she  said.  She  assured  me  that  she  had  had  no  idea,  no
presentiment  of  this  visit.  This,  then,  is  a  complex  hallucina-
tion realized  twenty-three  days  after  suggestion.

I  will  relate  the  case  of  an  old  sergeant,  S ,  a  somnambu-
list, to  whom  I  said,  during  his  sleep,  in  August,  18S3,  "What
day  in  the  first  week  in  October  shall  you  be  free  ?  "     He  replied

52  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

"  Wednesday."  "  Well,  then,  listen  carefully  :  the  first  Wednesday
in  October,  you  will  go  to  Dr.  Liébault  "  (who  sent  me  this  case)
"  and  you  will  there  see  the  President  of  the  Republic,  who  will
give  you  a  medal  and  a  pension."  "  I  will  go,"  he  answered.  I
did  not  speak  to  him  of  it  again.  Upon  waking  he  remem-
bered nothing.  I  saw  him  several  times  in  the  interval,  and
gave  him  other  suggestions,  but  never  recalled  the  first  to  his
memory.  On  October  3d  (sixty-three  days  after  the  sugges-
tion),  I   received  the  following  letter    from  Dr.  Liébault  :  "  The

somnambulist,   S ,  came  here  to-day  at  ten  minutes  of  one.

He  greeted   M.    F ,  who  met  him  as  he  came  in,  and  then

went  toward  the  left  side  of  my  library  without  paying  atten-
tion to  any  one,  and  I  saw  him  bow  respectfully,  and  heard
him  speak  the  word  '  Excellence.'  As  he  spoke  quite  low,  I
went  near  him  immediately.  Just  then  he  held  out  his  right
hand,  and  said,  'Thank  your  Excellence.'  Then  I  asked  him  to
whom  he  was  speaking.  '  Why,  to  the  President  of  the  Republic,'
he  said.  I  noticed  there  was  no  one  near  him.  Finally,  he
turned  away,  bowed,  and  came  toward  M.  F.  A  few  moments
after  his  departure,  the  witnesses  of  this  strange  scene  naturally
asked  me  about  this  fool, — as  they  thought  him.  My  reply  was
that  he  was  no  fool,  but  was  as  reasonable  as  they  or  I.  An-
other was  acting  through  him."

I   add    that    when   I  saw  S again,    several  days  later,  he

assured  me  that  the  idea  of  going  to  M.  Liébault  had  come  to
him  suddenly  on  October  3d,  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  ;
that  he  did  not  know  on  the  preceding  days  that  he  had  to  go,
and  that  he  had  no  idea  of  the  meeting  which  had  taken
place.

However  singular,  however  inexplicable,  may  be  these  sug-
gestive phenomena,  which  are  realized  after  a  long  interval  at  a
moment  assigned  in  advance,  and  which  are  elaborated,  or
thought  out  by  the  mind,  unknown  to  the  subject  himself,  I
do  not  hesitate  to  relate  them.  I  should  have  hesitated  in
the  presence  of  one  isolated  fact,  but  I  have  reproduced  them
so  many  times  in  different  somnambulists,  that  I  have  not  the
least  doubt  of  their  reality.  The  interpretation  of  them  belongs
to  the  domain  of  psychology.  I  shall  attempt  it  in  a  subse-
quent  chapter.

CHAPTER  III.

Observations  on  different  types  of  somnambulism. — Double  personality  in  certain
somnambulists. — Spontaneous  dreams  with  or  without  preservation  of  the  sense
of  reality.

We  have  seen  that  the  majority  of  people  may.  to  some
extent,  be  influenced  by  hypnotism,  but  that  all  cannot  be  put
into  deep  sleep  or  somnambulism.  In  a  report  given  me  by  M.
Licbault  prepared  from  a  list  of  2554  subjects  whom  he  hypno-
tized, there  were  385  somnambulists,  that  is  15.19  per  cent,  or
one  in  6.58.  Some  examples  of  induced  somnambulism  are  here
appended.

Observation  1. — M.  S ,  age,  40,  pasteboard  maker  ("the  thera-
peutical observation  upon  whose  case  I  shall  give  later),  is  a  small,
well-built  man  of  mixed  temperament,  dull  intelligence  and  slight  cul-
tivation, but  well-balanced  and  without  any  nervous  history,  and  who,
about  a  year  after  a  fracture  of  the  vertebral  column  which  was  followed
by  cerebral  disturbance,  had  paresis  of  the  lower  limbs  and  epilepti-
form attacks  of  which  he  was  cured  a  few  months  ago.  (Sept.  1883.)
ob.  3  l.

For  several  weeks,  I  was  only  able  to  induce  the  third  degree  of
hypnotism.  Then  he  fell  into  a  deep  sleep.  I  can  now  put  him  to
sleep  in  a  second  by  a  mere  command.  I  command  him  to  sleep
deeply  and  he  remains  motionless  in  the  position  in  which  I  place  him.
In  the  first  séances  he  awoke  spontaneously.  At  the  present  time,  he
keeps  on  sleeping  indefinitely  if  I  do  not  wake  him.  Once,  I  let  him
sleep  for  sixteen  consecutive  hours.  I  can  put  him  into  a  complete  or
partial  cataleptic  condition  by  suggestion,  and  can  keep  his  arms  and
legs  up-raised  as  long  as  I  wish,  perfectly  rigid  and  without  fatigue.  I
can  induce  trismus  or  the  forced  separation  of  the  jaw;-.  I  can  keep
the  head  bent  over  on  the  chest  or  inclined  to  one  side  in  an  irres
ble  contracture.

He  answers  all  questions  quickly,  but  like  my  other  somnambulistic
cases,  shows  no  mental  lucidity,  not  even  the  intellectual  exaltation
which  is  noticeable  in  some  instances.

At  my  command  he  gets  up,  walks  about  the  room,  goes  back  to
his  chair  or  bed  with  his  eyes    shut,  groping    in    the    darkness.     I   tell

53

54  Suggest  he     Therapeutics.

him  that  he  cannot  walk  any  further  and  he  remains  as  if  nailed  to  the
spot.  I  tell  him  that  he  can  only  walk  backwards,  and  though  he
makes  efforts  to  advance,  he  walks  backwards.

Sensibility  is  totally  destroyed.  A  pin  may  be  drawn  over  his  skin
without  causing  the  slightest  reaction.  His  nostrils  and  the  back  part
of  his  throat  may  be  tickled,  his  conjunctiva  may  be  touched  and  even
electricity  may  be  applied,  but  he  does  not  react.

I  can  induce  illusions  of  the  senses.  I  make  him  drink  water  for
wine  and  swallow  salt  for  sugar.  He  sucks  the  salt  and  thinks  it  very
sweet.  This  sensorial  suggestion,  however,  does  not  always  succeed
perfectly.  Sometimes  he  thinks  the  salt  is  a  little  salty  as  well  as
sweet.

I  suggest  acts  to  him.  He  dances,  doubles  up  his  fist,  and  at  my
command,  searches  the  pockets  of  a  person  whom  I  point  out,  takes  out
what  he  finds,  hides  it  in  his  bed  and  half  an  hour  afterwards,  still  acting
as  I  order  him,  looks  for  it  again  and  replaces  it,  making  excuses  to  the
person  robbed.

He  accepts  all  the  illusions  and  hallucinations  which  I  suggest,
whether  they  are  to  be  realized  immediately  during  his  sleep  or  after
waking  up.  Several  post-hypnotic  actions  and  hallucinations  relating  to
his  case  have  already  been  mentioned.  I  tell  him  his  forehead  itches,
and  he  lifts  his  hand  to  scratch  it.

I  can  make  him  see  a  cat  jump  up  on  his  lap.  He  pets  it  and
imagines  that  it  scratches  him,  etc.

I  wake  him  instantly  by  saying,  "  It  is  over."  Sometimes  he  has  no
recollection  of  what  he  has  done,  said,  and  heard  during  the  sleep.
This  is  particularly  the  case,  when  I  have  said  to  him  in  sleep,  "  When
you  wake  you  will  remember  absolutely  nothing."  On  the  other  hand
when  I  have  not  taken  the  precaution  of  saying  this  to  him  he  remem-
bers everything  he  has  done  ;  he  has  swallowed  sugar  (it  was  salt),  he
has  been  walking,  etc.  One  day,  I  made  him  dance  with  an  imaginary
partner,  and  drink  imaginary  beer;  then  I  made  him  see  the  nurse  on
duty.  The  next  day,  the  nurse  told  me  that  the  patient  was  irrational,
that  he  was  telling  everyone  he  had  been  to  a  ball  the  evening  before,
that  I  had  offered  him  supper,  and  that  he  had  met  the  nurse.  The
dream  suggested  in  his  sleep  had  been  realized  so  vividly  in  his  imagi-
nation, that  upon  waking,  the  recollection  of  it  forced  itself  upon  his
mind  as  a  reality.

Finally  this  subject  is  remarkable  because  of  the  facility  with  which
the  most  diverse  suggestions  may  be  developed  in  the  waking  condition.
We  shall  soon  return  to  this  most  interesting  part  of  his  case.

Observation  2. — The  second  somnambulist  whose  history  I  wish  to
trace  briefly,  is  a  photographer,  forty-four  years  of  age,  a  native  of
Bordeaux  and  sent  to  me  b)r  M.  Liébault.

Sugges til r    TJicrapcu tics .

He  is  thin,  has  a  pained  expression,  protruding  eyes,  and  appears  to
be  in  a  precarious  condition.  He  lias  three  children,  aged  respectively.
eighteen,  nineteen,  and  twenty-one  years,  and  lives  apart  from  his  wife
on  account  of  domestic  unhappiness  into  which  I  did  not  care  to
inquire.

He  has  had  no  previous  illness,  and  there  is  no  venereal  history.
He  says,  that  when  he  got  up  one  morning,  about  ten  years  ago,  he
suddenly  became  aware  of  a  peculiarity  in  his  gait,  characterized  by
a  tendency  to  propulsion  or  impulsion  forward.  The  phenomenon
became  progressively  more  marked.  For  five  years  he  has  walked
irregularly,  like  a  drunken  man,  stumbling  to  the  right  and  left,  so  that
the  police  have  stopped  him  several  times  in  the  belief  that  he  was  drunk.

C is  however  sober,  and  has  committed  no  alcoholic  excess.     When

_  tes  down-stairs,  or  when  the  weather  is  cold,  the  tendency  to  run
forward,  the  irresistible  propulsion,  suddenly  increases.  He  takes  sev-
eral hasty  steps  and  then  stops  himself  by  swaying  about.  He  has
never  had  pains  in  his  head,  nor  attacks  of  vomiting  ;  but  two  years  ago,
and  again  about  the  first  of  last  April,  he  suffered  from  vertigo,  which
came  upon  him  like  a  thunderbolt,  while  he  was  walking,  or  when  he
got  up.  *•  It  is  like  a  feeling  of  intoxication,"  he  says,  "which  only
lasts  a  moment,  about  a  quarter  of  a  second."  Since  then
this  sensation  of  vertigo  has  disappeared  rapidly  in  consequence  of
hypnotic  suggestion.  It  also  occasionally  happens,  especially  in  the
evening,  in  a  very  brilliant  light,  that  he  is  seized  with  diplopia,  which
lasts  only  an  instant.  He  has  passed  water  involuntarily  five  or  six
times   in   ten  years.     The  last  time  was  early  in  March.

He  has  never  had  seizures  of  any  kind,  and  has  never  lost  conscious-
ness. Tactile  and  special  sensibility  are  normal.  The  muscular  force
is  preserved  and  the  tendon  reflexes  are  normal.  The  appetite,  diges-
tion, and  other  functions  are  not  disturbed.

The  intelligence  is  clear  and  memory  good.  C answers  all  ques-
tions clearly.  He  is  naturally  docile  in  disposition  ;  his  character  is
quiet  and  gentle,  and  he  is  simple  and  reserved  in  behavior.  1  believe
that  he  has  a  tumor  of  the  cerebellum.

C says  that  he  has  never  been  nervous.     He  sleeps  well  at  night,

remembers  every  act  of  his  life  and  does  not  now  seem  to  be  subject  to
attacks  of  spontaneous  somnambulism.  Three  years  ago,  however,  he-
was  in  this  condition  on  several  different  nights.  This  he  proved  by  the
fact  that  the  next  day  he  found  his  work  finished  without  being  able  to
remember  having  done  it.  Since  then  he  has  had  nothing  more  of  the
kind.

He    came    to    my  chef  de  clinique,  on    March    20,  after   having  been

56  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

hypnotized  many  times  by  M.  Lie'bault.  I  had  only  to  put  my  two  fin-
gers before  his  eyes  ;  in  a  few  seconds  he  began  to  wink,  his  eyes  closed,
and  he  was  hypnotized.

I  lift  his  arms  ;  he  is  in  a  condition  of  suggestive  catalepsy.  He  is
almost  completely  insensible,  or  becomes  so  if  I  assure  him  of  the  fact.
He  is  pricked  with  a  pin  and  does  not  react.  I  put  him  on  the  stool  of
an  electric  machine,  and  draw  sparks  from  his  body  ;  he  shows  some
reflex  fibrillary  contractions,  but  no  pain.  The  nape  of  the  neck  and
back  of  the  head  alone  remain  sensible.  He  admits  that  there  is  a
painful  sensation  when  the  sparks  are  elicited  from  this  region,  and
upon  waking  remembers  that  he  felt  some  pain  there.

In  this  somnambulistic  state  C is  an  accomplished  automaton,

obeying  every  suggestion  and  susceptible  to  all  sensory  or  hallucinatory
illusions.

I  put  him  into  complete  or  partial  catalepsy.  I  paralyze  one  of  his
arms  at  will,  and  it  falls  motionless  ;  or  a  leg,  and  he  drags  it  as  a  hémi-
plégie patient  would.  I  can  induce  movements  by  imitation.  It  suf-
fices for  me  to  stand  before  him,  and  rotate  one  arm  about  the  other,
clap  my  hands  together,  or  separate  them,  put  my  fingers  to  my  nose,
or  make  any  movement  whatever  with  my  legs,  and  he  immediately
imitates  automatically  every  movement  he  sees,  for  he  can  open  his  eyes
wide  at  the  same  time  that  he  exhibits  all  these  phenomena.

When  I  draw  back  from  him  and  stretch  out  my  hand,  he  follows  me
passively.  He  stops  at  my  order.  I  suggest  that  he  is  fixed  to  the
spot  and  cannot  take  another  step,  and  he  has  to  be  pushed  quite  hard
in  order  to  be  moved.  1  draw  a  line  on  the  floor  and  tell  him  that  he
cannot  pass  it,  and  he  struggles  in  vain  to  do  so.  I  tell  him  that  he
cannot  go  forward  any  more,  but  only  backward.  He  tries  to  advance,
but  can  only  move  back.

Illusions  can  be  induced  instantaneously  ;  I  can  produce  uni- or  bilat-
eral blindness;  he  may  be  made  to  see  with  only  one  eye.  A  pin  or  a
light  held  close  to  the  other  eye  does  not  make  him  wink.  It  is  a
psychical  or  cerebral  blindness  ;  the  pupil  of  the  eye  is  not  influenced
by  the  suggestion;  a  light  makes  it  contract,  a  suggestion  of  darkness
does  not  make  it  dilate.

I  can  produce  the  various  hallucinations  of  sight.  I  send  him  to  sit
in  a  chair  where  he  finds  an  imaginary  poodle  ;  he  touches  it,  is  afraid
it  will  bite  him,  and  draws  his  hand  away  quickly.  I  make  him  pet  a
kitten.  I  evoke  visions  of  people  whom  he  has  known.  I  show  him
his  son,  whom  he  has  not  seen  for  eight  years.  He  recognizes  him,  and
remains  in  a  trance,  his  eyes  fixed,  a  prey  to  the  most  lively  emotions  ;
tears  flow  from  his  eyes.

There   are  also  distinct  illusions   of  taste.     I   make   him   swallow  a

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  57

quantity  of   salt    for   sugar,    and  he  finds  it  very    sweet.     I  smear  his
jue  with  sulphate  of   quinine,  telling  him  that  it  is  very  sweet  ;  but

just  before  waking  him  up,  I  take  care  to  assure  him  that  the  sweet
taste  will  remain  in  his  mouth.  When  he  wakes,  he  perceives  this
taste.  I  put  a  pencil  into  his  mouth,  saying  it  is  a  cigar.  He  blows  out
puffs  of  imaginai}-  smoke,  and  when  I  put  the  lighted  end  into  his
mouth,  he  feels  it  burn.  I  suggest  that  the  cigar  is  too  strong,  and  that
he  will  feel  badly.  He  is  seized  with  coughing,  is  nauseated,  spits,
grows  pale,  and  feels  dizzy.  I  make  him  swallow  a  glass  of  water,  pre-
tending it  is  champagne.  He  thinks  it  is  strong.  If  I  make  him  take
several  glasses,  he  is  drunk,  and  reels  about.  When  I  say,  "  Drunk-
enness brings  gayety  with  it,''  he  sings,  and  hiccoughs  and  laughs  in  a
silly  way.  If  I  say  "  Drunkenness  brings  sadness  with  it,"  he  weeps  and
laments.  I  make  him  sober  again  by  holding  imaginary  ammonia
under  his  nose  ;  he  draws  back,  contracting  his  nostrils  and  shutting  his
eyes  as  if  suffocated  by  the  odor.  I  make  him  sneeze  several  times
successively  by  means  of  an  imaginary  pinch  of  snuff.  All  these  sen-
sations follow  one  after  the  other,  rapidly  and  almost  instantaneously.
His  brain  accepts  and  perceives  as  soon  as  I  express  them.  I  can
make  him  stutter.  He  cannot  speak  without  stuttering.  I  send  him  to
write  my  name  on  the  board,  suggesting  that  he  can  no  longer  write  the
consonants,  he  writes  e-e  ;  then  that  he  cannot  write  the  vowels,  he
writes  b-r-n-m,  etc.

In  short,  he  carries  out  everything  according  to  my  command.  I
make  him  steal  a  watch  out  of  some  one's  vest  pocket.  I  make  him
follow  me  in  order  to  sell  it,  and  I  take  him  to  the  Hospital  Pharmacy,
an  imaginary  pawn-shop.  He  sells  it  at  the  price  offered,  and  follows
me  with  all  the  appearance  of  a  thief.  On  the  way,  I  make  him  double
up  his  fist  at  the  nurse,  and  put  his  fingers  up  to  his  nose  when  he
meets  one  of  the  sisters.  He  does  all  these  things  without  any  hesita-
tion.

I  provoked  a  truly  dramatic  scene  one  day,  as  I  was  anxious  to  see
just  how  far  the  power  of  suggestion  went  with  him.  I  showed  him  an
imaginary  person  at  the  door  and  told  him  that  he  had  been  insulted  by
him.  I  gave  him  an  imaginary  dagger  (a  paper-cutter)  and  ordered  him
to  kill  the  man.  He  hastened  forward  and  ran  the  dagger  resolutely
into  the  door,  and  then  stood  staring  with  haggard  eyes  and  trembling
all  over.  "  What  have  you  done,  unhappy  man  ?  "  I  said.  "  He  is  dead,
he  is  bleeding,  the  police  are  coming."  He  stood  terrified.  He  was
led  before  an  imaginary  magistrate  (my  interne).  "Why  did  you  mur-
der this  man  ?  "  "He  insulted  me."  "We  do  not  kill  the  man  who
insults  us.  You  must  be  complained  of  to  the  police.  Did  any  one  tell
vou  to  kill   him?"     He  answers,  "M.  Bernheim  did."     I  say  to  him,

53  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

"You  are  to  be  taken  before  the  justice.  You  killed  this  man.  I  said
nothing  to  you,  you  acted  as  your  own  master."

He  was  taken  before  my  chef  de  clinique,  who  played  the  part  of  magis-
trate. "Why  did  you  kill  this  man?"  "He  insulted  me."  "That  is
curious;  one  does  not  answer  an  insult  by  a  dagger  thrust.  Were  you
in  full  possession  of  your  faculties  ?  They  say  that  your  mind  is  some-
times affected."  "No,  sir."  "They  say  you  are  subject  to  attacks  of
somnambulism.  Perhaps  you  had  to  obey  some  strange  impulse  under
the  influence  of  some  one  who  could  have  forced  you  to  act  ?  '
"  No,  sir,  I  acted  from  my  own  impulse  because  he  insulted  me."
"Think,  sir;  it  is  a  question  of  your  life.  Speak  frankly  in  your  own
interest.  How  is  it  ?  Before  the  magistrate,  you  stated  that  the  idea
of  killing  this  man  was  suggested  to  you  by  M.  Bernheim."  "No,  sir,
I  acted  entirely  upon  my  own  free  will."  "You  know  M.  Bernheim
well,  you  go  to  him  at  the  hospital  to  be  hypnotized."  "  I  only  know
M.  Bernheim,  because  I  go  to  the  hospital  for  treatment  and  he  gives
me  electricity  to  cure  my  nervous  trouble,  but  aside  from  this,  I  do  not
know  him.  I  cannot  tell  you  that  he  told  me  to  kill  this  man  because
he  has  not  told  me  anything."  And  the  magistrate  could  not  get  the
truth  from  him,  because  for  him  the  truth  was  my  last  suggestion, — that
he  acted  of  his  own  free  will.  The  significance  of  this  experiment
deserves  thorough  consideration  from  a  psychological  and  medico-legal
point  of  view.

When  he  awakened,  or  returned  to  his  normal  condition,  C be-
lieved that  he  had  been  sleeping  quietly  in  his  chair,  and  had  no  remem-
brance of  the  drama  in  which  he  played  the  chief  part.  The  terrible
emotions  which  had  seized  him  and  the  violent  scenes  called  up  before
him,  had  left  no  imprint  on  his  mind.  He  had  been  led  about  for
hours  in  a  somnambulistic  condition,  with  his  eyes  open.  He  had  been
forced  to  do  the  strangest  acts,  and  had  done  them  resolutely.  Finally,
he  had  been  led  back  to  the  place  where  he  had  been  transformed  into
a  somnambulist,  and  his  true  nature  was  restored  to  him.  He  remem-
bered absolutely  nothing  of  what  had  occurred  in  this  automatic  second
life,  which  had  been  forced  upon  him  by  the  will  of  another.

C is  also  a  remarkable  case  on  account  of  the  facility  with  which

hallucinations  or  post-hypnotic  acts  can  be  induced.  Before  he  is  act-
ually asleep  I  suggest  that  when  he  wakes,  he  will  see  his  portrait  on
the  black-board.  I  do  not  wake  him  until  an  hour  has  passed,  then  he
sees  the  portrait  and  thinks  it  a  very  good  likeness.  I  suggest  that  he
will  see  a  big  dog  in  each  bed,  and  he  is  astonished  at  such  a  singular
state  of  affairs.  I  suggest  negative  hallucinations  ;  that  upon  waking
for  instance,  he  will  not  be  able  to  see,  hear,  or  feel  any  one  but  me.
that  everyone  will  have  gone  away  and  that  I  alone  shall  be  with  him

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  59

when  he  wakes  up.  The  assistants  speak  to  him,  touch  him,  give  him
his  hat  and  cane,  but  he  sees  no  one  and  answers  no  one.  My  honor-
able colleague,  M.  Victor  Parisot,  stops  up  his  ears  while  I  am  talking
to  him,  but  he  still  hears  and  answers  me.  Of  course,  if  I  spoke  in  too
low  a  voice,  the  mechanical  obstruction  of  the  ear  would  prevent  his
hearing.  I  take  leave  of  him  and  one  of  my  pupils  brings  him  his  hat.
He  appears  not  to  see  it,  and  does  not  take  it,  but  goes  to  get  it  where
he  placed  it.  When  I  hold  his  hat,  he  takes  it  immediately  and  thanks
me.  The  assistants  make  a  circle  around  him  just  as  he  starts  to  go
out.  He  walks  directly  against  one  of  them,  and  stops  before  the
obstacle  without  seeming  to  try  to  explain  it.  Some  one  stands  in
front  of  the  door  by  which  he  is  going  out.  He  looks  in  vain  for  the
knob  and  not  finding  it,  thinks  he  has  made  a  mistake,  and  goes  to
another  door.  Finally,  we  let  him  out.  As  soon  as.  he  is  out  of  the
room,  he  sees  and  recognizes  everyone  he  meets.

In  an  interesting  article  published  in  the  Revue  Philosophique,
in  March,  1883,  M.  Charles  Richet  relates  his  observations  upon
somnambulistic  cases,  in  which  he  has  caused  the  patient  to  lose
his  feeling  of  personality  by  transferring  it  into  another.

In  C 's  case,  nothing  is  easier  than  to  induce  illusions  relative  to

his  personality.  I  say  to  him,  "You  are  six  years  old.  You  are  a
child.  Go  and  play  with  the  boys."  He  gets  up,  jumps  about,  makes
a  gesture  as  if  taking  marbles  out  of  his  pocket,  arranges  them  prop-
erly, measures  the  distance  with  his  hand,  aims  carefully,  and  runs  to
place  them  in  order  again.  He  keeps  up  his  play  indefinitely,  with  sur-
prising activity,  attention,  and  precision  of  detail.  In  the  same  way,  he
plays  tag,  and  leap-frog,  making  jump  after  jump  over  one  or  two  imag-
inary playfellows,  increasing  the  distance  each  time,  and  with  an  ease
which  in  the  waking  condition,  would  not  be  possible,  because  of  his
malady.

I  say  :  "You  are  a  young  girl."  He  drops  his  head  in  a  modest  way,
opens  a  drawer,  takes  out  a  piece  of  cloth  and  pretends  to  sew.  Then  he
sits  down  in  front  of  a  table  and  begins  to  tap  on  it,  as  if  he  were  play-
ing the  piano.

I  say  :  "  You  are  a  general  at  the  head  of  your  army."  He  holds  him-
self erect,  and  cries  out  :  "  Forward  !  "  balancing  his  body  as  if  he  were
on  horseback.

I  say  :  "You  are  a  good  and  holy  priest."  He  puts  on  a  pious
expression,  walks  to  and  fro  reading  his  breviary,  and  makes  the  sign  of
the  cross,  as  seriously  as  if  it  wrere  all  reality.

I  can  transfer  him  into  an  animal,  by  saying  :  "  You  are  a  dog."     He

6o  Suppestive   Therapeutics.

"&&

gets  down  on  all  fours,  barks,  pretends  to  bite,  and  does  not  change  his
position,  until  I  restore  his  own  personality,  or  that  of  some  one  else,  to
him.

In  all  the  alterations  of  personality,  which  are  induced  by  suggestion,
in  many  cases  of  somnambulism,  the  subject's  own  character  is  mani-
fested. Each  one  plays  his  part  with  the  qualities  which  are  part  of  his
personality,  and  with  the  aptitudes  which  belong  to  him.

C is  naturally  timid,  and   a  poor    talker.     He    speaks   but    little

when  acting  the  part  suggested  to  him.  When  a  personality  beyond  his
power  is  suggested,  he  tries  in  vain  to  carry  it  out.  On  one  occasion,  I
said  to  him  :  "  You  are  a  lawyer,  you  speak  easily  and  fluently.
The  accused  is  before  you  ;  defend  him.  You  are  in  court."  He  rises
and  begins  :  "  The  accused  man  whom  I  am  to  defend — "  The  rest
does  not  come  ;  he  hesitates,  and  stops  thoroughly  confused  ;  he  hangs
his  head,  and  drops  off  to  sleep  again,  as  if  exhausted  by  the  impossible
task  set  him.

Moreover,  I  have  never  seen  the  intellectual  faculties  exalted
to  an  extraordinary  degree,  or  new  aptitudes  suddenly  created,  by
hypnotic  suggestion,  in  any  of  my  subjects,  which  is  claimed  by
some  to  be  the  case.  Doubtless,  the  concentration  of  the  mind
upon  the  suggested  idea,  may  increase  the  natural  sagacity,  and
develop  a  clairvoyance,  limited  to  the  sphere  of  the  idea  pro-
voked, which  may  be  greater  than  in  the  waking  condition  ;  but,
up  to  the  present  time,  I  have  never  observed  an  intellectual
phenomenon  exceeding  the  normal  in  degree.  I  have  not  been
able  to  make  lawyers  or  preachers  out  of  subjects  not  naturally
endowed  with  the  gift  of  eloquence.

I  repeat  the  fact,  that  every  somnambulist  has  his  own  indi-
viduality. Though  an  automaton,  directed  by  a  foreign  will,  he
acts  with  his  own  machinery,  and  answers  questions  according  to
his  own  understanding.

Observation  3. — G ,  a  laundress,  fifty-four  years  old,  has  loco-
motor-ataxia, with  arthropathy  of  the  left  knee.  She  has  attended  our
clinic  since  August,  1883.  She  is  an  excellent  somnambulist,  readily
susceptible  to  suggestion,  both  in  the  waking  and  sleeping  conditions.
By  simple  affirmation,  anaesthesia,  paralysis,  blindness,  deafness,  and
complex  hallucinations  may  be  induced.  Since  the  first  trial  of  hyp-
notism in  her  case,  there  has  been  deep  sleep,  and  the  realization  of  all
the  hallucinations  suggested.  She  has  never  had  attacks  of  spon-
taneous somnambulism,  crises  of  hysteria,  nor  any  other  nervous  affec-
tions, except  the  lightning  pains,  and  gastric  disturbances  caused  by
her  tabetic  trouble.

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  61

She  understands  any  act  which  may  be  suggested,  mimicks  most
expressively,  and  with  astonishing  correctness,  and,  like  a  true  artist,
identifies  herself  with  the  role  forced  upon  her  imagination.

The  following  is  an  instance  of  one  of  the  hypnotic  se'ances  (April
14.  1886),  the  details  of  which  were  taken  down  in  short  hand.

"  1  am  going  to  count  up  to  six;  when  I  count  four,  your  eyes  will
close,  and  you  will  fall  asleep/'  I  count  without  looking  at  her.  When
I  say  four  her  eyes  close,  and  she  yawns  and  stretches  several  times.
She  is  ana-sthetic,  and  remains  in  suggestive  catalepsy,  retaining  the
rotatory  movements  communicated  to  her  arms,  etc.

"  Well,"  I  say,  "  here  you  are,  as  bright  and  gay  as  possible.  When
is  your  fète-day  ?  "

"  The  15th  of  August."

"To-day,  the   15th   of  August,  your  fete-day!"

"Why,  I  did  not  know  that  it  was  to-day  !  "

"But  you  know  very  well   that  yesterday  was  the   14th."

"The  time  has  gone  very  fast."

"  See,  it  is  fine  weather;  the  sun  is  shining  and  the  birds  are  twitter-
ing; you  can  smell  the  shrubs  in  bloom."

"  Ah,  yes  !  "

"  Since  it  is  your  fête-day,  perhaps  you  will  drink  some  champagne.
Here  !  " — She  takes  the  imaginary  glass  and  drinks,  making  all  the
movements  of  swallowing.

"  It  is  very  fiery,"  she  says.

"  You  are  lively  after  that  !  "

"Lively!  Ah,  yes  !  Ha,  ha,  ha  !  What  am  I  doing!  So  small  a
glass  to  go  to  my  head  !  " — She  laughs  and  sings  an  air,  and  looks
slightly  inebriated.

"  Every  day  is  not  a  fête  day,  but  one  should  not  get  as  hilarious
as  that  !  "

She  laughs.  "There,  hear  the  bells  !  lam  so  sleepy;  champagne
makes  my  head  heavy  !  "  She  falls  back  on  her  pillow  ;  her  mind  is
excited   by   the   imaginary  wine.

I  say  :  "  Come,  I  will  make  you  sober  again.  Here  are  some  salts  !  "
I  put  my  hand  under  her  nose  ;  she  draws  back,  contracting  her  nos-
trils, and  snuffling  vigorously.  I  hold  the  imaginary  bottle  under  her
nose  again.  She  draws  back  again,  pushes  away  my  hand,  coughs,
and  acts  as  if  she  were  suffocating.

"You  are  stifling  me  !  "  she  cries  out.

I  then  give  her  the  following  suggestion  for  waking.  "  Two  minutes
after  you  wake,  you  will  see  a  procession  passing  through  the  room,  an
altar  and  the  holy  sacrament.  You  will  see  Monseigneur,  all  the
priests,  and  the  sisters  with  the  candles.     You  will  join  in  singing  the

62  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

Veni  Creator.  Then  two  nurses  will  come  in,  and  you  will  hear  them
talking  in  an  ill-behaved  manner  during  the  ceremony.  When  the  pro-
cession has  passed,  you  will  go  to  sleep  again.  You  will  wake  again  in
a  minute,  and  your  son,  who  is  at  Bourbon,  will  come  to  see  you.  He
will  bring  his  little  boy,  and  you  will  think  that  he  has  grown.  The  boy
will  climb  upon  your  bed,  and  you  will  give  him  some  strawberries.
You  will  offer  some  to  these  ladies  here,  also.  When  they  have  gone,
you  will  fall  asleep  again,  and  when  you  wake,  you  will  have  a  visit  from
M.  I!.  (She  had  been  his  son's  wet-nurse).  He  will  give  you  news  of
your  foster-child,  and  you  will  offer  him  a  pinch  of  snuff."

As  soon  as  I  had  made  this  suggestion,  I  said  to  her  :  "  Whose  dog
is  this  on  your  bed  ?  " — "  Ah  !  it  is  my  sister's  ;  she  makes  a  great  pet
of  it.  Well,  you  little  rogue,  go  away  !  Who  sent  you  here  ?  Where  is
your  mistress  ?  Do  you  run  away  from  her  like  this?  Give  me  your
paw  ;  you  are  a  good  little  dog.  You  want  some  sugar,  do  you,  you
little  rascal  ?  "  She  takes  her  bag  from  the  stand  by  the  bed,  and  looks
in  it  for  sugar.  She  finds  a  piece,  breaks  it,  and  gives  him  some,  say-
ing :  "  Oh,  no,  you  know  that  is  enough  for  you.  Come,  eat  it."  She
watches  him  chew  it  up.  "  Now  run  home  to  your  mistress  ;  run  fast,
and  don't  get  lost.     He  is  a  good  little  dog  !  "

"  Now,"  I  say,  "  you  are  twenty  years  old  ;  you  are  a  singer,  and  are
going  to  make  your  first  appearance  at  the  Casino.  You  will  sing  a
comic  song."

"  Oh  !  That  is  impossible  !     I  am  an  old  woman  !  "

"  In  two  minutes,  you  will  be  twenty  years  old,  you  will  feel  yourself
transformed."

She  thinks,  and  in  two  minutes  exclaims  :  "  How  pretty  !  how  grand  !
It  is  beautiful,  magnificent  !  " — She  sits  up,  arranges  her  fichu,  and  puts
on  a  smiling  expression. — "  Oh  !  there  is  the  director  !  Whose  turn  is
it  ?  "  And,  speaking  to  an  imaginary  companion  :  "  Is  it  yours,  or
mine  ?  Well,  I  will  go  !  What  must  I  sing  ?  I  do  not  know  what  is
on  the  programme.  Well, — what  difference  does  it  make  !  " — She  bows
graciously  three  times,  and  sings,  making  expressive  gestures  :  "  Mes
Amours,  je  suis  né  en  Bretagne,"  etc.  The  song  being  finished,  she
bows,  and  puts  out  her  hand  to  take  something  offered  her.  "  Oh  !  the
lovely  bouquet,  they  give  it  to  me  because  it  is  my  fête-day," — and  turn-
ing to  the  audience,  she  bows  again,  saying  :  "  Ah  !  you  understood  !  "

"  And  now,"  I  say  to  her,  "you  are  a  fine  lady,  driving  in  your  car-
riage, with  a  footman."

She  puts  on  an  air  worthy  of  the  situation,  leans  back  in  her  seat,
folds  her  hands,  and  says  in  an  appropriate  voice  :  "  What  charming
weather!  Take  me  as  far  as  the  falls,  Joseph.  Go  slowly."  She  bows
and  smiles  at  various  people  on  the  way,  then  says  :  "  Now,  go  back,
and  drive  slowly."

ive    Therapeutics.  6

j

I  say:  "The  horses  are  frightened  and  shy." — She  calls  out:  :'  Be
careful,  Joseph;  hold  them  in]  Oh,  oh,  I  will  jump  out  !  Hold  them
in  firmly  !  I  do  not  understand  why  you  are  not  more  careful.  Quiet
your  horses.     I  shall  dismiss  you  if  you  cannot  do  better."

I  transform  her  into  a  corporal.  She  thinks  up  her  part  for  a  minute,
then  stands  erect  and  says  :  "  Attention  recruits,  stand  erect  !  You
must  hold  yourselves  better  than  that  !  Stand  in  line  !  There,  that  is
better!     Attention!     Present  arms  !"  etc.

"  Now  eat  this  orange,"  I  say.  "Then  an  angel  will  come  and  blow
on  your  eyes,  to  wake  you." — She  takes  the  imaginary  orange,  peels  it
carefully,  putting  the  skin  on  the  table  by  the  bed,  eats  the  quarters
with  a  good  relish,  spits  out  the  pits,  and  takes  out  her  handkerchief  to
wipe  her  mouth.  She  then  looks  up,  her  face  lights  up,  and  she  opens
her  eyes.     She  continues  to  look  up  for  the  angel  who  woke  her.

"  What  are  you  looking  at  ?"  I  ask.

"Nothing — I  do  not  know."

"  Have  you  been  asleep  ?  "

"  I,  asleep  !     I  do  not  remember  anything  about  it."

In  two  minutes  she  exclaims  :  "  Oh,  oh  !  look  at  the  fine  procession  !  "
I  tell  her  that  it  is  only  a  dream  which  I  have  given  her,  and  that  there
is  nothing  there. — She  does  not  speak  to  me,  but  keeps  on  staring,  in  a
surprised  way. — "  The  altar  is  in  front  of  me  !  There  is  Monseigneur,
and  all  the  dear  sisters  with  the  candles  !  " — I  tell  her  in  vain  that  it  is
a  dream.  She  does  not  answer. — "The  benediction  is  about  to  be  pro-
nounced! They  are  beginning  to  sing  the  Vent  Creator!  It  is  grand  !
Beautiful  !  " — Then  she  folds  her  hands,  prays,  and  crosses  herself.
She  bows  humbly.  "Thank  you,  Monseigneur!"  Then  looking
around  in  an  irritated  way,  she  says  :  "Won't  you  go  away?  Is  this  the
time  to  gossip  ?  Just  see  these  intoxicated  nurses  !  Go  away  quickly  !
Are  you  not  ashamed  ?  Do  you  think  that  such  conduct  will  be  over-
looked ?  They  shall  know  how  you  have  behaved,  and  the  Sister
Superior  will  discharge  you." — She  looks  around  at  the  door,  and  bows.
— "  The  benediction  is  over  !  "

This  whole  scene  appeared  as  an  imposing  reality,  the  incidents
being  regularly  evolved  as  in  a  dream,  but  very  much  more  rapidly  than
would  be  the  case  in  reality.

The  somnambulist  falls  asleep  again,  waking  in  a  minute,  and  looking
at  the  door  on  her  right.  Her  face  lights  up  and  she  stretches  out  her
arms  and  embraces  the  empty  air  twice,  crying  out  with  emotion  :
"  How  do  you  do,  my  boy  !  What  a  surprise  !  Why  did  you  not  let  me
know  ?  Oh,  how  he  has  grown  !  See,  how  he  climbs  up  on  the  bed,
the  darling  !  Ah,  he  is  a  big  boy  !  "  She  embraces  him,  and  speaking
to  her  imaginary  son,  says:  "  How  did  it  happen  that  you  came  to-day,

64  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

Paul  ?  " — She  waits  for  his  answer,  and  then  replies  :  "  Oh,  yes  !  What,
a  basket  of  strawberries  !  They  are  the  first  of  the  season  !  "  She
laughs  in  a  happy  way,  and  tastes  a  berry. — "Will  you  allow  me  to
offer  you  some,  too,  ladies?"  She  says,  holding  out  the  imaginary
basket  to  two  ladies  present. — "  What,  are  you  going  so  soon?  It  was
not  worth  the  trouble  to  come  !  Well, — -another  time  !  "  She  embraces
her  son  and  grandson.  "  Kiss  Gabrielle  for  me.  Good-bye,  my  dar-
ling," and  she  follows  them  to  the  door  with  her  eyes,  throwing  them
kisses.

She  falls  asleep  a  third  time,  but  awakes  again,  after  a  minute.  She
looks  over  at  the  door,  and  says  in  a  surprised  way  :  "  See,  M.  B.  !
Good  day,  M.  B.  Are  all  well  at  your  house  ?  How  is  my  little  Louis  ?
I  always  call  him  little  Louis,  because  I  knew  him  when  he  was  so
little  ;  and  now  he  is  grown  up  !  Yes,  I  have  a  cold.  Won't  you  take
a  pinch  of  snuff?  It  does  one  good." — She  makes  the  gesture  of  tak-
ing snuff,  sneezes  twice,  and  blows  her  nose. — "  Oh,  thank  you,  Mon-
sieur. Please  give  my  compliments  to  Mme.,  and  kiss  Louis  for  me."
She  follows  him  out  of  the  room  with  her  eyes,  saying:  "These  visits
are  too  short  !  "

I  assure  her  that  it  is  all  a  dream  suggested  by  myself  ;  that  the
procession,  the  visit  from  her  son,  and  from  M.  B.,  only  existed  in  her
imagination.  She  will  not  believe  me.  "  I  have  seen  them  and
touched  them,  as  I  see  and  touch  you!"  Finally,  I  hypnotize  her
again,  and  take  away  all  the  impressions  suggested.  When  she  wakes,
she  remembers  nothing.

Observation  4. — S ,  thirty-nine  years  old,  formerly  a  sergeant,  is,

at  the  present  time,  a  workman  in  the  great  founderies.  He  was  sent
to  me  by  M.  Lie'bault,  who  had  hypnotized  him  several  different  times.
He  was  wounded  on  the  head,  at  Patay,  by  the  bursting  of  a  bomb,  and
has  a  deep  scar.  He  has  had  cystitis,  in  consequence  of  a  stricture  of
the  urethra,  of  which  he  is  now  cured.  He  is  a  man  of  sound  intelli-
gence, has  no  nervous  history,  sleeps  well,  and  is  not  subject  to  attacks
of  spontaneous  somnambulism.  The  only  thing  I  notice  in  him,  is  a
very  marked,  and  almost  general  analgesia,  without  anaesthesia,  which
follows  hypnosis.

He  goes  to  sleep  as  soon  as  the  command  is  given,  or  at  least,  shuts
his  eyes,  and  does  not  open  them.  "  Are  you  asleep  ?  " — "  Partly  so."
— "Sleep  soundly" — "Yes." — Anaesthesia,  suggestive  catalepsy,  auto-
matic movements,  sensorial  illusions,  hallucinations,  the  execution  of
any  acts  commanded, — all  succeed  each  other,  punctually,  with  the
precision  characteristic  of  an  old  soldier.

I  lift  his  arm  :  he  stiffens  it  immediately.  I  close  his  hand  gently;
he  contracts  it  with  so  much  force,  that  a  very  decided  command  is
necessary  to  make  him  relax  the  flexors.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  6

3

I  lift  both  his  arms  ;  he  understands  immediately,  or  thinks  he  under-
stands what  is  wanted,  and  does  what  he  has  sometimes  been  made  to
do, — rotates  his  arms,  one  about  the  other,  automatically,  and  with  great
rapidity.

I  make  him  swallow  a  quantity  of  salt  for  sugar  ;  he  sucks  it,  and
tastes  it,  without  showing  the  least  suspicion  of  what  it  really  is.

I  say  :  "  You  are  now  in  the  year  1870,  a  sergeant  at  the  head  of
your  company  ;  you  are  at  the  battle  of  Gravelotte." — He  thinks  a
minute,  as  if  to  arouse  memories.  They  come  back  to  him,  form
pictures  in  his  mind,  and  force  themselves  upon  him  with  striking
vividness.  He  gets  up,  calls  his  men,  commands  them,  marches,  and
places  them  for  action.  The  enemy  is  at  hand  !  He  lies  down,  puts
his  gun  to  his  shoulder,  and  shoots  several  times  consecutively.  Some
of  his  men  fall  ;  he  encourages  the  others.  "  Shelter  yourselves  behind
this  bush  ;  we  must  retreat  !  "  And  he  goes  through  all  the  movements
of  the  struggle  with  the  men,  as  memory  revives  them.

I  make  him  imagine  himself  at  the  battle  of  Patay,  where  he  was
wounded.  He  falls,  does  not  speak,  puts  his  hand  to  his  head,  does
not  move.  Then  he  comes  to  himself  again,  asks  for  a  doctor,  imagines
himself  being  carried  in  an  ambulance,  calls  a  nurse  to  dress  his  wound,
etc.

In  living  this  part  of  his  life  over  again,  S doubles  his  person-
ality, so  to  speak.  He  puts  questions,  and  gives  answers,  all  at  the
same  time  ;  he  speaks  for  himself  and  for  the  others.  I  transfer  him  to
Dijon,  where  he  was  on  garrison  duty. — "  Hold  !  Corporal  Durand  !
How  are  you  ?  " — "  Well,  and  you  ?  " — "  Where  have  you  been  ?  " — "  I
have  just  returned  from  a  furlough." — "  Let  us  go  into  the  coffee-
house !  " — He  gets  chairs,  asks  his  comrades  to  sit  down,  calls  a  boy,
and  orders  beer,  talking  with  his  friends  all  the  while,  and  speaking  now
for  himself,  now  for  them.

I  say  to  him  :  "  Where  are  you,  S ?  "

"  I  am  at  Dijon."

"  Who  ami?"

"  You  are  Dr.  Bernheim.  But  I  cannot  be  at  Dijon,  for  you  are  at
St.  Charles'  Hospital,  at  Nancy.  That  cannot  be  !  Here  are  my
comrades  !     No,  I  do  not  know  you."

I  make  him  see  his  former  colonel,  General  Vincendon.  He  rises
and  salutes  : — "  Good   day,  Colonel."

"Good  clay,  my  boy;  are  you  well;  is  your  wound  cured?  have
you  no  medal,  no   pension  ?  "

"  Xo,  colonel."

When   he  wakes,   all  that   has  occurred  has   absolutely  disappeared
from  his  memory.
5

66  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

Thus  he  dreams  the  drama  that  has  been  suggested  to  him,
regarding  himself  as  with  his  comrades  in  his  former  existence,
repeating  aloud  what  they  say  to  him,  what  he  answers,  and
gesticulating,  as  if  he  were  at  once  the  spectator  and  actor.

The  subject  of  Observation  2  maintains  his  own  rôle.  He
listens  to  the  questions  of  his  imaginary  questioners,  and  gives
his  answers,  without  repeating  the   questions.     He  grows  pale

and    trembles   when    he    is   wounded.     S ,    on   the  contrary,

does  not  turn  pale  when  wounded,  neither  does  his  heart  beat-
more  rapidly.  It  is  another  self  he  sees  and  feels  acting  in  this
strange  division  of  his  personality.  He  speaks  to  me,  answers
me,  knows  that  he  has  been  put  to  sleep  in  the  hospital,  and,  at
the  same  time,  finds  himself  on  the  battle-field  ;  the  inconsis-
tency does  not  strike  him.

I  have  seen  an  analogous  delirium  in  several  cases  of  typhoid
fever,  where  the  patient's  imagination  was  haunted  by  morbid
dreams.

Do  not  phenomena  of  the  same  kind  occur  in  physiological
sleep?  In  our  dreams,  we  believe  ourselves  back  in  our  youth-
ful days  again.  Deeply  buried  memories  revive,  and  become
pictures.  We  again  behold  people  no  longer  living:  we  con-
verse with  them,  but,  at  the  same  time,  do  not  lose  the  sense  of
the  present.  Sometimes  this  feeling  is  so  distinct,  that  we  say
to  ourselves:  "It  is  only  a  dream." — Maudsley  says:  "that
through  all  our  dream-wanderings,  there  is  generally,  deep  down
in  us,  an  obscure  feeling  or  instinct  of  our  identity,  for  otherwise
we  should  never  know  surprise  in  seeing  that  we  are  not  our-
selves, or  that  we  are  doing  something  extraordinary,  or  we
should  not  have  that  sort  of  sentiment  of  personality,  which  is  in
us  in  all  personal  dramas  in  which  we  may  take  part.  I  believe
that  the  organism  preserves  its  identity,  although  our  conscious
functions  may  be  of  the  most  distracted  order;  although  we
may  be  asleep,  our  fundamental  personality  is  felt  more  or  less
forcibly,  in  all  conscious  states,  in  the  dream  as  in  the  waking
condition.  The  patient  in  the  insane  asylum,  who  has  the  delu-
sion that  he  is  the  All-powerful,  asks  a  little  favor  humbly,  at  the
same  time  that  he  is  proclaiming  his  omnipotence.  These  are
the  consequences  of  a  distracted  identity."

The  hallucinations  of  somnambulism  are  in  reality  nothing  but
induced  dreams.  The  image  produced  is  more  or  less  real,  the
consciousness  of  identity  may  exist  more  or  less  confusedly,  side

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  67

by  side  with  the   dream,  without   the    inconsistency  striking  the

dreamer.     S feels  that  he  is  near  me,  and  under  my  control  ;

.it  the  same  time  he  is  on  the  battle-field,  and  repeats  aloud
the  dream  he  is  living  through,  but  which  has  been  suggested
by  me.

Side  by  side  with  the  types  of  somnambulism  just  traced,
examples  of  which  I  could  multiply  indefinitely,  exists  a  rarer
variety,  in  which  the  sleeper  is  attacked  by  spontaneous  dreams,
which  may  be  directed  and  modified  at  will  by  the  person  in
relationship  with  him.  These  dreams  may  be  so  vivid,  that  the
feeling  of  reality,  which  is  absolutely  effaced,  cannot  be  revived
again.

Observation  5. — The  following  is  the  case  of  a  young  .hysterical  girl,
whom  I  treated  from  October,  188 1  until  January,  1882.  She  has  crises
of  hysterical  convulsions,  with  lucid  intervals,  a  complete  hemianes-
thesia of  the  left  side  which  was  cured  by  the  use  of  magnets,  spastic
paraplegia,  transient  contracture  of  the  left  arm,  etc.  Her  intelligence
is  very  clear,  and  between  these  crises,  she  is  reasonable,  not  at  all
impressionable,  and  calm  and  deliberate  in  word  and  action.

She  may  be  hypnotized  in  a  few  minutes  by  fixation.  Her  eyes  close
suddenly  and  she  remains  motionless.  Suggestive  catalepsy  cannot  be
induced;  if  the  limbs  are  lifted,  they  fall  back  again.

The  following  is  an  account  of  one  of  the  séances.

I  say  to  her,  "  Are  you  asleep  ?  "  She  does  not  reply.  I  insist,  and
at  last  she  answers,  "No,  I  am  not  asleep."  "Where  are  you?"  She
replies,  "  I  am  in  the  street."  "Where  are  you  going  ?  "  "  I  am  going
home."  "  Where  do  you  live  ?  "  "  In  Etang  Street  with  my  mother,"
A  moment  after,  I  say,  "  Where  are  you  now  ?  "  "  You  see  very  well,
by  the  station."  Suddenly  she  seems  to  be  violently  agitated  by  some-
thing. This,  she  explains  upon  waking,  by  stating  that  she  saw  a  mon-
ument shake,  and  thought  she  would  be  crushed  by  it.  "  Well,"  I  say,
"  here  you  are  at  your  mother's."  "  How  are  you,  Marie  ?  "  "  I  feel
better,"  she  says,  thinking  that  she  is  answering  her  mother.  "  Are
you  to  be  always  at  the  hospital  ?  "  "  No,  I  have  left  ;  I  am  almost
cured.  They  used  electricity  on  me."  "  You  would  be  very  good,"  I
say,  "  if  you  would  help  me  iron  this  linen."  "  Ah,  you  weary  me,  I
did  not  come  to  work."

At  last,  however,  she  yields  to  her  mother's  desire.  She  draws  the
counterpane  off  the  bed,  makes  the  gesture  of  dampening  and  starching
it,  takes  up  an  iron,  tries  it  to  see  if  it  is  hot,  irons  with  great  care,  and
folds  the  spread  several  times,  not  forgetting  any  detail.  Now  I  say  to
her,  "  You  will  do  well  to  mend  this  stocking."     She  arranges  the  bed-

68  Suggestive    Therapeutics,

cover  in  the  form  of  a  stocking,  makes  the  gesture  of  putting  a  darning
ball  into  it,  takes  the  knitting  needle,  picks  up  stitch  after  stitch  with  an
astonishing  appearance  of  precision,  turns  the  stocking,  reversing  the
stitches,  etc.  I  make  lier  sew.  She  turns  down  a  hem  in  the  spread
she  has  in  her  hand,  pretends  to  thread  a  needle,  puts  on  her  thimble,
and  hems,  sticking  in  the  needle  and  drawing  in  the  thread,  pricking
her  finger  once,  and  putting  it  in  her  mouth  to  suck  the  drop  of  blood.
She  replaces  the  needle  which  has  not  a  good  point,  by  another,  and
does  it  all  with  a  striking  appearance  of  reality.  "  You  have  worked
enough  for  your  mother,"  I  say,  "  let  us  take  a  walk  together."  She
takes  me  for  her  friend  Louise.  "  I  should  enjoy  that,"  she  says.  "  It
is  very  warm,  let  us  go  and  bathe,"  I  say.  She  imagines  herself  going
with  me,  describes  the  streets  through  which  she  passes,  and  the  people
whom  she  sees.  I  knock  on  the  table  three  times.  "  What  is  that  ?  "  I
say.  "They  are  men  breaking  stones."  We  reach  the  baths.  She
makes  the  gesture  of  undressing  herself,  imagines  that  she  is  in  the
water,  shivers,  makes  the  regular  motions  of  swimming  with  her  out-
stretched hands,  etc.

If  I  let  her  go  on  sleeping  without  paying  any  attention  to  her,  she
continues  her  dream  spontaneously.  Once  after  having  left  her  alone
for  a  few  minutes,  I  saw  her  actively  at  work,  washing  linen,  pulling  it
out  of  a  little  tub,  dipping  it  in  the  water,  soaping  it  on  a  board,  plung-
ing it  again  into  the  water,  then  wringing  it  out,  etc.

As  soon  as  she  has  awakened,  she  tells  me  all  the  details  of  her
dream.  She  has  been  home,  and  has  passed  by  the  station  on  the  way,
where  she  had  a  fright.  She  has  seen  her  mother,  who  said  such  and
such  things  to  her.  She  does  not  forget  the  slightest  details,  co-ordi-
nating the  incoherent  acts  in  which  I  have  made  her  take  part,  in  log-
ical order.  If  my  students  have  sung  softly  while  she  slept,  she  speaks
of  them  as  musicians,  or  some  bad  singers  she  met  on  the  way.  Ob-
jects were  laid  on  her  forehead  while  she  was  sleeping  to  see  if  she
could  guess  what  they  were.  They  are  the  people  she  has  met  on  the
way,  who  have  stopped  her  to  ask  some  question.  In  vain  I  say,  "  But
it  is  a  dream,  you  have  been  asleep.  You  have  not  been  out  of  your
bed."     She  does  not  believe  it,  the  dream  seems  to  her  reality.

I  can  direct  her  dreams  during  this  sleep,  but  am  not  able  to  make
her  conscious  of  reality.  I  say  to  her,  "  You  are  asleep."  "  Why,  no,"
she  says.  "  But  you  are  paralyzed,  you  cannot  walk."  "You  are  mak-
ing fun  of  me,  as  long  as  I  am  up,  I  can  walk."

I  have  hypnotized  her  nearly  every  day  and  tried  to  remain  in  rela-
tionship with  her  during  the  hypnosis,  by  touching  her  hand  or  fore-
head, and  by  talking  to  her.  I  say,  "  Remember  that  you  are  asleep,
that  I  am  at  the  bed-side,  and  that  you   are  paralyzed."     At   a  given

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  69

moment,  her  eyes  close  and  she  is  beyond  my  influence.  The  remem-
brance of  the  reality  has  vanished.  She  is  not  sleeping,  she  is  not  par-
alyzed, she  can  walk  ;   I  am  her  friend  or  her  moil

No  therapeutic  suggestion  has  been  of  any  use,  as  the  patient  is  not
in  relationship  with  me  in  this  respect.  The  various  phenomena  of
hysteria, — contracture,  paraplegia,  transient  trismus,  aphonia,  etc. — have
persisted  with  slight  modifications  for  better  or  for  worse.  The  patient
was  discharged  January  9,  and  was  finally  cured  spontaneously.  I
only  wish  to  describe  the  peculiar  character  of  the  somnambulism  in-
duced in  her  case.

Spontaneous  dreams  appear  in  other  hypnotized  subjects,  but
they  vanish  at  the  hypnotizer's  voice  ;  he  retains  control  over
the  ideation  and  will  of  these  subjects.

Observation  6. — A  man  thirty-seven  years  old,  who  had  been  suf-
fering from  gastralgia  since  1872,  came  to  consult  me.  I  hypnotized
him  five  times.  By  the  aid  of  suggestion  and  the  fixation  of  his  eyes
upon  my  fingers,  he  goes  to  sleep  in  two  minutes  ;  he  is  in  the  somnam-
bulistic condition  ;  suggestive  catalepsy,  automatic  movements,  com-
plete anaesthesia  and  hallucinations  are  present.

If  I  stop  directing  him  for  an  instant,  he  has  spontaneous  dreams.
At  one  time,  he  remains  motionless,  trembling  all  over  with  an  expres-
sion of  fear  upon  his  face.  "  He  is  coming  !  Here  he  is  !  "  "What  is
there  ?  "  "  The  tiger  !  Do  not  you  see  him  down  there  ?  "  He  imag-
ines himself  in  a  desert,  and  sees  a  tiger  coming  toward  him.  At
another  time,  he  thinks  himself  at  Bar-le-Duc,  with  his  brother,  who  is  a
wood  merchant.  He  goes  with  him  to  the  wood-yard  and  talks  about
business.  I  say,  "  You  are  at  Nancy,  yes,  at  Nancy  in  Stanilas  Place."
Then  he  imagines  himself  back  again,  and  tells  me  everything  he  has
seen  on  the  walk,  which  I  called  up  to  his  imagination.

In  spite  of  his  dream,  he  retained  the  idea  of  reality.  He  knew  that
I  was  present  and  that  he  was  asleep.  At  one  and  the  same  time,  he
was  asleep  in  Nancy  and  awake  in  a  wood-yard  in  Bar-le-Duc.  The
contradiction  did  not  strike  him,  he  remained  in  relationship  with  the
person  who  hypnotized  him,  during  his  spontaneous  dream.  If  I  lifted
a  leg,  it  remained  up;  if  I  made  his  arms  rotate,  one  about  the  other,
they  continued  the  motion.  I  suggested  that  the  epigastric  and  spinal
pains  would  disappear.  He  said  he  was  no  longer  conscious  of  them,
and  when  he  woke,  they  did  not  reappear.

This  case  of  somnambulism,  then,  like  the  foregoing,  is  sus-
ceptible to  spontaneous  dreams  if  the  subject  is  left  to  himself

7<d  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

while  in  the  hypnotic  condition.  It  differs  from  the  foregoing,
in  that  the  idea  of  reality  remains  with  the  subject  and  may  be
recalled  by  suggestion.  The  consciousness  of  his  real  person-
ality, though  it  is  distracted  by  the  wanderings  of  imagination,
is  not  obliterated,  and  the  patient  can  be  affected  by  therapeutic
suggestions.

I  give  the  following  case,  in  which  nearly  all  the  suggestive
phenomena  mentioned  in  the  preceding  observations  are  want-
ing, as  an  illustration  of  still  another  type  of  somnambulism.
Nothing  but  the  closure  of  the  eyes  and  absence  of  memory
upon  waking  appear  to  distinguish  this  sleep  from  the  waking
condition.

Observation  7. — Mme.  de  X ,  56  years  old,  is  a  very  intelligent

woman.  She  has  suffered  for  many  years  from  chronic  gastritis  with
dilatation  of  the  stomach.  I  hypnotize  her  easily  by  simply  holding
her  eyelids  closed  for  a  minute.  She  exhibits  suggestive  catalepsy  to  a
certain  degree.  She  keeps  her  arms  up  a  while,  but  at  last  they  fall
spontaneously.  I  can  induce  rotatory  automatism  of  the  lower  limbs  by
saying,  "You  cannot  stop  yourself,"  but  the  movement  only  lasts  about
ten  seconds.  I*  cannot  induce  either  contracture,  anaesthesia  or  senso-
rial suggestion.  For  example,  if  I  say  to  her,  "  Hear  the  music,"  she
hears  nothing.  If  I  say,  "  Swallow  this  draught,"  she  answers,  "You
know,  doctor,  that  does  not  work  with  me."

She  retains  much  spontaneous  activity  during  the  sleep,  discourses
with  me,  initiating  me  into  all  the  details  of  her  sickness,  or  talking  to
me  about  outside  and  worldly  matters.  "Did  I  dream,  doctor,  of
inviting  you  to  drink  tea  that  day?"  etc.  If  she  hears  the  maid  walk-
ing about  in  an  adjoining  room,  she  talks  to  me  about  her.  She  acts
exactly  like  a  wide  awake  person,  but  she  is  sure  that  she  is  sleeping.
I  have  hypnotized  her  more  than  fifty  times,  and  have  never  been  able
to  give  her  either  a  sensorial  illusion,  or  a  very  clear  hallucination.
One  day,  however,  I  made  her  hear  military  music  when  she  woke;  she
heard  it  as  if  it  was  far  away  and  quite  dreamy.  She  realizes  certain
suggestions  of  acts  to  be  performed  after  waking.  For  example,  I  said
on  one  occasion,  "When  you  wake,  you  will  rise  from  the  arm-chair  in
which  you  are  sitting,  and  go  and  sit  clown  in  the  arm-chair  opposite
you."  When  she  was  waked,  she  looked  around  and  said,  "  I  do  not
know  why,  but  my  parlor  is  not  in  order  to-day.  I  am  not  comfortable
in  this  arm-chair,"  and,  o,bedient  to  the  suggestion,  she  went  and  sat
down  in  the  chair  opposite.  In  this  way,  she  tried  to  explain  to  herself
the  necessity  she  felt  for  changing  her  seat.

I  can   also   suggest  certain   acts  of  the  same   kind  which   she  is    to

Suggestive    Th  era  peu:  ~r

realize  during  her  sleep.  For  example,  I  say.  "  In  three  minutes,  you
will  go  and  sit  down  on  the  sofa,  and  after  you  have  been  sitting  theie
one  minute  you  will  wake."     She  obeys  exactly.

I  wake  her,  in  the  midst  of  a  most  animated  conversation,  by  saying,

Wake  up."'

She  remembers  absolutely  nothing.  Everything  is  effaced  from  her
memory.  She  does  not  know  how  long  she  has  been  asleep.  Some-
times a  single  fact  remains  in  her  memory  through  auto-suggestion.
She  said  to  me  one  day,  "  You  asked  me  in  my  sleep,  if  I  always  have
acid  eructations  accompanied  with  a  burning  sensation.  I  said  to  my-
self then,  when  I  wake  up,  I  must  not  forget  to  ask  the  doctor,  from
what  source  the  vichy  water  I  take  should  come."  She  thus  gave  her-
self a  suggestion  to  preserve  this  memory;  everything  else  was  gone.

Moreover,  if  I  say  before  waking  her,  "You  will  remember  absolutely
nothing,"  I  take  away  the  possibility  of  remembering  anything  from
her,  even  what  she  has  suggested  to  herself.

I  could  multiply  observations  upon  somnambulism  without
exhausting  the  subject.  Everyone  has  his  special  individuality
in  the  somnambulistic  as  in  the  waking  condition.

In  the  preceding  pages,  I  have  roughly  sketched  the  curious
phenomena  observed  in  induced  sleep  ;  phenomena  which  may
be  easily  verified  by  any  one  who  wishes  to  take  the  trouble.
Subjects  are  doubtless  met  with,  who  simulate  consciously,  or
who  think  they  must  simulate  in  order  to  be  obliging.  Doubt-
ful cases  also  occur,  which  are  not  convincing.  The  conditions
of  sleep  and  of  waking  are  separated  by  imperceptible  grada-
tions. Sometimes  the  operator  is  doubtful  whether  such  and
such  a  subject  is  really  influenced.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sub-
ject who  remembers  everything  he  has  heard,  may  think  that  he
has  not  been  influenced,  but  that  he  has  been  simulating.

Here  as  in  everything  else,  experience  teaches  whether  the
influence  obtained  is  real  or  not.  A  man  of  large  knowledge
and  intelligence,  whom  I  hypnotized  for  some  time,  on  account
of  a  nervous  affection,  fell  into  sleep  of  the  third  degree  at  the
first  séance.  Suggestive  catalepsy  was  present  and  memory  was
preserved  on  waking.  I  asked  him  if  he  slept.  He  thought
so,  without  being  absolutely  sure,  though  he  heard  everything.
To  my  questions,  why  he  had  not  once  opened  his  eyes,  and  why
he  had  not  lowered  his  arms  when  I  raised  them,  and  if  he  could
have  done  so,  he  answered  :  "  I  do  not  know  whether  I  could
have  done  it.     I  had  no  idea  of  doing  it.  vThe  desire  was  want-

72  Suggestive    Tkcrapctitics.

ing."  I  was  convinced  that  he  had  been  influenced.  He  was
influenced  so  decidedly  at  the  following  séance,  and  at  all  the
others  since  that  time,  that  he  fell  into  a  deep  sleep  with  abso-
lute loss  of  memory  upon  waking.  I  observe  similar  facts
daily.

After  a  single  observation,  positive  or  negative,  judgment
should  not  be  lightly  pronounced.  I  can  honestly  say,  that  I
have  made  my  observations  coolly,  without  any  predisposition  to
either  side,  and  without  enthusiasm.  But  when  after  many  hun-
dred observations  in  all  classes  of  society,  in  the  hospital  and  in
the  city,  I  have  seen  constant,  uniform  phenomena  induced,  and
when,  on  the  other  hand,  I  know  that  everyone  who  has  studied
the  question  in  an  unbiased  manner,  has  observed  facts  identical
or  analogous  to  those  I  have  observed,  am  I  to  admit  that  all
our  subjects  have  leagued  together  to  mystify  us?  Certain
minds  have  a  horror  of  the  marvellous.  They  are  right  :  but  they
are  wrong  when  they  consider  as  marvellous  and  systematically
deny,  facts  which  they  have  not  verified,  just  because  these  facts
do  not  agree  with  the  à  priori  conceptions  in  their  minds.  The
facts  are  undeniable  :  the  interpretation  of  them  follows  ;  if  that
is  faulty,  do  not  blame  the  facts,  but  the  insufficiency  of  our
knowledge  of  psychology  and  nervous  physiology.

CHAPTER  IV.

Circulation  and  respiration  in  hypnotism. — Changes  observed  by  authors  are  due
to  the  emotion  of  the  subjects. — Influence  of  the  hypnotic  suggestion  on  the
functions  of  organic  life:  retardation  and  acceleration  of  the  pulse  influence;
upon  the  vaso-motor  circulation  ;  inflammation,  blisters,  hemorrhages  produced
by  suggestion.

ONE  word  more  about  the  circulation  and  respiration  in  hyp-
notism.

According  to  Braid,  the  pulse  and  respiration  are  at  first
slower  than  normal;  but  as  soon  as  the  muscles  are  put  into
activity  a  tendency  to  cataleptiform  rigidity  is  produced,  with
increase  of  the  pulse  rate  and  rapid  and  laborious  respiration.
According  to  his  experiments,  the  increase  of  the  pulse  rate
caused  by  the  muscular  effort  which  the  person  makes  normally,
in  order  to  keep  his  legs  and  arms  extended  for  five  minutes,  is
about  twenty  per  cent.  In  the  hypnotic  condition  it  is  one  hun-
dred per  cent.  If,  then,  all  the  senses  are  excited,  if  the  mus-
cles of  the  head  and  neck  are  put  into  a  cataleptiform  con-
dition simultaneously  with  the  limbs,  there  is  a  rapid  fall  to  forty
per  cent,  (that  is,  twice  as  much  as  the  increase  during  the  nor-
mal condition).  If  the  muscles  are  allowed  to  relax  again,  the
subject  still  remaining  in  the  hypnotic  state,  the  pulse  falls
rapidly  to  its  rate  before  the  experiment,  and  even  below  it.
Further,  during  the  cataleptiform  rigidity  the  pulse  is  slow  and
small,  and  at  the  same  time,  a  sudden  injection  of  the  ocular
conjunctiva  of  the  capillaries  of  the  head,  neck  and  face  occurs.
Braid  thinks  that  the  rigidity  of  the  cataleptic  muscles  prevents
the  free  transmission  of  blood  to  the  extremities,  and  thus  causes
an  increase  of  the  cardiac  action  and  hyperaemia  of  the  brain  and
spinal  cord.

Other  authors  have,  like  Braid,  observed  modifications  of  the
cardiac  and  respiratory  functions.  In  a  case  of  hypnotic  leth-
argy reported  in  a  thesis  at  Strasburg,  Pau  de  St.  Martin  noticed
the  increase  of  the  pulse  and  respiration,  the  diminution  of  the
vascular  tension  and  profuse  perspiration.

By  means  of  more  precise  methods,   Heidenhain  reached  the

73

74  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

same  results,  and  noticed  besides  an  augmentation  of  the  salivary
secretion,  and  recently  Tamburini  and  Seppili,  with  the  graphic
method  and  Mosso's  plethysmography  observed  that  at  the  time
of  transition  from  the  waking  condition  to  the  hypnotic  sleep,
the  respiratory  movements  became  irregular,  unequal,  and  more
frequent,  the  cardiac  and  vascular  pulsations  increased,  and  the
face  was  congested.

Dr.  Hack-Tuke  observed  an  acceleration  of  the  cardiac  and
respiratory  movements  in  one  case  ;  in  another,  on  the  contrary,
both  remained  unaffected.

In  forming  their  conclusions,  it  seems  to  me  that  these  ob-
servers have  not  taken  into  consideration  the  method  used  to
induce  hypnosis,  and  the  emotional  conditions  under  which  it  is
obtained.

The  subjects,  being  asked  to  fix  their  eyes  upon  a  brilliant
object,  or  upon  the  operator's  eyes,  make  a  more  or  less  intense
effort  in  so  doing.  To  the  muscular  fatigue  of  the  eye  and  the
psychical  concentration  there  is  added  a  certain  moral  emotion,
especially  when  submitting  to  the  experiment  for  the  first  time;
hence,  an  irregular,  increased,  and  sometimes  panting  respiration.
The  pulse  is  agitated  by  the  emotions,  and  clinicians  call  it  a
medical  pulse.  The  congestion  of  the  face,  the  muscular  twitch-
ings,  and  the  uncomfortable  sensations  experienced  by  some
subjects  do  not  seem  to  me  to  be  due  to  any  other  cause.

None  of  these  symptoms  are  manifested  by  patients  who  are
hypnotized  by  the  quiet  suggestion  method,  and  who  retain
their  tranquillity  of  mind;  nor  by  those  who  having  already  been
hypnotized  several  times  go  to  sleep  with  confidence  and  with-
out emotion  or  agitation.  Under  these  conditions  I  have  ob-
served neither  increase  nor  diminution  of  the  pulse  rate,  nor  of
the  respiratory  movements.  I  have  recorded  the  pulse  by  the
sphymograph  before,  and  during  hypnosis,  and  have  found  it  to
be  the  same  at  both  times.  Neither  have  I  noticed  the  marked
acceleration,  which  according  to  Braid,  is  produced  by  the  cata-
leptiform  rigidity  which  occurs  in  the  extension  of  the  limbs.  It
appears  to  me  that  no  appreciable  difference  exists  between  the
waking  and  the  hypnotic  conditions.

Can  the  functions  of  organic  life,  which  under  ordinary  con-
ditions are  beyond  the  influence  of  the  will,  be  modified  by  sug-
gestion ?  M.  Beaunis  has  performed  some  physiological  experi-
ments,  in   order  to   determine   this  question.     He  has  tried   to

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  75

vary  the  frequency  of  the  heart-pulsations  in  somnambulists  by
suggestion,  registering  them  by  physiological  methods.  To  this
end,  the  sphymograph,  with  Marey's  transmission,  is  applied
over  the  left  radial  artery  ;  an  electric  clock  inscribes  the  seconds
on  the  registering  cylinder.  The  following  are  the  results  ob-
tained in  two  cases  of  somnambulism  :  In  one  the  average  num-
ber of  pulsations  to  the  minute,  before  hypnotic  sleep,  was
ninety-six,  and  during  sleep,  ninety-eight  and  four-tenths,  and
the  suggestion  of  decrease  gave  ninety-two  and  four-tenths  to
the  minute.  Then  the  pulse  having  returned  to  the  normal
condition  and  registering  one  hundred  and  two  per  minute,
the  suggestion  of  increase  brought  it  to  one  hundred  and  fif-
teen and  five-tenths.  Upon  awaking  it  was  one  hundred  and
two-tenths.  The  decrease  and  increase  in  the  pulsations  fol-
lowed immediately  upon  the  suggestions.  In  the  other  case,
the  suggestion  of  decrease  in  pulse  rate  gave  an  analogous  re-
sult.

Suggestion  may  act  upon  the  vas-motor  circulation.  In  cer-
tain subjects  a  fixed  spot  on  the  body  may  be  made  to  appear
red.  M.  Beaunis  said  to  a  somnambulist,  "When  you  wake  up
you  will  have  a  red  spot  where  I  now  touch  you."  In  ten  min-
utes the  patient  waked.  The  spot  indicated  began  to  look
slightly  red,  growing  more  and  more  so,  and  after  lasting  from
ten  to  fifteen  minutes  it  gradually  disappeared.  This  condition
may  be  made  to  persist  a  longtime  by  means  of  suggestion.

In  certain  cases  even  more  can  be  done.  A  blister  can  be
raised  by  hypnotic  suggestion.  M.  Focachon,  an  apothecary  at
Charmes,  has  shown  us  the  phenomenon  in  two  cases  of  som-
nambulism, which  he  brought  to  Nancy,  in  order  that  we  might
verify  the  experiment.  At  eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  while
the  subject  was  asleep,  eight  postage  stamps  were  applied  to  the
left  shoulder  and  the  suggestion  was  given  that  a  blister  was
being  applied.  The  subject  was  allowed  to  sleep  during  the
entire  day,  being  waked  only  at  meal-time.  She  was  watched
all  the  time.  She  was  hypnotized  for  the  night  with  the  sugges-
tion that  she  would  not  wake  until  seven  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing. Next  day,  at  a  quarter  past  eight  the  bandage  was  taken
off.  The  postage  stamps  had  not  been  disturbed.  Over  an
area  of  from  four  to  five  centimetres  in  diameter,  the  epidermis
appeared  thickened,  modified  and  yellowish  white.  It  was  not
raised  however,  and  no  blister  was  apparent  ;   but  it  was  thick,

76  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

wrinkled  and  in  a  word,  presented  the  condition  which  immedi'
ately  precedes  an  actual  blister.  This  region  of  the  skin  was
surrounded  by  an  intensely  red  zone  with  swelling.  The  person
went  back  to  Charmes  with  M.  Focachon.  At  four  o'clock  in
the  afternoon  four  or  five  phlictenulae  had  developed.  Fifteen
days  later  the  blister  was  still  at  the  height  of  suppuration.*

M.  Focachon  tried  the  same  experiment  in  an  another  case,
successfully.     The  blister  was  raised  in  forty-eight  hours.

M.  Dumontpallier  endeavored  to  reproduce  this  phenomenon.
He  observed  a  notable  rise  in  temperature,  but  no  blister.

Finally,  hemorrhages  and  bloody  stigmata  may  be  induced  in
certain  subjects  by  means  of  suggestion.

MM.  Bourru  and  Burot  of  Rochefort  have  experimented  on
this  subject  with  a  young  marine,  a  case  of  hystero-epilepsy.
M.  Bourru  put  him  into  the  somnambulistic  condition  and  gave
him  the  following  suggestion.  "At  four  o'clock  this  afternoon
after  the  hypnosis,  you  will  come  into  my  office,  sit  down  in  the
arm-chair,  cross  your  arms  upon  your  breast  and  your  nose  will
begin  to  bleed."  At  the  hour  appointed  the  young  man  did  as
directed.     Several  drops  of  blood  came  from  the  left  nostril.

On  another  occasion  the  same  investigator  traced  the  patient's
name  on  both  his  fore-arms,  with  the  dull  point  of  an  instru-
ment. Then,  when  the  patient  was  in  the  somnambulistic  con-
dition he  said,  "  At  four  o'clock  this  afternoon  you  will  go  to
sleep,  and  your  arms  will  bleed  along  the  lines  which  I  have
traced,  and  your  name  will  appear  written  on  your  arms  in  let-
ters of  blood."  He  was  watched  at  four  o'clock  and  seen  to  fall
asleep.  On  the  left  arm  the  letters  stood  out  in  bright  red  relief,
and  in  several  places  there  were  drops  of  blood.  The  letters
were  still  visible  three  months  afterward,  although  they  had
grown  gradually  faint.

Dr.  Mabille,  director  of  the  Insane  Asylum  at  Lafond,  near
Rochelle,  a  former  pupil  of  excellent  standing,  repeated  the  ex-
periment made  upon  this  subject  at  Rochefort,  after  he  was  re-
moved to  the  asylum,  and  confirmed  it.  He  obtained  instant
hemorrhage  over  a  determined  region  of  the  body.  He  also
induced  an  attack  of  spontaneous  somnambulism,  in  which  the

*  Prof.  Forel  recently  made  a  number  of  experiments  upon  somnambulists  with  a
view  to  producing  vesication  by  suggestion,  but  without  success.  There  was
generally,  however,  a  patch  of  distinct  erythema  at  the  point  where  the  blister  was  to
have  been  produced.  C.  A.  H.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  yy

patient  doubling  his  personality,  so  to  speak,  suggested  to  him-
self the  hemorrhagic  stigmata  on  the  arm,  thus  repeating  the
marvellous  phenomenon  of  the  famous  stigmatized  auto-sugges-
tionist,  Louise  Lateau.

These  facts,  then,  seem  to  prove  that  suggestion  may  act
upon  the  cardiac  function,  and  upon  the  vaso-motor  system
Phenomena  of  this  order,  however,  rarely  occur.  They  are  ex-
ceptional and  are  obtained  in  certain  subjects  only.  I  have  in
vain  tried  to  reproduce  them  in  many  cases.  These  facts  are
sufficient  to  prove,  however,  that  when  in  a  condition  of  special
psychical  concentration,  the  brain  can  influence  even  the
organic  functions,  which  in  the  normal  state  seem  but  slightly
amenable  to  the  will.  Experiments  might  be  instituted  to  de-
termine to  what  degree  imagination  may  influence  certain  func-
tions in  the  waking  condition.  We  know  how  greatly  micturi-
tion and  defecation  are  influenced  by  will,  idea  and  imagination.
By  concentrating  the  mind  upon  the  phenomenon,  can  we  not
also  produce  an  increase  of  heat  in  certain  regions  of  the  body,
perhaps  even  without  hypnosis?  This  is  a  question  for  experi-
ment to  answer  by  seeking  to  determine  a  local  increase  of
temperature  through  psychically  induced  vaso-motor  congestion.

CHAPTER  V.

Suggestion  in  the  waking  condition. — Production  of  the  same  phenomena  by  simple
affirmation  in  subjects  who  can  be  hypnotized  and  in  those  who  cannot  be
hypnotized. — Transfer  of  hemianesthesia  in  a  case  of  hysteria. — Sensorial  sugges-
tions.— Hallucinations. — Suggestive  modifications  of  the  visual  field. — Auto-sug-
gestion in  ecstasy. — A  question  of  priority.

I  NOW  approach  the  study  of  some  facts  observed  in  regard  to
suggestion  in  the  waking  condition.

I  have  shown  that  many  subjects  who  have  previously  been
hypnotized,  may  manifest  susceptibility  to  the  same  suggestive
phenomena  in  the  waking  condition,  without  being  again  hyp-
notized, however  slight  may  'have  been  the  influence  of  a  small
number  of  previous  séances.     (One,  two  or  three  séances.)

Here,  for  example,  is  the  case  of  X ,  one  of  my  patients

who  is  accustomed  to  being  hypnotized,  and  who  is  subject  to
light  somnambulism.  Without  putting  him  to  sleep,  I  say
directly,  "  Close  you  hand.  You  cannot  open  it  again."  He
keeps  his  hand  closed  and  contractured  and  makes  fruitless
efforts  to  open  it.  I  make  him  hold  out  his  other  arm,  with  his
hand  open  and  say,  "  You  cannot  shut  it."  He  tries  in  vain  to
do  so,  brings  the  phalanges  into  semiflexion,  one  upon  the  other,
but  can  do  no  more  in  spite  of  every  effort.

I  say,  "  Now  your  closed  hand  opens  and  your  opened  hand
closes,"  and  in  a  second  or  two,  the  phenomenon  takes  place  and
the  hands  remain  motionless  in  this  new  position.

Automatic  movements  succeed  very  well  in  his  case.  I  say,
"  Rotate  your  arms  ;  you  cannot  stop  them."  He  turns  them
one  about  the  other  for  an  indefinite  time.  I  add,  "  Do  all  you
can  to  stop  them.  Do  not  try  to  oblige  me,  stop  them  if  you
can."  He  struggles  to  bring  both  hands  together  so  as  to  strike
one  against  the  other.  It  is  useless.  They  fly  apart  like  springs
forced  by  an  involuntary  mechanism.  I  stop  one  of  his  arms,
the  other  keeps  on  turning.  As  soon  as  I  release  the  one  stopped,
it  resumes  its  place  and  continues  the  rotatory  movement.  In
the  same  way,  I  induce  trismus,  wry-neck,  suggestive  paralysis  of
a  limb,  etc.

78

Suggestil  r    7  Inrapcutics.

This  is  not  a  unique  observation  ;  the  same  tiling  is  manifested
by  man}-  patients  susceptible  to  hypnosis,  who  are  not  in  the
least  hysterical,  and  even  by  those  who  do  not  pass  into  a  deep
sleep  but  only  into  that  of  the  second  or  third  degree.  Some  of
them  at  least,  show  exactly  the  same  phenomena  in  the  waking
condition  as  in  the  hypnotic  state  ;  some  exhibit  suggestive  cata-
lepsy with  muscular  contraction,  or  a  varying  contracture  only  ;
others,  catalepsy  with  automatic  movements  ;  others,  at  the  same
time,  suggestive  sensitivo-sensorial  anaesthesia  ;  and  others  still,
all  suggestive  phenomena  up  to  hallucinations.  I  do  not  have  to
assume  a  deep  authoritative  voice  nor  frighten  my  patients  with
a  look,  in  order  to  obtain  the  suggestive  phenomena.  I  speak
pleasantly,  in  the  simplest  manner  possible,  and  obtain  the  effect,
not  only  in  the  docile,  obliging  patients  who  have  no  wili,  but
in  well-balanced,  clear-headed  patients,  possessed  of  strong  wiil
and  some  of  them  even  of  a  spirit  of  insubordination.

Modifications  of  sensibility  maybe  obtained,  in  some  cases,  by
suggestion  in  the  waking  condition.

The  following  is  a  remarkable  instance.  There  is  in  my  service,
a  young,  hysterical  girl  (whose  case  is  related  farther  on)  afflicted
with  sensitivo-sensorial  hemianesthesia  of  the  left  side,  and  cap-
able of  being  hypnotized  into  deep  sleep.

In  the  waking  condition,  she  is  susceptible  to  catalepsy  or
suggestive  contracture.  I  can  effect  transfer  of  the  hemiames-
thesia  from  the  left  to  the  right  side,  without  hypnotizing  and
without  touching  her.

I  say,  "You  will  again  have  feeling  in  your  left  arm  and  hand.
The  sensibility  will  come  back  entirely."  I  direct  her.  attention
to  the  return  of  this  sensibility,  in  a  commanding  manner.  In
three  minutes  she  feels  a  sharp  pain  in  her  shoulder,  and  sensibil-
ity  returns  to  the  shoulder  at  this  moment,  though  not  to  the
fore-arm.  The  right  shoulder  is  insensible.  The  pain  spreads
rapidly  from  the  centre  to  the  periphery,  down  the  fore-arm  and
into  the  fingers,  and  then  disappears.  This  lasts  from  several
seconds  to  a  quarter  of  a  minute.  Sensibility  comes  back  with
the  spreading  pain.  It  is  restored  completely  to  the  upper  left
limb  but  destroyed  in  the  right.  A  transfer  has  taken  place  and
this  transfer  has  not  been  suggested.  The  return  of  sensibility
to  the  left  side  alone  was  suggested.

I  effect  the  transfer  between  the  lower  limbs  simultaneously  ;
if  the  suggestion  is  commanding  enough,  successfully,  if  it  is  less

So  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

authoritative,  less  efficaciously.  Similar  transfer  from  left  to
right  occurs  most  frequently  in  the  special  senses,  smell,  taste,
sight  and  hearing,  and  without  special  suggestion.

The  transfer  back  again  may  be  immediately  provoked,  and
successively,  as  many  times  as  we  wish.

I  can  produce  crossed  sensibility,  in  the  upper  left  limb  and  the
lower  right  limb,  for  example,  and  vice  versa,  the  other  limbs
remaining  anaesthetic.

By  strongly  accentuating  the  suggestion  and  keeping  the
patient's  attention  fixed  upon  both  arms  and  legs,  which  is  some-
times, but  not  always  possible,  I  provoke  the  return  of  sensation
without  transfer.  Both  sides  are  then  sensible.  If,  on  the  con-
trary, the  suggestion  is  insufficient,  the  spreading  pain  and  sensa-
tion stop  half  way.  The  arm  and  the  upper  half  of  the  fore-arm,
for  example,  alone  are  sensible,  the  wrist  and  hand  remaining
anaesthetic.

The  anaesthesia  is  more  rapidly  produced  than  the  restoration
of  sensation.  The  latter  requires  at  least  a  minute,  the  former
is  instantly  obtained.  I  prick  the  left  hand  with  a  pin,,  and  the
patient  reacts  quickly  (the  eyes  being  closed  to  avoid  deception).
Then  I  say,  "  You  no  longer  feel  anything,"  and  I  prick  the  hand
again  ;  there  is  immediate  and  complete  analgesia.

Transfer  or  restoration  of  sensation  may  be  effected  by  a  still
more  efficacious  method,  which,  so  to  speak,  embodies  the  func-
tional re-establishment  in  a  visible  and  tangible  phenomenon.

I  make  the  patient  raise  the  anaesthetic  arm  with  the  hand
closed.  It  remains  in  a  cataleptic  condition.  Then  I  say,  "Your
hand  will -open,  you  arm  will  fall  back  again  and  you  will  again
have  feeling  in  it."  In  less  than  a  minute,  the  hand  opens
suddenly,  as  if  by  a  painful  electric  shock;  the  transfer  of  sensa-
tion has  taken  place.  A  transfer  of  contracture  occurs  at  the
same  time,  if  I  have  suggested  it;  the  other  hand  closes  and  the
arm  becomes  cataleptic.

Instead  of  contracting  the  hands  in  flexion,  I  can  contract
them  in  extension  and  suggest  their  closure.  The  same  effect  is
produced.

I  prevent  the  transfer  and  restore  the  sensation  of  the  anaes-
thetic limb,  keeping  it  in  the  healthy  limb  at  the  same  time,  by
the  following  method.  I  lift  both  arms  and  both  legs,  and  keep
them  in   a   cataleptic   condition  with  the   hands  closed.     Then  I

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  Si

say,  "  Your  hands  will  open,  your  legs  will  fall  back  again  and
you  will  feel  all  over."  In  a  few  instants,  the  hands  open,  the
fall  back  again  and  sensation  is  general.

Finally,  if  while  inducing  these  suggestive  phenomena,  I  say,
and  repeat  authoritatively,  "Sensation  is  returning  without  pains,
you  have  no  pain,"  the  patient  recovers  sensation  without  sudden
or  spreading  pains.

I  may  add,  that  after  a  variable  time,  hemianesthesia  of  the
left  side  reappears  spontaneously.

I  have  performed  and  repeated  all  these  experiments  daily  for
several  weeks,  in  the  presence  of  my  students  and  several  of  my
associates  and  colleagues,  who  have  been  able  to  verify  them,  as
the}'  have  been  all  the  facts  which  I  have  already  stated,  and
have  still  to  state.

In  one  of  my  somnambulistic  cases  (S ,  whose  history  I  have

already  given),  I  can  obtain  all  possible  modifications  of  sensi-
bility in  the  waking  condition.  It  suffices  to  say,  "  Your  left
side  is  insensible."  Then  if  I  prick  his  left  arm  with  a  pin,
stick  the  pin  into  his  nostril,  touch  the  mucous  membrane  of  his
eye,  or  tickle  his  throat,  he  does  not  move.  The  other  side  of
his  body  reacts.  I  transfer  the  anaesthesia  from  the  left  to  the
right  side.  I  produce  total  anaesthesia,  which  was,  on  one  oc-
casion, so  profound  that  my  chef  de  clinique  pulled  out  the  roots
of  five  teeth  which  were  deeply  embedded  in  the  gums,  twist-
ing them  around  in  their  sockets  for  more  than  ten  minutes.
I  simply  said  to  the  patient,  "You  will  have  no  feeling  what-
ever." He  laughed  as  he  spit  out  the  blood  and  did  not  show
the  least  symptom  of  pain.

This  subject,  moreover,  takes  all  suggestions  without  being
hypnotized.  He  may  be  walking  when  I  say,  "  You  cannot  go
any  further,"  and  he  remains  as  if  fixed  to  the  spot.  I  say,
81  Do  all  you  can  to  move  on,  you  cannot  advance."  He  bends
his  body  forward,  but  does  not  succeed  in  lifting  his  feet  from
the  floor.  I  can  provoke  any  attitude  and  any  contracture  I
please  in  him,  and  he  will  keep  it  for  an  indefinite  time.  He  is
susceptible  to  any  hallucinations  suggested.  I  say  to  him,  "  Gp
to  your  bed,  you  will  find  a  basket  of  strawberries  there."  He
goes,  finds  the  imaginary  basket,  holds  it  by  the  handle  and  eats
the  strawberries,  just  as  we  have  seen  subjects  do  in  post-hyp-
notic cases.

G ,  a   boy  fourteen  years  old,  was  admitted  to  the  hospital

S  2  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

on  account  of  a  catarrhal  nephritis  of  which  he  was  rapidly
cured.  He  is  of  lymphatic  temperament,  intelligent,  has  had  a
good  primary  education,  and  shows  no  signs  of  any  nervous
trouble.  I  have  hypnotized  him  four  or  five  times.  He  goes
into  somnambulism,  performs  any  actions  suggested  during  sleep,
has  no  remembrance  of  anything  upon  waking  and  is  susceptible
to  post-hypnotic  hallucinations.

In  the  waking  condition  I  can  induce  suggestive  catalepsy  of
the  upper  limbs  and  automatic  rotation  of  the  arms,  one  about
the  other,  without  his  being  able  to  stop  them,  as  in  examples
already  cited.

I  only  emphasize  the  sensory  phenomena  in  this  case.  After
having  assured  myself  that  his  sensation  is  normally  perfect,
and  that  both  hands  react  quickly  when  pricked,  I  say,  "  Your
right  hand  has  no  more  feeling  in  it.  Your  left  hand  only  can
feel,"  and  I  stick  the  pin  some  distance  into  the  right  hand.  It
does  not  react,  but  the  other  shows  pain  when  it  is  pricked.
Then  I  say,  "  But  no,  it  is  the  left  hand  which  has  no  feeling,"
and  instantly  the  phenomenon  supervenes  ;  the  right  hand  is
sensible  again.  In  the  same  way  I  induce  anaesthesia  of  the
face  and  nostrils,  etc.  The  sense  organs  may  also  be  influenced
by  affirmation.  After  satisfying  myself  that  his  vision  is  normal
I  say  to  him  :  "You  see  well,  and  at  a  great  distance,  with  your
left  eye,  but  your  right  eye  is  defective  and  distinguishes  only
very  near  objects."  Then  I  ask  him  to  read  printed  letters,
three  millimetres  in  height.  The  left  eye  reads  eighty  centime-
tres off,  the  right  only  at  twenty  four  centimetres.

I  bring  about  transfer  by  suggestion,  saying,  "  The  right  eye
sees  very  far  away,  the  left  eye  only  very  near  to."  The  right
eye  reads  at  eighty  centimetres,  the  left  at  twenty-four.  These
distances  are  onîy  measured  when  the  patient  says  he  can  see
clearly.

His  hearing  is  very  good.  The  right  ear  hears  the  ticking
of  a  watch  at  ninety-four  centimetres,  the  left  ear  at  eighty-
seven.

I  say  to  him,  "  You  hear  very  clearly,  and  at  a  long  distance
with  the  left  ear,  but  your  right  ear  hears  only  with  difficulty
and  very  near  to."  I  measure  the  distance  at  which  the  ticking
of  the  watch  is  perceived,  and  get  eighty-seven  centimetres  for
the  left  ear,  and  two  only  for  the   right.     I  suggest  the  transfer

Suggestive    Therapeutics  83

which  immediately  occurs.  These  measurement-;  are  taken  by
my  chef  de  clinque,  while  I  hold  the  boy's  eyes  tightly  closed,
which  seems  to  me  to  exclude  any  chance  of  mistake.

I  suggest  complete  deafness  of  one  side,  lie  says  he  does  not
hear  the  watch  when  held  to  the  ear  of  that  side.  I  transfer  the
deafness  to  the  other  side.  I  suggest  complete  bilateral  deaf-
ness. He  assures  me  that  he  does  not  hear  anything  when  the
watch  is  held  to  both  ears.  When  I  have  restored  his  hearing,  he
says  he  has  not  heard  the  slightest  noise  while  I  was  speaking,
and  only  read  what  I  wished  to  say  by  the  motions  of  my  lips.
Verification  is  of  course  impossible  here.  I  can  only  be  guided
by  the  subject's  assertion.

In  G (Marie,  whose  case  I  have  already  related),  I    can

induce  catalepsy,  automatic  movements,  anaesthesia  and  hallu-
cinations in  the  waking  condition.  I  wish  only  to  speak  of  the
aaaesthesia.  After  having  ascertained  that  sensation  throughout
the  body  was  perfect,  I  said  to  her,  "  You  have  absolutely  no
more  feeling  in  your  right  upper  limb,  it  is  just  as  if  dead."
With  her  eyes  closed  she  no  longer  reacts  to  the  pin.  She  does
not  know  whether  her  arm  is  up  or  on  the  bed  ;  her  muscular
sense  is  gone.  In  order  to  exclude  all  idea  of  deception,  I  use
Dubois-Raymond's  apparatus,  varying  the  intensity  of  the  cur-
rent by  alternately  separating  and  approximating  the  coils  of
the  induction  apparatus.  A  rule  graded  into  centimetres  indi-
cates the  degree  of  separation  of  the  coils.  Now  I  had  already
determined  that  the  tingling  caused  by  the  electricity  was  per-
ceived by  this  subject  when  the  separation  between  the  ends
was  five  centimetres,  and  that  the  pain  became  unendurable,  the
patient  drawing  back  the  arm  suddenly,  when  the  separation
was  from  three  to  two  centimetres.  These  figures  remained
absolutely  the  same  when  her  eyes  were  tightly  closed,  so  that
she  could  not  have  observed  the  degree  of  separation,  and  I
have  proved  this  several  times.  By  this  means  I  determined
that  the  pain  is  really  perceived  and  not  pretended.

This  being  granted,  I  provoke  anaesthesia  by  affirmation  and
place  the  electrodes  on  her  arm  with  the  greatest  current  attain-
able with  the  greatest  approximation  of  the  coils.  The  painful
sensation  thus  produced  is  normally  absolutely  unbearable.
"  The  pretence  of  an  equal  analgesia,"  said  my  colleague,  E.
Victor  Parisot,  who  desired  to  verify  this  experiment,  "would  be
more  remarkable  than  the  production  of  analgesia."     Now  the

8  4  Suggestii  r    T/i  era  peu  tics .

patient  showed  no  sign  of  reaction,  and  assured  me  that  she
felt  nothing  in  her  arm,  and  the  electrodes  were  applied  to  her
arm  indefinitely,  until  I  said,  "Your  arm  is  again  sensible."
In  an  instant  she  drew  it  back.  I  can  produce  the  same  analgesia
by  affirmation  anywhere  on  her  body.  This  experiment  has  been
repeated  before  several  of  my  colleagues,  under  careful  control.
I  frequently  repeat  it  when  I  happen  to  be  passing  by  the
patient.  In  the  same  case  all  possible  hallucinations  may  be
evoked  without  first  hypnotizing.

The  observations  which  I  have  mentioned  are  not  exceptional.
Many  subjects  are  susceptible  to  suggestion  and  hallucination  in
the  waking  condition.

I  will  finish  this  chapter  by  presenting  the  following  fact  which
belongs  to  a  class  of  conceptions  {suggestive  therapeutics)  which  I
shall  treat  later.

A  young  man  was  sent  to  the  Society  of  Medicine  at  Nancy
by  Dr.  Spiilmann.  He  was  syphilitic,  had  vegetations  on  his
penis,  and  presented  some  interesting  hysterical  conditions,
among  others,  a  persistent  amblyopia  of  the  left  eye.  Under
the  influence  of  an  interrupted  current,  suggested  and  tried  by
my  colleague,  M.  Charpentier,  the  acuteness  of  his  vision  which
was  reduced  to  one-sixth,  became  normal  again,  and  the  visual
field  increased  from  ten  to  twenty-five  degrees  in  each  meridian.

Subsequent  hypnotic  suggestion  enlarged  each  one  of  the
meridians  still  more  (from  eight  to  ten  degrees),  and  this
improvement  was  still  observed  at  the  end  of  a  week.

Then,  as  my  colleague  and  I  wished  to  see  what  effect  sugges-
tion would  have  in  the  waking  condition,  united  with  pretended
electrical  treatment,  we  applied  the  electrode  to  the  temple  for
about  fifteen  minutes,  without  allowing  the  current  to  pass.
Now  the  visual  field,  measured  by  M.  Charpentier,  was  increased
seven  degrees  internally,  twenty-five  externally,  and  twenty  in
the  vertical  meridian.  Its  extent  was  greater  than  that  given  as
normal.     (See  observation  farther  on.)

Relative  to  these  experimental  facts,  I  give  without  comment
the  following  quotation  from  Dr.  Charpignon.*

"  Among  the  martyrs  of  Christianity  many  escaped  pain
through  the  ecstasy  which  came  from  the  ardor  of  their  faith,
a  phenomenon  well-known  to  their  executioners,  who  increased

*  Charpignon  :    Etudes  sur  la  Médecine  animique  et  vitaliste.      Paris,  1SC4.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  85

their  fury  and  improved  their  inventions  for  punishment.  In
the  same  way,  at  the  time  of  the  tortures  of  the  Inquisition  cer-
tain individuals  became  insensible  under  the  influence  of  their
faith  in  the  somniferous  virtue  of  some  talisman.  Upon  this
point  1  will  give  the  following  passage,  an  extract  from  Secrets
merveilleux  de  la  magie  naturelle  et  cabalistique.  (In —  12,  Lyons,
1629.)  "  Some  rascals  trusted  so  strongly  in  the  secrets  they
possessed  to  make  themselves  insensible  to  pain,  that  they  vol-
untarily gave  themselves  up  as  prisoners,  to  cleanse  themselves
of  certain  sins.  Some  use  certain  words  pronounced  in  a  low-
voice,  and  others  writings  which  they  hide  on  some  part  of
their  body.  The  first  one  I  recognized  as  using  some  sort  of
charm,  surprised  us  by  his  more  than  natural  firmness,  because
after  the  first  stretching  of  the  rack,  he  seemed  to  sleep  as
quietly  as  if  he  had  been  in  a  good  bed,  without  lamenting,  com-
plaining or  crying,  and  when  the  stretching  was  repeated  two  or
three  times,  he  still  remained  as  motionless  as  a  statue.  This
made  us  suspect  that  he  was  provided  with  some  charm,  and  to
resolve  the  doubt  he  was  stripped  as  naked  as  his  hand.  Yet  after
a  careful  search  nothing  was  found  on  him  but  a  little  piece  of
paper  on  which  were  the  figures  of  the  three  kings,  with  these
words  on  the  other  side  :  '  Beautiful  star  which  delivered  the
Magi  from  Herod's  persecution,  deliver  me  from  all  torment.'
This  paper  was  stuffed  in  his  left  ear.  Now  although  the  paper
had  been  taken  away  from  him  he  still  appeared  insensible  to  the
torture,  because  when-  it  was  applied  he  muttered  words  between
his  teeth  which  we  could  not  hear,  and  as  he  persevered  in  his
denials,  it  was  neces'sary  to  send  him  back  to  prison."

One  word  more  on  a  question»  of  priority,  before  finishing  this
chapter.

I  was  the  first  to  mention  these  phenomena  of  suggestion  in
the  waking  condition  in  my  report  to  the  Congress  for  the
Advancement  of  Science,  held  at  Rouen,  in  August,  1883.  Since
then  these  phenomena  have  been  verified  by  Bottey,  Dumont-
pallier,  Charles  Richet  and  by  observers  in  general.

Fourteen  months  after  my  communication,  Charles  Richet,  in  a
paper  entitled,  De  la  suggestion  sans  hypnotisme,  seems  to  claim
priority  in  the  discovery,  and  mentions  a  communication  made
by  himself  to  the  Biological  Society,  in  1882  (No.  3).

This  communication  was  concerning  a  person  who  without
being  hysterical,  and  without  the  aid  of  hypnotism,  showed  re-

86  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

markable  symptoms  of  contracture  when  pressure  was  exerted
on  the  muscles,  the  contracture  disappearing  upon  a  slight  excite-
ment, such  as  insufflation  or  sudden  noise.  Further,  if  a  light
oscillatory  movement  was  impressed  upon  the  hand  for  half  a
minute,  the  patient  could  not  stop  it  voluntarily  ;  it  kept  up
indefinitely.

The  author  refers  to  the  reflex  medullary  excitability  intensi-
fied to  such  a  degree  that  the  psychical  centres  can  no  longer
exercise  control  over  the  spinal  cord.  This  then  is  all  that  M.
Richet  says.  He  did  not  see  that  it  was  a  question  of  suggestion.
His  communication  is  entitled,  Notes  stir  quelques  faits  relatifs
a  l'excitabilité  musculaire.  He  passed  close  by  a  fact  without
getting  the  real  signification  of  it.

It  was  not  until  1884,  after  I  had  shown  that  phenomenon  of
paralysis,  contracture,  sensitive  and  sensorial  anesthesia,  sensorial
illusions,  and  complex  hallucinations  may  be  obtained  by  sugges-
tion in  a  great  number  of  subjects  susceptible  to  hypnotism,
without  hypnosis,  just  as  absolutely  as  with  it,  that  enlightened
by  the  facts  I  had  published,  he  at  length  comprehended  the
significance  of  what  he  had  seen,  and  published  a  new  paper  en-
titled :  De  la  suggestion  sans  hypnotisme.  (Biological  Society,
October  11,  1884.)

I  should  add  further  that  after  having  demonstrated  these
facts,  I  found  them  mentioned  by  Braid  under  the  name  of
"  Phenomena  of  the  waking  condition,"  in  a  treatise  entitled,
The  power  of  the  mind  over  the  body,  published  since  1846,  and
later  in  an  additional  chapter  to  his  Nenrypnology,  in  1860.
They  have  been  confirmed  in  America  under  the  name  of  Elec-
tro-biology. I  have,  then,  only  called  attention  to  these  phenom-
ena ;  and  I  was  moreover,  the  first  to  notice  suggestive  anaesthe-
sia and  analgesia  in  the  waking  condition,  of  which  Braid  has
made  no  mention.

CHAPTER  VI.

Reply  to  critics. — The  three  phases  of  hypnotism  according  to  the  school  of  the
Salpêtrière. — Experiments  of  transfer. — Experimental  illusions. — The  real
image  and  the  hallucinatory  image.

IN  the  preceding  pages,  I  have  endeavored  to  outline  as  faith-
fully and  exactly  as  possible,  the  different  manifestations  from
simple  drowsiness  to  the  most  pronounced  degree  of  deep  som-
nambulism, which  can  be  induced  in  the  various  hypnotic  con-
ditions.

I  now  wish  to  answer  several  criticisms  which  have  been  made
upon  the  observations  carried  on  at  Nancy,  and  at  the  same  time
to  show  in  what  respect  and  why  the  results  we  obtain  differ
from  those  observed  by  the  school  of  the  Salpêtrière.

M.  Charcot,  who  has  made  his  experiments  principally  upon
hysterical  cases,  considers  the  hypnotic  condition  developed  in
them  to  be  a  real  neurosis,  essentially  made  up  of  three  states
or  periods,  each  having  its  own  very  distinct  differential  charac-
teristics, and  states  that  the  operator  may  make  the  subject  pass
at  will  from  one  to  the  other,  by  means  of  certain  skilful  manip-
ulations.

The  first  is  the  lethargic  state.  It  is  obtained  either  by  fixa-
tion upon  an  object  or  by  pressing  lightly  upon  the  eye-ball
through  the  closed  eyelids.  The  lethargy  thus,  induced  is  char-
acterized essentially  by  the  appearance  of  deep  sleep,  relaxation
of  the  muscles,  anaesthesia,  often  complete,  and  the  abeyance  of
the  intellectual  life.  In  this  stage,  suggestion  is  impossible.
But  a  certain  muscular  hyper-excitability  is  noticeable  ;  any
muscle  excited  by  pressure  or  light  friction,  contracts  ;  pressure
upon  ulnar  nerve  provokes  the  ulnar  attitude  (griffe  cubital),  and
pressure  upon  the  facial  nerve  is  followed  by  distortion  of  the
features  of  the  corresponding  side  of  the  face.

The  second  is  the  cataleptic  condition.  To  make  a  subject
pass  from  the  first  to  the  second  stage,  it  is  only  necessary  to
raise  the  eyelids.  If  one  eye  only  is  opened,  the  corresponding
side  of  the  body  alone  passes  into  the  cataleptic  condition,  the

$7

88  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

other  side  remaining  lethargic.  The  cataleptic  subject  retains
any  position  into  which  he  is  put  ;  the  neuro-muscular  hyper-
excitability  has  disappeared.

In  this  condition,  suggestions  can  be  induced  through  the
muscular  sense.  For  example,  if  the  subject's  hands  are  brought
together  as  if  to  throw  a  kiss,  the  face  assumes  a  smiling  expres-
sion ;  if  joined  as  in  prayer,  the  face  becomes  grave  and  the  sub-
ject kneels  down.  The  subject  can  be  made  to  pass  from  the
cataleptic  to  the  lethargic  condition  by  closing  his  eyelids.
Finally  this  condition  can  be  directly  induced  without  being  pre-
ceded by  lethargy,  through  the  nervous  shock  caused  by  a  very
brilliant  light  or  a  violent  noise.

The  third  stage  is  that  of  somnambulism.  It  can  be  primarily
induced  by  fixation  or  by  other  methods.  Lethargy  or  cata-
lepsy can  be  transformed  into  somnambulism,  by  light  or  re-
peated friction  of  the  top  of  the  subject's  head.  This  condition
is  characterized  by  a  more  or  less  marked  habitual  anaesthesia,
hyper-acute  sensibility,  and  above  all,  by  the  susceptibility  of
the  subject  to  all  suggestions.

The  neuro-muscular  hyper-excitability  does  not  exist  in  this
stage.  Permanent  contractions  cannot  be  induced  by  mechanical
excitation  of  the  muscles  or  nerves  ;  but  by  means  of  light  con-
tact, or  by  gently  breathing  upon  the  skin,  etc.,  a  special  contrac-
ture may  be  induced,  "  differing  from  the  contracture  of  the
lethargic  state  in  that  it  cannot  be  relaxed  by  the  excitation  of
the  antagonistic  muscles,  and  from. cataleptic  immobility  in  that
it  resists,  when  one  wishes  to  alter  the  position."  (Binet  and
Féré.)

Somnambulism  can  be  transformed  into  catalepsy  by  opening
the  subject's  eyes,  or  into  lethargy,  by  closing  the  lids  and  press-
ing lightly  upon  the  eye-balls.  These  three  phases  constitute
what  is  called  "  le  grand  hypnotisme,"  or  the  great  hypnotic
neurosis.

The  Nancy  school  has  been  reproached  with  having  rushed
suddenly  into  the  field  of  psychical  phenomena  instead  of  hav-
ing first  studied  the  somatic,  physical  characters  of  the  subjects
hypnotized.  They  say  that  we  have  confused  and  confounded
all  the  different  conditions  without  discerning  them  ;  in  short,
that  we  have  not  mentioned  whether  our  patients  were  in  the
lethargic,  cataleptic,  or  somnambulistic  condition.

Ï  reply  that  if  we  have  not  taken  the  three   phrases  of  hysteri-

çgestive    Therapeutics.  89

cal  hypnotism,  as  Charcot  describes  them,  for  the  starting-point
of  our  researches,  it  is  because  we  have  not  been  able  to  confirm
their  existence  by  our  observations.  The  following  is  what  we
constantly  observe  at  Nancy.  When  a  patient,  hysterical  or  not,
is  hypnotized  by  no  matter  what  method,  by  fixation  upon  a
brilliant  object,  or  upon  the  operator's  fingers  or  eyes,  by  passes,
vocal  suggestion,  or  closure  of  the  eyelids,  there  comes  a
moment  at  which  the  eyes  remain  shut.  Often,  but  not  always,
they  are  rolled  up  under  the  upper  lid.  Sometimes  a  twitching
of  the  lids  occurs,  but  this  is  not  constant.  We  neither  observe
the  existence  of  neuro-muscular  hyper-excitability  nor  exaggera-
tion of  the  tendon  reflexes.  Is  this  state  that  of  lethargy  ?  I
insist  upon  it,  that  in  this  condition,  as  in  all  hypnotic  condi-
tions, the  hypnotized  patient  hears  the  operator.  His  attention
is  fixed  upon  him  and  his  ears  are  prepared  to  catch  any  sound.
He  frequently  answers  questions  ;  indeed,  this  is  almost  always
the  case,  if  it  is  insisted  upon,  and  he  is  told  that  he  can  speak.
Then  although  he  remains  motionless  and  insensible,  with  his
face  as  expressionless  as  a  mask,  and  to  all  appearance  isolated
from  the  outer  world,  he  hears  everything.  Upon  waking,  later,
he  may  or  may  not  remember  all  that  has  passed.  The  proof
is  that  without  touching  him  and  without  blowing  on  his  eyes,
he  is  awakened  by  simply  saying,  once  or  twice,  "  Wake  up."

In  this  condition,  the  subject  is  capable  of  manifesting  the
phenomena  of  catalepsy  or  somnambulism  without  the  necessity
of  subjecting  him  to  any  manipulation,  provided  the  degree  of
hypnotization  is  deep  enough.

In  order  to  cause  a  limb  to  assume  the  cataleptic  condition,  it
is  not  necessary  to  open  the  patient's  eyes  or  to  subject  him  to  a
brilliant  light  or  to  a  loud  noise,  as  is  done  at  the  Salpêtrière.
It  is  sufficient  to  lift  the  limbs,  keeping  them  up  for  some  time
and  asserting  that  the  patient  is  unable  to  lower  them  again.
They  remain  in  suggestive  catalepsy  and  the  subject  hypnotized,
whose  will  or  power  of  resistance  is  enfeebled,  passively  main-
tains the  position  imposed  upon  him.

It  is  unnecessary  to  rub  the  crown  of  the  head  as  is  done  at  the
Salpêtrière,  in  order  to  demonstrate  somnambulistic  character-
istics in  patients  who  are  capable  of  showing  them.  To  speak
to  the  patient  is  enough,  and  being  susceptible  to  suggestion,
he  performs  the  action  or  realizes  the  phenomenon  suggested.
Passes  or  breathing  upon  the  skin  bring  about  no  contracture  of

go  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

the  underlying  muscles,  in  our  subjects,  when  suggestion  is  not
used.  We  have  not  observed  that  the  act  of  opening  or  of  shut-
ting the  eyes,  or  of  rubbing  the  top  of  the  head  modify  the
phenomena  in  any  way,  or  that  these  actions  develop  the  phe-
nomena in  subjects  incapable  of  manifesting  them  by  sugges-
tion alone.

We  have  simply  observed  that  there  are  variable  degrees  of
susceptibility  to  suggestion  in  hypnotized  subjects.  Some  mani-
fest only  occlusion  of  the  eyes,  with  or  without  a  general  drowsi-
ness ;  others  exhibit  beside  this,  a  relaxation  of  the  limbs  with
inertia  or  inaptitude  for  spontaneous  movements;  others  still,
retain  the  attitudes  impressed  upon  them— (suggestive  cata-
epsy).  In  short,  suggestive  contracture,  automatic  obedience,
anaesthesia  and  provoked  hallucinations  mark  the  progressive
development  of  this  susceptibility  to  suggestion.  One  subject
out  of  about  six  or  seven  hypnotized,  reaches  the  highest
degree  of  somnambulism,  with  amnesia  upon  waking,  and  when
he  does  not  reach  this  degree  immediately  by  hypnotization
alone,  none  of  the  manœvres  we  have  tried  can  develop  it.
Continued  suggestion  alone  has  been  able  to  produce  it.  The
degree  of  hypnotic  suggestibility  has  always  seemed  to  us  to
depend  upon  individual  temperament  and  the  psychical  influ-
ence exercised  ;  not  in  the  least  upon  the  manipulation
employed.

This  is  what  I  have  constantly  observed  in  the  several  hundred
people  whom  I  have  hypnotized.  None  of  my  colleagues  at
Nancy,  nor  M.  Liébault,  who  has  hypnotized  more  than  six
thousand  persons  during  the  last  twenty-five  years,  have  ever
observed  anything  to  the  contrary.

I  have  never  been  able  to  induce  in  any  of  my  cases,  the  three
phases  of  the  Salpêtrière  school,  and  it  is  not  for  want  of  trial.
I  add,  that  even  in  three  hospitals  in  Paris,  I  have  seen  subjects
hypnotized  in  my  presence  and  they  acted  as  our  subjects  do,
and  the  doctors  who  were  treating  them  fully  confirmed  our
observations.

Once  only  did  I  see  a  subject  who  exhibited  perfectly  the
three  periods  of  lethargy,  catalepsy  and  somnambulism.  It  was
a  young  girl  who  had  been  at  the  Salpêtrière  for  three  years,  and
why  should  I  not  state  the  impression  which  I  retained  of  the
case  ?  Subjected  to  a  special  training  by  manipulations,  imitat-
ing the  phenomena  which  she  saw  produced  in  other  somnambu-

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  91

lists  of  the  same  school,  taught  by  imitation  to  exhibit  reflex
phenomena  in  a  certain  typical  order,  the  case  was  no  longer  one
of  natural   hypnotism,    but   a   product   of   false    training,    a   true
festive  hypnotic  neurosis.

Even  if  I  am  mistaken,  and  these  phenomena  are  met  with
primarily,  and  without  any  suggestion,  we  must  recognize  that
this  "grand  hypnose  "  is  a  rare  condition.  Binet  and  Féré  say
that  only  a  dozen  of  these  cases  have  occurred  at  the  Salpêtrière
in  ten  years.  Should  these  cases,  opposed  to  thousands  of  cases
in  which  these  phenomena  are  wanting,  serve  as  the  basis  for  the
theoretical  conception  of  hypnotism  ?

It  would  be  a  curious  thing  in  the  history  of  hypnotism  to
see  so  many  distinguished  minds  misled  by  an  erroneous  first
conception,  and  carried  into  a  series  of  singular  errors  which  no
longer  permit  them  to  see  the  truth.  Grievous  errors  they  are,
for  they  hinder  progress  by  obscuring  a  question  which  is  so
simple  that  everything  explains  itself,  when  it  is  known  that
suggestion  is  the  key  to  all  hypnotic  phenomena!

From  this  point  of  view,  there  is  nothing  more  curious  to  read
than  the  many  transfer  experiments  of  MM.  Binet  and  Féré.
These  authors  conclude  from  their  experiments,  that  the  appli-
cation of  a  magnet  to  a  hypnotized  subject  can  transfer  to  the
side  to  which  it  is  applied, — for  example,  to  the  upper  left
limb, — such  phenomena  as  anaesthesia,  contracture,  paralysis,  etc.,
which  have  been  provoked  on  the  opposite  side, — for  example,
in  the  upper  right  limb.  In  the  same  way,  the  magnet  is
supposed  to  transfer  sensorial  anaesthesia,  hallucinations  of  the
senses,  of  smell,  hearing,  sight,  taste,  and  touch.  This  transfer
is  supposed  to  take  place  without  the  intervention  of  suggestion,
by  a  simple  physical  phenomenon  in  which  the  subjects  brain,
considered  as  the  psychical  organ,  takes  no  part.

These  authors  think  they  have  eliminated  suggestion  because
they  have  made  their  experiments  in  the  conditions  known  as
lethargy  and  catalepsy.  They  say,  "  These  are  unconscious
states  in  the  '  grand  hypnose,'  states  in  which  the  condition  of
the  senses  and  intelligence  renders  the  subject  a  complete
stranger  to  what  is  going  on  around  him.  Experiment,  however.
shows  that  in  these  conditions  the  magnet  transfers  a  large
number  of  phenomena."  This  is  a  fundamental  error,  which  has
been  the  source  of  all  the  experimental  illusions  of  these
authors.

92  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

I  repeat  that  the  subject  remains  conscious  in  all  degrees  of
hypnotism,  as  we  have  observed  in  thousands  of  cases  in  Nancy.

If,  in  the  twelve  only  cases  in  which,  during  the  space  of  ten
years,  the  phenomena  of  what  is  called  "great  hypnotism"  to
distinguish  it  from  what  is  known  as  the  "little  hypnotism"  of
the  Nancy  School,  have  been  observed  ;  if  in  these  cases,  an
apparent  unconsciousness  during  what  is  called  the  lethargic
state  has  been  noticed,  I  believe  that  it  was  only  an  illusion.
The  subject,  unconsciously  educated  in  this  suggestion,  cannot
react  in  this  condition,  because  he  believes  he  cannot,  because  the
idea  has  been  introduced  into  his  brain,  that  as  the  necessary
manipulation  has  not  been  made  upon  him,  he  cannot  emerge
from  this  state,  and  cannot  accept  any  suggestion.  Nothing  is
easier  than  to  artificially  create  an  analogous  condition  in  all
somnambulistic  cases.

This  granted,  I  have  tried  to  reproduce  MM.  Binet's  and
Féré's  experiments.  I  have  tried  a  great  many  times  on  a  great
many  subjects,  in  the  presence  of  several  colleagues,  among
them,  MM.  Beaunis  and  Charpentier,  and  should  never  have
succeeded  unless  suggestion  had  been  employed.

For  example,  here  is  an  experiment  which  I  made  with  M.
Beaunis.  We  hypnotized  a  nurse  in  our  service  who  was  sus-
ceptible to  somnambulism.  She  had  never  been  present,  either
as  witness  or  subject  of  the  kind  of  experiment  which  I  wanted
to  try  On  her.  I  put  the  upper  left  limb  into  the  cataleptic  con-
dition in  the  horizontal  position,  the  thumb  and  index  finger
stretched  out,  the  other  fingers  bent  ;  the  right  arm  remained
relaxed.

I  applied  a  magnet  to  it  for  eight  minutes.  No  phenomenon
occurred.

Then,  turning  to  M.  Beaunis,  I  said,  "  Now  I  am  going  to  try
an  experiment.  I  shall  apply  the  magnet  to  the  right  hand  (on
the  unaffected  side),  and  in  a  minute  you  will  see  this  arm  lifted
and  take  the  exact  attitude  of  the  left  arm,  while  the  latter  re-
laxes and  falls."

I  placed  the  magnet  just  where  it  was  at  first,  and  in  a  min-
ute, the  suggested  transfer  was  realized  with  perfect  precision.
The  subject's  face  was  expressionless.      It  was  a  lifeless  mask.

If  then,  without  saying  anything  more,  I  put  the  magnet  back
against  the  left  hand  at  the  end  of  a  minute,  the  transfer
occured  in  inverse  order,  and  so  on  consecutively.

Suggestive  Therapeutics.  93

In  the  same  subject.  I  can  provoke  wry-neck  by  the  contrac-
ture of  the  muscles  of  one  side  of  the  neck.  I  bring  the  magnet
to  the  opposite  side,  without  saying  anything.  In  a  minute,  the
head  turns  toward  the  side  where  the  magnet  is,  and  there  is  wry-
neck of  the  opposite  side.     The  transfer  has  taken  place.

A  single  statement  to  the  effect  that  the  transfer  would  occur,
made  to  M.  Beaunis  in  the  subject's  presence,  sufficed  to  ensure
the  occurrence  of  the  phenomenon  on  every  subsequent  occa-
sion and  for  all  positions,  because  the  idea  of  the  phenomenon
had  penetrated  into  the  subject's  mind,  which  was  intelligent
and  attentive,  in  spite  of  her  apparent  inertia.

Afterwards  I  said,  "  I  shall  change  the  direction  of  the  mag-
net, and  the  transfer  will  take  place  from  the  arm  to  the  leg."

At  the  end  of  a  minute,  the  arm  fell,  and  the  leg  was  raised.
I  put  the  magnet  against  the  leg,  without  saying  anything,  and
the  transfer  took  place  from  the  leg  to  the  arm.

If,  without  saying  anything  to  the  subject,  I  replace  the  mag-
net by  a  knife,  a  pencil,  a  bottle,  a  piece  of  paper,  or  use  noth-
ing in  its  place,  the  same  phenomenon  occurs.

The  next  day,  I  repeated  these  experiments  on  another  som-
nambulist who  had  been  present  the  day  before,  and,  without
saying  anything  to  her  or  to  any  of  the  persons  present,  they
succeeded  marvellously;  the  idea  of  the  transfer  had  been  sug-
gested to  her  mind  by  the  circumstances  of  which  she  had  been
a  witness.

Moreover,  after  I  had  repeated  this  transfer  from  one  arm  to
the  other  several  times,  on  discontinuing  the  alternate  applica-
tions of  the  magnet,  the  transfer  recurred  twice  spontaneously
{consecutive  oscillations),  doubtless,  on  account  of  the  idea  the
person  had  that  the  experiment  was  being  continued.  Before
this,  I  had  tried  several  times  to  obtain  the  transfer  in  this  sub-
ject, but  without  result,  so  that  the  idea  of  the  phenomenon
could  not  have  penetrated  into  her  mind.

MM.  Binet  and  Féré  state,  also,  that  the  transfer  of  localized
phenomena  such  as  the  attitude  of  the  limb  in  catalepsy,
paralysis  and  hallucination,  is  accompanied  with  a  localized  pain
in  the  head,  generally  appearing  first  on  the  side  to  which  the
magnet  is  applied,  then  passing  to  the  other  side.  "  The  posi-
tion of  this  pain  is  constant  for  the  same  limb,  and  the  same
sense,  and  should  accord  precisely  with  the  corresponding  corti-
cal   centre.     Thus    the    transfer   of    the    positions    and    of    the

94  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

paralysis  of  the  upper  limb,  determines  a  pain  which  is  localized
at  the  level  of  the  inferior  extremity  of  the  second  frontal  con-
volution, and  of  the  corresponding  region  of  the  ascending
frontal  ;  for  the  movements  employed  in  the  articulation  of
words,  inferior  and  anterior  to  this  position  ;  for  the  lower  limb,
about  the  upper  part  of  the  fissure  of  Rolando  ;  for  sight  hal-
lucinations, in  the  upper  part  of  the  inferior  parietal  lobule  in
the  region  where  hemianopsia  and  word  blindness  have  been
localized  ;  for  hallucinations  of  hearing,  in  the  anterior  region  of
the  sphenoidal-lobe."

Here  is  another  one  of  these  authors'  experiments.

"  Wit  (the  same  somnambulist  who  served  for  all  these
transfer  experiments)  is  in  the  somnambulistic  condition.  We
suggest  to  her  to  count  up  to  one  hundred.  When  waked,  she
begins  to  count.  A  ten-armed  magnet  is  placed  near  her  right
arm.  When  she  gets  as  far  as  seventy-two,  she  stops,  stutters,
and  can  count  no  farther,  and,  in  a  minute,  cannot  even  speak.
She  can  readily  stick  out  her  tongue,  however,  and  understands
everything  that  is  said  to  her.  She  is  very  lively  and  laughs
continually  ;  her  head  is  turned  to  the  left.  In  ten  minutes,
the  magnet  is  applied  to  the  left  side.  After  about  two  minntes,
her  left  arm  begins  to  tremble,  and  her  speech  comes  back.
Her  first  words  are,  '  That  makes  me  act  foolishly.'  Then  she
feels  an  inclination  to  cry,  at  the  same  time  turning  her  head  to
the  right.

"  It  is  easy  to  account  for  what  has  happened,"  say  these
authors  ;  "  we  have  caused  a  peculiar  excitement  of  the  left
brain,  or,  more  exactly,  of  the  convolution  of  Broca,  by  sugges-
tion, which  manifests  itself  outwardly  by  the  act  of  counting
aloud.  The  magnet  has  caused  the  transfer  of  this  excitement
to  the  symmetrical  area  of  the  right  brain.  The  corresponding
convolution  on  this  side  does  not  subserve  speech  ;  the  patient  is
silent."     {Revue Philosophique,  January,  1885.)

I  defy  any  one  to  reproduce  these  phenomena  under  conditions
in  which  suggestion  cannot  play  a  part  ;  and  it  is  upon  experi-
ments of  this  kind  that  M.  Binet  builds  up  psychological  theo-
ries, which  he  speaks  of  as  experimental  !

Is  it  worth  while  to  say,  that  I  have  never  observed  the  trans-
fer, spontaneously  accompanied  with  a  localized  pain  in  the  head,
in  any  of  my  hypnotic  cases?  But  each  time  I  stated  that  there
would  be  a  pain  at  such  or  such  a  part  of  the  head,  the  subjects

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  95

felt  it.  A  second  hypnotized  subject  sometimes  manifested  it
spontaneously,  when  he  had  seen  it  exhibited  by  the  first.
Neither  have  I  been  able  to  determine,  without  suggestion,  any
phenomena  by  pressure  exercised  upon  certain  points  of  the
cranium.  For  example,  here  is  one  of  my  somnambulistic  cases
hypnotized.  I  press  upon  the  different  points  of  the  cranium
successively  ;  no  result.  I  say,  "  Now  I  am  going  to  touch  that
part  of  the  cranium  which  corresponds  to  the  movements  of
the  left  arm,  and  this  arm  will  go  into  convulsion."  Having  said
this,  I  touch  an  arbitrary  part  of  the  head  ;  immediately  the  left
arm  is  convulsed.

I  say,  "  I  press  harder,  and  paralysis  will  take  the  place  of
excitement."  The  arm  falls  motionless.  In  the  same  way,  I
provoke  convulsions  localized  to  one  side  of  the  face.

I  state  that  I  am  going  to  induce  aphasia  by  touching  the
region  corresponding  to  speech.  I  touch  any  part  of  the  head,
and  the  subject  no  longer  replies  to  our  questions;  he  answers  as
soon  as  I  take  my  hand  off  his  head.  Then  I  state  that  I  shall
touch  the  head  in  such  a  way  that  irritation  will  result,  instead  of
paralysis  ;  speech  will  then  be  easier  and  the  person  then  answers
my  questions  in  the  following  manner.  "  What  is  your  name?"
— "Marie — Marie — Marie — Marie."  "How  are  you?" — "Well
— Well — Well  " — etc.  "  You  have  no  pain  ?  " — "  None  at  all —
none  at  all — none  at  all,"  etc.

It  is  well  to  add  that  many  somnambulists  possess  extremely
acute  perception.  The  slightest  indication  guides  them.  Know-
ing that  they  should  carry  out  the  hypnotizer's  thought,  they
make  an  effort  to  divine  it.  If  the  transfer  experiments  have
been  repeated  many  times  with  the  same  subject,  he  readily
guesses  that  he  should  transfer  such  and  such  a  phenomenon,
and  without  anything  being  said  before  him,  he  can  divine
whether  the  transfer  should  occur  or  not,  by  the  expectant  atti-
tude of  the  operator  or  by  some  other  indication.

If  I  rather  insist  upon  these  facts  and  lay  stress  upon  my
critical  observations,  I  do  so  in  order  that  the  doctrine  of  hyp-
notic phenomena  may  be  perceived  in  its  very  origin.

I  also  wish  to  describe  here,  some  experiments  upon  hallucina-
tory images  which  were  made  with  the  aid  of  my  colleague,  M.
Charpentier.  Nothing  shows  better  that  these  experiments  how
readily  suggestion  takes  effect  and  how  deceptive  is  observation.

It  is  possible  to  suggest  to   many  somnambulists  during  their

c)6  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

sleep  that  they  will  see  such  and  such  things  upon  waking,  and
the  hallucination  may  be  realized  with  such  vividness  that  the
subject  confounds  it  with  reality.  Now,  MM.  Féré,  Binet,  and
Parinaud  have  concluded  from  their  experiments,  that  this  image
acts  like  a  real  image,  obeying  the  laws  of  optics.  For  example,
they  contend  that  a  prism  doubles  it,  or  again,  if  cards  are
colored  red  and  green  by  suggestion  and  these  colors  are  super-
posed by  one  of  the  known  methods,  the  patient  sees  gray  as  the
resulting  color  produced  by  the  mixture  of  these  two  comple-
mentary colors.

Are  these  results  accurate  ?  Does  the  image  suggested,  act  as
they  allege,  like  a  real  image  ?  Is  it  objective  ?  Does  it  traverse
the  peripheral  apparatus  of  vision,  the  retina  and  the  optic  nerve,
up  to  the  visual  centre  of  the  cerebral  cortex?  Or  is  it  only  a
subjective  image  awakened  directly  as  a  memory  in  the  visual
center  and  evoked  by  the  subject's  imagination?

We  have  made  some  experiments  calculated  to  decide  this
question  and  shall  describe  them  in  the  order  in  which  they  were
made.

As  subjects,  we  have  chosen  non-hysterical  women  of  medium
intelligence  and  good  judgment,  who  were  susceptible  during
sleep  to  all  grades  of  suggestion  ;  that  is  to  say,  to  anaesthesia,
catalepsy,  sensorial  illusions,  hypnotic  and  post-hypnotic  hal-
lucinations. All  of  them  could  be  put  into  a  condition  of  com-
plete analgesia  during  their  sleep.  They  did  not  move  if  their
nostrils  were  tickled  and  there  was  no  question  of  simulation  in
the  matter.  What  is  more,  and  we  insist  upon  this  fundamental
precaution,  all  these  experiments  were  performed  without  saying
a  word,  even  in  a  low  voice,  that  could  put  the  hypnotized  subjects
on  the  right  track  ;  because,  and  nothing  can  be  more  easily
demonstrated,  they  hear  in  all  degrees  of  the  hypnosis,  and  often
note  everything  with  a  delicacy  of  perception  which  is,  at  times,
highly  remarkable.

This  premised,  the  following  are  the  facts.

Louise  C seventeen    years  old,  healthy,  is    easily  hypnotized  by

simple  closure  of  the  eyelids  and  an  injunction  to  sleep.  We  prepare  a
disc  of  white  card-board,  and  suggest  to  her  that  upon  waking  she  will
see  the  left  side  of  the  disc  red  and  the  right  side  green.  She  sees
these  two  colors  distinctly  upon  waking.  We  then  put  this  card-board
on   a  rotating  disc  and  make  it  rotate  rapidly.     We  know  that  when  two

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  qj

•
primary  colors  fall  thus  simultaneously  upon  the  retina,  they  are
ceived    as  one   color.       Now,    the  two  colors  mentioned  would,    when

blended,  appear    as   yellow,  but    if  we  ask  L what  color  she  sees.

she  designates  white.

2d.  Having  hypnotized  her  again,  we  suggest  that  she  will  see
another  disc,  half  yellow,  half  blue.  When  she  wakes,  we  show  her  the
same  disc  perfectly  white,  but  she  sees  the  two  suggested  colors.  We
make  it  rotate.     She  sees  white  again.

3d.  While  she  sleeps,  we  prepare  a  real  blue  and  yellow  disc  and
she  perceives  it  thus  upon  waking,  and  when  rotated  it  again  appears
white  to  her.

4th.  A  perfectly  blue  disc  appears  red  and  yellow  to  her  by  sugges-
tion.    When  rotated,  it  always  appears  white.

5th.  The  same  blue  disc  is  suggested  to  be  blue  and  violet.  When
rotated,  it  appears  white.

6th.  A  white  disc  is  suggested  to  be  red  and  yellow.  When  she
wakes,  she  sees  the  two  colors  distinctly.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the
card  board  out  of  Louise's  sight,  we  had  marked  with  a  pencil  the  part
suggested  yellow,  and  the  part  suggested  red.  To  displace  the  two
colors,  we  turned  the  disc  around,  unknown  to  the  subject,  and  asked  her
to  indicate  them.  We  repeated  this  experiment  several  times,  and  each
time  Louise  pointed  out,  rapidly  and  exactly,  the  red  and  the  yellow
halves,  as  marked  on  the  reverse  side.  But  we  perceived  an  opening,
with  a  seam,  in  the  center  of  the  card-board,  which  might  answer  as  a
guiding  mark.  This  we  removed.  Louise  could  not  localize  any  longer.
She  pointed  out  the  red  and  yellow  at  random,  to  the  right  or  left,  up  or
down.  Her  indications  no  longer  agreed  with  the  mark  on  the
disc.

The  second  series  of  experiments  was  made  with  Rose  A ,  a  girl

eighteen  years  old,  two  months  convalescent  from  typhoid  fever,  and  like
the  preceding  subject  susceptible  to  all  degrees  of  suggestion.

1  st.  During  her  sleep  it  is  suggested  that  a  white  disc  will  appear  half
red,  half  yellow.  When  she  wakes  up,  she  sees  the  two  colors  clearly.
When  the  disc  is  rotated,  she  sees  yellow  and  red  together.

2d.  A  white  disc  appears  yellow  and  blue  by  suggestion.  It  is
turned  in  another  direction  unknown  to  her.  Rose  localizes  the  yellow
and  the  blue  by  chance.  When  the  disc  is  rotated  she  sees  both  yellow
and  blue.

3d.  A  disc  really  red  appears  yellow  and  blue  by  suggestion.  If
the  disc  is  displaced  without  her  knowledge,  she  localizes  the  two
colors  by  chance.  She  sees  both  yellow  and  blue,  when  it  is  ro-
tated.

4th.     A  white  disc  appears  red  by  suggestion.     The  disc  being  placed
7

gS  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

•

on  a  sheet  of  white  paper,  Rose  is  asked  to  fix  her  eyes  on  it  for  two
minutes.  Then  it  is  lifted  suddenly  and  she  is  asked  what  color  she
sees.  She  says  only  white.  After  a  few  seconds  she  thinks  she  sees
the  red  appearing,  but  she  does  not  see  the  complementary  color  green,
which  would  appear  after  gazing  at  an  actually  red  object.

A  third  series  of  analogous  experiments  was  made  with  Mme.   G ,

forty-seven  years  old,  troubled  with  arthropathy  of  the  right  knee,
secondary  to  locomotor  ataxia.  She  is  a  very  intelligent  woman  and
highly  suggestible,  like  the  two  preceding  cases.

ist.  A  white  disc  appears  red  and  yellow  by  suggestion.  If  we
turn  it  another  way,  she  localizes  the  two  colors  by  chance.  When  ro-
tated, she  sees  two  colors  at  once.

2d.  The  same  result  is  obtained  with  the  same  disc  suggested  to  be
red  and  green,  or  yellow  and  violet.

3d.  A  white  disc  is  suggested  to  be  half  red,  half  white.  When  she
wakes,  she  says  she  sees  the  red  half  very  distinctly.  She  is  told  to
fix  her  eyes  on  the  disc  for  some  time  and  then  is  asked  the  color  of  the
other  half.  She  always  states  that  it  is  white  and  not  green,  the  color
complementary  to  red.

4th.  In  the  waking  condition  she  is  shown  a  disc,  one  half  of  which  is
really  red  and  the  other  green.  Then  it  is  rotated.  She  recognizes
perfectly  the  yellow  color,  the  result  of  the  mixture  of  the  two
colors.

Then  we  put  her  to  sleep  and  suggest  that  upon  waking  she  will  see
this  same  red  and  green  disc.  We  wake  her  and  show  her  a  white  disc.
She  sees  it  as  red  and  green.  We  rotate  it,  she  sees  white  first,  then
both  red  and  green.

We  hypnotize  her  again  and  suggest  that  when  she  wakes  she  will  see
the  same  red  and  green  disc,  but  that  when  we  rotate  the  disc,  the
two  colors  will  blend  into  a  single  one  which  we  shall  indicate.

When  waked,  she  sees  the  red  and  green  disc  again.  When  rotated,
it  appears  to  her  yellow,  as  she  had  seen  it  before  being  hypnotized.

5th.  Before  being  hypnotized  she  is  shown  a  blue  and  orange  disc.
During  sleep  we  suggest  that  she  will  see  this  same  disc,  and  that  in
rotating  it  rapidly,  she  will  see  but  one  color.

When  she  wakes,  she  sees  (on  a  really  white  disc)  the  two  colors,  the
union  of  which  on  a  rotating  disc  makes  her  see  fire  color,  which  she
compares  to  a  sunset.  The  union  of  the  two  colors  really  gives
gray.

6th.  Before  being  hypnotized,  she  is  shown  a  disc  two  thirds  red
and  one  third  yellow.  Upon  waking  she  sees  these  same  colors  by  sug-
gestion, on  a  disc  which  is  really  blue.  When  we  rotate  the  disc,  she
sees  a  dirty  gray  or  a  gray-blue  color.  The  real  color  formed  by  the
mixture  of  the  two  is  orange.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  çç

All  these  experiments  agree.  The  suggested  image  does  not
act  like  a  real  image.  The  mixture  of  the  suggested  colors  does
not  occur  as  is  the  case  with  differently  colored  rays  of  light  im-
pinging upon  the  retina.  If  it  occurs,  it  is  according  to  the
will  of  the  subject's  imagination  and  contrary  to  optical
laws.

We  have  made  the  following  experiments  in  order  to  confirm
and  verify  this  conclusion.

We  suggest  to  our  hypnotized  subjects  that  upon  waking  they
will  see  some  object,  a  light,  for  example,  one  or  two  metres  in
front  of  them.

When  awakened  they  see  the  light.  Then,  we  put  a  cylinder
before  their  eyes,  which  contains  a  doubly-refracting  prism,  and
which  should,  therefore,  make  an  object  appear  double.  Now
the  majority  of  subjects  do  not  see  the  light  double.

Then,  if  they  are  made  to  look  at  the  real  light  through  the
prism,  they  see  it  double.  If  they  once  know  that  the  prism
has  the  property  of  doubling  objects,  they  see  this  same  duplica-
tion for  the  suggested  image  also.  We  said  the  majority,  be-
cause one  of  our  somnambulists,  Rose  (after  submitting  four
times  to  this  experiment),  saw  the  image  double  at  first  sight,
without  having  known,  apparently,  the  property  of  a  prism.
This  series  of  experiments  will  show  that  we  have  not  been  slow
to  discover  that  certain  subjects  recognize  the  doubling  of  the
image,  because  they  deduce  it  psychically  from  the  doubling  of
the  real  objects  which  traverse  the  field  of  the  prism.

To  continue  the  recital  of  our  experiments.

According  as  the  cylinder  containing  the  prism  is  turned  in
one  direction  or  the  other,  the  two  real  duplicated  objects  are
seen  side  by  side  on  the  same  horizontal  line,  or,  on  the  contrary,
one  above  the  other,  on  the  same  vertical  line.  We  mark  by
points  on  a  register,  the  position  of  the  cylinder  corresponding
to  the  horizontal  or  vertical  juxtaposition  of  the  two  images.

At  a  given  distance  in  front  of  the  subject,  we  place  some
object,  a  bottle,  for  instance,  which  we  make  him  look  at  through
the  prism.  He  sees  a  double  image.  We  ask  him  to  turn  the
cylinder  in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  the  two  images  side  by  side,
then  one  above  the  other.  His  indications  agree  with  the  points
on  the  register.  He  understands  the  handling  of  the  prism  now,
and  takes  in  thoroughly  what  he  sees.

Then  we  hypnotize  him  and  take  the   bottle  away,  while  he  is

ioo  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

asleep,  suggesting  that  he  will  see  it  in  the  same  position  as
before,  when  he  wakes  up.  When  he  wakes,  he  does  in  fact  see
the  imaginary  bottle,  and  through  the  prism,  a  double  image.
We  tell  him  to  turn  the  prism,  so  as  to  produce  two  images,
horizontally  side  by  side,  then  vertically,  one  over  the  other.
His  indications  are  then  purely  imaginary,  and  no  longer  corre-
spond to  the  points  of  the  register.

Even-  time  we  replace  the  fictitious  bottle  by  a  real  one,  un-
known to  the  subject,  he  gives  exact  indications  corresponding
to  the  registered  points,  thinking  that  he  sees  the  same  bottle
each  time.  Every  time  that  we  remove  the  real  bottle  and
suggest  one  in  its  stead,  the  indications  become  imaginary
again.

It  sometimes  happens,  however,  that  after  a  certain  amount  of
experience,  a  subject  gives  exact  indications  deduced  from  the
vertical  and  horizontal  duplication  of  the  real  objects  seen
through  the  prism.

To  avoid  this  source  of  error,  we  have  suggested  the  appear-
ance of  a  letter  or  number  on  a  totally  white  wall  without  any
object  between  it  and  the  subject.  The  subject  sees  it  single
with  his  eyes,  and  through  the  prism,  double,  if  he  knows  that
the  prism  duplicates.  The  two  images  are  juxtaposed  or  super-
posed,  but  with  four  subjects  submitted  for  the  first  time  to  this
experiment,  the  indications  never  corresponded  to  those  given
by  a  real  object.  The  duplication  occurs  by  chance,  contrary  to
all  rules,  through  the  suggestion  given  by  the  imagination.

This  manner  of  experimenting  is  not  always  sufficient  to  ex-
clude error.  To  be  perfectly  convincing,  the  experiments  must
be  repeated  and  varied.  One  must  be  on  guard  against  every-
thing.

We  have  used  two  cylinders  of  similar  appearance  :  one  con-
taining a  doubly  refracting  prism,  the  other  plain  glass.  After
placing  one  of  our  somnambulists  before  a  white  wall  and  sug-
gesting that  she  would  see  the  number  six  on  it  when  waked,  we
waked  her.  She  saw  this  number  and  when  made  to  look  at  it
alternately  through  the  two  cylinders,  the  effect  of  each  being
unknown  to  her,  she  recognized  the  doubling  power  of  the  prism
each  time,  and  even  guessed  the  horizontal  or  vertical  direction
of  the  duplication  frequently.

Four  other  somnambulists  gave  imaginary  indications.     The

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  ioi

first  one,  submitted  to  the  same  experiment  at  another  time  of
the  day,  saw  nothing  more  corresponding  to  optical  laws.

In  consequence  of  this,  we  ask  ourselves  if  there  may  not  be
two  different  results  here.  Sometimes  the  duplication  of  the
object  may  occur  in  the  person's  imagination  only,  varying  accord-
ing to  her  caprices.  The  effect  of  the  prism  may  be  hidden,  so
to  speak,  by  the  eyes  of  the  imagination.  At  other  times,  on
the  contrary,  she  may  really  see  the  suggested  image,  single  or
double,  just  as  the  glass  would  represent  a  veritable  object,  the
effect  of  the  prism  dominating  and  not  allowing  the  imagination
to  wander  into  a  deceptive  suggestion.

The  following  fact  may  also  give  some  support  to  this  hypoth-
esis. We  put  two  cylinders  one  inside  the  other,  each  contain-
ing a  doubly  refracting  prism.  By  making  the  two  cylinders
turn  one  about  the  other,  the  prisms  are  juxtaposed  in  such  a
way  as  to  present  the  object  double  or  quadruple.  Now  the
first  somnambulist  whom  we  made  look  through  this  glass  at  the
number  six,  suggested  on  the  white  wall  (the  glass  being  placed
so  that  it  could  quadruple),  saw  four  images  at  the  first  glance.
The  glass  being  then  changed  for  duplication,  she  saw  only  two
images.

This  indication  would  appear  striking  to  a  superficial  observer.
It  seems  evident,  however,  that  the  images  were  not  real,  but
suggested  by  some  guiding  mark,  because  the  somnambulist
always  placed  the  four  images  horizontally  side  by  side,  while
they  should  have  been  superposed,  two  above  two.

To  avoid  guiding  marks,  we  have  placed  this  somnambulist
out  in  the  open  air,  and  having  hypnotized  her  have  suggested
that  she  would  see  a  balloon  very  high  up  in  the  air  when  she
woke.  The  sky  was  blue  and  cloudless,  and  she  saw  the  balloon.
We  made  her  look  alternately  through  the  two  glasses,  only  one
of  which  doubled.  Another  somnambulist  has  been  subjected  to
the  same  experiment.  We  have  convinced  ourselves  that  each
time  they  directed  the  prism  toward  the  balloon  for  the  first
time,  they  gave  false  indications.  The  indications  did  not  be-
come exact  until  they  had  found  a  chimney,  a  roof  or  some
object  to  answer  as  a  guide.

Of  course,  it  is  well  to  know  that  somnambulists  sometimes
mot  always)  display  an  astonishing  sagacity  in  elucidating  the
problem  set  them.  They  want  to  solve  it,  they  endeavor  to  do
so,  and  all  their  attention  being  concentrated  upon  the  question.

io2  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

they  consciously  or  unconsciously  find  in  the  slightest  sign,  a
crack  in  the  wall,  an  almost  imperceptible  line,  a  guide,  which,
coming  under  the  influence  of  the  prism,  suggests  the  same  effect
to  them  for  the  subjective  image.  If  they  have  once  found  this
indication,  or  once  recognized  a  difference  in  weight,  dimension,
or  brightness,  between  the  simple  and  the  prismatic  glass,  they
are  no  longer  deceived  ;  they  deceive  in  good  faith.

To  thwart  any  surprise  of  the  senses  and  to  exclude  absolutely
anything  liable  to  guide  the  imagination,  we  have  acted  in  the
following  manner.  We  took  two  subjects  into  a  dark  room  and
having  hypnotized  them,  suggested  that  they  would  see  a  lighted
candle  on  the  mantel-piece  when  they  awakened.  They  saw  it
very  distinctly.  We  then  asked  them  to  look  at  this  fictitious
candle  through  the  two  prisms  which  we  put  alternately  in  the
positions  of  doubling  and  quadrupling.  The  experiment  was  re-
peated at  least  twenty  times  with  each  subject.  We  had  proved
previously  with  a  real  candle,  that  the  objects  were  distinct  and
that  there  were  no  sources  of  error.  Under  these  conditions
their  indications  were  erroneous  and  it  was  perfectly  evident  that
when  so  restricted  that  their  eyes  could  not  fix  upon  any  point
of  indication,  they  saw  the  image  single,  double,  triple  or  quad-
ruple,  solely  according  to  the  fancy  of  their  auto-suggestion.

We  give  the  following  experiments  as  conclusive.

We  suggested  to  Mme.  G— —  during  sleep,  that  she  would  see
a  red  wafer  on  her  white  bed-spread  when  she  woke  (there  was
nothing  on  the  bed),  and  at  the  same  time  an  orange  hung  at  the
foot  of  her  bed.  When  she  woke  she  saw  both  objects.  If  she
looked  at  the  wafer  through  the  two  prisms,  she  saw  it  by  chance,
single,  double,  triple,  or  quadruple,  the  positions  of  the  prisms
never  agreeing  with  what  they  should  have  been  fora  real  object.
On  the  other  hand,  if  she  looked  at  the  imaginary  orange  hung
at  the  foot  of  the  bed  through  the  glass,  she  was  no  longer  de-
ceived. Her  indications  agreed  with  the  optical  position  of  the
glass.  Why  this  difference  ?  Because  in  the  first  case,  she  did
not  see  any  point  of  indication  on  the  white  bed-spread,  while
when  she  looked  at  the  orange  her  imagination  was  enlightened
by  the  real  objects  around  it,  which  were  doubled  or  quadrupled
by  the  glass,  and  then  the  fictitious  image  followed  logically  the
example  of  the  real  image,  unknown  to  the  subject.

If  we  first  made  her  see  an  orange  quadrupled  by  the  prism
(according  to  the  position  of    the    glass),  and  afterwards  directed

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  103

the  glass  upon  the  wafer,  she  would  quadruple  the  latter  also,
but  never  gave  the  four  images  the  respective  positions  which  the
prism  demanded.  If  on  the  other  hand,  we  asked  her  to  look
through  the  glass  at  the  wafer  first,  she  was  deceived  ;  she  saw
it  doubled  for  example,  instead  of  quadrupled.  If  afterwards
she  turned  the  glass  from  the  wafer  to  the  imaginary  orange,  the
latter,  owing  to  the  points  of  indication  between  her  and  it,
appeared  quadrupled,  and  this  greatly  astonished  Mme.  G — —
who  is  an  intelligent  woman  and  understands  the  fact  very  clearly,
that  if  a  prism  quadruples  one  object  it  quadruples  all  the  others
also.

Before  hypnotization,  we  made  another  one  of  our  somnam-
bulists,.  Mme.    X ,    see   a    piece    of    orange    skin    which    M.

L was  holding  in  her  hand  at   the   foot  of  the   bed.     Then

having  hypnotized  her,  we  suggested  that  she  should  see  the
same  piece  when  she  woke,  and  when  waked,  she  saw  the  ficti-
tious piece  of  skin,  though  M.  L held    nothing  in  her  hand.

Then  we  requested  that  she  should  look  through  the  glass
(arranged  to  quadruple),  and  asked  if  it  caused  any  change.  (She
had  no  idea  of  the  property  of  the  glass.)  She  stated  that  she
saw  a  whole  orange,  one  only.  Her  imagination  had  evidently
suggested  this  change  to  her.     Then,  unknown  to  the  subject  M.

L took  the  real    piece  of   skin   in   her  hand  again.     Mme.

X ■  saw  it    clearly,  without   the   glass,  thinking  it  to   be   the

same  one  (fictitious)  she  saw  at  first.  We  made  her  look  through
the  glass  again,  and  this  time  she  saw  four  pieces  of  skin  dis-
tinctly. This  experiment  was  repeated  several  times  with  her
and  always  succeeded.  The  fictitious  piece  of  skin  when  looked
at  through  the  glass  was  transformed  by  the  imagination  into  an
entire  orange  ;  the  actual  piece  was  transformed  into  four  pieces,
according  to  the  properties  of  the  prism.

Such  are  the  facts,  and  we  could  add  others.  All  have  been
carefully  verified.  They  have  left  no  doubt  in  our  minds  ;  they
have  forced  upon  us  this  conviction,  easy  to  foresee,  that  the
suggested  image  is  a  fictitious  image,  and  that  it  answers  to  no
material  representation  in  space.  A  prism  can  double  only
rays  passing  through  it  from  a  real  object.  It  cannot  double  an
image  perceived  behind  it  in  the  cerebral  centres.  The  hallu-
cinatory image  may  be  as  distinct,  as  bright,  and  as  active  to  the
subject  as  reality  itself,  but,  borne  entirely  in  the  subject's  im-
agination, he  sees  it  as  he  conceives  it,  as  he  interprets  it,    as

io4  Suggestive     Therapeutics.

conscious  or  unconscious  memory  brings  it  up  again  in  the
sensorium.  It  is  a  psychical  cerebral  image  and  not  a  physical
one.  It  does  not  pass  by  the  peripheral  apparatus  of  vision,  has
no  objective  reality,  follows  no  optical  laws,  but  obeys  solely  the
caprices  of  the  imagination.

I  should  acknowledge  that  M.  Binet  has  mentioned  the  exist-
ence of  points  of  indication  which  served  as  a  material  sub-
stratum for  hallucination  in  his  article  "Hallucinations"  in  the
Revue  philosophique.  But  if  this  is  true,  do  these  experiences
constitute,  as  the  author  believes,  a  method  of  making  the
phenomenon  objective,  the  method  which  he  reproaches  me  with
having  neglected  ?  Hallucination  has  no  objective  characteris-
tics, but  only  subjective  ones,  rendered  objective  by  the  imag-
ination.

And  now,  may  I  be  permitted  to  again  say  to  MM.  Féré  and
Binet,  and  to  all  who  may  desire  to  repeat  their  experiments  :

ist.  Take  inexperienced  subjects  who  have  not  been  used  in
this  kind  of  experiment,  who  have  not  assisted  in  such  experi-
ments made  upon  others  and  have  not  heard  them  talked
about  ;

2d.  Make  the  experiment  without  speaking  a  single  word
before  the  subject,  even  in  a  low  voice,  because  in  all  degrees  of
hypnotism  he  hears  and  notes  everything  with  a  sharpness  of
perception,  which  is  often  quite  remarkable.

I  maintain  that  the  conclusion  will  not  be  doubtful,  and  I  feel
convinced  that  after  these  experimental  counter-proofs,  the
young  contributor  to  the  Revue  Philosophique,  better  enlightened
upon  the  question,  will  have  the  courage  to  rectify  some  of  his
criticisms.

CHAPTER   VII.

Historical  sketch. — Mesmer  and  mesmerism. —  His  condemnation  by  the  learned
societies. — Husson's  report. — Abbot  Faria  and  sleep  by  suggestion. — Alexandre
Bertrand's  doctrine. — Gen.  Noizei's  experiments  and  the  fluidic  doctrine. —
Second  period  :  Braid  and  Braidism. — Analysis  of  the  doctrine. — Grimes  and
Electro-biology  in  America  and  in  England. — Durand  de  Gros'  experiments
and  doctrine. — Dr.  Charpignon's  moral  medicine  :  his  fluidic  doctrine. —
Braidism  in  France  :  Prof.  Azam's  communication. — Application  to  surgical
anaesthesia. — Experiments  and  doctrine  of  Dr.  Liebauk  of  Nancy  :  hypnotic  sleep
compared  with  ordinary  sleep. — Hypnotism  in  animals:  Kircher,  Czermak,
Freyer,  Wilson,  Beard. — Induced  somnambulism  in  France  :  Chas.  Richet's
experiments. — Induced  sleep  in  cases  of  Hysteria:  Charcot's  and  Dumont-
pallier's  experiments. — Hypnotism  in  man  in  Germany:  experiments  of  the
Danish  magnetizer,  Hansen  ;  Rumpf's  physiological  theories;  Preyer's  chemical
theories;  Schneider's,  Berger's  and  Heidenhain's  psycho-physiological  theories. —
Prosper  Despine's  theory. — Recent  publications.

I  HAVE  published  the  phenomena  of  suggestion  as  I  have
observed  them,  so  that  any  one  wishing  to  repeat  my  experi-
ments might  be  able  to  do  so.  I  have  stated  only  that  which  I
have  seen  and  verified  and  which  has  been  verified  by  others  a
number  of  times.  I  hasten  to  add  that  I  have  seen  nothing
which  has  appeared  to  me  opposed  to  the  physiological  and
psychological  conceptions  already  established  by  science.  Is  it
necessary  to  say  that  I  have  observed  nothing  of  a  marvellous
nature,  such  as  clairvoyance,  prevision  of  the  future,  spiritual
insight,  sight  at  a  distance  or  through  opaque  bodies,  transposi-
tion of  the  senses  or  instinctive  knowledge  of  remedies?

For  a  long  time  the  truth  has  been  drowned  in  a  flood  of  hazy
practices  and  chimerical  absurdities  ;  so  that  the  history  of
magnetism  appears  as  one  of  the  greatest  vagaries  of  the
human  mind.  Scientific  men  rejected  what  was  opposed  to  rea-
son ;  classic  science  repelled  that  which  was  alien  to  it.  Only  a
shameless  charlatanism,  which  fell  into  disgrace,  continued  to
profit  by  public  credulity.

All  was  not  worthless,  however,  in  the  foolish  and  arrogant
conceptions  of  mesmerism.  A  few  earnest  persons  insisted  in
seeing  a  grain  of  truth  in  the  midst  of  the   errors,  and   in   distin-

!05

io6  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

guishing  the  kernel  from  the  chaff.  To-day,  magnetism  is  dead
together  with  alchemy,  and  hypnotic  suggestion  is  born  of  mag-
netism as  chemistry  is  born  of  alchemy.

I  shall  not  go  back  to  the  history  of  Mesmer  and  of  mes-
merism. It  has  been  written  by  Figuier  and  by  Bersot,  and
delineated  by  the  master  hand  of  Dechambre  in  the  Dictionnaire
encyclopédique  des  Sciences  Médicales.  Who  has  not  heard  of  the
baquets  of  Mesmer,  of  the  patients  standing  silently  in  rows
around  these  baquets,  of  the  magnetizer's  animal  current  meet-
ing with  the  current  from  the  pit  and  after  a  time  causing  differ-
ent nervous  or  hysteriform  troubles,  or  troubles  analogous  to
those  of  somnambulism,  veritable  convulsionary  scenes  ?  And
who  has  not  heard  of  the  doctrine  of  a  universal  magnetic  fluid
which  is  capable  of  receiving,  propagating  and  communicating
all  the  impressions  of  movement  by  which  a  mutual  influence  is
exerted  between  the  celestial  spheres,  the  earth  and  animated
bodies  !  The  learned  societies,  the  Academy  of  Science  and
the  Royal  Society  of  Medicine  condemned  the  new  doctrines
after  examining  them.  "  From  a  curative  point  of  view,"  said
the  latter,  "  animal  magnetism  is  nothing  but  the  art  of  making
sensitive  people  fall  into  convulsions.  From  a  curative  point  of
view,  animal  magnetism  is  useless  and  dangerous."

In  spite  of  the  discredit  which  the  interested  charlatanism  of
Mesmer  threw  upon  his  practices,  magnetism  continued  to  have
its  followers  ;  moreover  it  became  modified  by  his  pupils.  The
Marquis  of  Puységur,  the  most  celebrated  of  all  these  pupils,
magnetized  by  means  of  passes,  by  contact,  and  by  the  use  of
glass  rods,  and  the  influence  of  a  magnetized  tree.  By  these
means  he  really  induced  the  condition  known  as  somnambulism,
our  actual  knowledge  of  which  appears  to  be  inseparably  con-
nected with  his  name.  According  to  his  interpretation,  the
essence  of  animal  magnetism  lay  in  the  action  of  the  will  upon
the  vital  principle,  the  focus  of  electricity,  that  is  of  movement.

Numerous  magnetic  societies  were  gradually  founded  in  the
principal  cities  of  France.  In  Strasbourg,  the  Society  of  Har-
mony, consisting  of  more  than  150  members,  published  the
result  of  their  work  for  several  years.

The  disturbances  incident  to  the  revolutionary  period  and  the
wars  of  the  Empire  directed  thought  into  other  channels.
Nevertheless,  innumerable  books  and  essays  for  or  against  mag-
netism, continued  to  attract  attention.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  107

When  order  and  quiet  were  again  established,  the  question
came  to  the  front  once  more.  Public  courses  were  instituted  •
the  official  world  and  the  learned  societies  showed  less  opposi-
tion. In  1820,  Dupotet  carried  on  a  series  of  experiments  at  the
II.  tel-Dieu,  and  afterwards  at  the  Salpêtrière.  In  1825  Dr.
Foissac  sent  a  note  to  the  Academy  of  Science  and  to  the
Academy  of  Medicine,  requesting  them  to  pass  judgment  upon
him.  At  his  request  these  societies  again  began  the  investiga-
tion of  animal  magnetism.  Six  years  after,  on  June  21,  and
1831,  Husson's  report  was  read  before  the  Academy.  "The
favorable  conclusions  of  this  report,"  says  Dechambre,  "give  a
general  idea  of  the  state  of  magnetism  about  1831,  as  it  had
been  moulded  by  the  action  of  the  times  and  the  many  tests
through  which  it  had  passed."

To-day,  when  the  question  seems  to  have  escaped  from  clouds
of  theory  and  the  charlatanism  which  enveloped  it  so  long,  it  is
interesting  to  go  back  and  read  the  conclusions  reached  in  this
remarkable  report,  which  contains  and  recognizes  the  value  of
the  majority  of  the  facts,  as  we  have  described  them,  in  a  reason-
able way.

The  following  are  some  of  these  conclusions.

Contact  of  the  thumbs  and  hands,  the  frictions  or  certain  movements
called  passes,  which  are  made  a  short  distance  from  the  body  are  the
means  used  to  put  different  persons  in  relationship,  in  other  words,  to
transmit  the  action  of  the  magnetizer  to  the  person  magnetized.

The  time  necessary  for  the  transmission  and  testing  of  the  magnetic
action  is  from  half  an  hour  to  one  minute.

After  a  person  has  been  magnetized  several  times,  it  is  not  always
necessary  to  use  contact  and  passes  in  order  to  magnetize  afresh.  The
hypnotizer's  gaze,  or  his  wish  only,  have  the  same  influence  over  the
subject.

More  or  less  remarkable  changes  ordinarily  occur  in  the  perceptions
and  faculties  of  individuals  who  fall  into  the  somnambulistic  condition
through  the  effect  of  magnetism.

(a).  In  the  midst  of  the  noise  of  confused  conversation,  certain  sub-
jects do  not  hear  anything  but  the  magnetizer's  voice.  Many  reply  in  a
precise  way  to  questions  asked  them  by  the  magnetizer  or  by  persons
with  whom  they  have  been  put  into  magnetic  relationship  ;  others  con-
verse with  all  the  people  around  them.  It  is  rare,  however,  that  they
hear  what  happens  about  them.  Most  of  the  time  they  are  complete
strangers  to  external  and  unexpected  noises,  such  as  the  resounding  of

io8  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

brass  vessels  struck  near  them,  the  falling  of  furniture,  etc.,  even  when
made  near  their  ears.

(/>).  The  subject's  eyes  are  closed,  and  it  is  difficult  to  force  the  lids
open  with  the  hand.  This  painful  operation  shows  the  eye-balls  some-
times rolled  up  and  sometimes  clown.

(V).  The  sense  of  smell  sometimes  seems  to  be  destroyed.  The  sub-
ject mav  be  made  to  inhale  the  fumes  of  muriatic  acid  or  ammonia  with-
out showing  any  ill  feeling,  and  without  even  suspecting  it.  The  con-
trarv  holds  true  in  certain  cases  and  odors  are  noticed.

(d).  The  majority  of  the  somnambulists  we  have  seen,  were  com-
pletely insensible.  Their  feet,  nostrils  and  the  corners  of  their  eyes
could  be  tickled  with  a  feather,  their  skin  pinched  so  that  it  bled,  a  pin
could  be  run  under  their  nails  to  a  considerable  depth  without  their
being  aware  of  it.  Finally  we  saw  one  somnambulist  who  was  insen-
sible during  one  of  the  most  painful  surgical  operations,  and  in  whom
neither  the  face,  nor  the  pulse,  nor  the  respiration  denoted  the  slightest
emotion.

We  have  only  seen  one  case,  which,  magnetized  for  the  first  time,  fell
into  somnambulism.  Sometimes  the  somnambulism  did  not  appear
until  the  eighth  or  tenth  seance.

On  waking,  the  subjects  say  that  they  have  totally  forgotten  all  the
circumstances  of  the  somnambulistic  state,  and  they  never  recall  them.
On  this  point  we  have  no  other  guarantee  than  their  declarations.

In  order  to  estimate  the  relationship  of  magnetism  to  therapeutics
justly,  it  would  be  necessary  to  observe  the  effects  of  it  on  a  large  num-
ber of  individuals,  etc.  This  not  having  been  done,  the  commission
had  to  limit  itself  to  the  statement  that  it  had  observed  too  small  a
number  of  cases  to  dare  pass  judgment  upon  the  question.

Some  of  the  patients  magnetized  have  not  felt  any  benefit  from  it,
others  have  been  more  or  less  improved.  In  one  case  there  was  a  sus-
pension of  habitual  pain,  in  another  a  return  of  strength,  in  a  third,
epileptic  seizures  were  postponed  for  several  months,  and  a  fourth
completely  recovered  from  an  old  and  serious  paralysis.

Regarded  as  a  means  of  inducing  physiological  phenomena  or  as  a
therapeutic  agent,  magnetism  ought  to  take  rank  as  one  of  the  resources
of  medicine  ;  consequently  physicians  only  should  make  use  of  it  and
direct  its  employment  as  is  done  in  the  countries  of  the  North.

The  Academy  did  not  dare  to  print  Husson's  report.  They
let  him  shoulder  the  responsibility  of  his  own  opinions.  The
probity  of  the  writer  was  above  suspicion,  but  he  got  a  reputa-
tion for  credulity  which  long  remained  attached  to  his  name.

Several  years  later,  in  1837,  a  magnetizer  named  Berna  made

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  109

experiments  relative  to  the  transfer  of  sight,  before  a  new  com-
mission, appointed  by  the  Academy.  Nobody  was  convinced.
Dubois  made  a  negative  report.  Burdin,  the  elder,  another  of
its  members,  offered  a  prize  of  three  thousand  francs  to  the
person  who  could  read  without  the  help  of  his  eyes  and  without
a  light.  The  candidates  came,  but  the  prize  was  not  awarded.
At  the  end  of  October,  1840,  the  date  of  the  adjournment  of  the
assembly,  the  Academy  decided  that  it  would  no  longer  answer
communications  concerning  animal  magnetism.  So  again  in  this
case,  the  truth  contained  in  Husson's  report  was  drowned  in  the
chimerical  absurdity  of  the  marvellous.

We  have  now  reached  the  second  period,  of  the  history  of
animal  magnetism.  The  doctrine  of  a  magnetic  fluid  regarded
either  as  a  universal  fluid  or  as  an  emanation  from  the  human
organism,  animal  heat  or  electricity,  was  unable  to  bear  the  test
of  scientific  investigation.  The  persons  commissioned  by  the
learned  societies  had  all  been  impressed  by  the  influence  of  the
imagination  in  the  production  of  the  phenomena.  Deslon  him-
self,  Mesmer's  first  pupil,  wrote  in  1870,  "  If  M.  Mesmer  pos-
sessed no  other  secret  but  that  of  being  able  to  benefit  health
through  the  imagination,  would  this  not  always  be  a  sufficient
wonder0  For,  if  the  medicine  of  the  imagination  is  the  best,
why  should  we  not  make  use  of  it  ?  "

About  1815  an  Indian  Portuguese  Abbot  from  the  Indies,  who
had  become  celebrated  under  the  name  of  the  Abbot  Faria,*
gave  a  series  of  strange  mystic  lectures,  in  which  he  taught  that
the  cause  of  somnambulism  lies  in  the  subject  and  not  in  the
magnetizer,  and  that  the  sleep  cannot  be  produced  against  the
subject's  will.      He  assembled  about  sixty  persons  every  day  and

*  The  following  are  the  statements  made  by  Gen.  Xoizet  about  him.  "The  Abbot-
Faria  was  a  man  endowed  in  many  respects  with  superior  understanding.  All
Paris  has  had  an  opportunity  of  witnessing  his  experiments  ;  nevertheless  few  per-
sons have  been  convinced.  When  they  branded  him  with  the  name  of  charlatan,  all
was  said.  Many  persons  were  persuaded  beforehand  that  they  would  see  sleight-of-
hand  tricks  and  only  visited  him  once.  All  persons  upon  whom  the  experiments  suc-
ceeded they  regarded  as  accomplices.  If,  in  an  assembly  of  several  persons,  it  hap-
pened that  one  of  them  experienced  some  influence  and  fell  asleep  or  became  som-
nambulistic, the  effect  was  at  first  astonishing  to  those  who  could  not  doubt  its  reality  ;
but  afterwards  the  impression  became  weaker,  and  the  power  of  the  word  charlatan
was  sufficiently  g~eat  to  make  them  forget  what  they  had  seen,  and  even  the  person
who  had  felt  the  influence,  deluded  himself  like  the  others,  and  in  the  end  believed
that  nothing  out  of  the  way  had  happened  to  him.  The  shame  of  having  something
in  common  with  a  man  called  a  charlatan  frequently  made  them  deny  the  truth,  and

i  io  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

tried  his  experiments  on  eight  or  ten  of  the  number  among
whom  one,  two,  and  sometimes  more  fell  into  a  state  of  somnanv
bulism.

The  person  to  be  magnetized  was  seated  in  an  arm-chair  and
was  requested  to  close  his  eyes  and  collect  his  thoughts.  Then,
all  at  once,  the  magnetizer  said  in  a  strong  and  imperative  voice,
"  Sleep,"  repeating  the  command  three  or  four  times  if  neces'
sary.  After  a  slight  shock,  the  subject  sometimes  fell  into  the
condition  which  Faria  called  lucid  sleep.

The  doctrine  of  suggestion  was  created  at  least  as  an  explana-
tion of  the  mechanism  for  the  production  of  sleep,  if  not  as  an
interpretation  of  the  so-called  clairvoyant  phenomena,  which  are
manifested  in  this  sleep.

In  1 8 19,  Alexandre  Bertrand,  a  former  pupil  of  the  Polytech-
nic School,  and  a  doctor  of  medicine,  announced  a  series  of
public  lectures  on  animal  magnetism.  He  attributed  all  the
effects  he  observed  to  the  properties  of*  a  magnetic  fluid,  that  is,
he  was  a  mesmerist.

At  the  same  time  an  officer  (afterwards  Gen.  Noizet),  a  fol-
lower of  Abbot  Faria,  who  had  been  deeply  impressed  by  the
facts  which  he  observed,  denied  the  fluid  theory,  and  admitted
the  existence  of  no  other  force  but  that  of  the  imagination,  the
conviction  of  the  person  who  experienced  the  effects.

He  allied  himself  with  Bertrand,  whom  he  finally  converted  to-
his  belief.  "  Too  much  so  perhaps,"  adds  Gen.  Noizet,  "  in  that
he  (Bertrand)  rejects  even  the  little  I  took  from  his  system."

Bertrand's  definite  opinions  were  published  in  his  Traité  du
Somnambulisme  et  des  différentes  modifications  qu'il  présente,
written  in  1823.     According  to  his  views  the  phenomena  are  due

they  even  dared  to  state  that  a  plan  had  been  laid  to  deceive  the  audience  and  the
juggler  himself.  No  one  who  knows  the  weakness  of  the  human  heart  should  be
astonished  at  what  I  state.  I  have  been  the  more  impressed  by  this,  as  I  have  had
occasion  to  verify  it  for  myself.

"  It  actually  happened  one  day  however,  that  an  actor  simulated  somnambulism  and
deceived  the  Abbot  Faria.  From  this  moment  charlatanism  was  more  loudly  cried
than  ever,  as  though  it  was  a  charlatan's  part  to  expose  himself  to  such  contempt,
and  to  allow  himself  to  be  thus  taken  in  by  an  unknown  person.  His  experiments
were  no  longer  attended,  and  it  was  considered  absurd  to  believe  in  them.  Neverthe-
less, I  believe  in  them,  and  shall  never  blush  to  proclaim  the  truth.  I  do  not  declare
myself  the  champion  of  the  Abbot  Faria,  whom  I  hardly  knew.  I  do  not  know  what
his  morality  was,  but  I  am  certain  that  he  produced  the  effects  which  I  have
reported."

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  1 1 1

to  the  peculiar  form  of  nervous  exaltation  to  which  he  gave  the
name  of  ecstasy.  The  possessed  patients  of  Loudun,  the  mag-
netized persons  around  Mesmer's  baquets,  and  the  somnambu-
lists, were  in  this  ecstatic  condition;  a  condition  which  is  char-
acterized by  loss  of  consciousness,  moral  inertia,  and  loss  of
memory  on  waking,  instinctive  knowledge  of  remedies,  thought
transmission,  and  sight  without  the  help  of  the  eyes,  and  an
exalted  state  of  the  imagination.

It  is  a  singular  thing  that  Gen.  Noizet,  after  having  rescued
Bertrand  from  his  first  ^mistaken)  conceptions,  dominated  by  his
spiritualistic  ideas  and  striving  to  reconcile  the  opposed  fluidic
and  anti-fluidic  doctrines,  soon  fell  back  on  the  fluidic  theory
himself.  It  is  by  this  hypothesis  of  a  vital  fluid  that  the  author
explains  the  interesting  phenomena  which  he  relates  in  a  memoir
addressed  to  the  Royal  Academy  of  Berlin  in  1820.  {Memoir
sur  le  somnambulisme  et  le  magnétisme  animal.     Paris,  1854.)

Although  the  doctrine  of  suggestion  had  its  precursors,  it  was
not  until  the  year  1841  that  it  was  definitely  established  and
demonstrated  by  James  Braid,  of  Manchester.*  To  him  is  due
the  discovery  of  hypnotism,  and  the  words  Braidism  and  Braidic
suggestion  have  remained  in  science  to  commemorate  a  new  doc-
trine which  arose  ia  the  face  of  Mesmerism.

Braid  proved  that  no  magnetic  fluid  exists  and  that  no  myste-
rious force  emanates  from  the  hypnotizer.  The  hypnotic  state
and  its  associated  phenomena  are  purely  subjective  in  their
origin,  which  is  in  the  nervous  system  of  the  subject  himself.
The  fixation  of  a  brilliant  object  so  that  the  muscle  which  holds
up  the  upper  eyelid  becomes  fatigued,  and  the  concentration  of
the  attention  on  a  single  idea  bring  about  the  sleep.  The  subjects
can  even  bring  about  this  condition  in  themselves,  by  their  own
tension  of  mind,  without  being  submitted  to  any  influence  from
without.  In  this  state,  the  imagination  becomes  so  lively  that
every  idea  spontaneously  developed  or  suggested  by  a  person  to
whom  the  subject  gives  this  peculiar  attention  and  confidence,
has  the  value  of  an  actual  representation  for  him.  The  oftener
these  phenomena  are  induced,  the  more  readily  and  easily  can
they  be  induced,  for  such  is  the  law  of  association  and  habit.  If
the  hypnotizer's  will  is  not  expressed  by  his  words  or  his  gest-

*  Braid  :  Nenrypnology.     Translated  from  the  English  by  Jules  Simon,  with  a  pre-
face by  Prown-Séquard.     Paris,  1S83.

ii2    •  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

ures,  or  if  the  subject  does  not  understand  them,  no  phenomena
appear.  The  attitude  which  is  given  the  hypnotized  subject,  the
position  into  which  the  muscles  of  his  limbs  or  face  are  put,  may
give  rise  to  sentiments,  passions,  and  acts  corresponding  to  these
anatomical  attitudes,  in  the  same  manner  that  the  suggestion
of  certain  sentiments  or  passions  may  give  rise  to  a  correlative
mimicked  attitude  or  expression.

This  part  of  Braid's  work  cannot  be  attacked.  Observation
confirms  it  on  all  points.  But  is  this  true  of  the  phreno-hypnotic
experiments  in  which,  by  manipulation  of  the  neck  and  face,  he
pretends  to  excite  certain  corporeal  and  mental  manifestations,
according  to  the  parts  touched,  and  in  this  way  to  stimulate
through  the  medium  of  the  sensory  nerves  of  the  head,  organs
localized  in  the  brain  corresponding  to  the  different  passions,
benevolence,  imitation,  theft,  etc?

I  believe  with  Brown-Séquard  "  that  Braid  did  not  guard  suffi-
ciently against  the  effects  arising  from  suggestion  when  he
believed  that  he  had  found  proofs  of  the  verity  of  the  phreno-
logical doctrines  in  his  subjects.  It  is  easy  for  any  one  to  see  how
Braid  committed  the  faults  which  I  mention,  if  he  realizes  that  a
single  word  spoken  to  the  hypnotized  subject  from  a  distance,  is
sufficient  to  suggest  a  whole  series  of  ideas  to  him,  or  to  develop
the  most  varied  sentiments  or  acts."  *

Moreover  it  seems  to  me  that  at  the  end  of  his  life  Braid  felt
some  doubt  about  his  experiments  relative  to  phreno-hypnotism.
In  his  last  memoir,  a  remarkable  résumé  of  his  work  addressed
to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  in  i860,  at  the  time  of  the  experi-
ments of  Azam  and  Broca,  he  passes  by  his  phreno-hypnotic
researches  in  silence.  He  contents  himself  with  saying  that  his
experiments  on  the  emotional  phenomena  induced  by  contact
with  the  scalp,  led  him  to  conclude  that  the  results  obtained
neither  proved  nor  disproved  the  phrenological  organology.  He
explains  his  error  relative  to  the  correlation  which  he  supposed
to  exist  between  the  frontal  integument  and  the  memory,  by
the  fact  that  contact  with  the  forehead  of  a  hypnotized  subject
gives  rise  to  a  more  efficacious  suggestion  by  driving  away  dis-
traction and  reveries,  and  so  enabling  the  subject  to  fix  his
attention  better  on  the  question,  and  answer  it  correctly.

*  Preface  to  the  Treatise  on  Nervous  Sleep  or  Hypnotism,  by  James  Braid.     Trans-
lated from  the  English  by  Jules  Simon.     Paris,  18S3.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  i  i  3

Braid's  experiments  did  not  make  much  stir  in  England  ;  in
France  they  were  hardly  known.

It  was  in  America  that  the  doctrine  of  magnetism  was  to
reappear  under  a  new  name.  About  1848  a  New  Englander  by
the  name  of  Grimes  induced  analogous  phenomena,  without
having  heard  of  Braid's  discovery  it  seems.  He  showed  besides
that  these  phenomena  could  be  induced  in  certain  subjects,  in
the  waking  condition,  by  simple  vocal  suggestion,  which  fact
Braid  had  already  mentioned  in  1846,  in  a  memoir,  entitled:
T/ie  Power  of  the  Mind  over  the  Body.  Emotion,  sensation,  the
passions,  and  even  the  exercise  of  the  organic  functions,  could
be  modified  by  a  foreign  will  without  the  induction  of  hypno-
tism.

This  doctrine,  designated  by  Grimes  as  electro-biology,  was
propagated  in  the  United  States  by  a  multitude  of  professors
"the  majority  of  whom,"  says  Dr.  Philips,  from  whom  I  borrow
these  details,  "were,  unfortunately,  not  fitted  for  scientific  inves.
tigation."  In  1850  Dr.  Dods  delivered  twelve  lectures  on  this
subject  of  "Electrical  Psychology"  before  the  Congress  of  the
United  States,  in  reply  to  a  semi-ofificial  invitation,  signed  by
seven  members  of  the  senate.  He  published  these  lectures
under  the  title  of  The  Philosophy  of  Electrical  Psychology,
etc.,  X.  Y.

The  new  method  was  applied  successfully  in  inducing  insensi-
bility in  surgical  operations,  as  well  as  in  the  treatment  of
diseases.

In  1850  it  spread  to  England,  and  Dr.  Darling  was  one  of  its
first  disseminators.  Electro-biology  caused  hypnotism  to  be
forgotten  for  an  instant,  but  it  was  not  long  before  it  was  recog-
nized that  the  phenomena  observed  in  the  waking  condition
rank  in  importance  with  Braid's  discovery,  and  the  most  distin-
guished English  savants,  J.  H.  Bennet,  Simpson,  Carpenter,
Alison,  Gregory,  Dr.  Holland,  the  physicist  David  Brewster,
and  Dugald  Stewart  the  psychologist,  published  numerous  con-
firmatory observations.

In  France  the  public  were  indifferent  to  all  these  researches.
Official  medicine  knew  neither  Braidism  nor  Electro-biology.
Dr.  Durand  de  Gros,  under  the   name   of  Dr.  Philips,"    was  the

*  Being  proscribed  on   Dec.  2d,  he  had  to  change  his   name  in  order  to  reenter
France.

ii4  Suggestive   Therapeutics,

only  one  who  called  the  attention  of  physicians  and  savants  to
these  phenomena,  through  his  oral  and  experimental  lessons
given  in  Belgium,  Algeria,  and  at  Marseilles,  during  the  year
1S55.  In  1855  he  published  a  treatise  entitled:  Electro-dyne^
misme  vital,  the  abstract,  theoretical  conceptions  of  which,  were
too  obscure  to  appeal  to  the  medical  public.  Later,  in  i860,
appeared  his  Cours  théorique  et  pratique  du  braidistne  ou  hypno-
tisme nerveux,  in  which  the  author's  thought  and  method  were
presented  with  great  clearness.

Braid  had  proved  that  the  concentration  of  the  attention  and
thought,  obtained  by  fixation  of  the  gaze,  were  the  determining
causes  of  the  hypnotic  state,  but  he  did  not  try  to  fathom  the
physiological  and  psychological  mechanism  of  the  phenomena.
Durand  de  Gros  tried  to  go  further,  and  to  explain  the  relation
which  exists  between  this  concentration  of  thought  (the  first
point  of  departure  of  the  Braidic  modification),  and  the  appear-
ance of  insensibility,  catalepsy,  and  ecstasy;  that  is,  in  a  word,
the  profound  and  general  revolution  of  the  economy  which  is  its
culminating  point.

The  following  is  the  author's  theory,  as  he  himself  gives  it.
A  general  and  sufficiently  intense  activity  of  thought  is  neces-
sary for  the  regular  diffusion  of  nervous  force  in  the  nerves  of
sensibility.  If  this  activity  ceases,  the  innervation  of  these
nerves  is  suppressed,  and  they  lose  their  ability  to  conduct
external  impressions  to  the  brain.  In  fact,  we  know  that  idiots
are  more  or  less  anaesthetic,  etc.  On  the  other  hand,  sensation
is  the  necessary  stimulus  to  mental  activity.

From  this  it  follows,  that  in  order  to  bring  about  insensibility
it  suffices  to  suspend  the  exercise  of  thought,  and,  in  order  to
suspend  this,  it  is  necessary  to  isolate  the  senses  from  the  exter-
nal agents  which  act  upon  them.  It  is  not  possible  to  suspend
the  actions  of  the  mind,  but  they  may  be  reduced  to  a  minimum,
by  submitting  them  exclusively  to  a  simple,  homogeneous,  and
continuous  sensation  ;  thus,  its  sphere  of  action  is  reduced  to  a
-impie  point.  The  cerebral  ganglion-cell  continues  to  secrete  its
nervous  force,  but  that  only  consumes  a  very  small  part  of  the
whole  amount;  hence  its  nervous  force  accumulates  in  the  brain
until  congestion  takes  place.  This  is  the  first  part  of  the  Braidic
operation,  which  produces  what  the  author  calls  the  hypotaxic
condition.  This  condition  being  once  produced,  the  impression
glides  in  as  far  as  the   brain   through  the   half   open   door  of  the

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  1 1 5

sensorium  along  the  path  of  sight,  of  hearing,  or  of  muscular
sense,  and  the  point  to  which  this  excitation  is  transferred
immediately  emerges  from  its  torpor,  to  become  the  seat  of  an
activity  which  the  tension  of  the  nervous  force  increases  with  ali
its  power.  Thus  it  is  that  the  general  arrest  of  innervation  will
all  at  once  succeed  an  excessive  local  innervation,  which,  for
example,  will  instantaneously  substitute  hyperesthesia  for
insensibility,  and  catalepsy,  tetanus,  etc.,  for  relaxation  of  the
muscular  system,  etc.

The  available  nervous  force  may  be  called  to  this  or  that
functional  point  of  the  center  of  innervation,  by  directing  toward
this  point  an  impression,  which  arouses  its  peculiar  activity.  To
accomplish  this,  a  mental  impression  is  employed,  that  is  to  say,
an  idea  is  suggested.  This  constitutes  the  second  stage  of  the
Braidic  operation,  which  Durand  de  Gros  calls  idcoplastic.  The
idea  becomes  a  determining  cause  of  the  functional  modifications
to  be  induced.  The  mental  excitation  reproduces  the  sensations
previously  induced  by  means  of  organic  excitations.  These  sen-
sations,  which  are  originated  by  means  of  an  idea,  are  called
sensations  of  recollection.

The  experiments  of  Dr.  Philips  (Durand  de  Gros),  did  not
succeed  in  dispelling  the  discredit  into  which  magnetism  had
fallen  with  the  medical  public,  and  Braidism  remained  forgotten.
It  is,  however,  necessary  to  mention  Dr.  Charpignon  of  Orléans,
who,  about  1841,  took  a  great  interest  in  the  subject  of  magnetism
and  emotional  medicine  in  the  treatment  of  nervous  disease.
His  memoir  entitled  :  De  la  Part  de  la  Médecine  morale  dans  le
traitement  des  maladies  nerveuses  (1862),  received  honorable
mention  from  the  Academy  of  Medicine.  The  phenomena  of
hypnotic  suggestion,  and  of  suggestion  in  the  waking  state,
which  are  there  described,  thus  obtained  the  official  sanction  of
this  learned  body  for  the  first  time.  It  was  in  reality  a  return
to  the  summary  decision  of  October  1,  1840.  The  memoir
was  published  in  1864,  under  the  title  of:  Etudes  sur  la  médecine
ani  inique  et  vit  a  liste.

Dr.  Charpignon  admits,  that,  in  addition  to  the  moral  influ-
ence, there  exists  a  magnetic  influence,  which  has  just  as  much
of  a  fluid  nature  as  the  luminous,  caloric,  and  electric  forces,  and
that  this  influence  transmitted  from  the  one  organism  to  another
through  the  terminations  of  the  peripheral  nerves,  is,  in  certain
individuals,  a  means  of  modifying  the  nervous  and  vital  functions.

1 1 6  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

We  must  also  mention  Victor  Meunier  who,  in  1852,  in  the
journal  La  Presse,  had  the  scientific  courage  to  popularize  the
knowledge  which  official  science  then  condemned.

In  1859,  Braidism  really  made  its  entrance  into  France.  A
communication  of  Prof.  Azam,  of  Bordeaux,  to  the  surgical
society,  published  in  the  Ar drives  de  Médecine  (i860),  gave  it
great,  but  ephemeral  popularity.  He  became  acquainted  with
the  phenomena  induced  by  the  English  physician,  through  a
colleague  who  had  read  Carpenter's  article  on  Sleep  in  Todd 's  En-
cyclopedia, and  repeated  the  experiments  upon  a  number  of
persons  in  good  health  successfully.

Demarquay  and  Giraud-Teulon  {Recherches  sur  V hypnotisme
ou  sommeil  nerveux,  Paris,  i860),  and  Gigot-Suard  {Les  Mystères
du  magnétisme  animal  et  de  la  magie  dévoilés  ou  la  Vérité  démon-
trée par  l'hypnotisme,  Paris,  i860),  published  some  interesting
observations.  Surgeons,  especially,  sought  for  an  anaesthetic
agent  in  hypnotism,  capable  of  replacing  chloroform,  and  a  satis-
factory observation  (on  the  incision  of  an  ischio-rectal  abscess
by  Broca  and  Follin)  was  presented  to  the  Academy  of  Science
in  1859.  Some  years  afterward,  Dr.  Guérineau,  of  Poitiers,
announced  to  the  Academy  of  Medicine  that  he  had  amputated
the  thigh  under  hypnotic  anaesthesia  {Gazette  des  hôpitaux,  1859).

The  use  of  hypnotism  for  the  production  of  surgical  anaesthe-
sia was  by  no  means  a  new  thing.  Dr.  Charpignon  reviewed  the
following  facts,  relative  to  operations  practised  during  hypnotic
anaesthesia,  in  the  Gazette  des  hôpitaux  in  1829.  The  removal  of
a  breast  by  Jules  Cloquet  in  1845  ;  in  1846,  the  amputation  of
a  leg,  and  the  extirpation  of  a  gland,  both  painlessly  performed
by  Dr.  Loysel  of  Cherbourg;  in  1845,  a  double  thigh  amputation
by  Drs.  Fanton  and  Toswel  of  London  ;  in  1845,  tne  amputation
of  an  arm,  by  Dr.  Joly  of  London  ;  and  in  1847,  tne  removal  of
a  tumor  of  the  jaw,  by  Drs.  Ribaud  and  Kiaro,  dentists  of
Poitiers.

In  spite  of  these  fortunate  trials,  surgeons  soon  showed  that
hypnotism  only  rarely  succeeds  as  an  anaesthetic,  that  absolute
insensibility  is  the  exception  among  hypnotizable  subjects,  and
that  the  hypnotizing  itself  generally  fails  in  persons  disturbed
by  the  expectation  of  an  operation.  Braidism  seemed  to  be
denuded  of  practical  interest,  and  fell  into  oblivion.

If  Lasègue  had  carried  his  researches  a  little  further,  he  would
have  been  able    to    resuscitate   Braidism   permanently.      In  an

Suggestive   Therapeutics,  1 1 7

iy    entitled  :  Des    Catalepsies   partielles  et  passagères    {Arch-

'-.  de  médecine,  1865),  he  proves  that  the  simple  closure  of
the  eyes,  in  certain  hysterical  and  even  in  certain  non-hysterical
subjects,  induces  degrees  of  sleep  varying  from  drowsiness  to
complete  lethargy  accompanied  with  anaesthesia.  These  various
les  are  accompanied  by  a  cataleptic  rigidity  of  the  limbs,
which  suddenly  ceases  when  the  subject  is  awakened,  and
regains  the  sense  of  sight.

But  Lasegue  went  no  further;  he  did  not  think  of  identifying
these  phenomena  with  the  phenomena  of  hypnotic  sleep,  as
Braid  had  described  them.

In  1866,  Dr.  Liébault,  who  had  been  studying  the  question
for  a  number  of  years,  published  a  book  entitled  :  Du  Sommeil
et  des  états  analogues  considères  surtout  au  point  de  vue  de  l'action
du  moral  sur  le  physique.  This  is  the  most  important  work  that
has  ever  been  published  upon  Braidism.  As  a  partisan  of  the
doctrine  of  suggestion,  which  he  had  pushed  further  than  Braid
had,  and  which  he  had  applied  with  success  to  therapeutics,
and  as  an  enemy  of  the  marvellous  and  of  mysticism,  the  author
sought  to  interpret  the  phenomena  observed  from  the  psycho-
physiological standpoint.

His  doctrine  resembles  that  of  Durand  de  Gros.  The  concen-
tration of  the  mind  on  a  single  idea,  the  idea  of  sleep,  facilitated
by  the  fixation  of  the  gaze,  brings  about  the  repose  of  the  body,
the  deadening  of  the  senses,  their  isolation  from  the  external
world,  and  finally  the  arrest  of  thought,  and  an  unvarying  con-
dition of  consciousness.  Suggestive  catalepsy  is  the  conse-
quence of  this  arrest  of  thought.  His  thoughts  concentrated,
the  subject  remains  in  relationship  with  the  person  who  has  put
him  to  sleep.  He  hears  him.  and  receives  impressions  from  him.
Being  incapable  of  passing  from  one  idea  to  another  by  himself,
his  mind  remains  fixed  on  the  idea  which  has  been  last  sug-
gested to  him.  If,  for  example,  this  idea  is  that  of  extension  of
the  arms,  he  keeps  them  extended.

Ordinary  sleep  does  not  differ  from  hypnotic  sleep.  The  one
is,  like  the  other,  due  to  the  fixation  of  the  attention  and  of  the
nervous  force  upon  the  idea  of  sleep.  The  individual  who
wishes  to  sleep,  isolates  his  senses,  meditates,  and  remains
motionless.  The  nervous  force  concentrates  itself,  so  to  speak,
at  one  point  of  the  brain  upon  a  single  idea,  and  abandons  the
nerves  of  sensation,  motion  and  special  sense.

1 1 8  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

But  the  ordinary  sleeper  is  in  relation  with  himself  only,  as  soon
as  his  consciousness  is  lost.  The  impressions  conducted  to  his
brain  by  the  nerves  of  sensibility  or  of  organic  life,  may  awaken
diverse  memory-sensations  or  images,  which  constitute  dreams.
These  dreams  are  spontaneous,  that  is  to  say,  suggested  by  him-
self.

The  hypnotised  subject  falls  asleep,  with  his  thought  fixed,  in
relationship  with  the  hypnotiser  ;  hence  the  possibility  of  the  sug-
gestion of  dreams,  ideas  and  acts,  by  this  foreign  will.

The  loss  of  memory  on  waking  from  deep  hypnosis,  comes
from  the  fact  that  all  the  nervous  force  collected  in  the  brain
during  sleep,  diffuses  itself  anew  throughout  the  whole  organism
when  the  subject  wakes,  and  this  force,  diminishing  in  the  brain,
makes  it  impossible  for  the  patient  to  recall  what  he  was  con-
scious of  before,  after  he  has  come  to  himself.

In  ordinary  sleep,  or  in  a  light  grade  of  hypnotic  sleep,  the
nervous  force  collected  about  the  seat  of  the  fixed  idea  is  less.
The  other  portions  of  the  nervous  system  are  not  as  inactive,
the  dreams  are  led  in  by  peripheral  impressions.  Moreover,  the
waking  is  not  sudden,  but  gradual.  The  nervous  force  accumu-
lated in  the  brain,  diminishes  gradually,  and  when  thought
begins  to  be  established,  it  grasps  the  recollection  of  the  end  of
the  sleep  at  least.

The  work  of  the  physician  of  Nancy  was  passed  by  unheeded,
and  hypnotism  continued  to  be  simply  a  scientific  curiosity.
People  were  satisfied  to  know  that  fixation  upon  a  brilliant
object  produced  sleep  with  anaesthesia  in  some  subjects,  and  in
others    catalepsy,  and  the  researches  were  carried  no  further.

In  Germany,  in  1873,  Czermak  *  published  his  observations  on
the  hypnotic  condition  induced  in  animals.  As  early  as  1646,
Athanasius  Kircher  had  shown  that  a  hen,  placed  with  its  feet
bound  before  a  line  traced  on  the  earth,  remains  motionless  fora
certain  length  of  time  ;  it  retains  the  same  attitude  even  when
the  ligature  is  removed,  and  when  it  is  excited.  Czermak
obtained  the  same  phenomena  without  the  use  of  the  ligature,
and  without  tracing  the  line  on  the  ground  :  it  sufficed  to  keep
the  animal  motionless  for  some  time,  with  his  neck  gently
stretched  over  the  abdomen.     Other  animals,  birds,  salamanders,

*  Beobachtitngen   und    Versuche  iiber  hypnotische   Zustdnde  bei    Thieren.     [Arch.  f.
Physiologie,  VI].,  p.  107,  1873.)

Suggestive   Tlicrapcutics.  119

lobsters,  pigeons,  rabbits,  and  sparrows  were  hypnotized,  and
some  were  made  cataleptic  simply  by  fixation  upon  an  object,  a
finger,  match,  etc.,  placed  before  their  eyes.

Preyer  *  considered  this  state  due  to  fear,  and  called  it  cata-
plexia.  The  contracture  of  tritons  when  seized,  the  effects  of
lightning,  surgical  shock,  paralysis  due  to  violent  fright,  the
unconsciousness  of  animals  wounded  by  fire-arms,  might  be
phenomena  analogous  to  those  produced  by  hypnotizing  animals,
and  might  be  due  to  the  excitation  of  the  regulating  apparatus
of  central  innervation  by  an  intense  tactile  impression.  In
horses  similar  hypnotic  conditions  have  been  observed.  In  1828
Constantine  Balassa,  f  a  Hungarian,  called  attention  to  the
method  of  shoeing  horses  without  danger  of  violence.  By  look-
ing him  square  in  the  eyes,  the  horse  is  induced  to  draw  back,  to
lift  his  head,  and  stiffen  the  cervical  column,  and  he  can  be
influenced  to  such  a  degree  that  he  does  not  budge  even  if  a  gun
is  fired  off  in  his  neighborhood.  Gentle  friction  with  the  hand
across  the  forehead  and  eyes,  might  be  used  as  a  valuable  aux-
iliary means  of  calming  and  quieting  the  gentlest  horse,  as  well
as  the  wildest.

In  England,  in  1839,  Dr.  Wilson  produced  a  condition,  which
he  called  trance,  in  the  animals  of  the  London  Zoological  Gar-
dens. Finally,  more  recently,  in  1881,  Beard,  \  of  Boston,  com-
pared these  phenomena  exhibited  by  animals  in  so-called  trance
or  trancoidal  states,  with  hypnotism  in  man,  and  showed  that
they  may  be  obtained  by  various  methods  :  fear  (the  attitude
impressed  on  animals  which  renders  them  incapable  of  resisting,
dorsal  decubitus,  ligature),  magnetic  passes,  fixation  with  the
eyes,  bright  light  (fishing  by  torch-light,  insects  drawn  to  a
candle),  music  ;  all  methods  which  disturb  the  psychical  equilib-
rium, and  concentrate  the  cerebral  activity  upon  a  single  idea.

In   1875,  Charles   Richet  §    resumed   his  experiments  on   man

*  Die  Kataplexie  u.  d.  thier.  Hyp?iotismus.  (Sammlung  physiol.  Abhandl.,  von  IV.
Preyer.     2  Reihe,  I  Heft.  Jena.  1878.)

t  Méthode  des  Hufbeschlages  ohne  Zwang.     Wien,  bei  Gerold,  1828.

t  Beard,  Geo.  M.,  Trance  and  trancoidal  states  in  the  lower  animals.  {Journal  of
comparative  medicine  and  surgery,  April,  1881.)

All  these  facts  of  Czermak's,  Preyer's,  Balassa's  and  Beard's  are  extracts  from  a
General  Review  of  Hypnotism,  by  Môbius,  of  Leipzig.  In  Schmidt's  Jahrbiicher,  Band
199,  No.  1,  1881.

§  Chas.  Richet,  Journal  de  Panatomie  et  de  la  physiologie,  1875.  Archives  de  physi
olosir.  18S0.     Revue  Philosophique,  1SS0  et  18S3.

1 20  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

and  studied  induced  somnambulism  anew.  He  showed  that  by
the  so-called  magnetic  passes,  by  fixation  upon  a  brilliant  object,
and  by  other  empirical  procedures,  a  neurosis,  analogous  to
natural  somnambulism,  is  obtained.  It  is  difficult  to  obtain  the
first  time,  but  almost  always  appears  if  one  has  patience  enough
to  try  several  séances.  Moreover,  according  to  Richet,  this
magnetic  neuropathy  offers  little  in  the  way  of  therapeutic  appli-
cations.

This  author  has  had  the  merit  of  having  called  the  attention
of  the  medical  world  to  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism  ;  he  is  one
of  those  who  has  studied  and  best  brought  out  the  psychical
phenomena  of  somnambulism.

In  1878,  Charcot  ■■  studied  somnambulism,  induced  in  hysteri-
cal patients.  His  memorable  researches  are  well  known  ;  the
production  of  catalepsy  with  anaesthesia  by  fixation  upon  a
bright  light,  and,  in  this  condition,  phenomena  of  suggestion,
that  is  to  say,  the  attitude  impressed  on  the  limbs  reflecting  itself
by  the  expression  of  the  physiognomy  (smiles,  prayers),  the  sud-
den disappearance  of  the  light,  replacing  the  catalepsy  by  a  sleep
with  relaxation,  or  lethargy,  the  muscular  hyper-excitability  man-
ifesting itself  in  this  condition  (the  contracture  of  a  muscle  by
slightly  stimulating  it,  or  its  nerve),  finally  the  friction  of  the
head,  transforming  this  lethargic  state  into  somnambulism,  with
the  possibility  of  walking,  answering  questions,  etc.

Bourneville  and  Regnard  have  described  and  illustrated  these
experiments  in  the  IcongrapJiie  de  la  Salpctricre.  Charcot  and
his  pupils  did  not  formulate  any  theory  for  the  interpretation  of
these  phenomena.  The  interesting  results  of  Dumontpallier,
communicated  to  the  Society  of  Biology,  are  also  known.

In  1879,  the  question  was  again  taken  up  in  German}-.  A
Danish  magnetizer,  named  Hansen,  a  man  unacquainted  with
medicine,  travelled  through  the  principal  cities,  giving  public
representations.  I  saw  him  at  Strasbourg  and  at  Nancy.  He
hypnotized  according  to  Braid's  method.  Out  of  twenty  per-
sons in  the  audience,  who  submitted  to  his  experiments,  volun-
tarily, he  found  four  who  were  susceptible  of  being  thrown  into
catalepsy,    and    of   receiving    all    sorts   of   suggestions.      These

*  Comptes  rendus  de  P  Académie  des  sciences,  1881.  Progrès  médical,  1878,  fSSi  et
1882.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  121

experiments  were  repeated  by  the  professors  of  the  University
towns  ; — at  Chemnitz  by  Weinhold,*  Ruhlmann,  and  Opitz,  at
Breslau,  by  Heidenhain,  Grùtzner,  Berger  and  others.

Diverse  theories  sprang  up  :  some  purely  physiological,  like
the  theory  of  Rumpf,+  who  admitted  the  existence  of  reflex
changes  in  the  cerebral  circulation,  giving  place  to  phenomena
of  cerebral  hyperaemia  or  anaemia  ;  others  purely  chemical,  like
that  of  Preyer,  \  who  believes  that  the  concentration  of  thought
causes  an  exaggerated  activity  of  the  cerebral  ganglion-cells,
from  which  result  readily  oxydizable  products,  such  as  the  lac-
tates, which  make  the  brain  drowsy  by  the  abstraction  of  oxygen
from  its  different  parts.  The  rapidity  of  the  hypnosis  and  the
instantaneousness  of  the  awakening,  cannot  be  reconciled  with
these  theoretical  conceptions.

Finally,  other  doctrines  are  psycho-physiological.  Schneider,§
of  Leipzig,  looks  for  the  interpretation  of  the  phenomena  in  the
exclusive  and  abnormal  concentration  of  the  mind  upon  a  single
idea  ;  the  intellectual  excitation,  the  exaggerated  acuteness  of
the  senses,  and  the  vivacity  of  the  imagination,  might  be  due  to
the  fact  that  the  psychical  activity  concentrates,  itself  upon  a
small  number  instead  of  being  spread  over  a  large  field,  a  theo-
retical view  already  put  forth  in  France,  as  we  have  seen,  by
Durand  de  Gros  and  by  Liébault.  Berger,  of  Breslau,  also
believes  that  the  concentration  of  the  whole  thinking  being  upon
a  single  idea  gives  rise  to-  an  inertia  of  the  will,  which  consti-
tutes the  basis  of  the  hypnotic  condition  ;  the  cataleptiform
rigidity  might  be  a  concomitant  phenomenon,  due  to  the  fact,
that  the  psychological  excitation  spreads  itself  to  the  excito-
motor  centres  of  the  brain.

Heidenhain,  of  Breslau,  gives  an  analogous  hypothesis.  He
admits  that  the  feeble  and  continued  excitation  of  the  nerves  of
special  sense,  acoustic  or  optic,  brings  about  a  suspension  in  the
activity  of  the  cells  of  the  cerebral  cortex  ,  to  this  is  added  ex-

*  Weinhold,  Hypnotische  Versuche.  Exper.  Beitrage  zur  A'entniss  des  sogen.  tier-
ischen  Magnetismus.  Chemnitz,  1880. — Ruhlmann,  Die  Exper.  mit  Jan  sogen.  thier.
Magnet.  Garten-laube,  No.  819.  1S80—  Opitz,  Ckeméitzer  Zeitung.  1879.— Heidenhain,
Der  sogen.  thier.  Magnet.,  etc.  Leipzig,  iSSo.—B  res/auer  arztl.  Zeitschr.  1SS0.—
Griitzner,  Ibid. — Berger,  Hyptiot.  Zustande.     {Ibid.  1880-1881.)

+  Rumpf,  Deutsche  vied.  Wochenschr.    1SS0.

%  Preyer,  Die  Entdeck.  des  Hypnotismus.     Berlin,  iSSi.

§  Schneider,  D.c psych.  Ursache  der  hypnot.  Ersehein.     Leipzig,  18S6.

1 2  2  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

altation  of  the  activity  of  the  reflex  motor  centres,  lying  subja-
cent to  the  cortex,  perhaps,  because  the  cortex  is  paralyzed,  and
its  inhibitory  action  over  the  reflex  is  therefore  wanting  ;  per-
haps, because  in  consequence  of  this  same  paralysis,  all  centrip-
etal irritation  transmitted  to  the  brain  spreads  itself  over  a  more
circumscribed  nervous  domain,  and  for  this  reason  acts  more
efficiently  upon  this  excito-motor  region.

M.  Espinas,  *  Prof,  of  the  Literary  Faculty  of  Bordeaux,
develops  analogous  physiological  views.  He  made  a  special
study  of  the  sleep  in  hysterical  subjects,  and  holds  that  in  these
subjects  the  nervous  system  is  in  a  state  of  unstable  equilibrium,
and  that  rapid  exhaustion  of  the  higher  centres  follows  pro-
longed and  depressing  sensations.

In  terminating  this  historical  review,  let  me  call  attention  to
the  theory  of  Dr.  Prosper  Despine  f  of  Marseilles,  who  has
published  one  of  the  most  interesting  scientific  studies  on  som-
nambulism. There  exists,  says  the  author,  an  automatic  cere-
bral activity  which  manifests  itself  without  the  concurrence  of
the  ego  ;  for  all  nervous  centres  possess,  in  accordance  with  the
laws  which  govern  their  activity,  an  intelligent  power,  without
any  ego,  and  without  personality.  In  certain  pathological  cere-
bral states  the  psychical  faculties  may  manifest  themselves  in
the  absence  of  the  ego,  of  the  mind,  of  consciousness,  and  may
give  rise  to  acts  similar  to  those  which  normally  are  manifested
through  the  agency  of  the  ego.  This  is  automatic  cerebral
activity.  That  which  manifests  the  ego,  on  the  contrary,  is
conscious  cerebral  activity.  In  the  normal  condition,  these  two
activities  are  intimately  bound  together,  they  are  but  one,  and
always  manifest  themselves  conjointly  ;  in  certain  pathologi-
cal nervous  states  they  may  be  separated  and  act  alone.

Somnambulism  is  characterized,  physiologically,  by  the  exclu-
sive exercise  of  the  automatic  activity  of  the  brain  during  the
paralysis  of  its  conscious  activity.  Hence,  the  somnambulist's
ignorance  of  all  that  he  has  done  in  the  somnambulistic  condi-
tion does  not  arise  from  forgetfulness,  but  from  the  non-partici-
pation of  the  ego  in  these  acts.  In  the  following  chapter  we
shall  see  whether  this  opinion  has  any  foundation.

*  Espinas,  Die  sommeil  provoqué  chez  les  hystériques,  Essai  d'explication  psycho-
logique de  ses  causes  et  de  ses  effets. — Bulletin  de  la  Société  oT anthropologie  de  Bor-
deaux, t,  1,  1884.

t  P.  Despine,  Etude  scientifique  sur  le  somnambulisme.    Paris,  1S80.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  125

Admitting  the  doctrine  (hypothetical)  of  Luys,  that  the
different  layers  of  the  gray  substance  of  the  cortex  possess  dif-
ferent functions,  and  that  the  most  superficial  layer  subserves
sensation,  while  the  middle  layers  subserve  the  intellectual  fac-
ulties, and  the  deepest,  the  transmission  of  will  for  action, — the
author  believes  he  is  bound  to  deduce  from  it  that  active  som-
nambulism would  be  physiologically  determined  by  the  ner-
vous functional  paralysis  of  the  most  superficial  layer  of  the
gray  substance  of  the  convolutions,  with  persistence  of  the
activity  of  the  middle  and  deepest  layers  ;  but  if  the  middle
layer  is  similarly  paralyzed,  there  occurs  inactive  somnambulism,
which  does  not  manifest  any  psychical  activity.

In  a  study  of  Dr.  Ladame,  of  Geneva,  published  in  1883,
entitled  La  Névrose  hypnotique  ou  le  magnétisme  dévoilé,  there  is
a  clear  and  complete  exposition  of  the  subject  as  understood  at
that  time.  Mention  must  also  be  made  of  the  publication  of  M.
Emile  Yung,  of  Geneva,  which  appeared  in  1883,  entitled  Le
Sommeil  normal  et  le  Sommeil  pathologique.  (O.  Doin,  editor.)

Since  m}'  first  publication  which  appeared  in  1884,  and  which
was  soon  followed  by  M.  Liégeois's  essay  on  La  Suggestion  hyp-
notique avec  le  droit  civil  et  criminel,  the  question  of  hypnotism
has  been  studied  and  discussed  with  great  ardor.  Special
treatises  on  the  subject  have  been  published  by  Dr.  Bottey,*
Prof.  Beaunis,  f  Dr.  Cullerre,  \  MM.  Binet  and  Féré,  £  Dr.  Gilles
de  la  Tourette,  î  and  by  MM.  Fontan  and  Ségard.  *~  We  must
also  make  mention  of  the  inaugural  thesis  of  M.  Louis  Sicard,-*
of  Montpellier  ;  of  M.  Alphandery,++  of  Paris  ;  of  M.  Brullard  \\  of
Nancy  ;  and  of  the  inaugural  thesis  of  M.  Barth.  §§

For  very  interesting  psychological  and  physiological  studies,

*  Bottey,  Le  Magnétisme  animal.      Paris,  1885.

t   Beaunis,  Du  Somnambulisme  provoqué.      Paris,  1886.

X  Cullerre.  Magnétisme  et  Hypnotisme.      Paris,  1886.

§   Binet  et  Féré,  Le  Magnétisme  animal.     Paris,  1886.

ii  Gilles  de  la  Tourette,  L.' Hypnotisme  et  les  états  analogues  au  point  de  vue  medico-
Paris,  18S7.

r  Fontan  et  Ségard,  Éléments  de  medicine  suggestive.     Paris,  1887.

**  Louis  Sicard,  Contribution  a  V étude  de  l' hypnotisme  et  de  la  suggestion.  Thèse  de
Montpellier,  1886.

tt  Alphandery,  La  Thérapeutique  morale  et  la  suggestion.     Thèse  de  Paris,  18S6.

XX  Brullard.     Considérations  générales  sur  P état  hypnotique.     Thèse  de  Nancy,  1886.

§§  Barth,  Le  Sommeil  non  naturel  :  ses  diverses  formes.  Thèse  d'  agrégation,  Paris,
1886.

i  24  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

we  are  indebted  especially  to  M.  Delboeuf,  *  M.  Azam,  f  Prof.
Enrico  dal  Pozzo,^;  of  Pérouse,  and  Prof.  Morselli,  §  of  Turin.
Among  the  authors  who  have  written  upon  the  question  from  a
forensic  point  of  view,  I  shall  mention  Prof.  Lilienthal,  |  of
Zurich  ;  Dr.  Giulio  Campili,^[  of  Pérouse  ,  and  Dr.  Paul  Gamier,**
of  Paris.

The  therapeutic  applications  have  been  brought  to  notice  by
Dr.  Auguste  Voisin, ff  Prof.  Desplats,^  of  Lille  ;  Dr.  Vizioli,§§  in
Italy;  Prof.  Forel,|||  of  Zurich  ;  and  Dr.  Von  Renterghem,^f^[  of
Amsterdam.

The  Elements  of  suggestive  medicine,  by  Drs.  Fontan  and
Ségard  of  Toulon,  contain  ninety-nine  clinical  observations
which  show  the  efficacy  of  suggestion.

The  Revne  Philosophique,  directed  by  M.  Ribot,  the  Revue  de
l'hypnotisme,  founded  by  Dr.  Bérillon,  the  Mémoires  de  la  Société
de  Biologie  and  the  Archives  de  neurologie,  contain  a  large  number
of  interesting  studies  and  observations.  The  numeration  of
all  the  publications  which  have  appeared  on  this  subject  dur-
ing the  past  years,  would  occupy  too  much  space.

*  Delboeuf,  Une  visite  à  la  Satpêtrière.  Bruxelles,  1SS6.  De  P origine  des  effets
curaiifs  de  P  hypnotisme.  Etude  de  physiologie  expérimental.  Paris,  1887.  Articles  in
the  Revue  Philosophique  and  the  Revue  de  Biologie.

t  Azam,  Hypnotisme,  dotcble  conscience  et  altérations  de  la  personnalité.    Paris,  1887.

X  Enrico  dal  Pozzo  di  Mombello,  Un  Capitolo  di  Psicofisiologia.  Conferenze.  Po-
ligno,  1885.

§  Enrico  Morselli,  Il  Magnetismo  animale.     Torino,  18S6.

Il  Von  Lilienthal,  Der  Hypnotismus  und  das  StrafgerecJit.      Berlin  et  Leipzig,  13S7.

T  Guilo  Campili,  77  grande  ipnotismo  nei  rapporti  col  diritto pénale  e  civile.  Torino
1SÔ6.

**  Paul  Gamier,  L'automatisme  somnambulique  devant  les  tribunaux.     Paris,  1887.

tt  Auguste  Voisin,  several  publications  in  the  Revue  de  P  hypnotisme.  Paris,  1SS6  et
1887.

XX  Desplats,  Applications  thérapeutiques  de  P  hypnotisme  et  de  la  suggestion.  Lille,
1886.

§§  Vizioli,  La  Thérapeutique  suggestive.  (  Giorn.  di  neuropatologia.  Sept,  et  Dec.
1SS6.)

Il  II  Forel,  Einige  therapeutische  Dersuchen  mit  dem  Hypnotismus  bei  Geisteskrank-
heiten.     (Correspondenz-blatt  fur  Schweizer  Aerzte,  1S87.)

llf  Von  Renterghem,  Hypnotisme  en  Suggestie  in  de  Cenees,  Kundige  Praktijk.
Amsterdam,  1S87.

CHAPTER  VIII.

The  author's  theoretical  conception  of  the  interpretation  of  the  phenomena  of  sugges-
tion.— Automatism  in  daily  life  ;  reflex  acts  ;  automatic  instinctive  acts. — Autom-
atism in  the  new-born  child,  and  in  the  adult. — Moderating  influence  of  the
mind. — Sensorial  illusions  rectified  by  the  mind.— A.  Maury's  experiments. —
Hypnagogic  hallucinations. — Credulity. — Sensorial  suggestions  by  imitation. —
Automatic  obedience. — Influence  of  the  idea  upon  the  act. — Despine's  doctrine —
Abolition  of  the  state  of  consciousness. — Continuity  of  the  state  of  conscious-
ness.— Exaltation  of  reflex  ideo-motor.  ideo-sensitive,  and  ideo-sensorial  excitabil-
ity.— Negative  suggestion. — Inhibition. — Sleep  by  suggestion,  from  fatigue  of
the  eyelids,  from  occlusion  of  the  eyes,  from  monotonous,  feeble,  continuous
impressions. — Suggestion  without  sleep. — Chambard's  classification  of  the  various
periods  of  hypnotic  sleep. — Objections. — Attempted  interpretation  of  latent
memories,  and  of  suggestions  à  longue  échéance. — Answer  to  M.  Beaunis's  objec-
tions.

We  have  shown  that  the  phenomena  which  are  present  in  the
hypnotic  and  waking  conditions,  are  not  due  to  a  magnetic  fluid,
to  an  emanation  from  one  organism  to  another,  but  that  the
whole  explanation  lies  in  suggestion: — that  is,  in  the  influence
exerted  by  an  idea  which  has  been  suggested  to,  and  received  by
the  mind.  The  most  striking  feature  in  a  hypnotized  subject  is
his  automatism.  The  cataleptic  condition  is  the  result  of  sugges-
tion. The  subject  retains  the  attitude  in  which  he  is  placed,  and
continues  the  movements  communicated  to  his  limbs.  He  per-
ceives the  sensations  impressed  upon  his  mind.  He  believes
that  the  visual  images  which  are  suggested,  are  realities,  and
refers  them  to  the  outer  world.

At  first  sight  it  seems  as  if  we  had  to  deal  with  an  abnormal
and  unphysiological  condition.  In  the  waking  condition,  the
subject  only  perceives  that  which  he  actually  sees,  does  only  what
he  wishes,  and  obeys  only  his  spontaneous  and  personal  sugges-
tions. This  is  our  first  impression.  On  reflection,  however,  we
see  that  this  is  not  an  absolute  contradiction,  that  nature  does
not  violate  her  laws,  and  that  the  same  laws  which  govern  the
normal  organism  govern  the  organism  which  is  experimentally
and  pathologically  modified.

In  every-day  life  many  acts  occur  automatically,  involuntarily
and  unconsciously,  on    our  part.      The   spinal  cord  exercises  its

125

I2Ô  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

peculiar  functions  without  our  consciousness.  The  complex
phenomena  of  vegetative  life, — circulation,  respiration,  nutrition,
secretion,  excretion,  the  movements  of  the  alimentary  canal,  and
the  active  chemistry  of  the  organism,  are  quietly  carried  on  by
means  of  a  mechanism  which  acts  without  our  voluntary  effort.
We  know  that  an  impression  transmitted  along  a  sensory  nerve
may  be  reflected  through  the  gray  horns  of  the  cord,  without
traversing  the  brain;  involuntary  motion  follows  the  unperceived
impression  or  sensation.  This  is  spinal  reflex  action,  and  is  an
illustration  of  the  automatism  of  the  spinal  cord.  Tickling  of
the  sole  of  the  foot  gives  rise  to  reflex  movements,  even  when
the  spinal  cord  is  injured  and  no  longer  transmits  stimuli  to  the
brain.  A  decapitated  frog  continues  to  execute  adapted,  appro-
priate and  defensive  movements  with  its  forelegs  and  trunk,  and
if  a  drop  of  acetic  acid  is  put  on  the  surface  of  the  skin,  the  hind
leg  is  drawn  up  in  such  a  way  as  to  scratch  the  irritated  spot.  If
the  region  of  the  flanks  be  pinched  between  the  points  of  a
forceps,  the  frog  brings  the  extremity  of  the  corresponding  hind
leg  in  front  of  them,  and,  pressing  his  toes  upon  them,  makes
repeated  attempts  to  push  the  forceps  away.  (Vulpian.)  In
this  case  there  is  no  cerebral  interference.  The  involuntary
animal  mechanism  is  capable  of  executing  complex  acts,  de-
signed to  protect  the  organism  from  the  external  world.  Is  it
not  the  same  with  a  man,  who,  absorbed  in  profound  meditation,
functionally  decapitated,  as  Mathias  Duval  says,  unconsciously
and  without  subsequent  memory  brushes  away  a  fly  which
alights  on  his  hand,  by  means  of  simple,  perfectly  co-ordinated,
reflex  acts  ?

The  brain  may  intervene  to  give  the  primary  impulse  ;  the  act
continues,  even  when  thought  and  will  are  otherwise  occupied,
exclusively  by  means  of  spinal  automatism.  When  we  are  walk-
ing, and  various  ideas  distract  the  mind,  we  forget  that  we  are
walking.  Our  steps  continue,  simply  by  means  of  a  reflex
process.  The  contact  of  the  sole  of  the  foot  with  the  ground
is  sufficient  to  bring  about  the  phenomena  of  muscular  co-ordina-
tion, which  effects  the  act  of  progression,  through  a  centrifugal
path  in  the  spinal  cord.  Being  thus  relieved  of  the  necessity  of
constantly  watching  the  execution  of  this  complex  activity  of  an
inferior,  automatic  mechanism,  our  brain  works  with  perfect
liberty  in  other  directions.  We  habitually  walk  in  a  mechanical
way,  to  such  an  extent  that  we  often  pass  the  limit  assigned  by

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  127

the  will,  which  directed  our  first  step,  provided  that  this  will,
by  interrupting  our  preoccupation,  docs  not  intervene  to  arrest
our  steps.  It  is  the  same  with  swimming,  fencing,  horse-
back riding,  and  music.  The  artist  who  plays  through  a
long  piece  without  stopping,  frequently  allows  himself  to  be
absorbed  by  foreign  ideas  ;  his  thoughts  are  no  longer  upon  the
music:  his  fingers  wander  over  the  key-board,  and  he  plays  on
mechanically,  under  the  direction  of  medullary  stimuli  succeed-
ing each  other  spontaneously.

Moreover,  that  which  the  mind  has  lost  track  of,  spinal
automatism  may  resume.  The  artist  no  longer  remembers  all
the  phrases  of  a  musical  composition.  His  recollection  has
become  defective  ;  he  is  incapable  of  playing  the  piece  through,
in  consequence  of  his  mental  confusion.  The  spinal  memory,  if
I  may  use  the  expression,  supplements  the  cerebral  memory.
The  fingers  frequently  recover  the  difficult  arrangements  of  stops
and  movements  on  the  key-board,  and  accomplish  them  pre-
cisely, even  when  these  movements  assimilated,  so  to  speak,  by
the  spinal  cord,  have  become  a  mechanical  operation,  owing  to
their  frequent  repetition.

The  phenomena  of  automatic  activity  of  the  nervous  centres
may  be  instinctive.  Acts  occur  naturally,  without  ever  having
been  acquired,  by  means  of  the  spontaneous,  unconscious  initia-
tive of  the  brain  and  spinal  cord.  "  The  most  remarkable  of
these  acts,"  says  Despine,*  "  are  those  which  manifest  facial
expression,  gestures,  and  bodily  attitudes,  imitative  acts,  which
are  habitually  associated  with  various  and  indistinct  feelings,  and
which  are  carried  out  by  everyone,  although  they  have  never
been  learned.  To  these  acts  also  belong  the  different  inflections
which  the  voice  takes  under  different  circumstances,  and  the
movements  of  the  head  which  are  made  by  some  musicians  when
they  are  playing,  as  well  as  by  some  of  their  hearers.

"  Hate,  anger,  pride,  cunning,  admiration,  etc.,  bring  about  in
all  persons  who  experience  them,  the  same  muscular  contrac-
tions, and  consequently  a  similar  expression.  And  this  is  true,
not  only  of  man,  but  of  animals.  These  various  acts,  accom-
plished by  the  automatic  mechanism  of  the  nervous  centres,  are
so  pre-established  by  law,  that  they  are  found  to  be  always  iden-
tical in  all  individuals  submitted  to  the  same  exciting  causes.

*  Etude  scientifique  sur  le  somnambulisme.     Paris,  1880.

128  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

"  Another  effect  of  this  automatic  arrangement,  is  seen  in
affectation.  It  is  thought  that  the  phenomena  which  constitute
it,  are  voluntary  and  studied.  This  is  a  mistake.  A  person  is
affected  in  manner  in  consequence  of  an  exaggerated  facility  for
following  what  happens  in  thought,  which  the  automatic  nervous
organs  possess.  The  voice  takes  the  most  varied  inflections,
according  to  the  slightest  changes  in  the  feelings.  The  muscles
of  the  face  produce  the  greatest  variety  of  contractions.  The
limbs  and  the  body  move  in  a  thousand  ways.  This  disposition
is  observed  especially  in  woman."

To  these  instinctive  acts,  we  may  add  certain  movements
which  may  succeed  the  impressions  received  and  perceived  by
the  sensorium,  and  which  are  none  the  less  due  to  automatic,  cere-
bral activity.  A  disagreeable  odor,  which  makes  us  close  our
nostrils,  a  sudden  noise,  which  causes  us  to  turn  the  head,  an
arm  directed  against  us,  which  makes  us  extend  the  hand  to
push  it  away,  are  all  examples  of  defensive  movements  adapted
to  the  repulsion  of  a  danger,  or  of  a  hostile  impression.  The
impression  has  been  perceived  by  the  olfactory,  auditory,  or
visual  centres,  but  has  been  received  in  the  raw  state,  if  I  may
use  the  expression.  It  has  not  had  time  to  be  elaborated  and
interpreted  by  the  psychical  centres  of  the  hemispheres.  The
defensive  movement  has  been  committed  unconsciously,  involun-
tarily and  without  deliberation.  We  cannot  help  performing  it.
Before  the  will-power  comes  into  play,  the  reflex  reaction  is
instantly  transferred  from  the  sensory  bulbar  nucleus  where  it
has  been  perceived,  to  the  motor  centres,  corresponding  to  the
complex  movement  which  has  to  be  carried  out  in  the  instinct-
ive, that  is,  the  non-deliberate  interest  of  self-preservation.

As  my  distinguished  friend,  M.  Netter,  has  well  shown  in  his
excellent  work,*  the  cerebro-spinal  activity  is  almost  exclusively
automatic,  both  in  the  animal  throughout  life,  and  in  the  newly
born  child.  The  life  of  the  nervous  system  is  in  a  manner
almost  exclusively  concentrated  in  the  medulla,  the  spinal  cord,
and  its  intra-cranial  prolongations.  Voluntary  acts  do  not
exist,  and,  nevertheless,  complicated  acts,  such  as  suction,  are
accomplished  solely  by  the  reflex  mechanism  of  the  cerebro-
spinal centres.  Anatomy  confirms  this  observation.  Parrot  has
shown  that  the  brain  of  the  newly-born  child,  which  has  a  gelati-

*  L'Homme  et  V Animal  devant  la  méthode  expérimentale.     Paris,  1SS3.

Suggestive   Therapeutics*  129

nous  consistency,  and  is  of  a  uniformly  gray  color,  contains
hardly  any  nerve  fibres.  The  excitable  parts  of  the  cortex  and
the  so-called  motor  area,  do  not  exist  in  man  and  animals  before
the  occurrence  of  voluntary  acts  (Soltman).  The  white  color,
corresponding  to  the  completed  structure  of  the  nerve  fibres  (the
axis-cylinder  covered  by  its  medullary  sheath),  only  appears  later.
Hence,  anatomically  and  physiologically,  the  brain  is  embryonic.
Not  until  the  end  of  the  first  month,  does  the  substance  of  the
occipital  lobe  begin  to  grow  white,  and  only  about  the  fifth
month  do  the  anterior  regions  begin  to  develop.  This  develop-
ment is  not  completed  until  about  the  ninth  month  (Parrot.)

Hence,  consciousness,  will,  and  the  psychical  faculties  of  the
brain,  become  active  and  are  developed  gradually  through  the
progress  of  years  and  education.  The  automatic  cerebro-spinal
activity,  which  alone  dominates  the  organism  during  the  first
months,  and  which  predominates  throughout  life  in  animals,  is
associated  in  the  human  being  with  conscious  and  deliberate  ac-
tivity. The  automatic  phenomena  always  persist  and  recur  in
all  the  acts  of  life,  sometimes  isolated,  often  dominated  and
modified  by  consciousness.  The  child  is  impulsive,  it  acts  from
instinct,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  entirely  given  over  to  its  automatism.
It  jumps,  laughs,  screams,  makes  faces,  cries,  according  to  the
impressions  it  receives.  It  sings,  when  a  familiar  air  awakens  in
it  the  idea  of  song.  We  see  a  troop  of  young  school-boys  ;  a
regiment  passes  with  drum  and  band,  and  the  boys  are  thrown
into  step  as  though  moved  by  a  spring.  They  march  to  the
music,  fatally  impelled  by  an  instinctive  suggestion.

"  It  is  impossible,"  says  Gratiolet,  "to  be  seized  by  a  vivid
idea,  without  the  whole  body  being  placed  in  harmony  with  this
idea."  Even  we,  at  more  advanced  years,  and,  indeed,  at  every
time  of  life,  accompany  exhilarating  music  with  gesture  and
voice  ;  and  does  not  the  idea  of  dancing  suggested  to  the  mind
by  music,  tend  to  produce  involuntary,  corresponding  motions  of
the  body  and  limbs?  We  should  be  forced  to  relax  our  habitual
restraint  for  a  trifle,  if  the  condition  of  mind  developed  by  edu-
cation, the  reserve  imposed  by  custom,  and  our  introspection,
did  not  intervene  as  moderating  and  regulating  influences,  to
impose  a  check  to  the  cerebral  automatism  awakened  by  senso-
rial suggestion.  Are  not  all  our  every-day  acts  ruled  by  educa-
tion and  by  social  conventionality  ?  Are  they  not  the  result  of
the  domination  which  our  consciousness,  directed  by  habit,  exer-
9

1 50  Suggestive    TJierapcutics.

cises  over  our  unpremeditated  instincts,  over  our  animal  nature?
And  in  fact,  are  not  savages  in  a  state  of  prolonged  infancy,
unconditionally  surrendered  to  the  automatism  of  the  nervous
system  which  controls  them,  until  the  civilization  resulting  from
a  philosophical  education,  or  a  suitable  religion  has  created  in
the  embryonic  mind,  a  new  state  of  consciousness,  a  force  regu-
lating instinctive  acts?

It  often  happens  in  the  most  enlightened  self-controlled  man,
that  a  perceived  impression  is  so  intense  that  it  is  transformed
into  an  automatic  act  before  the  moderating  influence  of  con-
sciousness has  had  time  to  prevent  it.  A  soldier  violently  struck
by  a  superior,  forgets  himself  and  strikes  back.  His  action
follows  the  perceived  impression  instantly, — it  is  a  reflex  act.
The  soldier  regrets  it,  for  it  exposes  him  to  severe  punishment.
But  reason  comes  too  late  ;  anger  is  blind  and  does  not  reason.

As  a  psychical  organ,  the  brain  not  only  intervenes  to  moder-
ate reflex  action,  but  also  intervenes  to  correct,  to  interpret,  and
to  rectify,  impressions  imperfectly  transmitted  by  our  sensory
organs,  or  suggested  by  an  external  influence.  The  wind  blow-
ing through  a  crack  produces  the  auditory  impression  of  a  sigh  ;
the  mind  interprets  it,  and  refers  it  to  its  true  cause.  A  vision
startles  us  during  our  reveries,  but  consciousness  itself  again  tri-
umphs and  re-establishes  the  truth.  Are  we  not  all  susceptible
to  illusions  and  suggestions,  on  account  of  the  imperfection  of
our  conscious  being,  and  of  our  sense-impressions  ?  What  hap-
pens in  our  dreams,  when  our  dull  senses  no  longer  rectify  the
rushing  incoherent  ideas  which  make  the  most  fantastic  things
appear  to  us  as  realities,  and  in  which  we  believe  because  our
judgment  is  absent  and  no  longer  exercises  any  control, — this
happens  in  some  persons  in  the  period  of  mental  concentration
which  precedes  sleep.  Alfred  Maury  has  made  an  interesting
study  of  these  phenomena  upon  himself,  being  decidedly  subject
to  certain  kinds  of  hallucinations  which  he  calls  hypnagogic
hallucinations.  "  My  hallucinations,"  says  he,  "  are  more
numerous  and  particularly  vivid,  when  I  am  disposed  to
cerebral  congestion,  which  is  frequently  the  case.  As  soon
as  I  suffer  from  headache,  or  have  nervous  pains  in  the  eyes,
ears,  or  nose,  the  hallucinations  attack  me  before  my  eyelids
are  closed.  If  I  do  difficult  work  in  the  evening,  the  hallucina-
tions never  fail  to  appear.  After  having  spent  two  consecutive
days  in  translating  a  long  and  very  difficult  Greek  passage,  I  saw

Suggestive   Therapeutics*  131

before  falling  asleep,  images  which  were  so  numerous,  and  which
followed  each  other  so  rapid!}',  that  I  sat  up  in  bed  in  actual  fear,
in  order  to  dissipate  them.

"  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  attention  should  be  long  diverted
in  order  that  the  hypnagogic  hallucination  may  appear.  A
second,  or  perhaps  less,  suffices.  I  have  often  observed  this  my-
self. Soon  after  lying  down,  my  attention  becomes  distracted.
Images  immediately  appear  before  my  closed  eyes.  The  appear-
ance of  these  hallucinations  brings  me  back  to  myself  and  I
resume  the  course  of  my  thoughts,  soon  after  to  fall  a  prey  to
the  new  visions,  and  this  happens  many  times  in  succession,
until  I  fall  fast  asleep.  One  day  I  had  the  following  singular
experience.  I  was  reading  aloud  an  account  of  a  trip  through
Southern  Russia.  I  had  hardly  finished  a  certain  paragraph,
when  I  instinctively  closed  my  eyes.  In  one  of  these  short
moments  of  somnolence,  I  saw  hypnagogically,  but  with  the
rapidity  of  lightning,  the  vision  of  a  man,  clad  in  a  brown  robe
and  with  a  cowl  on  his  head,  like  one  of  the  monks  in  Zur-
baran's  pictures.  This  image  called  me  back  to  myself  as  soon
as  I  had  closed  my  eyes  and  stopped  reading.  I  suddenly
opened  them  again  and  resumed  the  course  of  my  reading.
The  interruption  was  of  such  short  duration,  that  the  person
to  whom   I  was  reading  did  not  perceive  it,  etc."*

Who  has  not  had  more  or  less  marked  hallucinations  of  this
kind,  when  the  attention  is  distracted,  when  the  mind,  losing
distinct  consciousness  of  the  ego,  becomes  the  play  of  visions
evoked  by  the  imagination?  Blind  to  the  truth,  the  mind  is
delivered  over  completely  to  the  fictitious  conceptions  which
beset  it,  until  consciousness  once  more  takes  the  ascendency,
disperses  these  disturbing  dreams,  and  re-establishes  the  truth.

Our  errors,  illusions,  and  hallucinations,  are  not  all  sponta-
neous or  consecutive  to  an  imperfect  sensorial  impression  ;  they
may  be  suggested  to  our  minds  by  others,  and  they  are  some-
times accepted  without  being  challenged.

For  have  we  not  all  a  certain  amount  of  credulity,  which
inclines  us  to  believe  what  we  are  told?  Says  Durand  de  Gros,
"  The  credulity  which  theologians  call  '  Faith'  is  given  us  in
order  that  we  may  be  able  to  believe  upon  simple  affirmation,
without  exacting  rational  or  material   proofs  as    evidence.     This

*  Sleep  and  Dreams.     Paris,  1878.

132  Suggestive    TherapeîUics.

is  a  most  important  moral  bond.  Without  it,  no  education,  no
tradition,  no  history,  no  social  code,  would  be  possible,  for  all
evidence  would  go  for  naught,  and  the  most  vehement  assur-
ances of  our  best  friend,  breathlessly  announcing  that  our  house
is  on  fire,  or  that  our  child  is  drowning,  would  find  us  as  cool  and
immovable  as  if  he  had  contented  himself  with  saying,  '  It  is  a
fine  day,'  or,  '  It  is  raining.'  Our  mind  would  remain  fixed
and  imperturbable  in  the  balance  of  doubt,  and  actual  evidence
would  be  the  only  means  capable  of  bringing  it  out  of  this  con-
dition. In  a  word,  to  believe  without  credulity  would  be  as  diffi-
cult as  to  see  without  vision,  that  is  it  would  be  radically  impos-
sible." *

When  an  assertion  is  made,  our  first  impression  is  to  believe
it.  The  child  believes  what  it  is  told.  Daily  experience,  the
habit  of  correcting  errors  which  are  imposed  upon  us,  the  second
nature  with  which  social  education  furnishes  us,  gradually  weak-
ens this  inborn  credulity,  this  naïveté  of  youth.  Like  all  the
innate  feelings  of  the  human  soul,  this  credulity  always  survives
to  a  certain  extent.  Say  to  some  one,  "  There  is  a  wasp  on
your  forehead,"  and  mechanically  he  puts  his  hand  on  the  spot.
Indeed,  there  are  persons  who   even  believe   they  feel  the  sting.

An  idea  may  originate  in  the  mind  through  imitation,  and
may  give  rise  to  a  corresponding  sensation.  For  example,  we
see  a  person  scratching  himself,  and  the  idea  of  itching,  the  fear
of  having  gotten  upon  us  the  insect  which  we  saw  upon  our
neighbor,  is  often  sufficient  to  produce  the  sciisorial  image  of
itching,  and  we  feel  the  necessity  of  scratching  some  part  of  the
.  body.  The  first  itching  suggests  a  second  somewhere  else  on
the  body.  The  necessity  of  emptying  the  bladder  is  felt  at  the
sight  of  a  person  making  water  ;  and  yawning  is  contagious.
Nervous  habits,  nervous  cough,  and  sometimes  vomiting,  chorea,
hysterical  convulsions,  and  certain  vicious  habits  of  children,  are
among  the  pathological  states  which  may  be  developed  by  imi-
tation. Not  unfrequently  the  pupil  unconsciously  acquires  his
master's  gestures,  intonation,  and  certain  of  his  peculiarities  of
expression.

Some  people  are  very  susceptible  to  these  sensory  suggestions;

\    They  are  endowed  with  lively  imaginations,  that  is  to  say,  they

have  a  great  aptitude  for  mentally  creating  an  image  of  the  sug-

*  Philips,  Cours  théorique  et  pratique  de  Braidisme.     Paris,  1S60.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  133

gestions  induced  by  speech,  vision,  and  touch,  and  this  image
projected  to  the  exterior  through  the  peripheral  nerves  of  the
corresponding  organs,  reproduces  an  actual  sensation,  as  vivid  as
if  it  had  an  objective  cause  in  these  same  organs  ;  for  example,
the  pain  of  a  stump,  which  is  referred  to  a  member  which  no
longer  exists.  Such  may  be  the  effect  of  imagination.  Char-
pignon  says,  "  When  I  think  of  an  acid  fruit,  I  represent  to
myself  an  apple  yielding  under  a  knife,  or  being  crushed  by  my
teeth,  my  mouth  waters,  and  I  experience  a  sensation  almost  as
distinct  as  if  the  object  itself  had  been  the  cause  of  it."

Do  we  not  all  possess  a  certain  cerebral  docility  which  makes
us  obey  commands  ?  We  tell  a  child  to  walk,  and  he  lifts  his
leg  mechanically.  Say  to  a  person,  "  Close  your  eyes,"  and
many  persons  will  close  them  without  reflection.  The  idea  suf-
fices to  bring  about  the  corresponding  movement  automatically,
and  sometimes  even,  contrary  to  the  will.  A  well-known  exper-
iment shows  the  influence  of  an  idea  upon  the  act.  I  hold  the
end  of  my  watch  chain  between  two  fingers  at  the  height  of  my
forehead  ;  the  watch  hangs  vertically  suspended  and  moves  to
the  right  or  left,  backwards  or  forwards,  or  in  a  circle,  according
as  I  conceive  the  idea  of  these  successive  movements.  I  try  in
vain  not  to  interfere  voluntarily,  but  am  unconscious  of  the
motion  which  my  hand  imparts  to  the  chain.  Simply  the  idea
of  motion  is  enough  to  occasion  it.  Is  not  this  the  secret  of
table  turning,  which  has  turned  so  many  heads  for  more  than
thirty  years?  Involuntarily  and  unconsciously  everyone  imparts
a  slight  movement  to  the  table,  and  the  sum  of  all  these  uncon-
scious movements,  results  in  the  tipping  of  the  table.

Doubtless,  the  impression  produced  by  an  order  given  by  one
who  has  no  authority  over  us,  is  too  weak  to  make  the  mind
carry  it  out  automatically,  without  first  estimating  its  expediency.
Our  judgment  questions  it,  and  our  reason  opposes  the  instinct
of  passive  obedience.  But  when  the  mind  is  dulled  by  somno-
lence, or  lost  in  reverie,  this  no  longer  holds  true.  The  absent
or  distracted  attention  no  longer  allows  of  control,  automatism
gains  the  mastery,  and  we  involuntarily  obey.

"  One  evening,"  says  Maury,  "  I  was  dozing  in  my  chair,  and  I
still  heard  vaguely,  when  my  brother  said  to  me,  in  a  loud  voice,
'  Get  a  match,  the  candle  has  gone  out.'  It  seems  that  I  heard
the  words,  but  without  knowing  that  it  was  my  brother  who  had
uttered  them,  for  in   the  dreams  which   I  then   had,  I   imagined

134  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

that  I  went  to  look  for  a  match.  Awaking  a  few  seconds  after,
wards,  I  was  told  what  my  brother  had  said.  I  had  already  for-
gotten that  I  had  heard  him,  although  at  the  time  I  answered.
My  answer  was  purely  mechanical.  However,  in  my  dream,  I
believed  that  I  was  looking  for  a  match  upon  my  own  account,
and  I  did  not  even  suspect  that  I  was  carrying  out  an  order."

The  following  remarks,  which  I  quote  from  Chambard,*  show
in  an  entertaining  way  how  a  frequently  repeated  act  is  aroused
by  a  suggested  idea.  "  When  Dr.  Veron  was  director  of  the
opera,  he  invited  the  ballet-dancers  and  their  mothers  to  dinner
on  a  certain  occasion.  When  the  rich  repast  was  over,  the
respectable  matrons  fell  asleep.  A  queer  idea,  worthy  of  a
clever  man,  originated  with  the  host.  '  Dance,  if  you  please  !  '
he  exclaimed  in  a  loud  voice.  Mechanically,  but  in  perfect  har-
mony, the  sleeping  women  executed  the  traditional  figure,  thus
betraying  the  exercise  of  a  profession  at  which  their  daughters
blushed,  and  to  which  not  one  of  them  would  have  owned  a  few
minutes  before."

These  considerations,  which  it  seems  to  me  unnecessary  to
amplify,  are  sufficient  demonstration  of  the  fact  that  the  normal,
physiological  state  shows,  in  a  rudimentary  manner,  phenomena
analogous  to  those  which  are  observed  in  hypnotism  ;  that  nature
,does  not  contradict  herself,  and  that  there  exists  in  our  cerebro-
I. spinal  nervous  apparatus,  an  automatism  by  which  we  accomplish
certain  highly  intricate  acts,  unconsciously  and  involuntarily,  and
through  which  we  submit  to  a  certain  extent  to  orders  which  are
given  us,  to  movements  which  are  communicated  to  us,  and  to
sensory  illusions  which  are  suggested  to  us.  They  also  demon-
strate that  the  condition  of  consciousness  intervenes  to  modify  or
neutralize  automatic  action,  and  to  rectify  or  destroy  false  im-
pressions insinuated  into  the  nervous  centres.

Suppress  consciousness,  suppress  voluntary  cerebral  activity,
and  we  have  somnambulism.  Such  at  least  is  the  opinion  of  P.
Despine.  "  Somnambulism,"  says  this  author,  "  is  characterized
physiologically,  by  the  exercise  of  the  automatic  activity  alone  of
the  brain,  during  the  paralysis  of  the  conscious  activity,  which
manifests  the  ego."

According  to  this  doctrine,  the  hypnotized  subject  would
move  as  the  decapitated  frog  swims  :  he  would  be  an  unconscious

*  Etude  symptomatologique  sur  le  somnambulisme.     {Lyon  medical,  18S3.)

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  135

mechanism,  at  the  mercy  of  the  hypnotizer.  If  I  lift  his  arm,  it
remains  passively  raised,  as  though  fixed  in  the  position  imposed,
for  his  personal  will  no  longer  exists  to  put  it  back  into  place.  I
say.  "  Your  arms  are  revolving,  you  cannot  stop  them."  The
idea  of  the  suggested  movement  is  accepted  by  the  mind  which
is  deprived  of  initiative,  and  this  idea  automatically  engenders
the  movement,  which  continues,  because  the  ego  is  weakened,
and  unable  to  arrest  the  automatic  action  directed  by  an  external
influence.

I  say,  "  Your  hand  feels  hot,"  and  the  idea  of  warmth  being
induced  into  the  mind,  and  accepted  without  control,  calls  forth
a  memory-sensation  of  heat,  which  is  projected  along  a  centrif-
ugal path  to  the  periphery  of  the  hand.

Or,  I  say,  "  You  are  sad,"  and  sad  feelings  take  possession  of
the  mind  ; — "  You  are  gay,"  and  bright  ideas  arise.  I  direct  the
movements,  sensations  and  feelings  of  the  hypnotized  subject,;
who  no  longer  possesses  a  conscious  personality,  who  yields  with-
out a  struggle  to  modifications  of  his  relationship  with  the  exter-
nal world,  and  of  his  intellectual  life,  which  my  will  dictates  to
his  mind.

Does  the  doctrine  thus  formulated  conform  to  the  facts?  Is
it  correct  to  say  with. P.  Despine,  that  involuntary  cerebral  activ-
ity may  be  put  to  sleep  with  the  hypnotized  subject,  and  that
the  ego  does  not  participate  in  his  acts  ?     I  think  not.

In  the  primary  degrees  of  sleep,  consciousness  and  will  exist,
as  we  have  stated  in  our  description  of  the  hypnotic  manifes-
tations. In  a  case  of  this  sort,  the  only  phenomenon  manifested
after  hypnotization  is  the  closure  of  the  eyes  :  the  subject
observes  everything,  laughs,  even  aids  in  the  maintenance  of
the  catalepsy  of  his  eyelids  or  of  the  arms  if  it  exists.  He
makes  ineffectual  efforts  to  open  his  eyes,  or  to  put  down  his
arm.  He. says,  "I  try  in  vain  and  I  cannot."  Intelligent  sub-
jects on  awaking,  can  often  give  a  complete  account  of  all
their  sensations  during  sleep.  One  man  said  to  me,  "  I  heard
everything,  and  I  was  even  able  to  struggle,  my  hand  was  closed
in  contracture,  and  I  tried  hard  to  open  it,  my  arms  revolved
one  about  the  other,  and  I  tried  every  means  of  stopping  them.
I  brought  my  hands  nearer  together,  so  that  one  should  hit
against  the  other.  I  thought  I  had  succeeded  in  stopping  them
at  last,  when  all  at  once  they  flew  apart  like  a  spring,  in  spite  of
me,  cither  spontaneously,   or  at  the   slightest   word  spoken    by

136  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

you."  I  lay  one  of  his  fingers  on  his  nose  and  say,  "  You  cannot
take  it  away  again,"  He  tries  to  do  it.  As  he  finds  it  impossi-
ble to  pull  it  away  directly,  he  tries  to  do  so  by  sliding  it  up  and
down.  He  almost  succeeds  when  I  say,  "  Your  finger  is  stuck
there,"  and  it  immediately  adheres  throughout  the  whole  length
of  his  nose.  He  still  tries  to  pull  his  finger  away,  and  though
he  knows  perfectly  well  why  it  sticks  fast,  he  cannot  remove
it.

Despine  states  that  "  The  somnambulist's  ignorance  of  what
he  does  when  in  the  somnambulistic  condition,  does  not  come
from  forgetfulness.  but  from  the  non-participation  of  the  ego  in
his  acts."  I  have  seen  somnambulists,  however,  who  recall  their
acts  when  they  wake.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  to  them,  "  You  will
remember  everything  when  you  wake,"  and  the  memory  of  what
has  occurred  is  retained.  If  they  are  told  when  they  wake,
'•You  are  going  to  remember  everything,"  the  memory  of  what
they  have  done  in  the  somnambulistic  condition  comes  back  to
them.  Moreover,  they  are  perfectly  self-conscious  while  in  this
condition  ; — they   answer  the    questions    addressed    to  them  ; —

they  know  that  they  are  asleep.     When  I  tell  S that  he  is  on

the  battle-field,  he  recalls  the  scenes  in  which  he  assisted  ;  a
truly  active  intellectual  work  goes  on  within  him  ;  his  thoughts,
consciously  evoked  memories,  become  images  of  which  he
cannot  rid  himself.  "Hallucination,"  says  Lélut,  "  is  the  trans-
formation of  thought  into  feeling.'  The  suggestions  which  I
induce  in  the  wakinsf  condition,  are  created  in  a  conscious  being,
who  knows  what  he  is  doing,  and  who  remembers   what    he  has

done.     I  develop  a  hallucination  in  S without  hypnotizing

him.  He  says  that  he  is  perfectly  self-conscious.  The  suggested
hallucination  is  the  only  abnormality  evident  in  his  mind.  He
goes  and  comes,  speaks,  and  carries  out  all  his  ordinary,  every-
day actions,  spontaneously  and  thoughtfully.  I  have  created  a
susceptibility  to  hallucination  ; — I  have  made  an  organic  autom-
aton.

Consciousness  and  will  are  doubtless  weakened  in  cases  of
profound  sleep.  The  more  intense  the  sleep  is,  the  less  the
subject's  spontaneity,  and  the  greater  the  docility  to  sugges-
tions. But  this  profound  sleep,  and  weakness  of  the  will  and
consciousness,  are  not  necessary  for  the  manifestation  of  sug-
gestive phenomena.  This  important  fact  indisputably  follows
from  the  preceding  considerations.

tive    Therapeutics.  137

The  one  thing  certain  is,  that  a  peculiar  aptitude  for  trans-
forming tlie  idea  received  into  an  act  exists  in  hypnotized  sub-
jects who  are  susceptible  to  suggestion.  In  the  normal  con-
dition, every  formulated  idea  is  questioned  by  the  mind.  After
being  perceived  by  the  cortical  centres,  the  impression  extends
to  the  cells  of  the  adjacent  convolutions  ;  their  peculiar  activity
is  excited  ;  the  diverse  faculties  generated  by  the  gray  substance
of  the  brain  come  into  play  ;  the  impression  is  elaborated,  regis-
tered, and  analyzed,  by  means  of  a  complex  mental  process,
which  ends  in  its  acceptation  or  neutralization  ;  if  there  is  cause,
the  mind  vetoes  it.  In  the  hypnotized  subject,  on  the  contrary,
the  transformation  of  thought  into  action,  sensation,  move-
ment, or  vision  is  so  quickly  and  so  actively  accomplished,
that  the  intellectual  inhibition  has  not  time  to  act.  When  the
mind  interposes,  it  is  already  an  accomplished  fact,  which  is
often  registered  with  surprise,  and  which  is  confirmed  by  the
fact  that  it  proves  to  be  real,  and  no  intervention  can  hamper  it
further.  If  I  say  to  the  hypnotized  subject,  "Your  hand  remains
closed,"  the  brain  carries  out  the  idea  as  soon  as  it  is  formulated.
A  reflex  is  immediately  transmitted  from  the  cortical  centre,
where  this  idea  induced  by  the  auditory  nerve  is  perceived,  to
the  motor  centre,  corresponding  to  the  central  origin  of  the
nerves  subserving  flexion  of  the  hand  ; — contracture  occurs  in
flexion.  There  is,  then,  exaltation  of  the  ideo-nwtor  reflex  excita-
bility, which  effects  the  unconscious  transformation  of  the  thought
into  movement,  unknown  to  the  will.

The  same  thing  occurs  when  I  say  to  the  hypnotized  subject,
"You  have  a  tickling  sensation  in  your  nose."  The  thought
induced  through  hearing  is  reflected  upon  the  centre  of  olfactory
sensibility,  where  it  awakens  the  sensitive  memory-image  of  the
nasal  itching,  as  former  impressions  have  created  it  and  left  it
imprinted  and  latent.  This  memory  sensation  thus  resuscitated,
may  be  intense  enough  to  cause  the  reflex  act  of  sneezing.
There  is  also,  then,  exaltation  of  the  ideo-sensorial  reflex  excita-
bility, which  effects  the  unconscious  transformation  of  the  thought
into  sensation,  or  into  a  sensory  image.

In  the  same  way  the  visual,  acoustic  and  gustatory  images
succeed  the  suggested  idea.

Negative  suggestions  are  more  difficult  to  explain.  If  I  say
to  the  hypnotized  subject,  "Your  body  is  insensible,  your  eye  is
blind,"  the  impression  transmitted  by  the  auditory  nerve  to  the

1 3S  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

centre  of  tactile  or  visual  sensibility,  creates  the  image  of  the
tactile  or  visual  anaesthesia  ;  the  cutaneous  nerves  receive  the
stimulus;  the  retina  receives  the  image;  retinal  vision  exists,
light  makes  the  pupil  contract  :  but  the  cerebral  perception  of
the  tactile  impression,  or  of  the  retinal  image,  no  longer  exists.
It  seems  as  if  it  might  be  a  reflex  paralysis  of  a  cortical  centre,
which  the  suggested  idea  has  produced  in  this  case.  Moreover,
these  nervous  actions  of  arrest  are  well  known,  if  not  well
explained,  to  physiology  and  pathology.  Stimulation  of  the
pneumogastric  stops  the  beating  of  the  heart;  a  violent  emotion
paralyzes  us;  a  severe  injury  produces  bodily  insensibility
(surgical  shock);  speech  fails  from  the  effect  of  a  deep  impres-
sion ;  and  sudden  functional  blindness  is  manifested  incases  of
hysteria.

The  organism  possesses  dynamic  mechanisms,  by  the  aid  of
which  control  or  activity  may  be  suddenly  suspended.  This  is
what  Brown-Séquard  calls  inhibition.  The  control  or  activity
may  on  the  contrary  be  re-enforced,  and  Brown-Séquard  calls
this  dynamogeny.  ''This  inhibitory  or  dynamogenic  faculty
belongs  to  different  parts  of  the  nervous  system,  and  may  be
exercised  either  in  a  direct  or  reflex  manner."  As  an  example
of  inhibition,  Brown-Séquard  cites  the  arrest  of  the  heart  from
the  irritation  of  the  abdominal  sympathetic  ganglia,  the  arrest
of  respiration  from  the  irritation  of  the  laryngeal  nerves,  the
inhibition  of  mental  activity  or  loss  of  consciousness,  by  simple
puncture  of  the  medulla,  the  heart  continuing  to  beat;  the  reflex
amaurosis  following  a  lesion  of  the  trigeminus  and  other  nerves,
or  the  partial  section  of  the  restiform  bodies  in  rabbits.*  The
negative  suggestions  of  which  we  have  spoken,  belong  under  the
same  order  of  facts.

The  mechanism  of  suggestion  in  general,  may  then  be  summed
up  in  the  following  formula:  increase  of  the  reflex  ideo-viotor,
ideo-sensitive,  and  idco-sensorial  excitability.     In    the   same  way,

*  Brown-Séquard  says, — "  The  initial  act  by  the  aid  of  which  an  individual  is
thrown  into  hypnotism,  is  itself  but  a  peripheral  (from  one  of  the  senses  or  from  the
skin),  or  central  (by  the  influence  of  an  idea  or  of  an  emotion)  stimulus,  which  pro-
duces a  diminution  or  augmentation  of  power  in  certain  parts  of  the  brain,  the  spinal
cord,  and  other  parts  of  the  nervous  system,  and  Braidism  or  hypnotism  is  nothing
else  than  the  very  complex  condition  of  the  loss  or  increase  of  energy  into  which  the
nervous  system  and  other  organs  are  thrown  under  the  influence  of  the  primary
peripheral  or  sensorial  stimulus.  Hypnotism  is  then  essentially  only  the  collective
effect  of  acts  of   inhibition  and  of  dynamogeny."     {Gazette  hebdomadaire,  1S83,  p.  137.)

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  139

through  the  effect  of  some  influence,  strychnine  for  example,  the
sensitive-motor  excitability  is  increased  in  the  spinal  cord,  so
that  the  least  impression  at  the  periphery  of  a  nerve  is  imme-
diately transformed  into  contracture,  without  the  moderating
influence  of  the  brain  being  able  to  prevent  this  transformation.
In  the  same  way  in  hypnotism,  the  ideo-reflex  excitability  is
increased  in  the  brain,  so  that  any  idea  received  is  immediately
transformed  into  an  act,  without  the  controlling  portion  of  the
brain,  the  higher  centres,  being  able  to  prevent  the  transforma-
tion.

This  is  only  a  formula,  I  know:  I  do  not  pretend  to  advance  a
theory.  In  the  realm  of  psychology  the  cause  and  essence  of
phenomena  escape  us.  If  I  am  not  mistaken,  this  formula,  such
as  it  is,  helps  us  to  conceive  of  a  mechanism  which  the  mind
cannot  strictly  explain.  It  seems  to  me  that  a  little  light  rises
from  this  theoretical  conception,  imperfect  as  it  is;  we  under-
stand that  these  curious  phenomena  may  exist  normally  in  the
waking  condition,  in  certain  subjects,  whose  paths  of  intra-
cerebral reflectivity  are  more  distinct  and  more  easily  traced,  and
in  whom  the  condition  of  consciousness  which  moderates  the
reflex  automatism,  is  at  the  same  time  weakened.  We  also
know  that  subjects  who  have  been  hypnotized  often,  may  con-
tract an  increase  of  this  ideo-reflex  excitability  through  habit,
that  is  to  say,  through  the  frequent  repetition  of  the  phenomena
induced  ;  the  paths  most  frequently  followed,  present  the  easiest
and  most  rapid  way  of  diffusing  the  nervous  force  ;  the  impres-
sion follows  these  paths  from  preference,  even  in  the  waking
condition;  and  for  this  reason  subjects  trained  and  educated  by
former  hypnotizations,  without  being  again  hypnotized,  may
manifest  the  same  phenomena,  and  carry  out  the  same  acts,
under  the  influence  of  the  all-powerful  suggestion.

Sleep  itself  is  born  of  a  conscious  or  unconscious  suggestion.
The  subject  who  has  made  up  his  own  mind  that  he  is  going  to
sleep,  or  who  has  been  assured  of  the  fact  by  word  or  gesture,  con-
centrates his  thoughts  upon  this  idea,  and  gradually  experiences
all  the  symptoms  of  sleep, — heaviness  of  the  eyelids,  dimness
of  sight,  insensibility  of  the  limbs, — he  isolates  his  senses,  avoids
all  external  impressions,  his  eyes  close,  and  sleep  has  appeared.

The  various  methods  of  hypnotization  act  partly  in  a  sugges-
tive way  ;  fixation  upon  a  brilliant  object,  the  convergent  stra-
bismus of  the  eyes,  develops  fatigue  and  a  heavy   feeling  in    the

1 40  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

eyelids,  which  insinuates  the  idea  of  sleep  ;  the  closure  of  the
eyelids  is  an  invitation  to  sleep.  It  is  said  that  the  women  of
Brittany  put  their  babies  to  sleep  by  hanging  a  little  glass  ball  to
the  top  of  the  cradle,  so  that  it  shines  in  front  of  their  eyes.
Certain  practices  used  in  order  to  produce  religious  ecstasy  are
referable  to  this  suggestion,  visual  fatigue.  For  instance,  the  con-
templation of  an  imaginary  point  in  space,  or  of  the  end  of  the
nose,  practiced  by  the  devotees  of  India  ;  the  contemplation  of
their  umbilicus,  which  is  practised  by  the  Mount-Athos  monks,
or  "  omphalo-psy chiens"  Let  us  add  that  in  the  majority  of  per-
sons, the  monotonous  wearying  and  continuous  impression  of  one
of  the  senses,  produces  a  certain  intellectual  drowsiness,  the  pre-
lude of  sleep.  The  mind,  entirely  absorbed  by  a  quiet,  uniform,
and  incessant  perception,  becomes  foreign  to  all  other  impres-
sions ;  it  is  too  feebly  stimulated  ;  and  allows  itself  to  become
dull.  "  If  the  mind,"  says  Cullen,  "  is  fixed  upon  a  single  sensa-
tion, it  soon  reaches  a  condition  in  which  there  is  total  absence
of  impressions,  or  in  other  words,  the  condition  which  nearest
approaches  sleep."

The  prolonged  and  monotonous  sound  of  tambourines  struck
in  the  same  cadence  and  in  the  darkness  of  night,  produces
ecstatic  hypnotism  in  Arabs  of  the  Aissaoua  sect.  The  impres-
sion made  upon  the  hearing  by  the  continual  murmur  of  the
waves,  or  by  monotonous  and  slow  utterance,  induces  sleep.
'  '  The  child  is  hypnotized  through  its  sense  of  hearing,  by  the  mo-
notonous songs  sung  by  its  nurse  ;  the  regular  oscillations  of  its
cradle  hypnotize  it  through  its  muscular  sense  by  communicating  a
long  series  of  weak  shocks,  each  one  like  the  last  and  separated
by  equal  intervals.  Incantation  with  charms  {carmind),  the
simple  and  unvarying  rhythm  of  which  murmurs  in  the  captive's
ear,  without  speaking  to  his  intelligence,  ought  to  be  considered
as  a  particular  form  of  Braidism  which  is  exercised  upon  the
sense  of  hearing  instead  of  upon  sight."     (Dr.  Philips.)

There  is  no  fundamental  difference  between  spontaneous  and
induced  sleep.  M.  Liébault  has  very  wisely  established  this  fact.
The  spontaneous  sleeper  is  in  relationship  with  himself  alone  ;
the  idea  which  occupies  his  mind  just  before  going  to  sleep,  the
impressions  which  the  sensitive  and  sensorial  nerves  of  the
periphery  continue  to  transmit  to  the  brain,  and  the  stimuli  com-
ing from  the  viscera,  become  the  point  of  departure  for  the  inco-
herent images  and  impressions   which  constitute  dreams.     Have

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  141

those  who  deny  the  psychical  phenomena  of  hypnotism,  or  who
only  admit  them  in  cases  of  diseased  nervous  temperament,  ever
reflected  upon  what  occurs  in  normal  sleep,  in  which  the  best
balanced  mind  is  carried  by  the  current,  in  which  the  faculties
are  dissociated,  in  which  the  most  singular  ideas,  and  the  most
fantastic  conceptions  obtrude  ?  Poor  human  reason  is  carried
away,  the  proudest  mind  yields  to  hallucinations,  and  during  this
sleep,  that  is  to  say,  during  a  quarter  of  its  existence,  becomes
the  plaything  of  the  dreams  which  imagination  calls  forth.

In  induced  sleep,  the  subject's  mind  retains  the  memory  of
the  person  who  has  put  him  to  sleep,  whence  the  hypnotizer's
power  of  playing  upon  his  imagination,  of  suggesting  dreams,
and  of  directing  the  acts  which  are  no  longer  controlled  by  the
weakened  or  absent  will.

Moreover,  owing  to  this  paresis  of  the  psychical  activity  of  the
voluntary  regulator  of  the  cerebro-spinal  automatism,  the  latter
becomes  exaggerated  and  dominant.  Thus  sleep  favors  the  pro-
duction of  suggestive  phenomena,  by  suppressing  or  weakening
the  moderating  influence,  but  it  is  not  indispensable  to  their  pro-
duction. I  repeat  the  fact  that  it  is  itself  a  phenomenon  of
suggestion.  Certain  subjects  who  reach  the  condition  in  which
the  cataleptiform  closure  of  the  eyelids  occurs,  resist  the  idea
of  sleep.  In  one  case  in  my  service,  I  cannot  induce  either  sleep
or  closure  of  the  eyelids,  but  by  affirmation  alone  I  can  induce
the  closure  of  the  contractured  hand.  Hypnotism  is  not  then
the  necessary  prelude  to  suggestion  ;  it  facilitates  suggestion
when  it  can  be  induced  ;  but  other  suggestions  may  sometimes
succeed  when  the  suggestion  of  sleep  is  inefficacious.

At  the  beginning  of  this  study,  we  showed  that  the  hypnotic
condition  exhibits  various  degrees.  M.  Chambard  has  classed
the  periods  of  hypnotic  sleep  in  a  different  way,  in  an  interest-
ing memoir,  the  work  of  an  ingenious  mind.  This  division  is
partly  based  upon  Alfred  Maury's  conception  regarding  the  suc-
cession of  the  phenomena  which  border  upon  physiological
sleep.

Sight  first  disappears  :  the  other  senses  are  at  first  exalted,
afterward  they  cease  to  perform  their  functions  ;  taste  is  the  last
to  disappear.

The  intellectual  functions,  which  become  more  active  for  the
moment,  being  no  longer  distracted  by  sensorial  impressions,
finally  undergo  dissociation  ;  the  faculties  of  co-ordination,  deci-

1 4 2  Stiggcstiz'e   Therapeutics.

sion,  and  direction,  are  the  first  to  disappear  ;  will,  attention,
and  judgment  follow,  and  finally  memory  disappears.  The  im-
aginative faculties,  the  faculties  of  suggestion  and  impulsion,  are
the  only  ones  which  persist  for  a  time,  leaving  the  brain  acces-
sible to  dreams,  hallucinations,  and  curious  conceptions.

These  are  obliterated  in  their  turn.  For  an  instant,  the  ego
alone  watches  over  the  intellectual  faculties  and  the  deadened
senses  ;  then  it  suddenly  vanishes.     Sleep  is  complete.

Provided  with  these  data,  M.  Chambard  classifies  the  degrees
intermediate  between  the  deepest  sleep  and  waking,  in  the  fol-
lowing manner.

ist.  The  most  profound  degree  is  lethargy  :  the  hypnotized
subject  is  at  first  under  its  sway,  then,  rousing  himself  more  or
less  completely,  he  reaches  one  of  the  intermediate  degrees.

In  the  lethargic  state  the  subject  is  inert,  unconscious,
and  without  any  relationship  with  the  outside  world  :  the  func-
tions of  vegetative  life  alone  continue.

The  functions  of  relationship  re-appear  ;  in  the  first  place,
those  which  created  an  unconscious  bond  between  the  organism
and  the  impressions  from  without  ;  this  is  known  as  automatism  ;
every  sensorial  or  sensory  stimulus  causes  simple  or  complex
movements,  the  same  movements  which  it  would  cause  in  the
waking  condition,  if  the  faculties  of  co-ordination  did  not  inter-
pose to  prevent  or  to  moderate  them.

2d.  Motor  automatism  gives  place  to  the  phenomena  de-
scribed by  Charcot  under  the  name  of  neuro-muscular  hyper-
excitability.  The  brain  being  still  absent,  as  far  as  function  is
concerned,  the  reflex  excito-motor  action  is  increased  still  more,
as  in  the  decapitated  frog.

3d.  These  functions  of  relationship,  which  are  unconscious  or
at  least  but  slightly  conscious,  grow  more  active.  The  tactile,
acoustic,  and  muscular  senses  are  gradually  aroused.  This  is
known  as  passive  soninambulistic  automatism.  The  subject  con-
tinues any  movements  communicated  to  his  limbs  (motor  inertia),
carries  out  any  acts  in  relation  with  the  sensory  or  sensorial
impression  (motor  suggestion),  reproduces  articulate  sounds,  the
movements  which  he  sees  or  hears  (automatic  imitation),  and
executes  orders  (automatic  obedience).

4th.  Memory  and  the  faculties  of  the  imagination  are  aroused
in  their  turn.  This  is  known  as  active  somnambulistic  automatism.
The  brain  is  deprived  of  spontaneity,  and  is  accessible  to  dreams

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  143

which  differ  from  ordinary  dreams,  in  that  the  psycho-motor  and
psycho-sensorial  phenomena  are  of  an  unconscious  character.     In

this  state  there  are  dreams  in  which  the  subject  walks  about,  pro-
fessional, instinctive,  and  passionate  dreams,  dreams  in  which
memory  is  revived,  intelligent  dreams  (during  which  the  subject
performs  intelligent  acts,  writes,  and  plays  upon  the  piano,  etc.),
and  suggested  dreams.

5th.  The  faculties  of  co-ordination  are  imperfectly  aroused  ;
the  imaginative  and  instinctive  faculties  still  rule  the  scene,  and
have  the  advantage  over  the  first  or  reasoning  faculties.  This  is
known  as  the  somnambulistic  life.  The  subject  appears  to  be
awake,  performs  his  every-day  acts,  but  his  weakened  will  and
exalted  imagination  leave  him  susceptible  to  suggestions  and
obedient  to  acts  commanded.

6th.  Finally,  the  faculties  of  co-ordination  re-appear  entirely  ;
the  equilibrium  is  re-established,  and  the  awaking  is  complete.

This  ingenious  conception  does  not  appear  to  me  to  conform
to  the  facts.

From  all  observation,  and  from  descriptions  of  the  phenomena,
we  may  deduce  the  fact  that  active  somnambulism  (Chambard's
active  somnambulistic  automatism  and  somnambulistic  life),
implies  the  most  profound  influence,  the  most  advanced  degree
of  hypnotism,  and  the  most  widely  separated  from  the  waking
condition.  All  the  other  phenomena,  moreover,  motor-autom-
atism, motor-suggestion,  automatic  imitation  and  obedience  are
found  in  the  active  somnambulists.  The  same  subject  whom  we
hypnotize  daily,  often  reaches  only  the  stage  of  motor  automa-
tism in  the  first  séances  ;  it  is  only  through  repeated  hypnotiza-
tions  that  he  gradually  acquires  the  aptitude  for  carrying  out  the
hallucinations  and  dreams  suggested.  It  is  then  only  that  am-
nesia upon  waking  exists  ;  a  proof  of  more  intense  psychical
modification  than  that  of  the  preceding  degrees,  in  which  the
subject  was  fully  aware  of  the  cause  of  his  catalepsy  and  retained
an  exact  recollection  of  it.  Moreover  the  subjects  who  only
manifest  motor-automatism  are  not  pure  automatons  ;  they  hear
and  remember  that  they  have  heard  when  they  wake;  they  often
reply  to  questions  ;  they  try  to  resist  suggestions,  and  struggle
against  the  attitudes  or  movements  which  are  commanded  :  con-
sciousness is  not  destroyed  ;  the  will  is  still  alive,  but  is  power-
less against  the  exaggerated  automatic  action.

Even  in  active  somnambulism,  the  psychical   faculties   are   not

144  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

destroyed  ;  the  somnambulistic  subject  also  resists  certain  sug-
gestions, and  refuses  to  perform  certain  acts  ;  he  reflects  before
answering  certain  questions,  and  carries  on  active  intellectual
work.  Moreover,  acts,  illusions,  and  post-hypnotic  hallucinations
commanded  during  the  hypnosis,  are  carried  out  when  the  sub-
ject wakes,  when  consciousness  and  the  faculties  of  co-ordination-
have  certainly  resumed  their  control.  Finally,  the  manifestation
of  these  same  phenomena  in  the  waking  condition  in  a  subject
who  is  compos  sui,  and  astonished  that  he  cannot  struggle  against
the  automatism  which  dominates  him,  shows  clearly  that  con-
sciousness and  will  may  survive  all  degrees  of  hypnotism.

As  to  lethargy,  that  is  to  say  complete  inertia, — the  reduction
of  the  organism  to  vegetative  life, — this  I  have  not  observed.
Although  they  appeared  inert,  all  my  hypnotized  subjects  were
in  relationship  with  the  outer  world  through  the  agency  of  some
one  of  their  senses ,'  vocal  suggestion  has  always  been  sufficient
to  arouse  them.

The  division  of  the  hypnotic  condition  into  degrees,  such  as  I
have  stated,  seems  to  me  to  conform  more  closely  to  the  data
furnished  by  observation.

The  slightest  influence  is  manifested  by  simple  drowsiness,
accompanied  with  closure  of  the  eyelids.

If  the  susceptibility  to  suggestion  is  greater,  the  motor  function
is  the  first  to  yield  to  its  effects;  suggestive  contracture  and
finally  suggestive  automatic  movements  appear  upon  the  scene.
Automatic  obedience,  anaesthesia,  sensorial  illusions,  and  finally
induced  hallucinations,  mark  the  progressive  steps  in  the  develop-
ment of  this  susceptibility  to  suggestion,  the  culminating  point
of  which  is  active  somnambulism  and  the  somnambulistic  life.

I  shall  not  try  to  interpret  the  mechanism  of  all  these  hypnotic
phenomena  more  thoroughly.

There  is  however,  one  among  these  phenomena  which  is  par-
ticularly interesting.     It  has  appealed  in  vain  to  all  the  lights  of
psychology  for  some  attempt  at  interpretation  ; — I  refer  to  sug-
'    gestions  which  are  to  be  carried  out  after  a  long  interval  of  time
'   {suggestions  à  longue  échéance).

Let  us  try  in  our  turn  to  throw  a  little  light  upon  this  obscure
question.
i      It  seems  to  me  necessary  to  develop  a  few  considerations  rela-
tive to  latent  memories,  before  touching  on  this  question.

The  study  of  hypnotic  phenomena    makes    the    existence    of

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  145

latent  memories,  I  do  not  say  unconscious  memories,  evident.
Impressions  are  stored  in  the  brain  during-  hypnotic  sleep.  The
subject  is  conscious  of  them  at  the  moment  he  receives  them.
This  consciousness  has  disappeared  when  he  wakes.  The  mem-
ory is  latent  for  the  moment,  as  are  many,  indeed  all  memories
which  sleep  in  the  brain  from  the  time  when  we  begin  to  live  and
think.  But  these  latent  memories  of  the  hypnotic  condition  may
be  aroused  or  may  wake  spontaneously  by  means  of  certain
influences.     Let  us  give  a  few  examples.

1st.  On  one  occasion,  one  of  my  somnambulists  was  photo-
graphed in  the  waking  condition,  then  she  was  hypnotized  and
her  photograph  was  again  taken  in  different  suggested  attitudes;
— anger,  fright  (imaginary  serpent),  gayety  (drunkenness),  dis-
dain (sneering  students),  ecstasy.  The  subject  remembered
nothing  when  she  woke.  I  hypnotized  her  several  days  later,
and  said,  --  When  you  wake,  you  will  open  the  book  by  your  bed-
side, and  will  find  your  photograph  in  it."  I  said  nothing  else.
When  she  woke  she  took  the  book,  opened  it,  found  her  photo-
graph (imaginary;  there  was  none  there),  and  asked  if  she  might
keep  it  and  send  it  to  her  son.  "Do  you  think  it  is  like  you?"
I  asked. — "Very  like  me,  but  my  expression  is  a  little  sad."
••  Well,"  I  said,  "  turn  over  the  page."  She  turned  it  over,  and
recognized  her  photograph  (imaginary)  taken  in  an  attitude  of
anger.  —  "  Turn  over  again."  She  kept  on  turning  over  the
pages  in  succession,  and  recognized  her  photographs  in  the  dif-
ferent attitudes  of  fear,  gayety,  disdain,  and  ecstasy,  as  dis-
tinctly as  if  they  really  existed.  She  described  each  one  of  the
attitudes  to  me  precisely,  just  as  she  saw  it,  and  just  as  it  had
been  taken  during  her  sleep,  without  remembering  having  had  a
photograph  taken  at  all,  or  the  suggestion  corresponding  to
each  one.  She  seemed  very  much  astonished  when  I  told  her
that  I  had  communicated  these  attitudes  to  her  during  her  sleep.
Thus,  the  latent  memory  of  acts  performed  during  somnambu-
lism had  been  aroused  by  a  sort  of  association  of   idea-memories.

2d.  I  can  produce  suggestive  phenomena  of  transfer  in  a
hypnotized  somnambulist.  For  example.  I  put  his  left  arm  into
the  cataleptic  condition  in  the  horizontal  position,  and,  as  I
bring  a  stethoscope  up  to  the  other  arm,  I  say  that  the  catalepsy
is  going  to  be  transferred  to  this  side.  In  a  minute  this  arm
is  >tretched  out  horizontally,  while  the  left  falls  motionless.  If
I  bring  the  stethoscope  near  the  left  arm,  it  assumes  the  hcrizon-
10

146  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

tal  position,  and  the  other  falls  motionless,  and  so  on.  I  can
also  induce  wry-neck,  paralysis,  and  suggestive  contracture,  and
transfer  them  from  one  side  of  the  body  to  the  other  ;  simply  by
means  of  the  idea  suggested  to  the  subject  that  the  stethoscope
produces  this  phenomenon.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  upon
waking  the  subject  remembers  nothing,  and  yet,  if  I  put  one  of
his  arms  in  a  horizontal  position  and  hold  the  stethoscope  near
it,  the  phenomenon  of  transfer  takes  place.  The  wry-neck,
paralyses,  and  contractures,  are  transferred  in  like  manner,  to  the
subject's  great  astonishment,  for  he  does  not  know  how  it  hap-
pens, and  does  not  remember  that  the  same  phenomena  have
been  induced  during  his  sleep.  He  realizes  them  spontaneously
in  the  waking  condition.  It  must  be  added,  that  during  hypno-
sis I  have  not  suggested  the  reproduction  of  the  phenomena  in
the  waking  condition.  In  like  manner,  I  say  to  him  in  his  sleep,
"If  I  touch  your  forehead,  you  will  burst  out  laughing.  If  I
touch  the  back  of  your  head,  you  will  sneeze.  If  I  touch  the
right  side  of  your  head,  your  left  arm  will  be  convulsed."  After
I  have  obtained  these  phenomena  by  suggestion,  I  awaken  the
subject.  Without  saying  a  word  I  touch  his  forehead,  and  he
laughs;  I  touch  the  back  of  his  head  and  he  sneezes;  I  touch  the
right  parietal  bone,  and  his  left  arm  makes  convulsive  move-
ments. The  memory  of  the  reflex  which  I  suggested  during  his
sleep  is  unconsciously  retained  in  the  waking  condition.  1  have
succeeded  in  these  experiments  with  a  large  number  of  subjects.

3d.  I  have  proved  that  some  somnambulists  who  have  been
rendered  analgesic  during  their  sleep,  have  become  so  in  the
waking  condition  as  well,  after  a  certain  number  of  séances  ; —
they  have  no  pain  when  pricked  with  a  pin.  It  is  perhaps  a
phenomenon  of  the  same  nature  in  these  cases, — the  phenome-
non of  analgesia  suggested  by  latent  memory.

4th.  I  cite  another  fact  which  has  not  been  mentioned  before,
and  which  is  of  interest  to  all  psychologists.  A  somnambulist  is
hypnotized;  I  speak  to  him,  I  make  him  speak,  I  make  him
work;  I  give  him  hallucinations,  I  wake  him  in  half  an  hour,  or
in  an  hour  at  the  most ,  he  remembers  absolutely  nothing  of
what  has  passed;  he  will  remember  nothing  spontaneously.
Now,  nothing  is  easier  than  to  recall  to  any  somnambulist  the
memory  of  all  the  impressions  he  has  received  in  his  sleep,  and
this  experiment  succeeds  in  all  cases  of  somnambulism.  In  order
to  do  this  I   have  only  to  say,  "  You  will  remember  everything

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  147

that  has  happened,  everything  that  you  have  done  during  your
sleep."  If  necessary,  I  lay  my  hand  on  his  forehead  to  concen-
trate his  attention  ;  he  thinks  deeply  for  an  instant,  without  fall-
ing asleep,  and  all  the  latent  memories  arise  with  great  precision;
he  repeats  my  words  as  well  as  his  own,  relates  his  acts,  gestures,
and  hallucinations  successively  ;  nothing  is  forgotten.  I  have
aroused  the  latent  memories  by  a  simple  affirmation.

In  the  waking  condition  the  active  and  reasoning  part  of  the
brain  (we  will  call  it  the  higher  centre,  in  order  to  have  a  fixed
idea,  but  we  must  not  attach  any  precise  anatomical  signification
to  the  term),  this  part,  I  say,  interferes  and  controls  ;  it  mod.
erates  or  neutralizes  the  imaginative  or  automatic  part  (we  will
call  this  the  lower  centre).  In  sleep  this  influence  ceases.  The
higher  centre  of  the  brain  becomes  dull.  The  cerebral  activity-
is  concentrated  upon  the  imaginative  and  automatic  centres  ; — in
other  words,  the  intellectual  control  is  diminished.  (We  have
already  developed  this  conception.)

If  we  admit,  then,  with  Durand  de  Gros,  and  Liébault,  that
during  sleep  all  or  almost  all  the  cerebral  activity,  all  the  nervous
force,  if  we  will,  wanting  in  the  higher  centre  of  the  brain
(faculties  of  control),  is  concentrated  in  the  lower  centre  (auto-
matic centre), — what  is  the  result  ?  That  all  the  phenomena
induced  during  sleep,  conceptions,  movements,  sensations,
images,  all  the  impressions  produced  are  created  by  means  of
all  this  concentrated  and  accumulated  nervous  joxçe.

What  happens  at  the  waking  period?  The  subject  resumes
his  self-control.  The  concentrated  nervous  activity  is  again
diffused  through  the  higher  centres  of  the  brain,  and  to  the
periphery.  Then  the  impressions  which  were  perceived  during
sleep,  become  faded  as  it  were,  because,  having  been  perceived
by  means  of  a  great  quantity  of  nervous  light,  if  I  may  be  per-
mitted this  comparison,  they  are  no  longer  bright  enough  to  be
conscious  when  this  light  ceases  to  be  concentrated  upon  them  ;
they  are  latent,  as  too  faint  an  image  is  latent.

We  see  a  somnambulist  ;  she  goes  and  comes,  obeys  orders,
converses,  works,  and  is  entirely  conscious.  We  would  swear
that  she  is  awake.  After  half  an  hour's  active  conversation
I  suddenly  say,  "  Wake  up."  She  goes  on  talking  after  she
wakes.  She  remembers  nothing,  absolutely  nothing.  It  is  a
singular  phenomenon.  Everything  has  faded  from  her  memory.
The  nervous   force  which   was   concentrated   in  certain   parts  of

1 48  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

the  brain  is  now  diffused  throughout  ;  the  light  being  distributed
elsewhere,  no  longer  illumines  the  preceding  impressions  ;  a  new
.state  of  consciousness  exists.  I  put  the  somnambulist  to  sleep
again  ,  the  old  state  of  nervous  concentration  re-appears,  and
with  it  the  old  state  of  consciousness,  the  faded  impressions
return  ;  the  latent  memories  revive.

The  facility  with  which  some  subjects  pass  thus  from  one
state  of  consciousness  to  the  other  is  astonishing.  I  simply
close  their  eyes  and  talk  to  them:  "  What  is  your  name?" —
"  Paul  Durand." — "  How  old  are  you  ?  " — "  I  am  thirteen  years
old." — "You  have  no  ill-feelings?" — "  No,  I  feel  perfectly  well
all  over." — "Do  you  go  to  school?  What  do  you  study?" — "  I
study  Arithmetic,  History,  French,  etc."— "Wake  up."  The
child  wakes  up.  "What  did  I  say  to  you?" — "You  have  not
spoken  to  me." — "  What  ?  I  did  speak  to  you,  did  you  not  hear
me?" — "I  heard  nothing.  You  said  nothing  tome." — "Close
your  eyes."  He  shuts  his  eyes.  "  What  did  I  say  to  you  just
now?" — "You  asked  me  what  my  name  was,  how  old  I  was,  if
I  was  well,  and  what  I  was  studying  at  school." — "  What  did  you
reply?" — "I  said  that  my  name  was  Paul  Durand,  that  I  was
thirteen  years  old,  that  I  was  perfectly  well,  that  I  study  Arith-
metic, History,  and  French."-  ■-"  Open  your  eyes."  He  opens
them,  "What  were  you  just  saying  to  me?" — "I  have  not
spoken  to  you."  I  have  tried  this  experiment  a  great  many
times  with  many  subjects,  and  especially  with  children.

Simple  closure  of  the  eyes  is  in  many  cases  enough  to  deter-
mine a  new  state  of  consciousness.  Being  no  longer  impressed
by  the  material  objects  upon  which  it  fixes  its  attention,  the
f  mind  falls  into  a  passive  condition  ;  looking  about  no  longer
with  his  eyes,  the  subject  no  longer  looks  about  with  his  mind,
if  I  may  so  express  it.  The  nervous  activity  abandons  the
higher  centres  of  attention,  and  concentrates  itself  upon  the
automatic  centres  ;  the  new  impressions,  evoked  in  this  centre
after  the  cerebral  influx  has  spread  elsewhere,  are  as  if  implanted
upon  a  special  state  of  consciousness.  The  subject  looks  about
with  his  eyes  open  ;  the  material  images  make  an  impression
upon  the  brain,  and  by  calling  its  nervous  activity  to  the  sur-
face, causes  the  psychical  concentration  to  cease.  The  centres
which  perceive  the  impression  by  means  of  an  accumulation  of
nervous  force,  only  retain  a  diminished  nervous  force  ,  the  state
of  consciousness  is  modified,  the   impression   is   faded,    to   again

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  149

appear  if  the  same  state  of  consciousness  is   again    induced    by
the  simple  occlusion  of  the  eyes.

A  phenomenon  of  the  same  kind  is  produced  in  us  instinct-
ively. What  do  we  do  when  we  wish  to  recall  a  memory,  or  to
create  a  profound  impression  in  ourselves,  to  register  it  in  our
minds  so  that  it  may  be  aroused  at  a  given  moment  ?  We  con-
centrate our  thoughts,  we  shut  our  eyes,  we  close  the  sensorium
to  all  other  impressions  ;  and  we  thus  revive  the  latent  memory,
or  engrave  the  desired  impression  deeply  upon  our  minds.  It
soon  disappears  when  the  cerebral  activity  is  again  diffused  over
a  great  many  objects,  over  the  whole  nervous  periphery  ;  but  it
readily  reappears,  if  the  cerebral  activity  is  again  concentrated  ;
the  memory  gains,  so  to  speak,  in  depth  and  distinctness,  what
it  loses  in  continuity.

Is  it  not  for  the  same  reason  also,  that  the  memories  of  child-
hood, stored  in  a  younger,  more  impressionable  and  more  cred-
ulous mind,  a  mind  which  is  less  preoccupied  with  many  ideas,
is  more  readily  concentrated,  and  in  which  the  faculties  of  auto-
matic activity  predominate, — that  these  memories  are  more
deeply  engraved  and  are  more  readily  recalled.  In  old  age?
when  memory  is  weak,  childish  memories  are  always  retained,
re-appear  at  intervals,  and  are  never  entirely  effaced,  while  the
impressions  of  adult  age  often  disappear  never  to  return,  even
when  they  have  been  retained  a  long  time.  Let  us  add  that
almost  all  children  may  be  hypnotized,  and  that  the  number
susceptible  to  induced  somnambulism  is  much  greater  than
among  adults  ;  three  times  as  great  according  to  M.  Liébault.

The  hypnotic  condition  is  not  an  abnormal  one,  it  does  not
create  new  functions  nor  extraordinary  phenomena;  it  develops
those  which  are  produced  in  the  waking  condition  ;  because  of
a  new  psychical  modality,  it  exaggerates  the  normal  susceptibility
to  suggestion,  which  we  all  possess  to  some  extent  ;  our  psychical
condition  is  modified  so  as  to  carry  out  the  images  and  impres-
sions evoked  with  greater  boldness  and  distinctness.

When  we  are  deep  in  thought,  and  our  mental  activity  is  con-
centrated upon  memories,  old  impressions  revive,  old  images
re-appear  before  our  eyes,  often  as  distinct  as  reality  ;  we  remain
absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of  the  past,  we  live  our  past  life
again,  we  dream,  our  thoughts  are  turned  inward  upon  ourselves,
so  deeply  that  a  sudden  sensorial  excitation,  an  unexpected
noise,  a   friend's  voice,  recalls  us   to  ourselves  and  snatches  us

i  50  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

from  the  contemplative  life, — a  veritable  hallucination  in  the
waking  state.  We  come  to  ourselves,  our  psychical  activity  is
again  diffused  to  the  surface,  and  our  memories  instantly  fade  :
we  can  no  longer  remember  the  object  of  our  passive  reveries.
Who  has  not  experienced  this?  The  same  thing  happens,  if
our  minds  are  concentrated  upon  an  idea  instead  of  upon  a
memory-image:  we  can  no  longer  recall  the  object  of  our
abstract  meditations.  The  state  of  consciousness  is  modified.
Is  this  not  a  condition  comparable  to  the  induced  hypnotic  con-
dition which  is  spontaneously  and  involuntarily  evoked  in  us?
The  soldier  who  does  not  feel  his  wound  in  the  heat  of  combat,
Archimedes  killed  while  he  was  meditating  on  abstract  problems,
dead  to  all  else, — are  not  these  examples  of  nervous  concentra-
tion by  means  of  an  idea,  an  emotion,  like  to  that  which  hypno-
tism induces  ;  and  are  we  not  all,  often  without  our  knowledge,
in  an  analogous  condition  ?

Perhaps  in  reality  there  are  neither  one  nor  two  states  of  con-
sciousness, but  infinitely  varying  states.  All  degrees  of  varia-
tion may  exist  between  the  perfect  waking  condition,  and  the
condition  of  perfect  concentration  which  constitutes  somnam-
bulism. Our  minds  are  peopled  with  memories  which  have
been  stored  up  there  since  childhood.  All  these  memories  are
latent,  for  if  they  were  all  aroused  our  understanding  would  be
in  a  veritable  state  of  chaos  ;  but  each  one  of  these  memories
may  be  revived  when  the  same  state  of  consciousness  which  pro-
duced it  is  again  induced.

If  these  data  of  observation  are  thoroughly  grasped,  it  will
be  easy  to  understand  the  ideas  which  I  am  going  to  .present
upon  the  interpretation  of  suggestions  à  longue  écJtéance.  Some
somnambulists  have  the  faculty  of  carrying  out  a  suggestion
made  in  the  somnambulistic  condition,  at  the  day  or  hour  indi-
cated, several  weeks  or  even  months  after  the  suggestion.  This
memory  of  the  command  given,  apparently  latent  during  a  long
interval,  revives  at  the  moment  fixed  upon  with  mathematical
precision,  and  the  subject  executes  the  act  or  carries  out  the
hallucination  commanded,  without  knowing  its  origin.

I  know  of  no  other  attempted  explanation  of  this  strange
phenomenon  which  is  so  indisputably  real  ;  some,  unable  to
explain,  have  denied  it,  obstinately  refusing  to  bow  before  the
evidence  of  facts  :  others,  like  the    abbot  who  wrote  upon  hyp-

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  151

notic  phenomena  in  f  Universe,  not  being  able  to  find  any  plau-
sible explanation,  have  looked  upon  it  as  supernatural, — evil
spirits  rising  from  the  infernal  regions  to  aid  the  operator.
Some  are  wanting  in  scientific  spirit  ;  others  err  because  modesty
and  humility  are  lacking.  To  deny  what  we  cannot  understand,
to  invoke  the  aid  of  God  or  the  devil  to  explain  what  our  poor
human  minds  cannot  conceive,  is  an  evidence  of  a  certain  men-
tal self-sufficiency,  which  is  not  characteristic  of  strong  minds.
The  transmission  of  the  tones  and  inflections  of  the  human  voice
by  means  of  a  wire  and  a  vibrating  plate,  is  a  marvellous  phe-
nomenon, which  we  can  demonstrate  much  better  than  we  can
explain.  The  problems  of  infinity,  eternity  without  beginning,
of  limitless  space,  appear  to  our  human  understanding  like  enig-
mas of  which  it  can  conceive  no  solution,  and  yet  the  solution
exists.  All  phenomena  of  the  psychical  order  are  mysteries,
the  mechanism  of  which  escapes  us,  and  which  nevertheless  are
carried  out.  Let  us  be  contented  to  remain  humble,  feeling  our
insufficiency,  and  let  us  resign  ourselves  modestly  not  to  overstep
the  limits  of  our  intelligence.

If  I  dare  to  give  an  attempted  interpretation  here,  or  at  least
a  few  ideas  which  may  help  the  conception  of  the  phenomenon
I  mention,  it  is  not  because  I  pretend  to  be  able  to  solve  the
question  :  my  conception  is  perhaps  not  the  true  one.  I  may
at  least  show  that  a  certain  conception  of  the  phenomenon  is
possible,  and  thus  free  the  question  from  that  mysterious  and
supernatural  appearance  which  is  repugnant  to  all  scientific
minds.  May  not  the  suggestions  à  longue  échéance  be  explained
by  means  of  an  organic  modification  imprinted  upon  the  nervous
substance,  which  is  the  sub-stratum  of  psychical  phenomena?
Shall  we  say  that  in  the  hypnotic  condition  the  brain  has  the
property  of  receiving  the  imprint  of  the  suggested  idea,  and  of
undergoing  a  modification  analogous  to  that  of  a  mechanism
in  which  the  spring  is  wound  up  or  stretched  in  such  a  way  as  to
produce  the  recoil  at  a  given  moment,  like  an  alarm  clock
arranged  to  strike  at  a  set  hour?  This  seems  to  me  a  concep-
tion which  does  not  rest  upon  any  known  anatomical  or  physio-
logical fact.

As  an  argument  in  favor  of  this  comparison  of  the  psychical
apparatus  which  governs  memory,  to  the  alarm  clock,  we  could
cite  the  fact  that  many  persons  are  able  to  wake  themselves  at  the

1 5  2  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

hour  which  they  set  before  going  to  sleep.  The  mind  would  then
have  the  property  of  regulating  its  sleep  in  advance  for  any  num-
ber of  hours  it  might  choose.

But  the  explanation  seems  to  me  to  lie  elsewhere.  The  man
who  goes  to  sleep  with  the  idea  of  waking  at  a  fixed  hour,  re-
tains this  idea  during  his  sleep ,  for  natural  sleep  does  not  neces-
sitate the  abolition  of  thought  and  consciousness,  any  more  than
artificial  sleep  does  ,  we  are  self-conscious  during  sleep,  we
think,  we  dream,  we  work.  Many  subjects  talk  in  their  sleep
and  answer  the  questions  put  to  them.  I  have  often  said  to
subjects  whom  I  found  sleeping  naturally,  "  Do  not  wake  up,
continue  to  sleep."  Then  I  lift  the  arms;  they  remain  passively
in  suggestive  catalepsy.  I  give  a  suggestion  for  waking.  They
execute  it  without  remembering  anything,  without  knowing
that  I  spoke  to  them.  Gen.  Noizet  and  M.  Liébault  have  men-
tioned the  same  fact.  Natural  sleep  is  transformed  into  hyp-
notic sleep  ;  or  better,  I  have  put  the  subject  into  relationship
with  me;  for,  in  my  opinion,  nothing,  absolutely  nothing  differ-
entiates natural  and  artificial  sleep  ;  we  can  experiment  with
natural  as  we  experiment  with  artificial  sleep.  One  of  my
patients,  an  intelligent  man,  whom  I  hypnotized  for  several
months,  only  reached  the  third  degree  of  sleep;  that  is  I  could
induce  catalepsy,  contracture,  and  automatic  movements,  but
neither  anaesthesia,  hallucinatory  suggestions,  nor  amnesia  upon
waking.  He  remembered  everything  which  was  done  and  said
while  he  was  asleep.  One  day  he  told  me  that  his  brother  was
in  the  habit  of  talking  to  him  in  his  sleep  when  they  roomed
together  at  his  father's  house,  and  that  he  answered  him  with-
out remembering  anything  about  it  upon  waking  ;  to  such  an
extent  he  added,  that  when  his  brother  wanted  to  get  some
information  which  he  did  not  wish  to  give,  he  extorted  it  from
him,  so  to  speak,  while  he  was  asleep.

I  then  said  to  him,  "  If  you  can  talk  thus  in  your  natural  sleep
without  remembering  about  it  when  you  wake,  I  ought  to  be
able  to  put  you  to  sleep  artificially  in  the  same  way."  And  I
suggested  to  him  to  sleep  as  he  did,  naturally,  without  any
remembrance  upon  waking.  In  fact,  from  this  time  on,  I
induced  profound  sleep  accompanied  by  amnesia,  anaesthesia,
suggestive,  hypnotic,  and  post-hypnotic  hallucinations.  Gen-
erally all  subjects  who  talk  and  answer  questions  in  their  sleep,
are  susceptible  of  being  put  into  somnambulism  artificially.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  153

I  repeat  that  sleep,  whether  it  be  artificial  or  spontaneous,
does  not  mean  the  abolition  of  the  intellectual  faculties;  it  is  a
cerebral  condition  other  than  the  waking,  one  which  it  is  difficult
to  define,  the  study  of  which  still  remains  for  psychologists, — a
condition  in  which  the  phenomena  of  automatic  life  predom-
inate, but  in  which  the  so-called  reason,  or  reasoning  faculties
may  be  roused  and  concentrated  upon  a  special  point,  upon  a
class  of  ideas.  Concentration,  the  fixing  of  the  nervous  force
upon  the  phenomenon, — the  image  or  idea  suggested, — is  what
appears  to  dominate.  Moreover  this  concentration  may  be
turned  successively  upon  different  objects  ;  dream  succeeds
dream  in  a  sleeping  subject  ;  many  and  diverse  suggestions  are
communicated  to  somnambulists,  and  are  instantly  executed  by
them.  The  nervous  concentration  changes  its  object  at  the
hypnotizer's  will  ;  the  focus  shifts  its  place,  if  I  may  so  express
it,  but  the  same  concentration  continues  to  exist.

Without  developing  this  view,  which  I  leave  to  psychologists,
let  us  be  content  to  know  that  the  mind  may  still  think  and
work  during  sleep.  It  does  not  work  involuntarily;  we  are  con-
scious of  it,  as  the  somnambulist  is  conscious  of  what  he  is  doing,
only  it  is  anotJier  state  of  consciousness,  for  nervous  force  is  dis-
tributed otherwise  than  in  the  waking  condition  ;  it  is  concen-
trated upon  a  fixed  idea  or  upon  the  centres  of  imagination  ;  and
upon  waking  memory  has  faded  away,  as  the  memory  of  acts
performed  in  artificial  sleep  fades  away.  Who  has  not  had  the
experience  of  going  to  sleep  with  the  idea  in  his  head  of  a  prob-
lem, or  of  an  abstract  solution  which  has  slipped  his  memory,
and  of  awaking  with  the  solution  ready?  The  mind  keeps  up  its
intellectual  work  during  sleep,  and  sometimes  carries  it  on  more
easily  owing  to  a  special  psychical  concentration.  In  some  cases
this  work  during  sleep  is  accomplished  in  a  visible  manner  ;  the
subjects  rise,  go  and  come,  write,  play  the  piano,  or  do  some
manual  work,  and  when  wakened  are  very  much  astonished  at
what  they  have  done,  without  having  the  least  recollection  of
it — these  are  active  sleepers  or  somnambulists.

Why  does  the  sleeper  awake  spontaneously  at  the  hour
set?

Because  he  goes  to  sleep  with  the  idea  of  waking  at  such  or
such  an  hour,  and  thinks  about  it  all  night,  voluntarily  and  con-
sciously ;  his  attention  is   fixed   upon  this  idea.     If  he  has   an

154  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

accurate  idea  of  time,  as  some  people  have,  and  can  tell  exactly
at  any  time  during  the  day  what  o'clock  it  is — or  if  he  hears  the
clock  strike,  he  wakes  spontaneously.

If  he  has  no  idea  of  time, — what  happens?  He  is  preoccupied
with  the  idea  of  not  missing  the  hour,  and  he  wakes  several
times  during  the  night,  and  lights  the  candle  each  time  to  make
sure  ;  which  seems  to  be  evidence  of  a  perfect  state  of  conscious-
ness during  sleep.  Our  ideas  are  conscious  while  we  sleep:
the\'  become  latent  when  we  wake  ;  we  do  not  remember  that  we
dreamt  all  night  of  not  missing  the  hour,  and  we  think  that  we
waked  spontaneously  or  unconsciously.

It  is  by  means  of  this  class  of  facts  that  I  try  to  account  for
the  mechanism  of  suggestions  à  longue  échéance.  The  somnam-
bulist, who  at  the  end  of  three  months  should  carry  out  an
act  suggested  during  sleep,  manifests  no  idea  of  the  command
which  has  been  given  him  during  these  three  months  ;  and  when
he  has  executed  it,  he  believes  and  states  that  he  had  no  idea
relative  to  this  act  in  the  interval.  Has  the  memory  of  the
impression  stored  in  the  brain  by  sleep,  in  reality  been  latent  ?
Or,  at  least,  has  it  been  latent  during  all  this  time?  I  do  not
think  so.

Let  us  review  the  facts  which  have  already  been  given.

ist.  The  impressions  perceived  by  somnambulists  during
their  sleep  seem  absolutely  effaced  ;  everything  is  a  dead  letter.
Memory  is  revived,  however,  if  the  subject  is  assured  that  he  is
going  to  recall  everything  ;  he  puts  himself  spontaneously  into
the  condition  of  psychical  concentration  necessary  for  recollec-
tion.

2d.  In  certain  subjects  the  impressions  produced  simply
while  the  eyes  are  closed,  are  effaced  when  the  eyes  are  opened,
and  re-appear  when  the  eyes  are  again  closed.

It  is  important  to  have  witnessed  these  striking  phenomena,
to  have  seen  how  easily  memories  are  instantaneously  destroyed
and  revived  in  somnambulistic  cases,  to  have  seen  subjects  per-
fectly healthy  in  body  and  mind  whom  suggestion  has  put, — I  do
not  say  into  sleep,  but  into  another  condition  of  consciousness.
These  subjects  talk,  walk  about,  work,  a  second  after,  when  they
are  awake  again  and  in  their  former  conscious  condition,  all
memory  of  their  preceding  life  seems  to  be  destroyed  forever.
They  are  convinced  that  nothing  has  happened.  In  another
second  memory  is  revived  ; — and  thus  by  the  most  simple  pro-

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  155

ceeding  we  can  alternate  these  two  states  of  consciousness,  and
artificially  reproduce  this  double  life>  which  was  manifested
spontaneously  in  the  case  of  the  famous  Fetida,  observed  by
Azam.  In  order  to  grasp  all  they  import,  we  must  have  seen
these  curious  psychical  phenomena.  And  we  cannot  refrain
giving  the  subject  thought,  when  like  phenomena  are  spon-
taneously and  involuntarily  induced  in  somnambulists.  They
pass  from  one  state  of  consciousness  to  the  other  easily,  the
memories  of  the  second  state  being  effaced  in  the  first.  Put  an
idea  into  their  minds  when  they  are  in  the  condition  known  as
somnambulistic,  an  idea  which  should  be.  manifested  on  a  certain
day.  During  the  condition  known  as  the  waking  condition,  the
idea  seems  to  be  effaced  ;  but  it  does  not  remain  latent  until  the
day  fixed  upon.  It  revives  and  regains  consciousness  every  time
that  the  same  nervous  concentration,  the  same  psychical  state,  is
reproduced.  If  their  attention  is  self-concentrated,  and  their
minds  self-absorbed  in  an  idea  or  an  image,  it  is  sufficient  to
produce  a  sort  of  passive  somnambulism,  passive  only  in  that  it
cannot  be  made  to  change  the  condition.  And  this  is  so  true,
that  many  somnambulists  are  susceptible  to  suggestion  in  the
waking  condition  ;  every  idea  formulated,  every  image  called
forth,  is  carried  out  by  them  in  the  waking  condition  ;  hallucina-
tions may  be  communicated  by  word  alone;  they  are  somnam-
bulists normally,  and  without  being,  so  to  speak,  prepared.

The  operator  cannot  avoid  working  on  this  condition  of
special  psychical  receptivity.

There  is,  then,  reason  for  thinking  that  the  somnambulist
often  goes  spontaneously  into  the  somnambulistic  condition  of
consciousness,  in  which  the  impressions  which  were  lodged  in
the  mind  in  a  previous  and  similar  condition  may  be  revived.
He  then  recalls  the  order  he  received,  the  suggestion  which  was
commanded  ;  he  knows  that  such  and  such  a  phenomenon  should
be  carried  out  on  such  and  such  a  day  ;  he  takes  his  measure-
ments, so  to  speak,  he  re-enforces  the  idea  of  not  forgetting  it,
of  carrying  it  out  at  the  desired  moment,  as  the  natural  sleeper
re-enforces  the  idea  of  not  missing  the  hour  set  for  waking.  This
idea  is  then  a  perfectly  conscious  one  in  the  somnambulist's
mind.  But  when  his  mind  is  no  longer  concentrated,  when  we
speak  to  him,  when  we  recall  his  nervous  force  to  the  exterior,
we  restore  him  his  full  self-possession,  we  give  him  back  his  con-
dition of  normal  consciousness,  as  when  we  tell  a  child   to  open

156  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

its  eyes  and  look  out  with  its  mind.  The  concentration  no
longer  exists,  the  memory  is  again  destroyed  or  latent  :  and  at
the  very  time  the  somnambulist  has  executed  the  suggested  act,
he  believes  in  good  faith  that  the  idea  has  newly  and  spontane-
ously dawned  in  his  mind  ; — he  no  longer  remembers  that  it  is  a
memory.

I  have  been  able  to  verify  the  question  directly  in  two  cases
of  somnambulism.  While  one  of  the  patients  was  asleep  I  said,
"  Next  Thursday  (five  days),  you  will  take  this  glass  on  the
night-stand,  and  put  it  in  the  valise  at  the  foot  of  your  bed."
Three  days  after,  when  I  hypnotized  her,  I  asked,  "  Do  you
remember  what  I  told  you?  "  She  replied,  "Yes,  sir,  I  must  put
the  glass  in  my  valise  Thursday  morning." — "  Have  you
thought  about  what  I  told  you  since?" — "No." — "Think." —
"  I  thought  of  it  the  next  morning  at  eleven  o'clock." — "Were
you  awake  or  asleep  ?  " —  "  I  was  drowsy."

î  hypnotized  the  other  patient  one  morning  and  said  to  him,
"To-morrow  morning  when  I  make  my  rounds,  you  will  ask  me  if
you  are  to  keep  on  taking  the  bromide  of  potassium  ;  you  will  ask
me  as  if  to  obtain  information,  without  knowing  that  I  told  you  to
ask  me."  The  next  morning  Dr.  Voisin  honored  me  .with  his
presence  at  my  clinic.  I  had  forgotten  the  suggestion  myself.
I  was  leaving  the  patient's  bedside  when  he  called  me  back,  and
asked  if  he  should  continue  taking  the  bromide.  "  Why  do  you
ask?"  I  said.  "Because  I  must  soon  leave  the  hospital,  and  I
want  to  know  if  the  bromide  does  me  good."  —  "  Why  do  you
ask  me  just  now?"  —  "I  do  not  know,  the  idea  just  came  into
my  head."  I  then  hypnotized  him  again  and  asked,  "  Why  did
you  ask  me  if  it  was  necessary  to  continue  taking  the  bromide  ?  "
—  "  Because  I  wanted  to  know  if  it  did  me  good."  —  "  But  why
did  you  ask  on  this  particular  morning?"  —  "Because  you  told
me  yesterday  to  ask  you  the  question  this  morning."  —  "  Have
you  dreamed  since  yesterday  morning  that  I  hypnotized  you  and
that  you  were  to  ask  me  this  question  ?"  —  "I  dreamt  of  it  last
night.  I  dreamt  that  I  had  pains  in  my  legs,  and  that  I  ought
to  ask  you  if  I  was  to  go  on  taking  the  bromide."  I  waked  him,
and  he  no  longer  remembered  anything  about  this.  He  believed
that  the  idea  of  asking  me  this  question  had  come  to  him  spon-
taneously.

Thus  the  suggestion  which  has  been  stored  in  the  mind
during  sleep,  and  which  remains  as  a  latent   memory  upon  wak-

Suggestive   Thci-apcutics.  157

ing,  is  susceptible  of  becoming  conscious  again  spontaneously  ;
aiul  if  the  suggestion  is  not  to  be  carried  out  for  several  weeks,
the  idea  only  remains  latent  and  unconscious  until  the  time
fixed  upon.

To  sum  up  :

1st.  The  impressions  produced  by  artificial  or  induced
sleep  are  always  conscious  at  the  time  they  are  produced.

2d.  The  consciousness  of  these  impressions,  which  is  effaced
when  the  subject  wakes  from  the  induced  sleep,  may  always  be
evoked  by  simple  affirmation.

3d.  Latent  memories  of  the  hypnotic  condition  may  awake
spontaneously  in  certain  states  of  psychical  concentration.

4th.  The  idea  of  suggestions  which  are  to  be  carried  out  after
a  lapse  of  time  (à  longue  échéance),  only  remains  unconscious  up
to  the  time  set  for  their  realization  ;  the  consciousness  of  the
idea  stored  in  the  mind  during  the  hypnotic  state  may  be
aroused  at  times,  as  other  latent  memories  are  in  the  same  states
of  psychical  concentration.

My  colleague,  M.  Beaunis,  does  not  accept  this  theory.*  "If
the  suggestion,"  says  he,  "  is  spontaneously  recalled  in  the  inter-
val, instead  of  remaining  latent  up  to  the  time  fixed  upon,  there
is  the  same  difficult)' ;  the  explanation  reduces  it,  but  does  not
solve  it."

To  reduce  a  difficulty  is  to  solve  it  partly  ;  to  reduce  it  suffi-
ciently is  to  solve  it  totally.  I  have  said  that  somnambulists
who  are  susceptible  to  suggestions  à  longue  échéance  are  all
eminently  suggestible,  even  in  the  waking  condition  ;  they  pass
from  one  state  of  consciousness  into  the  other  very  easily  ;  I
repeat  the  fact  that  they  are  somnambulists  spontaneously,
without  any  art  of  preparation.  Self-absorbed  and  concentrated,
they  are  in  a  state  of  consciousness  in  which  they  recall  the  sug-
gestion communicated  to  them.  If  we  speak  to  them,  we  call
their  cerebral  activity  to  the  outside,  we  produce  another  state
of  consciousness  in  which  they  no  longer  remember,  in  which
they  do  not  know  that  they  have  a  memory.

Thus  the  suggestion  which  is  to  be  executed  may  be  present
in  their  minds  a  great  part  of  the  day  ;  only  the  subject  no
longer  knows  this  when  we  speak  to  him.

If  this  is  an  accurate  conception,  the  suggestion  which  is  to  be

*  Beaunis,  Le  somnambulisme  provoqué.     Second  edition.     Paris,  1SS7,  p.  241.

158  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

carried  out  after  an  interval  of  time  is  no  more  difficult  to  inter-
pret than  the  suggestion  which  is  to  be  carried  out  immediately
upon  waking.

M.  Beaunis  does  not  accept  my  explanation  of  the  awakening
at  a  set  hour.  "  If  the  sleeper,"  says  he,  "  thought  of  waking  at
such  and  such  an  hour,  either  consciously  or  unconsciously,  he
would  preserve  some  memory  of  it.  We  remember  a  dream,
which  has  nevertheless  done  nothing  but  pass  through  our
minds,  and  would  we  not  remember  an  idea  upon  which  our
attention  has  been  immovably  fixed?"  But  this  is  exactly  what
constitutes  the  essence  of  deep  sleep  or  somnambulism, — amne-
sia upon  waking.  The  somnambulist  may  remain  for  hours  with
his  mind  concentrated  upon  one  single  idea,  for  example,  upon
a  problem  to  be  solved  :  he  remembers  nothing  when  he  wakes.
Doubtless  in  the  less  profound  degrees  of  natural  or  induced
sleep,  we  remember  our  dreams  ;  certain  light  sleepers  may,  as
the  hypnotized  subjects  of  the  first  degrees,  remember  the  ideas
which  have  passed  through  their  minds  ;  they  may  remember
that  their  minds  have  been  occupied  with  the  idea  of  not  miss-
ing a  certain  hour.  But  in  this  case,  like  the  hypnotized  sub-
jects who  retain  memories,  they  lack  what  is  for  them  the  crite-
rion of  sleep  ;  they  believe  that  they  have  not  slept.

M.  Beaunis  sees  the  phenomena  of  unconscious  cerebration  in
all  these  facts.  I  confess  that  I  have  not  this  conception  except
in  so  far  as  it  relates  to  the  phenomena  of  vegetative  life  ;  the
mind  interferes  in  the  processes  of  circulation,  respiration,  and
nutrition,  unknown  to  us.  But  thought,  at  the  moment  it  is
produced,  is  always  a  phenomenon  of  consciousness  ;  the  hypno-
tized subject  who  robs  because  he  was  suggested  to  do  so,  the
fool  who  kills,  know  that  they  steal  and  that  they  kill.  If  they
are  not  responsible,  it  is  because  their  moral  conscience  is  per-
verted by  imperative  conceptions,  and  because  madness  and  sug-
gestion dominate  their  being  ;  they  cannot  prevent  themselves
from  striking.  The  state  of  consciousness  is  modified,  as  it  may
also  be  modified  by  vivid  moral  emotions,  such  as  anger.  When
the  subject  returns  to  his  normal  condition,  and  is  no  longer
under  the  power  of  suggestion,  no  longer  angry,  no  longer
insane,  and  returns  to  his  habitual  state  of  consciousness,  he
may  have  forgotten  everything.  The  act,  nevertheless,  was  con-
scious, although  the  memory  of  it  may  be  now  effaced.  There
are  latent  ideas,  but  there  are  no  unconscious  ideas.

CHAPTER  IX.

General  applications  of  the  doctrine  of  suggestion. — Moral  and  psychological  stand-
point.— Education. — Legal  stand-point. — Criminal  suggestions. — Observation. —
Retroactive  hallucinations. — The  Tiza-Eslar  affair. —  Instinctive  imbecility. — Re-
ply to  M.  Paul  Janet.

The  doctrine  of  suggestion,  as  we  have  established  it  accord-
ing to  the  facts  gained  from  observation,  raises  the  most  throb-
bing questions  on  all  sides.  In  psychology  it  means  revolution.
Though  still  in  its  infancy,  what  problems  is  not  this  study
called  upon  to  solve  ?  To  what  degree  may  not  suggestion
influence  the  most  widely  different  minds,  chosen  from  among
the  intelligent  classes,  refined  by  the  power  of  education,  as  well
as  from  the  lower  classes  where  less  cerebral  resistance  is
offered  ?  To  what  extent  may  not  the  subject's  instincts,  tastes,
and  psychical  faculties  be  modified  by  a  prolonged  and  cleverly
managed  suggestion,  whether  in  the  waking  or  in  the  hypnotic
condition  ?  Have  we  not,  indeed,  a  veritable  suggestion  in  the
waking  condition  in  the  child's  education,  in  the  notions  and
principles  inculcated  by  word  and  example,  in  the  philosophical
and  religious  teachings  by  which  it  is  surrounded  from  the  earli-
est age, — a  suggestion  which  often  works  with  an  irresistible
force  if  practiced  methodically,  directed  in  a  uniform  manner,
and  not  thwarted  by  contradictory  ideas  or  examples?  Mature
men,  whose  minds  have  been  rendered  liberal  by  personal  expe-
rience, in  spite  of  the  intelligent  action  of  their  reasoning
powers  often  reserve  a  stock  of  old  ideas  from  which  they  can-
not escape,  because,  through  previous  and  long  continued  sug-
gestion, these  have  become  part  of  the  mind,  although  they  may
seem  to  disagree  with  its  present  working.  M.  Liébault  says  :
"  Without  being  aware  of  it,  we  acquire  moral  and  political  pre-
dispositions, prejudices,  etc.,  etc.,  we  are  impregnated  with  the
mental  atmosphere  about  us.  We  honestly  believe  and  defend
as  we  would  our  own  welfare,  social  and  religious  principles
which  may  be  opposed  to  common  sense,  not  to  say  reason.
These    principles    were    held    by    our    ancestors,    they    are    also

159

1 60  Suggestive    Thci'apaities.

national,  and  they  descend  from  father  to  son.  It  is  impossible
to  destroy  them  by  argument,  and  dangerous  to  do  so  by  force.
Their  fallacy  is  pointed  out  in  vain.  Alan  thinks  by  imitation,
and  however  absurd  his  thoughts  may  be,  they  form  part  of  the
man,  and  are  finally  transmitted  from  generation  to  generation
as  instincts  are."

What  suggestion  may  accomplish  in  the  waking  condition
with  the  minds  of  the  young,  hypnotic  suggestion  accomplishes
forcibly  by  its  power  to  suppress  all  mental  control  in  the  person
hypnotized.  Can  we  say  truly,  as  Durand  does,  that  Braidism
furnishes  us  with  a  basis  for  an  intellectual  and  moral  orthopa;-
dia,  which  will  some  day  surely  be  introduced  in  educational
establishments  and  penitentiaries?

How  many  are  the  applications  from  the  judicial  and  medico-
legal stand-point  !  When  we  see  a  subject  who  is  in  a  spontane-
ously or  artificially  induced  somnambulistic  condition,  a  docile
instrument  in  the  hands  of  another,  with  no  will  of  his  own,
when  we  see  him  submit  to  all  influences,  and  perform  any  acts,
we  cannot  help  being  deeply  affected.  And  when,  after  he  is
awakened  from  hypnotic  sleep,  we  see  him  execute  an  order,
believing  he  is  doing  something  of  his  own  initiative,  we  cannot
help  repeating  with  M.  Ribot,*  Spinoza's  saying:  "  Our  illusion
of  Iree  will  is  but  ignorance  of  the  motives  which  make  us  act."

It  is  the  duty  of  moralists,  psychologists,  and  medico-legal
practitioners,  to  scrutinize  courageously  great  questions  of  this
kind,  which  force  themselves  upon  the  human  conscience.

I  wish  to  show  by  one  example  only,  to  what  degree  the  phe-
nomena of  psychical  suggestion,  as  demonstrated  by  experi-
ment, may  be  criminally  employed.  The  following,  according
to  P.  Despine,  is  an  extract  from  the  records  of  the  Draguignan
assizes  of  July  30  and  31,  1865.

"  On  the  31st  of  March,  1865,  a  beggar  came  to  the  village  of
Guiols  (Var.).  He  was  twenty-five  years  old,  and  lame  in  both
legs.      He  asked  for  hospitality  at   the  house   of  a  man  named

H ,  who  was  living  in  the  village    with  his  daughter.     The

daughter  was  twenty-six  years  old,  and  had  always  borne  a  per-
fectly moral  character.  The  beggar,  named  Castellan,  pretending
to  be  a  deaf  mute,  made  them  understand  by  signs  that  he  was
hungry.      They  asked  him  to  supper.     During  the  meal  he  acted

*  Ribot,  les  Maladies  de  la  volonté'.     Paris,  1883.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  1 6 1

in  such  a  strange  manner  that  he  attracted  the  attention  of  his
hosts.  He  pretended  not  to  empty  his  glass  until  after  he  made
the  sign  of  the  cross  upon  it  and  upon  himself.  During  the
evening,  he  made  a  sign  that  he  could  write.  Then  he  wrote
the  following  sentences:  'I  am  the  son  of  God,  I  am  come
from  Heaven,  and  my  name  is  Our  Lord  !  You  shall  see  my
small  miracles,  and  later,  you  shall  see  greater  ones.  Fear
nothing  from  me,  I  am  sent  from  God.'  He  pretended  to  fore-
tell the  future,  and  declared  that  civil  war  would  break  out  in
six  months.     These    absurd    actions   made   an   impression   upon

the  witnesses,  and  Josephine  H was  deeply  affected  by  them.

She  went  to  bed  dressed,  fearing  the  beggar.  He  spent  the
night  in  a  hay-loft,  and  the  next  day  after  breakfasting,  went
away  from  the  village.  He  soon  returned,  after  making  sure
that  Josephine  would  be  alone  during  the  day.  He  found  her
busy  with  household  cares,  and  conversed  with  her  for  some
time  by  the  aid  of  signs.  Castellan  employed  the  whole  morning
in  exercising  a  sort  of  fascination  over  this  girl.  The  witness
declares  that  while  she  was  leaning  over  the  fire,  Castellan  bent
over  her,  making  circular  signs  and  signs  of  the  cross  on  her
back.  (She  had  a  very  haggard  look  ;  perhaps  he  had  put  her
into  the  somnambulistic  state.)  At  mid-day  they  sat  down  to
the  table  together.  The  meal  had  hardly  begun  when  Castellan
made  a  gesture  as  if  to  throw  something  into  Josephine's  plate.
The  girl  fainted.  Castellan  carried  her  to  her  bed,  and  there
outraged  her.  Josephine  was  conscious  of  what  happened,  but,
restrained  by  an  invincible  force,  could  make  no  movement  nor
utter  a  cry,  although  her  will  protested  against  the  crime  com-
mitted upon  her.  (She  was  then  in  a  condition  of  lucid  lethargy.)
When  she  had  come  to  herself  again  she  could  not  release
herself  from  Castellan's  control,  and  at  four  o'clock  in  the  after-
noon when  the  man  left  the  town,  the  unhappy  girl,  drawn  by  an
influence  against  which  she  struggled  in  vain,  left  her  father's
house  and  followed  this  beggar,  for  whom  she  felt  only  fear  and
disgust.  They  spent  the  night  in  a  hay-loft,  and  next  day  went
toward  Collobrières.  M.  Sauteron  met  them  in  a  wood,  and
took  them  to  his  house.  Castellan  told  him  that  he  had  run
away  with  this  young  girl,  after  having  betrayed  her.  Josephine
also  told  him  of  her  unhappiness,  adding  that  she  wanted  to
drown  herself  from  despair.  On  April  3d,  Castellan,  followed
by  the  girl,  stopped  at  a  farmer's  named  Coudroyer.     Josephine

IÔ2  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

did  not  cease  lamenting  and  deploring  the  unhappy  situation
in  which  the  irresistible  power  of  this  man  held  her.  Fearing
further  outrage,  she  asked  to  sleep  in  a  neighboring  room.
Castellan  approached  her  just  as  she  was  going  out,  and  caught
her  by  the  hips.  She  immediately  fainted.  Then,  according  to
the  declarations  of  the  witnesses,  although  she  was  like  a  dead
person,  they  saw  her  go  upstairs  at  Castellan's  command,  count-
ing the  steps  and  laughing  convulsively.  It  was  proved  that
she  was  at  this  time  completely  insensible.  (She  was  in  the
somnambulistic  condition.)

"  The  next  morning,  April  4th,  she  came  down  stairs  in  a
condition  resembling  insanity.  She  talked  irrationally,  and
refused  nourishment.  She  called  upon  God  and  the  Virgin
Mary.  Castellan,  wishing  to  give  a  new  proof  of  his  power  over
her,  ordered  her  to  go  round  the  room  on  her  knees,  and  she
obeyed.  Touched  by  the  unhappy  girl's  sorrows,  and  indig-
nant at  the  audacious  way  in  which  her  seducer  abused  his
power,  the  inhabitants  of  the  house  drove  the  beggar  out,  in
spite  of  resistance.  He  had  hardly  got  out  of  the  door  when
Josephine  fell  down  as  if  dead.  They  called  Castellan  back.
He  made  various  signs  over  her  and  restored  the  use  of  her
senses.     Night  came  and  she  again  went  with  him  to  his  room.

"  The  next  day  they  went  away  together.  No  one  dared  to
prevent  Josephine  from  going  with  this  man.  All  at  once  she
was  seen  running  back.  Castellan  had  met  some  hunters,  and
while  he  talked  with  them,  she  had  escaped.  She  begged  in
tears  that  she  might  be  hidden,  and  that  they  might  snatch  her
from  this  influence.  She  was  taken  back  to  her  father,  not
seeming  to  possess  her  full  reasoning  powers.

"  Castellan  was  arrested.  He  had  already  been  condemned  for
misdemeanor.  He  seemed  to  be  naturally  gifted  with  rare
magnetic  power.  To  this  must  be  attributed  the  influence  he
exercised  over  Josephine.  Her  constitution  was  marvellously
influenced  by  magnetism,  as  has  been  proved  by  diverse  experi-
ments to  which  expert  physicians  have  subjected  her.  Castellan
recognized  that  his  magnetic  passes  were  the  cause  of  Jose-
phine's fainting  turns,  which  preceded  the  violation.  He  con-
fessed that  he  had  had  criminal  connection  with  her  twice,  at  a
time  when  she  was  neither  asleep  nor  fainting,  but  when  she
could  not  have  given  full  consent  to  the  culpable  actions  of  which
she  was  the  object.     (That  is  to  say  she  was  in  a  condition  of

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  16

j

lucid  lethargy.)  The  violation  during  the  second  night  they
spent  at  Capelude  took  place  under  the  following  conditions  :
Josephine  had  no  suspicion  of  the  crime  of  which  she  was  the
victim,  and  it  was  Castellan  who  told  her  about  it  in  the  morn-
ing. At  two  other  times  he  abused  her  in  the  same  manner
without  her  being  suspicious  of  the  fact.  (That  is  to  say  she
was  in  the  somnambulistic  sleep.)

"  Since  she  has  been  delivered  from  this  man's  influence,  Jose-
phine has  recovered  her  reason.  In  her  testimony  before  the
court,  she  said,  '  He  exercised  such  an  influence  over  me  with
his  gestures,  that  several  times  I  fell  as  if  dead.  He  could
then  do  what  he  pleased  with  me.  I  understood  what  I  was
the  victim  of,  but  I  could  neither  speak  nor  act  and  I  endured
the  most  cruel  torments.'  (She  alluded  to  the  turns  of  lucid
lethargy  ;  when  she  was  in  the  somnambulistic  condition,  she
had  no  consciousness  of  what  had  happened.)

"Three  physicians,  Drs.  Hériart,  Paulet,  and  Théus,  were  sum-
moned to  enlighten  the  jury  upon  the  effects  of  magnetism.
They  confirmed  the  conclusions  of  the  medico-legal  report  pre-
pared by  Drs.  Auban  and  Roux,  of  Toulon,  on  this  occasion.
Castellan  was  sentenced    to  twelve  years  hard  labor."

At  the  time  when  these  things  occurred,  the  phenomena  of
somnambulism  were  not  understood  as  they  are  to-day.  Our
readers  will  doubtless  appreciate  all  the  details  of  this  curious
observation.

Here,  the  psychical  condition  of  the  unhappy  victim,  due  to
criminal  manœuvres,  can  be  easily  established  ;  but  what  of  the
unconscious  suggestions,  the  origin  of  which  remains  doubtful  ?

My  colleague,  M.  Liégeois,  professor  of  law  at  Nancy,  has
made  a  special  study  of  suggestion  in  relation  to  civil  and  crim-
inal law  in  a  memoir  which  has  been  very  favorably  received.

He  has  made  a  large  number  of  experiments  necessary  for  the
establishment  of  the  possibility  of  suggesting  crimes,  which  the
subjects  of  such  suggestion  may  carry  out,  ignorant  of  the  real
motive  power  which  guides  their  hand.

The  following  is  a  statement  of  one  of  his  experiments  :

M.  Liégeois  says  :  I  am  to  blame  for  having  tried  to  have
my  friend,  M.  1'.,  formerly  a  magistrate,  killed,  and  this,  serious
as  it  was,  in  the  presence  of  the  commissary  general  of  Nancy.

I  armed  myself  with  a  revolver  and  some  cartridges.  I  took  a
subject  at   random    from  among  the  five  or  six   somnambulists

164  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

who  were  at  M.  Licbault's  that  day  ;  and  to  remove  any  possi-
ble idea  of  play,  which  the  subject  to  be  experimented  with
might  conceive,  I  loaded  the  pistol,  and  fired  one  shot  in  the
garden.  Then  I  came  in  again,  showing  the  assistants  a  card
just  pierced  by  the  ball.

In  less  than  a  quarter  of  a  minute,  I  suggested  to  Mme.  G

the  idea  of  killing  M.  P.  by  a  pistol  shot.  Absolutely  uncon-
scious, and  perfectly  docile,  Mme.  G approached   M.  P.  and

fired  the  pistol.

The  commissary  questioned  her  immediately.  She  confessed
her  crime  with  complete  indifference:  she  killed  M.  P.  because
she  did  not  like  him.  They  could  arrest  her.  She  knew  very
well  what  awaited  her.  If  they  took  away  her  life,  she  would  go
into  the  other  world  as  her  victim  had  done,  whom  she  saw
there  stretched  out  on  the  ground  bathed  in  his  own  blood.
She  was  asked  if  I  had  not  suggested  the  idea  of  the  murder
which  she  had  just  committed.  She  assured  us  that  this  was
not  so,  that  she  was  led  to  it  spontaneously,  and  that  she  alone
was  to  blame.

I  have  spoken  of  post-hypnotic  suggestions,  to  which  many
deep  sleepers  are  susceptible.  In  such  cases,  acts  or  hallucina-
tions may  be  provoked  which  will  take  place  several  days,  even
several  weeks  after  the  subjects  are  awakened,— actions  from
which  the}-  will  not  be  able  to  escape,  and  of  whose  origin  they
will  be  ignorant.

We  may  produce  even  greater  results.  Since  these  facts  were
established,  I  have  proved  that  true  retroactive  hallucinations
may  often  be  developed.  We  can  suggest  to  subjects  that  at
some  period,  now  past,  they  saw  such  and  such  an  act  com-
mitted, and  the  image  created  in  their  minds  seems  like  a  living
memory,  which  governs  them  to  such  an  extent  as  to  appear  an
incontestable  reality.

For  example,  here  is  the  case  of  a  somnambulist.  Marie  G ,

an  intelligent  woman  of  whom  I  have  already  spoken.  I  hypno-
tize her  into  deep  sleep  and  say,  "You  got  up  in  the  night?"
She  replies,  "  Oh,  no."  "  I  insist  upon  it  ;  you  got  up  four
times  to  go  to  the  water-closet,  and  the  fourth  time  you  fell  on
your  nose.  This  is  a  fact,  and  when  you  wake  up  no  one  will  be
able  to  make  you  believe  the  contrary."  When  she  wakes  I  ask,
"How  are  you  now?"  "Very  well,"  she  answers,  "but  last
night  I  had  an  attack  of   diarrhoea.     I  had  to  get  up  four  times.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  165

I  fell,  too,  and  hurt  my  nose."  I  say,  "You  dreamed  that.
You  said  nothing  to  me  about  it  just  now.  Not  one  of  the
patients  saw  you."  She  persists  in  her  statement,  saying  that
she  has  not  been  dreaming",  that  she  was  perfectly  conscious  of
getting  up,  that  all  the  patients  were  asleep  ; — and  she  remains
convinced  that  the  occurrence  was  genuine.

On  another  occasion,  while  she  was  sleeping,  I  asked  what
house  she  lived  in,  and  who  else  lived  there.  Among  other
things,  she  told  me  that  the  first  floor  was  occupied  by  a  family,
—mother,  father,  and  several  little  girls,  and  an  old  bachelor
who  lived  with  them.  Then  I  gave  her  the  following  sugges-
tion :  "  On  August  3  (three  months  and  a  half  ago),  at  three
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  you  went  into  the  house  where  you
live.  When  you  reached  the  first  floor,  you  heard  cries  coming
from  a  room.  You  looked  in  through  the  key-hole.  You  saw
the  old  bachelor  committing  rape  upon  the  largest  little  girl  :
you  saw  it.  The  little  girl  was  struggling,  she  was  bleeding,  and
he  gagged  her.  You  saw  it  all,  and  you  were  so  distressed  that
you  went  to  your  apartment  and  did  not  dare  to  say  anything.
When  you  wake  up  you  will  think  no  more  about  it.  I  have
not  told  the  story  to  you  ;  it  is  not  a  dream  ;  it  is  not  a  vision  I
have  given  you  during  your  hypnotic  sleep  ;  it  is  truth  itself  ;
and  if  inquiry  is  made  into  this  crime  later  on,  you  will  tell  the
truth."  I  then  changed  the  course  of  her  ideas,  and  gave  her
brighter  suggestions.  When  she  woke,  I  did  not  dare  to  speak
of  the  fact.  I  asked  my  friend  M.  Grillon,  a  distinguished  law-
yer, to  question  the  woman  three  days  later,  as  if  he  were  a
judge  deputed  to  do  so.  She  related  the  facts  to  him  in  my
absence,  giving  all  the  details,  the  names  of  the  criminal  and  the
victim,  and  the  exact  hour  of  the  crime.  She  gave  her  evidence
energetically.  She  knew  the  gravity  of  her  testimony.  If  she
was  summoned  before  the  assizes,  she  would  tell  the  truth  in
spite  of  her  feelings.  If  it  were  necessary,  she  was  ready  to
swear  before  God  and  man  !  As  I  approached  her  bed  after  her
evidence  was  given,  the  lawyer,  assuming  the  privilege  of  a  mag-
istrate, made  her  repeat  the  evidence  before  me.  I  asked  her  if
it  was  really  true  ;  if  she  had  not  been  dreaming;  if  it  was  not  a
vision  like  those  I  was  in  the  habit  of  giving  her  during  her
sleep.  I  tried  to  persuade  her  to  doubt  herself.  She  main-
tained the  truth  of  her  testimony  with  immovable  conviction.

After  that  I  hypnotized  her  in  order  to  take  away  this  sugges-

1 66  Suggestive   ThcrapetUics.

tion.  "  Everything  you  told  the  judge  was  a  mistake,"  I  said,
"  you  saw  nothing  on  August  3d.  You  know  nothing  about
anything  of  the  kind.  You  will  not  even  remember  that  you
have  spoken  to  the  judge.  He  has  asked  no  questions  and  you
have  told  him  nothing."     When  she  waked  I  said  to  her,  "  What

did   you  say  to  M just   now?" — "  I  said  nothing" — "What,

you  said  nothing!"  replied  the  magistrate.  "You  told  me
about  a  crime  which  occurred  on  August  3,  in  the  house  where
you  live.     You  saw  the  person  named  X ,  etc."

Marie  was  disconcerted.    The  news  of  the  crime  took  away  her

breath.      She  had    never   heard    of  it.      When   M insisted,

telling  her  that  she  herself  had  mentioned  this  crime,  she  could
not  understand.  She  was  violently  affected  by  the  news  that
she  would  be  summoned  to  court  as  a  witness,  and  to  calm  her  I
had  to  hypnotize  her  again  and  wipe  out  the  memory  of  this
truly  frightful  scene.  When  she  woke  again,  the  memory  of  all
that  had  passed  was  effectually  erased  from  her  mind,  and  the
next  day  when  talking  with  her,  I  purposely  led  her  to  speak  of
the  people  in  the  house  where  she  lived.  She  spoke  of  them
naturally,  as  if  we  had  never  mentioned  them  when  together.

More  still  may  be  proved.  We  have  observed  that  certain
subjects  capable  of  being  hypnotized  are  susceptible  to  illusions
or  varying  hallucinations  by  simple  affirmation  in  t/ie  waking
condition,  without  the  necessity  of  re-hypnotizing  them.  They
are  also  susceptible  to  retroactive  hallucinations.  What  occurs
pathologically  in  the  insane  when  they  imagine  themselves  as
having  been  present  at  such  and  such  a  scene,  as  having  com-
mitted such  and  such  an  act,  as  a  murder  or  a  robbery,  and  when
they  enumerate  all  the  details  of  a  crime  in  which  they  have
been  actors  and  spectators — all  this  may  be  artificially  carried
out  in  certain  persons  with  frightful  ease  by  affirmation   simply.

I  say  to  one  of  my  somnambulistic   cases,  S ,  "  Last  night

you   saw   by  your  bedside   Dr.  G ,  my  chef  de  clinique.     He

felt  ill  and  vomited.  You  gave  him  your  handkerchief  to  wipe
his  mouth."  He  is  convinced  that  this  happened.  The  sug-
gested idea   forces  itself  upon   his  mind,  like  a  real   retrospective

image.     When   S meets  Dr.  G ,  an   hour  afterwards,   he

says  to  him, — "  I  saw  you  last  night  :  you  were  pretty  sick."- — -
"  Why,  you  astonish  me,  I  was  not  in  the  hospital." — "I  cer-
tainly saw  you  ;  it  was  five  minutes  of  four.  You  were  sick  :  it
was  just  a  little  indisposition  which  you  could  not  help."

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  167

I  said  to  the  same  subject  on  another  occasion, — "You  went
out  of  the  room  this  morning.  You  went  to  the  chapel  and
looked  through  the  key-hole.  Two  men  were  fighting,"  etc.
He  saw  it.  The  next  day  I  called  him  into  my  office,  where  I
held  somebody  who  pretended  to  be  a  police  commissioner.  He
related  the  facts,  described  the  workmen;  one  had  a  broken  arm,
he  saw  him  carried  into  the  surgeon's  room  on  a  stretcher  ;  he
was  the  one  who  began  the  quarrel.  He  declared  himself  ready
to  give  evidence  in  court,  and  to  take  his  oath.  The  pretended
commissioner  insinuated,  while  I  was  out  of  the  room,  that  per-
haps it  was  all  an  illusion,  an  idea  which  I  had  suggested  to  him.
The  subject  seemed  vexed  by  this  observation  and  maintained
energetically  that  he  had  seen  it,  and  spoke  only  of  what  he  had
seen.  I  add  that  this  man  enjoyed  good  reasoning  powers.  He
was  a  former  patient,  who,  when  cured,  took  the  office  of  assist-
ant nurse  in  the  service.

These  are  not  isolated  facts.  M.  Liégeois  made  numerous
experiments  of  the  same  kind  upon  other  hypnotizable  subjects
in  the  waking  and  sleeping  condition,  at  the  same  time  that  I
made  mine.     The  conclusions  he  reached  agree  with  mine.

I  was  inspired  with  the  idea  of  these  experiments  by  a  recent
trial  which  excited  public  opinion  very  much.

The  Tisza-Eslar  affair  is  well  known.  A  young  girl,  fourteen
years  old,  who  belonged  to  the  reformed  faith,  disappeared.
Nineteen  Jewish  families  lived  in  this  Hungarian  village.  The
rumor  soon  spread  that  the  Jews  had  killed  the  girl  for  her  blood.
It  was  the  eve  of  the  Passover  feast  ; — they  had  mixed  her
Christian  blood  with  their  unleavened  bread.  A  corpse  was
later  found  in  the  Theiss,  and  was  recognized  by  six  people  as
that  of  the  girl  :  but  the  mother  remained  incredulous,  and  other
witnesses  chosen  by  her,  refused  to  recognize  the  body.  The
anti-semitic  passion  was  aroused.  Public  opinion  was  decided,
and  thirteen  unhappy  Jews  were  arrested.  The  judge,  a  great
enemy  of  the  Jewish  race,  busied  himself  in  confirming  with
active  ferocity  the  conjecture  which  blind  hatred  had  conceived.
The  sacristan  of  the  synagogue  had  a  son  thirteen  years  old  ;  he
was  summoned  before  the  judge.  The  child  knew  nothing  of
murder,  but  the  judge,  wishing  by  all  possible  means  to  establish
what  he  believed  or  wanted  to  be  the  truth,  gave  him  into  the
hands  of  the  commissioner  of  public  safety,  who  was  expert  in
extorting  confessions.     The   latter  took  the   boy  to   his  house.

ï  68  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

Several  hours  later  the  child  had  confessed  ;  his  father  had
allured  the  girl  into  his  house,  and  had  then  sent  her  to  the
synagogue.  The  boy  Moritz,  heard  a  cry,  went  out,  looked
through  the  key-hole  of  the  temple  door,  and  saw  Esther
stretched  on  the  ground  ;  three  men  held  her.  The  butcher  cut
her  throat  and  caught  the  blood  in  three  basins.

The  child  was  isolated  for  three  months  under  the  care  of  a
guardian  who  never  left  him.  When  he  came  before  the  assem-
bly he  persisted  in  his  confessions.  The  sight  of  his  father  and
twelve  co-religionists  threatened  by  the  gallows,  the  most  ear-
nest supplications  to  tell  the  truth,  tears  and  curses, — nothing
moved  him.  Without  hesitating  he  repeated  the  same  things
in  the  same  terms  ;  he  had  seen.  We  know  that  justice  tri-
umphed in  the  end,  causing  all  the  friends  of  Hungary  and  of
civilization  to  rejoice.

How  are  the  child's  statements  to  be  explained  ?  Two
hypotheses  are  possible.  Terror,  violence,  threats  have  been
able  to  force  the  lying  disposition,  and  everyone  knows  how  in
children,  and  even  in  adults,  persistence  in  a  lie  becomes  obsti-
nate opinion,  through  the  sole  fact  of  having  lived  for  weeks
with  the  habit  of  this  lie.  Add  to  this  the  flattery  that  follows,
and  the  promise  of  a  rose-colored  existence  as  a  reward  for
perseverance  in  a  forced  lie.  This  is  possible.  Yet  I  cannot
willingly  conceive  of  moral  perversion  so  monstrous,  so  rapidly
developed,  in  a  child,  who,  up  to  that  time,  had  shown  no  evi-
dence of  bad  instincts.

That  terror  should  force  false  testimony  from  persons  of  weak
mind,  is  in  the  nature  of  things.  But  that  a  child,  in  the  pres-
ence of  a  suffering  and  imploring  father,  deaf  to  all  supplications,
can  maintain  his  evidence,  knowing  that  it  will  bring  capital
punishment,  that,  notwithstanding,  he  can  continue  to  maintain
his  little  story,  which  he  knows  to  be  invented,  is  a  rare  example
of  moral  monstrosity.

The  following  is  the  other  hypothesis.  The  child  is  led  before
the  judge.  Humble,  debased  in  the  eyes  of  the  poor,  among
whom  he  has  been  brought  up,  he  trembles  before  the  personage
representing  force  and  justice.  Alone,  face  to  face  with  the
commissioner  of  public  safety,  into  whose  hands  he  has  been
delivered,  he  is  terrified.  The  commissioner  persuades  him  con-
vincingly that  the  Jews  are  a  cursed  race,  who  consider  it  a
pious  duty  to  spill  Christian   blood,  that   it   is   their  custom  to

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  169

sprinkle  the  unleavened  bread  of  the  passover  with  this  blood
and  that  this  is  not  the  first  trial  of  the  kind.  In  colored  lan-
guage full  of  assurance,  he  relates  the  circumstantial  and  realistic
details  of  analogous  scenes.  The  imagination  of  the  poor  nerv-
ous child,  fascinated  by  terror,  is  deeply  impressed.  He  is  all
eyes,  all  ears,  and  his  reasoning  faculties  are  paralyzed  by  emo-
tion. The  narrator's  word  makes  an  impression  upon  his  weak
mind,  and  little  by  little,  the  profound  and  persistent  impression
becomes  an  image.  Under  the  influence  of  this  vigorous  sugges-
tion the  hypnotized  brain  constructs  the  scene  which  the  com-
missioner makes  out  of  whole  cloth.  It  is  all  there.  The  child
sees  the  victim  stretched  out,  held  by  three  people,  the  sacrificer
plunging  his  knife  into  the  throat,  the  blood  flowing  ;  the  child
has  seen  ;  retroactive  hallucination  has  been  created,  just  as  it  is
experimentally  created  in  deep  sleep,  and  the  memory  of  the  fic-
titious vision  is  so  vivid  that  the  child  cannot  escape  it.  Such  a
dramatic  scene,  vigorously  sketched  by  a  romancer,  forces  itself
upon  the  imagination  with  as  much  vividness  as  reality  itself.

I  do  not  know  whether  this  hypothesis  is  the  true  one.  The
simple  fact  of  the  child's  rapid  conversion,  due  to  the  skilful
working  of  his  instructors,  seems  to  denote  a  mind  susceptible  to
suggestion.  The  psychical  study  of  this  witness  by  a  commis-
sion of  physicians  thoroughly  conversant  Avith  these  facts,  would
without  doubt  have  enabled  them  to  measure  the  suggestibility
of  his  brain,  to  prove  whether  he  was  hypnotizable,  and  perhaps
bring  the  truth  to  light.

The  facts  just  related  were  given  in  the  preceding  edition  of
this  work.     The  following  are  new  confirmatory  observations.

Joseph    François    S ,    a    young    man    of    twenty-two,   had

worked  as  a  compositor  in  the  printing  house  of  Berger-Levrault.
He  came  under  my  notice  for  a  sciatic  trouble,  dating  back  eight
days.  I  recognized  that  he  was  hypnotizable,  susceptible  to
hallucinations,  and  suggestible  in  the  waking  condition.  At  one
séance  he  was  cured  of  his  sciatica  by  suggestion.

He  is  an  almost  beardless  youth  of  lymphatic  temperament,
and  was  exempt  from  military  service  on  account  of  a  delicate
constitution.  At  the  same  time  he  is  well  formed  and  has
never  been  sick.  He  has  never  had  attacks  of  spontaneous  som-
nambulism, nor  any  other  evidences  of  nervous  affection.  He  is
quiet,  intelligent,  and  well-educated,  honest  and  industrious.
He  went  through  the  classes  of  the  Franciscan  School,  during

1 70  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

the  year  1882  to  1883.  He  attended  the  chemistry  course  at  the
high  school  twice  a  week.  He  has  beer,  working  as  compositor
for  seven  years,  and  was  earning  lately  three  and  a  half  francs
per  day.  He  has  never  committed  any  excesses.  His  father,  a
shoemaker,  is  sixty  years  old,  and  a  hale  old  man.  His  mother,
too,  who  is  the  same  age,  is  a  healthy  woman.  He  has  two
brothers,  both  strong  and  well  nourished,  and  a  sister,  twenty-
nine  years  old,  who  is  also  strong,  and  has  three  vigorous  chil-
dren. He  knew  of  no  nervous  trouble  in  his  family.  On  the  21st
of  last  March,  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Schmitt,  substituting  pro-
fessor in  the  faculty,  in  my  service,  I  said  to  S (without  hyp-
notizing him  and  without  having  hypnotized  him  before),  "  you
see  this  gentleman  ?  you  met  him  yesterday  in  the  street  talking
with  several  people.  As  you  passed  him  he  approached  you,
struck  you  several  times  with  his  cane,  and  took  the  money
which  was  in  your  pocket.  Tell  me  how  that  happened  ?  "
S instantly  said  :  "  Yesterday  at  three  o'clock  in  the  after-
noon I  was  walking  along  Academy  Place.  I  saw  M talk-
ing in  a  loud  voice  with  several  people.     Suddenly,  I  cannot  tell

why,  M came  up  to  me,  hit  me  several  times  with  his  cane,

put  his  hands  into  my  pockets  and  took  my  money  away  from
me." — "  Is  that  really  true?"  I  asked.  "  I  have  just  made  you
tell  that." — "  It  is  perfectly  true." — "  Look  here,  you  know  very
well  that  I  hypnotized  you,  and  gave  you  a  suggestion." — "  But
this  is  true  ;  it  is  not  a  suggestion." — "  What  is  your  profession  ?  "
I  asked. — "  I  work  in  Berger-Levrault's  Printing  House.  I  set
the  type  for  the  Revue  medicate  de  V Est." — "  Well,  do  you  know
who  this  gentleman  is?" — "No,  I  do  not  know  him." — "It  is
Dr.  Schmitt,  the  chief  editor  of  the  Revue  médicale  de  l'Est.
You  are  not  going  to  maintain  that  a  doctor  like  this  gentleman,
has  struck  and  robbed  a  poor  boy  like  you  ?  "- — "  It  is  true  :  I  do
not  know  why,  but  I  cannot  say  otherwise,  for  it  is  true." — "  See
here,  you  are  an  honest  boy  ;  you  are  religious." — "  Yes,  sir." —
"  One  does  not  accuse  a  man  without  being  absolutely  sure  of
what  he  has  done.  If  the  police  commissioner  questioned  you,
what  would  you  say?" — "  I  would  tell  the  truth.  He  struck  me
with  his  cane,  and  took  my  money  away." — "  And  you  would
swear  to  it?  Are  you  sure  enough  of  yourself  to  swear?  Think.
Perhaps  it  is  simply  an  idea,  an  illusion,  a  dream." — "  I  would
swear  before  Christ." — "  Perhaps  it  was  some  one  resembling  this
gentleman." — "  It  was  this  gentleman  ;  I  am  absolutely  certain."

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  171

Three  children  were  with  us  during  this  conversation.

(  nie  of  them,  Adrian  V ,  fourteen  years  old,  is  tubercular

and  has  moist  rales  at  both  apices  of  the  lungs.  He  says  that
for  five  years  he  has  had  colds  all  winter,  but  has  never  had  any
evidences  of  nervous  trouble,  and  no  spontaneous  attacks  of  som-
nambulism.

He  is  very  susceptible  to  suggestion  and  hallucination  in  the
waking  and  sleeping  conditions.  He  is  intelligent,  can  read,
write,  and  cipher.  His  memory  is  remarkable.  He  is  a  gentle,
honest  child,  has  been  in  the  service  a  long  time,  and  is  loved  by
the  sisters  and  the  patients.

His  father,  an  alcoholic  case,  abandoned  his  mother  last  Sep-
tember. The  mother  is  very  strong,  as  are  also  his  brothers  and
sisters.     None  of  them  have  any  nervous  affection.

I  said  to  this  child,  "  You  heard  this  young  man's  story  this
morning?" — He  replied  without  hesitation,  "Yes,  sir." —
"  What  was  it  about?  " — "  That  a  gentleman  had  struck  him  and
taken  his  money  away." — "  Where  was  it?"  1  asked. — "  In  the
hospital." — "Why,  no,"  I  said,  "  that  is  not  right,  because  he
has  just  told  us  that  it  happened  in  Academy  Place."  Without
being  disconcerted,  the  child  said, — "  I  no  longer  remember
where  it  happened,  but  he  told  me  that  he  had  been  struck  and
robbed." — "When  did  he  tell  you  that?" — "This  morning  at
half  past  seven." — "  Enough,"  I  said  ;  "  it  is  not  necessary  to  tell

me  untrue  things;"  and  I  pretended  to  be  angry.     "  M has

told  you  nothing.  I  made  you  say  it.  You  are  honest  and
religious  :  it  is  not  necessary  to  make  up  stories  to  be  obliging."
— "  I  assure  you,  sir,  that  he  told  me  about  it  this  morning." —
"If  the  commissioner  asked  you,  what  would  you  say?" — "I
would  say  what  was  told  me." — "  Would  you  swear  to  it?  " — "  I
would  swear  to  it."

Another  child  present  was  Joseph  L- ,  fourteen  years  old.

He  is  delicate,  having  had  a  stroke  of  infantile  paralysis,  but
suffers  from  no  other  nervous  troubles.  His  father,  mother  and
one  sister  are  strong  and  healthy.  He  is  quite  intelligent,  and
reads  and  writes  correctly.  He  is  susceptible  to  suggestion  in
the  waking  and  sleeping  conditions.

"  You  were  present,"  I   said  to   him,  "  when    M told   how

he  had  been  struck  and  robbed  ?  "  He  replied  without  hesita-
ting, "Yes,  sir." — "When  did  he  tell  it?" — "  This  morning  at
half  past  seven." — "  See  here,  you  need  not  repeat  that  like  a

I J 2  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

parrot,  because  you  have  just  heard  it.  But  did  you  hear  it
from  the  gentleman's  own  lips  this  morning?" — "Yes,  sir,  this
morning  at  half  past  seven." — "You  swear  to  it?" — "I  swear
it."

Finally,  in  the  next  bed,  there  is  a  child  nine  years  old,  G ,

who  is  convalescent  from  pleurisy.  He  has  a  good  constitution,
with  no  nervous  inheritance.  Father,  mother,  two  sisters  and  a
brother  are  all  well  and  strong.  This  child  is  also  very  suscepti-
ble to  suggestion,  though  to  a  less  degree  than  the  others.

"  Did  you  hear  it  too,"  I  asked  him  ?  He  hesitated.  "  I  do
not  remember  very  clearly." — I  insisted.  "  Think  hard,"  I  said  ;
"he  related  the  story  before  you  this  morning.  Do  not  worry,
do  not  be  afraid,  you  can  tell  it  if  you  know  it."  He  thought
several  moments  then  stated,  "  It  is  true,  I  heard  it."  —
"When?" — "This  morning  at  half  past  seven." — "What  did
you  hear?" — "That  a  gentleman  had  struck  him  and  had  taken
away  his  money." — "Are  you  very  sure  that  you  heard  him  tell
it  ?  A  moment  ago  you  did  not  remember.  You  must  not  say
so  if  you  are  not  certain  of  it.  You  just  heard  it  told,  but  you
did  not  hear  it  this  morning?  " — "  Yes,  sir,  I  am  perfectly  certain
I  did."

The  next  day  S left  the  hospital.     I  had  him  come  into

my  office  before  his  departure  and  said  to  him,  "  See  here,  my
friend,  tell  me  the  truth.  Yesterday,  you  accused  Dr.  Schmitt  of
having  struck  you  with  his  cane  and  taken  your  money.  Confess
that  you  were  joking,  and  that  such  was  not  the  case.  You
thought  you  were  pleasing  me  by  pretending  to  believe  what  I
said  to  you.  Now  that  we  are  alone,  tell  me  there  is  nothing  in
it."  He  replied,  "I  swear  to  you  that  it  is  true.  I  was  passing
along  Academy  Place.  He  came  up  to  me  with  his  cane,  struck
me  several  times  and  took  the  money  out  of  my  pockets.  I  had
but  ten  sous,  and  I  have  them  no  longer."  "  Why  should  a
doctor  take  a  few  sous  away  from  a  poor  boy?  That  is  not
credible." — "  I  do  not  know  why,  but  he  took  thern  from  me."

The  following  is  a  similar  case  :

Y Louis,  is  a  man   thirty-seven  years  old,  who  has   been

tubercular  since  1872.  Both  apices  are  consolidated.  The
affection  runs  a  subacute  course.  There  is  no  well  authenticated
neuropathic  history.  Clinical  examination  reveals  an  ordinary
phthisical  process,  but  nothing  further.  He  had  been  in  the
hospital  several  weeks,  when  one  day,  being  honored  by  a  visit

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  I  73

from  Prof.  Forel  of  Zurich,  an  eminent  colleague  who  is  working
in  psychiatry,  and  who  was  desirous  of  attending  my  clinic  in
order  to  study  the  question  of  hypnotism,  I  experimented  upon

some  new  subjects.      I  tried   V ,  and  found  him   an   excellent

somnambulist,  susceptible  to  suggestion  in  the  waking  and  sleep-
ing conditions.

Some  time  after  this,  on  the  3d  of  April,  my  honored  col-
league, M.  Victor  Parisot,  being  with  me  on  duty,  I  said  to  the
man  without  hypnotizing  him;  "Do  you  know  this  gentle-
man?"— "No  sir." — "  Did  you  go  out  yesterday?" — "Yes  sir."
— "  Well,  think  ;  you  met  this  gentleman.  When  passing,  you
came  too  close,  so  as  to  hit  him  with  your  elbow,  and  he  struck
you  with  his  cane.  You  remember  it  very  well."  After  a  few
moments  he  said,  "  Oh,  yes,  sir  ;  it  was  in  Jean-Lamour  Street;

I  was  going  home.    M hit  me  with  his  cane  so   that  it  hurt

me  very  much." — "  Are  you  perfectly  sure  ?  I  have  made  you
say  so." — "  It  is  perfectly''  true  ;  it  is  the  same  gentleman." —
"  It  is  a  suggestion.  I  have  made  you  dream  it." — "  No,  sir,  it  is
really  true.  I  felt  the  pain  in  my  leg  distinctly  and  I  feel  it
still."     He  persists  in  his  positive  affirmation.

In  the  same  room  opposite  him  is  a  patient,  T.  Nicholas,  thirty-
four  years  old,  a  plasterer,  who  has  been  in  the  hospital  two
years  for  mitral  insufficiency.  He  has  no  nervous  trouble,  and  is
very  susceptible  to  suggestion  in  the  waking  and  sleeping  con-
ditions. I  asked  him  questions  at  a  distance.  "  Is  it  true  that
Y told  you  that  story  yesterday' evening?  "  Without  hesi-
tating,— "  Yes,  sir;  yesterday  evening  when  he  came  in  he  said  to
me,  '  I  have  just  been  struck  with  a  cane  by  a  gentleman  coming
down  Jean-Lamour  Street.'" — "What  gentleman?" — "He  did
not  say  who,  he  did  not  recognize  him." — I  went  up  to  his  bed
and  said  to  him,  "  Look  here,  my  friend,  you  need  not  say  any-
thing of  which  you  are  not  sure.  Do  not  state  it  to  be  obliging.
He  was  not  struck  by  a  cane  ;  it  was  only  a  suggestion  I  gave
him." — "  He  told  me  about  it  last  night,  however." — "At  what
time?" — "At  half  past  four,  when  he  brought  me  an  Easter
ebto-"  And  he  shows  me  an  Easter  egg  in  his  drawer.  A
remarkable  coincidence.     The  retroactive  hallucination  provoked

in  T was  associated  with    the  real  fact    in  his    mind.     His

statement  was  corroborated  by  this  incontestable  fact  ;  the  egg
was  there  !  What  weight  this  would  add  to  testimony  given  in
court  !

1 74  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

Still  another  fact.

Last  November,  when   I   resumed  work  after   my  vacation,  I

passed  by  a  large,  fat.  servant  girl,  Josephine  T ,  twenty-two

years  old,  and  quite  stupid.  She  was  affected  with  articular
rheumatism,  but  not  at  all  of  nervous  constitution.  Her  bed
was  next  Mme.  G.,  a  laundress,  fifty-four  years  old,  who  had
locomotor  ataxia,  and  was  a  very  intelligent  and  highly  suggest-
ible person.  Speaking  of  the  former  case,  the  students  said  to
me,  "  This  girl  is  a  good  somnambulist  like  her  neighbor."

Then,  without  hypnotizing  her,  I  said  point  blank,  "  What
was  the  trouble  between  you  and  your  neighbor  yesterday
morning?  She  threw  her  crutches  at  your  head  and  struck  you
on  the  nose.  You  remember  it  very  well."  She  seemed  a  little
surprised  at  first.  I  repeated  the  sentence.  "Ah!  yes,  sir,"
she  said,  after  an  instant,  "  it  was  after  breakfast  ;  we  were
chatting  a  little.  All  of  a  sudden  she  grew  angry  and  threw
her  crutches  at  me.  She  hurt  me  very  much  ;  I  have  a  bruise
on  my  nose  yet." — "Look  here,  stupid,"  I  said,  "you  dreamed
it  ;  I  have  just  made  up  the  story." — "  No,  I  have  not  dreamed
it;  I  am  not  stupid.  She  threw  her  crutches  at  my  head.  I
told  her  that  I  should  tell  M.  Bernheim." — "You  have  been
dreaming."  She  became  angry.  "  I  know  what  I  say.  I  am
not  confused.  All  the  patients  saw  it  and  can  tell  you  so,"  and
she  calls  upon  all  her  neighbors  successively  as  witnesses.
There  was  a  general  burst  of  laughter  in  the  room.

Her  neighbor  G was  convulsed  with  laughter.     Josephine

T was  furious,  made  faces  at  her,  and   shook  her  fist.      The

scene  lasted  for  twenty  minutes.     Finally,  I  said   to   the  woman

G ,  "What    are   you    laughing   at?"     She    pointed    to    her

neighbor.  "  But,"  said  I,  "  is  it  not  possible  that  this  is  true?
You  may  have  forgotten  about  it.  Think."  Her  face  immedi-
ately grew  serious.  "  Yes,  it  is  true.  Why  is  she  always  bother-
ing me?  I  confess  that  I  was  angry,  I  could  not  command
myself  for  a  moment.  I  threw  my  crutches  at  her  head."
"  And  you  also  used  bad   language."     "  Heavens,  I  forgot  that.

I   called  her .     I    beg  your  pardon,  you  must  not  bear  any

grudge  against  me.  Was  it  necessary  for  you  to  tell  M.  Bern-
heim all  that?" — "Assure  yourself,"  I  said  to  her,  "that  all
this  is  not  true.  It  is  a  suggestion  I  gave  you." — "No,  sir,  it  is
true."  And  she  persisted  in  her  assertion,  convinced  of  its
reality,   so  much  so  that  when  I  started  to  leave  her  bed  she

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  1 75

became  restless,  and  said  to  me,  "  She  is  furious,  I  am  afraid  she
will  beat  me  in  revenge."  "  Do  not  be  afraid,"  I  said,  "  I  am
going  to  put  her  asleep  and  take  away  the  memory  of  all  that
has  happened."     I  did  so,  and  Mme.  G was  reassured.

I  could  multiply  these  cases,  but  will  finish  with  the  following,
which   I   observed  on   the  8th  of  April.     The   case   was  that  of

Charles  R ,  an  Italian  mason,  twenty  years  old,  who  was  in

the  hospital  for  tubercular  pleurisy; — a  boy  of  lymphatic  tem-
perament, without  any  nervous  history,  but  very  susceptible  to
suggestion.  I  said  to  him,  "  Were  you  in  the  yard  when  two
drunken  nurses  had  a  fight  ?  One  had  his  leg  broken,  and  had  to
be  taken  to  the  surgeon's  ;  the  other  had  a  nose  bleed."  He
answered,  "  I  do  not  know.  I  was  not  there."  I  said,  "You
told  me  about  it  this  morning.  You  were  in  the  yard  yesterday
at  three  o'clock,"  and  I  repeat  the  story,  emphasizing  the
details.  In  about  two  minutes  the  hallucinatory  memory  has
dawned  on  his  mind.  He  saw  it.  "  They  were  the  two  nurses
on  the  surgical  side;  the  elder  had  his  leg  broken  ;  he  was  the
one  who  began  the  fight.  They  called  each  other  bad  names.
The  policemen  came,  etc."

I  asked  him  for  the  man's  name,  in  order  to  give  it  to  the
police  commissioner,  who  was  coming  to  question  the  witnesses
of  the  scene.  He  should  tell  what  he  had  seen  and  should  take
his  oath.

All  these  experiments  were  made  independently  of  one  another
in  different  rooms.  None  of  the  subjects  had  been  present  at
similar  experiments.  There  had  been  no  chance  for  suggestion
by  imitation.

I  add  that  I  made  all  these  insinuations  quietly,  without
trying  to  force  them  upon  the  subject,  or  making  great  effort  to
provoke  a  favorable  reply.  Some  cases  were  affected  by  the
suggestion  immediately.  In  others  it  required  several  seconds,
two  minutes  at  the  most,  for  the  hallucinatory  image  to  be
evoked.  After  their  affirmation  I  insisted  upon  pointing  out
to  them  that  they  were  mistaken,  and  pretended  to  be  angry
with  them.  The  false  evidence  was  persisted  in,  because  the
subjects  saw  ;  a  retroactive  hallucination  had  been  created.

Some  subjects  relate  the  facts  with  surprising  accuracy  of
detail.  Like  a  professional  liar,  they  invent  out  of  whole  cloth,
with  imperturbable  coolness  and  perfect  conviction.  Their  im-
agination suggests   all    the    circumstances  of  the  self-conceived

i  y  6  Suggestive   Thc7rapeutics.

drama.  They  remind  one  of  apparently  lucid  cases  of  insanity,
who  invent  a  thousand  calumnies,  create  discord  wherever  they
can,  and  tell  groundless  stories  about  Peter  and  Paul  with  abso-
lute good  faith,  and  with  a  refinement  of  detail  that  make  them
seem  credible.  The  world  believes  in  malice  and  in  moral  per-
versity where  there  is  sometimes  only  mental  insanity  ;  instincts
perverted  by  sickness  engender  in  these  highly  imaginative
people  retroactive  hallucinations  that  force  themselves  upon
their  minds  as  realities.  Like  the  subjects  we  experiment  with,
they  do  not  lie,  yet  are  led  into  error  by  the  weakness  of  their
reasoning  powers.

People  will  ask,  "  What  proof  have  you  of  your  subject's
veracity?  Are  they  not  acting  to  oblige  you?"  I  reply,  "I
have  no  certain  proof,  but  I  have  repeated  these  experiments
with  numbers  of  different  subjects  ;  I  know  these  subjects  to  be
honest,  as  they  have  been  in  the  hospital  some  time  ;  their
expression,  their  behavior,  intonation  of  voice  and  manner  of
relating  a  story,  all  denote  conviction  and  sincerity."

Dr.  Motet  has  mentioned  similar  facts.  He  has  lately  called
the  attention  of  the  Academy  of  Medicine  to  the  false  evidence
given  by  children  in  court.  He  cites  the  Tisza-Eslar  affair,
which  he  interprets  as  I  have  done.  He  shows  that  these
children  act  in  good  faith  through  auto-suggestion.  Doubtless
Dr.  Motet  had  no  knowledge  of  the  facts  and  experiments  I  had
published  in  my  book,  because  'he  does  not  cite  them.  His
opinion  has  more  value  coming  as  it  does,  to  confirm  what  I  had
stated  independently.

As  we  have  seen,  it  is  not  children  alone  that  can  give  false
testimony  sincerely  and  in  good  faith.  It  can  also  be  done  by
serious  adults,  who  understand  the  significance  of  what  they  say,
and  do  not  speak  lightly.

I  repeat  that  it  is  a  true  retroactive  hallucination  which  dic-
tates the  evidence  to  them.  The  picture  of  the  fictitious  scene
exists  in  their  own  minds  ;    they  have  seen  with  their  own  eyes.

Is  there  any  need  of  emphasizing  the  importance  of  the  exper-
imental facts  just  related,  from  the  social  and  legal  point  of
view  ?  To  study  them  is  to  enlighten  justice,  to  forewarn  soci-
ety against  grave  judicial  errors  which  may  result  from  ignorance  ;
for  to  attract  attention  to  these  phenomena  of  suggestion  is
often  enough  to  liberate  the  truth.

In  order  to  reassure  those  who  may  be  troubled  by  my  state-

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  177

ment  s,  I  give  sonic  indications  which  may  serve  to  establish  the
differential  diagnosis  between  true  evidence,  and  evidence  falsi-
fied through  suggestion.

1st.  False  witnesses  or  accusers  do  not  seem  to  me  to  act  as
honest  cues  do.  The  memory  of  the  suggested  event  docs  not
appear  to  be  as  persistent  as  the  memory  of  the  real  event  ;  the
impression  is  not  as  continuous.  The  recollection  of  it  becomes
latent  or  dim  again,  unless  it  is  aroused.  Here  is  a  young  man,
who,  according  to  my  suggestion,  accuses  some  one  of  having
robbed  him.  When  I  question  him,  he  states  the  fact  positively
and  with  evident  conviction,  but  if  during  the  day  he  meets  his
pretended  robber,  he  will  not  approach  him  with  the  idea  of
making  accusations,  of  reproaching  him  with  the  robbery,  or  of
denouncing  him  to  justice,  unless  a  special  suggestion  on  this
point  has  been  given.  We  may  say  that  the  created  retroactive
hallucination  is  latent  in  the  normal  condition,  and  does  not
awaken  again  until  I  call  it  forth  by  questioning.  This  consti-
tutes a  veritable  suggestion,  which  provokes  the  hallucination  by
developing  a  special  state  of  consciousness  in  which  the  subject
perceives  it.

2d.  The  magistrate  should  question  the  witness  without  fore-
warning him,  without  trying  to  put  him  on  the  right  track,  and
without  letting  him  see  what  his  own  opinion  is.  People  have
been  aroused  against  the  abuses  of  hypnotism.  They  have  cried
out,  and  rightly,  against  the  idea  of  making  use  of  hypnotic  sug-
gestion to  obtain  confessions  from  the  accused.  But  does  the
magistrate  know  that  he  is  liable  to  give  suggestions  to  certain
subjects  unconsciously,  and  with  a  frightful  facility?

3d.  Witnesses  may  give  suggestions  to  one  another.  If  one  of
them  makes  an  affirmation  forcibly  and  convincingly,  and  relates
facts  in  such  a  manner  in  the  presence  of  others,  some  among
them  will  be  influenced,  will  accept  the  witness'  word,  and  will
make  a  picture  of  the  event  in  their  own  minds,  similar  to  that
which  has  just  been  presented  to  them.  Each  witness,  there-
fore, should  first  be  questioned  alone,  and  it  should  be  definitely
decided  that  no  reciprocal  suggestion  has  taken  place  in  previous
conversations.  The  agreement  of  several  witnesses  about  the
details  of  a  fact  is  not  always  an  argument  in  favor  of  its  reality f
even  when  the  witnesses  are  known  to  be  acting  in  good  faith.
There  may  be  some  among  them  who  have  made,  and  some  who
12

1 78  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

have  received  suggestions.  Nothing  is  more  false  than  the  say-
ing :    Vox  populi,  vox  Dei.

4th.  A  well-informed  magistrate  can  measure  the  suggestibil-
ity of  a  doubtful  witness  by  a  process  of  clever  questioning.  He
will  appear  to  accept  the  witnesses'  word,  will  insist  upon  the
incidents,  and  will  suggest  details  which  betray  the  witness'  sug-
gestibility if  he  confirms  them.

For  example,  he  will  say  to  him,    "  You  said  that  when  X

took  away  your  money,  he  let  a  piece  fall,  and  picked  it  up
again.  Do  you  remember  this  circumstance  ?  "  If  the  accuser
falls  into  the  trap  and  confirms  it,  the  question  is  decided.

5th.  The  medical  examination  of  a  witness  by  a  physician
who  is  conversant  with  the  subject,  will,  I  believe,  in  a  majority
of  cases,  enable  the  fact  to  be  established  as  to  whether  sugges-
tion is  present  or  not.  In  fact,  in  all  cases  where  my  experi-
ments have  proved  successful,  the  subjects  were  hypnotizable
(by  our  method),  and  susceptible  to  suggestion  in  the  waking
and  sleeping  conditions  ;  in  the  majority  of  these  cases  catalepsy
was  produced  by  simple  affirmation,  and  in  some  hallucinations
could  be  induced.

Such  are  the  facts  which  I  submit  to  the  consideration  of  my
colleagues.  I  have  studied  them  without  prejudice,  and  without
passing  the  limit  of  strict  and  rigorous  observation.

The  study  of  suggestion  opens  up  new  fields  in  medicine,  psy-
chology, and  sociology.  Poor  human  imagination  is  exposed  on
all  sides  to  good  or  bad,  salutary  or  pernicious  impressions.  All
criminals  are  not  guilty  \  all  untruths  are  not  lies  ;  there  are
those  who  mystify,  and  those  who  are  mystified  unconsciously  :
there  are  people  who  deceive  themselves.

Scientific  men  will  not  accept  my  statements  until  they  have
verified  them,  and  those  who,  from  prejudice,  systematically
refuse  to  examine  the  facts,  because  they  do  not  accord  with
their  a  priori  ideas; — those  who  judge  without  having  seen,  and
without  wishing  to  see  ; — those  who  have  enough  self-confidence
to  assume  that  the  conceptions  of  their  own  minds  are  identical
with  the  truth,  and  that  facts  should  bow  before  them,  will  also
believe  that  I  am  mistaken.

They  have  not  reflected  upon  these  words  of  Claude  Ber-
nard's :

"  Men  who  have  excessive  faith  in  their  theories  or  ideas,  are
not  only  ill-adapted  to  making  discoveries,  but  they  also  make

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  i  79

very  bad  observations.  The  results  of  experiment  must  be
accepted  as  they  present  themselves  to  us,  with  all  their  sur-
prises and  irregularities."

I  have  endeavored  to  show  that  hypnotism  does  not  really
create  a  new  condition  :  there  is  nothing  in  induced  sleep  which
may  not  occur  in  the  waking  condition,  in  a  rudimentary  degree
in  many  cases,  but  in  some  to  an  equal  extent.  Some  people
are  naturally  susceptible  to  suggestion.  From  a  psychological
point  of  view,  they  are  normally  in  the  condition  called  hypo-
taxic  or  charmed,  which  makes  them  incapable  of  taking  care  of
themselves,  and  enfeebles  or  suppresses  all  their  moral  resistance.
Men,  in  many  respects  distinguished,  and  endowed  with  artistic
qualities  or  brilliant  intuitions,  are  ofter.  only  grown  up  children,
having  all  their  intellectual  power  concentrated,  as  it  were,  in
one  or  two  faculties  of  the  imagination.  Everyone  has  heard  of
infant  prodigies  ;  lightning  calculators,  for  example,  like  Mon-
déux  and  Inaudi,  who  solved  the  most  complex  problems  men-
tally, by  means  of  a  prodigious  natural  power  of  abstraction,  but
who  were  incapable  of  intellectual  efforts  in  other  directions.
Here,  at  least,  an  immense  talent,  bordering  upon  genius,  com-
pensates for  the  discord  of  cerebral  functions.  Manx-  people
have  not  this  compensation.

Who  has  not  seen  those  disinherited  beings,  who,  not
deprived  of  intelligence,  are  capable  of  assimilating  current
ideas,  and  even  able  to  shine  in  the  parlor,  exhibiting  illustra-
tions of  their  worth  and  fulfilling  their  social  duties  properly
when  well  guided,  but  who  are  in  reality  wholly  without  initiative
and  will  power,  without  moral  resistance,  and  are  carried  along
with  the  wind,  that  is,  wherever  suggestion  blows  them?  I
freely  affirm  that  they  are  affected  with  instinctive  imbecility.

Under  the  name  of  instinctive  imbecility,  foolish  actions,  moral
insanity,  or  reasoning  mania,  alienists  describe  "  a  morbid  condi-
tion which  is  shown  less  by  intellectual  delirium,  by  disorder  in
ideas  and  expressions,  than  by  extravagance  of  sentiment  and
action  which  appear  to  be  the  result  of  instinctive,  automatic,
thoughtless  impulse,  without  the  intervention  of  reflection  or
reason,  as  in  the  case  of  a  man  possessed  of  all  his  senses."—  (A.
Foville.)  "  These  patients  are  foolish,"  says  Trélat, — "  but  they
do  not  appear  foolish,  because  they  express  themselves  clearly.
They  are  fools  in  their  actions  rather  than  in  their  words.  They
have  sufficient  power  of  attention  to   allow  nothing  happening

I  So  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

around  them  to  pass  unnoticed,  to  leave  nothing  heard  unan-
swered, and  to  commit  no  omission  in  carrying  out  any  project.
Their  want  of  reasoning  power  is  wholly  internal  and  is  not
apparent  to  the  outside  world.  It  is  among  these  that  we  find  a
large  number  of  beings  who  are  considered  sometimes  as  insane,
sometimes  as  malefactors,  and  who  have  alternately  been
inmates  of  asylums  and  of  prisons."

We  recognize  this  in  those  who  have  an  unusual  power  in
discussion,  who  have  the  gift  of  repartee,  and  who  are  constantly
seeking  an  opportunity  for  displaying  their  mental  brilliancy.
"Among  patients  of  this  sort,"  says  Gueslain,  "we  find  some
capable  of  nonplussing  sound  logicians.  Their  controversies  at
times  could  not  be  more  witty.  I  call  to  mind  a  lady  who  was  a
real  torment  to  me  as  well  as  to  everybody  in  the  establishment.
Every  time  she  took  part  in  conversation  I  had  to  struggle
against  her  witty  attacks.  All  her  answers  were  passed  through
the  crucible  of  analysis,  and  that  with  a  penetration  truly
astonishing  to  everyone."

Side  by  side  with  this  instinctive  insanity,  I  class  instinctive
imbecility  ;  and  under  this  head  range  those  already  spoken  of,
who  are  not  fools,  who  commit  no  unreasonable  acts  sponta-
neously, and  who  have  no  monomaniacal  impulses.  They  are
mentally-clear  imbeciles  ;  they  talk  well,  reason  correctly,  are
sensible,  and  sometimes  brilliant  in  conversation  ;  they  can  use
finesse  and  intelligence  in  accomplishing  projects  they  have  con-
ceived ;  but  the  instinctive,  sentimental  part  of  the  moral  being
which  directs  the  every-day  acts  is  as  if  atrophied.  They  have
no  moral  spontaneity;  they  do  not  know  how  to  behave,  and.
like  somnambulists  from  a  psychical  point  of  view,  obey  all
suggestions,  submitting  readily  to  all  outside  influences.  This
psychical  condition  exists  in  variable  degrees,  from  simple
instinctive  weakness  to  absolute  instinctive  idiocy.  Under  good
guidance  these  beings,  deprived  of  moral  sense,  may  fulfil  a
happy  and  useful  career.  Others  are  stranded  in  the  mud,  or
before  tribunals.

For  example,  let  us  take  a  young  girl  brought  up  with
good  principles,  and  considered  by  everybody  to  be  sweet
and  honest.  She  marries.  The  first  years  pass  happily  ;  she
seems  to  be  a  devoted  wife  and  a  good  mother.  A  young  man
takes  her  fancy.  Her  husband,  engrossed  with  the  struggle  for
existence,  neglects  her  ;  she  gives  herself  up  to  this  young  man.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  i Si

Later,  the  husband  meditates  vengeance  against  the  man,  who,
after  seducing  his  wife,  has  set  up  a  rival  establishment  which
flourishes,  while  his  own  goes  to  pieces.  In  order  to  gratify  his
revenge,  he  captures  his  wife's  mind  anew,  persuades  her  that  his
rival  is  the  cause  of  their  unhappiness,  insinuates  that  he  must
be  killed,  and  that  her  moral  well-being  is  at  the  expense  of  this
murder.  She  yields  to  his  suggestion.  Gentle  in  disposition,
giving  in  when  threatened,  she  arranges  a  rendezvous  with  her
former  lover — and  coldly,  on  a  pretense  of  renewing  the  relation-
ship which  has  been  broken  off,  she  takes  him  to  her  husband,
who  assassinates  him.  No  remorse,  no  regret  stirs  her  con-
science. She  does  not  seem  to  suspect  the  enormity  of  her
crime.

Nothing  in  her  previous  history  foretold  this  monstrous  per-
version of  the  moral  sense.  To  the  jury,  the  mistress  of  her
boarding-school  states  that  she  was  the  most  docile  and  best
disciplined  pupil.  A  witness,  at  whom  some  of  the  audience
laughed  because  they  did  not  understand  him,  said  of  her  ; —
"  She  was  soft  dough,  and  turned  to  evil  as  readily  as  to  virtue."
Translated  in  psychological  language,  she  was  susceptible  to  sug-
gestion. I  add  that  the  moral  sense  did  not  counterbalance
her  excessive  suggestibility.  It  was  less  a  perversion,  perhaps,
than  a  natural  absence  of  the  moral  sense.  It  was  instinctive
imbecility.

I  do  not  claim  that  my  interpretation  is  the  true  one  :  it
suffices  that  my  proposition  is  plausible.  Moreover,  far  be  it
from  my  thoughts  to  imply  that  all  criminals  are  foolish  or
unconscious  actors  ;  every  deed  should  be  studied  with  its
circumstances,  with  its  causes,  with  its  antecedents,  with  the
moral  condition  of  the  person  who  perpetrated  it.  For,  who
would  venture  to  claim  that  the  degree  of  culpability  is  to  be
measured  alone  by  the  gravity  of  the  act  committed  ?

But  I  must  stop.  I  desired  to  treat  but  briefly  a  question
which  involves  the  gravest  interests  of  justice  and  society,  leav-
ing the  care  of  further  scrutiny  and  deduction  to  those  more
competent  than  myself.  It  has  seemed  to  me  that  the  experi-
mental study  of  hypnotic  phenomena  could  throw  some  light
upon  this  field  of  moral  responsibility,  still  so  obscure.  This
dangerous  ground  must  be  ventured  upon  with  prudence  and
reserve.  I  have  disclosed  my  doubts  and  my  scruples  ;  I  dare
not  tell  my  convictions.

1 82  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

The  first  part  of  this  book  published  (excepting  numerous
additions)  in  1884,  called  forth  considerable  criticism.  The
eminent  philosopher,  M.  Paul  Janet,  wrote  a  series  of  articles
for  the  Revue  Politique,  in  which  he  reproached  the  observers  at
Nancy  with  several  imperfections  of  method.  This  is  the  answer
which  1  believed  it  my  duty  to  give  M.  Paul  Janet.*

"When  M.  Liégeois  read  his  memoir,  De  la  suggestion  hypno-
tique dans  ses  rapports  avec  le  droit  civil  el  criminal,  before  the
Academy  of  Moral  and  Political  Sciences,  the  assembly,  which
it  must  be  said  was  little  prepared  for  studies  which  were  up  to
that  time  foreign  to  its  domain,  was  deeply  stirred.  Some  of
your  colleagues  denied  the  statements.  The  observer  at  Nancy
was  deluded  by  simulation,  they  said.  Others,  fearing  the  con-
sequences of  deducing  facts  not  in  accord  with  their  precon-
ceived ideas,  refrained  from  investigating  them.

"  To  the  honor  of  this  learned  body  however,  many  of  the
sound  minded,  you  among  the  number,  dared  to  look  the  ques-
tion coolly  in  the  face,  and  to  accept,  as  demonstrated,  certain
facts  elsewhere  sanctioned  in  science  by  noted  medical  authori-
ties.

"You  have  read  some  recent  publications  upon  the  subject,
you  have  seen  some  experiments  at  the  Salpêtrière,  you  have
acquired  some  oral  information,  you  have  formed  an  opinion
upon  hypnotic  suggestion.  But  without  being  sufficiently
enlightened  upon  the  subject,  without  verifying  what  is  going
on  outside  of  your  immediate  surroundings,  you  publish  your
opinion.  You  state  what,  according  to  your  idea,  is  exact,  and
what  is  subject  to  doubt.  You  point  out  the  method  which
ought  to  be  followed,  and  wish  to  call  the  attention  of  the
observers  at  Nancy  to  defects  in  the  methods  they  follow.

"  Allow  me,  highly  honored  master,  to  reply  to  some  of  your
deductions.  I  shall  do  so  with  the  respectful  deference  due  to
your  character  and  talent,  but  also  with  the  perfect  freedom  of
conviction  with  which  the  love  of  truth  alone  inspires  me.

*  This  reply  to  the  articles  M.  Paul  Janet  published  in  the  Revue  Politique  was
intended  for  the  same  Revue.  M.  Yung,  after  having  submitted  it  to  M.  Janet,  refused
to  insert  it,  finding  it  "  too  technical,  too  physiological,"  for  a  literary  journal.

I  then  substituted  for  it  simply  a  letter,  short  and  courteous,  without  any  scientific
detail,  simply  answering  the  criticisms  of  which  my  memoir  De  la  Suggestion  dans
Pétât  hypnotique  et  dans  l'état  de  veille  had  been  the  object  in  the  Revue.  M.  Yung
readily  acknowledged  the  interest  I  had  shown  in  replying,  but  was  unwilling  to  insert
my  answer  in  his  journal.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  1S3

"  Vou  accord  boundless  faith  to  all  the  work  issuing  from  the
School  of  the  Salpêtrière.  Vou  accept  only  with  a  certain
reserve  that  which  is  produced  elsewhere.  There,  everything  is
demonstrated  to  your  mind.  There,  thanks  to  the  truly  scien-
tific method,  nothing  is  contestable.  '  We  leave  the  most  simple
and  elementary  facts  to  rise  to  the  most  complicated  ones,  the
physical  and  apparent  facts  for  the  more  hidden  psychological
facts  which  are  more  difficult  to  interpret.'  At  Nancy,  on  the
contrary,  you  seem  to  say,  we  neglect  the  most  elementary  and
plain  physical  phenomena,  and  try  above  all  to  make  the  most
extraordinary  and  the  most  striking  facts  stand  out  in  relief.
We  push  suggestion  too  far  perhaps,  and  perhaps  also  the
physician's  imagination  counts  for  something  in  the  therapeutic
results,  or  the  psychological  phenomena  which  we  pretend  to
develop.

"  My  reply  is  to  this  fundamental  objection,  for  it  is  the  direct-
ing idea  of  your  study.

•'  No  one  regards  the  work  of  the  Salpêtrière  School  more
justly  than  I  do.  I  am  too  much  a  pupil  of  M.  Charcot,  I  owe
him  too  great  a  part  of  my  medical  education,  not  to  render  the
homage  which  is  due  to  the  eminent  master  whose  name  will
always  be  an  honor  to  the  French  School  of  Medicine.

"But  I  do  not  accept  blindly — does  the  master  himself  do  so?
Does  he  accept  all  the  scientific  assertions  coming  from  all  the
pupils  which  succeed  one  another  upon  this  fruitful  field  of
observation  ?  Science  advances  slowly  over  thousands  of  diffi-
culties ;  new  facts  daily  appear  to  contradict  or  to  modify  the
acquisitions  which  we  believed  to  be  assured  only  the  day
before  ;  real  truth  is  long  in  disengaging  itself  from  the  dross
which  hides  it.

"  If  I  have  not  accepted  the  three  phases  of  hysterical  hypno-
tism as  M.  Charcot  describes  them,  lethargy,  catalepsy,  and  som-
nambulism, for  the  point  of  departure  in  my  studies,  it  is
because  I  have  not  been  able  to  confirm  their  existence  by  my
own  observations.

"As  I  stated  before  the  Biological  Society,  suggestion,  that  is
to  say  the  penetration  of  the  idea  of  the  phenomenon  into  the
subject's  mind  by  word,  gesture,  sight,  or  imitation,  has  seemed
to  me  to  be  the  key  of  all  the  hypnotic  phenomena  that  I  have
observed.  The  phenomena  said  to  be  physiological  or  physical,
have  seemed  to  me  in  large  part   if  not  entirely,  psychical  phe-

1 84  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

nomena.  I  do  not  claim  to  explain  by  suggestion  the  facts
stated  by  other  observers.  I  only  hold  to  my  statement,  that  I
have  not  been  able  to  produce  them  without  suggestion.  There-
fore, was  it  necessary  to  take  as  a  starting  point  for  my
researches  the  elementary,  physical,  and  apparent  facts  which
you  mentioned,  but  which  I  have  not  been  able  to  demonstrate
myself?  Have  I  then  fallen  from  the  truly  scientific  method
because  I  have  reasoned  only  from  what  I  have  seen  ?

"  Moreover,  if  I  admit  that  these  facts  of  a  purely  physical  or
physiological  order  may  be  exact  and  constant,  is  it  true  to  say
that  they  are  simpler,  and  more  elementary,  and  easier  of  inter-
pretation than  the  psychological  facts  which  we  have  observed  ?
Is  it  true,  that  one  can  rise  from  the  most  simple  ones  to  others
more  complex  and  delicate?  I  answer,  not  at  all,  because  these
facts  are  of  an  absolutely  different  order.

"  Suggestive  phenomena  have  their  analogies  in  normal
and  pathological  life.  Nature  produces  them  spontaneously.
Paralyses,  contractures,  anaesthesia,  sensorial  illusions  and  hallu-
cinations, are  present  in  natural  somnambulism,  in  hysteria,  in
mental  alienation,  in  alcoholism,  and  in  other  intoxications.
They  are  present  in  us  all  in  normal  sleep.  Hypnotized  natur-
ally, we  are  all  susceptible  to  suggestions  and  hallucinations  by
our  own  impressions  or  by  impressions  coming  from  others.
M.  Alfred  Maury  has  thoroughly  studied  these  hallucinations
which  are  called  hypnagogic,  and  which  appear  in  the  period
preceding  sleep.  Some  people  are  also  beset  by  them  during
the  period  immediately  subsequent  to  the  awakening.

"  We  reproduce  artificially  that  which  is  liable  to  be  produced
spontaneously.

"  Far  from  considering  these  facts  as  marvellous,  I  have  tried
to  reconcile  them  with  the  analogous  facts  which  exist  in  the
physiological  condition.  I  have  called  upon  the  automatism  of
daily  life,  reflective  and  instinctive  acts,  credulity,  imitation,  and
the  influence  of  idea  over  action  ;  I  have  risen  from  sugges-
tion in  the  normal,  to  suggestion  in  the  hypnotic  condition,  and
if  you  will  re-read  chapter  eighth  of  my  memoir  (Chapter  VIII.
of  this  book),  you  will  there  find  my  ideas,  which  you  yourself
have  published  after  me  in  other  terms.

"  I  add  that  all  observers  have  confirmed  the  psychological
phenomena  which  we,  as  well  as  M.  Richet  and  others,  have
related.      No  one  disputes  them.     On  the  other  hand,  we  have

Suggestive   Therapeutics,  1S5

not  been  able  to  verify  the  phenomena  which  are  supposed  to  be
physical.

"  These  have  no  analogy  in  normal  and  pathological  life.  Xo
lesion,  no  experiment  upon  the  scalp,  has  ever  produced  a  con-
tracture, a  paralysis,  or  a  partial  somnambulism  upon  the  part  of
the  body  corresponding  to  the  underlying  cortical  region  of  the
brain.  Is  this  a  simple  fact  easy  to  interpret,  that  by  touching
the  skin  an  effect  is  produced  which  is  transmitted  across  the
scalp,  the  cranium,  and  the  meninges,  to  the  brain,  to  localize
itself  in  the  zone  corresponding  to  that  where  the  hand  was
applied?

"  Xo  interpretation  exists  in  the  present  condition  of  science.
If  the  fact  were  confirmed,  it  would  be  necessary  to  turn  back  to
the  hypothesis  of  a  fluid  or  of  an  emanation  of  some  kind,  dis-
engaging itself  from  the  operator's  hand,  and  capable  of  travers-
ing the  membranous  and  osseous  envelops  of  the  brain  ;  it  would
be  necessary  to  turn  back  to  mesmerism,  and  admit  two  abso-
lutely distinct  orders  of  phenomena  in  the  hypnotic  condition  :
suggestive  phenomena  (and  these  are  easier  to  conceive  of)  ;  and
fluid  phenomena  (and  these  are  absolutely  impossible  to  inter-
pret, and  can  in  no  way  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  conception  of
the  former).  At  Xancy  we  have  studied  only  phenomena  of
suggestion.

"  A  second  fault  in  method  which  we  may  have  committed,
and  which  in  your  opinion  was  calculated  to  increase  public
astonishment,  is  to  have  carried  on  our  experiments  with  healthy
subjects  and  not  with  subjects  characterized  by  some  disease.
This  objection  will  astonish  all  scientific  men.  I  am  not  aware
that  physiologists  choose  sick  animals  in  which  to  observe  the
phenomena  of  the  living  organism,  and  that  psychologists  begin
by  studying  pathological  minds  in  order  to  analyze  the  faculties
of  the  understanding.  And  shall  we,  studying  phenomena  of
induced  sleep,  devote  ourselves  to  cases  of  hysteria,  in  which  the
symptoms  of  normal  hypnotism  may  be  perverted  by  abnormal
or  pathological  reactions?  When  a  hypnotized  hysterical  sub-
ject is  seized  with  general  convulsions,  or  with  a  limited  con-
tracture— with  trismus  for  example,  as  I  have  seen — when  she
passes  from  the  hypnotic  sleep  into  the  hysterical  sleep,  as  I
have  also  seen,  in  addition  to  other  characteristics,  do  you  think
that  research  into  the  phenomena  connected  with  the  hypnotic
condition  would  be  facilitated  by  the  addition  of  those  connected

1 86  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

with  hysteria  ?  For  the  hypnotic  condition  and  the  hysterical
condition  are  absolutely  different  things.  And  here  I  touch
upon  a  question  which  among  them  all  has  the  greatest  hold
upon  your  heart.

"  Yielding  to  the  evidence  of  facts,  you  wish  to  accept  the
reality  of  hypnotic  suggestions  ;  but,  obedient  to  a  certain  set  of
ideas,  you  think  that  suggestion  can  only  be  provoked  in  nervous
subjects,  that  the  hypnotic  condition  is  a  neurosis,  the  congener
of  hysteria,  which,  exceptionally  and  under  a  rudimentary  form,
may  be  provoked  in  ordinary  subjects,  but  which,  characterized
by  all  its  features,  requires  an  hysterical  or  neuropathic  ground  to
work  on.  You  seem  to  think  that  when  we  state  that  we  have
had  nothing  to  do  with  hysterical  or  neuropathic  cases,  it  is
forcing  the  truth  a  little  for  the  sake  of  provoking  not  only
astonishment  but  fear.  You  endeavor  to  show  that  my  precise
observations  only  treat  of  patients  with  nervous  affections  ;  that
for  all  others  the  diagnosis  would  be  '  badly  defined,  badly  char-
terized.'

"  I  reply  to  this  personal  argument.  Doubtless  many  of  my
observations  relate  to  nervous  affections,  for  the  reason  that  I
submit  nervous  affections  especially  to  hypnotization,  using  it  as
a  therapeutic  means  to  an  end.  It  is  not  my  custom  to  hypno-
tize all  patients  indifferently.  I  choose  those  to  whom  I  believe
it  may  be  beneficial.  For  this  reason,  nervous  cases  are  in  the
majority,  but  I  assure  you  that  a  very  large  number  of  observa-
tions refer  to  subjects  who  are  not  at  all  nervous.  On  one  occa-
sion, I  hypnotized  nearly  a  whole  ward  full  of  patients  in  M.
Liégeois's  presence.  The  majority  of  them  were  recovering
from  phthisis,  emphysema,  and  rheumatism  ;  only  two  out  of
twenty  were  hysterical.

"  Among  my  observations,  you  mention  the  case  of  an  old
sergeant  who  worked  in  the  founderies,  and  had  been  wounded  in
the  head  at  Patay,  by  the  bursting  of  a  bomb.  You  mention  him
as  affected  with  very  grave  nervous  troubles.  I  say  in  vain  '  that
his  intelligence  is  clear,  that  he  has  no  nervous  history,  that  he
has  no  attacks  of  spontaneous  somnambulism.'  In  spite  of  my
words,  you  affirm  '  very  grave  nervous  troubles,'  which  do  not
exist.  Again,  you  qualify  as  neuropathic,  a  case  of  gastralgia,
because  I  speak  of  rachialgia,  and  you  define  rachialgia  as  an
affection  of  the  spinal  cord,  which  is  not  exact.  The  spinal
column  is  no  more  the  spinal  cord,  than  the  cranium  is  the  brain.

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  i  S  7

All  physicians  know  that  affections  of  the  stomach  are  accom-
panied with  spinal  pain,  and  that  this  sensibility  does  not  imply
an\-  medullar}-  trouble.     Our  case  had  no  such  trouble.

When  I  speak  of  a  sailor  employed  on  a  railroad  as  affected
with  chronic  articular  rheumatism,  and  add,  '  He  is  an  intelligent
man,  well-balanced,  quite  cultivated,  not  in  the  least  nervous  or
credulous,'  and  that  I  have  been  able  to  put  him  into  deep
somnambulism  and  induce  hypnotic  and  post-hypnotic  sugges-
tions, I  state,  as  it  seems  to  me,  a  well-defined,  well-characterized
fact.  I  could  furnish  further  details,  describe  the  state  of  his
joints,  trace  out  completely  the  growth  of  his  rheumatism,
question  his  heredity,  and  load  the  case  which  I  desired  to
mention  with  details  which  are  useless  to  the  end  in  view  ;  but  I
have  told  all  that  I  need  tell.

"  I  relate  the  case  '  of  a  very  intelligent  man,  not  at  all  nerv-
ous, of  high  social  position,  and  very  healthy,'  to  whom  I  success-
full}'  suggested  a  post-hypnotic  olfactory  hallucination  during
sleep.  I  relate  some  of  the  phenomena  of  suggestion  in  the
waking  and  sleeping  condition,  produced  in  a  convalescent  boy?
fourteen  years  old,  affected  with  catarrhal  nephritis  ; — '  A  boy  of
lymphatic  disposition;  intelligent,  having  had  a  good  primary
education,  showing  no  nervous  trouble.'  I  could  have  specified
a  hundred  like  facts.  However,  you  do  me  the  honor  to  believe
that  I  am  quick  to  discern  the  nervous  perturbations  of  the
organism,  and  that  I  have  enough  scientific  coolness  not  to  allow
myself  to  compromise  with  the  truth.

"  Doubtless  we  all  have  nervous  systems  ;  we  all  possess  a  cer-
tain nervous  impressionability.  In  order  to  act  upon  the  psychi-
cal being,  a  certain  disposition,  a  certain  cerebral  receptivity  is
required  for  hypnotic  suggestion.  The  subject  must  know  how
to  concentrate  his  mind,  and  how  to  saturate  it,  so  to  speak,
with  the  idea  of  sleep.  But  this  special  disposition,  which  is  pos-
sessed to  a  certain  degree  by  many  people,  is  not  at  all  the  exclu-
sive characteristic  of  neuropathy  and  hysteria.  It  is  true  to  say
that  it  is  often  very  strongly  marked  in  hysterical  cases,  since
they  are  sometimes  put  in  somnambulism  by  nothing  at  all.  In
any  case,  that  is  far  from  being  constant.  There  are  hysterical
patients  who,  as  you  say,  are  difficult  to  hypnotize.  Among
cases  of  neuropathy  there  are  also  refractory  subjects.  The
insane,  cases  of  melancholia,  and  of  hypochondriasis,  and  people
of  mobile  imagination,  who  do    not    know  how  to    concentrate

1 88  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

their  attention,  those  who  are  entirely  absorbed  by  emotion,
whose  minds  are  preoccupied  by  various  ideas, — all  these  oppose
a  conscious  or  unconscious  moral  resistance  to  suggestion.  The
wish  or  the  idea  of  sleep  must  be  present.  Common  people,
soldiers,  artisans,  those  who  are  accustomed  to  passive  obedience,
and  those  who  have  docile  dispositions,  have  seemed  to  me  the
quickest  to  receive  suggestion.  Intelligent,  well  balanced  men
of  sanguine  and  lymphatic  disposition,  who  know  how  to  con-
centrate their  attention  without  preoccupation  or  retrospection,
sleep  better  when  they  wish  to,  than  certain  neuropathic  men
who  cannot  fix  their  minds  upon  anything.

"  In  reality,  ordinary  sleep  does  not  differ  from  hypnotic  sleep.
To  be  subject  to  my  influence  it  is  sufficient  that  a  person  goes
to  sleep  voluntarily  and  naturally  before  me,  with  his  thoughts
fixed  on  me.  I  recently  found  a  poor  phthisical  patient  asleep.
I  had  never  hypnotized  her.  Touching  her  lightly  with  my
hand  I  said,  '  Do  not  wake,  sleep,  continue  to  sleep,  you  cannot
wake.'  In  two  minutes  I  lifted  both  arms.  They  remained
cataleptic.  After  having  said  that  she  would  wake  up  again  in
three  minutes,  I  left  her.  At  the  time  indicated  she  waked,
and  I  went  back  to  talk  to  her.  She  did  not  remember  anything.
Here  then  was  a  natural  sleep,  during  which  I  was  able  to  put
myself  into  relationship  with  the  sleeping  subject,  and  that
alone  constituted  the  hypnotic  sleep.  How  was  it  possible  to
establish  the  relationship?  I  suppose  that  the  patient  began  to
wake,  but  that  my  command  to  continue  sleeping  prevented  the
complete  awakening.  The  patient  passed  into  the  sleep  called
hypnotic,  that  is,  she  was  in  relation  with  me.  A  mother  finds
her  child  asleep,  she  speaks  to  it,  the  child  answers  ;  she  gives  it
a  drink,  the  child  drinks,  then  goes  off  again  into  its  inertia,  and
upon  waking  has  forgotten  all.  The  child  has  in  reality  been
hypnotized,  that  is,  it  has  been  in  relationship  with  its  mother.
I  believe  that  all  men  can  be  hypnotized,  but  we  do  not  know
the  methods  by  which  this  can  be  done.  When  a  sure  and  con-
stant soporific  agent  shall  be  discovered,  provoking  sleep  rapidly
without  modifying  the  psychical  disposition,  so  that  the  subject
may  sleep  with  his  thoughts  fixed  on  the  person  present, — then
perhaps  no  one  will  escape  from  the  suggestive  influence  of
others,  as  no  one  escapes  from  the  hallucinatory  suggestions  pro-
voked by  his  own  impressions  in  the  normal  sleep.

"You  ço  so  far  as  to  think  that  the  success  of  M.  Liébault's

Suggestive   Therapeutics,  1S9

experiments  has  created  a  sort  of  suggestive  epidemic  at  Nancy,
as  epidemics  of  somnambulism,  of  magnetism,  and  of  mesmerism
are  created.  And  to  support  this  opinion  you  say  that  in  the
Paris  hospitals  spontaneous  somnambulism  is  very  rare,  while  at
Nancy  very  much  more  of  it  seems  to  be  met  with  of  late.
That  is  not  accurate  information.  Spontaneous  somnambu-
lism is  as  rare  at  Nancy  as  at  Paris.  I  have  never  seen  it  at  our
hospitals,  and  neither  have  my  colleagues.  Our  hypnotized  sub-
jects never  have  attacks  of  spontaneous  somnambulism.

"  As  to  artificially  induced  sleep,  M.  Chas.  Richet  obtains  it  as
easily  in  Paris  as  we  do  in  Nancy.  Dr.  Bremaud  also  obtains  it
readily  at  Brest.  I  myself  have  recently  successfully  experi-
mented in  a  Paris  Salon  upon  a  young  man  twenty  years  of  age,
and  upon  two  men  forty  years  of  age.  None  of  them  were  at
all  neuropathic,  and  yet  I  do  not  believe  that  I  imported  the
microbe  of  the  epidemic  from  Nancy  to  Paris.  One  of  these
experiments  deserves  to  be  related,  as  it  is  particularly  instruct-
ive. It  was  the  case  of  a  handsome,  well  developed  boy  of  more
than  ordinary  intelligence,  and  positive  character,  the  first  to  be
promoted  in  one  of  our  large  schools  for  superior  scientific
instruction.  Wishing  to  be  enlightened  upon  the  question  of
hypnotism,  he  himself  asked  to  be  put  to  sleep,  promising  to
submit  in  earnest,  and  without  resistance.  In  less  than  two
minutes  his  eyelids  closed.  Suggestive  catalepsy,  contracture
and  automatic  movements  were  present.  Upon  awaking  he  said
he  had  heard  everything,  but  as  he  had  promised  to  obey  with-
out resistance,  he  had  obeyed.  '  Could  you  have  resisted  ?  '  I
asked.  '  When  1  lifted  your  arms  could  you  have  dropped
them,  in  spite  of  my  affirmation  to  the  contrary?'  'I  think
so,'  he  said,  '  but  I  am  not  certain.  Once  I  began  to  lower  my
arm  (which  in  fact  had  been  noticeable)  but  as  I  was  about  to  do
it,  a  feeling  of  remorse  took  hold  of  me.  I  lifted  it  again  saying
to  myself,  no,  I  ought  not  to  lower  it.'  Was  this  the  result  of  a
wish  to  be  obliging  ?

"The  young  man  did  not  himself  know  what  to  think.  Half
an  hour  later  he  begged  me  to  hypnotize  him  again,  as  he  was
curious,  and  wished  to  be  enlightened.  In  less  than  a  minute,
he  was  again  influenced.  I  lifted  his  legs  and  arms.  They
remained  up.  Then  I  said  to  him,  '  Now,  make  the  experi-
ment ;  try  to  lower  your  arms  and  legs.  If  you  can,  if  you  have
the  will-power,  use   it,  but   I   warn   you  that  you    cannot  do  it."

1 90  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

He  tried  in  vain,  and  in  spite  of  all  his  visible  efforts,  did  not  suc-
ceed in  modifying  the  suggested  attitude.  I  made  him  turn  his
arms  one  about  the  other.  '  Try  to  stop  them  ;  I  say  you  can-
not.' In  fact,  he  could  not  stop  this  rotatory  automatic  move-
ment. When  he  was  awakened  he  was  convinced  that  it  was  not
only  the  result  of  a  wish  to  be  obliging,  but  there  was  also  pres-
ent a  material  impossibility  of  resisting  the  suggested  action.

"  I  have  repeated  this  experiment  with  a  great  number  of  sub-
jects.

"  Chas.  Richet,  relating  analogous  examples,  has  described  this
singular  psychical  state  well.  Many  imagine  that  they  have  not
been  influenced,  because  they  have  heard  everything.  They
believe  in  good  faith  that  they  have  been  pretending.  It  is
sometimes  difficult  to  show  them  that  they  were  not  able  to
pretend.

"  This  digression  supports  my  conclusion  :  that  hypnosis  is  not
a  variety  of  hysteria,  is  not  a  morbid  condition  which  takes
hold  of  neuropathic  cases.  It  is  a  physiological  condition,  as
natural  sleep  is,  from  which  it  can  be  derived.  It  can  be  induced
to  a  certain  degree  in  the  majority  of  subjects.  The  most
intense  degree,  profound  somnambulism,  is  neither  rare  nor
difficult  to  obtain.

"  Must  we  conclude  that  these  facts  will  inspire  terror  in  the
masses,  that  people  are  destined  to  universal  hallucination,  and
that  a  look  cast  upon  a  passer-by  is  sufficient  to  hypnotize  him  ?
This  is  an  exaggeration  against  which  as  a  moralist  and  a
philosopher  you  have  wisely  forwarned  the  public.

"No  magnetizer  exists.  No  magnetic  fluid  exists.  Neither
Donato  nor  Hansen  have  special  hypnotic  virtues.  The  in-
duced sleep  does  not  depend  upon  the  hypnotizer,  but  upon  the
subject  ;  it  is  his  own  faith  which  puts  him  to  sleep.  No  one
can  be  hypnotized  against  his  will,  if  he  resists  the  com-
mand. I  am  glad  to  join  you  in  re-assuring  the  public  against
all  chimerical  fear  which  a  false  interpretation  of  the  facts  might
produce.

"  Is  this  saying  that  justice  and  human  morality  have  no  rea-
son to  be  moved  by  these  facts,  that  all  is  said,  that  all  is  fore-
seen, that  all  is  for  the  best  in  the  best  judiciary  organizations?
It  would  be  prejudice  perhaps  to  shut  one's  eyes  to  a  pregnant
truth.  You  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  lawyers  and
philosophers   have  greatly   profited   by   these    studies,  and   that

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  191

M.  Liégeois  must  be  thanked  for  having  brought  the  question
before  an  academic  tribunal.

"  Induced  somnambulism  is  manifested  in  extreme  cases  ;  those
in  which  the  act  suggested  forces  itself  with  an  irresistible  sua)-.
But  nothing  happens  in  the  profound  sleep  which  has  not  its
analog}*,  its  diminutive,  if  I  may  so  express  it,  in  the  waking
condition.  Sleep  exaggerates  physiological  automatism,  it  does
not  create  it.  Between  the  fatal  suggestion  and  the  absolutely
voluntary  determination,  all  degrees  may  exist.  And  who  can
analyze  all  the  suggested  elements  which,  unknown  to  us,  come
into  the  actions  we  believe  to  be  of  our  own  initiative?

"Truth  is  never  dangerous;  ignorance  alone  is  disarmed.
You  speak  of  universal  hallucination.  It  existed,  when  it  was
not  known,  when  no  one  suspected  the  singular  facility  with
which  artificial  hallucination  could  be  realized.  It  existed  when
a  naïve  faith  in  sorcery  blinded  the  best  minds,  as  if  implanted
in  the  human  brain  by  suggestion  ; — when  meetings  of  witches,
sorcery,  nightmares,  malicious  spirits,  and  all  phantoms  evoked
by  the  imagination  were  considered  as  realities,  when  trem-
bling science  did  not  dare,  in  face  of  the  funeral  pile,  to  beard
all-powerful  religious  superstition.  What  crimes,  what  catas-
trophes, what  judicial  errors  might  have  been  spared  poor
humanity,  if  scientific  truth  had  been  able  to  show  itself  !  The
history  of  the  devil,  of  witchcraft,  of  evil  possessions,  the  history
of  demoniacal  epidemics,  these  collective  suggested  hallucina-
tions weigh  like  a  frightful  nightmare  upon  the  centuries  which
precede  our  own,  and  in  our  day  still,  what  superstitions  sug-
gested by  the  blinding  of  a  coarse  faith  will  disappear  like
shadows  under  the  torch  of  scientific  truth  !

"To  conclude  this  too  long  reply,  allow  me  to  add,  honored
master,  that  I  have  deeply  meditated  upon  these  words  of
Bacon's:  'The  human  mind  does  not  sincerely  receive  the
light  thrown  upon  things,  but  mixes  therewith  its  own  will  and
passions;  thus  it  makes  a  science  to  its  taste;  for  the  truth
that    man    most   willingly  receives,   is   the    one    he    desires."'

PART    II.

THE  APPLICATION  OF  SUGGESTION  TO   THERAPEUTICS.

CHAPTER  I.

Imagination  as  a  therapeutic  agent. — Talismans  and  amulets. — The  therapeutic
effect  of  magnets. — Report  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Medicine  upon  the  mag-
netotherapy of  Abbot  Lenoble.— Medicinal  magnetism  falls  into  discredit,  and
is  again  revived. — Various  practices,  ancient  and  modern  ;  the  healers. — Obser-
vations upon  cures  effected  through  the  influence  of  the  imagination. — Observa-
tions upon  the  miraculous  cures  at  Lourdes. — Therapeutic  suggestion. — The  hyp-
notic condition  exalts  susceptibility  to  suggestion. — Cures  obtained  by  the  ancient
magnetizers. — Braid's  doctrine  ;  his  theoretical  ideas  upon  the  mechanism  of  the
cures. — M.  Liébault's  method  ;  suggestion  by  speech. — A  general  picture  of  the
results  obtained  ;  the  various  methods  of  suggestion. — Failure  inherent  in  the
disease  or  in  the  subject. — Auto-suggestionists.

What  a  powerful  worker  of  miracles  is  the  human  imagina-
tion !  Upon  it  is  based  the  therapeutic  virtue  of  talismans  and
amulets.

"  From  the  time,"  says  Charpignon,*  "  that  stones  were  worn
attached  to  the  breastplates  of  the  Jewish  priests  and  to  the
girdles  of  the  priests  of  Cybele,  from  the  time  that  beetle-shaped,
hand-shaped,  and  circular  stones  were  worn  by  the  Orientals,
Greeks,  and  Romans,  down  to  the  cameos  of  our  modern  ladies,
all  these  objects  have  represented  the  magic  talisman  of  ancient
and  mysterious  power."

"  Paracelsus,  the  great  partisan  of  occultism,  recognized,"  this
author  goes  on  to  say,  "  the  cause  of  the  effects  produced  by
magnets  and  similar  objects,  for  he  wrote  these  wise  words:
1  Whether  the  object  of  your  faith  be  real  or  false,  you  will
nevertheless  obtain  the  same  effects.  Thus,  if  I  believe  in  St.
Peter's  statue  as  I  would  have  believed  in  St.  Peter  himself,  I
will  obtain  the  same  effects  that  I  would  have  obtained  from
St.  Peter; — but  that  is  superstition.     Faith,  however,  produces

*  Charpignon,    Etudes  sur  la   Médecine  animique  et  vitahsle.      Paris,   G.  Baillière,
I864.

192

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  193

miracles,  and  whether  it  be  a  true  or  a  false  faith,  it  will  always
produce  the  same  wonders.'  "

Let  us  compare  the  words  uttered  by  Pierre  Ponponazzi  of
Milan,  an  author  of  the  sixteenth  century,  with  these.  They
are  given  by  Hack  Tuke.*

"  We  can  easily  conceive  the  marvellous  effects  which  confi-
dence and  imagination  can  produce,  particularly  when  both
qualities  are  reciprocal  between  the  subjects  and  the  person  who
influences  them.  The  cures  attributed  to  the  influence  of  certain
relics,  are  the  effect  of  this  imagination  and  confidence.  Quacks
and  philosophers  know  that  if  the  bones  of  any  skeleton  were
put  in  place  of  the  saints'  bones,  the  sick  would  none  the  less
experience  beneficial  effects,  if  they  believed  that  they  were  near
veritable  relics."

The  magnetic  stone  which  the  Egyptians  used  in  the  prepara-
tion of  their  prophylactic  amulets,  has  cured  gouty  pains,  head-
aches, toothaches,  and  hysteria,  from  time  immemorial.  In  the
last  century,  the  artificial  magnets  made  by  Father  Hell,  the  cele-
brated astronomer  of  Vienna,  and  used  in  the  form  of  magnetic
armatures,  cured  spasms,  convulsions,  and  paralyses.  As  applied
constantly  by  Abbot  Lenoble  they  were  no  less  efificacious  in
grave  nervous  affections.

Let  us  dwell  a  little  upon  the  subject  of  magneto-therapeutics,
because,  together  with  the  metallo-therapeutics  of  Burcq,  it  has
been  a  true  forerunner  of  hypnotic  therapeutics  ;  the  medicinal
magnetism  of  Father  Hell  preceded  the  animal  magnetism  of
Mesmer:  and  modern  magneto-therapeutics  has  led  to  thera-
peutic suggestion.

Abbot  Lenoble,  who  succeeded,  by  means  of  the  most  perfect
methods,  in  making  artificial  magnets  of  a  power  before  unknown,
and  in  testing  their  therapeutic  application,  established  a  depot
for  his  magnets  in  Paris,  in  1771.  He  announced  that  certain
pieces,  such  as  bracelets,  and  magnetic  crosses,  were  to  be  applied
to  the  wrist,  to  the  chest,  etc.  In  1777,  he  confided  the  care  of
verifying  the  exactitude  of  his  assertions  to  the  Royal  Society  of
Medicine.  The  Royal  Society  entrusted  Andry  and  Thouret
with  the  repetition  of  these  experiments.     The  remarkable  report

*  Hack  Tuke,  Le  Corps  et  V Esprit.  Action  du  moral  et  de  I , imagination  sur  le
physique.     Paris,  1886.

13

1 94  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

made  by  these  authors,  and  entered  in  the  Society's  memoirs,  is
marked  with  the  stamp  of  a  judicious  and  truly  scientific  spirit.

Andry  and  Thouret  reported  forty-eight  cases  in  which  the
magnet  was  tested  by  them,  or  in  their  presence.  The  cases
observed  comprised  toothache,  nervous  pains  in  the  head  and
loins,  rheumatic  pains,  facial  neuralgia,  tic  douleureux,  stomach
spasms,  spasmodic  hiccough,  palpitation,  different  kinds  of
tremor,  convulsions,  and  hystero-epilepsy,  etc.

Among  the  effects  observed,  a  large  number  occurred  a  short
time  after  the  application  of  the  magnet.  In  some  cases,  sharp
neuralgic  pains  in  the  face  were  each  time  soothed  by  the  con-
tact of  the  magnet.  Spasmodic  and  convulsive  symptoms  dis-
appeared rapidly  after  its  application  ;  a  nervous  cough  was
instantly  soothed,  and  did  not  re-appear.  In  one  case,  convul-
sive movements  of  the  arm,  and  contracture  preventing  the  use
of  the  hand,  ceased,  or  were  notably  diminished  in  the  course  of
a  day.  Rheumatic  pains  were  soothed,  and  in  cases  where  they
returned  after  the  removal  of  the  armature,  they  disappeared
upon  replacing  the  armature.  In  others,  similar  pains,  calmed
by  the  action  of  the  magnet,  appeared  again  in  different  parts  of
the  body;  they  were  dissipated  by  the  local  application  of  cer-
tain magnetic  pieces.  Moreover  in  cases  of  toothache,  the
application  of  the  magnet  was  sometimes  followed  by  prompt
and  obvious  relief.  Sometimes  too,  when  a  magnet  did  not
soothe  the  pains  or  other  symptoms  against  which  it  would  have
been  efficacious  in  other  patients,  relief  was  gained  by  prolonging
the  application,  or  by  using  a  stronger  magnet.  Finally,  this
agent  has  at  times  seemed  to  augment  troubles,  and  to  create
sensations  not  before  experienced.

In  one  case,  the  application  of  a  magnetic  head-band  was
followed  by  headache  and  fever,  which  ceased  when  the  band
was  removed.  An  epileptic  patient  experienced  slight  but
recurrent  attacks  of  syncope,  which  ceased  as  soon  as  the  mag-
netic pieces  were  removed  ;  the  epileptic  attacks  also  seemed  to
increase  in  intensity.  Another  patient,  with  nervous  paralysis,
had  the  same  syncope  a  short  time  after  the  application  of  the
magnet.  Various  sensations  were  noticed  each  time  the  magnetic
applications  were  renewed,  sensations  of  heat  in  the  affected
parts,  vertigo,  nausea,  palpitation,  headache,  itching,  twitching,
intestinal  movements,  etc.  To  sum  up, — without  excessive
enthusiasam,  in  the  light  of  irrefutable  facts,  the  commissioners

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  195

of  the  Royal  Society  of  Medicine  recognized  in  medicinal  mag-
netism a  real  and  efficacious  agent,  not  against  organic  affections,
but  against  nervous  troubles  of  various  kinds,  the  exact  nature
of  which  remain  to  be  determined.

Following  Andry  and  Thouret,  several  good  observers,  among
whom  may  be  mentioned  Marcellin,  Halle,  Laennec,  Alibert,
Cayol,  Chomel,  Récamier,  and  Alexandre  Lebreton,  tested  the
truth  of  the  majority  of  these  observations.  Trousseau  says  in
the  Dictionnaire  de  Medicine  of  1833, — "  as  for  us,  who  have  some-
times made  use  of  the  magnet,  we  can  state  that  this  therapeutic
agent  exercises  an  influence  over  the  parts  with  which  it  comes
into  contact,  an  influence  which  it  is  impossible  to  refer  to  the
patient's  imagination.  I  have  seen  neuralgic  pain  modified,
attacks  of  nervous  dyspnoea  rapidly  checked,  etc.  Laennec  is
gratified  with  the  effects  of  the  magnet  in  the  treatment  of
angina  pectoris.  I  have  been  able  to  gather  two  facts  myself,
which  prove  that,  if  the  magnet  does  not  cure  disease,  it  can  at
least  moderate  its  intensity.  Incontestable  cures  have  been  per-
formed in  cases  of  rheumatism,  temporary  it  is  true,  as  they
almost  always  are;  and  in  support  of  this  we  can  cite  the  history
of  a  French  marshal,  whose  rheumatic  pains  could  only  be
relieved  by  the  use  of  magnetic  armatures."  In  spite  of  Trous-
seau's words,  all  these  experiments  were  lost  in  profound  obliv-
ion. The  discredit  attached  to  the  practice  of  animal  magnetism
which,  instead  of  prospering  as  it  might  have  done  on  the  ground
of  scientific  observation,  had  turned  with  Mesmer  into  a  danger-
ous charlatanism, — this  discredit  seems  to  have  enveloped  the
practice  of  magneto-therapeutics  also.  The  magnet  lost  its  place
in  the  therapeutic  armamentarium.  When,  thirty-five  years  ago,
Dr.  Burcq  brought  his  doctrine  of  metallo-therapeutics  before
the  medical  world,  he  only  met  with  incredulity.  He  had  to
wait  until  1876,  before  his  voice  found  an  echo  in  the  Salpétrière.
Metallo-therapeutics,  and  with  it  magneto-therapeutics,  was  resus-
citated. Among  the  numerous  therapeutic  virtues  assigned  to
metals  and  magnets,  one  only  was  proved  and  put  beyond
doubt  ;  esthesiogenic  virtue.  The  magnet,  like  the  metals,  often
restored  lost  sensibility.

I  have  myself  begun  a  series  of  researches  to  distinguish  the
value  of  magneto-therapeutics  in  different  nervous  affections;
these  researches  have  been  published  in  the  Revue  Medicate  de
'Est,  iSSr.

1 96  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

In  certain  cases  I  have  demonstrated  a  real,  though  not  con-
stant efficacy,  in  regard  to  various  conditions.  But,  in  the
course  of  these  researches,  I  learned  the  suggestive  method  used
by  M.  Liébault,  and  I  showed  that  constant  and  rapid  thera-
peutic effects  could  be  obtained  in  another  manner.  What  the
magnet  produces,  simple  suggestion  always  produces,  and  I
asked  myself  if  the  therapeutic  virtue  of  metals  and  magnets
might  not  be  simply  a  suggestive  virtue.  One  of  my  observa-
tions, which  is  detailed  further  on,  speaks  for  this  view.  How-
ever, I  do  not  wish  to  state  positively  that  this  is.  the  case.  It
is  a  question  for  future  observation  to  answer.  It  is  certain  that
suggestion  plays  a  very  great  rôle  in  the  dynamic  effects
obtained.  The  medicine  of  magnets  and  metals  is  perhaps
only  a  medicine  of  the  imagination,  and,  if  Trousseau  had
been  able  to  see  what  can  be  done  by  the  imagination  in
hypnotic  sleep,  he  would  doubtless  not  have  attributed  the
therapeutic  influence  of  magnets  to  another  mechanism.

And  now,  without  further  emphasis,  the  possible  efficacy  of
various  practices  employed  for  the  cure  of  disease,  and  which
have  succeeded  each  other  from  ancient  to  modern  times,  will
be  readily  understood.  We  may  cite  the  invocations  of  the
Egyptian  priests  to  obtain  a  cure  from  each  god  for  those  sub-
mitted to  his  influence;  the  magic  formulas,  which  taught  the
use  of  herbs  against  disease;  the  medicine  of  Esculapius*
descendants  in  the  Asclepiads,  or  temples  of  this  god.  We  may
also  mention  Paracelsus'  sympathetic  powder  ;  Perkin's  metallic
tractors,  the  pseudo-metallic  (wooden)  but  none  the  less  effica-
cious tractors  of  Drs.  Haygarth  and  Falconer,  and  in  our  own
times  homeopathic  medicine,  and  the  medicine  of  Mattei.  Is  it
necessary  to  speak  of  the  king's  touch,  of  the  miraculous  cures
at  the  tomb  of  Deacon  Paris,  and  of  the  no  less  miraculous
cures  of  Knock,  in  Ireland,  and  especially  of  Lourdes,  in
France  ?  Or  is  it  necessary  to  mention  the  numerous  healers,  of
whom  some  were  honest  and  believed  themselves  to  be  endowed
with  supernatural  powers  like  certain  magnetizers,  and  who  used
suggestion  without  knowing  it,  as,  for  example,  the  Irishman
Gréatrakes,  the  German  priest,  Gassner,  the  Abbot  Prince  of
Hohenlohe,  Father  Mathew,  the  peasant  healer  in  the  environs
of  Saumur,  the  Zouave  Jacob,  and  many  others  whose  fame  does
not  extend  beyond  the  region  where  they  exercised  their  mys-
terious power.

Suggestive   Therapeutics,  197

Does  not  suggestion  claim  a  share  in  the  efficacy  of  certain
pharmaceutical,  hydro-therapeutic,  and  electrical  means  of  medi-
cation ?  "Dr.  John  Tanner,"  says  Hack  Tuke,  "has  recom-
mended the  application  of  electro-magnetism  to  the  tongue
exclusively,  for  the  treatment  of  hysterical  aphonia.  He  states
that  he  has  used  this  treatment  in  more  than  fifty  cases,  with-
out being  once  unsuccessful.  He  particularly  cites  four  cases.
In  the  first,  the  return  of  the  voice  was  made  evident  by  a  loud
cry;  in  the  second,  the  voice  returned  immediately;  in  the  third,
it  was  recovered  and  again  lost  in  the  space  of  ten  minutes,  but
re-application  of  the  treatment  brought  about  a  permanent  cure;
in  the  fourth  case,  there  was  also  instantaneous  return  of  the
voice."  Dr.  Tanner  adds  the  following  remarks  :  "  Before  using
electro-magnetism,  it  is  extremely  important  to  persuade  the
patient  that  he  will  be  cured  :  if  the  persuasive  efforts  are  use-
less, it  is  probable  that  the  treatment  will  be  inefficacious."

In  a  witty  study,  dedicated  by  Dr.  Lisle  to  the  medicine  of
the  imagination,  in  the  Union  Médicale  (24th  and  26th  Oct.,  1861)
and  entitled,  Homéopathie  orthodoxe,  this  influence  of  the  moral
over  the  physical  is  skilfully  presented.  For  the  sake  of  the
reader  who  may  wish  to  examine  into  this  subject  closely,  we
must  also  mention  Virey's  article  on  Imagination  in  the
Dictionnaire  des  sciences  médicales,  in  sixty  volumes,  the  works  of
Padioleau  {Médecine  morale),  and  of  Charpignon  (Etudes  stir  la
Médecine  animale  et  vitalisté)  ;  M.  Liébault's  book  (Du  Sommeil
et  des  Etats  analogues  considérés  surtout  au  point  de  vue  de  l'action
du  moral  sur  le  physique)  ;  and  especially  Hack  Tuke's  recent
work  (Le  Corps  et  l Esprit.  Action  du  moral  et  de  l'imagination
sur  le  physique).

Before  touching  upon  the  heart  of  our  subject,  which  is  thera-
peutic suggestion,  let  us  give  a  few  observations  upon  cures
obtained  through  the  influence  of  the  imagination,  according  to
these  authors  :  facts,  which  although  well  known  everywhere,
it  is  well  to  have  before  our  eyes,  because  they  show  that  what
we  are  doing  has  always  been  done.  Therapeutic  suggestion  is
not  new  ;  what  is  new,  is  the  mode  of  applying  it  methodically,
and  its  final  adoption  in  general  medicine.

Sobernheim,  cited  by  Charpignon,  tells  the  story  of  a  man
with  a  paralysis  of  the  tongue  which  had  yielded  to  no  form  of
treatment,  who  put  himself  under  a  certain  doctor's  care.  The
doctor  wished  to  try  an    instrument   of  his   own    invention,  with

1 98  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

which  he  promised  himself  to  get  excellent  results.  Before
performing  the  operation,  he  introduced  a  pocket  thermometer
into  the  patient's  mouth.  The  patient  imagined  it  to  be  the
instrument  which  was  to  save  him  ;  in  a  few  minutes  he  cried
out  joyfully  that  he  could  once  more  move  his  tongue  freely.

Among  our  cases,  facts  of  the  same  sort  will  be  found.  A
young  girl  came  into  my  service,  having  suffered  from  complete
nervous  aphonia  for  nearly  four  weeks.  After  making  sure  of
the  diagnosis,  I  told  my  students  that  nervous  aphonia  some-
times yielded  instantly  to  electricity,  which  might. act  simply  by
its  suggestive  influence.  I  sent  for  the  induction  apparatus.
Before  using  it  I  wanted  to  try  simple  suggestion  by  affirma-
tion. I  applied  my  hand  over  the  larynx  and  moved  it  a  little,
and  said  :  "  Now  you  can  speak  aloud."  In  an  instant  I  made
her  say  a,  then  b,  then  Marie.  She  continued  to  speak  dis-
tinctly ;  the  aphonia  had  disappeared.

"The  BibliotJicque  cJiosie  de  médecine,'''  says  Hack  Tuke,
"  gives  a  typical  example  of  the  influence  exercised  by  the  imag-
ination over  intestinal  action,  during  sleep.  The  daughter  of  the
consul  at  Hanover,  aged  eighteen,  intended  to  use  rhubarb,  for
which  she  had  a  particular  dislike,  on  a  following  day  ;  she
dreamt  that  she  had  taken  the  abhorred  dose.  Influenced  by
this  imaginary  rhubarb,  she  waked  up,  and  had  five  or  six  easy
evacuations.

The  same  result  is  seen  in  a  case  reported  by  Demangeon.
{De  F  Imagination,  1879).  "  A  monk  intended  to  purge  himself
on  a  certain  morning.  On  the  night  previous  he  dreamed  that
he  had  taken  the  medicine,  and  consequently  waked  up  to  yield
to  nature's  demands.     He  had  eight  movements."

But  among  all  the  moral  causes,  which,  appealing  to  the  imag-
ination, set  the  cerebral  mechanism  of  possible  cures  at  work,
none  is  as  efficacious  as  religious  faith.  Numbers  of  authentic
cures  have  certainly  been  due  to  it.

The  Princess  of  Schwartzenburg  had  suffered  for  eight  years
from  a  paraplegia,  for  which  the  most  celebrated  doctors  in
Germany  and  France  had  been  consulted.  In  1821,  the  Prince
of  Hohenlohe,  who  had  been  a  priest  since  18 15,  brought  a
peasant  to  the  princess  who  had  convinced  the  young  prince  of
the  power  of  prayer  in  curing  disease.  The  mechanical  appar-
atus which  had  been  used  by  Dr.  Heine  for  several  months  to
overcome    the    contracture    of    the    limbs,    was    removed.      The

Suggestive   Therapeutics,  199

prince  asked  the  paralytic  to  join  her  faith  to  both  his  and  the
peasant's. — "  Do  you  believe  you  are  already  helped?" — '"Oh,
yes!     I  believe  so  most  sincerely." — "  Well  !     Rise  and  walk."

At  these  words,  the  princess  rose  and  walked  around  the  room
several  times,  and  tried  going  up  and  down  stairs.  The  next
day  she  went  to  church,  and  from  this  time  on  she  had  the  use
of  her  limbs.     (Charpignon).

The  reader  of  course  understands  that  this  was  one  of  those
very  common  nervous  paralyses  which  often  exist  only  in  idea,
(ideal  paralysis),  and  which  are  at  times  susceptible  to  cure
through  violent  emotion.

The  same  thing  may  occur  in  hysterical  contractures.  Char-
cot says,  "  Deep  moral  emotion,  a  concurrence  of  events  which
strikes  the  imagination  vividly,  the  return  of  monthly  periods
which  have  not  occurred  for  a  longtime,  etc. — are  frequently  the
cause  of  these  prompt  cures."

In  this  hospital  I  have  seen  three  cases  of  this  kind,  of  which
I  will  give  a  brief  résumé  :

1st.  The  first  case  was  a  contracture  of  a  lower  limb,  dating
four  years  back  at  least.  On  account  of  the  patient's  bad  be-
haviour, I  was  obliged  to  give  her  a  vigorous  talking  tor  and  to
assure  her  that  I  would  send  her  away  if  she  did  not  do  better.
The  next  day,  the  contracture  disappeared  entirely.

2d.  The  second  case  was  also  one  of  contracture  limited  to
one  limb.  The  hysterical  crises,  properly  so-called,  had  been
absent  a  long  time.  The  woman  was  accused  of  robbery,  and
the  contracture,  which  had  lasted  more  than  two  years,  suddenly
vanished  on  account  of  the  moral  shock  which  this  accusation
produced.

3d.  In  the  third  case,  contracture  had  taken  a  hémiplégie
form  ;  the  right  side  was  affected,  and  the  upper  limb  especially.
The  cure  came  suddenly,  eighteen  months  after  the  appearance
of  the  contracture,  being  brought  about  by  a  very  animated  con-
troversy.

In  this  connection,  Charcot  cites  an  article  by  Littré,  published
in  the  Revue  de  philosophic  positive,  and  entitled,  Un  fragment
de  médecine  rétrospective  {Miracles  de  Saint  Louis),  in  which  is
found  the  history  of  several  cases  of  paralysis  cured  after  pil-
grimages to  Saint-Denis,  to  the  tomb  where  the  remains  of  the
King,  Louis  IX.,  had  just  been  placed.*

*  Charcot,  Leçons  sur  les  maladies  du  système  nerveux.     Paris,  1872-73.

200  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

I  give  a  résumé  of  some  of  the  histories  of  cures  which  took
place  at  Lourdes,  and  which  have  been  collected  by  M.  Henri
Lasserre.

Catherine  Latapie-Chouat  fell  from  an  oak  tree  in  Oct.,  1856.
Her  arm  and  hand  were  badly  dislocated.  The  reduction  of  the
dislocation  was  performed  successfully  ;  but,  in  spite  of  the  most
intelligent  care,  the  thumb,  index,  and  middle  fingers,  remained
fixedly  bent,  and  it  was  neither  possible  to  straighten  them  nor
to  make  them  move  in  any  way.  The  idea  of  going  to  the  Mas-
sabielle  grotto,  six  or  seven  kilometres  away  from  her  home,  came
into  her  mind.  She  got  there  at  daybreak,  and  after  praying,
went  to  bathe  her  hand  in  the  marvellous  water.  Her  hand  im-
mediately  straightened  out  ;  she  could  open  and  shut  her  fingers,
which  had  become  as  flexible  as  they  were  before  the  acci-
dent.

Among  our  cases,  analogous  examples  of  contracture  of  the
hand  will  be  found,  even  cases  of  organic  origin,  maintained  by  a
functional  nervous  state,  and  instantly  cured  by  the  use  of  sug-
gestion.

Marie  Lanou-Domeugé,  twenty-four  years  old,  had  been
troubled  with  incomplete  paralysis  of  the  whole  left  side  for
three  years.  She  could  not  take  a  step  without  help.  Hearing
the  Massabielle  spring  spoken  of,  the  peasant  sent  some  one  to
Lourdes  one  day  to  bring  a  little  of  this  healing  water  from  the
source  itself.  She  was  helped  to  get  up  and  dress  ;  two  people
lifted  her  and  she  stood,  both  of  them  supporting  her  by  the
shoulders.  Then  she  stretched  out  her  trembling  hand  and
plunged  her  fingers  into  the  glass  of  healing  water,  made  a  large
sign  of  the  cross,  put  the  glass  to  her  lips  and  drank  the  contents
slowly.  Then  she  straightened  herself  up,  shook  herself,  and
cried  out  in  triumphant  joy  ;  "  Let  me  go  !  Let  me  go  quickly  !
I  am  cured."  And  she  began  to  walk  as  if  she  had  never  been
paralyzed.

We  also  relate  the  story  of  an  old  woman,  who  for  two
months  had  not  been  able  to  stand,  and  who  walked  after  two
séances  of  hypnotic  suggestion.

According  to  the  doctors'  reports,  a  child  five  years  old,
named  Tambourné,  had  showed  symptoms  of  the  first  stage  of
coxalgia  for  two  months  ;  very  sharp  pains  in  the  knee,  dull
ones  in  the  hip,  external  rotation  in  the  foot,  lameness,  then
inability    to    walk   without    the    greatest  pain.      The    digestive

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  201

functions  became  disordered.  The  child  could  not  take  any
nourishment,  and  in  consequence  became  very  thin.  He  was
taken  to  the  grotto  in  his  mother's  arms  and  bathed  in  the
miraculous  water.  He  fell  into  a  sort  of  ecstatic  state.  His
eyes  were  wide  open  and  his  lips  were  apart.  "  What  is  the
matter  with  you  ?  "  asked  the  mother.  "  I  see  the  good  God
and  the  Holy  Virgin,"  he  replied.  When  he  came  to  himself
again,  the  child  cried  out, — "  Mother,  my  sickness  has  gone.  I
do  not  feel  any  more  pain.  I  can  walk."  He  walked  back  to
Lourdes,  and  has  been  well  ever  since.

M.  Charcot  recently  gave  a  clinical  lecture  upon  nervous
coxalgia,  and  said  :  "  We  know  by  the  observations  of  different
authors,  that  these  psychical  arthralgias,  whether  of  traumatic
origin  or  dependent  upon  some  other  cause,  are  sometimes
suddenly  cured  in  consequence  of  a  deep  emotion,  or  of  a  relig-
ious ceremony  forcibly  striking  the  imagination."

In  May,  1858,  Mile.  Massot-Bordenave  of  Arras,  fifty-three
years  of  age,  was  seized  with  an  illness  which  deprived  both  her
feet  and  hands  of  part  of  their  strength  and  power  of  movement.
The  fingers  were  semiflexed.  She  could  not  cut  her  own  bread.
She  went  on  foot  to  the  grotto,  and  bathed  her  feet  and  hands.
She  left  cured,  her  fingers  had  straightened  out  and  become
flexible  again.

In  January,  1858,  Mile.  Marie  Moreau,  sixteen  years  old,  had
some  trouble  with  her  eyes.  It  was  an  amaurosis.  The  sight  of
one  eye  seemed  to  be  lost  entirely,  and  the  other  was  in  a  very
bad  condition  ;  all  medicines  had  failed  to  help  her.  A  nine
days'  prayer  was  begun  on  November  8.  At  ten  o'clock  in  the
evening,  the  young  girl  dipped  a  linen  bandage  into  the  Lourdes
water,  and  put  it  over  her  eyes.  When  she  woke  and  took  the
bandage  off  the  next  morning,  the  eye  which  had  been  in  a  bad
condition  was  entirely  well,  and  the  eye  which  seemed  to  have
lost  the  power  of  sight  was  again  normal.

We  know  that  complete  amblyopias  and  amauroses  of  an
hysterical  nature  exist,  even  without  the  presence  of  hysterical
crises.  Among  our  observations  will  be  seen  rapid  cures  of
amblyopia  by  the  application  of  a  magnet,  or  by  suggestion.
Braid  also  tells  of  a  remarkable  case  of  nervous  amblyopia  of
traumatic  origin,  which  was  almost  cured  by  a  single  hypnotic
séance.

Mlle,  de  Fontenay,  twenty-three  years   old,  had  a  paralysis  of

202  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

her  lower  limbs  for  nearly  seven  years.  It  developed  after  two
falls,  one  from  a  carriage  and  one  from  a  horse,  which  had  given
her  a  great  shock,  and  had  provoked  uterine  disease.  Two
seasons  at  Aix,  homeopathy,  hydro-therapeutics,  the  actual
cautery  ;  all  these  different  forms  of  treatment  had  failed.  From
the  end  of  January,  1873,  sne  could  no  longer  stand  on  her  feet.
She  had,  moreover,  sharp  internal  pains,  and  attacks  of  nervous
irritation.  On  the  21st  of  May,  1873,  she  went  to  Lourdes.
During  the  course  of  a  nine  days'  devotion,  her  strength  grad-
ually came  back;  after  the  devotional  season  was  over,  July  3,
she  could  follow  the  procession  on  foot.  But  the  day  after
Pentecost,  the  paralysis  reappeared.  She  tried  a  season  at  Aix
again  in  vain,  at  Brides,  at  Bourboule,  and  came  back  to  Autun
feeble,  paralyzed,  and  demoralized.  Under  the  influence  of
religious  suggestions,  her  imagination  was  gradually  exalted
again.  On  May  4,  1874,  Bernadotte  appeared  to  her  in  a  dream,
and  promised  her  that  she  should  be  cured.  In  August,  she
accompanied  the  Abbot  of  Musy  to  Lourdes,  who  was  himself
miraculously  cured  of  a  paraplegia.  She  was  plunged  into  the
pond  several  times,  and  then  taken  to  the  cave  in  a  carriage.
This  was  on  August  15,  the  anniversary  of  the  Abbot  Musy's
cure,  and  at  the  same  place  where  he  was  cured.  During  mass
read  by  the  abbot,  she  felt  a  slight  pricking  in  her  limbs  ;  after
the  mass  was  over,  she  rose  ;  she  was  cured.

This  is  another  instance  of  nervous  paraplegia  cured  by  faith.
The  first  religious  suggestion  had  had  only  a  temporary  result.
The  second,  given  under  conditions  calculated  to  deeply  impress
the  imagination,  found  the  soil  better  prepared,  and  a  better
developed  psychical  receptivity  ;  the  psycho-therapeutic  action
was  lasting.

By  relating  these  observations  of  authentic  cures  obtained  at
Lourdes,  by  trying,  in  the  name  of  science,  to  rid  them  of  their
miraculous  character,  by  comparing  religious  suggestion  with
hypnotic  suggestion,  simply  from  this  point  of  view,  I  do  not
intend  either  to  attack  religious  faith,  or  to  wound  religious
sentiment.  All  these  observations  have  been  gathered  together
with  sincerity,  and  verified  by  honorable  men.  The  facts  exist  ;
the  interpretation  of  them  is  erroneous.  Religious  convictions
are  eminently  respectable,  and  true  religion  is  above  human
errors.

I  come  now  to  the  study  of  therapeutic  suggestion.     If,  in  the

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  203

waking  condition,  violent  moral  emotions,  lively  religious  faith,
everything  which  strikes  the  imagination,  can  drive  away  func-
tional troubles  and  work  cures,  it  must  nevertheless  be  said  that
active  therapeutics  does  not  often  reap  advantage  from  this
moans.  In  the  waking  condition,  many  imaginations  are  refrac-
tory to  the  suggestive  shock  of  the  moral  emotions.  Credulity
is  moderated  by  the  superior  faculties  of  the  understanding.
Hypnotism,  like  natural  sleep,  exalts  the  imagination,  and  makes
the  brain  more  susceptible  to  suggestion.  The  strongest  minds
cannot  escape  from  the  hallucinatory  suggestions  of  their
dreams.  It  is  a  physiological  law,  that  sleep  puts  the  brain  into
such  a  psychical  condition  that  the  imagination  accepts  and
recognizes  as  real  the  impressions  transmitted  to  it.  To  provoke
this  special  psychical  condition  by  means  of  hypnotism,  and  to  culti-
vate the  suggestibility  thus  artificially  increased  with  the  aim  of
cure  or  relief,  this  is  the  role  of  psychotherapeutics.

The  brain,  influenced  by  suggestion,  tends  to  realize  the  phe-
nomena commanded  with  an  energy  varying  according  to  the
individuality  ;  in  some  it  is  already  docile  in  the  waking  con-
dition ;  it  becomes  so  in  almost  all  cases  when  the  hypnotic
condition,  or  a  condition  analogous  to  it,  has  put  to  sleep  or
dulled  the  faculties  of  reason,  judgment,  and  control  which
moderate  and  restrain  the  cerebral  automatism.  Then  the  brain,
more  powerfully  impressed  by  the  formulated  order,  accepts  the
idea  and  transforms  it  into  action.  We  have  seen  hypnotic
suggestion  cause  paralysis,  contracture,  anaesthesia,  pains,  cough,
nausea,  etc.;  we  have  seen  these  dynamic  effects  of  suggestion
persist  when  the  subject  is  awakened,  or  appear  only  after  the
awakening  (post-hypnotic  suggestion).  The  brain  refuses  to
perceive  the  centripetal  impressions  of  tactile,  visceral,  or  sensor-
ial sensibility  ;  it  refuses  to  set  the  motor  cells  of  the  spinal  cord
into  activity  ;  hence,  psychical  motor  paralysis,  anaesthesia,  blind-
ness, deafness,  which  are  phenomena  of  inhibition.  Or,  on  the
contrary,  it  perceives  the  centripetal  impressions  with  greater
vividness.  It  sends  extra  activity  to  the  motor  cells  ;  hence,
sensitiveness  and  sensorial  hyperaesthesia,  and  more  energetic
muscular  work,  or  contracture;  these  are  dynamogenie phenomena.
Other  psychical  (moral  emotions),  or  experimental  (experiments
of  Brown-Séquard)  proceedings  may  put  both  the  cerebral
mechanism  of  inhibition  and   of  dynamogeny  into  play  ;  as,  for

2  04  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

example,  paralysis  of  speech  produced  by  fear,  {vox  faucibus
hœsit),  or  the  increase  of  strength  caused  by  anger  or  unusual
excitement.

Observation  having  thus  shown  what  the  simple  hypnotic
suggestion  can  perform  in  the  healthy  condition,  it  was  natural
to  apply  these  qualities  to  pathological  states,  and  to  make  use
of  the  nervous  activity  concentrated  by  means  of  suggestion,
in  neutralizing  morbid  phenomena.  It  was  natural  to  say  to
oneself — if,  in  a  hypnotized  subject,  anaesthesia,  contracture,
movements,  pains,  can  be  produced  at  will  by  an  analogous
mechanism,  it  ought  to  be  possible  in  some  cases  to  suppress
anaesthesia,  contracture,  or  paralysis  caused  by  disease,  to
increase  the  weakened  muscular  force,  to  modify  favorably,  or
to  restore  the  functional  force  perverted  or  diminished  by  the
pathological  condition,  as  far,  of  course,  as  the  organic  condition
permits  this  restoration.

It  would  seem  that  an  idea  so  simple  as  this  would  have
forced  itself  upon  the  attention  of  the  first  physicians  who
learned  to  recognize  suggestion.  But  it  has  been  a  long  time
coming  to  the  front.

In  the  early  days  of  mesmerism,  therapeutic  effects  were
obtained.  "Some  among  the  patients  magnetized,"  says  Hus-
son's  report,  "have  felt  no  benefit.  Others  have  experienced  a
more  or  less  marked  relief.  In  one  case  there  was  suspension  of
habitual  pain,  in  another  return  of  strength,  in  a  third  cessa-
tion of  epileptic  attacks  for  several  months,  and  in  a  fourth  the
complete  cure  of  an  old  and  serious  paralysis."  Mesmer,
Puységur,  Dupotet,  and  many  other  magnetizers  obtained  cures
without  knowing  what  they  were  doing.  Rostan  was  able  to
say,  in  spite  of  the  Academy:  "There  were  very  few  physi-
cians, very  few  physiologists,  who  denied  that  magnetism
determined  changes  in  the  organism  and  that  it  could  act  with
some  power  in  curing  disease."

As  long  as  magnetic  phenomena  were  considered  the  effect
of  a  fluid  acting  upon  the  organism,  it  was  to  this  fluid  action
that  the  cures  were  attributed.  Magnetism,  by  its  mysterious
influence  upon  the  vital  principle,  re-established  functional
harmony  ;  it  was  beneficial,  like  warmth,  light,  and  electric-
ity.

Since  Braid's  time,  the  hypothesis  of  a  magnetic  fluid  has
had  but  few  adherents  ;  hypnotic  suggestion  has  replaced  mag-

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  205

netism.  It  is  the  subject's  imagination  alone  which  is  rendered
active  and  which  causes  all  the  phenomena.

It  is  a  singular  thing  that  Braid,  who  was  the  first  to  estab-
lish the  doctrine  of  suggestion  (caught  sight  of  for  a  moment
by  Bertrand)  upon  firm  foundations,  thought  no  more  of  apply-
ing suggestion  itself  in  its  most  natural  form, — suggestion  by
speech, —  to  bring  about  the  hypnosis  and  the  therapeutic  effects.
He  induced  sleep  by  fixation  upon  a  brilliant  object  ;  he  brought
about  therapeutic  effects  by  means  of  special  manipulations.

These  manipulations  are  based  upon  this  fact,  that  the  cata-
leptiform  rigidity  of  a  limb  produces,  according  to  Braid,
an  acceleration  of  the  pulse,  which  becomes  small  and  wiry.
This  acceleration  of  the  pulse  caused  by  the  effort  to  hold  the
limbs  stretched  out  for  five  minutes,  is  much  greater  in  the
hypnotic  than  in  the  normal  condition.  If  the  muscles  are
made  to  relax  while  the  subject  is  still  under  the  influence  of
the  hypnosis,  the  pulse  declines  rapidly  to  its  rate  before  the
experiment,  and  even  below  it.

This  understood,  Braid  varies  the  manipulations  according
to  the  object  in  view.  "  In  order  to  diminish  the  force  of  the
circulation  in  a  limb  and  reduce  its  sensibility,  it  is  necessary  to
set  the  muscles  of  this  limb  in  activity,  leaving  the  other  limbs
relaxed.  If  we  wish  to  increase  the  force  and  the  sensibility  of
a  limb,  it  must  be  kept  relaxed  and  the  other  limbs  must  be
put  into  catalepsy.  If  we  wish  to  obtain  a  general  depression,
after  one  or  two  of  the  limbs  have  been  extended  for  a  short
time  we  must  put  them  back  carefully  into  the  normal  position,
and  let  the  entire  body  rest.  To  obtain  a  general  excitation,
all  the  limbs  should  be  rendered  cataleptic,  whence  arises
difficulty  in  the  free  transmission  of  blood  to  them,  and  con-
sequently an  augmentation  of  the  cardiac  activity,  rush  of
blood  to  the  brain,  and  excitation  of  the  nervous  centres."

Further,  in  keeping  a  particular  organ  in  action  while  the
others  are  quiet,  there  is  a  considerable  augmentation  of  its
activity  by  concentration  of  its  nervous  energy  ;  in  keeping
the  other  organs  in  activity,  and  the  one  which  is  too  active
quiet,  its  activity  is  diminished.

"  Whether  I  am  wrong  or  right  in  my  theoretic  views,"  the
author  adds,  "  one  cannot  doubt  that  in  numerous  cases  I  have
succeeded  in  the  use  of  hypnotism  as  a  curative  agent,  and  the
happy  results  of  the  operation  have  been  so  immediate  and  so

2o6  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

clear  thac  one  could  not  overlook  the  relation  of  cause  and
effect.  Nevertheless,  it  seems  to  me  to  be  proved  that  th<"
success  depends  in  great  part  upon  the  impression  produced  by
the  modification  in  the  circulation."

Braid  relates  about  sixty  cases  of  cure  or  benefit  obtained
through  his  method.  Though  the  facts  may  hold,  his  theoretic
views  are  certainly  erroneous.  I  have  not  been  able  to  confirm
the  accuracy  of  his  statements  relative  to  the  modifications  of
cardiac  activity  induced  by  catalepsy.  Were  they  otherwise
exact,  these  modifications  would  not  be  sufficient  to  explain
cures  as  sudden  as  those  which  were  observed.

It  is  singular  enough,  that  after  having  proved  so  well  that  the
source  of  all  hypnotic  phenomena  is  in  the  subject's  imagination,
that  all  these  phenomena  are  purely  psychical,  Braid  did  not
dream  of  explaining  the  curative  effects  obtained  by  this  same
psychical  influence.  The  founder  of  the  doctrine  of  suggestion,
Braid,  forgetting  his  directing  idea,  did  as  all  his  predecessors
had  done,  and  as  many  of  his  successors  still  do  ;  he  made  use  of
suggestion  without  knowing  it.  His  patients  knew  that  they
were  hypnotized  with  the  idea  of  curing  them  in  view  ;  this  idea
remained  with  them  during  their  sleep  ;  they  knew  that  the
manipulations  which  were  made  were  designed  to  free  them
from  their  troubles  ;  this  was  a  therapeutic  suggestion.

Braid  does  not  seem  to  have  had  any  successors  in  his  own
country.  Dr.  Charpignon,  in  France,  is  one  of  those  who  have
most  deeply  studied  the  influence  of  faith  and  of  suggestion  in
the  hypnotic  condition.  But  side  by  side  with  the  moral  influ-
ence, he  believes  in  the  influence  of  a  magnetic  fluid  which
tends  to  restore  the  destroyed  harmony.

In  reality  we  must  come  down  to  i860  to  find  the  doctrine  of
suggestion  entirely  freed  from  all  the  elements  which  falsified  it
even  in  the  hands  of  Braid  himself,  and  applied  in  the  simplest
manner  to  therapeutics.  Durand  de  Gros,  like  the  Abbot  Faria,
had  already  employed  simple  vocal  suggestion,  speech,  in  the
production  of  hypnotic  phenomena.  M.  Liébault  conceived
the  idea  of  applying  the  same  vocal  suggestion  to  therapeutics.

The  patient  is  put  to  sleep  by  means  of  suggestion,  that  is  by
making  the  idea  of  sleep  penetrate  the  mind.  He  is  treated  by
means  of  suggestion,  that  is  by  making  the  idea  of  cure  penetrate
the  mind.  The  subject  being  hypnotized,  M.  Liébault's
method  consists  in  affirming  in  a  loud  voice  the  disappearance  of

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  207

his  symptoms.  Wc  try  to  make  him  believe  that  these  symp-
toms no  longer  exist  or  that  they  will  disappear;  that  the  pain
will  vanish,  that  feeling  will  come  back  to  his  limbs,  that  the
muscular  strength  will  increase,  and  that  his  appetite  will  come
back.  We  profit  by  the  special  psychical  receptivity  created  by
the  hypnosis,  by  the  cerebral  docility,  by  the  exalted  ideo-motor,
ideo-sensitive,  ideo-sensorial  reflex  activity,  in  order  to  provoke
useful  reflexes,  to  persuade  the  brain  to  do  what  it  can  to  trans-
form the  accepted  idea  into  reality.

Such  is  the  method  of  therapeutic  suggestion  of  which  M.
Liébault  is  the  founder.  He  was  the  first  to  clearly  establish  that
the  cures  obtained  by  the  old  magnetizers,  and  even  by  Braid's
hypnotic  operations,  are  not  the  work  either  of  a  mysterious
fluid  or  of  physiological  modifications  due  to  special  manipula-
tions, but  the  work  of  suggestion  alone.  The  whole  system  of
magnetic  medicine  is  only  the  medicine  of  the  imagination  ;  the
imagination  is  put  into  such  a  condition  by  the  hypnosis  that  it
cannot  escape  from  the  suggestion.

M.  Liébault's  method  was  ignored  a  long  time,  even  by
the  physicians  at  Nancy.  In  1884,  Chas.  Richet  was  satisfied  to
say  that  magnetism  often  has  advantages,  that  it  calms  nervous
agitation,  and  that.it  may  cure  or  benefit  certain  insomnias.

Since  1882  I  have  experimented  with  the  suggestive  method
which  I  had  seen  used  by  M.  Liébault,  though  timidly  at
first  and  without  any  confidence.  To-day  it  is  daily  used  in  my
clinic;  I  practice  it  before  my  students;  perhaps  no  day  passes
in  which  I  do  not  show  them  some  functional  trouble,  pain,
paresis,  uneasiness,  insomnia,  either  moderated  or  instantly  sup-
pressed by  suggestion.

For  example,  a  child  is  brought  to  me  with  a  pain  like  muscu-
lar rheumatism  in  its  arm  dating  back  four  or  five  days  ;  the  arm
is  painful  to  pressure;  the  child  cannot  lift  it  to  its  head.  I  say
to  him,  "  Shut  your  eyes,  my  child,  and  go  to  sleep."  I  hold  his
eyelids  closed  and  go  on  talking  to  him.  "  You  are  asleep  and
you  will  keep  on  sleeping  until  I  tell  you  to  wake  up.  You  are
sleeping  very  well,  as  if  you  were  in  your  bed  ;  you  are  perfectly
well  and  comfortable  ;  your  arms  and  legs  and  your  whole  body
are  asleep  and  you  cannot  move."  I  take  my  fingers  off  his  eye-
lids, and  they  remain  closed  ;  I  put  his  arms  up,  and  they  remain
so.  Then,  touching  the  painful  arm,  I  say,  "  The  pain  has  gone
away.     You  have  no  more  pain  anywhere  ;  you  can  move  your

2oS  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

arm  without  any  pain  ;  and  when  you  wake  up  you  will  not  feel
any  more  pain.  It  will  not  come  back  any  more.  In  order  to
increase  the  force  of  the  suggestion  by  embodying  it,  so  to  speak,
in  a  material  sensation,  following  M.  Liébault's  example,  I
suggest  a  feeling  of  warmth  loco  dolcuti.  The  heat  takes  the
place  of  the  pain.  I  say  to  the  child,  "  You  feel  that  your  arm
is  warm  ;  the  warmth  increases,  and  you  have  no  more  pain."

I  wake  the  child  in  a  few  minutes  ;  he  remembers  nothing  ;
the  sleep  has  been  profound.  The  pain  has  almost  completely
disappeared  ;  the  child  lifts  the  arm  easily  to  his  head.  I  see
the  father  on  the  days  following  ;  he  is  the  postman  who  brings
my  letters,  tie  tells  me  that  the  pain  has  disappeared  com-
pletely, and  there  has  been  no  return  of  it.

Here,  again,  is  a  man  twenty-six  years  old,  a  workman  in  the
founderies.  For  a  year  he  has  experienced  a  painful  feeling  of
constriction  over  the  epigastrium,  also  a  pain  in  the  cor-
responding region  of  the  back,  which  was  the  result  of  an
effort  made  in  bending  an  iron  bar.  This  sensation  is  contin-
uous and  increases  when  he  has  worked  for  some  hours.  For  six
months  he  has  only  been  able  to  sleep  by  pressing  his  epigas-
trium with  his  hand.  I  hypnotize  him.  In  the  first  séance  I  can
only  induce  simple  drowsiness  ;  he  wakes  spontaneously  ;  the
pain  continues.  I  hypnotize  him  a  second  time,  telling  him  that
he  will  sleep  more  deeply,  and  that  he  will  remember  nothing
when  he  wakes.  Catalepsy  is  not  present.  I  wake  him  in  a  few
minutes;  he  does  not  remember  that  I  spoke  to  him,  that  I
assured  him  that  the  pain  had  disappeared.  It  has  completely
disappeared  ;  he  no  longer  feels  any  constriction.  I  do  not  know
whether  it  has  re-appeared.

Next  in  order  is  the  case  of  a  workman  fifty  years  old,  who  has
already  been  in  the  hospital  several  times.  The  observations
referring  to  his  case  will  be  given  later  on.  For  several  days  he
has  had  an  ulnar  neuritis,  characterized  by  contraction  in  flection
of  the  three  last  fingers  of  his  hand,  a  complete  anaesthesia  in  the
entire  ulnar  region,  twinges  of  pain  along  the  path  of  the  nerve,
and  pain  along  the  olecranon  groove.  I  hypnotize  him  ;  in  a
few  seconds  he  falls  into  a  condition  of  complete  relaxation  ;
suggestive  catalepsy  and  so-mnambulism  are  present.  At  differ-
ent times  I  suggest  the  relaxation  of  his  hand,  the  return  of
sensibility,  the  cessation  of  the  pains.  I  run  a  needle  into  his
forearm,  saying,  "  You  aue  going  to    feel."     In  a  few  minutes

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  209

the  feeling  has  come  back  again  and  the  fingers  unbend.  When
he  wakes  all  phenomena  of  the  neuritis  have  vanished.

These  examples  relate  to  actual  observations.  However  sin-
gular they  may  appear  they  are  nevertheless  facts.

Morbid  phenomena  do  not  always  yield  at  a  first  séance.

Sometimes  the  pain  persists,  or  is  simply  diminished  ;  it  may
gradually  disappear  after  two  or  more  seances.  In  other  cases
it  may  be  diminished  when  the  subject  wakes,  and  may  continue
growing  less  until  it  disappears  without  a  new  hypnotization.
If  not,  a  new  suggestion  may  succeed,  especially  if  a  deeper
sleep  be  induced.  The  pain,  taken  away  for  the  moment,  may
return  in  several  hours  or  still  later,  and  may  only  yield  defi-
nitely after  a  variable  number  of  hypnotizations.  Finally,  only
certain  troubles  among  those  complained  of,  may  be  effaced  ;
the  others  resist  the  attempt.  We  can  understand  that  the
effect  obtained  is  subordinate  both  to  the  subject's  suggestibility,
and  to  the  psychical  cause  which  determines  the  symptoms.

Muscular  pains,  the  painful  points  in  phthisis,  certain  dyna-
mic contractures,  even  though  bound  up  with  organic  affections
of  the  nervous  centres,  certain  movements  which  remain  after
chorea,  incontinence  of  urine,  which  children  suffer  from  at
night,  etc., — often  disappear  as  if  by  enchantment  after  a
single  suggestion,  or  after  several.

It  is  not  always  necessary  to  have  deep  sleep  for  the  manifes-
tation of  a  rapid  action  ;  simple  dullness  is  sufficient  in  some
cases  ;  certain  subjects  are  suggestible  in  the  waking  condition.
For  example,  one  of  my  patients,  whose  history  I  shall  give  in
detail,  had  a  contracture  in  flexion  of  the  hand,  the  result  of  an
old  hemiplegia.  For  a  year  he  was  not  able  to  hold  it  open  ;  he
was  a  great  snuff-taker,  but  could  not  use  this  hand  for  this
purpose.  I  hypnotize  him  and  suggest  that  his  hand  is  pliant
again,  that  he  can  open  and  shut  it.  He  tries  during  his  sleep,
and  succeeds  easily  in  stretching  and  bending  his  fingers.  "  If
it  could  only  last,"  he  says.  I  assure  him  that  it  will  last.  And
so  it  does.  When  he  wakes,  the  stiffness  has  disappeared.  He
remembers  everything  he  did  during  his  sleep;  he  does  not
think  he  has  been  asleep.  At  another  séance  the  next  day,  how-
ever, I  put  him  into  a  profound  sleep.  He  was  somnambulistic,
with  no  remembrance  of  anything  upon  waking,  and  eminently
suggestible.

Generally  the  action  is  more  rapid  and  complete  in  profound

2io  Suggestive    Therafieictics.

sleep.  It  is  in  somnambulism  tJiat  suggestion  reaches  its  maximum
efficiency,  and  that  cures  are  often  instantaneous  and  seem  mirac-
ulous. Certain  subjects  resist  for  many  séances  ;  they  only  fall
into  somnolence  ;  the  effect  obtained  is  slight  or  doubtful.  By
persevering  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time,  several  days  or  even
several  weeks,  with  hypnotizations  which  give  but  little  result,
some  subjects  can  be  put  into  a  deeper  sleep,  and  then  the
therapeutic  action  of  suggestion  may  be  rapid  and  lasting.

The  mode  of  suggestion  should  also  be  varied  and  adapted  to
the  special  suggestibility  of  the  subject.  A  simple  word  does
not  always  suffice  in  impressing  the  idea  upon  the -mind.  It  is
sometimes  necessary  to  reason,  to  prove,  to  convince  ;  in  some
cases,  to  affirm  decidedly  ;  in  others,  to  insinuate  gently  ;  for  in
the  condition  of  sleep  just  as  in  the  waking  condition  the  moral
individuality  of  each  subject  persists  according  to  his  character,
his  inclinations,  his  special  impressionability,  etc.  Hypnosis
does  not  run  all  its  subjects  into  a  uniform  mould,  and  make
pure  and  simple  automatons  out  of  them,  moved  solely  by  the
will  of  the  magnetizer  ;  it  increases  the  cerebral  docility  ;  it
makes  the  automatic  activity  preponderate  over  the  will.  But
the  latter  persists  to  a  certain  degree,  the  subject  thinks,
reasons,  discusses,  accepts  more  readily  than  in  the  waking  con-
dition, but  does  not  always  accept,  especially  in  the  light
degrees  of  sleep.  In  these  cases,  we  must  know  the  patient's
character,  his  particular  psychical  condition,  in  order  to  make
an  impression  upon  him.

Contact  by  touch,  friction,  movements  imparted  to  the
affected  region,  and  suggested  warmth,  often  co-operate  effica-
ciously. As  noted  in  one  of  my  observations,  I  have  seen  the
use  of  electricity  upon  the  painful  part,  thus  materializing  the
suggestion  into  a  new  sensation,  succeed  where  simple  affirma-
tion had  been  insufficient.  At  other  times,  success  is  obtained
by  evasion.  One  of  my  patients,  a  good  somnambulist,  had  an
unconquerable  distaste  for  meat.  I  had  in  vain  suggested
that  she  would  eat  it  with  pleasure  ;  she  absolutely  refused  to
accept  the  suggestion,  she  did  not  even  wish  to  taste  meat  dur-
ing her  sleep.  I  made  her  change  her  personality  ;  she  was  no
longer  herself  ;  and  then  she  ate  the  meat  with  the  greatest
appetite.  But  this  mode  of  suggestion  is  only  applicable  to  a
restricted  number  of  somnambulists,  who  constitute  the
minority.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  211

In  some  cases,  a  nervous  habit  can  only  be  broken  by  a  strong
diversion,  or  by  a  vigorous  forcing.  One  hysterical  woman  went
into  somnambulism  easily,  but  in  this  condition  she  often  com-
plained of  discomfort,  pain  and  oppression  ;  then  sometimes  an
attack  of  hysterical  sleep  in  which  the  patient  ceased  to  be  in
relationship  with  me,  replaced  the  hypnotic  sleep.  Affirmation
alone  did  not  succeed  in  dissipating  this  uncomfortable  pre-
cursor of  a  crisis.  I  succeeded  by  means  of  a  musical  diversion  :
I  made  her  hear  a  wonderful  suggestive  orchestra  ;  and  as  she
adored  music,  her  face  became  radiant,  she  beat  time  with  her
hand,  and  all  the  discomfort  vanished.

A  neurotic  patient  complains  of  pain  in  her  legs.  She  cannot
walk.  Suggestion  soothes  the  pain  during  sleep  ;  but  upon
waking  she  feels  too  weak  to  walk  ;  there  is  some  pain  still.  I
put  her  into  somnambulism  again  and  say,  "You  are  cured  ;  you
are  at  home.  Get  up,  attend  to  your  housekeeping;  work,  since
you  have  been  cured."  She  gets  up,  walks  very  well,  takes  up  a
towel  and  a  duster,  and  also  a  broom  which  is  brought  to  her,
begins  to  dust,  and  does  not  complain  of  anything.  Upon  wak-
ing she  walks  very  well.  Thus,  by  a  powerful  diversion,  or  by
transforming  passive  into  active  somnanibulism,  the  efficiency  of
suggestion  may  be  increased.

We  have  a  case  of  convulsive,  painful,  dorso-lumbartic  in  our
service;  several  times  a  minute  the  man's  body  is  agitated  by
clonic  movements  which  throw  him  forward.  He  positively
cannot  walk.  Nothing  does  any  good.  This  condition  lasts  for
weeks.  When  he  wants  to  walk,  the  movements  repeat  them-
selves obstinately,  and  he  is  obliged  to  stop  and  lean  against
something  in  order  to  keep  from  falling.

I  hypnotize  him;  he  only  reaches  the  third  degree  of  sleep;
he  is  sitting  on  a  chair.  Simple  suggestion  does  not  always
succeed  in  arresting  these  movements,  but  if  I  make  him  walk,
either  in  the  sleeping  or  waking  condition,  affirming  energetically
that  he  has  no  more  trouble,  if  I  make  him  walk  quickly  with-
out stopping  to  rest,  the  movements  cease,  and  he  goes  about
for  hours  without  feeling  any  tendency  to  the  tic.  The  active
forcing  suggestion  succeeds  where  simple  suggestion  fails.

Therapeutic  suggestion  is  not  infallible,  though  it  gives  good
results  in  a  very  large  number  of  cases.  It  may  fail  even  when
it  is  intelligently  and  persistently  managed.  The  cause  of  the
failure  is  inherent  sometimes  in  the  disease,  sometimes  in  the  subject.

2 1 2  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

I  do  not  speak  of  incurable  diseases,  certain  manifestations  of
which  ma)-,  however,  be  favorably  acted  upon  by  suggestion.
Even  in  affections  which  are  not  very  serious  and  which  seem
to  be  simply  functional,  psycho-therapeutic  hypnosis  fails  at
times,  although  the  subject  may  be  perfectly  susceptible  to
suggestion.  I  remember  an  Italian  mason  who,  in  consequence
of  a  contusion,  had  a  violent  pain  in  the  lumbar  region  for
several  weeks.  No  bruise  could  be  found,  no  lesion  could  be
seen  ;  the  pain  alone  persisted,  yielding  neither  to  rubbing,
blistering,  nor  electricity.  Suggestion,  kept  up  persistently  for
a  long  time,  could  do  nothing,  although  the  man"  was  easily
put  into  a  deep  sleep  and  appeared  to  be  very  susceptible  to
suggestion.

The  lesion,  although  not  perceptible,  may  exist,  and  its  dis-
turbing action  may  be  such  that  the  brain  is  powerless  to
perform  acts  of  inhibition  or  of  dynamogeny,  even  when  it  is
put  into  the  most  favorable  psychical  conditions.  The  stim-
ulus which  incessantly  excites  the  motor  or  aesthesodic  cells,
constantly  renews  the  contracture  or  pain  ;  the  brain  tries  in
vain  to  neutralize  the  existing  functional  trouble  ;  the  organic
cause,  stronger  than  the  suggestion,  annihilates  the  dynamic
effects.

Sometimes  the  subject  resists.  We  have  noticed  that  even
in  hypnotic  sleep  his  will  is  not  always  destroyed  ;  he  refuses
to  accept  the  suggestion,  or  if  he  accepts  it  for  a  moment,  the
influence  does  not  remain  with  him.  Melancholic,  hypochon-
driac, and  certain  neuropathic  cases,  often  rebel  against  hypnotic
sleep  ;  the)'  do  not  allow  themselves  to  be  influenced.  What
is  told  them  makes  no  impression  ;  or  if  the  hypnotic  suggestion
succeeds  with  some,  the  therapeutic  suggestion  remains  ineffica-
cious. I  recently  had  to  treat  a  young  woman  who  was  hypo-
chondriacal. Among  other  troubles  she  had  a  violent  pain  in  the
epigastrium,  which  she  believed  to  be  connected  with  uterine
cancer,  although  she  had  been  repeatedly  told  that  there  was  no
lesion  there.  I  succeeded  in  hypnotizing  her  often  enough,  and
sometimes  even  in  obtaining  a  profound  sleep.  I  hypnotized
her  for  ten  days;  by  energetic  suggestion  I  succeeded  in  quiet-
ing the  pain.  Upon  waking,  she  was  obliged  to  confess  that
she  had  no  more,  or  scarcely  any  pain.  But  she  hastened  to
add  that  the  pain  would  return  ;  and  in  fact  it  did  come  back,
involuntarily  evoked  by  her  diseased  imagination.

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  213

In  the  Laennec  hospital,  in  Dr.  Lcgroux's  service,  I  recently
saw  a  man  who  had  been  troubled  with  a  sort  of  tic  douloureux
of  the  lower  limbs  for  several  years.  It  was  sufficient  to  touch
the  limbs,  and  especially  the  sole  of  the  foot,  and  strong  con-
vulsive movements  of  flexion  and  extension  were  determined,
following  each  other  frequently,  prolonged  for  a  certain  time,
and  accompanied  with  intense  pains  which  forced  the  patient  to
cry  out.  M.  Legroux  succeeded  in  neutralizing  this  pain  by
simple  suggestion  in  the  waking  condition.  By  assuring  the
patient  that  the  pains  had  ceased,  he  could  both  touch  and  rub
the  sole  of  his  foot  indefinitely  without  producing  the  least  pain.
But  as  soon  as  the  poor  man  was  left  to  himself,  to  his  own
suggestions,  the  pains  and  convulsion  re-appeared.  This  man
had  not  walked  for  a  long  time,  but  I  could  make  him  walk  by
a  vigorous  hypnotic  suggestion.  I  forced  him  to  get  up  and
walk  in  spite  of  the  resistance  he  offered.  In  vain  did  he  tell
me  he  was  tired  ;  I  obliged  him  to  walk  quickly  about  the  room
for  several  minutes.  He  lay  down  again,  saying  that  his  trouble
would  return,  that  it  was  incurable,  that  he  knew  very  well  he
would  have  to  pay  dear  for  the  effort  he  had  just  been  making.
There  was  no  doubt  in  his  mind  about  the  re-appearance  of  the
tic  douloureux.  Could  he  be  cured  by  a  suggestion  obstinately
prolonged  both  in  the  waking  and  sleeping  condition,  by  contin-
uous forcing?  I  believe  so,  without  stating  it  as  a  fact.  With
this  sort  of  patient,  auto'-suggestion  is  stronger  than  a  suggestion
from  some  one  else.  They  listen  to  their  inner  feelings,  they
call  them  up,  they  are  in  relationship  only  with  themselves  ;
they  are  auto-suggestionists.

At  the  present  time  I  have  a  remarkable  case  in  my  service.
I  will  give  it  briefly  ;  it  is  a  fine  example  of  local  hysteria.

A  young  girl,  twenty-six  years  old,  came  into  the  surgical
clinic  twenty  months  ago  for  a  tibio-tarsal  sprain.  My  col-
league, M.  Weiss,  put  an  apparatus  on  her.  When  he  took  off
the  apparatus  at  the  end  of  several  weeks,  he  saw  that  the
swelling  of  the  foot  had  gone  down,  but  that  the  entire  limb
was  rigid  and  painful.  He  asked  me  to  look  at  the  case  ;  there
was  contracture  and  excessive  hyperesthesia  to  the  slightest
touch.  Our  diagnosis  was  hysterical  contracture  provoked
by  traumatism.  She  did  not  show  and  had  never  shown  any
other  hysterical  symptoms.

I  tried  to   hypnotize   her;  she  gave   herself  up  to  it  with  bad

2  1 4  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

grace,  saying  that  it  would  do  no  good.  I  succeeded,  however,
in  putting  her  into  a  deep  enough  sleep  two  or  three  times.
But  the  painful  contracture  persisted  ;  she  seemed  to  take  a
malicious  delight  in  proving  to  the  other  patients  in  the  service
that  it  did  no  good,  that  slic  always  felt  worse.  Then,  after  a
few  séances,  I  was  no  longer  able  to  hypnotize  her.  The  appa-
ratus was  put  on  again.  Three  months  later,  without  any  cause,
and  as  if  to  confirm  the  diagnosis,  she  had  retention  of  urine,
and  from  this  time  on,  the  retention  persisted  together  with  the
contracture;  a  catheter  had  to  be  used  regularly 'three  times  a
day.  I  again  tried  to  hypnotize  her  ;  to  free  herself  from  my
experiments  she  simulated  sleep.

The  persistent  contracture,  however,  brought  about  retraction
of  the  tendon  of  Achilles,  and  talipes  equinus.  Chloroform  had
to  be  administered  several  times,  in  order  to  have  the  foot
straightened  out,  and  finally  the  tendon  of  Achilles  had  to  be
cut.  The  contracture  of  the  knee  at  last  yielded  spontaneously;
the  contracture  in  the  leg  and  foot  still  exists,  and  an  apparatus
now  holds  the  foot  flexed.

I  tried  intimidation,  electricity,  and  various  methods,  against
the  retention  of  urine,  but  all  in  vain.  Nothing  did  any  good.
I  have  used  gentle  means  lately.  I  have  hypnotized  her  again  ;
she  gave  herself  up  to  it  well,  and  went  into  a  profound  sleep,
without  any  simulation.  -She  is  distressed  on  account  of  her  sit-
uation ;  she  wishes  to  be  cured.  She  gets  angry  when  she  is
accused  of  acting  with  bad  grace.  In  March  of  this  year,  after  I
had  hypnotized  her  several  times,  and  tried  to  inculcate  the  idea
that  she  would  soon  be  cured,  she  seemed  at  last  to  accept  the
idea  ;  she  even  fixed  upon  the  day  in  her  sleep,  when  she  should
urinate  spontaneously; — in  fifteen  days,  on  a  Wednesday.  The
prediction  did  not  come  true.      The  retention  persisted.

Here  it  is  certainly  a  question  of  contracture  and  psychical
paralysis.  The  inrooted  idea,  the  unconscious  auto-suggestion,  is
such  that  nothing  can  pull  it  up  again.  When  the  treatment  was
begun  she  seemed  to  be  convinced  that  hypnotism  could  not
cure  her.  Is  it  this  idea,  so  deeply  rooted  in  her  brain,  which
neutralizes  our  efforts  and  her  own  wish  to  be  cured?

I  have  tried  to  show  failure  side  by  side  with  success,  the
shadow  side  by  side  with  the  light.  Psychotherapeutic  sugges-
tion may   fail,  as   other   agents   do  ;  but  it  often  succeeds  when

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  215

other  means  have  failed;  it  often  accomplishes  marvels,  I  do  not
say  miracles.

I  am  now  going  to  give  quite  a  large  number  of  observations  on
suggestive  therapeutics.  They  are  not  chosen  observations.  By
publishing  only  those  where  the  cure  has  been  complete  and
instantaneous  I  could  embellish  the  picture  and  astonish  my
readers  much  more.  I  keep  to  the  strict  truth,  and  present  the
idea  as  faithfully  as  the  present  results  given  by  therapeutic
suggestion  show  it.  Among  our  observations,  some  show  rapid
and  radical  cures,  others  show  slow  and  gradual  ones,  others
again  show  suggestion  suppressing  certain  symptoms  of  the
trouble  only,  still  others  show  it  struggling  a  long  time  with
obstinate  troubles,  which  though  improved,  keep  returning  per-
sistently, and  in  this  persevering  and  prolonged  struggle  between
mind  and  body,  it  is  sometimes  one,  sometimes  the  other,  which
prevails.

Up  to  the  present  time,  only  a  few  physicians  have  followed
the  Nancy  School  in  its  trials  of  suggestive  therapeutics  accord-
ing to  M.  Liébault's  methods.  We  must  mention  M.  Auguste
Voisin,  who,  at  the  Blois  and  Grenoble  Congresses,  called  atten-
tion to  its  application  to  the  treatment  of  mental  disease.  A
very  much  agitated  hysterical  patient  was  calmed  by  hypnotic
suggestion,  and  moral  sentiments  and  sentiments  of  affection
were  awakened,  at  least  for  a  short  time,  in  her.  Three  new
observations,  given  in  the  Bulletin  général'  de  thérapeutique  (April
15,  1886),  are  entitled  :

1st.  Hystcro-cpilcpsy.  Erotic  delirium,  with  hallucinations  of
sight  and  hearing.      Treatment  by  hypnotic  suggestion.     Cure.

2d.  Melancholic  delirium.  Hallucinations  of  sight  and  hear-
ing.    Refusal  of  nourishment .      Cure  by  hypnotic  suggestion.

2,d.  Hysteria.  Hysterical  insanity.  Hallucinations  of  sight
and  hearing.  Ideas  of  suicide.  Hcmianeesthcsia  and  hcmidys-
chromatopsia.     Cure  by  hypnotic  suggestion.

New  observations  have  been  published  since  by  the  author  in
the  Revue  de  V hypnotisme.

We  must  mention  still  another  interesting  observation  on  sug-
gestive therapeutics  successfully  used  in  a  case  of  hysteria,  pub-
lished by  M.  Séglas  {Archives  de  ATeurologie,  Nov.  1885),  and  one
published  by  M.  Lombroso  (lo  Sperimentale,  Nov.  1885).

M.    Desplats  of  Lille,   M.    Bérillon,   M.    Debove,  and   M.  Del-

2i6  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

bœuf,  have  cited  a  certain  number  of  facts  relating  to  suggestive
therapeutics.  M.  Fontan,  Professor  at  the  Toulon  School,  and
M.  Ségard,  Chef-de-Clinique  in  the  same  school,  have  published
in  their  Eléments  de  médecine  suggestive,  ninety-nine  most  inter-
esting observations,  which  throw  brilliant  confirmation  upon
the  facts  stated  by  the  Nancy  School.

In  Germany,  M.  Berger  {Brcslaucr  Zeitschrift,  1880)  reports
that  an  hysterical  contracture  of  the  fingers  was  cured  while  the
patient  was  in  the  hypnotic  condition.

Preyer,  {dcr  Hypuotismus,  Berlin  1882)  says  that'  his  assistant,
Dr.  Creutzfield,  has  stopped  neuralgic  pains  by  means  of  hypno-
tism.

Dr.  Fisher  {dcr  sog.  Magnctismus  odcr  Hypnotisimis,  Mainz,
1883)  has  observed  a  similar  result.  Rieger  {dcr  Hypnotismus,
Jéna  1884)  says  that  he  has  also  obtained  very  good  effects  by
means  of  it,  notably  in  the  case  of  a  young   girl  with  contracture.

Dr.  Wiebe,  from  whom  the  preceding  citations  are  borrowed,
has  had  recourse  to  hypnotism  as  a  therapeutic  means  four
times,  in  Prof.  Baumler's  service  at  Fribourg  in  Bresgau.

The  following  are  the  results  he  obtained.  (Berl.  Klin.  Wo-
chcHschr,  1884,  No.  3):

In  three  of  these  cases,  hypnotism  acted  as  a  prompt  and  last-
ing cure  ;  in  the  fourth,  the  effect  was  not  complete,  but  never-
theless it  was  useful.  In  the  first  case,  hypnosis  cured  anaesthe-
sia; in  the  third  clonic  convulsions  were  stopped,  and  in  the
fourth,  clonic  convulsions  were  benefited.

I  borrowed  these  facts  from  a  sketch  of  hypnotism  by  Prof.
Lépine  in  the  Revue  mensuelle  (1884,  p.  829).

Among  the  physicians  who  have  applied  hypnotism  to  thera-
peutics, we  must  yet  mention  Prof.  Achille  de  Giovanni  {Clinice
medico,  delta  Universita  di  Padowa,  1882).  The  following  is  a
résumé  of  his  observations,  taken  from  the  Revue  de  médecine
(1883):

1  st.  Persistent  rachialgia  in  a  patient,  who  was  much  weakened,  and
of  a  nervous  constitution.  The  rachialgia  had  been  preceded  by  con-
tracture of  the  lower  limbs,  cured  by  massage.  Sleep  was  easily  in-
duced. The  patient  was  hypnotized  every  day  for  a  week  ;  the  rachial-
gia grew  better,  then  disappeared.  There  was  simultaneous  improve-
ment in  her  normal  condition.

2d.     A  woman,   eighteen    years   old,  troubled    with    a  neurosis,  be-

Suggestive   Therapeutics*  217

tween  which  and  hysteria  the  author  makes  a  distinction.  After  inter-
mittent fever  and  a  dangerous  attack  (about  the  nature  of  which  the
author  is  doubtful),  arthralgia  developed,  with  contracture  in  the  right
leg  and  arm,  without  any  apparent  lesion.  This  contracture  grew
better,  and  then  was  entirely  cured  by  the  application  of  electricity  over
the  homologous  groups  of  muscles  of  the  opposite  side.  Attack  of  fever
without  any  known  cause.  Incomplete  hemianœsthesia  of  the  right  side,
glossalgia,  labio-glosso-pharyngeal  paralysis,  a  crisis  of  hystero-epilepsy  ;
neuralgia  in  the  shoulder,  with  ecthyma,  boils,  ganglionic  congestion.
The  first  trials  of  hypnotism  did  not  induce  sleep,  but  a  tremor  of
the  upper  and  lower  limbs  ;  at  the  third  séance  there  was  sleep  and  no
tremor.  From  this  time  on  the  patient  rapidly  improved.  In  fifteen
days,  with  one,  two,  and  three  se'ances  a  day,  she  was  cured.

4th.  Patient  had  alopecia  areata,  great  muscular  weakness,  pain  in
the  knees,  and  certain  nervous  troubles.  The  patient  was  hypnotized
in  order  that  a  piece  of  the  skin  could  be  obtained  for  microscopical
examination.  The  operation  was  performed  unknown  to  the  patient,
and  without  any  pain.

5th.  A  young  man,  suffering  from  acute  coxalgia  with  pain  in  the
knee,  and  whom  it  was  impossible  to  move  or  even  to  touch,  was  hypno-
tized ;  in  that  condition  he  was  examined  easily.  Upon  waking  he  said
that  the  pain  in  his  knee  had  disappeared.

In  spite  of  these  isolated  facts,  suggestive  therapeutics  has  few
adepts.  I  should  be  happy  if  the  observations  which  I  am  about
to  relate,  could  help  to  spread  abroad  the  new  method  instituted
by  M.  Liébault.

I.

Organic  Affections  of  the  Nervous  System.

Observation  I. — Hemiplegia  of  the  left  side,  with  sensitivo-sensorial  hemianœsthesia,
dating  baek  one  year. —  Transient  hemiplegia  of  the  right  side. — Lesions  in  each  hemi-
sphere.— Post-hemiplegic  bilateral  tremor  simulating  insular  sclerosis. — Reflexes  of
both  sides  exaggerated,  and  contracture  of  the  left  limbs. — Hemianœsthesia,  tremor,  and
trepidation  cured  by  a  single  application  of  the  magnet  to  the  face. — Return  of  the  con-
tracture of  the  left  limbs  with  flexion  of  the  hand  ;  twenty  months  later,  the  contracture
is  cured  by  hypnotic  suggestion. — /diminution  of  the  sense  of  oppression. — D*ath  at  the
end  of  three  years. — Autopsy.

A  man  came  into  my  service  at  the  hospital  last  December,  who  at
first  sight  seemed  to  have  insular  sclerosis.  His  limbs  trembled  a  good
deal,  and  as  soon  as  he  wanted  to  move  them  the  tremor  increased  in
proportion  as  he  accomplished  the  desired  motion.  On  closer  examina-
tion it  was  immediately  found  that  he  had  a  sensitivo-sensorial  left  hemi-

2 1 S  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

anœsthesia,  and  the  conclusion  was  that  it  was  not  a  question  of  insular
sclerosis,  but  of  a  bilateral  post-hemiplegic  tremor.  The  following  is
his  history  :

H is  forty-six  years  of  age.     At  the  present  time  he  is  wasted  by

disease,  and  emphysematous,  but  was  formerly  strong  and  we'll.  On
December  3,  1S79,  he  went  to  bed  feeling  badly,  and  when  he  got  up  at
three  o'clock  the  next  morning  to  milk  the  cows,  he  had  an  attack  of
vertigo,  thought  everything  was  moving  around  him,  and  fell  uncon-
scious. He  was  taken  to  the  hospital  of  St.  Nicolas-du-Port,  and  did
not  come  out  of  the  coma  for  four  days.  He  had  left-sided  hemiplegia,
with  facial  deviation  and  difficulty  of  speech.  About  the  15th  of  Jan-
uary his  left  arm  grew  rigid,  and  a  tremor  came  on  which  soon  extended
to  the  left  leg  and  has  grown  progressively  worse.

On  January  18  the  patient  still  kept  his  room;  the  hemiplegia  had
slightly  decreased,  and  he  could  pronounce  a  few  words.  This  same
day,  when  he  wished  to  go  to  bed,  and  started  up  for  that  purpose,  he
had  a  giddy  feeling  again,  thought  everything  was  turning  around  him,
and  fearing  that  he  would  fall,  sat  down  on  the  floor,  then  lay  down,
and  a  few  instants  afterwards  became  unconscious.  He  was  taken  up
and  put  to  bed.  He  became  conscious  again  in  three  hours,  but  was
not  able  to  speak  a  word  for  four  days.  His  right  arm  was  paralyzed
during  this  time.

This  right  hemiplegia  was  of  short  duration  ;  the  tremor  in  the  left
arm  continued,  and  on  the  26th  of  the  month  the  right  arm  was  affected
in  the  same  way,  after  having  first  showed  a  certain  degree  of  rigidity.
The  aphasia  lasted  until  the  beginning  of  March  without  any  appreci-
able improvement,  and  then  disappeared  quite  rapidly.  Hemiplegia  of
the  left  side  persisted  to  a  certain  extent  ;  the  patient  dragged  his  left
leg  and  let  the  sole  of  the  foot  slip  over  the  ground  ;  he  felt  as  if  he
were  walking  upon  cotton,  and  no  longer  felt  his  clothes  on  the  left  side
of  his  body  ,  his  sight  grew  weaker;  he  was  deaf  in  the  left  ear.  The
tremor  remained  in  all  four  limbs  and  progressed  slowly.  He  had  sud-
den spasms  in  his  limbs  at  times.  His  other  functions  were  well  per-
formed. Last  November,  the  patient,  who  had  complained  of  dyspnoea
on  going  upstairs,  for  two  years,  was  seized  with  a  cough  with  expecto-
ration and  a  permanent  feeling  of  oppression.  He  came  into  the  hospi-
tal where  he  was  treated  for  a  bronchitis  lasting  fifteen  days.

On  December  26,  1880,  the  following  notes  were  made;  tremor
extended  to  all  four  limbs,  more  marked  on  the  right  than  on  the  left
side,  more  intense  in  the  upper  than  in  the  lower  limbs  ;  movement
rhythmical,  ceasing  when  the  limbs  are  in  repose,  increasing  in  extent,
especially  at  the  extremities  of  the  limbs,  in  proportion  to  the  com-
plexity of  the  movement;  emotions  and  peripheral  stimuli  bring  it  on
when  the  limbs  are  in  repose.

Suggestive  Therapeutics.  219

The  left  hand  is  closed  ;  the  patient  cannot  open  it  entirely  ;  the  thiee
tir>t  fingers  are  partly  bent  in  toward  the  palm  of  the  hand,  almost  at
right  angles;  the  thumb  and  little  finger  are  brought  nearer  together;
the  interosseous  spaces  are  more  marked  on  the  dorsal  surface;  the  the-
nar and  hypothenar  eminences  appear  diminished  in  size.  The  patient
cannot  use  this  hand  and  cannot  hold  anything  in  it.  In  the  elbow  the
movements  of  extension  are  limited.  Shoulder  movements  are  made
with  a  certain  stiffness.  On  the  right  side,  all  movements  are  per-
formed without  any  stiffness,  and  the  patient  can  close  his  right  hand
with  considerable  force,  but  cannot  lift  a  glass  to  his  mouth  without
going  through  a  series  of  extensive  zigzag  movements.

In  the  lower  limbs  the  tremor  is  less  marked,  the  patient  performs  all
the  movements  he  is  told  to  without  ataxia,  and  walks  without  either
incoordination  or  tremor;  in  the  movements  of  the  left  knee  slight  stiff-
ness is  noticeable.  The  tendon  reflexes  are  exaggerated;  there  is  ankle-
clonus  and  the  knee-jerk  is  increased.  The  ankle-clonus  is  more
marked  on  the  left  side  and  is  accompanied  by  a  less  strong  trepidation
at  the  end  of  a  few  moments,  first  in  the  opposite  limb,  then  in  the
upper  right  limb,  and  finally  it  sometimes  spreads  to  all  four  limbs.

General  sensibility  is  destroyed  on  the  left  side  for  touch  as  well  as  for
pain  and  temperature.  On  the  right  side  it  is  present,  but  a  little  dimin-
ished. The  following  are  the  distances  between  the  two  points  of  the
compass  at  which  two  distinct  sensations  on  this  side  are  obtained,
expressed  in  centimetres.

Arm,  3,  5  ;  fore-arm,  4. — Hand  :  palm,  1,  5  ;  back  2,  5  ;  ends  of  fingers,
1. — Thigh  :  anterior  surface  4,  5. — Calf,  8. — Back  of  foot,  9,  5  ;  sole,  3. —
Thorax;  anterior  surface,  5,  5. — Abdomen  3. — Cheek,  2,  5. — Forehead,
1,  5.  There  is  moreover  a  certain  degree  of  analgesia  on  this  side.
The  muscular  sense  (idea  of  position  of  the  limbs)  is  abolished  on  the
left  side.

Special  senses:  the  left  eye  only  distinguishes  light  from  darkness,  has
no  perception  of  objects  or  of  colors,  no  visual  field.  With  the  ophthal-
moscope, slight  posterior  staphyloma  ;  some  pigmented  spots  on  the
inferior  parts  of  the  papilla.  The  right  eye  has  its  normal  visual  field,
and  distinguishes  objects  and  colors  ;  myopia  from  posterior  staphyloma.
(Examination  made  by  Professor  Charpentier.)

The  left  ear  docs  not  perceive  the  ticking  of  a  watch  held  up  against  it.
The  left  half  of  the  tongue  is  anesthetic,  and  insensible  to  colocynth.  The
left  nostril  does  not  react  to  the  odor  of  acetic  acid.  On  the  right  side,
hearing,  taste  and  smell  are  preserved.

The  intelligence  is  clear  ;  there  is  neither  cephalalgia,  vertigo,  nor
abnormal  feeling  in  the  limbs;  the  articulation  of  words  is  normal.

The  feeling  of  oppression  is  intense.     The  thorax  is  convex  in  front;

2  20  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

vesicular  murmur  is  exaggerated  on  both  sides  near  the  sternum.  Inspi-
ration is  hard  and  dry  ;  expiration  prolonged  and  sibilant  in  front.
Behind,  the  breathing  is  vesicular.  There  are  numerous  dry  rales.
Diagnosis  :  focal  lesion  (hemorrhagic  or  necrotic  softening)  double  and
symmetrical,  more  extended  on  the  right  side,  involving  the  internal  white
capsule,  its  posterior  third  particularly  ;  consecutive  irritation  of  the  pyra-
midal tracts,  whence  the  exaggeration  of  the  tendon  reflexes,  and  the
post-hemiplegic  tremor.     Pulmonary  emphysema  and  bronchitis.

On  December  25,  a  magnetic  bar  is  applied  along  the  external  sur-
face of  the  leg,  the  negative  pole  above,  and  is  left  in  place  for  twenty-
four  hours.     The  patient  is  not  conscious  of  any  abnormal  sensation.

28th. — It  is  observed  that  tactile  sensibility  and  sensibility  to  heat
and  to  pain  have  reappeared  in.  the  leg,  but  are  very  dull.  A  second
twenty-four  hour  se'ance.  In  the  night  there  are  pricking  sensations  in
the  limb  lasting  four  hours.

29th. — The  prick  of  a  pin  on  the  sole  of  the  foot  is  perceived,  and
causes  reflex  movements. — The  sensibility  in  the  leg  is  dull,  and  is  still
more  so  in  the  thigh.  Anaesthesia  persists  in  the  other  regions.  Dur-
ing the  day,  there  are  several  shooting  pains  in  the  calf  of  the  leg  and  in
the  great  toe.

30th. — Sensibility  is  present  in  the  lower  limb,  but  is  dull.

31st. — At  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  there  is  a  third  seance;  the
magnet  is  applied  to  the  left  side  of  the  face,  the  negative  pole  to  the
temple,  the  positive  pole  against  the  thorax  at  the  level  of  the  third  rib,
and  is  fixed  by  a  band.  A  few  minutes  later  the  patient  says  he  feels
shooting  pains  in  the  frontal  region  and  in  the  eyes,  especially  on  the  left
side,  and  sees  yellota  rays  and  black  spots.  At  four  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing, when  the  ward  is  lighted,  the  patient  states  that  he  can  see  dis-
tinctly with  this  eye.

January  1st. — When  making  rounds  we  observe  that  all  the  varieties  oj
sensibility  have  reappeared  on  the  left  side  of  the  body.  The  left  eye  sees,
and  the  left  ear  hears  the  ticking  of  a  watch  held  at  a  distance  of  seventeen
centimetres  to  the  left,  and  twenty-six  centimetres  to  the  right.  Taste  and
smell  are  again  present  on  the  left  side.

2d. — This  result  continues.  The  left  arm  feels  two  points  of  the  com-
pass, when  separated  three  centimetres  ;  the  right  arm,  eighteen  millime-
tres ;  the  left  leg,  two  centimetres;  the  anterior  surface  of  the  thigh,
eighteen  millimetres  ;  on  the  back  and  thorax  the  sensibility  is  equal  on
both  sides  of  the  body.  The  left  visual  field,  measured  by  M.  Charpen-
tier, measures  from  fifty  to  seventy-five  degrees,  and  is  equal  to  that  of  the
right  side.

3d. — Very  slight  pain  in  the  left  leg.  A  few  spots  of  acne  from  iodide
of  potash  (has  been  taking  one  gram  of  iodide  of  potassium  daily  since

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  221

December  26).  The  tremor  in  the  upper  limbs  has  very  visibly  diminished.
The  patient  opens  his  hjt  hand  slowly,  but  completely;  he  eau  hob/  a
glass  in  his  hand,  and  lift  it  to  his  mouth,  which  he  has  not  been  able  to
do  since  February,  1SS0.  He  can  dress  himself  and  use  this  hand,  which
he  could  not  do  before.

4th. — Perfect  sensitivo-sensorial  sensibility  continues.  The  tremor  has
further  diminished  since  yesterday.  The  hand  lifts  the  glass  to  the
mouth  directly,  sometimes  almost  without  tremor,  at  other  times  with
slight  tremor  as  it  nears  the  mouth.  The  tremor  has  almost  totally  dis-
appeared on  the  right  side.  The  muscular  force  of  both  hands  has
increased  considerably.  The  paresis  of  the  lower  limbs  persists  ;  the
patient  always  takes  short  steps,  sliding  along  on  the  soles  of  his  feet.
The  tendon-reflexes  persist  but  are  no  longer  generalized.

5th. — The  magnet  is  applied  to  the  left  leg  from  five  in  the  evening
until  the  next  clay  ;  pricking  sensation  in  the  leg  and  thigh,  pains  in  the
hip  and  knee,  which  disappear  rapidly.  The  tendon-reflexes  persist,
but  are  diminished  ;  on  the  right  side,  there  is  no  ankle-clonus,  and  the
knee-reflex  is  feeble  ;  on  the  left  side  it  remains  localized  in  the  limb.

The  left  hand  preserves  its  functions,  opens  and  shuts  more  slowly
than  the  right  hand  and  with  a  certain  stiffness,  but  can  do  everything
nevertheless,  can  button  and  unbutton,  etc.  The  tremor  persists,  but  to
a  very  slight  extent,  and  does  not  interfere  with  the  functions  of  the
limb.  Sensibility  remains  throughout.  Such  is  the  patient's  condition
to-day  (April  15,  1881).  Unhappily  for  him,  the  emphysema  and
oppression  persist.  The  chest  is  filled  with  sonorous,  sibilant,  and
mucous  rales,  and  it  is  to  be  feared  that  he  will  succumb  to  the  pulmo-
nary disease.

June  5th. — The  patient  is  still  in  the  hospital  ;  the  dyspnoea  persists  ;
it  is  combated  by  blisters,  dry  cupping,  and  iodide  of  potassium.  The
cure  of  the  hemianaesthesia  is  lasting.  The  left  side  of  the  body  and
the  sense  organs  preserve  their  sensibility.  The  tremor  in  both  limbs  is
reduced  to  almost  nothing.

The  muscular  contracture  alone  has  again  increased  during  the  last
month  ;  the  left  hand  is  deformed,  the  first  phalanges  bent  over  upon
the  metacarpus  at  an  obtuse  angle,  the  other  phalanges  extended,  the
fingers  separated  ;  the  patient  slowly  and  laboriously  succeeds  in  open-
ing the  hand  completely  and  in  closing  it;  a  resistance  is  noticed  when
some  one  else  tries  to  open  or  close  it  ;  nevertheless  the  patient  can  use
this  hand.  He  can  for  example  hold  a  glass,  and  lift  it  to  his  mouth
easily.  Flexion  and  extension  of  the  elbow  are  accomplished  with  a
certain  stiffness.  It  is  noticeable  that  the  patient  drags  his  left  leg
slightly  when  he  walks  ;  there  is  also  slight  resistance  in  the  knee  move-
ments ;  the  lifting  of  the  toe  of  the  foot  does  not  produce  any  trépida-

222  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

tion  ;  striking  the  patellar  tendon  gives  the  knee-jerk;  the  left  leg
describes  a  much  greater  arc  than  the  right  leg  if  its  tendon  is  struck
with  the  same  force.

To  sum  up.  The  curative  action  of  the  magnet  upon  the  hemianaes-
thesia,  and  upon  the  tremor  and  reflex  trepidation  continues  at  the  end
of  five  months.  The  contracture  of  the  upper  limb,  due  to  the  progres-
sive sclerosis  of  the  pyramidal  tract,  is  alone  reproduced.  On  the  right
side  the  limbs  perform  their  functions  normally  without  contracture  01
trepidation.

The  patient  remains  in  the  hospital  on  account  of  his  pulmonary
emphysema  ;  his  condition  remains  almost  stationary.

October  23d. — Contracture  is  again  present  in  the  upper  limb,
especially  in  the  flexors  of  the  fingers  ;  the  first  phalanges  are  flexed
upon  the  metacarpus,  the  others  are  in  demiflexion  ;  the  patient  can  no
longer  open  his  hand  spontaneously  ;  it  can  be  opened,  though  it  offers
a  certain  resistance,  but  it  shuts  again  like  a  spring  ;  the  limitation  in
the  movements  of  the  elbow  and  shoulder  also  exists,  to  a  less  degree.
The  patient  no  longer  uses  this  limb.  The  right  hand  performs  its
functions  well  ;  he  can  lift  a  glass  to  his  mouth  easily  with  it,  but  it
again  shows  slight  tremor,  which  becomes  a  little  more  exaggerated  as
the  glass  is  brought  to  the  lips.  Nevertheless  it  does  not  prevent  him
from  drinking  and  he  does  not  spill  a  drop.  The  articulations  of  the
lower  limb  are  also  a  little  stiff.  The  restored  sensibility  is  still
present.  For  two  weeks,  walking  has  been  painful  and  almost  impos-
sible; the  patient  drags  himself  painfully  to  get  over  a  short  distance.
The  attacks  of  dyspnoea  are  more  intense  ;  mucous  and  sibilant  rales  are
present  throughout  both  lungs.

The  results  which  I  had  seen  with  M.  Liébault,  and  those  which  I
had  obtained  on  this  same  day  with  a  patient  in  my  service  (See  Obs.
2),  influenced  me  to  try  hypnotization.  I  hypnotize  the  patient  by  means  of
suggestion  ;  he  falls  into  a  sleep  of  the  second  degree.  I  suggest  to  him
that  his  hand  is  cured,  that  he  can  again  move  it  easily,  that  the  tremor
in  the  hand  has  ceased,  and  at  the  same  time  that  his  dyspnoea  is  less
and  that  he  breathes  better.  During  his  sleep,  I  tell  him  to  open  and
shut  his  hand  ;  he  opens  and  shuts  it  alternately  with  a  little  stiffness  ;  but
little  by  little  it  becomes  more  supple  and  the  movements  of  flexion  and
extension  grow  easier.  "  If  that  could  only  last  !"  he  says  in  his  sleep.
I  assure  him  that  it  will  last.  When  he  wakes,  he  remembers  every-
thing that  I  told  him;  the  restored  movements  remain;  he  opens  and
shuts  his  hand  with  the  greatest  ease.  The  right  hand  hardly  trembles
during  the  movements,  and  the  left  hand  lifts  a  glass  to  his  lips  without
any  tremor.  On  the  dynamometer  the  needle  indicates  thirty-six  for  the
left  hand  and  forty  for  the  right.

Suggestii  r   Therapeutics.

**o

October  3d. — Ihe  benefit  obtained  has  continued.  Since  the  séance  of
yesterday,  the  patient  has  walked  easily  with  the  aid  of  a  stick.  There
is  no  tremor  whatever  of  the  right  hand:  the  left  preserves  its  limberness.
2'he  dynamo  metric force  has  increased  ;  for  the  left  hand  it  is  forty-seven  ;
for  the  right,  fifty. — New  hypnotic  suggestion.  This  time  the  patient
goes  into  somnambulism,  without  memory  upon  waking.  The  dyna-
mometer continues  to  register  forty-seven  and  fifty.  Moreover  the  pa-
tient states  that  he  has  /ess  oppression.

4th. — Same  condition.  Has  had  almost  no  feeling  of  oppression.
Has  slept  well  during  the  past  two  nights,  while  the  preceding  nights
were  very  bad.

5th. — Same  condition.  The  hand  continues  limber.  Slight  stiffness
remains  in  the  shoulder.  Has  slept  from  six  o'clock  to  midnight;  has
had  no  dyspnoea.  There  are  fewer  sibilant  rales  in  the  chest.  The
dynamometer  registers  thirty-eight  for  the  left  hand.  There  is  slight
stiffness  in  the  left  knee  and  hip.  When  the  patient  walks  the  leg  is
almost  rigid,  bends  a  little  at  the  joints,  and  shows  some  tremor.  He
cannot  stand  on  the  left  leg  alone.  Tendon  reflexes  of  the  foot  and
knee  are  present.

Hypnotic  Suggestion. — The  condition  of  the  limb  is  about  the  same
when  the  patient  wakes;  the  foot  and  knee  phenomena  persist.

6th. — The  stiffness  in  the  lower  limb  seems  to  have  diminished  a
little  ;  the  tendon-reflexes  persist.  The  leg  is  stiff  when  the  patient
walks.  However,  by  resting  one  hand  on  the  bed  he  can  stand  alone
upon  the  left  leg,  which  he  was  unable  to  do  before.  He  was  ab/e  to
walk  yesterday  afternoon  without  a  cane  for  the  first  time.  He  has  slept
well  and  has  no  feeling  of  oppression.

Hypnotic  suggestion  :  somnambulism.  I  suggest  the  complete  relaxa-
tion of  the  limb,  the  disappearance  of  the  tremor  and  dyspnoea.  During
sleep,  the  tendon-reflexes  of  the  foot  are  diminished  and  cease  at  command,
after  having  been  excited  about  ten  times.  Upon  waking,  he  can  stand
for  a  second  without  aid  and  walks  without  a  cane.  The  tendon-reflexes
of  the  foot  persist.

7th. — Has  slept  well,  without  any  dyspnoea.  Walked  yesterday  with-
out a  cane.     The  hand  and  shoulder  are  supple. —  Suggestion.

The  tendon-reflexes  are  diminished,  but  reappear  through  the  action  of
cold.  He  says  he  walks  better,  but  the  legs  are  still  stiff,  and  the  toes
are  slightly  so  in  extension.

The  improvement  continues  during  the  days  following.

1 2th. — The  tendon-reflexes  are  only  slightly  exaggerated  and  the
patient  walks  better.

16th. — He  walks  almost  all  day,  and  no  longer  has  any  dyspnoea.
Four  weeks  ago  he  kept  his  bed  because  of  a  sense  of  suffocation  :  now
he  has  nothing  more  of  the  kin^  and  is  up  all  day.

224  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

20th. — He  keeps  on  improving;  has  no  more  attacks,  sleeps,  and  no
longer  has  exaggerated  tendon-reflexes.

The  cure  holds  its  own  as  far  as  the  cerebral  affection  is  concerned.
For  two  years  the  patient  goes  and  comes,  and  walks  with  very  little
dragging  of  the  leg;  we  keep  him  in  the  hospital  on  account  of  his
emphysema.

We  thought  that  he  would  soon  succumb  ;  he  lived  on  until  April  4,
1885.  I  am  convinced  that  he  owed  this  prolongation  of  his  life  to  hyp-
notic suggestion.  The  frequent  attacks  of  oppression  were  invariably
calmed  by  means  of  it  :  when  he  passed  a  sleepless  night  on  account
of  the  orthopnoea,  I  hypnotized  him  the  next  day,  and,  thanks  to
suggestion,  the  following  nights  were  quiet  ;  the  dyspnoea  was  reduced
to  a  minimum.  The  organic  evolution  of  the  emphysema,  however,
gradually  brought  about  oppression,  with  permanent  cyanosis.  About
the  end  of  September,  1884,  the  patient  could  not  leave  his  bed,  and
this  was  so  until  his  death.

Autopsy. — Considerable  pulmonary  emphysema,  with  splenization  of
the  inferior  lobes.  Dilatation  of  the  right  heart. — Atheromatous  patches
in  the  aorta. — Venous  congestion  of  the  liver  and  kidneys.

Examination  of  the  brain. — Distinct  sub-arachnoid  oedema.

Left  hemisphere. — Focus  of  yelloio  softening  om,  012  in  width  and  om,  018
in  antero-posterior  diameter,  upon  the  convexity  of  the  occipital  lobe,  im-
mediately behind  the  fissure  which  separates  this  lobe  from  the  interior
parietal  lobule.

Right  hemisphere. — By  making  horizontal  sections,  until  the  level  of
the  upper  surface  of  the  corpus  striatum  is  reached,  a  spherical  cavity  is
reached  which  contains  serous  fluid  and  is  lined  by  a  yellow,  smooth,
serous,  false  membrane,  which  is  easily  detached.  This  cavity  exposed,
measures  om,  025  from  before  backward  ;  om,  03  in  width,  and  ora,  02  in
height.  At  this  level  the  focus  is  situated  immediately  behind  the  posterior
extremity  of  the.  optic  thalamus,  near  the  internal  capsule,  and  touching
externally  and  in  front  the  posterior  segment  of  the  insula  near  its
superior  border,  with  its  anterior  portion.  This  segment,  cut  very  thin,
presents  an  orifice  om,  003  in  diameter,  which  opens  into  the  cavity  which
is  found  in  the  sections  following.

A  second  section  about  a  centimetre  below,  shows  the  optic  thalamus
and  the  corpus  striatum  softened  i?i  their  posterior  third,  together  with  a  por-
tion of  the  intermediate  white  capsule.  The  length  of  the  softened  area  at
this  level  is  four  centimetres,  one  centimetre  and  a  half  of  which  has
preserved  its  white  color,  the  rest  of  the  tissue  being  soft  and  yellow.
The  white  capsule  is  softened  through  an  antero-posterior  extent  of  1.8
centimetres.

In  a  third  section  about  a  centimetre  below,  the  cavity  is  seen  to  be

Suggestil 'c    Therapeutics.  225

prolonged  into  the  posterior  third  of  the  white  external  capsule  of  the  claus-
trant ;  its  external  wall  is  made  up  of  the  gray  substance  of  the  posterior
third  of  the  lobule  of  the  insula.  The  external  white  capsule  measures
five  centimetres  and  a  half  in  length  at  this  level.  The  focus  takes  up  2.3
centimetres  of  its  extent.  At  this  level,  almost  all  the  posterior  portion
of  the  external  segment  of  the  corpus  striatum  is  destroyed ':  the  two  internal
segments,  to  the  extent  of  seven  millimetres  from  their  posterior
extremity,  present  a  yellowish  tint.  Finally,  in  the  same  section,  the
lesion  extends  into  the  internal  capsule,  as  far  as  the  origin  of  the
posterior  third  :  the  tissue  is  there  softened  to  the  extent  of  five  milli-
metres from  before  backward,  and  the  lesion  reaches  the  external  border
of  the  optic  thalamus,  upon  which  it  encroaches  to  a  depth  of  from  four
to  five  millimetres.

A  fourth  section  below  shows  nothing  further.

The  hardened  mid-brain,  medulla,  and  spinal-cord,  do  not  present  any
descending  degeneration  of  the  pyramidal  tract.

This  case  is  of  great  interest  from  different  points  of  view.  It
is  an  instance  of  a  focus  of  central  softening  having  given  rise  to
an  incomplete  left  hemiplegia  with  complete  sensitivo-sensorial
hemianesthesia,  post-hemiplegic  tremor,  and  secondary  con-
tracture.

At  the  end  of  a  year,  the  application  of  a  magnet  to  the  left
side  of  the  face  brought  back  the  sensibility  of  the  whole  body
and  of  the  special  senses,  in  a  few  hours  ;  during  the  days  follow-
ing, the  sensibility  kept  on  improving,  the  muscular  force
increased  considerably,  the  muscular  stiffness  disappeared  for  the
moment,  the  tremor  which  hindered  the  upper  limbs  from  per-
forming their  functions  diminished  to  a  point  where  it  no  longer
interfered  with  the  lost  prehensile  function,  and  at  last  dis-
appeared entirely.  The  contracture  alone  attacked  the  muscles
again  gradually,  at  the  end  of  four  months,  especially  those  of
the  upper  limb,  and  the  hand  was  again  closed.  Twenty
months  later  this  contracture,  together  with  the  exaggeration
of  the  tendon-reflexes,  yielded  distinctly  to  hypnotic  sug-
gestion.

A  fundamental  question  presents  itself.  Has  the  viag?iet  a
special  therapeutic  virtue,  or  has  it  only  acted  as  a  suggestive
influence  in  an  individual  who,  as  we  have  seen,  was  eminently
suggestible,  even  in  the  waking  condition  ?  Is  it  faith  in  the
power  of  the  magnet,  is  it  the  expectant  attention  of  the  subject
turned  in  upon  itself  and  suggesting  to  itself  the  return  of  sensi-
15

2  26  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

bility,  which  has  put  the  cerebral  mechanism  of  cure  into  activity  ?
The  question  does  not  vet  seem  to  be  definitely  decided.

Whatever  it  may  be,  however,  can  the  disappearance  of  such
persistent  phenomena  as  these,  hemianajsthesia,  tremor,  exagger-
ation of  the  tendon-reflexes,  and  contracture,  be  explained  either
by  a  special  action  of  the  magnet,  or  by  the  psychical  action  of
suggestion  ;  phenomena  which  seem  at  first  sight  to  be  directly
induced  by  the  organic  lesion  ?

Has  the  centripetal  conductivity  of  the  sensory  impressions
interrupted  by  the  focus  in  the  posterior  third  of  the  internal
capsule,  been  able  to  re-establish  itself  by  other  paths,  or  by  the
white  fibres  of  this  region  which  are  still  intact  and  are  seen  in
the  third  section,  near  the  base  of  the  brain  ?  Is  it  by  means  of
the  fibres  of  the  sensory  crossway,  which  are  still  preserved,  that
the  magnet,  the  suggestive  influence,  or  any  other  influence  has
been  able  to  restore  the  muscular  and  tactile  sensibility?  This
is  possible.

We  must  note  too,  that  the  anterior  portion  of  the  internal
capsule  was  not  destroyed,  and  that  the  medullary  bundle  had
not  been  affected  by  descending  degeneration.  It  was  then  a
question  of  a  purely  dynamic  irritation  of  this  bundle,  caused  by
the  neighboring  lesion.  We  know  besides  that  the  secondary
contracture  is  not,  as  Charcot  says  very  clearly,  the  result  of  the
■direct  activity  of  the  pyramidal  tract.  But  the  lesion  or  the  irri-
tation of  this  bundle  is  reflected,  thanks  to  the  direct  anatomical
relations  which  seem  to  exist  between  them,  into  the  motor  cells
of  the  anterior  horns.  Hence,  the  contracture  or  increase  of
muscular  tone;  hence,  the  exaltation  of  the  excito-motor  reflex
action  of  the  spinal-cord,  as  shown  by  the  exaggeration  of  the
tendon-reflexes.  If  this  condition  of  irritation  stretches  by  diffu-
sion to  other  ganglionic  elements  of  the  region,  an  exaltation  of
the  activities  of  this  system  will  be  the  result.  Each  stimulus
transmitted  from  the  brain  to  a  group  of  motor  cells,  instead  of
localizing  itself  there,  may  radiate  to  one  or  several  neighboring
groups  ;  hence  the  result,  that  intentional  movements  will  be
complicated  with  more  or  less  disordered  involuntary  movement,
and  the  hemi-tremor  or  hemi-chorea  will  be  seen  to  reappear
according  to  the  degree  of  this  spinal-cord  exaltation,  and  accord-
ing to  the  manner  of  the  reaction,  which  varies  with  each  indi-
vidual. The  tremor,  contracture,  and  trepidation  are  then  three
phenomena  due  to  a  common  pathogenic  mechanism,  the  exalta-

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  227

tion  of  the  gray  ganglionic  excito-motor  substance  associated
with  the  pyramidal  tract.

Has  the  magnet,  acting  in  the  first  place  by  suspending  these
phenomena  simultaneously  with  the  anaesthesia,  acted  directly
upon  the  spinal  cord,  the  exaggerated  excitability  of  which  it
has  diminished  ?  I  do  not  think  so.  The  tremor  and  contract-
ture  disappeared  after  the  return  of  sensibility.  I  am  inclined  to
think  that  the  disappearance  of  these  symptoms  was  associated
with  the  restoration  of  the  tactile  and  muscular  sense  ; — but  by
what  mechanism  ?

Physiologists  admit  that  the  brain  has  a  regulating  influence
over  the  reflex  excitability  of  the  cord.  Warned  by  the  impres-
sions which  reach  it,  of  what  is  going  on  in  the  muscles  and
organs  set  in  activity,  of  the  position  of  the  limbs,  of  the  degree
of  contraction  in  the  muscles,  of  the  vitality  of  the  movements,
etc.,  the  brain  may  act  in  knowledge  of  the  cause,  if  I  may  so
express  it,  quite  unknown  to  us,  by  a  reflex  mechanism,  and
may  contribute  to  direct  the  harmony  and  regularity  of  these
movements.  Doubtless,  in  a  healthy  subject  whose  spinal-cord
performs  its  functions  normally,  if  these  complex  movements
of  prehension  and  locomotion,  etc.,  which  are  repeated  daily,
have  once  been,  so  to  speak,  assimilated  by  the  cord,  they  con-
tinue to  be  carried  on  almost  exclusively  by  the  spinal  mechan-
ism, automatically  in  some  ways,  without  the  conscious  or
unconscious  intervention  of  the  brain  being  necessary.  But  it  is
no  longer  thus  when  the  cord  carries  on  its  functions  abnormally,
when  the  abnormal  excitability  of  its  gray  ganglionic  substance
hinders  it  from  fulfilling  with  regularity  and  precision  its  excito-
motor  functions.  Then  the  movements  become  disordered;
centres  foreign  to  the  intentional  movement,  excited  by  irradia-
tion, add  to  the  latter  muscular  movements  which  are  foreign  to
the  end  in  view;  there  is  tremor,  chorea,  etc.

Under  these  conditions  the  intervention  of  the  brain  becomes
useful  ;  it  moderates  the  excito-motor  influence  of  the  cord,  it
regulates  movements  that  the  cord,  left  to  itself,  no  longer  knows
how  to  direct  properly.  It  corrects,  in  a  certain  measure  at
least,  the  imperfection  of  the  spinal  mechanism  ;  it  corrects  it  so
that  it  can  appreciate  what  is  going  on  in  the  muscular  move-
ments. When  these  ideas  are  wanting  in  it,  when  the  sensorium
is  ignorant  of  the  position  of  the  limbs,  their  contraction,  or
relaxation,  their  flexion  and  extension,  when  the  nerve-fibres  by

22$  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

means  of  which  the  organs  of  movement  keep  it  informed  each
second  of  their  situation  and  needs,  are  broken,  then  the  brain
becomes  powerless  to  help  the  disorders  of  motion,  and  the  cord
has  full  command.  If  the  broken  fibre  be  renewed,  and  the
brain  put  into  relation  with  the  cutaneous  and  muscular  periphery,
it  creates  order  there,  and  re-establishes,  as  far  as  possible,  the
muscular  harmony  which  is  subserved  by  the  cord.  Now,  such
seems  to  be  the  therapeutic  influence  of  the  magnet.  Restoring
the  tactile  and  muscular  senses,  it  allows  the  brain  to  correct  the
aberrations  of  the  spinal  excitability  which  are  manifested  by
tremor,  reflex  trepidation,  and  chorea.

The  magnet  is  able,  at  the  same  time,  to  moderate  the  mus-
cular rigidity  by  means  of  a  mechanism  analogous  to  that  by
which  it  appears  to  modify  the  reflex  trepidation  and  hemi-
chorea.  The  encephalic  ganglia  also  interfere  to  modify  and
correct  this  mode  of  exaggerated  reflex  spinal  activity,  which
transforms  the  muscular  tone  into  contracture.  Warned  by  the
centripetal  muscular  nerves  of  the  degree  of  muscular  contrac-
tion, the  brain  regulates  this  exaggerated  contraction  involunta-
rily, and  puts  it  as  far  as  is  possible,  back  to  its  normal  state,  and
re-establishes  the  physiological  muscular  tone.

Thus  would  be  strictly  explained,  by  the  single  and  dynamic
virtue  of  magneto-therapeutics,  the  esthesiogenic  virtue  (sugges-
tive or  otherwise)  which  restores  the  tactile,  articular,  and  mus-
cular sense,  and  the  simultaneous  efficacy  of  this  therapeutic
means  in  regard  to  these  three  phenomena,  tremor,  reflex  trepi-
dation, post-hemiplegic  contractures,  which  are  all  spinal  phe-
nomena, bound  up  with  a  functional  over-activity  of  the  gray,
excito-motor,  reflex  axis  of  the  spinal  cord.

But  the  contracture  reappeared  in  our  patient,  although  the
restored  sensibility  was  maintained.  We  must  conclude,  there-
fore, that  the  irritation  ceaselessly  transmitted  by  the  pyramidal
tract  to  the  motor  spinal  centres,  may  be  of  such  a  nature  that
the  influence  of  the  encephalic  centres,  even  aided  by  the  infor-
mation derived  from  the  muscular  sense,  may  be  powerless  to
rule  it.

Suggestion  then  has  interfered  efficaciously.  By  means  of  an
inhibitory  phenomenon  of  psychical  origin,  it  has  acted  especially
upon  the  contracture  and  reflex  trepidation,  phenomena  which
were  simply  dynamic  in  this  case,  and  which  were  not  rendered
incurable  by  the  condition  of  the  organs.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  229

I  cannot  insist  too  strongly  upon  this  fact,  which  explains  the
efficacy  of  suggestion  under  many  circumstances.  The  func-
tional trouble  in  diseases  of  the  nervous  centres  often  exceeds  the
field  of  the  anatomical  lesion  ;  this  latter  is  reflected  by  shock  or
dynamic  irritation  upon  the  functions  of  neighboring  zones.
And  it  is  against  this  modified  dynamic  state,  independently  of  a
direct  material  alteration,  that  psycho-therapeutics  may  be  all-
powerful.  It  remains  inefficacious  and  restricted,  or  has  only  a
transient  use,  when  the  functional  trouble  is  directly  kept  up  by
the  lesion.  I  have  often  tried  suggestion  against  the  slow  con-
tractures connected  with  descending  degeneration,  and  distinct
results  are  sometimes  obtained,  but  they  are  ephemeral,  while
at  other  times  there  is  no  result.  Suggestion  does  not  restore  a
destroyed  organ  any  more  than  the  magnet  does  ;  it  restores
function  as  far  as  is  compatible  with  the  anatomical  condition  of
the  organ.

These  considerations  show  what  an  enormous  influence  func-
tional dynamic  states  play  in  the  affection  of  the  nervous  centres;
they  show  by  what  mechanism,  in  my  opinion,  suggestion  acting
through  the  mediation  of  the  psychical  organ  to  re-establish  the
disturbed  dynamic  condition  may  diminish  a  series  of  grave  and
obstinate  perturbations,  connected  in  reality  with  a  simple
functional  modality,  although  a  distant  organic  lesion  may
have  determined  them.

Observation*  II. — From  September  i,  1882,  to  February  15.  18S4,  four  severe  cerebro-
spinal, apoplectiform  attacks,  the  first  with  paraplegia,  most  marked  on  the  left  side  :
the  others  with  paralysis  of  the  lender  left  limb,  ulnar  neuritis,  pains  in  the  loins,
cephalalgia,  etc. — Many  slight  attacks  of  isolated  ulnar  neuritis. — Efficacy  of  suggestion.
—  Total  cure  by  a  series  of  suggestions.

P.  (François),  a  workman  fifty-two  years  old,  came  into  the  hospital
September  3,  1882.

Constitution  good,  generally  good  health,  no  syphilitic,  alcoholic,  or
rheumatic  history.  He  says  that  when  eleven  years  old  he  had  epilepti-
form attacks  daily  for  thirty-six  days,  in  consequence  of  fright  caused
by  the  sight  of  a  bear.  Then  they  ceased,  to  reappear  in  1856,  when
he  was  twenty-six  years  old.  He  had  them  three  or  four  times  a  day
for  fourteen  years.  Since  1870,  he  has  had  none.  He  fell  without
pain  or  other  sensation.     He  has  never  had  headache.

During  the  past  two  or  three  years  he  has  had  pains  in  the  loins  at
long  intervals,  which  have  lasted  an  hour  or  two,  and  have  never  pre-
vented him  from  working.

230  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

On  August  28,  1882,  at  five  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  patient  sud-
denly fell  unconscious,  and  remained  so  for  twelve  hours.  He  was  in
the  hospital  at  Pompey.  He  then  experienced  great  stiffness  with
fatigue  in  his  arms  and  legs,  and  a  severe  supra-orbital  neuralgia.  He
left  his  bed  on  the  30th,  and  the  hospital  on  September  1st.  On  the
3d,  he  came  to  Nancy  on  foot  (12  kilometres),  feeling  very  well.

Here  he  suddenly  felt  a  sharp  pain  in  his  legs  and  again  fell  uncon-
scious.

When  taken  into  the  hospital  an  hour  afterwards  he  had  regained
consciousness.

4th. — Temperature  normal;  pulse  slow  and  regular;  arteries  ather-
amatous;  intelligence  clear;  heart  regular.  Complains  of  sharp  pain
in  his  lower  limbs  which  he  compares  to  the  wound  left  by  the  bite  of  a
dog.  and  further,  of  a  burning  sensation  in  the  epigastric  region.  Sen-
sation as  of  a  blow  from  a  hammer  at  the  spinous  process  of  the  seventh
dorsal  vertebra  ;  pressure  causes  sharp  pain  at  the  seventh,  eighth,
and  ninth  dorsal  vertébrée,  and  at  the  corresponding  intercostal  spaces.
There  is  a  tow-like  sensation  in  the  hands.  Severe  supra-orbital  neu-
ralgia. Paraplegia  exists.  Patient  bends  his  knees  in  bed,  but  cannot
lift  his  legs.  Anaesthesia  with  analgesia  of  the  lower  limb,  as  far  as  a
horizontal  line  extending  a  finger's  breadth  above  the  pubes.  No  con-
tracture, no  reflex  trepidation, — micturition  painful  ;  it  takes  from  six  to
eleven  minutes  to  pass  300  grams  of  urine  ;  he  passed  water  involunta-
rily for  the  first  time  during  the  night:  no  appetite  ;  great  thirst.

5th. — Cephalalgia  persists  ;  the  dorsal  and  epigastric  pain  has  dis-
appeared ;  pressure  at  the  level  of  the  dorsal  vertebrae  and  intercostal
spaces  still  causes  slight  pain.  Cutting  and  tearing  pains  in  the  legs,
particularly  in  the  knees,  and  spreading  to  the  feet;  pricking  sensation
upon  pressure  of  the  thighs.

Extension  of  the  legs  gives  rise  to  the  cutting  pains  in  the  knees  ;  it
is  the  same  with  the  movements  of  the  ankle.  Pressure  upon  the
muscles  of  the  legs  also  causes  sharp  pain.

The  analgesia  extends  nine  centimetres  above  the  condyles  of  the
femurs;  above  that,  there  is  diminished  sensibility  as  far  as  the  folds  of
the  groin,  where  it  again  becomes  normal.  In  the  arms,  sensibility  to
pain  is  much  diminished  ;  the  tow-like  feeling  persists  in  the  hands.

The  paraplegia  persists  ;  the  leg  is  flexed  upon  the  thigh  with  more
difficulty  than  yesterday. — During  the  night,  from  ten  to  three  o'clock,
the  patient  had  tinnitis  in  his  right  ear,  and  violent  neuralgia.  This
morning,  hearing  on  the  right  side  diminished  ;  the  ticking  of  a  watch  is
perceived  at  a  distance  of  six  centimetres  on  this  side  and  eighteen  on
the  left  (examination  of  the  ear  shows  nothing  abnormal)  ;  profuse  per-
spiration ("four  cupping  glasses   applied.     Bonjean's  ergotine  iKm,   20).

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  231

6th. — The  lower  right  limb  is  better.  The  patient  lifts  the  leg  five
centimetres.  Sensibility  has  returned  to  the  thigh  and  leg  on  this  side,
as  far  as  three  finger  breadths  above  the  malleoli.  The  left  leg  is  still
paralyzed  ;  he  cannot  lift  it.  Analgesia  exists  as  far  as  four  centi-
metres above  the  condyles.

The  right  hand  is  better  ;  the  tow-like  sensation  has  disappeared  ;
only  a  feeling  of  stiffness  remains.  The  left  hand  still  feels  like  tow;
further,  the  analgesia  has  increased  in  it,  and  is  complete  as  far  as
three  finger  breadths  above  the  wrist.  With  the  dynamometer  this
hand  gives  10.  the  other  60.

7th. — Complains  of  shooting  pains  from  left  elbow  to  fingers. — {Appli-
cation  of  magn

9th. —  The  application  of  a  magnet  to  the  left  limb  has  been  continued.
— Motility  and  sensibility  have  returned  to  the  right  side.  No  change
in  the  left.

nth. — Same  condition,  in  spite  of  the  application  of  magnets;  pro-
fuse perspiration  ;  insomnia.

1 2th. — Same  condition.  Persistent  anaesthesia  in  the  left  hand,  as
far  as  20  centimetres  above  the  wrist.  The  dynamometer  gives  13
for  the  left,  and  67  for  the  right  hand.

The  situation  remains  the  same  until  about  the  20th  of  September.

T/ie  application  of  magnets,  which  has  been  discontinued  since  the  14th,
is  again  begun.

Under  the  influence  of  a  magnet  applied  to  the  sole  of  the  foot,  sensi-
bility reappears  first  in  the  thigh,  then  in  the  knee,  and  two-  days  afterward
it  is  present  as  far  as  the  tuberosity  of  the  tibia.

24th. — Sensibility  extends  to  the  malleoli,  the  foot  remaining  insen-
sible. Since  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  the  patient  has  felt  sharp  pain  in
the  sole  of  the  foot,  running  along  the  internal  plantar  nerve  to  the
ankle.  Further,  a  contracture  in  flexion  of  the  three  last  fingers  on  the
left  hand  is  noticed,  and  the  thumb  and  index  finger  alone  preserve
their  normal  motility.  The  three  contracted  fingers  are  totally  anaes-
thetic, the  two  others  retain  slight  sensibility.  It  is  the  same  with  the
palm  and  back  of  the  hand  ;  anaesthesia  as  far  as  the  third  metacarpal
space  ;  in  the  wrist  the  radial  border  alone  is  sensible,  to  a  transverse
extent  of  two  centimetres.  Finally,  the  entire  ulnar  area  of  the  fore-
arm is  anaesthetic  as  far  as  ten  centimetres  above  the  wrist.  In  the
arm  sensibility  is  perfect.  Pressure  upon  the  ulnar  nerve  in  the  ole-
cranon groove  is  very  painful. — (Application  of  a  blister  at  the  level  of
the  pisiform  bone.)

25th. — Sensibility  has  reappeared  in  the  sole  of  the  foot,  as  far  as
the  head  of  the  metatarsus.     Same  condition  in  the  upper  limb.

26th. — Perfect  sensibility  in  the  entire  foot.

232  Suggestive   Thei'apcidîcs.

On  the  evening  of  the  28th,  he  patient  suddenly  feels  a  sharp  pain
in  the  course  of  the  ulnar  nerve,  from  the  elbow  to  the  three  last  fin-
gers.    The  pain  is  sharp  and  continuous,  forcing  him  to  cry  out.

30th. — Under  the  influence  of  the  magnet  applied  yesterday,  the  tac-
tile sensibility  of  the  fore-arm,  which  was  abolished  as  far  as  ten  centi-
metres above  the  wrist,  reappears  two  and  a  half  centimetres  above.
The  condition  of  the  hand  remains  the  same.

October  1st. — Sensibility  begins  at  two  centimetres  above  the  wrist.
(Application  of  magnet  continued.)

2d. —  Sensibility  recedes  to  the  level  of  the  two  phalanges.

The  patient  is  hypnotized.  He  falls  into  a  profound  sleep  in  a  few  sec-
onds, without  memory  upon  waking.  I  vigorously  suggest  the  return
of  sensibility  and  motility  to  the  fingers.  Upon  waking,  the  contracture
has  disappeared  ;  the  patient  again  moves  his  fingers  and  wrist  perfectly;
sensibility  has  returned  to  the  two  last  phalanges.  By  the  dynamometer
the  left  hand  gives  20,  the  right  60.

3d. — The  result  obtained  continues.  There  is  paresis  of  the  lower
left  limb.  Walking  is  slow  and  painful  ;  the  patient  drags  the  lower
limb,  and  cannot  stand  on  the  left  foot.

New  hypnotization.  I  suggest  to  the  patient  that  he  can  walk  very
well.

When  he  wakes  after  ten  minutes,  the  patient  walks  quickly,  only  drag-
ging the  leg  slightly  ;  he  supports  himself  for  three  seconds  on  the  left
foot.  He  only  complains  of  a  certain  heaviness  in  the  limb.  The
dynamometer  registers  30  for  the  left  hand.

On  the  4th,  the  left  hand  registers  32  to  34  ;  the  right  hand  63.  Same
condition  for  the  lower  limb.

New  hypnotic  suggestion,  after  which  the  left  hand  gives  40,  the
right  hand  70.  The  heaviness  in  the  leg  is  diminished  to  half  ;  he  supports
himself  for  five  seconds  on  this  leg.

5th. — The  left  hand  gives  51,  the  right  70.  Can  raise  the  foot
as  high  as  twenty  centimetres. — After  a  new  suggestion,  the  feeling  of
weight  has  entirely  disappeared  ;  the  patient  walks  about  without  drag-
ging the  limb,  lifts  the  foot  as  high  as  forty-five  centimetres,  and  sup-
ports himself  for  five  seconds  on  this  foot.     The  left  hand  gives  52.

6th. — The  left  hand  gives  55,  the  right  64.  He  stands  seven
seconds  on  the  left  foot,  and  lifts  the  sole  as  high  as  fifty-eight  centi-
metres. He  has  complained  of  involuntary  crying  for  several  days  past.
New  suggestion.

7th. — He  can  still  walk  well  ;  he  can  run,  and  stands  twelve  seconds
on  the  leg  ;  the  involuntary  crying  has  disappeared  ;  his  eyes  were  stuck
fast  together  for  one  or  two  hours   after  he  waked,  and  during  the  day

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  233

the  involuntary  crying  appeared  at  the  least  effort,  at  the  act  of  bending
over  for  example  ;  this  morning  his  eyes  have  not  been  so  closed.

Patient,  whom  I  have  not  hypnotized  since  October  7,  continues  to
walk  well  ;  he  runs  without  dragging  his  leg  and  without  the  least  feel-
ing of  weight;  his  hand  remains  supple  ;  on  the  12th,  the  dynamometer
gives  50  for  the  left,  and  72  for  the  right  hand.  The  involuntary  crying
has  entirely  disappeared.

The  patient  leaves  the  hospital  and  resumes  his  work  on  the  14th.
After  having  kept  on  uninterruptedly  until  the  25th,  he  returns  to  the
hospital  on  the  26th.  For  three  or  four  days  he  has  felt  a  cold  sensa-
tion creeping  from  the  left  foot  to  the  knee,  which  is  calmed  by  heat;
beside,  there  has  been  a  sense  of  weight  in  the  left  hand.  The  even-
ing before,  all  of  a  sudden,  he  felt  shooting  pains  extending  from  the
fingers  to  the  left  elbow,  accompanied  with  cramp,  and  contracture  in
flexion  of  the  hand,  for  ten  minutes.  At  the  same  time,  lightning  pains
spreading  along  the  external  surface  of  the  thigh  and  of  the  left  leg  to
the  end  of  the  foot,  with  a  sense  of  weight  in  the  limb  without  cramps,
lasting  five  minutes.  This  attack,  as  sudden  as  a  pistol  shot,  left  him
stupefied  and  speechless.  He  has  been  weeping  for  four  or  five  days
and  his  eyes  are  red.

This  morning  the  symptoms  disappeared  spontaneously  ;  the  dyna-
mometer registers  51  for  the  left  hand.  He  feels  nothing  but  a
sense  of  weight  in  this  hand.  Is  put  into  a  profound  sleep.  After  sug-
gestion, this  feeling  of  weight  disappears  and  the  dynamometer  registers
61.

P goes  back  to  his  work  and  has  no  more  trouble  until  the  end  of

March,  1883.

On  the  1st  of  April  he  comes  to  the  hospital  again.  His  hand  has
been  growing  weak  for  three  or  four  days  but  he  has  had  no  pain.

The  dynamometer  registers  24  for  this  hand,  65  for  the  other.  After
hypnotic  suggestion  the  dynamomctric  pressure  is  60  instead  of  24,  and  the
patient  is  able  to  work  again.

But  he  is  again  brought  back  to  the  hospital  on  the  5th.  About  ten
o'clock  on  the  4th  he  suddenly  felt  sharp  pains  in  his  left  leg  from  the
knee  to  the  malleoli,  seven  or  eight  times  in  succession  during  two
or  three  seconds,  and  lasting  over  three  quarters  of  an  hour.  In
consequence,  the  leg  became  heavy  and  lost  strength.  The  patient  tried
to  continue  his  work,  but  had  to  give  it  up  at  half-past  three  and  go
home,  dragging  his  leg;  in  the  morning  he  took  the  train  to  come  to
Nancy.  On  the  way  from  the  station  to  the  hospital  he  had  another
attack  of  cutting  pains  in  the  left  leg  and  arm,  and  fell  unconscious.
He  was  lifted  by  a  passer-by,  and  did  not  come  to  himself  again  until
half  an  hour  had  passed.  He  was  carried  to  the  hospital,  as  he  was
unable  to  walk.

234  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

Since  his  fall  he  has  complained  of  incessant  and  sharp  pains  in  the
knee,  groin,  and  left  ankle.  The  limb  is  completely  paralyzed  and
anaesthetic  as  far  up  as  the  groin  ;  the  patient  can  only  bend  the  first
three  toes  slightly. — In  the  upper  limb  there  is  a  contracture  of  the  left
hand.  If  closed  it  can  only  be  forced  open  with  difficulty,  for  it  closes
again  like  a  spring.  Sharp  painful  sensations  running  from  hand  to
elbow.  Pain  in  the  epitrochlear  groove,  both  spontaneous  and  on  pres-
sure. Analgesia  of  the  last  three  fingers,  and  of  the  entire  ulnar  area.
Pricking  sensation  in  the  fingers,  which  lasts  until  seven  o'clock  in  the
evening.  Pain  on  pressure  of  the  left  buttock  at  the  emergence  of  the
sciatic.  For  two  months  the  patient  has  had  tinnitis  and  deafness
of  the  right  ear.

It  is  impossible  to  use  suggestion  in  the  morning  on  account  of  the
violence  of  the  pains.  It  is  successful  in  the  evening.  After  hypnotic
suggestion  the  patient  can  open  his  hand  and  stretch  out  his  fingers  The
sharp  pains  in  the  upper  limb  disappear  in  three  quarters  of  an  hour;
in  the  lower  limb  in  three  hours.     Little  sleep  during  the  night.

6th. — Patient  opens  the  first  three  fingers  three  quarters  of  the  way,
the  second  phalanx  remaining  at  right  angles  to  the  first.  Pressure  on
the  epitrochlear  groove  is  still  painful.  Sensation  has  returned  to  the
fingers.  The  dynamometer  indicates  10  for  the  left  hand  and  64  for
the  right.  The  leg  movements  are  almost  nil. — Hypnotic  suggestion:
the  hand  opens  more  easily:  17  by  the  dynamometer. — Slight  move-
ments in  the  toes.  Return  of  sensation  to  the  external  surface  of  the
foot  and  leg.

At  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  the  patient  is  seized  with  "girdle
pains,"  like  burning  at  the  base  of  the  thorax. — At  six  o'clock  there
is  pain  upon  pressure  in  the  5th,  6th,  and  7th  intercostal  spaces,  over  the
four  lower  dorsal  vertebras.  The  sharp  pains  have  not  reappeared  in
the  limbs.  Sensibility  is  distinct  in  the  entire  foot  and  external  surface
of  the  leg.

Prolonged  hypnotic  suggestion  with  application  of  the  hand  to  the  pain-
ful and  affected  regions.  Upon  awaking  all  the  pains  have  disappeared
the  spontaneous  ones  as  well  as  those  caused  by  pressure.  The  patient  can
open  his  hand  more  easily.  Sensibility  is  perfect  throughout  the  lower
limb.  He  lifts  his  foot  five  centimetres  easily  and  holds  it  up  for  three
seconds.

7th. — Dream-troubled  sleep  during  the  night.  The  effect  obtained
is  lasting.  The  restored  sensibility  continues.  Patient  moves  his
fingers  and  toes,  opens  his  hand  partially,  presses  the  dynamometer  up
to  r6,  and  bends  his  knee  and  lifts  his  leg  a  little.  The  tenderness  of  the
epitrochlear  groove  persists,  as  well  as  the  feeling  of  weight  in  the  leg.
Hypnotic  suggestion  in  the  evening.

Suggestii  r   Therapeutics.

-JO

8th. — The  hands  register  20  by  the  dynamometer.  The  patient  opens
and  closes  his  hand  more  easily  ;  lifts  his  foot  higher,  and  holds  it  up
for  four  seconds.  Has  constant  buzzing  in  the  left  ear.  During  the
morning  has  a  sensation  of  vertigo  on  the  left  side  of  his  head,  and  in
his  eye,  which  lasts  until  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening.  No  sug-
gestion.

9th. — The  left  hand  registers  25.  The  foot  can  be  lifted  ten  centi-
metres and  held  up  for  four  seconds.  The  pain  in  the  epitrochlear
groove  persists.

10th. — Same  condition.  New  hypnotic  suggestion  in  the  evenings  after
which  the  h a  /ut  prisses  the  dynamometric  needle  up  to  25.  and  the  left  foot
is  held  as  high  as  thirty  centimetres  for  five  seconds.  At  nine  o'clock  in  the
evening  there  are  new  shooting  pains  along  the  ulnar  tract,  lasting
several  seconds,  and  succeeding  each  other  every  five  minutes,  with
sense  of  constriction  in  the  wrist.

nth. — The  hand  cannot  be  opened  wide.  Pain  along  the  ulnar
nerve.     Sensation  not  abolished.     Hypnotic  suggestion  checks  the  pain.

1 2th. — Patient  can  no  longer  extend  the  fingers  entirely;  dynamom-
eter 17  to  20.  Ulnar  pain  again  present,  but  to  a  less  degree.  Con-
dition of  leg  the  same.  At  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  there  is  still  pain
upon  pressure  over  the  ulnar  nerve.  It  disappears  after  hypnotization
and  the  fingers  are  easily  opened.     Buzzing  in  the  ear  has  disappeared.

At  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  patient  ate  a  little  bread,  being
hungry  ;  at  eleven  o'clock,  after  having  taken  some  boullion,  he  was
seized  with  a  feeling  of  violent  epigastric  constriction,  which  lasted  three
hours  :  at  one  o'clock  he  became  unconscious  and  remained  so  for
about  half  an  hour.  Then,  the  constriction  having  ceased,  he  had  a
painful  pricking  sensation  in  his  forehead,  nose,  and  eyes.

18th. — Cephalalgia  with  pricking  sensation  ;  no  pain  along  the  nerve
path.  Hand  gives  20  by  the  dynamometer.  Very  sharp  pain  at  the
seventh  and  eighth  dorsal  vertebra.  Hypnotic  suggestion  diminishes  the
sensation  of  pricking  very  much  :  spina/  pains  persist.  New  suggestion
during  the  evening  causes  the  former  trouble  to  disappear  entirely,  but
has  no  effect  upon  the  latter.

A  moderate  sub-cutaneous  injection  of  morphine  does  not  succeed  in
removing  this  excessive  spinal  pain,  which  makes  the  patient  groan  all
night.  Toward  midnight  cold  sweat,  with  loss  of  consciousness,  lasting
half  an  hour.

14th. — Sensation  of  weight  in  fronto-parietal  region,  especially  on  the
left  side.  Spinal  pain  persists  in  the  sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth  dorsal
spinous  processes,  and  in  the  corresponding  left  intercostal  spaces.
"  Girdle  pain."

Hypnotic  suggestion  :  pain  in  the  head  has  disappeared  :  spinal  hyperœs-

236  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

thesia  persists.  During  the  evening,  injection  of  one  centigramme  of
morphine  loco  dolenti ;  pain  disappears:  hypnotic  suggestion.

15th. — Patient  did  not  sleep,  but  had  no  spontaneous  pains.  In  the
morning  the  spinal  hyperesthesia  and  "girdle  pain"  still  exist,  but  are
much  less  severe.  Hypnotic  suggestion.  "  Girdle  pain,"  has  vanished
cntirelx,  spinal  hypcrœsthesia  has  decreased.  For  three  hours  during  the
night,  sensation  as  of  blows  from  a  hammer,  leaving  the  dorsal  surface
of  the  hand,  and  extending  to  the  fingers.

17th. — Stiffness  in  the  fingers,  which  cannot  be  stretched  out  com-
pletely. Sensibility  persists  ;  no  pain  in  ulnar  nerve.-  Dynamometer
registers  15.  Patient  walks  quite  well,  but  the  contact  of  the  sole  of  the
foot  with  the  floor  causes  pricking  sensations.  (No  suggestion  for  two
days.)

19th. — Still  opens  hand  with  difficulty,  and  cannot  extend  fingers.
Walks  with  difficulty,  and  complains  of  pain  in  heel.  For  several  clays
micturition  has  been  difficult  and  is  accompanied  with  hypogastric
pains  which  cease  as  soon  as  the  urine  begins  to  flow.  The  spinal
hyperesthesia  has  not  reappeared.

21st. — Same  symptoms.  Micturition  painful  at  first.  Drags  left  leg
and  cannot  hold  fingers  open.  Dynamometer,  23  for  left,  60  for  right
hand.  After  hypnotic  suggestion  dynamometer  registers  28  for  left  hand;
patient  walks  somewhat  better.

23d. — Evening  ;  continued  stiffness  of  hand  and  complete  extension  of
fingers  impossible.  Drags  left  leg  and  has  pain  in  the  groin,  knee,  and
heel,  while  walking.  After  hypnotic  suggestion,  stiffness  in  the  hand
and  pain  in  the  knee  and  heel  have  notably  decreased  ;  pain  in  the
groin  persists.

24th. — Same  condition.  New  suggestion;  upon  waking,  pain  in  the
groin  persists,  but  diminishes  spontaneously  during  the  night.

1 2th. — Stiffness  in  the  hand  persists.  The  patient  walks  somewhat
better,  but  drags  leg  with  feeling  of  great  weight  in  it,  and  cannot  sup-
port himself  standing  on  that  leg  alone.  After  suggestion,  sensation
diminishes  considerably  but  reappears  rapidly.

27th. — This  morning,  after  suggestion  of  yesterday  evening,  leg  is  not
as  heavy,  and  patient  is  much  less  lame.  Can  stand  for  one  second  on
the  left  foot  alone.  Pain  in  the  groin  has  not  reappeared.  Suggestion.
Stiffness  in  fingers  persists  and  only  yields  for  a  short  time  to  suggestion.

28th. — Leg  is  doing  well,  fingers  remain  straight.  After  prolonged
hypnotic  suggestion,  patient  can  stretch  them  out  completely  ;  they  are
supple.     Stiffness  reappears  about  three  o'clock  in  the  morning.

29th. — In  the  morning,  hypnotic  suggestion  makes  stiffness  disappear
again  ;  hand  remains  supple  ;  retraction  of  fingers  reappears  at  four
o'clock  in  the  morning.

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  237

301b. — Complains  of  sensation  of  hemp  or  crumpled  paper  in  his
hand  when  he  closes  it.  Cannot  pick  up  a  pin  with  last  three  fingers.
Hypnotic  suggestion.  Stiffness  disappears,  as  well  as  tow-like  sensation
in  hand.      He  picks  up  a  pin  with  the  three  last  fingers  easily.

May  1st. — Stiffness  in  the  hand  has  not  reappeared.  Dynamometer
registers  30  and  25  for  the  left,  and  68  for  the  right  hand.  Stands  for
two  seconds  on  left  leg.  After  suggestion,  stands  for  three  seconds  on
it.     Dynamometer  gives  36  for  the  left,  and  70  for  the  right  hand.

2d. — Patient  goes  out  into  the  city  and  walks  a  considerable  dis-
tance. In  the  evening,  complains  of  slight  weight  in  his  leg  and  stiff-
ness in  the  back  of  his  hand.  These  symptoms  disappear  by  sugges-
tion, and  the  left  hand  gives  40  by  the  dynamometer.

3d. — Dynamometer  registers  38.  Patient  lifts  his  foot  five  centi-
metres. Last  hypnotization  :  the  leg  is  completely  free  from  pain  and
moves  as  well  as  the  other.  Dynamometric  pressure  with  the  left  hand
gives  63.

4th. — In  the  morning  dynamometer  gives  56  for  the  left,  and  62  for
the  right  hand.  Patient  walked  about  all  day  yesterday  without  feeling
pain.     Both  ears  hear  equally  well.     He  leaves  May  5,  cured.

July  1st,  1873. — Patient  comes  to  the  hospital  again.  Very  well  up
to  that  time.  Four  days  ago  was  troubled  with  left  ulnar  neuritis  ;  can
now  only  extend  the  three  last  fingers  a  little  way.  Dynamometer  reg-
isters 24.     Anaesthesia  of  ulnar  area.     Pain  in  left  epitrochlear  groove.

Hypnotic  suggestion.  All  the  symptoms  disappear;  sensibility  has
returned  completely  ;  the  ulnar  groove  is  no  longer  painful  ;  patient
opens  and  shuts  hand  at  will.  Dynamometer  registers  46.  Goes  back
to  work.

Returns  July  15th.  Five  days  ago  he  had  sudden  sharp  pain  from
elbow  to  fingers,  which  has  kept  up  incessantly  since.  At  the  same
time,  the  three  fingers  closed  suddenly  and  the  old  ulnar  pains  returned.

I  make  a  suggestion  without  hypnotizing  him,  by  touching  his  hand  and
assuring  him  that  the  sharp  pain  will  disappear,  that  his  hand  can  be
opened  again,  and  that  sensibility  will  return.  Little  by  little  the  pain
ceases;  sensibility  reappears  first  in  the  fore-arm,  then  in  the  hand;  the
fingers  unbend  gradually  and  completely.  In  ten  minutes  everything  is
in  good  order  again.  Pain  upon  pressure  in  the  epitrochlear  groove
remains.     Dynamometer  registers  successively  28,  31,  and  40.

After  this  result,  I  repeat  the  suggestion,  but  this  time  in  the  hypnotic
condition.  Upon  waking  the  epitrochlear  pain  has  disappeared.  Only
tenderness  upon  pressure  remains.  Dynamometer  registers  60  and  67
for  left,  and  67  for  right  hand.     Patient  returns  home  cured.

Comes  back  to  us  again  on  the  25th  of  October,  1S83,  having  been
free  from  all  trouble  until  just  lately.

238  Suggestive   TJicrapciitics.

Fifteen  days  ago  had  conjunctivitis  with  involuntary  weeping  ;  was
treated  with  blisters,  which  provoked  oedema  of  the  eyelids,  with  infra-
orbital cephalalgia.

At  two  o'clock  on  the  mornings  of  the  22d  and  23d,  shooting  pains
in  the  left  shoulder  accompanied  with  other  symptoms  of  ulnar  neuritis.
The  next  day  he  comes  to  consultation  ;  we  try  suggestion  first  in  the
waking  condition  ; — no  result  ;  the  suggestion  in  the  hypnotic  condition
which  drives  away  the  contracture,  ancesthesia,  and  shooting  pains  in  the
ulnar  area.

Two  hours  afterward,  however,  the  last  three  fingers  of  the  hand  were
again  contractured,  and  now  the  patient  can  only  open  them  a  third  of
the  way.

25th. — In  the  morning,  constriction  with  lightning  pains  around  the
base  of  the  thorax,  lasting  from  three  to  four  seconds  and  persisting  day
and  night.

26th. — We  note  :  conjunctivitis  cured  ;  weeping  continues,  tenderness
over  the  supra-orbital  region  ;  usual  signs  of  ulnar  neuritis  very  marked.
Spinal  pain  ;  sensitiveness  to  pressure  at  the  level  of  the  sixth,  seventh,
and  eighth  dorsal  vertebra?.  Heaviness  it  the  left  leg.  Hypnotic  sugges-
tion: upon  waking  the  symptoms  of  ulnar  neuritis,  olecranon  pains,  shoot-
ing pains,  ancesthesia,  and  flexion  oj  the  fingers  have  disappeared  ;  spinal
pain  persists.

At  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  patient  is  found  unconscious,  and
he  remains  so  for  about  six  minutes.  He  had  had  lightning  pains  in
his  back  during  the  day.

27th. — Ulnar  neuritis  has  not  reappeared.  Spinal  pain  persists  from
the  seventh  to  the  tenth  spinous  process,  and  extends  into  the  inter-
costal spaces.

Hypnotic  suggestion,  during  which  the  patient  complains  of  very  sharp
pains.  Upon  waking,  they  are  slightly  soothed,  but  reappear  and  are
intense  during  the  day.  Injection  of  morphine  at  six  o'clock  in  the
evening.

28th. — The  spinal  pain  has  disappeared.  Suggestion.  Sense  of
weight  in  leg  diminished.     Olecranon  groove  slightly  sensitive.

29th. — Hypnotic  suggestion.  Heaviness  in  the  leg  and  head  disappears.
Patient  does  well  during  the  day.  Was  waked  suddenly  in  the  night  by
the  cries  of  another  patient,  and  was  seized  with  a  burning  sensation  in
the  back  and  left  side.

30th. — Dynamometer  registers  34  for  the  right  hand,  and  13  for  the
left.  Pain  from  the  eighth  to  the  tenth  dorsal  vertebrae.  Pressure  on
this  region  when  the  patient  is  in  the  hypnotic  state  wakes  him.

In  the  evening  his  pain  is  dissipated  to  a  great  extent  by  suggestion
in  the  waking;  condition.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  239

31st. — Doing  well,  except  for  heavy  feeling  in  the  head  and  pain  in
the  ulnar  groove.  At  five  o'clock  in  the  evening,  suggestion  in  the  wak-
ing condition  drives  both  troubles  away.  But  about  eight  o'clock  shooting
pains  suddenly  reappear,  spreading  from  the  elbow  to  the  finger  ends,
and  the  hand  again  closes.

November  1st. — Tenderness  over  ulnar  nerve  persists;  hand  only
opens  three-quarters  of  the  way  ;  fingers  anaesthetic.  Dynamometer
registers  19  for  the  left,  and  60  for  the  right  hand.

Suggestion  in  the  looking  condition  dissipates  the  contracture  and  ulnar
pain  in  a  few  minutes.

Suggestion  in  the  hypnotic  condition  restores  sensibility  to  the  fingers.  A
third  suggestion  increases  the  muscular  force  of  the  hand.

Dynamometer  registers  24,  26,  and  27  successively. — About  two
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  the  hand  closes  again,  after  two  shooting
pains.

2d. — Patient  opens  his  hand  four-fifths  of  the  way  with  pain,  but  it
closes  again  instantly.  Pressure  on  ulnar  nerve  very  painful.  No
anaesthesia.  Suggestion  in  the  waking  condition  dissipates  all  these  symp-
toms. At  ten  o'clock  two  attacks  of  shooting  pain  in  the  elbow,  and  the
hand  again  closes.  Still  complains  of  pain  in  the  leg.  Another  sugges-
tion in  the  waking  condition  makes  the  contracture  and  pain  disappear.

A  third  suggestion  in  the  hypnotic  condition,  drives  away  the  pain  in  the
leg.  But  at  two  o'clock  the  contracture  in  the  hand  reappears,  as  well
as  the  heaviness  in  the  leg.     The  head  perspires  during  the  night.

3d. — No  pain.     Only  bends  the  hand  three  quarters  of  the  way.

After  suggestion  in  the  waking  condition,  the  hand  can  be  opened
completely  and  is  again  limber.  Dynamometer  registers  19  for  the
left,  and  58  for  the  right  hand  ;  and,  after  a  new  hypnotic  suggestion,
22  for  the  left  hand.

At  half-past  one  the  stiffness  has  returned  in  the  hand  without  any
attack  of  pain.  Tenderness  over  ulnar  area.  Suggestion  in  the  waking
condition  drives  away  the  stiffness  and  pain.

4th. — Slight  tenderness  still,  upon  pressure  over  the  groove  ;  the  fin-
gers cannot  be  completely  extended.  Suggestion  in  the  waking  condition
drives  all  the  trouble  away.

5th. — Patient  is   doing  well.     Slight    stiffness  in  the  hand  continues.

On  the  6th,  perfectly  well  ;  complains  of  nothing.  The  dynamom-
eter registers  61  for  the  right,  and  50  for  the  left  hand.  Patient
leaves  hospital  November  7,  and  gets  along  nicely  until  February
19,  1884.

At  three  o'clock  on  the  afternoon  of  this  day,  he  suddenly  felt  shoot-
ing pain  in  the  left  foot.  It  began  low  down,  but  reached  the  knee  by
ten  o'clock  in  the  evening.

240  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

Attacks  of  pain  succeeded  each  other  every  three  minutes  during  the
night.  The  next  day,  the  20th,  be  came  to  Nancy.  On  the  way  from
the  station  to  the  hospital,  he  again  fell  in  the  street,  and  remained
unconscious  for  an  indefinite  time.  When  he  regained  conscious-
ness, pain  still  persisted  in  the  lower  limb.  Moreover  the  ulnar  neu-
ritis was  accompanied  with  very  intense  twitchings  and  pricking  sensa-
tions in  the  ulnar  area.

At  the  hospital,  we  note, — girdle  pain  in  the  three  lower  left  intercos-
tal spaces.  Painful  twitchings  in  the  fore-arm,  with  clonic  spasms  pro-
voked by  the  pain  nearly  every  minute  ;  the  pain  extends  as  far  as  the
shoulder  during  these  spasms.  Paralysis  and  anaesthesia  of  the  lower
limb  extending  as  far  as  the  middle  of  the  thigh.  Hypnotization  fails  on
account  of  the  intensity  of  the  pain.  Suggestion  in  t/ie  waking  condition
causes  relaxation  of  tlie  hand.

February  2 1st. — Patient  opens  hand  partly;  phalanges  remain  bent,
and  fingers  close  again  one  after  another,  remaining  from  two  to  three
centimetres  distant  from  the  palm  of  the  hand.  Very  sharp  pain
on  pressure  over  olecranon  groove.  Yesterday  the  patient  could  not
lift  his  foot,  to-day  he  lifts  it  as  high  as  from  six  to  seven  centimetres  ;
can  hardly  bend  the  three  last  toes  ;  makes  almost  no  knee  or  ankle
movement.  Sense  of  heaviness  in  the  leg;  the  anaesthesia  has  disap-
peared. He  cannot  stand,  and  keeps  the  leg  stiff.  No  contracture  or
exaggeration  of  the  reflexes.  (It  has  never  existed).  Spinal  pain  upon
pressure  of  the  fourth  and  sixth  dorsal  vertebrae,  in  the  interscapular
and  left  scapular  region.

Suggestion  in  the  waking  condition,  lasting  two  minutes,  drives  away  the
ulnar  pain  completely,  and  the  stiffness  in  the  hand  almost  completely  ;  the
patient  keeps  his  fingers  extended.

A  second  suggestion  in  the  waking  condition  lasting  five  minutes,  diminishes
the  paresis  of  the  lower  limb  notably.  The  patient  holds  the  leg  up  from
the  bed,  bends  the  joints,  gets  up  and  walks,  limping  a  little  and  drag-
ging his  leg  slightly.

A  third  suggestion  in  the  waking  condition,  lasting  two  minutes,  makes
the  pains  in  the  spine  and  loins  disappear  completely.  The  painful  spasms
have  disappeared.     This  result  holds  during  the  day.

22d. — At  one  o'clock  in  the  morning  patient  was  waked  by  painful
sensations  in  the  ulnar  area,  and  the  three  fingers  were  again  flexed.
To-day  the  fingers  are  at  right  angles  to  the  metacarpus  ;  no  anaesthesia.
The  left  leg  is  extended;  he  does  not  dare  to  lean  on  it.  Slight  pain
upon  pressure  of  the  intercostal  spaces.  Hypnotic  suggestion  :  the
ulnar  and  intercostal  pain  disappears  ;  the  hand  may  be  bent  entirely,
and  is  limber  ;  the  patient  walks  much  better.

23d. — Slept  well.     When    walking,  complains  of  sensation  of   weight

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  241

from  the  internal  malleolus  to  the  middle  of  the  leg.  Dynamometer
registers  17  for  the  left,  and  68  for  the  right  hand.  Hypnotic  sugges-
tion. Sense  of  weight  diminishes,  but  does  not  disappear.  Left  hand
gives  25.

24th. — Same  condition.  Suggestion  in  the  waking  condition  makes  the
sensation  0/ weight  disappear.  Patient  complains  of  nothing  but  a  sensa-
tion of  heaviness.     Walks  well,  but  still  limps  slightly.

25th. — Same  condition  ; — left  hand  doing  well,  but  the  tow-like  sensa-
tion remains  :  gives  from  17  to  23  by  the  dynamometer.  This  sensation
vanishes  after  hypnotic  suggestion.  The  dynamometer  registers  27.
Heavy  feeling  in  the  leg  has  diminished.

26th. — Same  condition.  Dynamometer  registers  25.  Hypnotization.
Dynamometer  registers  50.  Feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  leg  has  dimin-
ished by  half.

27th. — Dynamometer  registers  43  for  the  left,  and  56  for  the  right
hand.  After  hypnotization  the  left  hand  registers  59,  and  patient  says
he  feels  hardly  any  heaviness  in  leg.

2Sth. — Continues  to  improve.  Dynamometer  registers  54  for  the  left
hand;  after  a  new  hypnotization  57.  Patient  walks  very  well,  goes  out
into  the  city,  but  at  half-past  two  o'clock  has  the  sensation  of  weight
again.

29th. — Left  hand  registers  61.  Hypnotization  makes  the  heavy  feeling
vanish.

March  1st. — Very  little  heaviness.  Cannot  stand  on  left  leg  for  more
than  a  minute.  When  the  foot  touches  the  ground,  patient  again  feels
sensation  of  weight.  After  hypnotization,  this  sensation  disappears  com-
pletely.

Patient  continues  to  do  well.  The  dynamometric  force  of  the  left
hand  always  exceeds  50.  On  the  4th,  he  walks  five  miles,  not  feeling
any  pain.     Returns  to  his  work  on  March  5,  1884.

Comes  to  consult  me  again  on  March  3,  1885.  Says  he  has  been  well
up  to  three  months  ago.  Since  then  he  has  had  continuous  pain  in  the
olecranon  groove,  which  often  wakes  him  at  night.  Can  open  and  shut
his  fingers.  If  he  makes  an  effort  to  lift  an  object  or  to  press  anything
tightly,  painful  twitchings  appear  in  the  elbow  and  fingers.  When  the
elbow  is  bent,  the  pain  is  only  in  the  groove  ;  if  he  stretches  it  out,  the
pain  increases  and  appears  in  the  last  three  fingers.  Pressure  on  the
groove  causes  sharp  pain.

Thirty-six  days  ago  he  pricked  himself  with  an  iron  filing  in  the  last
phalanx  of  the  right  middle  finger,  in  consequence  of  which  a  diffuse
inflammatory  swelling  appeared  on  the  back  of  the  hand,  which  was
opened  ten  days  after  by  the  physician  at  the  Pompey  hospital.  Suppu-
ration kept  up  for  fifteen  days.  Then  the  abscess  closed.  The  back  of
16

242  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

the  hand  is  still  swollen  and  red  ;  acute  sensitiveness  here  and  in  the
middle  finger  ;  pronation  and  supination  are  possible  ;  wrist  movements
are  painful  ;  the  extended  phalanges  cannot  be  bent  without  pain.

After  hypnotic  suggestion,  the  left  ulnar  pain  has  completely   vanished.

P can  press  hard  with  his  hand,  and  can  lift  a  log  of  wood  without

having  the  slightest  pain  in  consequence  of  the  effort.

The  right  hand  is  no  longer  painful  ;  can  bend  the  wrist  and  pha-
langes slightly,  spontaneously,  and  without  pain,  as  much  as  the  swell-
ing will  allow.

Patient  comes  back  on  May  20th.  Left  hand  has  been  doing  well  all
the  time.  Right  hand  still  sensitive  and  swollen  ;  fingers  stiff,  and  he
cannot  bend  them.  After  hypnotic  suggestion,  pain  disappears.  The
stiffness,  due  to  the  swelling,  still  persists.

He  comes  to  see  me  again  on  April  9,  1886  ;  there  is  only  slight
stiffness  in  the  right  hand,  the  result  of  the  inflammatory  swelling;  the
first  phalanges  are  slightly  flexed  upon  the  metacarpus  ;  but  he  has  felt
no  symptom  of  ulnar  neuritis,  or  of  any  other  manifestation.  I  heard
from  him  on  May  13th.     He  was  doing  very  well.

I  have  related  this  observation  in  detail  because  it  so  well
shows  how  suggestion  acts,  how  it  struggles  against  serious  func-
tional troubles,  and  in  spite  of  their  obstinacy  succeeds  in  inces-
santly repressing  them,  and  finally  in  triumphing  over  them.

It  also  shows,  as  does  the  preceding  observation,  what  part
functional  dynamism  plays  in  cerebro-spinal  affections.  The  first
attack,  leaving  behind  it  a  paraplegia  with  spinal,  girdle,  and
lightning  pains,  seemed  to  point  to  an  acute  meningo-myelitis.
The  rapid  disappearance  of  the  symptoms  through  suggestion
showed  that  it  was  nothing  of  the  sort.

The  total  cure  after  each  attack,  the  instantaneous  disappear-
ance of  the  ulnar  neuritis  through  suggestion,  evidently  indicates
that  all  these  troubles  were  not  due  to  a  serious  and  diffuse  lesion
of  the  cerebro-spinal  axis,  as  might  have  been  supposed  from  the
symptoms.

We  think  that  it  is  a  question  of  a  localized  lesion,  situated
perhaps,  near  the  spinal  origin  of  the  left  ulnar  nerve.  Might  it
not  be  a  benign  tumor  lying  latent  and  inoffensive,  like  certain
cerebral  tumors  ?  From  time  to  time  this  local  lesion  would
become  the  seat  of  dynamic  irradiations  into  the  cerebro-spinal
axis,  and,  according  to  the  extent  of  these  irradiations,  they
would  give  rise  perhaps  to  ulnar  neuritis  alone,  perhaps  to  light-
ning pains  with  paralysis  and  anaesthesia  of  the  lower  left  limb,

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  243

perhaps  to  paraplegia,  perhaps  to  paralysis  of  the  four  limbs,  and
finally,  perhaps,  to  encephalic  troubles: — cephalalgia,  involuntary
weeping,  facial  t  wit  chin  gs,  apoplectiform  seizures.  In  the  same
way,  a  cerebral  tumor  which  has  been  latent  for  a  long  time,  may
from  time  to  time  provoke  apoplectiform  or  epileptiform  attacks,
with  variable  paralyses.  When  looked  at  from  a  distance,  these
phenomena,  which  are  so  frequent  in  nervous  pathology,  should
force  a  certain  reserve  upon  the  topographical  diagnosis  of  the
lesion.

We  have  seen  how  suggestion  may  effectually  interfere  and
drive  away  troubles  which  are  not  controlled  by  an  irremediable
material  alteration  of  the  corresponding  organic  elements.  In
these  cases  we  also  see  how  suggestion  may  contribute  to  rectify
and  assure  diagnosis,  by  separating,  so  to  speak,  what  is  simply
dynamic  from  what  is  organic.

Observation  III. — Incomplete  left  hemiplegia  dating  back  eight  days. — Rapid  improve-
ment through  suggestion. — Almost  complete  cure  in  three  weeks.

Louis  C ,  a  house-painter  sixty  years  old,  enters  the  hospital  on

November  7,  1886.  His  constitution  is  good  and  he  is  generally
very  well.  Six  days  ago  he  suddenly  felt  a  sensation  of  heaviness  in  his
left  leg  ;  he  was  able  to  get  home.  Two  hours  after  he  felt  a  similar
heaviness  in  his  left  arm,  with  pricking  sensations  which  have  lasted  ever
since.  He  could  still  walk  by  supporting  himself  along  the  wall.
When  he  tried  to  get  up  in  the  evening  he  could  no  longer  support
himself  on  his  left  leg.

November  8th. — We  note  :  no  fever;  pulse  regular;  arteries  hard
and  atheromatous.  Features  are  notably  deviated  to  the  right.  Patient
rises  slowly,  and  cannot  lift  his  left  arm  as  high  as  he  could.  It  is  also
more  easily  fatigued.  He  can  execute  all  movements  with  this  arm.  Dyn-
amometer registers  from  35  to  40  for  both  sides.  Patient  cannot  stand.
When  lying  down,  can  lift  left  leg,  but  cannot  hold  it  up  more  than
four  or  five  seconds.  Bends  his  toes  with  some  hesitation.  Cannot
bend  his  heel.  Reflexes  seem  a  little  more  marked  on  the  right  side.
Sensibility  normal.  Heart  not  hypertrophiée!  ;  sounds  clear  ;  respiration
norma!;  intelligence  intact.  Patient  has  been  constipated  for  four
days.     Treatment  :  laxative  injection,  which  takes  effect.

9th. — Patient  is  easily  hypnotized  and  goes  into  profound  steep.  After
waking  can  hold  leg  up  for  ten  seconds  and  can  move  toes  much  better,
but  cannot  yet  bend  heel.

nth. — Cannot  hold  leg  up  for  more  than  four  seconds.

16th. — Suggestion.     Same  condition.

244  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

17  th. — Suggestion  repeated.  After  the  seance,  patient  was  able  to  stand
alone  and  walk  with  slight  support.

19th. — After  suggestion,  was  able  to  stand  alone  and  walk  to  the  end  of
the  room  without  being  supported,  dragging  his  leg,  however.  Most  diffi-
cult movement  is  the  dorsal  flexion  of  the  foot.  When  lying  down,  can
hold  leg  up  indefinitely  and  lower  it  gradually. — Tendon  reflexes  slightly
exaggerated.

20th. — This  condition  persists.     Daily  suggestion.

23d.  Continues  to  do  well.  Walks  alone.  Tendon  reflexes  no
longer  exaggerated.     Lifts  foot  very  well.

Improvement  continues.  By  December  2,  patient  can  go  down-stairs,
and  drags  his  leg  but  slightly.  All  movements  can  be  made.  Dorsal
flexion  of  foot  is  perfect.     No  exaggeration  of  tendon  reflexes.

Remains  in  the  hospital  until  January.  Condition  remains  the  same.
Walks  well,  still  complains  of  heaviness  in  leg  and  arm,  which  prevents
him  from  getting  up  on  ladder  and  managing  his  brush  as  before.

Observation  IV. — Cerebral  disturbance. — Fracture  op  spine  with  reccrvery. — Sub-acute
articular  rheumatism. — Epileptic  seizures  of  traumatic  origin. — Gradual  disappear-
ance of  the  pains  by  suggestion. — Abortion  of  an  epileptic  seizure,  and  complete  cure
through  suggestion.

M.  S ,  a  paste-board  maker,  forty  years  old,  enters  the  clinic  on

December  21,  1882.

In  January,  1881,  he  fell  five  metres,  from  a  loft  down  to  the  pave-
ment. He  lay  unconscious,  with  a  wound  on  his  head,  and  was  taken  to
the  St.  Leon  Hospital,  where  he  remained  unconscious  for  ten  days.
He  could  not  stand  for  two  months.  Had  pains  in  the  loins  and  at  the
level  of  the  lower  dorsal  vertebrae,  extending  forward  ;  pains  in  the
shoulders  and  right  leg,  which  he  could  no  longer  bend.  Vertigo,  with
a  tendency  to  fall  over  on  the  left  side,  difficulty  in  moving  head,  and
inability  to  bend  body  to  pick  up  anything.  Orbital  pains  up  to  about
a  month  after  the  accident,  cephalagia  in  the  frontal  and  temporal
regions  ;  at  the  same  time,  deafness  and  buzzing  in  the  ear,  lasting  about
eight  days.  Sight  became  weak  and  dim,  especially  on  the  left  side.
Stammering,  with  a  heaviness  in  the  tongue,  which  rendered  his  speech
almost  unintelligible  ;  a  symptom,  which,  although  diminishing  day  by
day,  did  not  disappear  entirely  for  five  months.  Swallowing  was  almost
impossible,  at  least  for  solid  food  ;  for  four  or  five  days  nourishment  had
to  be  given  through  the  sound,  and  the  disphagia  did  not  disappear  com-
pletely until  two  months  after  the  fall.  No  trouble  with  micturition,
but  constipation  during  a  month's  time.  He  went  back  to  work  after
two  months,  but  found  that  he  was  too  weak  on  his  legs  to  do  much.
Fifteen  days  after  his  departure,  he  had  swelling  and  pain  in  his  ankles

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  245

and  knee;  then  in  his  wrists,  elbows,  and  shoulders.  He  went  back  to
the  hospital  in  April,  remaining  two  months.  It  was  sub-acute  articular
rheumatism.  Seven  or  eight  years  before  his  fall,  he  had  a  poly-articu-
lar rheumatism,  which  lasted  six  months,  and  since  then  he  has  had  fre-
quent but  slight  relapses.  At  the  end  of  two  months,  he  went  back  home,
but  could  only  work  a  little.  For  the  last  six  weeks  he  has  again  had
articular  pains  in  the  elbows,  wrists,  and  ankles;  painful  twitchings
lasting  from  one  to  two  hours,  now  in  one,  now  in  the  other  joint.
The  knees  and  ankles  have  been  swollen  for  three  weeks  ;  the  right
elbow  and  wrist  for  fifteen  days  ;  nevertheless  the  patient  has  been  able
to  walk  all  the  time.  For  two  months  he  has  had  no  more  cephalalgia,
vertigo,  or  buzzing  in  his  ears  ;  he  hears,  sees,  and  sleeps  well.  We
must  add  that  last  May,  at  the  hospital,  he  had  two  epileptiform  seizures
two  days  in  succession,  and  remained  unconscious  for  five  days.

In  August  he  had  another  attack,  and  remained  unconscious  for  six
hours.  He  remembers  that  he  had  another  attack  at  Champigneulles
in  October.

Present  condition. — Temperament  lymphatic  ;  intelligence  medium  ;
works  in  a  paste-board  factory  where  he  is  always  exposed  to  damp-
ness. Thorax  somewhat  more  convex  on  left  than  on  the  right  side  ;
spine  slightly  curved  to  the  right,  and  projecting  out  behind  to  an  extent
of  twenty  centimetres,  from  the  sixth  or  seventh  dorsal  to  the  middle
of  the  lumbar  vertebrae  ;  this  hump  developed  after  his  fall.

At  the  present  time,  patient  complains  of  sharp  pains  in  the  loins  and
spine  at  the  level  of  the  projection,  occurring  both  spontaneously  and  on
pressure,  and  preventing  him  from  standing  erect  when  he  walks.  The
right  knee  is  sensitive  to  pressure  ;  there  is  also  sensitiveness  in
the  back  of  the  thigh  and  calf,  extending  to  the  tendon  of  Achilles  ;
painful  twitchings  on  sitting  down  and  on  walking.  Both  ankles
swollen  and  sensitive  to  pressure,  but  can  execute  any  movements.
Supports  himself  four  seconds  on  the  left  leg,  and  barely  two  seconds
on  the  right  ;  can  bend  the  latter  with  difficulty  ;  tendon  reflexes  nor-
mal. Upper  limbs  doing  well,  except  for  slight  swelling  of  the  right
wrist.  Movements  in  the  right  wrist  are  a  little  ataxic.  He  cannot
touch  the  end  of  his  nose  with  his  finger  without  going  through  a
series  of  oscillations.  Sensibility  to  pain  and  to  touch  is  diminished  on
the  right  side,  especially  in  the  lower  limb,  where  only  a  few  points  of
normal  sensation  remain  at  the  root  of  the  spine,  at  the  internal  side  of
the  patella,  and  on  the  external  surface  of  the  tibio-tarsal  articulation  ;
several  zones  of  very  limited  anaesthesia  in  the  left  leg.  Hearing  is
notably  diminished  on  the  left  side  ;  patient  hears  the  ticking  of  a  watch
at  ninety  centimetres  on  the  right  side  ;  barely  at  two  centimetres  on
the  left.     Other  functions  normal.

246  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

To  sum  up:  symptoms  of  cerebral  disturbance,  of  medullary  com-
pression by  fracture  of  tlie  spine  ;  articular  symptoms  from  rheumatic
diathesis.

January,  1885. —  Condition  almost  the  same.  Pains  in  the  loins  and
right  leg.  Has  complained  of  pain  in  the  precordial  region  since  seven
o'clock  this  morning.  Has  had  attacks  of  dizziness,  which  vanished
spontaneously  this  morning.

1'hc  patient  is  hypnotized,  and  is  very  suggestible  (somnambulism).
Upon  waking,  the  precordial  pain  has  disappeared,  and  the  pain  in  the  leg
has  greatly  diminished.  These  pains  return  during  the  night,  but  are
much  less  intense.

5th. — New  suggestion.     Does  well  during  the  day.

6th. — Again  complains  of  pains  in  the  knee,  the  right  calf,  and  right
costal  border.      They  disappear  almost  completely  by  suggestion.

7th. — At  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  the  patient  has  an  attack  char-
acterized by  slight  tremor,  without  convulsions,  and  without  foaming  at
the  mouth,  closure  of  the  eyelids,  inferior  strabismus,  relaxation  of  the
upper  limbs,  slight  stiffness  in  lower  limbs,  dim  sight  (cannot  count  the
number  of  his  fingers)  ;  can  shut  his  hand,  but  cannot  press  with  it.
Intelligence  preserved.  Painful  sense  of  constriction  of  the  epigastrium,
which  disappears  at  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening.  Sensation  of  shoot-
ing pains  in  the  same  region,  which  do  not  disappear  until  three  in  the
morning.

8th. — The  attack  has  disappeared.  Only  complains  of  pain  in  the
right  costal  border,  and  pricking  sensation  in  the  knee.  Presses  well
with  both  hands.     Passes  a  good  day.

At  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  pain  in  the  precordial  region  (shoot-
ing pains)  lasting  two  hours  and  a  half  ;  it  is  less  to-day.  Pain  in  the
upper  and  internal  part  of  the  tibia,  under  the  patella,  lasting  since  four
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  ;  disappears  when  the  precordial  pain  appears.
Pain  in  the  lumbar  region  at  the  level  of  the  spinal  projection.

9th. — In  the  morning  the  precordial  pain  has  vanished  ;  the  lumbar
pain  persists,  as  well  as  the  pain  at  the  right  costal  border  and  in  the
knee.  Patient  feels  weak  on  his  legs  ;  cannot  support  himself  at  all  on
the  right  foot,  and  hardly  on  the  left.

After  hypnotization,  the  pains  disappear  and  the  patient  walks  well,
but  the  lumbar  pain  reappears  at  the  end  of  an  hour.

10th. — Complains  of  pain  in  the  internal  part  of  the  right  knee,  which
came  back  in  the  night  and  kept  him  from  sleeping.  //  is  relieved  by
suggestion,  but  reappears  during  the  day.

1 2th. — Slept  well  after  suggestion.  At  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,
shooting  pains  in  the  knee  and  calf  waked  him,  and  he  complains  this
morning   of   dizzy  feelings   in    his  head.     After  suggestion,  he  feels  no

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  247

more  pain  during  the  «.lav.  hut  slight  twitchings  in  his  knee.  The  pains
reappear  in  the  knee  and  ankle.

I  shall  not  follow  the  details  of  the  history.  This  state  of  things  con-
tinues nearly  up  to  the  beginning  of  March.  The  pains  in  the  left
lower  limb,  knee,  calves,  heel,  and  lumbar  region,  which  are  driven
away,  or  notably  diminished  each  time  suggestion  is  tried,  reappear
after  a  few  hours,  or  during  the  night.

The  patient  becomes  more  and  more  sensitive  to  suggestion  however.
He  sleeps  indefinitely,  if  he  is  ordered  not  to  wake  spontaneously.  One
day  we  iet  him  sleep  for  fifteen  consecutive  hours.  He  realizes  any
hallucinations,  either  in  the  sleeping  or  waking  condition  ;  he  can  be
made  perfectly  analgesic  by  a  simple  affirmation.

This  susceptibility  to  suggestion  being  developed  to  this  extent  by
the  end  of  February,  the  pains  more  rarely  return  after  suggestion,  and
disappear  by  simple  affirmation,  or  touching  of  the  limb,  without  hypnoti-
zation  ;  the  least  inkling  of  a  return  of  pain  is  immediately  repressed  ;
and  in  the  early  part  of  March,  the  patient  passes  eight  days  and  more
without  pain  either  in  the  loins  or  knee;  he  walks  well,  can  run,  and
helps  with  the  work  in  the  ward.

Between  one  and  three  o'clock  during  the  afternoon  of  the  13th  of
April,  he  has  a  succession  of  severe  epileptiform  seizures.

At  the  same  time  on  the  17th,  in  spite  of  daily  suggestion,  he  again
has  seizures,  preceded  by  prodromata  in  the  morning.

On  the  morning  of  the  21st  he  has  pain  in  his  head,  cephalalgia,
dimness  of  sight,  slight  spasms  in  his  limbs  ;  these  are  the  premonitory
symptoms  of  a  seizure.  I  hypnotize  him  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning,
and  suggest  that  he  shall  sleep  quietly  until  five  o'clock  in  the  evening.
He  wakes  up  at  the  hour  indicated.  During  his  sleep  he  has  several
sharp  twitches  in  his  arms  and  legs,  and  uncovers  himself.  It  lasts  only
a  second,  but  the  seizure  does  not  come.

He  has  had  no  more  seizures  or  twitchings  since.  He  remains  in
the  hospital  a  year  longer;  he  works  about,  complains  only  of  slight
pain  in  the  loins  from  time  to  time,  which  is  the  result  of  effort,  and  is
immediately  abolished  by  suggestion.  One  day  my  chef -dc-cl inique
pulled  out  five  roots  of  his  teeth,  twisting  them  around  in  their  sockets
with  the  forceps.  The  operation  lasted  fully  twenty  minutes.  I  assured
him  beforehand  that  he  would  feel  no  pain  and  that  he  would  laugh
over  it.  He  showed  no  suffering  during  the  operation,  and  laughed  as
he  spit  out  the  blood.  I  add  that  in  his  normal  condition  he  was  not  at
all  analgesic.

I  have  seen  S again  this  winter  (1885)  ;  he  came  to  the  hospital  to

be  cured  of  a  new  pain  in  his  legs;  he  has  been  able  to  continue  his
work,  is  very  well,  and  has  had  no  more  epileptiform  seizures.

248  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

We  may  ask  if,  in  this  case,  the  traumatic  epilepsy  would  have
become  persistent  without  the  help  of  suggestion.  In  cases  such
as  this,  where  an  old  epilepsy  is  assimilated,  so  to  speak,  by  the
nervous  system,  cure  is  generally  impossible.

I  have  tried  hypnotic  suggestion  in  several  cases  of  long  stand-
ing idiopathic  epilepsy,  and  I  have  not  succeeded  in  diminishing
the  number  and  frequency  of  the  seizures  in  any  very  evident
way.  In  two  cases  I  thought  I  had  obtained  results  momen-
tarily ;  the  seizures  appeared  to  be  less  frequent  ;  but  in  spite  of
the  continuance  of  suggestion  the  result  was  not  confirmed.

Observation  V. — Hemiplegia   with    organic  hemianeesthesia. —  The  magnet  unsuccess-
ful without  suggestion. — Cure  by  the  use  0/  magnet  with  suggestion,  without  sleep.

R ,  a  miner  sixty-two  years  old,    enters  the  hospital   on  July  5th.

He  has  been  troubled  with  slight  left  hemiplegia  and  hemianesthesia
for  two  days.  The  attack  was  preceded  by  prodromic  symptoms.  It  is
a  case  of  embolism  of  the  middle  cerebral  artery,  with  a  focus  of  soften-
ing in  the  internal  capsule  or  in  its  vicinity.  The  hemianaesthesia  is
complete  in  the  upper  limb  ;  hemianalgesia  in  the  trunk,  face,  and  upper
limb.

I  will  not  relate  this  observation  in  detail,  as  it  is  not  important  for
our  object.

On  Julv  11,  the  analgesia  with  anaesthesia,  as  well  as  the  abolition  of
the  muscular  sense,  remained  complete  in  the  upper  limb.  Sensation
had  partly  returned  in  the  lower  limb  ;  only  slight  movements  could  be
made  ;  slight  movements  were  also  possible  in  the  fore-arm  and
hand.

A  magnet  is  applied  to  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  hand  and  wrist,  and
left  on  for  three  days,  the  nth,  12th,  and  13th  of  July.

The  anaesthesia  and  paralysis  remain  the  same.

On  the  following  days,  the  patient  has  a  supra-orbital  neuralgia,
which  is  treated  with  sulphate  of  quinine,  but  does  not  yield  definitely
until  the  end  of  the  20th  day.  The  anaesthesia  still  persists.  The
motor-paralysis  is  diminished  ;  the  patient  lifts  the  left  arm  to  a
right  angle,  and  bends  the  elbow  ;  he  lifts  his  leg  as  high  as  twenty-
five  centimetres.

22d. — The  magnet  is  again  applied  and  left  in  place.

24th. — We  note,  that,  in  spite  of  the  application  of  the  magnet,  the
anaesthesia  persists.  We  continue  to  apply  the  magnet,  assuring  the
patient  at  the  same  time  that  it  will  cause  the  return  of  sensation  ;
that  he  will  again  be  conscious  of  his  hand  and  of  the  position  in  which
it  is.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  249

25th. — He  says  he  has  more  feeling  in  his  arm;  when  examined  sen-
sibility seems  doubtful.  Suggestion  is  repeated  in  the  waking  condi-
tion.

26th. — Tactile  sensibility  exists,  but  is  dull  ;  slight  sensation  upon
the  prick  of  a  pin  ;  the  muscular  sense  has  not  returned.  Suggestion  is
repeated,  with  the  application  of  the  magnet,  but  without  sleep.

2Sth. — Tactile  sensibility  as  well  as  sensibility  to  pain  and  the  mus-
cular sense  (idea  of  the  position  of  the  limb),  is  present  and  very
distinct,  in  the  whole  limb.  Tactile  sensibility  has  also  returned  much
more  distinctly  in  the  lower  limb  and  trunk. — The  magnet  is  removed
and  this  result  continues.

This  fact  seems  to  prove  that,  in  the  present  case,  the  magnet
only  acted  by  means  of  a  suggestive  influence.  Nevertheless,  I
dare  not  draw  a  conclusion  from  one  single  case  ;  repeated  obser-
vation is  necessary  in  order  to  bring  out  the  truth  as  to  the  real
efficacy  of  magnets.

Observation  VI. — Diffuse  rheumatic  myelitis. — Decided  benefit  by  repeated  suggestion.
— Condition  stationary.

A.  (Michael),  a  laborer  forty-six  years  old,  comes  into  the  hospital
on  Febuary  24,  1883.

He  has  been  very  well  up  to  two  months  ago,  when  he  experienced
dull  pain  in  his  left  fore-arm,  and  numbness,  which  still  persists.  At  the
least  movement,  if  he  wishes  to  take  hold  of  anything  for  example,  he  is
seized  with  a  transient  cramp,  which  extends  the  fingers  and  forces  him
to  drop  the  object  ;  he  can  hardly  dress  himself  in  consequence  of  these
cramps.

For  fifteen  days  past  the  right  hand  has  also  been  affected,  but  to  a
much  less  extent.  One  day,  about  a  month  ago,  while  out  walking,  the
patient  suddenly  felt  a  dull  pain  in  both  feet  ;  he  could  no  longer  bend
his  legs,  they  had  become  rigid,  and,  when  he  tried  to  go  on,  he  fell  on
the  sidewalk.  He  picked  himself  up,  took  about  a  hundred  steps,  and
fell  again.  After  resting  a  few  minutes,  he  was  able  to  go  on,  but
with  great  difficulty.  On  the  following  days  he  walked  with  great
difficulty,  and  became  greatly  fatigued.  The  neighbors  were  often
obliged  to  help  him  up  the  stairs  to  his  room  on  the  second  floor.

Seven  or  eight  years  before,  he  had  had  pains  in  the  loins  and  shoul-
ders also,  at  times  ;  since,  he  has  been  subject  to  rheumatic  pain,  but
has  always  been  able  to  do  his  work.  He  says  he  has  been  a  little
short  of  breath  for  two  or  three  years,  but  can  still  do  heavy  work.

No  syphilitic  or  alcoholic  history.

250  Suggestive    TJicrapciUics.

February  25th,  we  note:  strong  constitution;  pulse  full,  bounding,
regular.  Slight  aortic  insufficiency,  without  hypertrophy  of  the  heart  ;
slight  diastolic  murmur  at  the  base.     Respiration  normal  ;  no  rales.

The  patient  gets  out  of  the  bed  with  difficulty,  walks  painfully  and
slowly,  taking  little  steps,  and  with  his  legs  far  apart.  He  puts  the
soles  of  his  feet  flat  down  on  the  floor,  bending  his  knees,  but  can
hardly  bend  his  ankles;  he  stops  and  turns  quite  easily;  he  stands  up
with  his  eyes  closed,  but  loses  his  equilibrium  quickly  if  he  tries  to  walk.
He  can  only  stand  for  a  second  on  one  foot.  He  complains  of  a  sensa-
tion of  coolness  in  his  lower  limbs,  but  has  neither  sensations  of  numb-
ness nor  of  pricking.  If  he  squats  on  the  floor  he  cannot  get  up  again
without  pain.  Lying  in  bed,  he  lifts  his  right  leg  ten  centimetres  with
difficulty,  but  cannot  keep  it  up  ;  he  can  only  bend  his  knees  with  diffi-
culty. He  lifts  his  left  leg  very  well,  but  cannot  keep  it  up  any  better
than  he  can  the  other  leg.  The  toe  movements  are  good.  Sensation  is
normal  ;  the  tendon  reflexes  seem  diminished.

In  the  upper  limbs,  aside  from  the  pricking  sensation  and  cramps,
which  occur  from  time  to  time,  sensibility  and  motility  are  very  well
preserved,  and  movements  are  dexterously  made.

The  dynamometer  registers  25  for  the  left,  and  30  for  the  right  hand.
There  is  no  spinal  pain  and  no  cephalalgia.

Sight  has  been  gradually  growing  dim  for  two  or  three  years.  At  the
present  time  vision  seems  to  be  only  half  as  distinct  as  normally  ;  there
has  been  no  diplopia.  At  times  last  summer  he  had  a  sensation  of
thoracic  constriction.

Diagnosis  :  diffuse  sub-acute  myelitis  of  the  posterior  columns.

Treatment  :  one  gramme  iodide  of  potassium,  /.  i.  d.

28th. — When  lying  down,  the  patient  lifts  his  left  leg  better  and  holds
it  up  for  from  five  to  seven  seconds,  but  cannot  hold  up  the  right  leg.
He  bends  his  knees  better.  Opens  and  shuts  left  hand  with  a  certain
hesitation;  does  better  with  right  hand.  Dynamometer  registers  23  for
the  left,  and  31  for  the  right  hand.  Patient  says  he  has  had  transient
diplopia  at  times  during  the  last  two  days.

Evening  ;  hypnotization  :  2d  degree. — Suggestion.

March  1st. — Iodic  coryza;  walks  better;  supports  himself  about  a
second  on  each  foot  ;  opens  and  shuts  left  hand  more  easily.  Dyna-
tnometer  registers  34  for  the  left,  and  33  for  the  right  hand.

This  result  is  not  sustained.  On  the  3d  the  left  hand  gives  32,  the
right  37.     The  patient  still  walks  quite  well.

6th. — The  left  hand  gives  20,  the  right  19.  He  can  hold  his  legs  up,
the  left  one  for  four  seconds,  the  right  for  one  second  only;  he  cannot
sit  clown  on  his  bed  without  help  ;  neither  can  he  support  himself  on
one  foot.

Suggestive  Therapeutics.  2  5 1

8th. — Since  a  new  hypnotic  suggestion  given  yesterday  morning,  the  force
in  the  upper  limbs  has  increased.  'The  left  hand  gives  34,  the  right  the
same.  Walking  is  not  any  bitter,  the  patient  cannot  support  himself  on  one
foot. — On  Match  9th  both  hands  give  32.

Patient's  condition  improves  slowly.      Suggestion  from  time  to  time.

20th. — After  a  new  hypnotization,  the  left  hand  gives  41,  the  right  47.
The  patient  walks  better,  and  stands  for  nearly  two  seconds  on  one  or
the  other  leg.  When  lying  clown  he  can  hold  both  legs  up  from  three
to  five  seconds.

On  the  2d  C walks  well,  sometimes  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  at  a

time.  His  pace  is  regular.  He  drags  the  left  leg  slightly,  and  always
complains  of  a  certain  weakness  in  it.  He  stands  for  three  seconds  on
each  foot.  For  the  past  four  or  five  days  he  has  gone  up  or  down  stairs
easily.  The  dynamometer  registers  45  for  the  left  hand,  and  48  for  the
right.  Opens  and  shuts  his  hand  easily,  though  he  complains  of  slight
stiffness.     (Daily  hypnotization, — sleep  of  2d  degree.)

3d. — Improvement  continues.  Patient  walks,  lifts  his  legs  and  bends
both  knees  well  ;  sits  down  on  his  bed  without  help,  lies  down  by  him-
self, but  has  to  make  use  of  his  hands  in  order  to  lift  his  legs  up  on
the  bed.

Later  hypnotization  does  not  modify  this  condition  to  any  noticeable
degree.     The  improvement  obtained  is  persistent.

August  2d. — C leaves  the  hospital.     We  do  not   see  him  for  a

month.

He  walks  well,  but  he  says  he  still  feels  pain  in  the  loins  when  he
leans  over  or  when  he  walks.  When  he  straightens  himself  up,  he  has
a  sensation  of  weakness  and  cold  in  his  lower  limbs,  extending  to  his
feet.  Left  hand  always  feels  somewhat  cold,  and  when  he  carries  any-
thing, there  is  a  sensation  of  stiffness  in  the  hand  and  fore-arm.  Muscu-
lar force  preserved.

I  have  tried  the  suggestive  method  in  different  cases  of  incur-
able myelitis.  In  several  ataxic  cases,  the  lightning  pains,
gastric  crises,  and  vesical  tenesmus  have  disappeared  momenta-
rily. In  one  case,  the  walk  was  remarkably  improved  for  a  time  ;
the  patient,  who  could  no  longer  stand  up,  improved  so  that  he
could  walk  without  a  cane.  But  these  results  are  transient  ;  the
organic  disease  following  its  inexorable  course,  re-establishes  the
functional  troubles.

In  many  patients  troubled  with  spasmodic  tabes,  or  insular-
sclerosis  with  spastic  paralysis,  I  have  been  able  to  diminish  for  a
time  the  exaggeration  of  the  tendon  reflexes  and  contracture  by

252  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

means  of  suggestion,  but  have  never  succeeded  in  arresting  the
evolution  of  the  disease  entirely.  I  do  not  consider  cases  of
myelitis  which  are  curable,  or  which  disappear  spontaneously,  as
in  the  preceding  observation.  But  locomotor  ataxia,  insular
sclerosis,  muscular  atrophy,  affections  which  are  progressive  and
incurable  by  nature,  only  receive  from  suggestion  a  more  or
less  lasting  diminution  of  certain  functional  dynamic  troubles.
As  an  example  of  a  remarkable  improvement  obtained,  I  will
cite  the  following  observation.

Observation  VII. — Symptoms  of  cerebrospinal  insular  sclerosis. —  Very  remarkable
amelioration  and  retardation  of  the  disease  for  six  months,  after  several  hypnotic
seances.

D ,  a  laborer  twenty-nine  years  old,  is  in  the  service  of  my  col-
league, Dr.  Spillmann.  I  was  asked  to  look  at  the  case  on  October  o,
1884.  The  patient  had  been  ill  for  three  months.  At  this  time  he  had
begun  to  flex  his  legs.  He  had  had  violent  pains  in  his  limbs  which  he
compared  to  lashes  from  a  whip.  The  weakness  increased,  and  tremor
appeared  in  the  hands.  Three  months  ago  he  was  obliged  to  give  up
work.

His  constitution  is  good,  he  has  had  no  previous  disease  and  has
never  committed  any  excesses  ;  he  is  of  medium  intelligence.  Can  give
no  other  certain  information  about  himself.

We  note  : —

1st,  Very  marked  tremor  in  both  upper  limbs,  resembling  that  of
insular  sclerosis,  which  is  increased  when  the  patient  moves  ;  for
example,  when  he  lifts  a  glass  to  his  mouth  he  tips  it  over  or  seizes  it
with  his  mouth.

2d,  Very  marked  rigidity  in  the  lower  limbs,  with  exaggeration  of  the
tendon  reflexes,  the  foot  phenomena  continuing  indefinitely.  The
patient  walks  slowly  and  with  difficulty,  tottering  ;  his  limbs  are  rigid.

3d,  He  complains  of  vertigo.  Certain  difficulty  in  the  articulation  of
words  is  noticed.

Sensibility  normal.     Evacuations  occur  normally.

October  9th.  /  hypnotize  him,  and  he  goes  into  the  second  degree  of  sleep.
I  suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  tremor  and  rigidity.

Upon  waking  there  is  no  tremor  in  the  hand  ;  the  patient  lifts  a  full
glass  to  his  mouth  without  spilling  a  drop  ;  he  walks  better  and  faster  ;
ihe  exaggeration  of  the  tendon  reflexes  still  exists,  but  to  a  slighter
degree.

10th. — The  improvement  persists.  Patient  walked  better  yesterday.
Used  his  hand   constantly  without   tremor  ;  dynamometric  force  is  from

Suggestive   Therapeutics,  253

2S  to  32. — New  hypnotic  suggestion.  Upon  waking,  he  walks.  His  legs
are  still  stiff,  but  to  a  less  extent  than  before  the  suggestive  treat-
ment.

nth. — He  says  he  has  no  more  vertigo;  no  more  tremor;  walks
very  well  but  with  slight  stiffness  still. — Suggestion.

13th. —  Improvement  continues;  there  is  no  longer  any  vertigo  or
tremor.     Can  lift  a  chair  easily  with  one  hand.

I  put  the  patient  into  somnambulism  ; — amnesia  upon  waking.  He
feels  stronger  and  can  lift  the  chair  with  his  hand,  holding  it  by  one  kg.
Tendon  reflexes  have  diminished  very  decidedly.

14th. — The  patient  helps  with  the  work  in  the  ward.

19th. — Continues  to  do  well.  Says  he  had  headache  both  yesterday
and  day  before,  and  at  times  trouble  with  his  sight.  When  looking
at  an  object  opposite  to  him,  he  sees  it  large  and  confused  ;  this
trouble  is  transient,  however,  only  lasting  about  five  minutes  at  a
time.  He  walks  well,  says  however  that  he  still  trembles  a  little  on
his  legs  ;  tendon  reflexes  are  no  longer  exaggerated.  Tremor  in  the
hand  at  times.  He  spills  the  contents  of  a  glass.  The  dynamometer
registers  48  for  the  right,  and  18  for  the  left  hand. — Hypnotic  sugges-
tion.

23d. — Has  clone  well  since  the  19th  ;  has  had  no  more  headache  or
trouble  with  his  sight  ;  no  more  tremor  ;  the  exaggeration  of  the  tendon
reflexes  is  no  longer  noticeable  ;  speech  is  still  slow.

24th. — D is  doing  well.     Certain  stiffness  in  left  leg  still  ;  cannot

support  himself  on  one  foot.  Still  slight  exaggeration  of  tendon  reflexes.
— New  hypnotic  suggestion.  Upon  waking,  can  lift  left  leg  fiearly  as  high
as  right,  and  can  support  himself  upon  the  left  foot  alone  several  seconds.

Suggestion  discontinued.  Improvement  persists.  Patient  well
enough  again  to  undertake  a  nurse's  work.  For  more  than  six  months
I  have  seen  him  daily,  trotting  actively  about,  bringing  the  patients'
meals  from  the  kitchen  into  the  ward.  There  is  no  more  tremor,  and
he  walks  well.

But  stiffness  and  tremor  gradually  reappear.  He  enters  the  service  of
one  of  my  colleagues,  and  suggestion  is  no  longer  tried.

He  has  been  in  the  department  for  chronic  diseases  (St.  Julian  Hos-
pital) for  several  months.  I  saw  him  on  the  5th  of  April.  The  symp-
toms of  insular  sclerosis  were  well  marked  ;  tremor  of  the  hands,  stiff-
ness of  the  lower  limbs,  considerable  exaggeration  of  the  tendon
reflexes,  speech  very  slow,  monotonous  and  scanning,  etc.

254  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

OlîSERVATlON  VIII. — Nervous  troubles  in  the  left  brachial  plexus,  spreading  at  times
to  the  thoracic  and  cardiac  nerves  ;  pricking  sensations,  numbness,  contracture,  con-
striction, and  attacks  of  pain. — Suggestion  causes  these  attacks  to  disappear  momentarily,
but  does  not  prevent  their  return.

B ,  a  shoemaker  thirty-four  years  old,  enters  the  hospital  on  May

ii,  1883.

He  had  intermittent  fever  in  Senegal,  and,  since  his  return  in  1875,
he  has  had  an  attack  of  fever  each  season. — Eighteen  months  ago  he
had  pleurisy  on  the  right  side,  which  kept  him  confined  to  his  bed  for
two  months  and  a  half,  and  left  him  weak  for  several  months  after.  Since
then  he  has  been  feeble,  and  his  respiration  is  somewhat  obstructed.

On  December  25,  he  felt  as  if  his  whole  left  hand  had  become  numb,
and  there  were  pricking  sensations  as  if  he  had  been  lying  on  it  ;  these
pricking  sensations  kept  up  all  day.  At  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  they
extended  to  the  shoulder,  then  spread  from  above  downwards  along  the
arm-pit  to  the  hip.  Next  morning  his  neck  was  stiff,  and  he  felt  as  if  a
weight  were  in  the  left  half  of  the  back  of  his  neck.

These  pricking  sensations  lasted  three  days,  accompained  with  com-
plete insensibility  of  the  whole  upper  left  limb  and  paresis.  After  three
days  the  prickings  disappeared,  and  after  five  or  six  days  sensibility  was
totally  restored.

On  the  following  clays  there  was  continuous,  slight,  tremor,  persisting
even  when  the  patient  was  at  rest.  This  lasted  until  March.  Then
attacks  began,  characterized  by  numbness  in  the  hand,  extending  up
the  arm  and  clown  the  left  side  of  the  thorax.  The  fore-arm  was  con-
tracture! in  flexion,  the  hand  in  pronation.  The  fingers  were  bent  with
sharp  pains.  Sensation  of  constriction  and  suffocation  in  the  precor-
dial region.  These  cramps  lasted  about  five  minutes  and  were  followed
by  a  sense  of  weakness.  Since  March  he  has  had  five  attacks  in  all  ;
the  last  one  took  place  twelve  days  ago.  The  arm  did  well  in  the  inter-
val, save  for  the  sensations  of  numbness  which  came  five  or  six  times  a
day  in  some  part  of  the  upper  limb,  hand,  fore-arm  or  arm,  and  lasted
from  five  to  six  minutes  each  time.  Since  the  end  of  April  he  has  had
tremor  of  the  upper  left  limb,  with  twitching  sensations,  several  times  a
day.

He  is  a  married  man,  of  industrious  habits,  and  has  no  alcoholic  or
venereal  history.  Naturally  his  constitution  is  good.  He  is  anaemic.
Temperature  normal.  We  note  flatness  with  diminished  respiratory  mur-
mur, and  absence  of  vocal  fienutus  on  the  side  which  is  not  retracted.
The  pleuritic  effusion  seems  to  continue  in  a  passive  condition.

Heart  sounds  normal  ;  no  pain  on  pressure  of  the  thorax  or  of  the
brachial  plexus. — Appetite  good,  digestion  normal. — Diagnosis  :  lesion  of

Suggestive   Therapeutics*  255

an  unknown  nature  in  the  path  or  roots  of  the  brachial  plexus t  causing
dynamic  irradiations.

May  13d). — Had  several  sensations  of  numbness  yesterday,  one  in  the
shoulder,  die  other  beginning  in  the  left  breast,  spreading  clown  the
arm,  ami  into  the  extremities  of  the  fingers,  coming  as  suddenly  as  a
Hash  of  lightning,  lasting  about  five  minutes,  and  followed  by  tremor. —
Hypnotization  (2d  degree)  ;  suggestion.  The  left  hand  gives  38  by  the
dynamometer  before  suggestion  and  41  afterwards.

Patient  has  no  sensations  of  numbness  on  the  13th  or  14th.  He  has
not  been  free  from  them  so  long  since  the  beginning  of  his  illness.

But  during  the  morning  of  the  15th,  he  has  two  attacks,  like  electric
shocks,  in  the  deltoid. — Hypnotic  suggestion  in  the  evening.

16th. — In  the  morning,  sensation  of  pinching  in  the  deltoid;  twice
during  the  day,  sensations  like  electric  shocks  in  the  left  shoulder. —
Hypnotic  suggestion  in  the  evening.  Feels  nothing  more  until  the  morning
of  the  iS///.  Then  numbness  with  contracture  in  the  left  hand,  lasting
five  minutes.  Numbness  occupies  the  entire  upper  limb,  and  the  hand,
and  lasts  until  six  o'clock  in  the  evening.  At  this  time  hypnotic  suggestion
drives  it  a  70  ay.

19th. — At  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  rhythmical  tremor  and  numb-
ness without  twitchings,  preceded  by  a  sensation  as  of  an  electric  shock,
spreading  from  the  breast  to  the  hand. — Later  these  phenomena  disap-
pear.— Daily  suggestion.

The  patient  has  no  more  pain  until  the  morning  of  the  22d.  Then  he
is  again  seized  with  cramps  and  pricking  sensations  spreading  from  the
fingers  to  the  elbow,  lasting  five  minutes.

25th. — Pricking  sensations  followed  by  heat  in  the  left  arm,  then  tre-
mor in  the  upper  limb,  lasting  all  clay,  and  disappearing  in  the  evening,
after  suggestion.

28th. — About  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  tremor  of  the  left  arm,  pre-
ceded and  followed  by  cutting  pains,  the  pain  lasting  five  minutes,  the
tremor  half  an  hour.  Hypnotic  suggestion  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening.
About  seven  o'clock  the  patient  is  again  seized  with  tremor,  without
pain.     He  sleeps  part  of  the  night.

At  four  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  29th,  tremor.  At  six  o'clock,
sensation  of  numbness  in  hand,  which  he  cannot  close.  Sensation  of
constriction  in  the  deltoid  region  ;  tremor  appears  especially  when  the
arm  is  bent  ;  sweats  localized  in  the  arm-pit  accompany  the  severe  pains.
Compression  of  the  brachial  plexus  during  the  attacks  is  not  painful.
Suggestion  makes  all  these  symptoms  disappear.

30th. — In  the  morning  slight  constriction  in  the  left  arm-pit,  with
pricking  sensations  in  the  limb,  which  are  driven  away  by  suggestion
in  the  eventmr.

256  Suggestive   Thei'apcutïcs.

On  the  31st,  at  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  severe  pain  in  the  hand,
spreading  toward  the  shoulder,  arm-pit,  and  left  half  of  the  hand.  It
lasts  several  minutes,  with  cramps  when  the  arms  are  flexed.  Then
comes  a  fainting  fit  which  lasts  from  five  to  six  minutes,  followed  by  a
sensation  of  weakness.  Hypnotic  suggestion  in  the  evening. — About
seven  o'clock  shooting  pains,  with  tremor  of  the  hand.

June  1  st. — In  the  morning,  painful  sensation  of  numbness  in  the
deltoid  and  arm-pit,  with  local  sweats. — Suggestion  at  eleven  o'clock:  all
symptoms  disappear  ; — but  at  mid-day  there  is  a  sense  of  constriction  in
the  wrist,  in  the  hand,  and  about  the  arm  and  deltoid,  which  does  not
disappear  until  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  after  hypnotic  suggestion.  The
patient  sleeps  well.

On  the  morning  of  the  2d,  new  sensations  of  constriction  with  slight
prickings  in  the  wrist  and  hand.  Pressure  upon  the  olecranon  causes
pain,  which  spreads  over  the  entire  fore-arm. — All  symptoms  disappear
after  suggestion  at  eleven  o'clock;  but  at  mid-day  new  sensation  of  con-
striction with  stiffness  in  the  wrist,  until  six  o'clock  in  the  evening.
Since  hypnotization,  everything  has  vanished.  Quiet  sleep  until  four
o'clock.

3d. — The  same  sensation  upon  waking  at  four  o'clock.  Patient  can
neither  stretch  nor  bend  the  stiff  elbow.  Suggestion  in  the  waking  con-
dition makes  the  stiffness  disappear  in  three  and  a  half  minutes.

I  will  not  follow  this  observation  any  farther.  The  nervous  phe-
nomena are  always  suppressed  by  suggestion  either  in  the  waking  or  in
the  hypnotic  condition,  and  always  re-appear.  For  example,  on  the
25th  of  June,  the  patient  has  sensations  of  numbness  in  the  entire
limb  from  shoulder  to  fingers.  When  he  wishes  to  take  hold  of  any-
thing the  limb  is  seized  with  slow  oscillations,  until  it  finds  a  place  of
support.  After  suggestion,  the  sensation  of  numbness  and  the  tremor
have  entirely  disappeared.

The  patient  leaves  the  hospital  on  the  26th,  not  cured.

The  influence  of  suggestion  on  the  nervous  symptoms,  refera-
ble principally  to  the  region  of  the  brachial  plexus,  is  incontesta-
ble ;  but  its  powerlessness  to  prevent  the  return  of  these  symp-
toms might  make  one  think  that  the  functional  trouble  is  kept
up  by  some  organic  lesion  which  induces  new  attacks.

Suggestive   Therapeutics.

-0/

OBSERVATION  IX. — Paresis  of  traumatic  origin  in  the  muscles  of  the  hand. — Immediate
restoration  of  movement  by  suggestion.

C ,  twenty  years  old,  comes  to  consult   me   on  January  8th,  1887.

Three  months  ago  he  was  wounded  in  the  hand  at  the  level  of  the  right
pisiform.  The  hand  immediately  closed  ;  there  was  a  certain  degree  of
anaesthesia  in  the  ulnar  area,  which  has  disappeared.  Since  this  time
C has  not  been  able  to  use  this  hand;  he  cannot  stretch  out  his  fin-
gers, or  open  and  shut  hand  spontaneously.  Dr.  Guyon,  thinking  it  a
lesion  of  the  ulnar  nerve,  sent  him  to  my  colleague,  Dr.  Weiss,  who  asked
me  to  see  the  patient.

We  hypnotize  him,  he  goes  into  the  third  degree  of  sleep.  I  suggest
that  he  can  open  and  shut  his  hand,  and  extend  his  fingers,  and  I  add
manipulation  to  the  suggestion.  In  ten  minutes  I  awake  him.  He  can
open  and  shut  his  hand,  extend  and  flex  his  fingers.  He  goes  home  the
same  evening,  in  spite  of  my  wish  to  have  him  remain  a  few  days  in
order  to  make  sure  of  the  cure.  Has  this  immediate  effect  been  main-
tained ?  In  any  case,  in  case  of  relapse,  repeated  suggestion  will  no
doubt  succeed  in  definitely  restoring  the  function.

OBSERVATION  X. — Chronic  lead  poisonijig. — Paralysis  of  the  extensors  of  the  hand
dating  back  more  than  five  months. — Anesthesia  of  the  bach  of  the  hand. — Cure  of
the  anœsthesia  by  suggestion  in  the  waking  condition. — Complete  amelioration  of  the
paralysis  of  the  extensors  after  the  first  seance,  and  gradually  total  cure. — Happy
action  of  suggestion  upon  the  neuralgia  and  vomiting.

J ,  a  house-painter,  thirty-nine  years  old,  comes  to  the  hospital  for

the  second  time  on  July  23d,  1886.

For  twelve  years  he  has  had  attacks  of  lead  colic.  For  more  than  six
months  he  has  shown  symptoms  of  a.  general  saturnine  intoxication,  with
cachexia.  I  do  not  wish  to  trace  his  history  here,  and  will  simply
relate  one  episode  bearing  upon  his  case.

Since  November  or  December,  1885,  he  has  had  obstinate  neuralgia
accompanied  with  delirium  at  night.  Since  April  he  has  had  amblyopia
with  hemorrhagic  retinitis,  generalized  tremor,  muscular  pains  in  the
limbs,  hypertrophy  of  the  left  side  of  the  heart,  with  a  mitral  murmur,
connected  with  an  interstitial  nephritis  with  albuminuria.

Finally,  since  the  end  of  March  1886,  he  has  had  paralysis  of  the  ex-
tensors of  the  right  hand,  which  has  persisted.  He  has  also  had  anal-
gesia with  anœsthesia  in  the  right  fore-arm  at  different  times.  These  are
the  symptoms  which  are  of  interest  to  us.

August  7th. — Condition  is  the  same.  Patient  can  lift  right  wrist  and
put  it  in  the  line  of  the  axis  of  the  fore-arm,  but  cannot  lift  it  higher  ;
the  fingers  are  flexed  at  an  obtuse  angle  upon  the  metacarpus,  and  cannot
-   17

25 S  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

be  straightened.  This  condition  has  persisted  since  we  saw  the  patient
for  the  first  time,  since  May,  1S86.  We  noted  on  June  5,  paralysis  of
the  extensors  of  the  hand  ;  the  extensor  muscles  of  the  little  finger  and
of  the  thumb  contract  to  faradic  electricity;  but  the  other  fingers  remain
motionless  on  the  application  of  electricity  to  the  common  extensor,
which  does  not  react.

The  patient  has  hyperœsthesia  of  both  fore-arms.  Flexors  and  exten-
sors are  very  painful  to  pressure.  If  the  borders  of  the  ulna  and  radius
are  pressed  there  is  also  pain,  and  the  patient  cries  out.  Complete
anœsthesia  with  analgesia,  limited  to  the  dorsal  face  of  the  hand,  extending
to  the  level  of  the  wrist,  also  exists.  The  palm  of  the  hand  and  the
fingers  are  sensible.  The  fore-arm  is  insensible.  (Anaethesia  with
analgesia  in  the  right  fore-arm  was  noticed  on  July  23.)  Very  marked
tremor  in  both  hands.  No  pricking  sensation  or  numbness  in  the
limb.

The  singular  distribution  of  this  anaesthesia  over  the  entire  back  of  the
hand,  the  fingers  and  the  fore-arm  receiving  the  same  innervation  and
remaining  sensible,  makes  us  think  that  this  anaesthesia  is  not  organic  ;
that  it  is  connected  neither  with  an  affection  of  the  nerve  centres,  nor
with  a  lesion  of  the  peripheral  nerves,  but  that  it  may  be  simply  dynamic,
unconsciously  created  perhaps,  by  the  patient's  imagination,  and  associ-
ated by  it  with  the  paralysis  of  the  extensors.  It  is  the  dorsal  surface
of  the  hand  and  wrist  that  the  patient  imagines  he  cannot  lift  ;  it  is
there  that  imagination  localizes  the  motor-paralysis  ;  it  is  there  also  that
it  has  been  able  to  create  a  sensory  paralysis.  The  patient  can
flex  and  extend  the  phalanges  ;  there  is  no  motor-paralysis  there,  and
sensibility  also  is  preserved.

Starting  with  this  idea,  I  try  to  induce  the  return  of  sensation  to  the
back  of  the  hand  by  means  of  suggestion  in  the  waking  condition.  I  touch
the  patient's  hand,  saying  that  he  can  feel.  At  the  same  time  I  test
sensation  by  means  of  a  pin,  and  at  the  end  of  three  minutes  I  note
that  the  sensation  is  restored ;  the  patient  feels  pain  from  the  prick  very
distinctly  in  the  upper  part  of  the  back  of  the  hand  ;  he  feels  less,  but
still  clearly  in  the  lower  half.  After  this  I  hypnotize  the  patient  mto pro-
found sleep,  and  make  the  suggestion  of  cure.

August  9th. — The  restored  sensation  is  maintained.

The  patient  thinks  that  he  can  extend  and  move  his  fingers  better.
Pain  still  exists  in  the  fore-arm,  in  the  muscle 5,  and  near  the  border  of
the  ulna  and  radius.  We  also  note  pain  in  the  extensor  muscles  of  the
left  fore-arm  and  along  the  bone. — Suggestion.

10th. — The  patient  finds  that  since  yesterday's  suggestion  he  can  open
his  hand  better,  that  the  trembling  has  diminished  notably,  and  that  he  can
write  his  name,  which  he  could  not  do  before.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  259

Pressure  upon  the  muscles  or  bones  of  the  fore-arm  no  longer  causes
pain  ;  there  is  only  slight  sensibility  when  the  elbow  is  Hexed.  He
straightens  his  wrist  much  better. — I  put  him  into  somnambulism  :  he
goes  into  this  condition  by  simple  occlusion  of  the  eyes;  but  each  time
he  has  a  sudden  shock  at  the  end  of  ten  seconds,  and  wakes  up.  I  put
him  into  somnambulism  with  his  eves  open,  and  suggest  complete  cure
of  the  upper  limbs.  Upon  waking  he  can  execute  any  movements.  If
the  arm  is  held  in  pronation  and  horizontally,  he  straightens  his  wrist
completely,  which  he  could  not  do  so  well  before  ;  he  cannot  yet  extend
the  fingers  completely.

22d. — This  result  is  maintained.  There  is  restoration  of  sensibility  ;
straightening  of  the  wrist,  complete  disappearance  of  pains,  and  the  thumb
does  well.  The  fingers  cannot  yet  be  completely  extended  upon  the  meta-
carpus.

I  make  a  fourth  suggestion. — The  patient  leaves  the  hospital.

He  returns  on  November  7.  For  a  week  he  has  had  convulsive
attacks  with  amnesia  lasting  two  hours.  He  complains  of  frequent  neu-
ralgia in  the  frontal  and  occipital  regions.  For  a  week  he  hns  also  had
attacks  of  vomiting,  insomnia,  agitation,  buzzing  in  the  ears,  vertigo,  etc.

But  the  improvement  brought  about  by  suggestion  has  lasted  and
even  increased.  The  patient  bends  and  extends  the  wrists,  and  extends
his  fingers  completely  over  the  metacarpus.  The  dynamometer  registers
15  for  the  right  hand,  and  27  for  the  left.  Sensation  is  normal  in  the
hand.

Hypnotic  suggestion  also  succeeded  in  a  marked  way  in  improving
the  patient's  other  symptoms.  After  three  or  four  séances,  we  succeeded
by  suggestion  in  maintaining  the  induced  sleep  for  an  indefinite  time,  with-
out shocks  and  spontaneous  awakening.  The  intense  neuralgia  and
heaviness  in  the  head  were  quickly  calmed  at  each  seance,  and  definitely  cured
in  ten  days.  The  vomiting  also  disappeared  after  two  or  three  séances,  and
the  patient  again  slept  at  night.  His  intelligence,  which  was  clouded
by  the  neuralgia,  and  his  memory,  were  reawakened,  and  the  patient  kept
up  well  until  the  end  of  November.  Then  pulmonary  gangrene  slowly
grafted  itself  upon  the  broncho-pneumonia,  in  the  course  of  the  interstitial
nephritis,  and  was  followed  by  death  on  the  24th  of  December.

This  observation  shows  that  even  in  chronic  and  incurable
affections,  suggestive  therapeutics  are  not  useless.  Here  is  a
case  of  saturnine  paralysis  of  the  extensors  which  yields  to  sug-
gestion. Doubtless  it  should  not  be  concluded  from  this  fact  that
all  saturnine  paralyses  are  amenable  to  suggestion  ;  we  have  tried
it  in  other  cases  without  any  result.  Where  the  radial  nerve  has
undergone   complete  degeneration,  suggestion    can  do  nothing.

2  6o  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

But  the  nerve  may  be  partially  affected,  and  certain  fibres  may
be  respected  ;  or  regeneration  of  the  nerve  may  have  occurred
without  its  function  being  restored  ;  dynamically,  it  remains  com-
promised. Suggestion,  acting  in  a  dynamogenic  manner,  incites
the  nerve  to  arouse  its  muscular  contraction.

Other  functional  troubles,  such  as  cephalalgia,  vertigo,  insom-
nia, and  the  intellectual  weakness  resulting  from  them,  were
happily  amended  in  our  patient  through  suggestion.

II.

Hysterical  Affections.
Observation  XI. — Hystero-epilepsy  in  a  young  man. — Sensitivo-sensorial  hemianœs-
thesia,  remarkable  restoration  of  the  visual  functions  obtained  by  the  use  of  magnetism,
through  hypnotic  suggestion. — Has  the  magnet  only  a  suggestive  virtue  ?

On  February  28,  1883,.  Dr.  Spillmann  presented  a  patient  suffering
from  hystero-epilepsy  to  the  Society  of  Medicine.  He  was  a  young
man,  eighteen  years  of  age,  with  seventeen  brothers  and  sisters,  none
of  whom  had  ever  shown  any  symptom  of  nervous  disease.  The  mother
had  a  neuropathic  taint.

As  a  child,  the  patient  showed  symptoms  of  somnambulism,  getting  up

in  the  night  and  going  to  walk  in  the  village.     Three  years  ago  L

contracted  syphilis  and  had  syphilides  on  the  scalp,  skin,  mucous
membranes,  etc.  He  entered  the  House  of  Refuge  on  November  4^
1882.  He  is  below  the  average  in  intelligence,  and  can  scarcely  read
or  write.  The  penis  is  inflamed  and  large,  and  presents  two  deep
ulcerations  as  large  as  a  silver  quarter,  on  the  prepuce.  Very  pro-
nounced congenital  phimosis.  From  the  orifice  of  the  prepuce  exudes
purulent,  yellowish,  fetid  matter.     Mercurial  treatment.

One  month    after   admission    L was    seized,  without    any  known

cause,  with  an  attack  of  unconsciousness,  convulsions,  and  delirium
followed  by  muscular  relaxation  and  coma,  and  ushered  in  with  grinding
of  the  teeth  and  cries.  The  attacks  recurred  almost  daily.  Mercurial
inunctions  and  iodide  of  potassium  produced  no  effect.  Examination  of
patient  shows  that  the  case  is  one  of  hystero-epilepsy.  The  attacks
begin  with  a  sensation  like  that  of  a  ball,  which,  leaving  the  extremity
of  the  penis,  mounts  into  the  left  inguinal  region  and  passes  by  the
posterior  surface  of  the  trunk,  following  the  crest  of  the  ilium  to  the
vertebral  column,  along  which  it  rises  as  far  as  the  sixth  dorsal
vertebra.  Then  comes  a  sensation  of  heat  with  vertigo,  and  the  patient
loses  consciousness.

Patient  presents  a  number  of  disorders  of  sensibility.  There  is  com-
plete anassthesia,  involving  the   skin  and   muscular  system  of  the  right

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  261

side,  and  hyperesthesia  of  the  left  side.  The  sensibility  of  the
olfactory  mucous  membrane  is  dull  on  the  right  side.  Smell  is  abol-
ished on  this  side,  and  the  sense  of  taste  is  diminished.  Hearing  is
less  acute  than  normal.  The  eyes  were  examined  bv  M.  Stœber  on
December  27.  The  left  eve  distinguishes  four  fingers  held  hardly  a
metre  away,  though  the  patient  is  unable  to  count  them.  The  right  eve
perceives  the  hand  distinctly  three  metres  away.  The  left  eye  has  no
perception  of  form  or  of  color.

Both  visual  fields  are  restricted.  For  the  left  eye  the  perimeter
registers  30°  externally,  in  the  horizontal  meridian,  and  200  internally,
in  the  horizontal  meridian,  and  40°  above  and  below  the  fixing  point  in
the  vertical  meridian.  On  the  right  side  the  limitation  is  less.  Opthal-
moscopic  examination  reveals  left  neuro-retinitis,  cloudy  papilla,  and
dilated  veins.

Between  the  shoulder-blades,  at  the  height  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  dorsal
vertebra;,  the  patient  presents  a  surface  as  big  as  two  silver  dollars,
which  is  insensible  to  touch  and  to  the  prick  of  a  pin.  Moderate  and
prolonged  pressure  on  this  surface  immediately  brings  on  an  attack.
1  Hysterogenic  zones.)

January  2 2d. — Prepuce  cut,  and  enormous  accumulations  of  fetid
sebaceous  matter  removed  with  thermo-cautery.  From  the  time  of  this
operation   until  the  28th   of   February,  the  day  on  which    Dr.  Spillmann

presented    the   case    to    the    Society  of    Medicine,  L has    had  no

spontaneous  crises,  and  those  which  are  induced  by  pressure  on  the
hysterogenic  zones  are  of  short  duration.

Patient  hypnotized  several  times  and  easily  put  into  somnambulism.

Dr.  Charpentier  examined  the  patient's  eyes  on  the  27th  of  February.
He  found  the  acuteness  of  vision  normal  on  the  right  side,  and  reduced
to  one  third  on  the  left.     (Optometer  of  Badal.)

Field  of  vision  normal  on  right  side,  restricted  on  left,  and,  after
examination  with  Landolt's  perimeter,  reduced  to  470  internally  in
horizontal  meridian,  and  400  externally,  350  above  fixing  point  in  vertical
meridian,  and  300  below  (the  field  then  had  enlarged  subsequent  to
the  examination  made  by  Dr.  Stceber,  on  December  27).

Visual  field  for  colors  also  restricted  on  the  left  side.  Blue  only
perceived  io°  externally,  and  50  internally.  Green  recognized  120  ex-
ternally, and  11°  internally.     Red  180  internally,  and  150  externally.

Dr.  Charpentier  afterwards  determined  the  degree  of  sensibility  to
colors,  finding  out  by  means  of  a  special  apparatus  the  least  intensity
a  color  might  have  in  order  to  be  recognized  by  the  eye  under  exami-
nation.

The  following  are  the  results  obtained  :

Perception  of  yellow,  normal  on  right  side,  tws  on  left.

2Ô2  Suggestive    TJiei'apcutics.

Perception  of  green,  normal  on  right,  dhr  on  left.

Perception  of  blue,  normal  on  right,  too  on  left.

Sensibility  to  light  reduced  to  t<jo  on  left  side.

Examination  with  the  opthalmoscope  shows  the  presence  of  theneuro-
retinitis  already  mentioned.

These  different  phenomena  having  been  noted,  Dr.  Charpentier
experimented  with  regard  to  the  therapeutic  influence  of  application  of
the  magnet.  He  made  the  patient  hold  one  end  of  a  temporary  magnet
connected  with  a  Planté  element,  and  asked  him  to  apply  the  projecting
extremity  of  the  bundle  of  soft  iron  wires  near  the  external  angle  of  the
left  palpebral  fissure.

He  left  the  patient  under  the  influence  of  the  magnetic  action  for
fifteen  minutes,  at  the  end  of  which  time  he  again  examined  the  visual
functions.

The  acuteness  of  vision  was  normal  on  the  right  side.  On  the  left
side  it  iuas  equal  to  the  right  side,  that  is,  it  was  normal.

The  field  of  vision  was  appreciably  increased  in  size  on  the  left  side.  It
measured  550  internal!}',  and  420  externally,  40°  in  the  superior  vertical
meridian,  420  in  the  inferior  vertical  meridian.  On  the  right  side  it  had
remained  normal.     (See  chart  of  February  27.)

The  visual  field  for  colors  was  also  increased.  Blue  was  recognized  at
200  externally  and  internally.  Green,  21°  internally,  and  180  externally.
Red  200  internally,  and  210  externally.  The  most  noticeable  increase
was  for  blue,  for  which  color  the  visual  field  was  almost  tripled  in
extent.

Acuteness  of  vision  for  colors  was  normal  on  the  right  side.  On  the
left  it  had  become  tVô  for  red,  tVtj  for  yellow,  tot  for  green,  and  tot  for
blue.  The  perception  of  the  colors  green  atid  blue  had  thus  become  five  times
better  than  it  was  before  the  magnetic  application,  and  the  acuteness  for
red  had  quadrupled  ;  while  for  yellow  it  had  been  increased  two  and  a  half
times.

To    sum    up  : —  The  interrupted  magnetic   application   acted  in   a   very

remarkable  manner  on  all  the  visual  functions.

These  results  were  communicated  to  the  Society  of  Medicine  at
Nancy.

The  amblyopia  which  was  diminished  on  February  21,  after  the  appli-
cation of  the  magnet,  reappeared  a  few  days  later  in  consequence  of  a
new  excision  of  the  growths  on  the  fore-skin.  On  March  10  the  acute-
ness of  vision  of  the  left  eye  was  reduced  to  \.  The  acuteness  for  colors
determined  by  Dr.  Charpentier's  method,  was  tot  for  red,  tot  for  yellow
tot  for  green,  and  tot  for  blue.  The  visual  field  was  very  much
restricted,  extending  only  from  12°  to  150  in  the  various  meridians.

Opthalmoscopic  examination  showed  no  change  in  the  neuro-retiniits

Suggestive   Therapeutics,

26

of  the  left  eye.  Right  papilla  slightly  obscured,  and  the  veins  enlarged.
The  patient  was  submitted  to  the  magnetic  application  for  a  quarter  of
an  hour.     At   the   end  of  this   time  the  following  changes  were  noted.

O  >l

First,  acuteness  of  vision  had  again  become  normal  on  the  left  side.
Second,  acuteness  of  vision  for  colors,  normal  for  green,  and  varying
from  fW  to  t4uV  for  the  three  other  primary  colors.  Thirdly,  the  visual
field  was  increased  in  size  to  38°  internally  and  320  externally  in  the

264

Suggestii 'c   Therapeutics.

horizontal  meridian.     The  field  was  increased  in  all  the  meridians  from
200  to  250.     Fourth,  condition  of  fundus  oculi  same  as  before.

Dr.  Bemheim,  who  was  present,  desired  to  see  whether  hypnotic  sug-
gestion would  increase  the  benefit  already  obtained.

He  hypnotized  the  patient  and  suggested  that  his  field  of  vision  would
increase  in  all  directions.  After  waking,  the  visual  field  was  found  to
extend  420  internally,  and  40°  externally  in  the  horizontal  meridian.  The
visual  field  was  extended  on  an  average  from  8°  to  io°  in  each  merid-
ian.    (See  chart  of  March  10.)

0

Before  the  use  of  Magnet.
After  the  use  of  Magnet.
After  Hypnotic  Suggestion.

CHART  OF   MARCH    10th.

On  the  1 2th  of  March,  two  days  later,  another  examination  was
made.  The  improvement  in  the  acuteness  of  vision  and  in  the  visual
field  still  continued.  The  perception  of  colors  was  still  feeble  :  red,
t4ô°ô,  yellow  tVïï,  green  tVit,  blue  $$$.  Dr.  Bemheim  hypnotized  the  patient
and  suggested  a  further  improvement  during  sleep.

On  awaking,  the  acuteness  of  vision  was  normal,  and  the  visual field  had
increased  from  2°  to  io°  in  every  direction.  Color  perception  had  become
normal  for  green,  it  had  increased  to  jVff  for  red,  and  to  toïï  for  yellow.
For  blue  it  was  still  very  feeble.  The  application  of  the  magnet  was
afterwards  tried  for  thirty-three  minutes,  and  it  was  noted,  at  the  end  of
this  time,  that  there  was  a  new  enlargement  of  the  visual  field  as  well  as  a
considerable  improvement  in  the  perception  of  colors.     The  visual  field  had

Suggestive    Therapeutics.

26;

increased  from  5°to  12  in  every  meridian  (see  chart  of  March  12)  ;  the
perception  for  green  and  blue  was  normal,  for  yellow  it  had  increased
to  iVu,  and  for  red  to  i

The  patient  returned  three  days  later,  on  March  15.  The  improve-
ment which  had  been  obtained  still  existed,  even  in  the  perception  of
colors,  which  was  at  this  time  only  slightly  diminished  for  red  and  blue.
Dr.  Charpentier  hypnotized  the  patient,  and  noticed  when  he  waked  up
that  the  visual  field  had  increased  still  more  in  extent,  the  increase  being
from  5'  to  20°  in  the  various  meridians.     The  perception  for  colors  had

—  Before  the  use  of  Magnet.

—  After  the  use  of  Magnet.

...    After  Hypnotic  Suggestion.

CHART   OF   MARCH    12th.

not  been  modified.  The  application  of  the  magnet  to  the  left  temple
for  thirty  minutes,  produced  a  new  extension  of  the  limits  of  the  visual
field,  the  increase  being  160  externally,  and  6°  internally  in  the  horizon-
tal meridian,  so  that  the  field  had  become  almost  normal,  except  in  the
external  and  inferior  external  regions.  Color  perception  was  normal.
It  is  a  curious  fact  that  the  right  visual  field,  which  had  been  considered
normal  since  it  extended  to  95°  externally  and  6o°  internally,  had  shared
in  the  improvement  of  the  left  eye.  It  measured  650  internally,  and  no°
externally  in  the  horizontal  meridian  and  ioo°  in  the  superior  and  infe-
rior vertical  meridians.  These  are  extraordinarily  wide  limits.  (See
chart  of  March  15.)

2  66  Suggestive   TJicrapcittics.

Two  days  later,  March  17,  the  patient  still  possessed  this  enormous
visual  field  on  the  right  side.  On  the  left  side  the  acuteness  of  vision
and  color  perception  were  perfectly  normal,  excepting  for  red  and  blue.
The  visual  field  had  not  decreased  since  the  last  séance.

At  this  time  it  occurred  to  Drs.  Bernheim  and  Charpentier  to  try  the
effect  of  unconscious  suggestion  accompanied  by  the  pretended  application  of
the  magnet.  The  pole  was  applied  as  before  to  the  left  temple,  but  no
current  was  passed  through  it.  The  magnet  was  left  in  place  thirty-five
minutes,  and  at  the  end  of  this  time  the  visual  field  of  the  left  eye  had
acquired  the  same  extent  as  that  of  the  right  eye,  an  extent  greater  than
that  usually  given  as  normal.  It  had  increased  70  internally,  and  250
externally  in  the  horizontal  meridian,  and  200  in  the  superior  and  inferior
vertical  meridians.  Color  perception  was  normal  (see  chart  of  March
17).

Thus  the  pretended  use  of  the  magnet  had  acted  upon  the  acuteness  of  per-
ception of  the  visual  apparatus  with  the  same  efficacy  as  the  real  magnet  and
hypnotic  suggestion.

We  see  from  this  interesting  experiment  how  closely  suggestion
is  associated  with  many  therapeutic  methods,  unknown  to  the
patient  and  often  to  the  physician  himself.  It  is  an  element  which
we  must  take  into  consideration  before  pronouncing  upon  the
value  of  certain  therapeutic  agents.

OBSERVATION  XII. — Hysteria. —  Varying  sensitivo-sensorial  anaesthesia. —  Transient  dis-
appearance of  the  symptoms  or  transfer  brought  about  by  suggestion  in  the  waking
and  sleeping  conditions. — Unsuccessful  use  of  suggestion  for  the  permanent  disappear-
ance of  the  symptoms.

L ,  a  servant,  seventeen  years  of  age,  entered    the   hospital  on

March  27,  1S83.  On  Good  Friday  she  dislocated  her  shoulder,  and  the
dislocation  was  reduced.  The  next  clay  she  had  a  nervous  crisis,  and
since  then  she  has  been  subject  to  such  attacks.

She  is  fairly  strong,  and  quite  intelligent.  She  complains  of  pain  in
her  left  arm,  in  the  anterior  part  of  the  thorax  on  the  left  side,  in  the
back  on  the  same  side,  and  along  the  dorsal  spinous  processes.  Anaes-
thesia of  upper  left  limb.

28th. — Hypnotic  suggestion  (somnambulism)  restores  sensibility  of  limb.
Passes  a  good  night.

29th. — Shoulder  still  painful.  The  anœsthcsia  which  has  returned  to  the
limb  is  again  removed  by  suggestion.  The  pain  persists  ;  it  resists  a  second
hypnotization.

Evening. — Complete  right  sensitivo-sensorial  hemianesthesia,  with
loss  of  muscular  sense.     Pain  in  fore-arm  and  left  hand.     Hypnotization

Suggestive    Therapeutics.

267

causes  the  pain  to  disappear.     Anaesthesia  persists.     A  second  hypnotization

causes  the  hemianesthesia  to  disappear.     Only  the  pain  in  the  shoulder
persis:-.

i       ~_

30th. — Sensibility  normal  on  right  side,  left  hand  and  fore-arm  anaes-
thetic. Acuteness  of  hearing  diminished  on  same  side.  Loss  of
olfactory  and  gustatory  sense.  Diminution  in  sight  (acuteness  of  vision
reduced  to  one-third).      Sensibility  of  lower  limbs  normal.     Simple  sug-

26S  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

gestion  with  application  of  diachylon  plaster  to  left  hand  produces  no
change.  Hypnotic  suggestion  re-establishes  sensibility  on  left  side,  but  at
the  same  time  a  transfer  (not  suggested  )  is  observed  to  have  taken  place.
There  is  complete  right  sensitivo-sensorial  hemianesthesia.  After
another  suggestion,  the  right  side,  with  the  exception  of  the  fore-arm,
becomes  sensible.

At  half-past  five  in  the  evening  we  note  the  following  points.  On  the
right  side,  anaesthesia  of  face,  upper  limb,  thorax  and  back,  to  the  level
of  the  tenth  dorsal  vertebra;  sensorial  anaesthesia,  and  tenderness  of
the  lower  limbs  and  abdomen.  On  the  left  side,  anaesthesia  of  face  and
upper  limb.  Shoulder  and  breast  painful.  Tenderness  over  abdomen
and  lower  limbs.  Left  eye  sees  indistinctly  ;  can  read  at  distance  of
30  centimetres  (acuteness  of  vision  i).  Anaesthesia  of  senses  of  smell
and  taste.

Patient  has  had  slight  paroxysm,  lasting  eight  minutes.  Small  bar  of
soft  iron  applied  to  hand  and  left  fore-arm  gives  rise  to  no  result,
although  applied  for*  twenty-five  minutes.  A  magnet  is  applied  in  its
place,  with  suggestion  (without  sleep)  at  the  end  of  the  application.
Patient  complains  of  pain  in  fingers  and  hand.  Sensibility  restored  in
fore-arm,  from  middle  third  up.  Face  and  special  senses  remain  anaes-
thetic.

I  then  give  suggestion  in  waking  condition  for  return  of  sensibility
to  right  side,  holding  the  patient's  right  hand  between  both  of  my  hands.
Suddenly  patient  complains  of  sharp,  cutting  pain  in  arm.  Sensibility  is
restored  to  right  arm,  down  to  wrist,  hand  remaining  insensible.
Thorax  and  neck  are  sensible,  face  continues  anaesthetic.  Left  arm  has
again  become  anaesthetic.  Anosmia  persists.  Olfactory  sensibility
restored  by  touching  right  nostril  and  giving  a  suggestion  at  the  same
time.

Finally,  I  hypnotize  patient  and  repeat  the  suggestion  for  five  minutes.
Upon  waking,  sensibility  has  cotne  back  in  both  sides.  Ticking  of  watch
is  heard  at  om,  30  on  right  side,  and  at  om,  10  on  left.  Vision  f  instead
of  \.  Sense  of  smell  present  on  both  sides.  Sense  of  taste  alone
requires  a  new  hypnotization  of  one  minute  before  it  is  restored.  But
the  effect  obtained  is  not  lasting;  the  anaesthesia  reappears.

Suggestion,  either  in  waking  or  sleeping  condition,  readily  restores
sensibility,  generally  by  transferring  anaesthesia  to  other  side.  The
experiments  related  above  in  regard  to  suggestion  in  waking  condition
have  been  frequently  repeated  in  this  case.  I  will  not  follow  the  case
in  detail.  On  April  14,  paralysis  of  extensors  of  left  hand  with  anœsthe-
sia  of  limb  and  contracture  of  arm  disappeared  rapidly  through  hypnotic
suggestion.     But   twenty   minutes   after   waking,  sudden    cutting   pains

Suggestive    Therapeutics.

\6g

began  and  the  entire  limb  was  contractured  in  extension.     This  contract-
ure also  disappeared  through  hypnotic  suggestion.

But  suggestion,  although  daily  repeated,  did  not  bring  about  lasting

co  =

<u   j

f.

O    ^_  J5

JÛ     «

w  <

results.  The  anaesthesia  generally  reappeared  as  ordinary  left  hemi-
anaesthesia  ;  sometimes  it  was  on  the  right  side,  sometimes  throughout
the  body,  and  sometimes  in  three  limbs.  Hysterical  attacks  took  place
from  time  to  time.

2  70  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

About  the  end  of  June  the  paroxysms  and  pains  ceased  ;  nothing
remained  but  anaesthesia,  varying  in  extent.  The  patient  did  well,  but
became  intractable.  She  had  frequent  quarrels  with  her  sister.  We
dismissed  her  on  July  27.

OBSERVATION  XIII. — Hemiplegia  with  left  hemianœsthesia  of  hysterical  character. —
Restoration  of  sensibility  by  means  of  magnets,  and  rapid  cure  of  the  hemiplegia  by
suggestion  and  electricity.

F ,  forty-one  years  of  age,  married,  enters  the  hospital  on  Novem-
ber 30,  1SS2.

Patient  menstruated  at  seventeen  years  of  age,  and  had  her  first
child  when  she  was  nineteen  and  a  half,  at  full  term.  Since  then
her  periods  have  been  irregular  and  recur  too  frequently.

Second  child  born  at  seven  and  a  half  months,  no  known  cause  for
premature  labor.  During  seventeen  months  following  patient  had
three  miscarriages,  at  the  second,  fifth,  and  sixth  months  respectively,
the  last  one  having  occurred  in  1870.  Since  then,  there  has  been
leucorrhcea  and  some  metrorrhagia,  and  menstruation  has  occurred
irregularly  and  at  long  intervals.  Patient  has  never  had  any  acute
disease.  About  two  months  ago  she  passed  seventeen  days  in  the
hospital  in  consequence  of  symptoms  of  spinal  irritation  and  hysteri-
form  pains.  There  were  no  hysterical  paroxysms.  From  the  time
patient  left  hospital  until  November  23,  she  felt  very  well.  On  this
day,  without  known  or  acknowledged  cause,  she  was  seized  with  an
attack  of  syncope  and  nausea,  glairy  vomiting,  and  perspiration,  and  at
the  end  of  twenty  minutes  lost  consciousness.

Patient  remained  in  bed  next  day,  suffering  from  pain  in  external
part  of  shoulder  and  left  arm.  Sense  of  oppression,  no  globus.  Con-
dition same  on  the  24th.  On  the  25th,  at  four  o'clock,  she  experienced
a  sensation  of  weight  and  pricking,  spreading  from  left  leg  up
to  precordial  region.  Arms  unaffected.  At  eleven  o'clock  patient
complained  of  sense  of  fulness  in  epigastrium,  involuntary  weeping,
and  sense  of  constriction  as  high  as  left  nipple.  In  addition,
extremely  sharp  pain  which  patient  compared  to  tliat  of  a  knife-cut,
then  loss  of  consciousness  for  thirty  minutes.  On  regaining  conscious-
ness her  arm  was  the  seat  of  twitching  movements,  accompanied  with
pains  involving  wrist,  elbow,  and  shoulder.  Pain  in  abdomen  and
pelvis.  Violent  palpitation  for  about  fifteen  minutes.  Mobility  and
sensibility  of  arm  preserved.

Examination  on  November  30,  shows  patient  to  be  of  nervous  temper-
ament, slightly  pale,  and  anaemic.  Pain  in  precordial  region,  pricking
sensation  in  sole  of  left  foot.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  271

Hemiplegia  with  hemianasthesia  on  the  left  side.     Tactile  sensibility

in  lower  limb  almost  abolished.  Moderately  strong  pressure  gives  rise
only  to  slight  sensation  of  contact.  Complete  analgesia  of  entire  left
side.  On  anterior  surface  of  thorax  sensibility  is  present  four  centi-
metres from  median  line  above  umbilicus.  Below  umbilicus,  sensi-
bility is  present  two  centimetres  left  of  median  line.  Same  for  neck  and
face.  In  upper  limb  all  forms  of  sensibility  are  abolished,  including
muscular  sense.  Patient  has  no  idea  of  the  position  of  the  arm  and
does  not  feel  that  she  is  lying  on  her  left  side.  Arm  is  completely
paralyzed  and  relaxed.  When  it  is  moved  passively,  the  patient  feels
slight  pain  near  external  part  of  clavicle.  Cornea  and  left  conjunctiva
insensible.  Pituitary  and  buccal  mucous  membranes  insensible  as
far  as  median  line.  Right  ear  hears  watch  25  to  30  centimetres  dis-
tant. Left  ear,  3  to  4  centimetres  distant.  Smell  abolished  on  left
side.  Acuteness  of  vision  less  on  left  side.  Field  of  vision  measured
December  1,  has  undergone  a  concentric  limitation,  more  marked  on
left  side.     The  following  are  the  dimensions  on  Landolt's  perimeter  : —

Left  eye:  superior  meridian  15  ;  left  horizontal  20;  inferior  30  ;  right
horizontal  20.

Right  eye:  superior  meridian  40;  left  horizontal  35;  inferior  50;
right  horizontal  55.

Color  vision  normal  for  both  eyes.

Patient  has  eaten  little  during  past  four  days.  Heart  and  lungs
normal.

November  30th. — A  magnet  is  applied  to  left  temple,  negative  pole
applied  to  external  angle  of  eye,  positive  pole  to  internal  surface  of  arm,

December  1st. — During  night,  painful  spot  in  breast  disappears.
Patient  slept  well.     Motor  and  sensory  paralyses  stationary.

2d. — Same  condition.     Intense  neuralgia  yesterday  evening.

3d. — Sight,  hearing,  and  smell  seem  improved.  Persistent  pain  in  left
shoulder.  Patient  complains  of  hunger,  nausea,  and  salivation.  Face
anaesthetic  except  near  opening  of  mouth  and  ear.  Limbs  continue
anaesthetic,  and  motor  paralysis  persists.

The  magnet  has  been  applied  to  the  temple  for  three  days.  The  field  of
vision  of  left  side  has  noticeably  increased  in  size.  The  following  are  the
measurements  made  this  morning  :

Left  eye  :  superior  meridian  40;  left  horizontal  55  ;  inferior  55  ;  right
horizontal  45.

Right  eye:  superior  meridian  40;  left  horizontal  50;  inferior  55  ;
right  horizontal  52.

Thus  the  magnet  has  manifestly  modified  the  sensorial  ancesthesia.  As  to
the  sensory  ancesthesia,  it  has  remained  the  same.  Hemiplegia  remains
complete,  excepting  the  face.

z~2  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

I  hypnotize  the  patient.  She  goes  into  somnambulism  easily.  Pro-
longed suggestion.  The  suggestion  of  return  of  sensibility  to  the  hand  is
the  only  one  which  is  successful.     Finger  movements  are  impossible.

At  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  M.  Ganzinotty,  my  chef  de  clinique,
hypnotizes  the  patient  by  fixation.  In  less  than  a  minute  she  is  in  pro-
found sleep.  At  first  she  does  not  answer  questions,  but  upon  insist-
ence she  gives  feeble  answers.  Series  of  suggestions  made  in  order  to
provoke  movements  in  the  paralyzed  arm.  For  quarter  of  an  hour  no
result.  Suddenly  the  patient  lifts  her  arm,  but  it  falls  again  immedi-
ately. Finally,  the  fingers  move,  the  hand  is  raised  slowly  as  high  as  ten
centimetres,  and  brought  toward  the  left  side  near  the  umbilicus.  The
patient  complains  of  inability  to  do  more.  If  we  wish  her  to  put  her
hand  to  her  mouth,  we  can  only  make  her  do  it  by  supporting  her  hand
each  time  she  makes  the  effort.  Finger  movements  and  the  flexion  of
the  fore-arm  upon  the  arm  remain  possible.  It  is  impossible  to  lift
the  arm,  and  the  patient  complains  of  pain  in  the  external  border  of
the  biceps.

Upon  waking,  the  patient  is  surprised  to  find  herself  in  the  hospital.
Then  memory  returns,  but  she  says  she  has  neither  heard  nor  said  any-
thing ;  she  thinks  she  has  awakened  from  a  deep  sleep.

In  several  minutes  she  moves  her  fingers  and  hand,  and  flexes  the
fore-arm  upon  the  arm,  which  was  an  impossibility  before  hypnoti-
zation.

Complains  of  pain  in  shoulder  and  elbow,  and  of  nausea  accom-
panied by  pain  in  precordial  region.

M.  Ganzinotty  hypnotizes  her  a  second  time.  Afore  extended  and
exact  movements  are  obtained.  Hand  can  be  lifted  as  high  as  head,  but
arm  falls  motionless  if  suggestion  is  discontinued.  Some  surprise  upon
waking.  Painful  sensations  disappear.  Heaviness  in  left  shoulder
and  arm  persist.

Upon  waking,  patient  can  perform  all  the  movements  which  she  has  exe-
cuted during  sleep.  In  two  consecutive  hypnotic  séances,  pa?'tial  restoration
of  the  movements  of  the  fingers,  hand  and  fore-arm  have  been  obtained.

Sensibility  has  not  reappeared  in  the  upper  limb  or  elsewhere,
excepting  in  the  hand,  in  which  it  has  been  persistent  since  morning.
The  lower  limb  remains  anaesthetic  and  paralyzed.

5th. — During  the  night,  patient  applies  magnet  to  thigh  and  knee
herself.  In  the  morning,  sensibility  has  reappeared  throughout  the  body.
Both  eyes  distinguish  a  watch  at  a  distance  of  25  centimetres.  Very
distinct  gustatory  and  olfactory  sensibility.  Lifts  hand  and  bends  fore-
arm ;  can  also  flex  instep  slightly  but  cannot  lift  foot.  Pain  in  shoulder
and  left  groin.

6th. — Yesterday,  patient  complained  of  burning  sensation  throughout

Sugges  tive    7  lie  rape  it  tics ,

-i  o

body,  especially  low  in  back.  Complains  of  nausea  and  bad  taste  in
her  mouth.  Sensibility  exists  throughout,  but  is  diminished  in  foot.
Can  bend  all  the  phalanges,  excepting  the  third;  cannot  close  hand
completely,  can  bend  fore  arm,  but  cannot  raise  arm.  When  we  lift  it
for  her  she  feels  pain  in  the  humerus  and  in  the  acromioclavicular
articulation.  Left  toes  can  only  be  moved  very  slightly.  Pain  upon
pressure  of  patella,  tendon  of  triceps,  fold  of  groin,  and  region  of  left
ovary.  Complains  of  palpitation.  Is  hypnotized  in  the  morning,  and
told  during  sleep  that  she  will  be  able  to  walk  on  the  following  Sunday.
Upon  waking,  she  can  lift  her  arm  slightly,  the  pain  in  the  shoulder
preventing  her  from  lifting  it  higher.

In  the  evening,  M.  Ganzinotty  held  a  se'ance  lasting  thirty-seven
minutes.  Repeated  suggestion  with  reference  to  arm  and  shoulder,  No
result.  Patient  complains  of  nausea,  and  even  makes  efforts  to  vomit,
which  are  dissipated  by  a  single  suggestion.

Suggestion  is  also  ineffectual  with  regard  to  disappearance  of  pain  in
groin,  thigh  and  knee.  Finally,  however,  patient  is  able  to  flex  and
extend  toes  to  a  greater  degree,  and  foot  slightly.

After  use  of  electricity,  patient  holds  arm  up  for  more  than  twenty
seconds,  deltoid  contracts  well,  and  pain  has  disappeared.

Patient  is  in  vain  assured  that  use  of  lower  limbs  has  been  equally
restored,  and  that  the  pain  in  them  has  been  cured.  She  makes  useless
efforts  to  move  thighs  and  legs,  and  passive  movements  still  cause
pain.  Movements  of  toes  and  foot,  which  were  executed  during  sleep,
are  the  only  ones  which  persist.

7th. — Result  gained  still  persists.  Complains  only  of  sensation  of
heaviness  in  upper  limb,  which  she  can  move  freely.  Knee  and  groin
still  painful.  She  does  not  wish  to  be  hypnotized,  and  says  she  is  tired.
In  the  evening,  faradisation  of  nerves  and  muscles  of  lower  limb  for  ten
minutes.  Patient  cries  out  and  moves.  Afterwards  she  gets  up  and
moves,  supporting  herself  slightly.  Complains  of  nausea  and  vertigo
for  two  or  three  minutes  after  the  séances.  Vomits  during  the
night,

8th. — Still  complains  of  nausea  and  pain  in  epigastric  region.  Infra-
orbital nerves  painful.  Electricity  applied  to  legs  and  thighs,  then
hypnotization.  Pain  in  infra-orbital  nerves  disappears  after  suggestion.
Walks  a  little  during  the  day  with  the  help  of  a  cane.

9th. — Is  feeling  well.  Moves  leg  without  pain.  Complains  of  ver-
tigo when  sitting  up.  Has  had  no  more  nausea.  Appetite  begins  to
improve.

nth. — Xo  more  pain  or  nausea.  Has  been  able  to  walk  around  the
bed  alone.

1 2th. — Can  walk  without  a  cane.  Leaves  on  the  14th,  cured.  Com-
iS

274  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

plains  of  nothing  but  weakness  in  her  legs.  Says  she  has  not  control  of
her  hands  yet.

Returns  on  December  20th.  Improvement  continues.  Both  hands
give  20  by  the  dynamometer.  Complains  only  of  not  being  able  to
control  her  hands.

In  this  case  the  hemianaesthesia  yielded  to  suggestion,  without
transfer,  and  the  use  of  the  magnet  and  electricity  were  bene-
ficial. Is  this  action  due  to  a  virtue  inherent  in  the  magnetic  or
electric  agent,  or  is  it  but  a  psychical,  suggestive  action?  It  is
difficult  to  answer.

Observation  XIV. — Hysterical  sensitivo-sensorial  hemianesthesia. — Sensibility  restored
after  a  single  seance. — Increase  in  distinctness  and  range  of  vision. — Definite  restora-
tion.

B ,  seventeen  years  old,  married,  enters  the  hospital  on  March  18,

1883.  On  March  30,  1883,  she  was  delivered  of  a  child,  at  full  term,
which  lived  twenty  clays.  The  confinement  was  normal.  Since  Sep-
tember, she  has  complained  of  abdominal  pains  and  leucorrhcea.  For  a
week  she  has  had  pain  in  the  left  scapula  and  in  the  precordial  region.
Walking  is  painful.  Digestion  is  bad,  she  has  been  constipated  for  a
week,  and  has  vomited  several  times.  Her  last  period  was  on  March
10th.  Since  the  12th,  she  has  had  frontal  neuralgia,  shooting  pains
about  the  temples,  and  rumbling  sound  in  left  ear.

Among  the  causes  of  this  nervous  condition  must  be  mentioned  fre-
quent disagreement  with  her  mother-in-law,  in  consequence  of  which
she  had  to  leave  her  husband's  house.

19th. — We  note:  constitution  delicate;  temperament  nervous;  char-
acter irritable.  Facial  pain  upon  pressure  on  both  sides.  Pain  upon
pressure  over  the  upper  and  lower  left  spinous  fossae.  Acute  sensibility
of  the  abdomen  to  pressure,  especially  on  left  side,  and  below  umbilicus.

Left  sensitivo-sensorial  hemianœsthesia  ;  anaesthesia,  analgesia,  and
abolition  of  muscular  sense  in  upper  and  lower  limbs.  Tactile  sensi-
bility absent,  but  sensibility  to  pain  exaggerated.  Anaesthesia  of  the
posterior  part  of  the  left  side  of  the  body  up  to  the  scapula,  hyperalgesia
above  this  point.

Ticking  of  watch  not  perceived  on  left  side.  Is  heard  on  right  side
at  a  distance  of  4  centimetres.

Senses  of  taste  and  smell  wanting  on  left  side;  also  nasal  and  lingual
mucous  membranes  anaesthetic  and  analgesic.

19th. — Dr.  Charpentier  notes  a  concentric  diminution  of  the  field  of
vision  for  white  light  and  colors,  especially  on  left  side.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.

-/O

For  white  light,  the  left  eye  registers  the  four  following  meridians  on
the  perimeter:  superior,  25  ;  right,  30;  inferior,  37  ;  left,  28.

Ci'.      :/.

-     ■=  <

For  blue  the  four  meridians  are  :  18,  20,  16,  20.
For  red  :  25,  20,  23,  20.
For  the  right  eye  these  four  meridians  are  :
For  white  light  :  45,  4S,  55,  55.

2  76

Suggestive    Therapeutics.

For  blue  :  45,  45,  35,  45.

For  red  :  50,  65,  50,  50.

Acuteness  of  vision  is  0.8  on  the  right  side,  and  -h  on  the  left.

20th. — Perimeter  shows  field  of  vision  slightly  increased  on  left  side.
The  four  meridians  are  :  30,  55,  45,  45.  For  the  right  they  are  :  40,  50,
50,  64.

For  red  the  two  horizontal  right  and  left  meridians  are  50  and  35.

Suggestive   Therapeutics,

-i  i

For  blue,  50  and  40.

On  the  right  side  :  for  red,  40  and  60,  and  for  blue,  45  and  60.

Acuteness  of  vision  diminished  on  this  day,  being  -fa  for  both  sides.

Color-perception.  Left  eve  :  Red  and  green  (colored  papers,  1  cen-
timetre square)  are  distinguished  at  45  centimetres  ;  blue  and  yellow  at
about  Co. — Right  eye:  Red  and  green  are  distinguished  at  2m,5o;
blue  and  yellow  at  2"1  ,  50.  Normal  distance  of  perception  is  about  25
centimetres.

Such  is  the  condition  of  vision  before  suggestion.

The  patient  is  hypnotized  and  goes  into  somnambulism  easily.  Sug-
gestion. Immediately  after  waking,  the  distinctness  of  vision  is  0.8  on
the  right  side,  and  0.6  on  the  left  (instead  of  tV  for  both  sides).

Color-perception,  tested  in  the  same  way  as  before,  is  :

Left  eye.  Red  and  green  distinguished  at  3m  (instead  of  at  0.45)  ;
blue  and  yellow  at  3111  ,  30  (instead  of  at  0.60).

Right  eye.  Red  and  green  are  distinguished  at  5™  ,  30  (instead  of  at
2s1  ,  50)  ;  blue  and  yellow  at  6m  ,  (instead  of  at  2m,  50).

Field  of  vision  has  remained  the  same  on  right  side.  It  has  increased
on  the  left.  The  four  meridians  are  :  35,  65,  55,  50.  (See  chart  of
March  20.)

As  for  color-perception,  there  is  only  a  slight  enlargement  of  50.

The  hemianesthesia  and  pain  in  left  spinous  fossce  have  disappeared.
Ticking  of  watch  perceived  at  9  centimetres  from  left  ear,  and  at  13
from  right.  Odor  of  acetic  acid  noticed  slightly  on  left  side.  Abdominal
pain  is  diminished.

Result  continues.  New  hypnotic  suggestion  on  evening  of  21st.  On
the  2 2d,  sensibility  completely  restored.  Abdomen  much  less  tender  to
pressure.  Both  ears  hear  at  18  centimetres.  Odor  of  vinegar  distinctly
perceived.

24th. — After  a  new  suggestion,  field  of  vision  is  still  much  increased.
The  four  meridians  measure,  45,  63,  67,  and  55  for  the  left  eye  ;  and  45,
55,  65,  and  70  for  the  right.     (See  chart  of  March  24.)

Acuteness  of  vision  is  1  for  the  right  eye,  and  0.8  for  the  left.
Patient  feels  well,  and  leaves  during  the  day.

In  this  case  also,  sensitivo-sensorial  hemianesthesia  has  yielded
to  suggestion,  without  transfer.

Observation  XV. — Hysleriform  crises  with  hysterical  somnambulism. — Rapid  cure  by
means  of  hypnotic  suggestion.

Mile.  X ,  twenty-two  years  of  age,  in  service  at  Malze'ville,  near

Nancy,   is   brought   to  me   by  her  mistress  on   April    19,    1886.     The
patient  has  had  nervous  attacks  for  three  weeks,  coming  on  regularly  at

2jS  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

about  eight  or  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  when  she  retired  to  her  room.
Sometimes  she  has  violent  convulsions  lasting  about  an  hour,  then  she
falls  asleep,  and  upon  waking,  remembers  nothing  that  has  happened.
Sometimes  she  gets  up  and  goes  out  into  the  street.  Several  people
have  to  hold  her  down,  to  prevent  her  getting  up.

The  next  day  she  is  obliged  to  remain  in  bed,  being  worn  out  with
fatigue.  She  has  lost  eleven  pounds  in  three  months.  For  the  last
three  days  she  has  eaten  almost  nothing.

For  two  years  patient  has  shown  signs  of  decline,  and  has  been
troubled  with  anorexia.  Her  mother  is  nervous  and  impressionable,
but  has  never  had  hysteria.  The  girl  herself  has  never  had  any  sick-
ness. She  refused  an  offer  of  marriage  from  the  valet  of  the  house,  and
it  is  supposed  that  she  has  been  annoyed  by  his  attentions.  She  had  an
attack  of  hysteria  the  evening  before  she  came  to  consult  me.

She  is  an  intelligent  girl.  Complains  of  nothing  but  loss  of  appetite.
Digestion  is  good.  Xo  neuralgia,  ovarialgia,  or  globus.  Before  the
attack  yesterday,  she  had  a  sensation  of  pressure  upon  the  right  side  of
the  larynx,  which  embarrassed  respiration.  Her  periods  are  regular
and  somewhat  excessive.  No  leucorrhoea.  Sensibility  normal  through-
out body.

19th. — I  put  patient  into  somnambulism  simply  by  closure  of  the  eye-
lids. I  suggest  cure,  disappearance  of  convulsions,  and  return  of
appetite  ;  she  will  no  longer  get  up  at  night,  but  will  dream  of  sleeping
quietly  in  her  bed.     Upon  waking  she  remembers  nothing.

20th. — When  she  left  yesterday,  she  felt  hungry  and  bought  a  roll  on
the  way  home.  No  attack  in  the  evening.  Ate  her  supper  with  a  good
appetite.  I  put  her  into  somnambulism  agaia  She  tells  me  that  she
got  up  at  ten  o'clock  last  evening.  I  suggest  vigorously  that  she  will
not  get  up  any  more.

21st. — Was  very  well  yesterday.  Did  not  get  up  during  the  night.
Is  now  only  troubled  with  tremor  in  the  arms,  which  comes  on  about
half-past  eight  in  the  evening.     Suggestion.

Patient  passed  a  restless  night.  After  a  quieting  suggestion  she  sleeps
quietly.

23d. — Patient  seems  to  be  cured.  Is  active  and  bright  and  has  had
no  more  tremor.  Hypnotization  for  the  last  time.  She  is  a  good  som-
nambulist and  realizes  the  suggested  hallucinations.  She  no  longer
gets  up  at  night.  Treatment  is  stopped,  and  the  patient  is  to  come
back  if  the  cure  is  not  permanent.

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  279

Observation  XVI. — Hysteria. — Aneesthesia. — Spinal  pain, — First  suggestion  efficacious
in  restoring  sensibility. — Increase  of  dynamometric  force. —  Total  cure  in  three  séances.

E.  M ,  forty-two  years  of  age,  enters  the  hospital  on  November  4,

1SS4.  She  has  had  eleven  children,  seven  of  whom  are  living.  Last
confinement  three  years  ago.  Nursed  eight  of  her  children.  She  does
not  live  with  her  husband  on  account  of  ill-treatment.

Pain  between  the  shoulders  and  at  the  level  of  the  xiphoid  appendix
for  a  month  past.  Also  abdominal  pain,  with  oppression,  which  kept
her  in  bed  for  eight  days.  During  the  nights  of  November  1st  and  2d,
two  weak  turns  with  loss  of  consciousness.  Patient  cannot  specify  fur-
ther. Loss  of  appetite.  At  eight  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  the  3d,  vio-
lent epigastric  oppression  and  loss  of  consciousness,  lasting  all  night.

Had  similar  attacks  at  the  age  of  21  (hysterical).  Has  had  them  at
different  times  since  then,  always  as  the  result  of  emotion.  Since  she
entered  the  hospital,  she  has  only  connplained  of  prostration.

6th. — We  note  :  Constitution  delicate. — No  fever.  Pulse  68,  regular
and  equal. — Intelligence  clear.  Heart  and  lungs  normal. — Appetite
poor.  Can  eat  meat.  Abdomen  slightly  distended.  Constipated
since  day  before  yesterday.  Abdomen  tender,  especially  in  infra-um-
bilical region.  Abundant  leucorrhcea  for  two  years.  Very  acute
sensibility  from  the  4th  to  the  6th  dorsal  spinal  process.

Fingers  of  right  hand  sensible.  Back  of  hand  sensible  to  touch,  hit  anal-
gesic. Thorax,  face,  and  lower  limb  on  right  side  also  analgesic,  but  their
tactile  sensibility  is  preserved.  On  left  side,  general  analgesia,  with-
out anasthesia,  excepting  the  hand,  which  is  sensible  throughout.
Muscular  sense  abolished.  Sensibility  of  mucous  membrane  pre-
served.

Hypnotization.  Sleep  of  third  degree.  Suggestion.  Upon  waking,
tactile  sensibility  has  returned  to  fingers.  Analgesia  and  spinal  pain  per-
sist, but  disappear  almost  entirely  after  a  second  hypnotic  suggestion.

7th. — Spinal  and  abdominal  pain  persist  to  a  slight  degree.  They
disappear  entirely  after  a  new  suggestion.

8th. — Anaesthesia  again  present  as  far  as  middle  of  fore-arm,  also
analgesia  and  abolition  of  muscular  sense.  Same  condition  in  right
foot.  Spinal  pain  has  not  reappeared.  Slept  better  last  night.  Hyp-
notic suggestion.  Upon  waking,  tactile  sensibility  to  pain,  and  muscular
sense  have  reappeared  throughout  the  body.

9th. — Sensibility  persists.     Slept  well.     Appetite  good.

10th. — Continues  to  do  well.  Right  hand  gives  15  by  dynamometer,
and  after  hypnotic  suggestion  31.  Left  hand  gives  20  before,  and  30  imme-
diately after  suggestion.

nth. — Doing  very  well.     Right  hand  gives  36  before,  and  38  after  hyp-

2  So  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

notization.  Left  hand  31  before  and  after.  On  the  14th,  right  hand
gives  39,  left  31.  Patient  continues  to  do  well  and  asks  for  her  dis-
charge.

OBSERVATION   XVII. — Hysteria. — Paraplegia  {incomplete)  with  anœsthesia  of  the  legs.
— Restoration  of  sensibility  in  one  séance,  of  power  of  motion  in  six.

M.  G ,  a    cigar  manufacturer,  twenty-one  years  of  age,  enters  the

clinic  on  October  18,  18S4.  Was  married  four  years  ago,  but  is  divorced
from  her  husband  on  account  of  ill-treatment.  Typhoid  fever  followed
by  pleuro-pneumonia  at  twelve  years  of  age.

Menstruation  appeared  at  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  has  always  been
regular.  Xo  leucorrhoea.  Has  never  been  pregnant.  Temperament
neuropathic.  Is  subject  to  fits  of  passion.  Frequent  attacks  of  mi-
graine and  neuralgia.  Seems  slightly  addicted  to  alcohol.  Father  died
of  consumption.  Mother  nervous,  but  not  hysterical.  Brother  strong
and  healthy.

In  1S79,  an  attack  of  hysteria,  following  a  fit  of  anger.  It  lasted  six
hours,  and  was  followed  by  general  anœsthesia,  and  contracture  of
limbs  and  jaw  lasting  eight  days.     Was  in  hospital  six  weeks.

Another  violent  attack  in  1S81,  which  lasted  two  hours  and  was  fol-
lowed by  paraplegia  with  anaesthesia.

On  the  morning  of  November  18,  18S4,  another  attack  without  known
cause.  Had  had  neuralgia  for  two  or  three  days  previously.  When  she
became  conscious  after  the  paroxysm,  she  had  violent  thirst,  and  her
legs  were  rigid.

November  19th. — We  note  :  Intelligence  clear.  Legs  in  extension.
Bends  feet  and  toes  slightly  ;  cannot  bend  knees.  Can  lift  both  legs  as
high  as  8  centimetres  only.  Anœsthesia  with  complete  analgesia,  extend-
ing from  patella  to  ends  of  toes  in  both  legs.  Reflexes  feeble.  Mus-
cular sense  in  legs  abolished.  No  neuralgia  of  ovaries. — Complains  of
pain  in  left  fronto-parietal  region.

Suggestion  in  waking  condition  useless.  Hypnotization.  Deep  sleep
with  amnesia  upon  waking.  Obeys  suggestions  during  sleep,  but  does
not  realize  post-hypnotic  suggestions.

Upon  -waking,  tactile  sensibility  and  sensibility  to  pain  have  returned.
Difficulty  in  bending  knees  at  an  obtuse  angle  still  exists.  Fronto-parietal
pain  has  disappeared.

Pain  comes  back  in  afternoon,  but  disappears  spontaneously  in  the
evening.  At  one  o'clock,  pain  in  left  shoulder  and  in  supra-spinous
fossa  preventing  patient  from  lifting  arm  above  the  horizontal.  Cannot
support  herself  on  her  legs.

10th. — Sensibility  remains  intact.  Slept  well.  Pain  in  shoulder  still
exists.     Can  bend  lejrs  at  a  rijrht  ancde.

Suggestive  Therapeutics.  281

Hypnotization.  Rapid  and  profound  sleep.  Suggestion.  Awakening
slow.

After  waking,  pain  in  shoulder  has  completely  disappeared.  Can  lift
arm  completely.     Bends  her  legs  at  a  right  angle  easily.

2 1  st. — Condition  the  same.  Bends  legs  at  an  acute  angle,  but  with
slight  stiffness.

After  suggestion,  bends  her  legs  more  easily.

Second  suggestion  given,  patient  being  seated  in  a  chair.  Movements
are  impressed  upon  the  joints  in  order  to  aid  the  vocal  suggestion  in
dissipating  the  rigidity.  Immediately  after  suggestion,  she  walks  well,
but  her  legs  are  still  somewhat  stiff.  Three  minutes  afterward  pain  and
stiffness  have  vanished  and  she  walks  easily.

22d. — Walks  well,  but  complains  of  weakness  in  bending  her  legs. —
Hypnotic  suggestion.  Upon  waking,  feels  stronger  and  more  firm  on
her  legs.

23d. — Weakness  again  in  afternoon.  Sensibility  still  intact. — New
suggestion.

25th. — Patient  feels  perfectly  well.     No  fatigue  since  yesterday.

26th. — Suggested  a  distaste  for  wine  during  sleep.  No  success.
Has  taken  her  portion  of  wine  as  usual.  Continues  to  do  well,  and
leaves  the  hospital  on  the  27th  completely  cured.

Observation  XVIII. — Symptoms  of  hysteria  for  two  months. — Paroxysms. — Sensi-
tivo-sensorial  hemianesthesia  with  dyschromatopsia. — Neuralgia  and  abdominal  pain.
— Cure  of  the  hemianesthesia  from  time  of  first  suggestion. —  Total  cure  in  four  or
five  days.

Marie  G ,  a  shoemaker,  sixteen  years  of  age,  enters  the   hospital

on  July  29,  1887.  Her  trouble  first  appeared  two  years  ago.  She  had
syncopal  attacks  preceded  by  dizziness,  a  desire  to  vomit,  epigastric
oppression  and  swelling  and  finally  she  lost  consciousness,  without  having
convulsions  and  without  crying  out.  She  does  not  know  how  long  these
attacks  lasted.  She  had  four  on  the  25th,  three  on  the  26th,  one  on  the
27th,  and  none  on  the  28th.  She  often  has  a  sensation  of  swelling
without  any  paroxysm.  Since  the  beginning  of  these  attacks  she  has
had  frontal,  right  temporal,  and  syncipital  neuralgia  every  morning.  For
the  last  two  months  she  has  eaten  little  or  nothing,  and  sometimes  she
has  had  attacks  of  vomiting.  Her  digestion  is,  however,  good.  She
menstruated  exactly  one  month  ago,  and  the  last  time  three  days  ago,
without  pain.  The  evening  of  her  entrance  her  temperature  was  38. 20,
pulse  112.  The  next  day,  temperature  was  37. 40  in  the  morning,  and
37. 8°  in  the  evening.     Then  it  became  normal  again.

July    29th,    we    note  :    temperament    nervous.     Constitution    good. —

282  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

Has  had  no  previous  disease. — Acute  pain  upon  pressure  of  left  side  oj
abdomen,  not  limited  to  region  of  ovaries.

Hemianœsthesia  with  complete  right  hemianalgesia  limited  to  median
line  exactly.  Muscular  sense  preserved.  Olfactory,  gustatory,  auditory,
and  visual  senses  are  intact.  Dyschromatopsia  is,  however,  noticed.
Red  is  seen  as  black,  blue  as  yellow,  green  as  blue,  and  yellow  as  red.
Same  results  after  a  second  examination.  Dyschromatopsia  is  purely
psychical.  I  show  her  a  ball  of  yellow  wool  ;  she  calls  it  red.  I  put
a  prism  before  the  dyschromatopsic  eye;  she  sees  two  yellow  balls.  I
take  away  the  prism  ;  she  sees  a  single  red  ball.  The  prism  has
restored  the  ball  to  its  true  color  by  troubling  the  play  of  the  diseased
imagination.     The  experiment  succeeds  each  time  it  is  tried.

In  order  to  show  my  colleague,  Dr.  de  Smeth  of  Brussels,  how  easily
the  hemianœsthesia  of  hysterical  patients  may  often  be  taken  away,  I
hypnotize  the  patient.  I  suggest  that  sensibility  will  return  throughout
the  body,  and  that  she  will  distinguish  colors  correctly.  I  test  the
sensibility  during  sleep.  I  affirm  that  it  will  return.  In  two  minutes
it  is  restored.  When  I  wake  her,  I  state  that  it  will  persist,  and  that  the
dyschromatopsia  has  disappeared.

July  30th. — Restored  sensibility  and  color-perception  is  permanent.
Patient  took  bouillon  and  milk  yesterday.  Slept  but  little.  Still  com-
plains of  acute  pain  in  right  temporal  region,  and  in  left  side  of  abdomen
from  the  edge  of  the  ribs  to  the  pelvis.  /  suggest  the  disappearance  of
the  pain  in  the  head.     After  waking,  it  has  disappeared.

July  31st. — Pain  in  head  has  not  returned.  Slept  well.  Abdominal
pain  persists.     I  suggest  its  disappearance.

August  1  st. — Abdominal  pain  greatly  diminished.     Suggestion.

2d. — No  more  abdominal  pain.  Appetite  good.  Complains  of  tooth-
ache.    Suggestion  drives  it  away.

3d. — Still  complains  of  toothache.  Suggestion.  Again  the  pain
disappears.

4th. — Toothache  returned  in  an  hour.  Patient  wants  to  have  tooth
pulled.  I  hypnotize  her  and  suggest  that  the  pain  has  entirely  van-
ished.

Pain  does  not  return  again.  On  August  6th,  she  complains  of  frontal
headache.  It  is  dissipated  by  suggestion,  but  reappears  during  the
day.

7th. — After  suggestion  she  is  much  better.  Has  no  more  trouble
and  goes  home  on  August  14th,  cured.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  28

j

Observation  XIX. — Symptoms  of  hysteria  for  five  months,  paroxysms  of  weeping,
accompanied  by  convulsions. — Pai>is,  lack  of  appetite,  sadness. — Complete  cure  after
two  suggestions.

Jeanne  G .  twenty-seven  years  of  age,  married,  enters  the  hos-
pital on  December  7,  1887,  for  the  sixth  time  in  two  years.  She  has
been  here  before  on  account  of  hysterical  paroxysms,  gastric  trouble,
jaundice,  etc.

Two  years  ago  she  was  in  our  service  for  six  weeks,  for  anaemia,
accompanied  with  neuropathic  symptoms  without  paroxysms.

Her  present  trouble  began  on  July  2d,  with  a  paroxysm  of  weeping
lasting  ten  minutes,  brought  on  by  the  death  of  her  daughter.  Then
she  had  symptoms  like  those  of  dysentery  for  two  days,  bloody  stools
with  rectal  tenesmus.  She  was  weak  and  nervous,  and  lost  all  appetite.
In  August  she  had  catarrhal  jaundice,  without  colic.  After  her  recov-
ery, she  went  to  work  again.     She  has  had  sad  domestic  trouble.

I  hypnotize  her.  She  goes  into  somnambulism.  I  suggest  that  she
shall  be  in  good  spirits.  She  laughs  and  sings,  and  when  she  wakes
feels  very  well.

In  the  evening  she  complains  of  dorsal  and  epigastric  pains,  which
prevent  her  sleeping.

December  9th. — Patient  is  anaemic  and  thin.  Carotid  murmur,  no
organic  lesion.  Heart  and  lungs  normal.  Sensibility  normal  through-
out. Sharp  spinal  pain  upoti  pressure  from  the  second  to  the  seventh
dorsal  vertebra.  Sharp  pain  also  at  the  level  of  the  2d,  3d,  and  \th
intercostal  spaces  on  left  side.  Epigastric  pain.  Iliac  fossae  not  tender.
Generalized  sensation  of  cold.     Suggestion.

10th. — Has  done  well  since  yesterday's  suggestion.  Slept  well,  has
good  appetite  and  no  pain.     Suggestion.

nth — .Continues  to  do  well.

13th. — In  consequence  of  some  disagreement  yesterday  afternoon
she  had  a  crisis,  about  which  she  can  give  no  information.  Otherwise
she  has  no  more  trouble,  except  slight  weakness.

14th. — Feels  stronger.  Has  good  appetite,  and  does  not  complain  of
any  more  troubles.  Remains  in  the  service  until  January  1st.  Since
then  I  have  seen  her  several  times  going  to  her  work.

The  manifestations  of  hysteria  in  this  case  yielded  to  sugges-
tion rapidly.

Five  or  six  times  I  have  thus  succeeded,  by  means  of  sug-
gestion, in  checking  hysterical  paroxysms  at  their  height.

284  Suggestive   Tkcrafieutics.

Observation  XX. —  Violent  hysterical  paroxysms  dating  back   one  year. — Complete
cure  from  time  of  first  suggestion,

Mme.  X ,    twenty-six   years   of  age,   has   always  been   well    and

strong,  and  has  never  had  any  nervous  trouble.  But  in  October,  18S5,
she  was  seized  with  an  attack  characterized  by  sleep  which  lasted  ten
minutes  and  from  which  it  was  impossible  to  wake  her.

At  the  end  of  ten  minutes  she  woke  spontaneously.  In  about  fifteen
days  she  had  a  similar  attack.  They  became  gradually  more  frequent
and  were  accompanied  by  nervous  movements.  It  was  noticed  that  she
spoke  in  a  low  voice  as  if  addressing  some  one,  but  giving  both  ques-
tions and  answers  herself.  The  development  of  these  hysterical  parox-
ysms coincided  with  great  annoyance   occasioned  by  a  quarrel   with  an

intimate    friend.     Between   the  attacks   Mme.   X showed    signs   of

nervousness.  Their  occurrence  bore  no  relation  to  her  menstrual
periods.

About  July,  1886,  these  attacks  assumed  the  character  of  violent
hysteria.  A  sensation  of  general  weight  preceded  them  several  hours,
sometimes  a  day.  Suddenly  her  feet  became  riveted  to  the  floor,  she
had  a  sense  of  constriction  in  her  wrists,  and  oppression  in  her  throat,
and  immediately  afterwards  would  fall  asleep.  This  sleep  generally
lasted  from  ten  to  twelve  minutes,  and  sometimes  as  long  as  an  hour.
Her  jaws  were  set,  but  the  limbs  remained  supple  in  this  first  phase.
Soon  convulsions  involved  the  upper  and  then  the  lower  limbs,  being
repeated  at  intervals  of  half  a  minute  or  a  minute.  Finally,  the  convul-
sions became  general,  degenerating  into  violent  movements,  with  general
rigidity.  The  body  was  extended  in  the  arc  of  a  circle.  These  violent
convulsions  lasted  three  or  four  minutes.

Finally  the  patient  woke,  worn  out,  and  not  remembering  anything
that  had  happened.  One  attack  lasted  for  two  hours.  As  a  rule,  the
duration  was  from  half  an  hour  to  an  hour.

During  the  months  of  August  and  September  the  crises  were  more
frequent,  returning  once  every  ten  days.  The  last  one  took  place  on
October  nth.

October  19th. — I  find  no  psychical  or  organic  trouble,  no  anaesthesia,
ovarialgia,  or  globus.

I  hypnotize  her  by  suggestion.  She  goes  into  profound  sleep.  No
muscular  hyperexcitability.  If  lifted,  the  arms  remain  up.  I  sugges*
calmness  and  tranquillity  of  mind.  I  tell  her  she  is  sleeping  naturally,
that  she  is  perfectly  comfortable,  has  no  preoccupation  of  mind,  and
will  not  have  another  crisis.  I  suggest  that  she  will  come  to  see  me
again  on  the  21st.     After  a  quarter  of  an  hour  I  wake  her.

She  comes  to  see  me  again  on  the  21st.     She   had  not  thought   of  it

tive    Therapeutics.  2S5

until  one  o'clock,  when  the  idea  suddenly  entered  her  head  that  she
would  come  to  my  consultation  again.     New  séance.

23d. — Ano: her  seance.  Has  had  no  crises.  Pain  in  the  abdomen
after  walking.  This  pain  has  only  been  present  since  the  beginning  of
her  sickness.  During  her  sleep  I  suggest  the  entire  disappearance  of
all  pain.

She  comes  on  the  25th,  27th  and  29th.  Is  completely  cured.  Can
walk  a  long  distance  without  pain.  Has  not  had  the  least  sign  of  a
crisis.

The  cure  has  been  maintained  since  the  first  se'ance,  that  is,  since
October  19th.

In  this  case,  definite  cure  took  place  after  the  first  séance.
This  is  not  usual,  as  we  have  seen  in  other  observations.  It  is
often  necessary  to  follow  up  the  disease  for  several  weeks,  some-
times for  months,  in  order  to  eradicate  the  symptoms  and  pre-
vent the  occurrence  of  relapses.

Observation  XXI. — Hysteria,  dating  back  fourteen  months,  convulsive  crises,  vomit-
ing, sensitivo-sensorial  hemianesthesia,  lameness  caused  by  pain. — Cure  of  the  anes-
thesia and  lameness  in  a  few  days. —  Total  cure  in  seven  or  eight  weeks.

Henriette  \V ,  twenty-one  years  of  age,  enters  the  clinic  on  June

23,  1886.  Her  trouble  began  fourteen  months  ago,  when  she  was  in
Paris,  with  cramps  in  the  stomach.  These  cramps  have  occurred  daily
since,  accompanied  with  a  sensation  of  swelling  in  the  epigastrium  and
in  the  left  hypochondrium,  with  nausea,  and  bilious  vomiting.  They
generally  last  from  four  to  five  o'clock  in  the  evening,  and  are  followed
by  headache,  which  lasts  all  night.

Two  or  three  days  after  appearance  of  cramps  patient  was  taken  with
complete  right  hemiplegia,  anaesthesia  and  contracture  of  the  leg.  Elec-
tricity was  used  for  six  months.  The  hemiplegia  gradually  disappeared,
but  a  tongue  paralysis,  with  aphonia,  and  inability  to  swallow  came  on.
This  lasted  three  months.

In  April,  1885,  she  had  her  first  attack  of  hysteria,  accompanied  with
violent  convulsions,  loss  of  consciousness,  and  sometimes  with  biting  of
the  tongue.  During  a  period  of  ten  weeks,  she  had  from  three  to  six
attacks  a  day.  For  eleven  months,  she  has  only  had  one  a  day  as  a
rule.     Sometimes  two  days  pass  without  an  attack.

Menstruation,  which  ceased  with  the  beginning  of  the  trouble,  reap-
peared a  month  ago.  Finally,  the  patient  is  constipated,  and  sometimes
passes  a  week  without  having  a  movement.

Patient  was  under  treatment  at  the  Rothschild  Hospital  for  fourteen
months.     A  douche  was  given  daily,  and  a  sulphur  bath  every  two  days.

2  86  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

The  stomach  was  washed  out  and  food  given  through  the  sound  for  five
or  six  months.  She  continued  to  vomit  after  the  catheterization.  She
was  hypnotized  for  some  time  without  any  result.

Condition  stationary  for  last  four  months.  Takes  only  milk  and
bouillon.  Vomits  after  taking  nourishment,  and  the  vomiting  is  accom-
panied with  pains  in  thorax  and  dyspnoea.     Cramps  every  evening.

On  admission  we  note  :  complete  hemianesthesia  of  right  side,  sen-
sorial hemianesthesia  of  left.  Sight,  hearing,  taste,  and  smell  abolished
on  this  side.  Left  amblyopia  proved  to  be  purely  psychical by  means  of
prism  and  Stoeber's  apparatus.

Complains  of  continuous  and  intense  sensation  of  constriction  in  right  leg
and  foot.  Sole  of  foot  very  painful  upon  pressure.  Patient  limps  badly
on  right  leg,  and  only  rests  on  the  heel.  Pain  in  right  axillary  border
when  standing.  Constitution  strong.  No  previous  disease.  Tempera-
ment lymphatic,  with  slight  tendency  to  scrofula.     Nervous  heredity.

Two  hysterical  seizures  on  the  26th,  one  on  the  27th,  one  on  the  29th,
and  one  on  the  30th,  intense  and  accompanied  with  opisthotonos  and
loss  of  consciousness.  Headache,  palpitation,  pain  upon  pressure  of
lower  part  of  right  arm-pit,  vomiting.  Anaesthesia  is  modified  spontane-
ously. Right  thigh  again  sensible.  Auditory  anaesthesia  changes  to
right  side  on  July  1st.     Two  slight  hysterical  paroxysms  on  July  2d.

2d. — Hypnotic  suggestion.  Patient  goes  into  light  somnambulism.
(5th  degree.)

Left  visual  and  auditory  anaesthesia  disappear  after  suggestion.
Auditory  anaesthesia  reappears.  Sensitive  anaesthesia,  headache,  and
vomiting  persist.     Suggestion  daily.

4th. — Slight  paroxysms.  Has  walked  better  since  the  2d.  Still
limps  slightly  however.

5th. — Sensory  and  right  auditory  anaesthesia  disappear  after  sugges-
tion. Patient  walks  much  better,  and  no  longer  complains  of  pain  in
legs.     Vomiting  persists.     Slight  attacks  after  waking  from  hypnosis.

6th. — Condition  the  same.  Hearing  almost  equal  on  both  sides.
After  hypnotization,  patient  has  an  uncomfortable  sensation,  catches
her  breath,  and  shows  signs  of  an  hysterical  crisis,  which  is  checked  by
means  of  suggestion.

7th. — Right  side  of  face  and  right  leg  again  anaesthetic.  Walks  well,
limps  but  slightly.     Sensibility  returns  after  suggestion.

Slight  hysterical  attack  on  8th  and  9th.  Vomiting  diminished.  Vio-
lent crises  on  10th,  nth,  14th,  15th  and  18th.  Patient  still  walks  well.
Appetite  good.

1 2th. — Only  vomits  her  coffee  in  the  morning.  After  the  20th  no
longer  vomits  anything.

More  difficult  to  restore  sleep.     On  the  17th  and  18th  she  begins  by

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  :$j

sleeping  for  two  hours  during  night.  Sleeps  the  entire  night  on  the
22i\.     Slight  attack  on  22(1.     Still  digests  without  pain.     No  vomiting.

27th. — Crisis,  accompanied  with  nausea.  Sleeps  from  four  to  five
hours  during  night.  Period  appears  on  the  31st,  preceded  by. cramps
in  stomach.  On  August  1st,  nausea,  which  yields  to  suggestion.  On
August  2d,  cramps  in  stomach  repressed  by  suggestion.  On  the  3d,
slight  crisis.  On  the  5th  vomits  again.  On  the  6th,  cramps,  which
resist  suggestion,  and  transient  insomnia.  Vomiting  continues  on  the
7th  and  8th,  accompanied  with  pains  in  epigastrium  and  thorax,  which
resist  suggestion.  On  the  9th,  these  pains  disappear.  Complains  of
neuralgia  on  the  following  days,  and  the  vomiting  diminishes.

Finally,  on  the  20th,  slight  attack,  characterized  by  convulsive  tremor.
Still  find  right  hemiancesthesia  and  cephalalgia.  All  disappears  after
suggestion.

No  more  crises  after  this.  Patient  vomits  no  longer,  and  walks  with-
out limping.  Anaesthesia  does  not  reappear.  Complains  only  of  slight
gastric  disturbance,  the  result  of  dilatation  of  the  stomach.

On  September  13th,  she  is  taken  with  typhoid  fever,  contracted  in
the  hospital.  It  develops  regularly,  without  any  nervous  symptoms.
Defervescence  is  reached  on  October  1st.  Convalescence  perfect.
Patient  leaves  hospital  on  October  14,  1886.  Had  a  relapse  about
November  13th,  preceded  by  diarrhoea  with  anorexia,  but  without  symp-
toms of  hysteria.  Since  December  30th  the  patient  has  done  well.
Comes  to  consult  me  from  time  to  time  for  troubles  connected  with  a
chronic  stomach  catarrh,  the  result  of  the  hysteria.  But  the  hysteria  is
definitely  cured,  or  at  least  it  is  no  longer  manifested.

To  sum  up  :  The  phenomena  of  anaesthesia  yielded  to  sugges-
tion in  four  or  five  days,  the  pain  in  sole  of  foot  in  three  days.
The  other  manifestations,  vomiting,  insomnia,  hysterical  crises,
resisted  for  a  longer  period.  Total  cure  by  means  of  sugges-
tion took  place  in  from  seven  to  eight  weeks.

I  KVATiON  XXII. — Hysteria  dating  back  fourteen  months. —  Convulsive  paroxysms,
vomiting,  pain,  vertigo,  and  insomnia. — Cured  in  thirty-five  days,  by  means  of
suggestion.

R ,   (Emilie),  a   servant-girl,  twenty-one  years  of  age,  enters  the

hospital  on  December  7,  1886.  Symptoms  of  hysteria  appeared  in  July,
1885,  when  she  was  convalescing  from  typhoid  fever.  Since  then  she
has  had  frequent  attacks  of  vertigo,  insomnia,  headache,  and  digestive
disturbances.

In  December,  1885,  she  had  her  first  attack  of  hysteria,  which  was
accompanied  with  suffocation,  strangulation,  loss  of  consciousness,  and

288  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

convulsions.  These  attacks  have  been  frequent  since.  The  last  one
occurred  two  months  ago.

She  went  to  Prof.  Kussmaul's  clinic,  in  Strassbourg,  in  April,  1886,
and  remained  until  June.  During  this  period  she  had  hysterical  parox-
ysms, and  attacks  of  vomiting  which  could  not  be  checked.  For  four
weeks  she  could  retain  no  nourishment.  After  that  she  was  able  to
take  milk,  but  no  solid  food.  Farad  ism  was  tried  for  eight  weeks.
For  four  weeks  the  stomach  was  washed  out  and  nourishment  given
through  the  sound.  Patient  continued  to  vomit  food  thus  introduced.
Hypnotism  was  tried  five  or  six  times  without  success.  When  she  left
Strasbourg,  she  had  improved  so  far  as  only  to  vomit  her  evening
meal.

Since  June,  only  two  paroxysms.  Other  symptoms  still  present.
We  note  :  continuous  left  dorsal,  infra-clavicular  and  left  supra-spinous
pain.  Insomnia  almost  constant  since  the  typhoid  fever.  No  ovarian
neuralgia,  or  strangulation.  Constitution  strong.  No  previous  disease.
Nature  impressionable.

7th. — Hypnotization.  Patient  does  not  concentrate  her  attention,  says
she  cannot  sleep,  and  laughs.  I  persist,  and  she  soon  goes  into  pro-
found sleep,  with  loss  of  memory  upon  waking,  but  is  not  susceptible  to
hallucination.  I  suggest  disappearance  of  pains,  vomiting,  and  other
symptoms.  Upon-  waking,  all  have  disappeared,  but  the  sub-clavicular
pain  reappears  during  the  evening.  The  first  suggestions  do  not  have
any  effect  >upon  the  insomnia,  vomiting  and  anorexia.  The  pains
reappear  each  time  after  an  interval  of  several  hours.

Pains  gradually  disappear.  On  the  9th,  after  a  third  séance,  patient
only  complains  of  slight  pain  in  dorsal  region.

After  fourth  séance,  sleeps  an  hour  during  night.  Still  vomits  all  food,
excepting  dried  bread.  Complains  also  of  pain  in  stomach.  Some-
times resists  suggestion,  and  seems  to  have  but  little  confidence.

During  the  nights  of  the  nth  and  12th,  patient  taken  with  colic  and
diarrhoea.  On  the  14th,  ate  an  egg,  without  vomiting  afterwards.
Slept  pretty  well  on  the  13th  and  14th.  Continues  to  menstruate  with-
out much  pain.

16th. — Diarrhoea  reappears,  without  colic.  Has  not  vomited  since  the
14th,  and  is  sleeping  better.

From  the  15th  to  the  28th,  complains  of  palpitation.  Had  several
attacks  of  vomiting.  Insomnia  reappears.  After  the  28th,  these  symp-
toms disappear.  From  time  to  time  she  has  palpitation  and  head-
ache.

Hypnotic  séances  discontinued  from  December  30th  to  January  7th.
On  January  2d  and  3d,  two  hysterical  paroxysms,  in  consequence  of  a
quarrel.     Also  begins  to  vomit  again.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  289

Suggestion  continued  from  January  7th.  Since  the  10th,  patient  has  not
vomited  any  more,  has  no  more  headache,  sleeps  well,  and  continues  to
improve.

Leaves  hospital  on  the  12th.  On  the  21st,  I  saw  her  again.  She
had  begun  work  again,  and  was  feeling  very  well.

The  duration  of  the  suggestive  treatment  up  to  the  time  of  complete
cure  was  thirty-five  days.

Patient  came  to  see  me  again  in  May,  having  had  severe  pain  in
region  of  right  hypochondrium  for  a  week,  which  prevented  her  sleep-
ing and  eating.     I  took  it  away  by  suggestion  in  three  minutes.

Since  then  she  has  been  well  and  has  kept  on  working.

OBSERVATION  XXIII. — Hysteria  dating  back  seven  or  eight  months; — convulsive
attacks,  vomiting,  insomnia. — Cure  after  the  first  seance. — Relapse  at  the  end  of  three
weeks  ;  crises,  sensitivosensorial  hemianesthesia,  pains. — Symptoms  resist  suggestion.
— Cure  in  three  weeks.

Eliza  S ,  eighteen  years  of  age,  comes  to  consult  me  on  December

22d,  1886,  for  crises  of  hysteria.  Has  had  leucorrhoea  since  her  eleventh
year.  Menstruated  when  fifteen.  Was  regular  at  first,  but  for  the
past  year  the  periods  have  occurred  every  fifteen  days,  have  been
abundant,  and  have  lasted  from  six  to  eight  days.  When  she  was
eleven  years  old,  she  had  attacks  of  vomiting,  lasting  nine  months,
which  could  not  be  checked.  They  disappeared  spontaneously.  Has
cramps  in  the  stomach,  occurring  as  a  rule  twice  a  week.  Mother  died
of  some  affection  of  the  liver.  Father  is  a  hot-headed,  impressionable
man.     Brother  is  very  nervous.

Mother  died  on  17th  of  last  May.  When  Eliza  heard  of  her  death,
she  had  a  nervous  paroxysm,  accompanied  with  weeping  and  loss  of
consciousness.  Since  then  she  has  had  one  or  two  every  week,  and  for
the  last  four  weeks  they  have  been  still  more  frequent.  The  attacks
are  preceded  by  sensation  of  foreign  body  in  epigastrium  rising  into
throat,  with  burning  sensation,  constriction  in  upper  thoracic  region  and
at  the  same  time  a  tickling  sensation  in  nose.  Then  in  a  few  seconds,
she  falls  unconscious,  weeps,  and  has  severe  convulsions.  When  she
becomes  conscious  again,  she  remembers  nothing.  The  slightest  vexa-
tion brings  on  the  paroxysms.  Since  the  22d,  patient  has  vomited
everything,  even  water.  Insomnia  has  been  present  since  the  first
attack.

Constitution  good.  Temperament  lymphatic.  No  organic  trouble.
Sensibility  normal.     No  abdominal  pain.

Hypnotization.  Profound  sleep.  Has  had  no  crises  since  first  séance
and  has  slept  well.  Vomiting  ceased  after  special  suggestion  given  on  the
27  th.

19

290  Suggestive   Therapeutics,

Patient  comes  to  see  me  again  on  March  24th.  Has  had  three
relapses,  brought  about  by  vexation.  Had  no  trouble  in  interval  be-
tween attacks.

Attack  came  on  yesterday  evening  without  premonitory  symptoms.
New  hypnotic  suggestion.

Patient  is  well  for  three  weeks.     Then  the  attacks  appear  again.

She  enters  the  hospital  on  May  17,  1887.  We  note:  complete  left
sensitivo-sensorial  hemianesthesia.  Almost  complete  left  amblyopia.
Colors,  however,  are  perceived.  A  finger  held  before  eye,  recognized  as
a  shadow.  A  pencil  is  not  recognized.  Amblyopia  proved  to  be
purely  psychical.

Hypnotic  suggestion  on  the  17th.  Hemianesthesia,  excepting  of  ear
and  eye,  for  which  I  give  no  suggestion,  disappears.  Taste  and  smell
restored  on  left  side.

19th. — Condition  the  same.  Sensibility  restored,  except  to  eye  and
ear.  Patient  complains  of  pain  in  synciput,  at  base  of  sternum.  Hys-
terical crises  on  17th,  18th,  and  19th,  in  spite  of  daily  suggestion.  No
crisis  on  20th,  on  account  of  vigorous  suggestion.  Pains  still  exist.
Restored  sensibility  is  maintained.  Left  eye  distinguishes  nothing,  not
even  color.  Left  ear  hears  at  a  distance  of  from  4  to  5  centi-
metres.

2 1  st. —  Vision  on  left  side  restored  by  suggestion.

Severe  crises  during  nights  of  22d  and  23d.

Sensibility  maintained.  Vision  good.  Neuralgia  has  vanished.
Suggestion.

24th. — Has  had  no  crisis.  Is  feeling  well.  Sensibility  is  restored
excepting  to  left  ear,  which  does  not  perceive  ticking  of  watch  when
held  close  to  it.     After  suggestion,  hears  at  distance  of  four  centimetres.

25th. — No  more  pains  or  paroxysms.  After  suggestion,  hears  ticking
of  watch  at  distance  of  twelve  centimetres.

On  the  26th  and  27th,  crises  during  the  night,  for  which  no  cause  is
found.  Patient  still  feels  well.  Sensibility  is  maintained.  Only  com-
plains of  abdominal  pain,  which  is  acute  upon  pressure.

June  5th. — Complains  of  headache.  Another  violent  crisis  in  the
evening.

Has  been  doing  well  since,  but  complains  of  continuous  abdominal
pain.

8th. — Abdominal  pain  has  partially  disappeared  in  consequence  of
suggestion.

10th. — Complains  of  pain  below  left  breast.  I  stop  hypnotizing  her,
and  pass  by  her  bed  saying  simply,  "  You  are  doing  well,  you  are
cured.'*  She  has  no  more  crises,  no  longer  complains,  remains  in
hospital  about  ten  clays  longer,  and  then  leaves  in  good  health.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  291

To  sum  up  :  A  first  series  of  hysterical  manifestations  dating  back
six  or  seven  months,  yielded  at  the  first  suggestion.

A  second  series,  constituting  a  relapse,  was  more  tenacious.  The
hemianesthesia  yielded  readily  after  two  or  three  suggestions.  The
paroxysms  and  pains  resisted  for  three  weeks.

In  suggestive  therapeutics  it  is  important  that  suggestion
should  be  varied  and  modified  according  to  individuality.  Its
efficacy  varies  according  to  the  subject  and  circumstances.  As
shown  in  some  of  the  foregoing  observations,  the  impression
produced  by  the  first  suggestion  is  sometimes  profound  enough
to  overcome  the  symptoms.  More  frequently  they  reappear,  to
yield  only  after  repeated  suggestions.

In  certain  subjects  it  also  happens  that  the  suggestion  wears
away.  Hysterical  patients  seem  to  delight  in  their  nervous
condition  in  spite  of  suffering,  and  do  not  allow  themselves  to
be  impressed  by  suggestion  after  a  time.  This  more  or  less
voluntary  resistance  is  sometimes  caused  by  a  patient's  surround-
ings. Other  people  laugh  at  them,  make  fun  of  "magnetism,"
say  that  it  only  affects  simple-minded  people,  and  can  do  no
good.

The  experienced  physician  takes  exact  account  of  the  situa-
tion.    He  regains  his  control  over  the  patient.

When  it  is  found  that  nothing  further  can  be  gained  from  the
use  of  suggestion,  and  that  the  patient  continues  to  exhibit  or
complain  of  new  symptoms  daily,  it  is  often  well  to  leave  it  off,
especially  in  cases  of  hysteria.  In  such  cases  it  only  helps  to
direct  the  patient's  attention  upon  himself  and  indirectly  invokes
auto-suggestion.

Observation  XXIV. — Hysteria  dating  back  six  weeks. — Convulsive  paroxysms. —
Left  sensitivo-sensorial  hemianesthesia. —  Vomiting. — Pains. — Immediate  eff~ects  of  sug-
gestion.— Reappearance  of  symptoms. — Cure  in  six  or  eight  weeks. — Relapse  in  eight
months. — Cure  in  three  weeks  by  suggestion.

G (Marie),  sixteen  years  of  age,  enters  the  hospital  on  June  17th.

Four  years  ago  she  was  treated  for  nervous  symptoms,  especially  abdom-
inal pain.

For  the  last  six  weeks  she  has  been  subject  to  crises  of  hysteria.
She  complains  x)f  pain  near  the  right  axillary  border,  spreading  toward  the
epigastrium  and  recurring  frequently.     Also  frequent  pain  in  right  side.

Patient  well-developed  and  moderately  intelligent.  Temperament
lymphatic.     Painful    spot    on    forehead.     Pain    at  emergence  of    supra

2Ç2  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

and  infra  orbital  nerves  on  left  side.  Acute  sensibility  on  pressure  over
abdomen.  Upon  epigastric  pressure,  respiration  becomes  panting,  face
becomes  congested,  patient  turns  over  on  stomach,  her  eyes  open
wildly,  in  about  twenty  seconds  the  arms  become  rigid,  and  a  paroxysm
is  imminent.     If  the  pressure  be  stopped,  the  attack  is  checked.

Acute  pain  in  lower  part  of  left  thigh  extending  below  patella.

Complete  lift  sensitivo-sensorial  hemianœsthesia  with  hemianalgesia  and
abolition  of  the  muscular  sense.

Retinal  vision  exists.     Purely  psychical  amblyopia.

Choreiform  movements  in  hands  for  six  weeks.

Other  functions  normal.     We  discover  dilatation  of  stomach.

No  treatment  until  July  2d.  All  symptoms  still  present.  Hysterical
paroxysm  on  19th.  Sharp  epigastric  pain,  often  preventing  sleep.
Paroxysms  again  on  25th,  26th,  and  27th.  Vomits  all  nourishment  after
21st.  Leaves  hospital  on  28th,  but  returns  on  July  1st,  condition
remaining  the  same.      Daily  paroxysms.

2d. — Slight  paroxysm.  Light  somnambulism  (5th  degree).  Sugges-
tion.     Vision  restored.     Other  symptoms  still  persist.

4th. — Suggestion.  Left  eye  reads  letters  2  millimetres  high  at  a
distance  of  9  centimetres.  Same  condition  for  right  eye.  Left  ear
hears  at  5  centimetres,  right  at  7.  Sensory  anaesthesia  disappeared
yesterday,  after  suggestion,  but  is  present  again  to-day.  Epigastric
sensibility  diminished.

Slight  paroxysm  this  morning.  Neuralgia  has  disappeared.  Patient
sees  distinctly  with  both  eyes,  and  hears  at  a  distance  of  from  4  to  5
centimetres  on  both  sides.     Suggestion.     Return  of  sensibility.

Hears  at  9  centimetres  on  right  side,  and  n  on  left.  Paroxysm  on
July  7th.

9th. — We  note.  Contracture  in  extension  of  lower  left  limb  dating
from  preceding  day.  Similar  contracture  in  hand  disappeared  this
morning,  spontaneously.  We  try  to  resolve  contracture  by  suggestion.
Patient  resists,  and  only  a  partial  result  is  obtained  at  first  trial.  After
second  hypnotization  and  vigorous  suggestion,  flexion,  and  relaxation  of
limb  is  obtained,  simultaneously  with  disappearance  of  hemianœsthe-
sia.

10th. — Severe  paroxvsm  yesterday.  Abdominal  pains.  To-day  com-
plains especially  of  headache,  pain  in  sternum,  and  near  right  axillary
border.     Anaesthesia  of  upper  left  limb  only.

By  means  of  suggestion  return  of  sensibility  is  obtained,  first  in  hand,
then  in  fore-arm,  and  finally  in  arm.  Headaches  and  pains  disappear
after  suggestion.

1 2th. — Two  successive  paroxysms  yesterday  after  a  visit  from  her
mother.     Hemianœsthesia  has  reappeared,  excepting  in  trunk  and  back.

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  293

Contracture  in  extension  of  lower  limb.  Pain  in  head  and  epigastrium.
After  hypnotic  suggestion,  and  passive  motion  of  limbs,  contracture
disappears.     Pains  also  disappear,  and  sensibility  is  restored.

Hysterical  crisis  on  14th.  Two  on  15th,  and  one  on  17th.  Restored
sensibility  maintained.     Frequent  epigastric  pain.

No  new  paroxysms  up  to  August  3d.  Doing  well.  Hemianesthesia
definitely  cured.  Pain  in  head  and  thorax  remains.  It  yields  to  sug.
gestion,  but  reappears  easily.  Digestive  disturbances  connected  with
dilatation  of  stomach.

On  July  29th  and  30th,  new  contracture  of  leg,  which  yields  to
suggestion  each  time.

August  3d. — Severe  convulsive  paroxysm,  lasting  half  an  hour.

Since  then,  no  more  crises,  and  is  doing  well.  Remains  in  hospital
until  the  end  of  September,  and  complains  of  nothing  but  slight  diges-
tive disturbances.  Occasional  return  of  hemianaesthesia,  which  always
yields  to  suggestion.

Goes  out  as  servant  and  does  her  work  well.

The  cure,  which  is  almost  complete,  has  taken  eight  weeks.

Patient  returns  to  hospital  on  April  28,  1887.  Fifteen  clays  ago  she
was  seized  with  a  convulsive  hysterical  paroxysm  lasting  an  hour.
Upon  regaining  consciousness  she  remembered  nothing  about  it.
Fatigue,  buzzing  in  ears,  and  loss  of  sensibility  of  left  side  afterward.
Deafness  in  left  ear,  and  left  eye  sees  less  distinctly.  Dull  frontal
pain,  abdominal  pain,  and  frequent  cramps  in  stomach,  without  nausea
or  vomiting,  have  been  present  ever  since.  Complains  also  of  sensation
of  heat  in  head,  profuse  perspiration,  and  frequent  palpitation.

Menses,  which  had  been  absent  for  five  months,  reappeared  profusely
on  the  clay  of  her  entrance.

May  2d. — Acute  pain  upon  pressure  of  epigastrium  and  of  right  side
of  abdomen.  Frontal  and  syncipital  neuralgia.  Left  sensitivo-sensorial
hemianaesthesia,  ear  absolutely  deaf,  eye  distinguishes  color.

Hemianesthesia  instantly  removed  by  suggestion.  We  purposely
allow  the  olfactory  and  gustatory  anaesthesias  to  remain.  Paroxysm  in
the  evening.

3d. — Doing  well,  sensibility  maintained.  Complains  of  pain  only  in
lower  part  of  abdomen  on  right  side.

1 1  th. — Doing  well,  no  more  crises.  Cramps  and  headache  have  ceased.
Sensory  anaesthesia  has  reappeared.  Eye  and  ear  retain  sensibility,
gustatory  and  olfactory  senses  absent.  Suggestion.  Hemianœsthesia  dis-
appears.

21st. — Doing  well.  No  paroxysms.  Sensibility  maintained.  Diges-
tion somewhat  feeble.  Pain  low  down  in  abdomen,  which  disappears
after  suggestion,  to  return  in  a  few  hours.

294  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

25th. — Pain  disappears  entirely.  Patient  remains  ten  days  longer
without  manifesting  any  symptoms.

Thus,  this  relapse,  or  second  series  of  hysterical  symptoms
yielded  to  suggestion  in  three  weeks.  There  were  no  new  crises
after  two  days  of  suggestion.

Observation  XXV. — Reappearance  of  hysteria  eight  months  ago  in  consequence  of  a
miscarriage,  with  pelvic  peritonitis. — Sensitivo-sensorial  hemianesthesia, pain, globus,
palpitation. —  Transient  effect  of  suggestion  at  first. — Complete  cure  in  twelve  days.

Catherine    V ,  twenty-two  years  of  age,    enters    the    hospital    on

March  12,  1887.  having  been  under  Ur.  Spillmann's  treatment  for  four
months.

Menses  appeared  at  the  age  of  eighteen.  On  this  occasion  she  was
seized  w'ith  complete  paraplegia,  for  which  she  was  sent  to  Paris.  Treat-
ment of  rubbing,  electricity,  and  application  of  magnets  for  eight
months.  Paraplegia  lasted  a  year  and  disappeared  suddenly  and  spon-
taneously, but  she  continued  to  drag  left  leg.

Patient  has  complained  of  palpitation  for  two  years.  Coughs  and
expectorates  a  little,  but  has  had  no  haemoptysis.

Eight  months  ago.  she  had  a  miscarriage  at  six  months  and  a  half,  in
consequence  of  a  fall.  Abundant  leucorrhcea,  containing  clots,  with
abdominal  pain  and  vomiting  for  two  months.  Treated  for  pelvic
peritonitis  with  blisters  and  actual  cautery.  Severe  paroxysms  of  hys-
teria.

Peritonitis  finally  cured.  Menses  reappeared,  but  less  abundantly,
and  always  late.

Entered  Dr.  Spillmann's  service  for  bronchitis  and  severe  pain  in  left
leg.     Treatment,  electricity  and  cold  pack.

March  14th. — We  note  :  Temperament  lymphatic  and  nervous.  Con-
stitution debilitated.  Temperature  37. 20.  Pulse  120,  and  regular.
Respiration  46 — somewhat  panting.  No  râles.  Apex  beat  normal.
Action  of  heart  regular,  but  becomes  tumultuous  if  patient  walks.  Xo
murmur.

Slight  tremor  in  fingers.  Complains  of  pain  in  temples,  often  of  sen-
sation of  suffocation.     Slightest  vexation  causes  globus  hystericus.

Hemianaesthesia  of  left  side  of  face,  left  upper  limb,  excepting  hand,
and  of  entire  lower  limb.  Chest,  back,  and  abdomen  still  sensible  on
left  side.  Acute  pain  in  left  supra-umbilical  region.  Left  sensorial
anaesthesia.  Eyes  cannot  read  and  do  not  distinguish  colors.  Sense  of
vertigo  and  obnubilation.  Amblyopia  and  dyschromatopsia  purely  psychic
cal.

14th. — Patient  put  into    somnambulism    easily.     Sensory    hemianaes-

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  295

thesia  is  removed,  but  reappears  next  day.  Is  feeling  better.  Has  no
more  palpitation  when  resting,  and  breathing  has  improved.

16th. — Same  distribution  of  sensory  and  sensorial  anœsthesia.  Pain
upon  pressure  of  pit  of  epigastrium,  in  left  supra-umbilical  region,  and
above  right  groin.     Continuation  of  suggestion.

17th. — Intense  supra-orbital  headache  in  the  night.  It  is  taken  away
and  sensibility  is  restored  by  suggestion.     Vision  is  also  restored.

iSth. — Is  doing  well.  Anaesthesia  and  amblyopia  have  reappeared.
Dyschromatopsia  has  definitely  yielded.  Colors  are  correctly  perceived,
excepting  black,  which  is  called  gray.     Suggestion.

19th. — Complains  of  nothing.  Eats  and  sleeps  well.  Pain  upon
pressure  very  slight.     Can  read  with  left  eye.

2 2d. — Restored  sensibility  has  been  maintained  since  yesterday.
Reads  more  distinctly  with  left  eye.  Firm  pressure  upon  abdomen  no
longer  painful.  Slight  sensibility  in  back  of  right  leg.  Palpitation
upon  walking  only.

23d. — Is  doing  well.  Complete  restoration  of  sensibility,  excepting
for  the  auditory,  gustatory,  and  olfactory  senses.

24th. — No  feeling  in  right  leg  all  night.  This  morning,  complete
right  hemianaesthesia  with  hemianalgesia.  Muscular  sense  still  exists.
Sensorial  sensibility  not  modified.

25th. — Same  condition.     Sensibility  restored  by  suggestion.

26th. — Restoration  maintained  excepting  in  right  side  of  face.  Left
ear  hears  watch  at  three  and  a-half  centimetres.  Suggestion  restored
sensibility  to  face.

In  evening,  chill  followed  by  pain  in  left  side.  Morning  of  27th,
temperature  39. 83.  Evening,  40°.  Pulse  12S.  Morning  of  28th,  tem-
perature 38.4°.     Pulse  124.

Cough  and  expectoration.  Respiratory  murmur  diminished  over  lower
three  spaces  on  left  side  of  chest.  Pain  in  side  disappears  on  28th.
In  evening,  temperature  39°.  Pulse  128.  Morning  of  29th,  tempera-
ture 28".  Pulse  108.  Evening,  temperature  3S.80.  Pulse  116.  Morn-
ing of  30th,  temperature  370.     Defervesence  of  pneumonia.

Evenings  of  30th  and  31st,  temperature  rises  to  38. 6°,  then  becomes
normal  again  both  morning  and  evening.  No  nervous  symptoms  during
this  period.     Restored  sensibility  is  maintained.

April  2d. — Watch  heard  at  four  centimetres,  on  right  side.  Daily
suggestion  to  improve  hearing.  On  the  5th,  hears  at  sixteen  centime-
tres. On  the  18th,  at  eighteen  centimetres.  Smell  and  taste  also
restored  by  suggestion.

Patient  continues  to  feel  very  well.  No  more  pain.  Slight  palpita-
tion upon  walking,  still.     Remains  until  May  14th,  and  goes  home  cured.

The  almost  total  cure  by  suggestion  was  obtained  in  about  twelve  days.

296  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

Observation  XXVI. — Hysteria  since  the  age  of  twelve  in  a  young  man  of  twenty-one.
—  Transient  cure  by  hypnotic  suggestion,  with  isolation.

On  January  30,  1887,  my  colleague,  Dr.  Herrgott,  asked  me  to  look
at  a  case  of  hysteria  in  a  young  man  aged  twenty-one,  dating  back  to  his
twelfth  year.  He  was  strong  and  well-made,  and  there  seemed  to  be  no
nervous  history.

Trouble  has  been  aggravated  since  the  last  of  December.  Continual
discomfort,  weeping,  groaning,  and  sensation  of  constriction  in  throat.
Severe  paroxysms,  beginning  with  intense  constriction,  almost  strangu-
lation. Oppression  and  suffocation  becomes  excessive,  face  is  con-
gested and  swollen,  general  tremor  without  convulsions  or  contracture,
sharp  distressing  cries.  This  condition  lasts  several  hours.  Afterward
great  fatigue,  relieved  by  profound  sleep.

During  whole  period  of  discomfort  patient  is  powerless  to  work
physically  or  intellectually,  can  neither  read  nor  write,  cannot  fix  atten-
tion on  anything,  and  sometimes  does  not  answer  questions  for  several
minutes.  Takes  him  several  minutes  to  rise  from  his  seat.  He  can-
not grasp  an  object.  When  walking,  he  sometimes  has  to  stop  for  ten
minutes  being  powerless  to  take  a  step  further.  Has  no  fear,  and  is
not  subject  to  hallucinations.  Often  irritable  without  cause.  The
more  his  family  try  to  soothe  him,  the  more  nervous  he  becomes.

In  this  condition  he  is  very  impressionable.  A  sad  story  or  a  slight
accident  excites  him,  makes  his  heart  palpitate,  and  gives  rise  to  a  sense
of  strangulation.

Functions  normal.  No  trouble  with  sensibility,  no  pain,  no  globus.
Digestion  good.  Cannot  eat  during  severe  crises  on  account  of  feeling
of  strangulation.     Very  intelligent.     Understands  his  condition.

The  following  is  the  account  of  the  progress  of  his  trouble  which  he
gave  me  after  he  was  cured.

"  My  trouble  began  at  Rocroy,  when  I  was  twelve  years  old,  without
any  cause.  I  suffered  from  severe  torment  of  mind,  gloomy  ideas,  and
slight  fatigue,  but  I  was  not  incapacitated  for  work.

"During  the  scholastic  year  1878-1879  I  worked  at  home.  The  men-
tal distress  was  less  frequent,  but  attending  one  lecture  was  enough
to  arouse  it.

"In  1879-1880,  I  was  at  college  in  Reims.  My  trouble  became  very
violent,  and  for  the  first  time  I  had  attacks  of  weeping,  sometimes  last-
ing two  hours.     Nevertheless  I  could  study.

"Ini88o-i88i  the  disease  assumed  an  intermittent  form,  periods  of
calm  alternating  with  periods  of  agitation,  each  of  about  three  months'
duration.     I  lost  memory  completely  during  the  periods  of  agitation,  so

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  297

that  study  became  impossible.  I  had  beside  a  sensation  of  weight  and
dulness  in  my  fingers.     No  crises  as  yet  however.

"  In  July,  when  I  was  studying  well,  I  had  my  first  paroxysm,  but  it
was  not  as  severe  as  the  following  ones  were.

"  In  June,  1883,  I  was  well  enough  to  continue  my  college  course,  but
was  refused  a  degree  because  of  the  interruptions  forced  upon  me  by
my  disease.

"  In  August  the  paroxysms  became  violent  again.  I  was  under  hydro-
pathic treatment  at  Benfeld.  I  improved,  and  the  paroxysms  ceased,
but  gave  place  to  an  inertia  of  body  and  mind  which  made  it  impossible
for  me  to  occupy  or  distract  myself  in  any  way.

"  I  improved  after  leaving  the  establishment,  and  kept  up  my  studies
until  June.

"  In  January,  1885,  I  left  college  for  good,  and  spent  the  whole  spring
in  the  country.  In  June  I  entered  the  army  at  Amiens,  and  for  the  first
time  had  complete  relief,  and  enjoyed  bodily  exercise.  This  lasted  four
months.  I  was  away  on  sick-leave,  then  went  to  the  military  hospital,
and  finally  in  February,  1886,  received  my  discharge  and  went  home.

"  I  was  very  miserable  all  the  spring,  but  became  much  better  in  the
summer.  Toward  the  end  of  December,  however,  I  had  continual  dis-
comfort, and  violent  paroxysms  which  kept  on  into  January,  1887."

It  was  at  this  period  that  I  was  called  in  to  see  the  patient.

Hypnotization.  Patient  goes  into  2d  degree  easily.  Feels  calm
and  rested  for  ten  minutes  after  suggestion.  Daily  suggestion,
Improvement.  Paroxysms  cease.  Suggestion  has  transient  effect  only.
Patient  is  irritated  by  his  surroundings,  and  is  easily  agitated.

He  is  removed  to  hospital  and  isolated,  is  free  to  walk  about  where
he  chooses,  but  forbidden  to  go  home.  Has  had  no  paroxysms  since
admission.  Heaviness  in  fingers,  and  general  discomfort  gradually  dis-
appears.    Can  occupy  himself,  but  cannot  yet  take  up  his  work  again.

Well  enough  to  go  home  in  April.     Comes  to  be  hypnotized  daily.

In  May,  discomfort,  heaviness  in  fingers,  and  confusion  of  thought
again.  Suggestion  instantly  drives  away  these  symptoms.  Violent  par-
oxysms about  the  middle  of  the  month.  He  returns  to  the  hospital  for
three  months.

Daily  hypnotization — 3d  degree.  I  let  him  sleep  half  an  hour,  sug-
gesting calm  and  cure.

Three  days  after  his  entrance,  all  his  troubles  disappeared.  He  has
not  had  the  slightest  return  of  any  trouble.  "  During  the  entire  month
of  June,"  he  says,  "  I  occupied  myself  as  I  pleased.  Toward  the  end  of
July  I  could  even  do  sustained  intellectual  work,  which  was  impossible
before,  even  at  my  best  times."

298  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

At  the  present  time, — Oct.  20th, — the  patient  is  feeling  better  than  he
ever  felt  before.

Will  the  cure  be  lasting  ?  With  the  aid  of  suggestion  I  hope  and
think  it  will.

OBSERVATION   XXVII. — Hysterical  aphonia  dating  back  two  months. — Rapid  cure  by
hypnotic  suggestion.

Mme.  C.  L ,   thirty  years  of    age,  has  been  hysterical  for  twelve

years.  She  often  has  attacks  of  hysterical  sleep,  lasting  from  half  an
hour  to  two  hours.  Rarely  convulsive  attacks.  Strangulation,  globus,
left  ovarialgia  and  hemianesthesia,  are  all,  however,  present.  She  is  an
intelligent  woman,  of  lymphatic  temperament.  Various  methods  of
treatment,  bromide,  hydrotherapy,  etc.,  have  been  tried  without  great
success.

She  comes  to  see  me  about  the  last  of  June,  1887.  Her  voice  is  com-
pletely gone,  but  there  is  neither  pain  nor  spasm.  Left  sensory  hemi-
anesthesia. General  health  good.  Attacks  of  hysterical  sleep  fre-
quent.

I  try  to  make  her  speak,  in  vain.  Electricity  is  used  without  effect.
I  try  to  hypnotize  her,  but  she  is  agitated  and  has  spasms,  and  I  give
up  the  attempt  fearing  a  paroxysm.  The  following  day  1  hypnotize  her
into  profound  sleep,  with  loss  of  memory  upon  waking.  Discomfort
during  sleep,  sensation  of  epigastric  and  thoracic  weight.  She  passes
from  hypnotic  into  hysterical  sleep,  and  wakes  spontaneously  in  about
half  an  hour.

Hypnotization  again  on  the  third  day.  Somnambulism.  I  calm  her
by  suggestion,  and  the  crisis  of  the  day  before  is  not  repeated.  Hemi-
anaesthesia  disappears  after  suggestion,  but  aphonia  is  still  present.

Hypnotization  easy  for  the  fourth  time.  I  try  to  suggest  cheerfulness.
I  make  her  hear  music.  She  keeps  time  with  gestures,  and  the  anxious
slate  of  mind  is  driven  away.  Profiting  by  this  experience  I  say,  "You
know  you  will  be  entirely  cured  in  a  few  days.  Your  voice  is  coming
back.  You  know  on  what  day  you  will  be  cured  and  will  speak.  On
what  day?" — She  replies,  "  In  a  week." — "Very  well,"  I  say,  "it  is
understood  then,  next  Thursday  when  you  wake  from  the  hypnosis
you  will  be  able  to  speak." — Upon  waking  she  does  not  remember  what
has  occurred.

Daily  hypnotization.  Perfect  somnambulism.  Post-hypnotic  halluci-
nations are  realized.  At  each  se'ance  I  make  her  repeat  that  she  will
be  able  to  speak  next  Thursday.

Thursday  arrives.  I  try  in  vain  to  make  her  speak  before  the  se'ance.
She  complains  of  laryngeal  constriction.  She  thinks  it  is  growing
worse.       Hypnotization.      She   says  she   will    speak  when  she   wakes.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  299

Upon  waking,  sharp  laryngeal  pain.  Fearing  a  paroxysm,  I  put  her  to
sleep  again,  and  suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  pain,  and  that  she
will  speak  without  any  difficulty.  Upon  waking  she  says  in  a  feeble
i-oice,  "  I  think  I  can  speak  again."  I  make  her  articulate  her  name  in
a  loud  voice.  She  tries,  hardly  daring  to  venture,  as  a  person  who  has
lain  in  bed  a  long  time  hardly  ventures  to  walk  upon  first  getting  up.
But  her  voice  has  returned  clear  and  distinct,  and  the  aphonia  does  not
reappear.

I  try  the  same  method  in  order  to  cure  her  hysterical  paroxysms.  I
hypnotize  her  daily,  and  suggest  that  she  will  soon  be  free  from  these
attacks,  making  her  fix  upon  a  certain  day.  She  tells  me  that  after  her
return  home,  and  after  her  menstrual  period,  the  crises  will  disappear.
I  suggest  that  she  will  dream  of  this  three  successive  nights,  which  she
does.

The  patient  goes  home.  The  paroxysms  continue  for  about  fifteen
clays,  and  then  disappear  almost  entirely.  This  is  what  she  writes  in
January,  1886  :  i;  I  have  been  sick  with  pleurisy  for  two  months.  I
have  had  paroxysms  only  very  rarely,  even  when  suffering  most.  For
the  last  six  weeks  I  have  again  lost  my  voice,  and  nothing  seems  to
help  me.  It  came  on  when  I  was  convalescing,  in  consequence  of
throat-spasm  which  prevented  swallowing.  I  have  been  treated  with
electricity  for  fifteen  days,  and  if  I  am  not  benefited  soon,  will  come  to
Nancy  to  see  you,  ii  ycu  think  it  wise."

Observation  XXVIII.—  Aphonia   in  a   nervous  woman,  dating  back  eight  days. — ■
Immediate  cure  by  hypnotic  suggestion.

Mme.  O ,  who  is   fifty-five  years  old,  is  generally  well.     She  says

that  every  winter  she  has  hoarseness  which  lasts  six  weeks.  At  the  pres-
ent time,  January  23,  1887,  she  has  had  severe  hoarseness  for  eight  days,
without  any  cough  or  expectoration  ;  she  has  an  enlarged  gland  over  the
right  ear  and  pain  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck.  This  has  lasted  from
fifteen  days  to  three  weeks.

Mme.   O has  never  had  real  nervous  crises;  but  pretty   often,

every  six  weeks  or  at  least  every  two  months,  she  has  what  she  calls
nervous  spasms,  accompanied  with  pain  in  the  chest,  the  sensation  of  a
foreign  body  rising  into  her  throat,  suffocation,  and  uneasiness  in  her
limbs,  but  never  loss  of  consciousness.  This  lasts  sometimes  three  or
four  hours.  She  has  eight  children  who  are  all  nervous.  One  daughter
is  subject  to  crises  of  hysteria  ;  she  is  very  easily  hypnotized  into  deep
sleep,  and  I  have  twice  succeeded  in  hypnotizing  her  during  a  crisis  and
in  dissipating  the  attack,  without  her  remembering  when  she  woke  that
I  had  been  there.

300  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

One  of  her  little  boys  has  had  nervous  crises  resembling  syncope,
which  I  have  driven  away  by  hypnotic  suggestion.  He  was  also  sus-
ceptible of  being  put  into  deep  sleep.

I  therefore  thought  the  mother  was  susceptible  to  suggestion,  and  that
her  aphonia  was  either  of  nervous  origin,  or  at  least  aggravated  and
kept  up  by  the  nervous  diathesis.

I  hypnotize  her;  in  a  few  seconds  she  is  in  somnambulism.  I  suggest
the  total  disappearance  of  the  aphonia  ;  I  make  her  talk  in  a  loud  voice.
In  a  few  minutes  I  wake  her.  To  her  great  astonishment  her  voice  has
come  back.     She  has  remained  cured  of  her  aphonia.

III.

Neuropathic  Affections.
Observation  XXIX. — Hysteriform  symptoms. — Se?isatio?i  of  emptiness  in  the  head  and
buzzing  in  the  ear. — Moral  inertia. — Rapid  and  almost  total  disappearance  of  these
symptoms  by  hypnotic  suggestion.

S.  N ,  a  clerk  in  Paris,  twenty-one  years  of  age,  came  to  consult

me  on  April  12,  1886.

His  trouble  began,  he  said,  on  January  2.  He  was  in  Paris,  feeling
rather  sad  and  weary  at  having  left  the  place  which  he  held  three  weeks
since.  At  half-past  nine  in  the  evening  he  had  a  sensation  of  chilliness
in  his  chest  and  in  his  head,  over  the  left  eye,  which  lasted  five  minutes.
He  had  gone  to  bed,  but  he  got  up  and  spent  the  night  in  his  arm-chair,
shivering  and  trembling.  The  next  clay  he  kept  his  room,  and  purged
himself;  in  five  or  six  clays  his  discomfort  had  nearly  ceased.  About
the  8th  of  January,  in  the  night,  he  had  a  violent  paroxysm  of  convul-
sions, unconsciousness,  delirium,  and  agitation.  The  doctor  was  with
him  five  hours.  The  seizure  lasted  until  six  o'clock  in  the  morning
(hysterical  seizure).

In  a  few  days  he  was  well  again  ;  but  a  new  paroxysm  occurred  eight
days  after  the  preceding  one,  lasting  from  three  to  four  hours.  He  re-
turned to  his  family  in  Chatenois  (Vosges)  ;  then  consulted  a  physician
in  Nancy,  who  prescribed  baths;  the  second  bath  brought  on  an  attack
of  syncope  which  lasted  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Since  then  he  has  had  no
more  paroxysms,  but  about  the  beginning  of  February  he  was  troubled
with  nervousness  at  night,  which  lasted  for  three  weeks.  It  was  impos-
sible for  him  to  remain  in  bed  ;  he  was  obliged  to  get  up  every  night,
being  unable  to  sleep.  At  this  time  he  felt  a  sensation  of  weight  in  his
head,  succeeded  by  attacks  which  lasted  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and
recurred  five  or  six  times  a  day.  This  sensation  of  weight  disappeared
in  about  fifteen  days,  and  gave  place  to  a  sensation  of  emptiness  in  the
head,  which  has  persisted.  Since  this  time,  too,  he  has  complained  ot
continual  buzzing  in  his  right  ear.     He  has  also  had  buzzing  in  his  left

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  301

ear,  but  it  disappeared  after  a  few  days.  Finally,  during  the  last  six
weeks  he  has  frequently  had  a  sensation  of  constriction  in  his  throat
which  has  been  very  intense  and  almost  continuous  for  fifteen  days,  pre-
venting him  from  eating.

He  is  a  young  man  of  strong  constitution,  although  of  lymphatic
temperament.  He  is  naturally  sad  and  morose.  We  have  not  discov-
ered anything  important  in  his  family  history.  At  my  consultation  on
April  12  he  complained  of  two  principal  phenomena  :  of  a  constant  sen-
sation of  emptiness  in  the  head,  localized  especially  in  both  temporal
regions,  and  of  persistent  buzzing  in  the  right  ear.  For  two  months  he
has  not  read  or  written  anything.  He  feels  incapable  of  working,  has  no
taste  for  anything,  and  does  not  care  to  walk.  He  sits  with  his  head
resting  on  his  hands,  and  is  always  complaining.  He  fears  that  his
mind  may  be  deranged.  This  fixed  idea  has  got  possession  of  him.  He
is  sad  and  demoralized.  His  appetite,  however,  is  good,  and  he  sleeps
well.

I  put  him  into  somnambulism  with  singular  ease,  simply  by  stating  that
he  is  going  to  sleep.  I  suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  sensation  of
emptiness  in  his  head  and  the  buzzing  in  his  ear,  and  I  tell  him  that  he
will  be  bright  and  gay.  Upon  leaking,  his  head  feels  better,  but  the  sen-
sation of  emptiness  is  still  there  to  a  slight  degree.  The  buzzing  has
ceased.

13th. — The  patient  says  that  his  head  felt  a  little  better  yesterday
evening,  but  the  sensation  of  emptiness  has  returned.  The  buzzing,
which  ceased  for  several  hours,  has  re-appeared,  but  is  less  intense.  He
says  that  his  eyes  are  tired  immediately,  if  he  reads  even  a  little.  His
acuteness  of  vision,  however,  is  normal.  I  put  him  into  somnambulism
three  consecutive  times,  and  each  time  repeat  the  suggestion  that  all  the
morbid  phenomena  have  disappeared.  The  first  two  times  we  saw  him
try  to  evoke  these  sensations  in  his  head  with  his  hands  when  he  woke  :
"There,  there,  the  emptiness  is  always  there;  the  buzzing  is  continual."
It  was  only  at  the  third  suggestion  that  he  admitted  upon  waking  that
the  buzzing  had  disappeared,  and  that  his  head  zeas  heavier,  that  is  to  say,
less  empty.

14th. — Yesterday  he  had  almost  no  buzzing  in  his  ear,  and  the  sensa-
tion of  emptiness  in  his  head  was  not  so  marked.  In  the  evening  he
was  quite  bright  for  a  few  moments,  admitting  that  he  felt  well.  Since
this  morning  he  has  again  complained  of  the  sensation  of  emptiness  in
his  head  and  of  slight  buzzing,  as  well  as  of  sore  throat.  Upon  waking,
after  vigorous  and  repeated  suggestion,  he  feels  nothing  more.

15th. — The  buzzing  in  his  ear  which  disappeared  yesterday,  only
reappeared  this  morning  at  eight  o'clock  very  slightly.  The  sense  of
emptiness  in  his  head  is  much  less.     His  parent,  who  is  with  him,  told

302  Suggestive   Therapctitics.

me  that  lie  was  really  better  but  that  he  hesitated  in  admitting  it,  and
that  he  was  always  looking  for  something  new.  In  a  fresh  trial,  I  sug-
gest brightness  and  confidence.  Upon  waking  he  confesses  that  he  is
doing  well.

1 6 1 h . — The  buzzing  in  his  ear  has  not  reappeared.  He  complains  of
a  slight  sense  of  emptiness  in  his  head.  He  is  brighter  and  walks
about  with  more  satisfaction  than  before.     Suggestion.

17th. — The  improvement  has  continued:  the  buzzing  in  the  ear  has
disappeared  definitely  ;  the  sense  of  emptiness  is  very  slight.  He  feels  more
confident,  more  sure  of  himself. — His  expression  is  more  serene.  The
patient  has  gone  back  to  Chatenois.  He  wrote  me  on  April  21st  that
he  was  doing  well,  and  that  after  Easter  he  would  see  if  it  was  neces-
sary to  come  to  consult  me.     He  has  not  come.

OBSERVATION  XXX. — Nervous   aphonia  of  one  month's   standing. — Cure    by   simple
affirmation.

M.  B ,  a  servant  girl  sixteen  years  old,  enters  my  clinic  on  March

3,  1885.  She  is  small,  delicate,  and  of  lymphatic  temperament.  For
twenty-five  days  she  has  had  a  cough,  without  expectoration.  During
the  last  ten  days  she  has  had  pains  in  her  side,  and  for  fifteen  days  has
had  no  appetite  ;  she  has  been  hoarse  for  a  month  ;  there  has  been
complete  aphonia  during  the  past  three  weeks.  She  has  had  amenor-
rhcea  for  six  months.  We  find  in  front,  diminished  pulmonary  resonance
about  the  fourth  intercostal  space  on  the  right  side,  and  subcrepitant
rales  near  the  anterior  extremity  of  the  third  ;  behind,  slightly  dimin-
ished pulmonary  resonance  on  the  right  side,  extending  from  the  infra-
scapular  region  to  the  base,  slightly  roughened  expiration  at  both
apices,  with  fine  subcrepitant  rales.  No  fever.  Diagnosis  :  pulmonary
tuberculosis  of  gradual  development.

On  the  7th  the  condition  is  the  same  ;  the  aphonia  persists  and  is
complete.  There  is  no  cough  and  no  expectoration,  and  as  the  patient
has  no  dysphagia  or  laryngeal  pain,  spontaneous  or  provoked,  or
fever,  and  the  tuberculosis  is  stationary,  I  ask  myself  if  the  aphonia
may  not  be  nervous.  I  tell  my  students  that  nervous  aphonia  some-
times yields  instantly  to  electricity,  which  acts  by  means  of  its  simple
suggestive  influence.  I  send  for  the  battery.  Before  using  it  I  wish  to
try  simple  suggestion  in  the  waking  condition,  afiirmation.  I  say  to  the
patient,  "  I  am  going  to  give  you  back  your  voice  ;  "  and  while  I  lay
my  hand  upon  the.  larynx  and  move  it  up  and  down  I  add,  il  Now  you
can  speak  aloud.  Say  A."  She  says  it  in  a  low  voice  (aphonic).  I
insist,  in  a  loud  voice,  "  You  can  speak.  Say  A,  A"  She  says  in  a
cleatJ^ice  "A"   then  "  B."     "Now  say  Marie."     She  says  "  Marie,"

MlSTC-ÊiCAi

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  303

and  continues  to  speak  very  distinctly.  It  was  indeed  nervous
aphonia,  and  she  was  cured  simply  by  affirmation.

I  then  say  to  my  students,  "This  patient  being  so  easily  influenced
by  simple  affirmation,  ought  to  be  easy  to  hypnotize."  In  fact  I  simply
close  her  eyes  and  s:iy,  "  You  are  asleep."  She  is  in  profound  sleep  ;
her  arms  remain  in  suggestive  catalepsy  :  suggestive  anaesthesia  is  com-
plete. She  is  susceptible  to  hallucinations  during  her  sleep,  but  post-
hypnotic suggestions  do  not  succeed.  The  aphonia  is  definitely
cured.

The  insomnia  of  which  she  complained  also  disappeared  by  suggestion  in
two  days.  On  the  tenth  the  patient  complains  of  neuralgia.  Induced
sleep  and  suggestion  in  the  morning.  The  neuralgia  gradually  disappears
in  the  afternoon.

The  patient  leaves  the  hospital  on  May  26th  ;  she  speaks  well,  sleeps
well,  and  no  longer  complains  of  anything.  The  lack  of  appetite  alone
has  resisted  suggestion  up  to  the  present  time.

Observation   XXXI. — Epilepsy:  tremor  of  the  hands,  insomnia,  and  repeated  attacks
of  headache,  cured  by  suggestion. — Increase  of  dynamometric  force.

Alphonse  L is  a  weaver  forty  years  old.     He  has  epilepsy.     He

comes  to  the  hospital  on  October  21,  1884.  There  is  no  direct  hered-
itary history.  Between  the  sixth  and  thirteenth  year  he  had  glandular
abscesses  in  the  sub-maxillary  region.  When  he  was  eight  years  old
he  had  his  first  attack,  without  any  aura.  Four  years  afterward,  if  his
memory  is  correct,  which  is  always  doubtful  in  cases  of  epilepsy,  he
had  the  second,  preceded  by  a  burning  sensation  which  went  through
his  head,  by  a  blow  upon  the  head,  epigastric  weight,  fear,  and  alternate
flexion  and  extension  of  the  thumb.  He  was  pretty  well,  except  for
slight  attacks,  until  he  was  twenty  years  old.  Since  then  the  attacks
have  been  more  frequent.  Four  years  ago  he  broke  his  arm  by  falling.
His  wife  says  that  he  sometimes  has  three  or  four  attacks  a  week.  For
the  last  twelve  years  he  has  gone  two  or  more  months  without  having
an  attack.  For  the  last  seventeen  days  he  has  had  three  attacks  a  day,
after  having  passed  eight  days  without  one.  The  week  preceding  his
admission  to  the  hospital,  he  had  three  attacks.  He  often  has  besides
three  or  four  attacks  during  the  day,  with  intervening  coma.  He  has
sometimes  bitten  his  tongue,  but  has  never  urinated  involuntarily.  On
the  18th,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  he  had  an  attack,  and  had  two
during  the  next  day,  the  19th,  and  one  in  the  evening  ;  the  next  day  he
felt  too  weak  to  go  to  work.  Each  attack  is  followed  by  tremor,  which
lasts  for  several  days.  Further,  for  the  past  two  years  he  has  had  con-
vulsive shocks  nearly  every  night.     Before  or  after  the   attacks,  some-

304  Suggestive    TJicrapcutics.

times  after  an  Interval  of  eight  days,  he  often  has  wanderings  and
transient  hallucinations.

We  find  that  his  intelligence  is  somewhat  dull,  his  temperament  lym-
phatic, and  his  constitution  delicate.  There  is  slight  tremor  in  both
hands  which  has  existed  since  the  iSth.  The  right  hand  gives  22  bv
the  dynamometer,  the  left  37.

23d. — Tremor  still  continues.  He  says  that  his  upper  limbs  were
rigid  during  the  day.

24th. — Condition  same.  Neuralgia.  Hypnotization  ;  light  somnam-
bulism. Suggestion.  Upon  waking  tlie  neuralgia  has  disappeared.  The
next  night  the  patient  sleeps  well,  which  he  has  not  done  for  eight  days.
The  tremor  has  also  disappeared.

On  the  26th,  a  new  suggestion  ;  the  patient  still  feels  better;  the  tre-
mor, which  was  very  decided  before  the  first  séance,  has  not  reappeared  ;
and  the  patient  sleeps  well.

On  the  31st,  the  right  hand  gives  30  by  the  dynamometer,  and  47  after
a  hypnotic  suggestion.     The  left  hand  gives  27  before  and  37  afterward.

On  the  1st  of  November,  the  right  hand  gives  40  before,  and  51  after-
ward ;  the  left  still  gives  37.

On  the  2d  the  patient  is  still  doing  well.  He  has  had  no  paroxysms
and  no  tremor.  The  right  hand  gives  37  before,  and  43  afterward;  the
left  hand  39  and  46.  The  patient  stays  until  November  9th.  He  no
longer  complains  of  anything  and  asks  for  his  discharge.

We  have  to  do  here  simply  with  nervous  troubles  consecutive
to  epileptic  seizures:  neuralgia,  tremor  and  muscular  weakness,
which  hypnotic  suggestion  has  benefitted.

Observation  XXXII. — Nervous  gastric  trouble,  epigastric  pain,  anesthesia  of  the
limbs. — Rapid  disappearance  of  the  anœsthesia  by  suggestion  ;  transient  amelioration
of  the  gastric  trouble.

F.  C is  a  single  woman  forty-nine  years  old.     She  has  no  chi!'

dren.  She  enters  the  hospital  on  April  29,  1884.  She  has  been  sick  for
three  months.  The  trouble  began  with  severe  pains  in  the  epigastrium
and  in  the  hypochondriac  region.  After  eating  she  has  a  sensation  of
supra-umbilical  and  laryngeal  constriction  which  lasts  about  an  hour,  as
well  as  eructations  and  very  frequent  vomiting.  Moreover  when  she
has  not  eaten  she  also  feels  a  burning  epigastric  sensation  ;  she  has  no
watery  regurgitations.  Habitual  constipation  ;  passage  only  once  in
three  days.  For  three  months  she  has  had  frequent  nervous  attacks,
especially  after  a  fit  of  anger.  These  attacks  are  accompanied  with
tingling  in  her  fingers  lasting  about  two  minutes  and  followed  by  weep-
ing.    She  has  had  vertigo  for  two  years.     She  is  neuropathic.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.

0UD

The  vomiting  ceased  after  her  entrance  to  the  hospital,  but  the  other
symptoms  continued.  We  only  find  slight  swelling  with  epigastric
tenderness  ;  the  stomach  is  not  dilated,  the  liver  is  not  enlarged.

On  the  7th  of  May  we  rind  beside  this,  analgesia  with  anaesthesia  of
the  trunk  and  upper  limbs  ;  the  muscular  sense  is  abolished.  In  the  lower
limbs  sensibility  only  exists  in  the  sole  of  the  foot.

The  patient  is  hypnotized  (profound  sleep)  :  suggestion.  During  the
day  she  digests  what  she  eats  well,  and  has  the  epigastric  burning  sensation
but  slightly.  During  the  night  she  sleeps  for  six  hours  ;  she  says  she  has
not  slept  as  much  for  six  months.

On  the  8th  we  find  that  the  anasthesia  has  disappeared  ;  the  patient
feels  when  we  touch  her,  but  the  prick  of  a  pin  although  felt  is  not
painful  ;  the  muscular  sense  has  also  reappeared.

The  restoration  of  sensibility  is  maintained.-

The  other  gastric  and  psychical  troubles  are  favorably  influenced  by
repeated  suggestions,  but  they  generally  reappear  after  a  variable
period.

Observation  XXXUL—A/europatAic  pains  suppressed  by  suggestion. — Distaste  for
meat  resisting  simple  suggestion  and  only  disappearing  after  petitions  change  of  per-
sonality.— Failure  of  moral  suggestion.

M ,  seventeen  years  old,  enters  the  hospital  on  March  25,  1884.

For  three  weeks  she  has  complained  of  pains  in  her  limbs  and  of  palpi-
tation ;  for  eight  days  of  frontal  neuralgia  and  vertigo  ;  for  fifteen  days
of  a  cough  without  expectoration.

Menstruation  is  irregular,  slight,  not  painful.

She  is  a  stout  girl,  has  a  strong  constitution  and  has  had  no  previous
maladies.  At  the  present  time  she  complains  of  anorexia,  of  pain  in  her
stomach,  even  when  fasting,  of  regurgitation  of  glairy  fluid,  and  of  a  sen-
sation as  of  a  foreign  body  in  her  throat  after  eating.  No  eructations,
no  nausea,  no  colic.

For  two  months  she  has  had  frequent  palpitation.  Nothing  abnormal
is  found  on  examination  of  her  heart.  She  coughs  and  expectorates  a
We  find  respiration  normal  upon  examination  of  the  thorax.

For  eight  days  she  has  had  frontal  neuralgia,  recurring  twice  a  day
and  lasting  five  minutes  each  time.  This  pain  does  not  prevent  her  from
sleeping.  She  left  her  family  two  months  ago  in  consequence  of  domes-
tic trouble.     She  has  frequent  attacks  of  weeping.

She  has  never  had  hysterical  paroxysms.  The  sensation  of  strangula-
tion is  only  present  after  she  has  eaten.  No  ovarialgia.  The  right
hand  gives  26  by  the  dynamometer,  the  left  hand  24.

Anaesthesia  with  analgesia  and  abolition  of  the  muscular  sense  in  the
upper  left  limb;  sensibility  is  present  near  the  head  of  the  humerus;
20

306  Suggestive   Therapeutics*

elsewhere  it  is  perfect.  For  fifteen  days  there  has  been  a  sensation  of
tingling  in  the  hand.  The  sense  organs  perform  their  functions  nor-
mally.    Diagnosis  :  neuropathy.

A  piece  of  gold  applied  to  the  arm  makes  the  sensibility  reappear,  with-
out transfer,  in  three  minutes  ;  and  since  then  this  restored  sensibility  has
been  maintained.

On  the  27th  she  complains  of  pains  in  her  shoulders,  and  pressure
evokes  very  great  sensitiveness  in  the  two  supra-spinous  fossae  and  at
the  level  of  the  second  dorsal  spinal  process.  Hypnotic  suggestion  ;  the
patient  goes  into  somnambulism  easily.  Upon  waking  the  pains  disappear
completely  and  we  can  press  upon  the  region  which  was  hyperaesthetic
without  the  patient  showing  the  least  reaction.  The  pain  reappears  in
the  afternoon  and  again  yields  to  hypnotic  suggestion  in  the  evening.

It  does  not  appear  again  until  the  28th,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,
preventing  the  patient  from  sleeping.

Hypnotic  suggestion  makes  it  disappear  ;  the  patient  has  a  good  appetite.
At  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  the  pain  returns  to  the  right  shoulder.
Further,  she  is  taken  with  palpitation  with  tingling  in  her  hands.  She
only  sleeps  an  hour  during  the  night.

On  the  morning  of  the  30th  she  vomits  her  coffee.  We  find  that  the
right  supra-spinous  fossa  is  sensitive  to  pressure.  At  ten  o'clock  the
patient  complains  of  pain  and  tingling  in  her  hands.  Hypnotic  sugges-
tion. During  her  sleep  I  make  the  patient  walk  and  work  ;  I  have
found  that  active  somnambulism,  when  it  is  possible  to  induce  it,  works
a  beneficial  diverson,  and  often  acts*  more  efficaciously  than  passive
somnambulism  in  suppressing  nervous  discomfort.  Upon  waking  she
does  not  C07nplain  of  anything.

During  the  day  she  still  has  tingling  in  her  hands,  which  yields  to  hyp-
notic suggestion.

After  the  first  of  April  the  patient  no  longer  complains  of  any  discom-
fort or  nervous  trouble.

Hypnotic  suggestion  rapidly  suppresses  any  pain  which  appears.

In  May  we  find  a  papular  and  eczematous  syphilitic  eruption.
Treatment  by  mercurial  applications.     This  eruption  disappears.

^'e  keep  her  in  the  hospital  for  some  time,  because  she  is  an  excellent
somnambulist.  During  her  sleep  we  make  her  work  ;  she  goes  and
comes,  sweeps  the  ward,  goes  to  the  kitchen  to  get  irons,  and  irons  old
linen  according  to  the  suggestions  given,  doing  everything  with  her
eyes  shut.  She  will  work  thus  for  an  hour  without  remembering  any-
thing about  it  when  she  wakes.

Sometimes,  however,  the  suggestion  has  to  be  modified  in  order  to
take  hold  of  her  imagination.  For  some  time  she  has  had  a  dislike  for
meat  and  absolutelv  refuses  to  eat  it.     I  have  in  vain  given  her  decided

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  307

suggestions  every  day  that  she  likes  meat  and  that  she  will  gladly  cat
some.  She  promises  me  to  eat  some  when  she  wakes.  She  does  not
eat  any  however.  It  is  an  unconquerable  repugnance.  One  day  after
hypnotizing  her,  I  tried  the  following  subterfuge.  "What  is  your
name?" — "  M.  M." — "  But  no,  you  are  not  M.  M.  You  are  Josephine
D.,  her  aunt!  You  are  her  aunt!"  In  an  instant  or  two  she  says,
"That  is  true,  I  am  Josephine  U."  And  now  I  say,  "There  is  your
niece,  M.  M.  Give  her  a  lecture  !  She  does  not  want  to  eat  meat,
thinking  it  is  bad.  Show  her  how  we  eat  it.  Tell  her  how  good  it  is  !  "
And  she  puts  herself  in  her  aunt's  place,  gives  her  fictitious  niece  a
little  lecture  and  swallows  willingly  a  large  piece  of  beef  which  I
had  brought  upstairs,  asking  for  more  to  show  her  niece  how  good  it  is.

I  again  try,  while  she  is  in  the  hospital,  to  give  her  a  suggestion  for
a  moral  end  ;  I  make  her  promise  that  she  will  remain  in  the  ward  as
a  nurse,  that  she  will  be  an  honest  girl,  will  have  no  more  lovers,  and
that  she  will  preserve  her  religious  feelings,  etc.  She  promises  every-
thing and  during  her  stay  at  the  hospital  her  queer,  capricious,  and
gross  character  is  transiently  modified.  She  becomes  dociîe  and  more
reserved.  But  one  fine  day  she  leaves  the  hospital,  and  on  the  same
day  we  met  her  in  the  city  with  unmistakable  companions  of  her  pro-
fession. She  becomes  more  than  ever  a  puella  publica.  She  was  sus-
ceptible to  suggestion  of  every  kind.

Observation  XXXIV. — Neuropathy. — Pains  in  the  epigastrium  and  lower  limbs,
which  disappeared  rapidly  by  suggestion.

D.  N ,  a  dressmaker,   twenty-one  years  old,  enters  the  hospital  on

January  8,  1885.  On  November  4,  at  the  Maternity  Hospital,  she  was
delivered  of  a  seven  months  child,  which  died  fifteen  days  after  birth.
She  was  not  taken  sick  until  a  month  afterwards.  Then  pain  came  on
above  the  right  groin,  which  still  persists  and  which  she  compares  to
uterine  cramps.  The  pain  is  accompanied  with  fever  and  an  excessive
desire  to  make  water.  For  fifteen  clays  she  vomited  ;  since  then  she
has  retained  all  her  food.  She  has  begun  to  lose  color  a  little  during
the  last  fifteen  days.

She  is  a  girl  of  lymphatic  temperament  and  quite  pale  in  complexion.
There  is  no  fever.  The  abdomen  is  increased  in  size  and  somewhat  dis-
tended. Cutaneous  sensibility  is  normal  and  there  is  tympanitic  reso-
nance throughout  ;  palpation  shows  nothing  abnormal.  She  is  troubled
with  habitual  constipation  ;  urine  is  normal.  During  the  past  two  months
she  has  had  pains  in  her  legs  and  thighs,  especially  on  the  posterior  sur-
face,— pains  which  often  hinder  her  walking.  Three  weeks  before  her
confinement  she  had    pains    in  the  loins  and  backs  of   the  thighs,  pains

308  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

without  cramps  and  without  rigidity,  which  made  it  difficult  for  her  to
walk  but  did  not  prevent  her  sleeping. — Neuropathy. — On  the  12th  the
patient  had  a  passage,  having  been  constipated  for  a  week  in  spite  of
having  taken  four  cathartic  pills  and  Sedlitz  water.  The  abdomen  is  a
little  less  distended  ;  she  complains  of  a  burning  sensation  about  the
stomach  ;  twice  during  the  night  she  had  a  sensation  of  suffocation.
She  bends  her  legs  at  an  obtuse  angle  slowly  and  with  difficulty.  She
complains  of  sharp  pain  upon  pressure  in  both  ankles,  at  the  level  of  the
calf,  at  the  back  of  the  thigh,  in  the  distribution  of  the  crural  nerve  on
both  sides,  at  the  fourth  dorsal  spinous  process,  at  the  last  dorsal  ver-
tebrae, at  the  sacrum,  and  at  the  point  of  emergence  of  the  sciatics  and
of  all  the  nerves  of  the  face. — Insomnia.

On  the  14th,  hyperesthesia  is  almost  general.  Complains  especially
of  pain  in  the  epigastrium  and  in  the  legs. — Hypnotization  at  ten  o'clock  :
the  patient  goes  into  somnambulism.  Upon  waking  after  the  suggestion,
epigastric  pain  has  disappeared  ;  it  reappears  at  five  o'clock  in  the  even-
ing.     The  other  pains  have  noticeably  diminished.

15th. — Is  doing  better;  the  nerves  of  the  face  are  no  longer  painful;
the  pain  in  the  epigastrium  again  disappears  by  suggestion.

1 6th. — Complains  of  no  more  pain  except  in  the  lower  limbs,  which
prevents  her  from  standing.  Pressure  upon  the  thighs  and  legs  pro-
vokes very  acute  sensitiveness.

I  hypnotize  her  and  suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  pains  and  the
possibility  of  walking;  I  affirm  that  she  can  walk.  In  fact,  upon  waking
the  hyperœsthesia  has  almost  completely  disappeared  and  the  patient  can
take  a  few  steps,  dragging  her  feet  over  the  floor.

During  the  days  following,  she  continues  to  walk  very  well.  The
leucorrhoea  has  gradually  disappeared.  She  remains  in  the  hospital  until
February  28th.  From  time  to  time  she  complains  of  pains  in  her  limbs;
each  time  they  are  suppressed  by  suggestion.

Observation     XXXV. — Nenro-arthritis. — Lumbar   pain. — Insomnia. — Distaste   for
meat. — Rapid  cure  by  suggestion.

S.  A ,  a  shoemaker,   fourteen  years   old,  enters  the   hospital  on

March  25,  1886.  Sixteen  months  ago  he  was  in  the  hospital  six  weeks
for  pains  in  his  feet.  At  the  present  time  he  complains  of  pains  in  the
loins,  elbows,  knees,  and  calves.  Since  day  before  yesterday  he  has
hardly  been  able  to  walk.  For  the  last  five  or  six  clays  he  has  been  very
hoarse,  has  had  no  appetite,  has  perspired  profusely.  Further,  for  the
last  two  years  he  has  hardly  slept  at  night  ;  he  is  constantly  changing
his  position  and  is  very  much  agitated.  His  father  died  of  alcoholic
tuberculosis.

Suggestive   Therapeutics,  309

Present  condition,  March  26th. — Temperature  3S0  on  the  evening  of
the  25th  ;  370  on  the  morning  of  the  26th.  Pulse  regular.  Constitution
delicate  ;  temperament  lymphatico-nervous.  Upon  examination  of  the
chest,  we  find  that  the  apex  beat  is  in  the  sixth  intercostal  space  in  the
mammary  line,  the  sounds  are  regular;  expiration  slightly  bronchial  in
the  interscapular  region.

Sharp  pain  upon  pressure  of  the  last  lumbar  vertebra;;  this  pain  was
brought  about  by  the  effort  necessitated  by  his  work.  Articular  pains
have  disappeared  since  this  morning  ;  day  before  yesterday  he  had  pains
spreading  from  the  knees  to  the  ankle  bones;  the  tendon-reflexes  of  the
foot  are  slightly  exaggerated.

Diagnosis  :  Nervousness. — Arthritis. — Spinal  irritation.

The  patient  is  hypnotized;— profound  sleep.  Upon  waking  the  lumbar
pains  have  disappeared.

27th. — The  pains  reappeared  during  the  evening.  The  boy  did  not
sleep  during  the  night;  he  was  constantly  turning  about.  This  morning,
pretty  abundant  epistaxis.     New  hypnotic  suggestion.

28th. — The  pain  has  disappeared.  He  slept  last  night,  but  the  sleep
was  broken. — Suggestion.

29th. — Slept  better  ;  was  quiet  all  night. — Slight  epistaxis.

30th. — Had  pains  in  his  loins  last  night  for  two  hours;  slept  however;
woke  up  five  or  six  times.     Slight  epistaxis. — Eats  a  little. — Suggestion.

31st. — Waked  up  three  or  four  times  only:  slept  well:  the  patient  in
the  next  bed  says  that  he  is  much  more  quiet.

He  has  had  no  more  pain.  He  eats  pretty  well,  but  says  he  has  no
desire  for  beef.

April  1st. — Is  doing  well.  Slept  well.  Still  complains  of  slight  pains
in  the  loins. — Suggestion  to  make  him  eat  beef.

2d. — Continues  to  do  well  ;  sleeps  well.  Ale  beef  with  a  good  appe-
tite.    Has  no  more  pain. — Leaves  the  hospital.

8th. — The  patient,  who  is-  now  selling  papers  in  the  street,  came  to
the  hospital  one  morning  three  days  ago.  He  is  doing  well,  sleeps  at
night,  and  continues  to  eat  meat.  He  stands  about  all  day,  and  still
complains  of  slight  fatigue  in  his  knees  ;  we  take  it  away  by  suggestion.

Observation  XXXVI. —  Weakness   with   nutnbness  in  the  right  leg. — Neuropathy. —
Rapid  cure  by  suggestion.

D ,  fifty-three  years  old,   enters   the  hospital   or.  April  25,  1884.

For  several  years  she  has  complained  of  different  dyspeptic  and  nervous
troubles,  only  a  few  of  which  I  have  been  able  to  relieve.  For  a  year
she  has  had  weakness  in  the  lower  limbs,  and  walks  in  an  unsteady  wayt
without  having  vertigo.     Since  the  month  of  December,  she  has  been

3 I  o  Suggestive    T Iter  apett  tics.

obliged  to  use  a  cane.  For  four  years  she  has  been  subject  to  lightnin»
pains  in  the  lower  left  limb,  which  grow  worse  in  bad  weather.  At  the
present  tune,  the  pain  is  either  in  the  knee  or  in  the  anterior  surface  of
the  left  thigh  ;  tenderness  over  the  external  malleolus  with  sensation  of
numbness.  She  moves  her  right  leg  well  ;  when  lying  in  bed  she  also
lifts  her  left  leg  well,  but  cannot  keep  the  latter  up  and  motionless.
She  has  been  able  to  stand  upon  this  leg  only  for  the  last  three  weeks
she  says.  The  patient  takes  little  steps,  and  has  a  certain  stiffness  in
her  left  leg,  dragging  it  a  little.  This  stiffness  and  numbness  in  the
ankle,  which  is  more  marked  on  the  left  side,  extends  from  the  foot
to  the  knee  and  sometimes  as  far  as  the  groin.— She  stands  and  walks
with  her  eyes  shut. — Sensibility  is  normal;  the  tendon  reflexes  are  not
increased.

26th. —  Hypnotic  suggestion  (moderately  profound  sleep). — Immedi-
ately afterward  the  patient  walks  much  better,  more  quickly,  and  drags
her  leg  less.  The  sensation  of  stiffness  and  numbness  in  the  ankle  has
diminished,  and  disappears  completely  during  the  evening,  in  consequence  of  a
new  suggestion.

28th. — The  patient  again  has  sensation  of  numbness  in  her  ankle,
and  also  complains  of  pain  in  her  shoulder  and  right  arm.  All  these
symptoms  disappear  by  suggestion.  The  patient  stays  about  ten  days
longer  in  the  hospital  on  account  of  a  sore  throat.  During  this  time
she  continues  to  walk  well  and  feels  no  pain,  stiffness,  or  numbness.

Observation  XXXVII. — Pains  in  the  right  leg,  preventing  walking  for  six  weeks. —
Improvement  after  one  seance  ;  cure  after  four.

B is  a  dressmaker,  twenty-one  years  old.     She  enters  the  hospital

on  September  n,  1884.

She  was  married  two  years  and  a  half  ago,  and  has  been  a  widow
since  January.  In  1880  she  was  delivered  of  a  seven  months  child,
which  lived.  In  March,  1882,  she  had  another  child.  In  June,  18S2,
her  husband  kicked  her  in  the  supra-pubic  region  when  he  was  drunk,
and  since  this  time  she  has  had  pains  in  the  abdomen  with  dysmenor-
rhoea  ;  menstruation  is  painful.  She  sometimes  goes  three  months  with-
out menstruating.

In  December,  1883,  she  had  a  miscarriage  at  three  months,  preceded
for  eight  clays  by  metrorrhagia,  with  severe  pains,  which  continued  after
the  miscarriage;  the  leucorrhcea  did  not  disappear  definitely  for  about
six  weeks.  She  remained  in  bed  fifteen  days, — then  menstruation
became  regular  again,  but  the  pains  persisted  with  great  intensity  into
March,  so  that  often  she  was  unable  to  walk.  In  March  and  April,
1884,   she   no  longer  felt  any  pain.      The   pains   reappeared  in   May,

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  3  1  1

especially  in  the  right  side  ;  at  the  same  time  there  were  pains  in  the
loins,  the  buttocks,  and  the  right  thigh,  spreading  to  the  bend  of  the
groin  and  to  the  foot.

Since  Augu  r/  the  patient  lias  neither  been  able  to  walk  nor  work,  in  eon-

'ice  of  pains  in  tiu  right  leg.

The  patient  has  a  neuropathic  temperament  ;  she  complains  of  sensa-
tions of  suffocation,  of  constriction  in  her  throat,  of  tingling  in  her  arms
and  hands,  of  an  almost  constant  cephalalgia,  and  often  of  dental  and
frontal  neuralgia.     She  has  frequent  fits  of  passion.

Examination  of  the  organs  shows  nothing  abnormal.

Diagnosis  :  metritis,  neuropathy.

The  patient  is  treated  by  hypnotic  suggestion  ;  profound  sleep  is
obtained.  The  first  séance  on  September  24th  gives  place  to  a
nervous  crisis,  which  lasts  but  a  short  time  ;  upon  leaking  the  pains  persist.
After  the  second  seance,  on  the  2§th,  the  patient  is  able  to  walk,  which  she
has  not  been  able  to  do  since  August,  and  only  complains  of  slight  pains.

After  the  third  sc'ance,  the  patient  no  longer  complains  of  any  pain  and
walks  very  well.  On  October  6th,  after  twelve  seances,  she  continues
to  do  well,  and  complains  of  nothing  but  slight  weakness.

nth. — She  complains  of  slight  pains  in  the  right  leg;  they  yield  to
suggestion.

She  leaves  the  hospital  on  the  12th  saying  that  she  is  cured.

Observation  XXXVIII. — Rheumatic  and  nervous  pains  about  the  waist  and  in  the
Icncer  right  limb  for  twenty  months. — Inability  to  walk. — Anorexia. — Rapid  cure  by
suggestion  in  the  waking  condition.

E.  B ,  forty-six  years   old,  comes  to  the  hospital   on   March  25,

1886.  She  is  the  mother  of  seven  children,  the  youngest  of  which  is
three  years  old.  She  has  nursed  them  all,  and  has  always  been  well
until  August,  1884.  At  this  period,  she  was  seized  with  a  sensation  of
cold  in  the  right  foot,  upon  which  the  heat  of  the  stove  had  no  effect.
This  sensation  was  accompanied  by  numbness  and  stiffness  in  the  foot,
which  forced  her  to  drag  her  leg.  At  the  same  time  a  pain  in  the
lumbar  region  and  in  the  waist  was  developed,  which  increased,  espe-
cially in  December,  1884,  and  prevented  her  from  working  from  this  time
on.  In  February,  1885,  another  sharp  pain  appeared,  spreading  from
the  groin  along  the  anterior  surface  of  the  thigh  and  the  leg  down  to  the
foot,  a  shooting  pain,  which  was  present  when  she  was  quiet  and  grew
worse  when  she  walked.

In  December,  1885,  this  condition  was  aggravated  to  such  a  point
that  she  was  almost  unable  to  walk.  She  dragged  herself  about  her
room  with  difficulty,  limping  badly,  and  clinging  to  the  furniture.  It
was  impossible  for  her  to  go  up  or  down  stairs  alone.     When  in  bed  she

5 1 2  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

could  not  turn  or  sit  up  without  crying  out  with  the  pains  in  the  groin
and  the  trunk,  and  especially  in  the  loins.  She  could  only  lie  down
slowly  and  with  great  pain.  She  does  not  complain  of  any  pain  in  the
upper  limbs,  but  is  deprived  of  strength  ;  she  feels  incapable  of  the  least
effort.  Finally,  she  has  had  almost  no  appetite  during  the  whole
winter  ;  she  cannot  eat  either  bread  or  meat  ;  coffee  and  bouillon  con-
stitute all  her  nourishment.  She  menstruates  every  four  months  only,
but  without  pain,  or  menorrhagia.  She  has  never  had  any  serious  sick-
ness nor  any  nervous  manifestations.

She  is  a  woman  of  ordinarily  strong  constitution,  but  deteriorated,
and  depressed,  and  of  medium  intelligence.  I  do  not  find  any  organic
lesion.  Pressure  upon  the  lower  thoracic  region,  especially  at  the  level
of  the  axillae  and  of  the  back,  causes  sharp  pain  ;  it  is  the  same  with  the
right  groin  ;  the  patient  executes  all  movements  well,  the  tendon  reflexes
are  not  exaggerated,  sensibility  is  normal.  She  can  stand  well,  but
walks  with  pain,  and  limps,  complaining  especially  of  pain  in  the  groin
which  restricts  her  movements.  I  think  it  is  simply  a  question  of  rheu-
matic or  nervous  pains.  For  the  last  two  years  she  has  been  living  in  a
damp  dwelling.

I  hypnotize  her  on  March  25th;  she  only  reaches  the  second  degree
of  sleep.  I  suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  pains  and  the  possibility  of
walking  very  well.  When  she  wakes,  in  ten  minutes,  I  make  her  get  up
and  walk  ;  I  continue  the  suggestion  in  the  waking  condition.  She
walks  around  the  room  several  times  almost  without  pain  and  without
limping.  Her  husband  is  surprised  at  the  result.  I  tell  her
to  come  back  on  May  3d,  being  obliged  to  be  away  until  this
day.

She  comes  back  on  May  3d.  The  improvement  has  not  lasted.
She  again  complains  of  constant  although  less  intense  pain  ;  she  again
limps,  but  not  so  badly.

I  repeat  the  suggestion  in  the  waking  and  in  the  sleeping  condition  ;
the  pains  diminish  noticeably  and  she  walks  very  well,  almost  without
limping.

After  May  5th  I  continue  the  suggestion  daily.  The  sleep  is  not
profound.  After  May  7th  I  content  myself  with  making  the  suggestion
in  the  waking  condition.  I  affirm  that  she  has  no  more  pain,  that  she
can  walk  without  limping,  that  everything  is  in  good  order  ;  I  rub  the
painful  places,  the  waist  and  the  groins.  Then  I  urge  her  decidedly  to
get  up  and  walk,  quickly,  without  pain,  without  limping  ;  I  make  her
walk  around  the  room  actively.

This  vigorous  affirmation  with  coercion  succeeds  better  than  passive
suggestion.

Since   May   6th  the   patient  has  walked   very   well    without   leaning

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  313

on  anything  and  without  a  cane.  On  May  6th  she  still  complained  of
lassitude  and  of  pain  in  the  groin.  On  the  7th  she  walked  nearly  all
the  afternoon  without  fatigue  ;  she  can  lie  clown  by  herself,  can  turn
about  in  her  bed,  and  can  sit  down  without  any  pain.  Further,  since  the
first  séance,  her  appetite  has  returned.  On  May  9th  she  was  abie  to
walk  about  in  the  city  for  three  hours  without  fatigue.  She  goes  up
and  down  stairs  alone.  On  May  10th  she  walked  well  nearly  all  clay.
She  also  feels  more  strength  in  her  arms  and  holds  things  better.
There  is  now  only  tenderness  in  the  lateral  part  of  the  lower  ribs  and
in  the  groin.

When  she  has  been  seated  for  some  time,  and  gets  up  to  walk,  she
still  feels  pain  in  the  groin,  which  causes  a  certain  hesitation  and  limp-
ing, but,  after  she  has  taken  about  ten  steps,  she  walks  without  pain  and
almost  without  limping.

Such  is  her  condition  on  May  12th.  I  continue  suggestion  in  order
to  correct  this  slight  remaining  trouble  ;  I  make  her  remain  seated  for
several  minutes,  and,  after  slight  friction,  accompanied  with  the  affir-
mation that  she  is  going  to  move  about  without  any  pain,  I  make  her
rise  and  walk.  She  begins  to  walk  a  little  better  each  time,  and  I  hope
to  dissipate  this  last  vestige  of  her  trouble,  by  continuing  this  sugges-
tive coercion.

On  May  13th,  the  cure  is  complete.

OBSERVATION    XXXIX. — Neuropathy,    insomnia,    want  of  appetite,    tremor,  gloomi-
ness ;  cure  by  suggestion  in  two  seances.

Mile.  X ,  twenty-seven  years  old,  generally  enjoys  good  health.

She  is  intelligent  and  has  never  been  neuropathic,  until,  in  August,  1885,
she  had  two  nervous  crises,  in  consequence  of  some  unpleasantness:
the  first  lasted  two  hours,  the  second  appeared  four  days  after  the  first
and  was  characterized  like  the  first  by  severe  convulsive  movements
with  strangulation,  without  loss  of  consciousness,  and  lasted  from  nine
o'clock  in  the  morning  to  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.

The  crises  have  not  been  repeated.    Mile.  X was  nervous  for  some

time  and  impressionable.  She  had  no  appetite.  Then  a  visit  in  the
country  restored  her  to  her  usual  health.

Since  November  she  has  again  felt  a  good  deal  of  discomfort  :  com-
plete loss  of  appetite,  gloomy  ideas,  general  demoralization,  insomnia  ;
often  she  does  not  sleep  until  daybreak  :  if  she  sleeps  she  has  night-
mare, and  for  about  ten  days  she  has  had  vertigo,  especially  when  in
bed.  Constant  tremor  agitates  her  limbs,  to  such  an  extent  that  she
can  hardly  pour  out  a  glass  of  water.  This  nervous  condition  has
resisted   all    treatment  :      bromide,    ether,    and    other    antispasmodics.

3 1 4  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

Mile.  X ,  who  is  very  courageous,  tries  in  vain  to  regain  her  self-
control.

Atter  long  hesitation,  she  comes  to  consult  me  on  February  15,  with
the  idea  of  trying  hypnotic  suggestion  in  spite  of  her  scepticism.

I  hypnotize  her  easily;  she  goes  into  profound  sleep  ;  post-hypnotic
hallucinations  can  be  induced.

I  suggest  the  disappearance  of  all  the  morbid  symptoms,  and  sleep  at
night.

After  two  séances,  on  the  15th  and  16th,  she  no  longer  feels  the  slightest
discomfort  ;  no  more  tremor  ;  she  sleeps  until  six  o'clock  in  the  morning
without  any  disturbance,  her  appetite  is  better  than  ever,  her  melan-
choly has  disappeared.     The  cure  has  continued  up  to  the  present  day.

OBSERVATION  XL. — Melancholy,  insomnia,  anorexia. — Rapid  cure  by  hypnotic  sug-
gestion.— (Observation  communicated  by  Dr.  Emiie  Levy,  of  Nancy,  formerly  chef
de  clinique.  )

Mlle.  W ,  twenty-four  years  old,  living  at  Malzeville,  near  Nancy,

is  a  fair  girl,  slightly  delicate  in  constitution.  I  treated  her  several
different  times  for  a  slight  suppurative  otitis  accompanied  with  polypi,
which  I  had  to  extract.

After  two  operations  and  local  treatment,  she  left  me,  completely
cured  of  her  ear  trouble.  Under  the  influence  of  a  general  tonic  treat-
ment of  wine  of  quinine  and  pills  of  the  iodide  of  iron,  she  regained  her
usual  color.

This  young  lady  came  to  see  me  again  in  November,  1885,  asking  me
to  give  her  treatment  to  make  her  sleep.  After  being  pressed  with
questions  upon  the  cause  of  this  insomnia,  she  confessed  that  for  the
last  three  weeks  she  had  been  worn  out  with  ennui  and  sadness  ;  weep-
ing night  and  day,  she  had  lost  her  appetite  and  her  sleep  :  thoughts  of
suicide  took  possession  of  her  at  times.  She  did  not  know  to  just  what
to  attribute  this  depression  ;  some  time  before  she  had  had  annoyances
and  deceptions  ;  she  mentioned  particularly  the  companionship  of  a
cousin  who  visited  her  for  several  months  during  her  pregnancy,  and
who  was  seized  with  gloomy  ideas.  I  must  also  say  that  without  show-
ing any  hysterical   trouble  herself,  Mile.  W belongs  to  a  family  in

which  there  have  been  nervous  affections.

I  proposed  treatment  by  suggestion,  which  she  accepted.  I  tried  to
hypnotize  her.  Although  she  only  reached  a  light  degree  of  sleep,  I
suggested  by  energetic  affirmation  that  I  was  going  to  cure  her.  I
repeated  the  same  treatment  for  eight  successive  days.  The  third  day
she  went  into  a  deeper  sleep,  although  she  never  reached  somnambu-
lism. The  general  condition  improved  more  and  more,  sleep  returned
and  with  it  appetite  and  gayety.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  3 1 5

She  kept  on  coming  to  see  me  at  different  times.  After  having  driven
away  from  her  mind  the  melancholy  and  the  thoughts  of  suicide,  and
having  planted  there  bright  and  agreeable  ideas,  I  also  succeeded  in
re-establishing  the  mental  equilibrium.     A  last  idea,  the  most  tenacious

one,  was  mentioned  to  me  by  Mlle.  W .     She  could  not  understand

why  she  was  thus  exposed  to  these  gloomy  ideas,  and  asked  herself  if
any  hereditary  influence  threatened  the  return  of  similar  troubles.
After  several  séances  and  not  without  a  good  deal  of  trouble,  I  suc-
ceeded in  driving  this  uneasiness  away.     I  suggested  to  Mile.  W ,

who  is  very  intelligent,  that  she  should  completely  forget  this  transient
sickness,  and  that    she    should   imagine    that  she    had    never   been   ill.

After  three  weeks  of  this  treatment  Mlle.  W was  completely  cured,

and  the  cure  has  been  maintained  up  to  the  present  day.

Dr.  Levy  makes  the  following  comments  :

"  The  lypomaniacal  condition  which  was  developed  in  our
patient,  and  which  threatened  to  become  very  grave,  has  been
so  rapidly  and  so  happily  dissipated  that  I  do  not  hesitate  in
affirming  that  no  treatment  could  have  obtained  a  like  result.
This  happy  effect  was  produced  from  the  very  beginning,  and
before  the  patient  had  gone  into  a  deep  sleep.  Dr.  Liébault  has
assured  us  that  this  effect  is  often  observed  in  subjects  who  are
hardly  asleep.

"I  attribute  the  authority  and  the  influence  which  I  obtained
over  this  young  person  partly  to  the  energetic  affirmation  of  cure
in  the  first  séance.  In  fact  I  said  to  her:  'I  am  going  to  hyp-
notize you,  and  you  will  soon  be  completely  cured.'  The
patient  immediately  said  with  a  big  sigh  :  '  Ah,  Mon  Dieu  !  if
it  were  only  true  !  '  This  impression  also  shows  the  profound
emotional  influence  which  my  affirmation  had  exercised  over  the
patient."

Observation   XLI. — Insomnia   contracted  through   habit. — Good  effect^   without  com-
plete success,  of  suggestion.

G ,  fifty-six  years  old,  a  dealer  in   flour,  enters  the  hospital   on

October  26,  1884,  for  a  chronic  bronchitis  with  emphysema  and  chronic
interstitial  pneumonia,  due  to  the  breathing  of  the  flour  dust  and  of  the
silica  to  which  he  is  exposed  in  grinding  the  flour.  He  is  a  man  of
medium  constitution,  lymphatic  temperament,  and  in  no  way  nervous.
I  shall  not  insist  upon  the  details  of  his  thoracic  affection,  which  do  not
interest  us.  He  has  not  been  able  to  work  for  a  month.  As  a  miller,
he  was  in  the  habit  of  rising  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  since  he

ô

1 6  Suggestive   TJicrapcutics.

has  not  been  able  to  work,  he  continues  to  wake  at  this  hour  and  can-
not go  to  sleep  again.

I  try  hypnotic  suggestion  in  order  to  benefit  this  insomnia.  A  first
trial  on  the  28th  only  produces  drowsiness  ;  a  second  trial  immediately
afterwards,  puts  him  into  profound  sleeps  without  memory  upon  waking.
I  suggest  to  him  not  to  wake  during  the  night.

29th. — Iti  spite  0/ the  suggestion,  he  waked  without  being  able  to  go  to
sleep  again,  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning. — New  suggestion.

30th. — Last  night  the  patient  woke  at  one  o'clock  and  went  to  sleep
again  between  three  and  four,  but  only  slept  an  hour.  This  has  never
happened  before.     I  continue  the  suggestion  every  clay.

31st. — Slept  from  six  o'clock  to  half-past  eleven,  and  again  from  half-
past  eleven  to  four.

November  1st. — Awoke  at  midnight,  went  to  sleep  again  an  hour
afterward,  and  slept  until  four  o'clock  in  the  morning.  The  dynamo-
metric  force  measured  for  the  right  hand  gives  45  twice,  and  51  once.
After  hypnotic  suggestion,  this  force  increases,  and  we  obtain  when  he
wakes  56,  53,  52.

2d. — Awoke  at  midnight  ;  went  to  sleep  again  to  wake  at  two  o'clock
in  the  morning.     Daily  suggestion  continued.

3d. — Did  not  wake  at  midnight,  but  at  two  o'clock.  Went  to  sleep
again  in  half  an  hour  and  slept  until  four  o'clock.

4th. — Awoke  at  eleven,  and  after  a  fit  of  coughing  went  to  sleep
again  and  slept  until  five  o'clock.  Suggestion  had  made  him  sleep
through  the  night  up  to  five  o'clock.

5th. — In  spite  of  suggestion  only  slept  from  eleven  o'clock  until  half-
past  one.

6th. — Woke  at  midnight  and  slept  again  until  five  o'clock.

8th. — Woke  at  midnight  and  slept  again  from  half-past  twelve  until
four  o'clock.

9th. — Woke  at  midnight  ;  slept  again  from  one  o'clock  until  four.

10th. — Woke  at  midnight,  then  went  to  sleep  again  from  half-past
twelve  until  four  o'clock.

When  he  left  the  hospital  he  resumed  his  work,  which  he  had  given
up  on  December  2d,  and  was  able  to  work  for  three  weeks  ;  then,  in
consequence  of  cold,  he  was  taken  with  a  sense  of  suffocation  and  had
to  stop  work  again  on  December  20th.

He  comes  to  the  hospital  again  on  February  3d  with  his  habitual
emphysema.

For  three  weeks  he  again  wakes  at  midnight  and  cannot  sleep  again
before  four  o'clock  ;  he  has  feelings  of  suffocation,  lasting  two  hours.

5th. — He  slept  in  consequence  of  suggestion,   from  half-past   seven

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  317

o'clock  until  midnight  ;  then  did  not  go  to  sleep  again  until  three
o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  slept  until  five.

6th. —  He  slept  spontaneously  from  seven  o'clock  until  two;  then
from  half-past  two  until  four.     Suggestion.

On  the  7th  he  slept  from  eight  o'clock  until  two  in  the  morning,  then
from  four  until  five.

He  leaves  the  hospital.

In  spite  of  repeated  suggestion  the  patient  has  not  been  able  to  sleep
uninterruptedly  until  morning.

OBSERVATION  XLII. — Cephalœa  for  three  years. — Impressionability  ;  obnubilation.
— Difficulty  in  studying  ;  'weakness  in  the  knees,  perspiration  caused  by  walking. —
Noticeable   improvement  after  a  single  suggestion. — Complete  cure  in  three  seances.

Léon  G ,  eighteen  years  old,  is  a  lymphatic,  nervous,  but  intelli-
gent young  man.  In  1879  or  1880,  he  had  articular  rheumatism  in  the
lower  limbs,  which  kept  him  in  bed  for  three  or  four  weeks.  Then  he
had  relapses,  so  that  he  remained  for  two  months  without  doing  any-
thing. Three  years  ago  I  treated  him  for  typhoid  fever.  Since  then  he
has  had  variable  pain  in  the  head,  sometimes  occipital,  sometimes
frontal,  and  always  more  severe  on  the  right  side  ;  this  pain  is  contin-
uous :  it  consists  in  a  sensation  of  heaviness,  with  a  sort  of  buzzing  in
ths  head.

From  time  to  time,  especially  after  confining  work,  as  a  rule  every
eight  or  fifteen  days,  this  sensation  degenerates  into  excessively  acute
pain,  right  supra-orbital  neuralgia,  which  lasts  an  hour  and  an  hour  and
a  half.

For  the  last  three  years  also  his  sight  troubles  him  after  half  an
hour  or  at  most  three  quarters  of  an  hour  of  work;  he  is  obliged  to
stop.  After  from  five  to  ten  minutes  he  can  work  again  ;  then  he  has
to  stop  again,  and  so  on.  The  pains  in  the  head  have  increased,  espe-
cially since  July  1885,  in  consequence  of  his  preparation  for  the  bacca-
laureate degree.  He  is  excessively  impressionable,  trembles  when  he
recites  a  lesson,  and  feels  himself  blushing  and  perspiring  when  a  pro-
fessor questions  him.  Further,  when  he  walks,  the  right  knee  gives  read-
ily ;  when  he  has  walked  a  long  time,  or  when  it  is  cold  weather,  he
feels  a  shooting  pain  in  his  knee  and  right  shoulder  ;  since  March  or
April  he  has  perspired  freely  when  walking.

With  these  exceptions,  G is  very  well,  and  has  a  good  appetite

and  digestion.

The  patient  comes  to  consult  me  on  October  5th.  I  put  him  into
somnambulism  easily,  and  suggest  the   disappearance   of  all   these  func-

ô

1 8  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

tional  troubles.  After  this  first  séance  the  pain  in  the  head  disappears
at  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  It  comes  back  again  about  half-past
seven  in  the  evening,  but  is  less  severe.

After  the  second  séance,  on  October  6th,  he  has  no  more  pain  in  the
head  ;  he  works  the  next  day  from  nine  o'clock  until  mid-day,  without  feeling
anything,  which  he  was  not  able  to  do  before.

On  October  7th,  the  third  séance.  The  patient  can  \rork  all  the  eve-
ning and  the  next  morning  without  pain.  He  says  that  for  the  last
three  years  he  has  been  unable  to  work  as  he  has  worked  this  evening,
three  consecutive  hours.     He  has  not  perspired  after  quite  a  long  walk.

8th. — Fourth  séance  :  is  doing  well  ;  feels  stronger  on  his  legs.

9th. — Fifth  séance  :  continues  to  do  well  ;  his  head  is  very  calm;  he
sleeps  very  well  ;  has  no  more  tremor  ;  walked  six  kilometres  very  rapidly
without  perspiring.

G returns  on  the  12th.     He  has  been  very  well   up  to  yesterday

evening  at  five  o'clock.

At  this  moment,  after  working  an  hour,  he  felt  heaviness  in  his  head
with  rather  a  sharp  pain  on  the  right  side  of  his  forehead,  which  lasted
half  an  hour  and  disappeared  after  rest.  Otherwise  he  could  have  gone
on;  his  head  was  clear  ;  he  has  had  no  more  tremor,  or  perspiration.
Yesterday  he  was  astonished  at  the  facility  with  which  he  made  a  Greek
translation  ;  he  did  it  in  two  hours,  while  before  he  would  have  given
from  four  to  five  hours  to  it  without  success.     Sixth  suggestion.

G comes  to  see  me  for  the  last  time  on  the  14th.     He  has  had  no

more  pain  and  continues  to  work  more  easily.  I  have  not  seen  him
since.

Observation    XLIII. —  Vertigo,  exhaustion,  depression   of  psychical  origin,   rapidly
suppressed  by  suggestion.

H ,  thirty-four  years  old,  a  commercial  man,  strong,  and  of  a  good

constitution,  has  probably  had  from  his  infancy  a  murmur  denoting
aortic  insufficiency,  and   a  bounding  pulse.     In   spite   of   the   murmur,

which  I   found  in  examining   him   about  twelve  years  ago,  H has

always  been  very  well,  and  has  had  neither  dyspnoea  nor  palpitation.
The  heart  is  not  hypertrophied.  There  is  probably  slight  aortic  insuffi-
ciency which  is  perfectly  compensated,  and  not  inconsistent  with  the
normal  action  of  the  heart.

In  1880,  he  contracted  syphilis,  had  secondary  syphilides,  and  has
since  then  continued  to  take  iodide  of  potassium  almost  continuously.

In  October,  1886,  he  had  a  severe  nose-bleed.  His  physician  doubt-
less attributed  this  bleeding  to  the  aortic  insufficiency,  and  fearing  mani-

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  319

festations  of  cerebral  congestion,  put  him  under  a  light  diet,  with  purga-
tives, for  three  days.

He  became  extremely  weak.  Fifteen  days  afterward,  he  was  taken
with  vertigo  and  obnubilation  ;  he  was  unsteady  in  his  walk.  Further,
from  time  to  time  weakness  took  possession  of  him  like  a  flash  of  light-
ning, his  legs   failed  him  and  he   felt  as   if   he  should   faint.     He  has

never    had    syncope,    however.     From    this    time,    H has    been

depressed,  restless,  and  troubled  with  gloomy  ideas  ;  his  memory  has
grown  weak.  He  has  palpitation,  and  he  believes  that  he  is  suffering
from  a  grave  affection  of  the  heart.

He  comes  to  consult  me  in  December  1886,  a  month  after  the  begin-
ning of  these  troubles.

Upon  examination  I  do  not  find  anything  abnormal,  unless  it  is  the
aortic  diastolic  murmur  already  mentioned.  Motility  and  sensibility
are  normal.     Sleep  is  good.

I  ask  myself  if  these  cerebral  troubles,  vertigo,  titubation,  and  weak-
ness of  memory,  are  not  connected  with  cerebral  syphilis,  and  being  in
doubt,  I  prescribe  treatment  by  mercurial  inunctions.

After  three  applications  of  four  grammes  each  of  the  mercurial  oint-
ment, there  is  no  improvement  ;  the  patient  is  continually  restless  and
nourishes  the  idea  of  heart  trouble,  his  physician  having  told  him  that
the  symptoms  in  his  head  came  from  the  heart.  I  then  ask  myself  if
these  troubles   are  not  of  psychical  origin,  or  at  least  aggravated  by  the

psychical  condition.     H is  impressionable  :    he  listens  to  his  heart,

knowing  that  he  has  a  murmur;  he  sometimes  feels  the  arteries  in  his
head  beating  more  forcibly  ;  some  one  has  told  him  that  the  epistaxis
was  the  result  of  congestion,  referable  to  the  heart.  He  fears  cerebral
congestion.  An  attack  of  vertigo,  perhaps  anaemic  in  character,  having
succeeded  the  epistaxis,  his  imagination  has  cherished  the  idea  of  the
vertigo,  has  suggested  the  weakness  and    titubation  in  the    legs,    the

obnubilation,  the  gloomy  ideas,  etc.     I   explain  this   idea  to  M.  H ,

and  I  propose  to  hypnotize  him.

He  reaches  the  third  degree  easily  and,  although  he  pretends  not  to
sleep,  he  cannot  modify  the  attitude  impressed  upon  his  limbs.  I  sug-
gest the  disappearance  of  all  his  troubles.

Since  the  first  se'ance,  there   has  been   a  marked  improvement  ;  after

four  or  five  se'ances,  at  the  end  of  four  or  five  days,  H is  feeling

very  well  ;  he  has  no  more  vertigo  ;  no  more  titubation;  his  ideas  have
become  clear  again,  his  head  is  lucid.

A  month  later,   January,    1887,  H comes  back  to  see  me.     He

again  has  vertigo,  and  a  sense  of  precordial  discomfort,  and  his  head
has  been  dull  for  several  days.  I  learned  that  having  met  his  physician
he  had  had  the  unlucky  idea  of  telling  him   that    I  had  cured   him    by

320  Suggestive   T/ierafieuéics.

suggestion.  His  physician  said  :  "  Yes,  but  these  troubles  will  necessar-
ily come  back  again  because  they  are  connected  with  your  heart  trouble."
Upon  this  his  imagination  is  stimulated,  and  the  troubles  come  back
again.

I  hypnotize  him  again,  and  suggest  vigorously  that  his  heart  will  per-
form its  functions  well,  that  his  troubles  are  purely  nervous,  and  due  to
his  attention  concentrated  upon  his  heart.  The  proof  is  that  all  the
symptoms  disappear  after  suggestion.

Upon  waking  he  again  feels  well,  and  after  two  se'ances  is  completel)
relieved.

He  had  no  more  trouble  until  July,  1887.  Then,  probably  in  conse-
quence of  business  preoccupation,  the  vertigo  takes  hold  of  him  again,
with  fear  and  uncomfortable  feeling  in  the  heart  ;  work  again  becomes
painful  to  him.  During  July  I  hypnotize  him  two  or  three  times  at
intervals  of  five  or  six  days,  with  transient  but  not  permanent  result.
Then  I  asked  him  to  come  eight  consecutive  days,  and  since  the  first
se'ance,  the  cure  has  been  permanent.  H is  again  gay  and  self-
confident  ;  he  no  longer  complains  of  vertigo,  and  his  head  is  clear.  I
persuade  him  to  come  every  month  in  order  that  his  nervous  system
may  be  wound  up,  so  to  speak.

Observation  XLIV. — Anorexia,  insubordination,  and  indolence  in  a  child. — Rapid
physical  and  moral  improvement  caused  by  suggestion.

Henry  H ,  ten  years  of  age,  is  brought  to  me  by  his  mother  (whom

I  have  treated  with  suggestion)  on  December  20,  1887.  This  child  is  of
strong  constitution,  his  disposition  is  somewhat  lymphatic,  he  frequently
suffers  with  his  throat  in  consequence  of  hypertrophy  of  the  tonsils,  and
he  has  lost  his  appetite.  He  has  never  eaten  any  meat.  Two  years
ago  when  he  was  in  Alsace  for  two  months  his  appetite  was  good  and
he  ate  meat  ;  but  since  his  return  he  manifests  the  old  repugnance  for
meat*  Besides  this,  the  child  is  frequently  angry  and  naughty  ;
when  his  mother  tries  to  correct  him  he  strikes  her,  and  throws  every-
thing around  out  of  reach.  He  is  always  in  a  bad  humor  and  disobe-
dient. He  only  goes  to  school  three  or  four  times  a  week  ;  his  absences
average  thirty  a  month.  His  mother  brings  him  to  me  in  order  that  I
may  correct  his  trouble  by  suggestion.

Like  his  mother  the  child  is  easily  put  into  deep  sleep  at  the  first
seance;  physical  and  moral  improvement  is  noticed.  He  comes  only
once  or  twice  a  week.  On  January  20,  1887,  after  six  séances  I  note  :
"the  child  looks  better  ;  he  cats  meat  with  appetite,  is  very  obedient,  goes
to  school  regularly,  works  well,  and  has  made  some  progress."

I  do  not  see  him  again  until   the  10th  of  February.     He  continues  to

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  321

do  well,  eats  with  a  good  appetite,  goes  to  school  gladly,  and  has  not
missed  any  more  classes.  Since  his  treatment  he  has  gone  up  ten
places  in  his  class.     Before  he  was  always  the  last.

He  comes  back  on  February  17th,  on  the  25th,  and  on  March  3d.
The  improvement  which  was  so  remarkable  has  lasted.  He  no  longer
complains  of  his  throat,  although  the  tonsils  are  still  large  ;  he  has  had
no  more  fits  of  passion  since  the  suggestion.

On  March  23d,  his  mother  tells  me  that  he  is  still  eating  well,  and  has
not  missed  school.  When  he  comes  home  from  school  he  no  longer
plays  before  doing  his  duty.  However,  for  the  last  eight  days,  he  has
been  listless  and  bad  tempered,  and  cries  as  soon  as  his  brother  speaks
to  him.     Suggestion.     'When  he  wakes  he  is  bright  and  good  natured.

April  21st. —  Patient  comes  back.  He  eats  and  works  well,  but  during
the  last  month  he  has  had  several  fits  of  passion  again,  once  every  eight
or  fifteen  days;  these  attacks  are  much  less  severe  than  before  and
cease  almost  immediately.  When  he  came  home  from  school  a  week
ago,  lunch  not  being  ready,  and  his  father  not  having  returned,  he  did
not  wish  to  wait  and  was  impertinent  to  his  mother. — Suggestion.

May  3d. —  The  child  has  been  obedient  since  the  last  séance,  but  this
morning  when  his  mcther  wished  to  wash  him  he  got  angry,  cried  and
stamped  his  foot. — Suggestion.

I  see  him  again  on  June  23d.  He  has  had  no  more  fits  of  anger,  is
very  docile,  and  does  his  work  well.  His  mother  noticed  that  for  the
last  fifteen  days  he  has  been  easily  excited,  and  has  cried  and  sung
without  any  motive. — Suggestion.

I  go  to  see  the  child  again  on  August  21st,  to  find  out  what  has
become  of  him.  His  mother  tells  me  that  the  excitement  was  calmed
after  the  last  séance  ;  and  that  the  child  has  been  quiet  and  obedient
since  then.     She  finds  that  he  has  completely  changed.

This  fact  of  rapid  moral  improvement,  of  character-transfor-
mation, obtained  by  suggestion,  shows  that  the  application  of
hypnotism  to  pedagogy  is  not  an  illusion.  Have  we  interfered
with  this  child's  liberty  because  we   suppressed  his  bad  instincts  ?

Observation  XLV. — Intermittent  pseudo-paraplegia   with   convulsive  tremor  of  the
lower  limbs,  dating  back  nearly  four  years. — Cure  by  a  single  suggestion.

On  May  16,  1887,  I  received  the  following  letter  from  Paris:  "I  wish
to  call  upon  your  large  experience  for  my  wife  who  is  in  the  most  ex-
traordinary condition  of  health.     I  wish  to  describe  it  in  detail.

"I  have  submitted  the  case  to  Drs.  Charcot,  Jaccoud,  Lancereaux,
Tarnier,    and   many   others  ;    I  have    each   time    found    myself   in    the

322  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

presence  of  great  astonishment  and  of  more  or  less  complicated  medi'
cations,  none  of  which  have  done  the  least  good.  My  wife  is  twenty-six
years  old,  and  up  to  the  age  of  twenty  two  her  health  was  perfect.  She
has  had  two  healthy  children.     In    the    period   between   1881  and  1884,

Mme.  S was  deeply  affected  by  severa?    sorrowful  occurrences  :  the

death  of  her  mother,  then  the  death  of  a  daughter,  and  her  father's
illness,  which  without  her  care  would  have  been  fatal.

'•  Finally,  she  had  a  very  painful  miscarriage  (nearly  four  years  ago),
after  which,  just  as  she  was  about  getting  up,  it  was  shown  that  she
had  been  attacked  by  a  reflex  paraplegia  of  the  lower  limbs.

"  This  affection  is  so  curious  that  it  has  been  classed  with  the  neuroses.
It  appears  without  any  apparent  cause  for  several  weeks,  then  disap-
pears in  the  same  way,  for  two  or  three  months,  leaving  my  wife  as  well
as  before,  and  coming  again  suddenly,  causing  extreme  weakness,  and
provoking  yawning,  accompanied  with  syncope,  in  one  word  upsetting
her  whole  nervous  system.

"After  having  tried  together  or  separately,  electricity,  valerian,  hydro-
therapy, metallotherapy,  and  quinine,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion
to  let  nature  work,  which  at  least  it  can  do  as  energetically  and  as
efficaciously  as  all  the  remedies  hitherto  employed."

I  see  the  young  woman  in  Paris  on  May  29,  1887,  the  day  of  Pente-
cost. She  has  again  been  paralyzed  for  the  last  five  or  six  weeks.
She  is  of  a  good  constitution,  stout  for  her  age,  and  of  mixed  tempera-
ment, has  never  had  any  nervous  history  before  this  trouble.  No  his-
tory of  hysterical  paroxysms.  Menstruation  is  regular,  and  has  no
influence  over  the  paralysis.  Her  uncle,  who  is  her  physician,  has
confirmed  these  facts.  Her  imagination  does  not  seem  to  be  exalted.
"  I  sometimes  ask  myself,"  she  says,  "  if  my  paralysis  is  not  the  effect
of  imagination,  for  there  are  times  when  I  can  walk  well.  Then  again
I  make  the  utmost  effort,  I  try,  and  I  am  obliged  to  state  that  in  spite
of  all  my  best  intentions  I  cannot."

Mme.   S has  no   distubances  of  sensibility,  no  abdominal  pains,

and  no  neuralgia.  She  complains  constantly  of  palpitation,  and  of  a
sensation  of  weakness  and  emptiness  in  the  head,  which  she  cannot
define.

I  note  that  when  lying  down  the  patient  can  execute  all  movements  ;
flexion  and  extension  of  the  thighs,  legs,  and  toes,  but  when  she  lifts
her  leg  it  is  seized  with  a  fine  irregular  tremor.  If  she  tries  to  stand  up,
her  legs  are  immediately  seized  with  tremor  of  wide  range,  the  thighs
flex  upon  the  legs,  the  trunk  upon  the  thighs,  and  in  a  few  seconds  the
patient  falls.  She  can  neither  stand  nor  take  a  single  step.  It  is  not
a  question  of  a  real  paralysis,  but  of  an  irregular  tremor  which  prevents
her  from  standing  and  is  provoked  by  the   slightest  effort.     The   legs

Suggestive   Tïierapeutics.  ^2^

are  otherwise  lax.  There  is  no  exaggeration  of  the  tendon-reflexes.
When  the  hands  are  held  out  horizontally  they  also  exhibit  a  slight  and
continuous  tremor.  The  patient  can  press  both  my  hands  with  hers,
but  with  very  little  force.

The  other  functions  are  normal.

After  having  told  her  husband  that  I  was  going  to  try  suggestion,
but  that  I  was  doubtful  of  its  success  in  one  single  séance,  I  assure
the  young  woman  that  her  trouble  is  purely  nervous,  and  that  I  am
going  to  cure  it  by  suggestion.  I  hypnotize  her  by  holding  two  fingers
before  her  eyes  and  affirming  the  presence  of  sleep.  She  closes  her
eyes  in  two  seconds  ;  I  tell  her  to  keep  them  shut.  Seeing  that  her
respiration  is  becoming  labored  and  anxious,  I  calm  her  by  saying  :
"  You  are  going  to  be  very  well,  very  calm,  and  perfectly  at  your  ease;
your  respiration  is  as  perfect  as  in  natural  sleep,  etc."  Her  emotion
disappears  under  the  effect  of  this  calming  suggestion,  and  the  respira-
tion becomes  regular  again.  I  affirm  her  cure,  and  lift  her  arms
saying,  "  See,  your  hands  no  longer  tremble  ;  your  strength  has  come
back  ;  you  will  be  able  to  press  with  great  force."  In  fact  I  notice
that  the  tremor  has  disappeared.  Afterward  I  lift  the  legs,  and  affirm
the  disappearance  of  all  tremor,  "  The  patient  will  be  able  to  rise,  to
stand  up,  to  walk  firmly  and  fearlessly,  etc."  I  continue  this  energetic
suggestion  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  rubbing  and  manipulating  her
limbs.  I  notice  that  the  patient  is  in  the  beginning  of  the  second
degree  of  sleep.  The  fore-arm  alone  is  cataleptic,  the  entire  arm
falls.

When  I  wake    Mme.  S ,  she   asks  if  she   has   slept,  because   she

heard  everything  and  even  spoke.  I  say  to  her:  "Whether  you  have
slept  or  not,  you  are  cured.  Give  me  you  hand.  Press  mine  strongly.
You  see  that  you  no  longer  tremble."  In  fact  she  presses  my  hand
with  much  more  force  and  without  tremor.  Then  I  say  :  "  Now  get
up  and  walk.  Do  not  be  afraid.  You  can  do  it."  She  hesitates,  then
she  gets  up,  and  to  her  great  astonishment  can  stand.  Then  she  walks,
completely  nonplussed,  and  wondering  if  it  is  really  herself.  She  walks
with  a  regular  and  firm  step  and  goes  around  the  room  several
times.

I  see  her  the  next  day,  and  again  the  day  after.  The  result  has
been  maintained.  The  first  night  the  patient  did  not  sleep.  She  was
agitated  by  the  emotion  of  the  cure.  I  suggest  to  her  calmness  and
sleep    and  the    second  night  she  sleeps  very  well.     Since   the    second

séance   Mme.   S goes   into  the    third  degree  of  sleep.     There  are

complete  irresistible  catalepsy,  and  automatic  movements.

I  saw  Mme.  S again  in   July  at  Nancy;  she    passed    three    days

there.     I  hypnotized  her  three  times,  and  each  time   she  went  into  the

324  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

third  degree  of  sleep.  The  cure  has  been  maintained  since  the  first
séance  ;  she  now  walks  several  kilometres  ;  her  legs  have  grown
stronger.  The  other  nervous  troubles,  palpitation,  vertigo,  etc.  have
also  disappeared.

IV.
Neuroses.
Observation    XLVI. — Choreic    movements    localized  in   one  arm. — Cure    in   three
séances. — Relapse  at  the  end  of  a  few  months. — A   new  cttre  in  three   séances;  each
suggestion  checks  the  movements.

W ,  sixteen  years  old,  works  in  a  factory.     She  comes  to  consult

me  on  July  17,  1884,  on  account  of  her  choreic  movements.

One  Sunday  early  in  October  last,  after  having  been  scolded,  she  went
to  Vespers  ;  and  there  the  choreic  movements  in  her  left  arm  appeared
for  two  hours.  The  next  day,  Monday,  at  four  o'clock  in  the  evening
the  same  movements  appeared  in  both  arms,  and  lasted  half  an  hour.

Tuesday  and  Wednesday  she  had  none,  but  they  reappeared  at  six
o'clock  on  Thursday  in  the  arms  and  legs  ;  and  since  then  the  chorea
has  continued,  with  more  or  less  increase,  for  three  months.  In  the
shop  where  she  works  four  other  girls  were  taken  with  choreic  move-
ments by  imitation.

For  two  months  she  went  to  M.  Lie'baull,  who  treated  her  by  hyp-
notic suggestion.  A  real  improvement  resulted  :  sometimes  she  remained
two  or  three  days  without  any  movements,  then  they  recurred.  More-
over since  January  the  chorea  has  not  been  general,  but  has  affected
the  arms  almost  exclusively.  The  movements  are  identical  with  those
presented  by  another  young  girl  who  lives  in  the  same  house  and  comes
with  the  patient.

Last  June  she  was  almost  free  from  these  movements  for  a  week,
having  them,  however,  in  her  arms  and  legs  every  evening.  Since  then
these  movements  have  never  left  her  but  have  been  more  or  less  severe.
For  the  past  four  weeks  they  have  been  in  the  arms  exclusively.  Some-
times the  choreic  movements  are  general.  Fifteen  days  ago  she
had  irregular  movements  of  her  eyes  accompanied  with  vertigo.

July  17th. — She  has  movements  in  her  hands  only,  which  are  sudden
and  spasmodic,  lifting  the  hand  and  fore-arm  as  if  by  a  strong  electricity
shock,  but  without  pain.  These  movements  are  obstinately  repeated
every  four  or  five  seconds.

Her  intelligence  is  clear.  Sensibility  is  normal.  The  girl  has  never
had  any  other  nervous  trouble.  Hypnotic  suggestion  on  the  17th  ;  profound
sleep,  7c>it/iout  immediate  result.

19th. — A  new  se'ance  ;  the  movements  persist  during  the  hypnotic
sleep,  but  disappear  when  the  patient  wakes.  They  do  not  reappear  until
the  following  night.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  325

New  suggestion  on  the  20th.

She  comes  back  on  the  23d  and  says  that  since  the  20th  she  has  only
had  five  or  six  movements  in  all,  and  those  during  the  past  night.  At
the  present  time  motion  is  normal.

24th. — Patient  has  returned  to  work,  which  she  has  not  been  able
to  do  for  four  weeks.  She  says  she  has  not  felt  so  well  since  October.
For  the  last  few  days  she  has  complained  only  of  pain  in  the  wrist
when  she  is  tired,  which  sometimes  lasts  ten  minutes  and  sometimes
spreads  up  to  the  shoulder,  especially  in  the  evening. — Hypnotic  sugges-
tion.

26th. — She  says  she  has  had  no  more  pain  for  two  days.  During
the  evening  there  is  slight  tremor  of  the  right  arm,  but  this  soon  dis-
appears.

Patient  continues  to  work  and  to  do  well  up  to  September.  At  this
time  she  again  has  spasmodic  movements  lasting  for  a  week,  and  ceasing
spontaneously.  On  the  30th  she  again  comes  to  consultation.  She
has  severe  movements  like  those  caused  by  electric  shocks,  in  her  arm
and  in  the  body,  which  are  repeated  twice  in  a  second.  They  have
existed  for  a  week  without  interruption.

The  patient  is  hypnotized  ;  the  movetnents  become  at  first  less  frequent,
then  more  intense,  then  in  a  few  minutes  they  cease.  The  sleep  is  quite
deep.  Upon  waking  she  only  remembers  a  little  of  what  I  have  said  to
her.  She  has  two  spasmodic  movements  then  nothing  more.  I  hyp-
notize her  a  second  time:  upon  waking  she  feels  very  well.  During  the
day  she  has  not  even  a  single  spasm.

On  the  31st  when  she  started  out  she  was  exposed  to  cold  and  the
movements  began  again.  She  came  to  see  me.  She  had  a  movement
nearly  every  second.  The  movements  were  stopped  in  three  minutes  by
suggestion  in  the  waking  condition.  Then  I  hypnotized  her  to  make  the
suggestion  more  efficacious.

She  does  very  well  up  to  November  3d,  when  upon  waking  new
movements  appear,  about  one  a  minute.  They  again  yield  to  hypnotic
suggestion.  The  next  day  the  girl  comes  for  the  last  time  to  say  that
she  is  perfectly  well  and  has  had  no  more  trouble.

Observation  XLVII. — Choreic  moz'ements  dating  back  fifteen  days  which  appeared
several  tnoiilhs  afitcr  a  general  chorea. — Cure  in  three  seances.

Caroline  V ,  eighteen    years  old,  working  in   the  same  shop  and

living  in  the  same  house  with  Marie  W ,  was  taken  by  imitation  in

November.  She  became  involved  in  an  altercation  on  Saturday.  On
Monday  she  had  choreiform  movements  in  the  waist,  and  then  in  the
arms,  just  as  her  friend   had   had.     At  times   the   chorea  was  general.

2,26  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

For  five  weeks  she  went  to  Dr.  Lie'bault,  and  was  completely  cured.
She  began  to  work  again  and  kept  on  until  March  12th.  On  this  day,  a
fright  caused  by  a  fire  in  a  neighboring  factory  brought  about  the  return
of  the  chorea,  which  lasted  six  weeks.

At  the  end  of  six  weeks  she  began  to  work  again.  Fifteen  davs  ago
she  was  again  attacked,  but  more  lightly,  and,  since  this  time  she  has  had
sudden  and  continual  movements  localized  in   her   arms  and   shoulders.

On  July  17th,  she  came  with  Marie  W .     The  convulsive  movements

are  like  her  friend's  ;  they  are  repeated  every  two  seconds.  Moreover
she  is  troubled  with  insomnia. — On  the  17th,  hypnotic  suggestion;  pro-
found sleep  without  inwtcdiate  result.

On  the  19th,  a  second  se'ance.  At  first  the  movements  continued
during  the  sleep  ;  then,  in  from  six  to  ten  minutes  they  become  more  and
more  infrequent  and  finally  disappear.  They  do  not  reappear  when  the
patient  wakes.  During  the  day  she  has  several  movements,  but  they  are
much  less  extensive  and  frequent.  Slept  well  during  past  two  nights.
We  recommend  that  these  two  young  girls  should  be  separated,  so
that  the  reciprocal  suggestive  influence  by  imitation  may  be  avoided.

21. — New  suggestion.     Since  this,  she  has  had  no  other  attack.

23d. — Idem.     She  remains  completely  cured.

OBSERVATION  XLVIII. — Choreic  movements   dating  back  eleven  days. — Cure  by  sug-
gestion in  three  seances. — Relapse  at  the  end  of  six  weeks. — Cure  in  several  séances.

Mlle.  J ,  teacher,  thirty-two  years  old,  comes  to  see   me   on  Feb-

uary  17,  1887,  for  choreic  movements  in  her  right  arm  and  leg.  On
February  4th,  she  was  coarsely  reprimanded  it  seems,  by  the  inspector
of  the  Academy.  Deeply  affected  by  this  she  experienced  nausea  dur-
ing that  day  and  the  next.  She  could  scarcely  eat. — At  the  same  time
she  had  acute  pricking  sensations  in  both  arms.  During  the  night  of
the  5th  she  was  as  if  wandering  for  about  an  hour,  not  knowing  where
she  was.  On  February  6th,  choreic  movements  appeared  in  the  right
arm  and  leg,  and  these  increased  during  the  following  clays  and  finally
became  continual.  The  patient  hardly  slept.  The  nausea  has  dimin-
ished since  the  13th  ;  she  has  been  subject  to  it  for  years.  Although
very  impressionable,  patient  has  never  had  chorea  or  any  other  nervous
affection  before.

At  the  present  time,  February  17,  there  are  incessant  movements  of
the  leg,  now  lateral,  now  of  flexion  of  the  foot.  Similar  movements
begin  in  the  right  hand,  and  extend  to  the  entire  limb.  She  has  from
one  to  two  movements  a  second;  she  writes  with  difficulty  and  her
writing  is  irregular.  At  the  same  time  she  has  a  painful  pricking  sen-
sation in  her  right  arm.     I  hypnotize  her  ;  she  goes  into  somnambulism

Suggestive   1 À  erapeutics.  327

easily.  In  three  or  four  minutes  the  movements  cease  in  consequence  of
suggestion. — Upon  waking,  they  reappear,  but  are  less  frequent,  being
about  one  a  minute.  A  second  séance  checks  them  completely.  She
then  writes  very  easily  and  her  writing  is  good  and  regular.

19th. — She  says  she  was  very  comfortable  yesterday  ;  the  prick-
ing sensation  in  her  legs  has  ceased.  The  movements  ceased  until  this
morning  at  nine  o'clock  ;  since  that  time  she  has  had  new  movements,
about  eleven  a  minute.  The  patient  remains  quiet  sometimes  for  a
quarter  or  half  an  hour  ;  then  the  movements  begin  again. —  New  hyp-
notic suggestion  during  which  the  movements  are  checked;  they  are  absent
when  she  wakes.

21st. — She  says  she  had  slight  needle  pains  in  her  heel  day  before
yesterday,  lasting  for  an  hour,  without  any  spasmodic  movements.  Yes-
terday she  had  three  movements  during  the  day.  This  morning  she
feels  no  pain,  and  the  leg  feels  only  slightly  heavy.

25th. — Is  doing  well.     No  more  movements  ;  says  she  is  cured.

Mile.  J comes  to  see  me  again  on  April  8th.  For  the  last  ten  days,

in  consequence  of  deep  emotion,  she  has  again  had  movements  in  the
arm  and  leg  lasting  from  half  an  hour  to  an  hour,  and  appearing  at  six
o'clock  in  the  evening.  For  the  last  three  days,  she  has  had  about  ten
movements  during  the  day.  For  the  last  eight  days,  she  has  had  shoot-
ing pains  in  her  right  shoulder,  extending  to  the  fingers  and  lasting
from  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  an  hour,  being  repeated  five  or  six  times
a  day.  Nevertheless  she  sleeps  very  well  at  night,  and  was  restless  only
one  night  last  week. — Suggestion.

April  21st. — After  the  last  séance  she  had  no  more  trouble  up  to  the
13th.  The  pain  in  her  shoulder  had  completely  disappeared.  But  on  this
day  she  was  again  taken  with  a  nervous  tremor  which  has  appeared
every  evening  since,  and  lasts  from  five  minutes  to  half  an  hour.  This
morning,  frightened  by  some  one  who  suddenly  entered  the  room  where
she  was  waiting,  she  developed  a  tremor  which  has  since  been  constant.

Through  suggestion  this  tremor  disappears.

Mile.  J comes  back  five  or  six  times   to   see   me.     She  still  has

movements  from  time  to  time,  which  do  not  prevent  her  from  attending
her  class.  Each  time  she  is  freed  from  them  by  suggestion,  and  after
three  or  four  séances  she  is  totally  cured.  I  had  news  of  her  on
October  20th;  she  had  had  not  the  slightest  spasmodic  movement.

RVATION    XLIX. —  Tremor  in  the  left   hand  consecutive  to   chorea,  and  inability
to  write  with  this  hand. — Cure  in  two  hypnotic  seances.

Claudine  D ,  fifteen   years    old,  was    brought   to    me   on  July  21.

1884,  by  two  of  her  friends,   who  work   in  the  same  shop  and  whom    I

;2S

Suggcstii r    Therapeutics.

had  just  cured  of  choreic  movements  by  hypnotic  suggestion  in  several
se'ances.

Claudine  D is  generally  well.     She  does  not   seem   to  be  more

than  ordinarily  nervous.  In  February,  18S4,  she  was  taken  with  chorea
by  imitation,  being  the  fourth  case  in  the  shop.  This  chorea  was  general,
involving  the  head,  trunk  and  limbs.  The  patient  bit  her  tongue.
In  six  weeks,  after  having  taken  fifteen  sulphur  baths,  she  was  com-
pletely cured.

Fifteen  days  ago  she  again  developed  general  chorea.  For  the  last
eight  days  she  has  had  only  an  incessant  lateral  rhythmical  tremor,  occu-
pying the  hand,  the  arm,  and  the  left  shoulder.  The  more  she  tries
to  stop  this  tremor  the  more  it  is  exaggerated.  Aside  from  this  her
health  is  perfect.     She  writes  very  well  with  her  right  hand.

If  she  wishes  to  write  her  name  with  her  left  hand  she  only  makes  a
confused  mass  of  unrecognizable  letters.

A  line  traced  with  this  hand  shows  the  tremor.

•"Xj

I  hypnotize  her,  after  having  hypnotized  her  two  friends  in  her  pres-
ence ;  she  only  reaches  the  second  degree  of  hypnotic  sleep  (that  is  to
say  relaxation,  incomplete  suggestive  catalepsy,  no  automatic  movements,
perfect  memory  upon  waking).  I  affirm  that  the  tremor  will  disappear,
that  she  will  be  able  to  use  her  left  hand  as  well  as  her  right.  I  rub
the  hand  a  little.

At  first  the  tremor  persists,  and  I  do  not  expect  to  obtain  an  immedi-
ate result  :  but  in  several  minutes  it  begins  to  diminish,  more  or  less
widely  separated  movements  take  its  place,  then  it  disappears.  I  make
the  patient  write  her  name,  and  I  make  her  trace  a  line  during  her  sleep
with  her  eyes  shut  and  she  succeeds  very  well.

r

Y

W\£

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  329

I  wake  her  in   about  twelve  minutes.     She  writes  her  name  very  well
with  her  left  hand  and  also  traces  a  line.

-V1X4U-

Another  line  traced  in  three  minutes  shows  a  slight  tremor  again.

The  tremor  has  disappeared  when  the  patient  wakes;  but  she  tells  us
the  next  day  that  it  reappeared  again  as  soon  as  she  got  into  the  street.

The  next  day,  the  22d,  Claudine  comes  again.  The  tremor  again
exists  as  distinctly  as  before.  She  cannot  write  with  her  left  hand.
This  is  the  way  she  writes  her  name  with  her  left  hand  and  traces  a  line
before  the  second  séance.

M^  ^Vu'ip

I  hypnotize  her  again  in  the  presence  of  my  students  :  I  energetically
suggest  that  the  tremor  will  cease  and  that  she  will  write  very  well.

In  a  few  minutes  the  tremor  again  disappears,  as  it  did  the  day
before  ;  and  I  make  her  write  during  her  sleep,  with  her  eyes  closed.
This  is  the  writing  with  her  left  hand  during  the  sleep,  and  a  line  also
traced  during  the  sleep  :

ss

c

br^L

We  here  see  that  the  tremor  has  totally  disappeared.  I  let  her  sleep
a  quarter  of  an  hour,  assuring  her  that  the  tremor  will  not  come  back,  and
that  she  may  be  sure  of  her  hand.

Upon  waking  there  is  not  the  slightest  tremor  :  she  writes  and  traces

2>2>o  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

a  line  clearly.     This  is  the  writing  with  her  left  hand,  and  a  line  traced
after  waking  :

The  cure   has  been  maintained  since   the   second  séance.     This  is  a
specimen  of  her  writing  with  her  left  hand  on  the  23d.

The  patient  has  come  back  three   times,  at  our  request,  to  be   hypno-
tized ;    the  cure  has  been  preserved.

Observation    L. —  Trouble    in   writing    coiisecutive    to   chorea. — Litre    in    a    single
seance  of  hypnotic  suggestion.

Henry  Grosse,  sixteen  years  old,  of  Hayange  (Alsace-Lorraine),
comes  to  consult  me  with  his  mother  on  June  5,  1884.  The  following  is
his  history.  When  ten  years  old,  he  had  an  attack  of  chorea  lasting  four
months.  At  twelve  and  a  half,  he  had  a  second  attack  lasting  three
months.*  It  was  severe  and  general,  involved  his  limbs,  the  trunk,  the  face,
and  the  tongue,  and  was  accompanied  with  difficulty  of  speech.  Acute
articular  rheumatism  preceded  this  attack  by  a  month.  When  fourteen
years  old,  he  had  another  attack  of  poly-articular  febrile  rheumatism.  It
involved  all  the  joints,  including  the  articulations  of  the  neck,  which
has  been  somewhat  stiff  ever  since,  and  lasted  six  months.  At  the  same
time  he  suffered  from  dyspnoea,  with  palpitation.

Last  February  he  had  another  attack  of  chorea  lasting  a  month.  The
irregular  movements  were  very  wide  in  range,  but  limited  to  the  upper
limbs.  Since  March  these  movements  have  gradually  diminished  in
intensity  and  have  since  disappeared.  But  the  patient  can  no  longer
write.  He  has  been  obliged  to  discontinue  his  studies,  and  for  that
reason  he  has  come  to  consult  me.  He  has  tried  different  kinds  of
treatment.  In  February  he  took  bromide  for  three  weeks,  and  then
syrup  of  chloral,  which  diminished  the  movements.  During  March
lie  took  tartar  emetic,  afterwards  arsenic  for  three  weeks.  During
April  and  May  the  ether  spray  was  used  over  the  spine  twice  a  day.
The  choreic  movements  ceased,  but  his  hands  remained  awkward;  he
could  neither  write  nor  tie  his  cravat.

At  the    present   time,  June  5,  he   is  a  lymphatic  boy,  tall,  timid,  and

Suggestive    Therapeutics.

331

3  n

O  pj

p  3^

<  ft

3'  s-

CTQ  (T

3"  J3
P  C
-1  —  •
p.    fD

3      X

S.    =

3      ft

crq    —

3  aq

3-  s:    -r

Ct

3.   <

g  3 .

3"    3

3*    ET
y    o

~.  ft  l-H

H  »  3  re

Si.  3>  3  ^L

£.    3  5T  S

c/i    o
»    o"

O    *G

>■>  -J  o  P

p  c/î  O  3

?  <i  P  C-

S"  s  g  n»

S.  ^  —  3

3|   en     en     ^

3

—

""

^

O

rt

•-«

«-t-

0

3/

pr

O

3"

3

"1

p
►1

O

fl

n>

O

j:

— 1

1

re

O

•a

ira'

n"

3-

x

.—

0

I-H

s

3
ft

3

c^

3

p

—

».

n>

X

t/:

~

"

ïï

w"

O

n"

:>

3

ft

<~t

—

3'

c

■*

a>

►1

5.

3

3

rt

"i

ft

tr

y

p

t/î

332  Stiggestive   Therapeutics.

I  propose  to  his  mother  that  I  shall  hypnotize  him  ;  she  consents.
The  first  trial  does  not  succeed  :  he  scowls,  winks,  and  pretends  that  he
cannot  sleep.  Then  I  hypnotize  his  mother,  who  gives  up  to  it  easily.
Seeing  her  calmly  asleep,  he  lets  himself  go  easily,  and  in  three
minutes  his  body  is  relaxed.  His  limbs  remain  relaxed  if  I  lift  them.
I  then  suggest  verbally  that  he  is  cured,  that  his  hand  no  longer
trembles,  and  that  he  is  doing  very  well.  I  repeat  this  suggestion
several  times.     In  ten  minutes  I  wake  him  and  make  him  wiite.

This  is  the  result  ;  it  is  not  very  brilliant.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  $$$

I  discover  that  the  child  had  been  in  profound  sleep  or  somnambulism,
that  is  to  say,  he  is  without  memory  upon  waking.  Knowing  that  in
this  deep  sleep  immediate  results  are  sometimes  obtained,  I  propose  to
hypnotize  him  a  second  time,  and  in  less  than  a  minute  I  put  him  into
somnambulism  again.  Then  I  repeat  and  emphasize  the  affirmation
that  he  is  going  to  write  very  well,  and  in  order  to  make  the  suggestion
more  efficacious,  I  put  a  pencil  into  his  hand,  saying  :  "  Here  is  a
pencil  ;  you  hold  it  very  well.  Your  hand  is  steady."  I  put  a  paper
under  the  pencil  and  I  make  him  write  his  name  while  he  is  asleep.  He
first  writes  his  name  Grosse.

I  say  :  "  You  will  write  your   Christian   name   better."      He   writes
Henry.

I  say  :  "  Still  better."     He  writes  Hayange.

/^c^^7^^—

I  say  :  "  Still  better  penmanship."    He  writes  Grosse.

jé^

Everything  is  written  with  his  eyes  shut.     I  tell  him  that  upon  waking
he  will  write  better.     I  make  him  say  himself  that  he  is  and  will  remain

.334

Suggestive    Therapeutics.

:ured,  that  his  hand  will  guide  the  pen  unhesitatingly.  In  about  twelve
minutes  I  wake  him.  He  remembers  nothing,  and  this  is  what  he
writes  upon  waking:

Suggestive    Therapeutics.

335

He  writes  a  long  letter  to  his  father  in  the  evening.  I  see  him  on
June  6  :  the  cure  has  been  lasting.  This  is  his  writing  before  anothei
hypnotization.

i

V*

M

$

*

1  -i  H  ?

fjH

1

^

^H%

V^v&^k

I  hypnotize  him  for  the  last  time,  for  the  cure  has  endured,  On  July
9,  I  receive  a  letter  from  him  in  which  he  thanks  me  in  his  best  writing,
which  is  worthy  of  a  professor  of  caligraphy.

v70V

Suggestive   Tkei'apeutics.

OBSERVATION  LI. — (Collected  and  related  by  M.  Beaunis,  Gazette  médicale  de  Paris,
1S84). — Choreic  movements  in  the  hands. — Difficulty  in  writing. — Cure  by  hyp-
notic suggestion.

Victorine  L ,  twelve  and  a  half  years  old,  of  lymphatic  temperament

but  strong  constitution,  is  affected  with  right  hemichorea,  about  which
her  mother  gives  me  the  following  information  :

First  attack. — At  the  age  of  four  years  and  a  half,  in  consequence  of
fright,  she  was  taken  with  very  severe  general  chorea.  The  child  could
neither  walk  nor  articulate  words,  and  could  hardly  eat.  Moreover,
the  disease  was  aggravated  at  certain  times  in  the  day;  these  crises
or  attacks  lasted  from  ten  to  fifteen  minutes  and  were  repeated  six  or
seven  times  a  day.  The  duration  of  this  first  attack  was  three  months.
Cold  water  douches  were  the  only  treatment  employed.

Between  the  ages  of  six  and  seven,  patient  had  articular  pains.

Second  attack,  at  the  age  of  seven  years  and  a  half. —  This  was  as
severe  as  the  first  and  showed  the  same  characteristics,  but  it  only  lasted
six  weeks.     Same  treatment.

Third  attack,  at  the  age  of  nine  years  and  a  half. — Only  the  right
side  was  involved.  Six  to  seven  attacks  during  the  day.  Duration,
six  weeks.     No  treatment.

Fourth  attack,  at  the  age  of  eleven  years  and  a  half. — Same  hemi-
choreic  form.  Same  duration.  Always  from  six  to  seven  attacks  pej
day.     No  treatment.

Fifth  attack,  patient  twelve  years  and  a  half  old. — The  first  attack
took  place  on  May  27,  and  was  followed  by  six  very  severe  attacks  dur
ing  the  same  day.  On  the  28th  and  29th,  the  same  number  of  very
severe  attacks.  On  the  morning  of  the  30th  she  had  two  severe
attacks.  Her  mother  took  her  on  this  day  to  M.  Liébault,  who  hyp-
notized her  for  the  first  time.  She  had  two  more  attacks  during  the
afternoon,  but  they  were  less  severe.

On  the  31st  she  was  hypnotized.  There  was  a  single  light  attack,
which  was  the  last.

On  June  9th,  in  consequence  of  fright,  the  choreic  movements  reap-
peared with  less  intensity,  but  the  movements  were  very  irregular,  espe-
cially those  of  the  hand  and  arm.  Her  mother  brings  her  to  be  hyp-
notized.

I  am  with  M.  Liébault  on  this  day.  Prof.  Bernheim  had  several  days
before  given  me  a  precise  account  of  a  case  of  chorea  in  which  hypno-
tism had  succeeded  in  one  séance  in  arresting  the  irregular  movements
of  the  hand  and  in  permitting  the  patient  to  write.  I  told  M.  Liébault
about  this  and  asked  him  to  try  the  same  experiment  upon  the  little
patient.     He  immediately  consented.

Suggestive     Therapeutics.  yô~

I  tell  Victorine  L to  write  her  name.     In  spite  of  all  her  attempts,

the  intelligent  and  obedient  child  only  succeeds  in  making  a  scrawl,  in
which  L,  the  first  letter  of  her  name,  is  with  difficulty  distinguishable.
The  following  is  a  fac-simile  :

Then  M.  Liébault  hypnotizes  her,  and  tells  her  to  write  her  name.
This  is  what  she  writes,  suddenly  and  without  hesitation,  her  eyes  being
shut  :

All  the  choreic  movements  disappeared  during  the  sleep.
Upon  waking,  we   make  her  write  her  name  again,  this   time  with  her
eyes  open.     The  following  fac-simile  shows  the  result  obtained  :

33S  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

On  the  following  clays  the  hypnotic  séances  are  continued  and  the
improvement  is  continued.  At  the  end  of  several  days  the  child  had  no
more  irregular  movements,  and  could  write,  sew,  and  carry  on  all  her
manual  occupations  as  before.

Observation    LIT. — Hemichorea,    the   result  of  fright. — Gradual  cure    by   hypnotic
suggestion  in  from  six  to  seven  weeks.

C.  K ,  a  child  eight  years  old,  was  brought  to  me  on  February  23d.

She  had  been  bitten  by  a  dog  in  the  left  check  twenty-six  days  before.
Two  days  afterwards  she  had  choreic  movements  in  the  left  arm  and
leg,  and  since  then  this  hemichorea  has  persisted.  She  also  complains
of  pain  in  the  left  cheek  at  the  seat  of  the  scar.  The  pain  is  acute  upon
pressure,  and  her  mother  cannot  wash  her  at  this  spot.  Her  hand  and
entire  limb  present  irregular  movements  of  flexion  and  extension  in  the
Angers,  of  adduction  and  abduction  in  the  thumb,  and  of  pronation  and
supination.  She  cannot  write  with  this  hand.  She  drags  her  leg  and
often  falls.     She  passes  restless  nights.

She  is  very  easily  put  into  somnambulism  by  simple  occlusion  of  the
eyes.  The  pain  in  the  scar  disappears  at  the  first  séance,  and  her  mother
can  wash  her  without  causing  the  slightest  pain.

After  each  seance  the  movements  diminish  in  intensity.  After  four
séances  they  remain  distinctly  less.  Sleep  after  midnight  is  still  dis-
turbed. Before  the  séances  she  was  not  able  to  sleep  at  all.  The  little
patient  is  now  less  depressed.  She  is  still  very  much  excited  during  the
night  of  the  26th.  She  moves  about  in  her  sleep;  her  mother  says  that
she  is  naughty  and  slaps  her  little  brother.  All  these  symptoms  grad-
ually disappear,  but  only  disappear  completely  early  in  April.  From
this  time  on  she  is  no  longer  restless  and  writes  very  well  with  her  left
hand.

After  April  4,  hypnotization  is  stopped.  The  child  comes  back  on  the
15th,  and  the  improvement  is  maintained.  I  hypnotize  her  again  several
times,  and  a  week  later  every  trace  of  chorea  has  disappeared.

Thus  localized  troubles  remaining  after  chorea,  movements  in
a  limb,  tremor,  trouble  in  moving  or  in  writing,  may  yield  rap-
idly to  suggestion.

General  chorea,  taken  in  hand  after  its  first  appearance,  seems
to  me  more  difficult  to  influence.  I  have  tried  in  other  cases
beside  the  one  I  relate.  Generally,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  more
general,  intense  and  violent  the  chorea  is,  and  when  it  involves
the  eyes  and  face  and  is  accompanied  with  psychical  troubles,  the

Suggestive  Therapeutics*  339

less  suggestion  takes  hold  of  it.  When  the  disease  is  in  a  less
acute  stage  {période  d'agitation  moindre)  hypnotization  often
succeeds  very  quickly  in  diminishing  the  intensity  of  the  irregu-
lar movements;  but  it  must  be  continued  for  weeks  before  it
can  arrest  them  completely.

Observation  LIII. — General  chorea  dating  back  eight  days. — Benefit  after  two
seances. — Almost  complete  cure  by  suggestion,  four  or  five  weeks  after  its
appearance.

Jean   A ,  nine  years   old,  was  brought  to  me  by  his  mother  on

December  9,  18S6,  for  chorea.

When  seven  years  old  he  had  for  the  first  time  a  violent  chorea,  which
lasted  three  months.  Eighteen  months  ago  he  was  taken  with  articular
rheumatism,  which  lasted  fifteen  days  and  was  followed  by  intense  gen-
eral chorea,  lasting  three  months.  For  the  last  fifteen  days  he  has  been
waking  at  night  with  colic  and  diarrhoea.

Eight  days  ago  he  began  to  tremble  in  his  right  hand,  and  on  the
following  days  his  other  limbs  were  affected.  During  the  night  he  has
nightmare,  and  complains  cf  pain.  He  is  always  hungry,  and  has  eaten
a  great  deal  during  this  time.  He  has  become  disobedient  ;  and  more-
over, is  exacting  and  greedy.

He  is  a  child  of  strong  constitution.  At  the  present  time  he  an-
swers questions  well.  He  has  incessant  movements  in  both  hands  and
legs,  especially  on  the  right  side.  He  walks  in  quite  an  irregular  way,
dragging  his  right  leg.  He  cannot  write  or  do  anything  with  his  hands.
He  is  troubled  with  irregular  movements  of  flexion  and  extension,  pro-
nation and  supination.  We  also  notice  movements  of  the  face,  espe-
cially of  the  orbicularis  oris.  His  nights  are  very  much  disturbed.  His
general  health  is  good.     Heart  and  lungs  normal.

I  succeed  in  putting  him  into  deep  sleep  easily  ;  the  movements  con-
tinue during  the  sleep.

On  the  night  of  the  10th,  the  little  patient  fell  out  of  bed  without
hurting  himself.

On  the  night  of  the  nth,  after  a  second  suggestion,  he  was  more  quiet
and  the  choreic  movements  were  less  intense.  He  does  not  write  any
better  on  the  12th.     Suggestion  on  the  12th  of  December.

14th. — Yesterday  the  patient  was  very  disobedient,  wished  to  run
away,  and  threatened  to  hang  himself,  and  throw  himself  in  the  canal.
He  went  into  the  street,  took  a  walk  alone,  and  then  came  back  and
began  to  laugh  and  cry.  During  the  night  he  had  a  nightmare  and
cried  tor  five  minutes.  The  choreic  movements  are  diminished.  Sug-
gestion.

34°  Suggestive   Thci'cipcutics.

16th. — Has  done  better  since  day  before  yesterday.  Is  more  quiet.
— Suggestion.

17th. —  The  improvement  continues.  Patient  sleeps  well,  and  the  move-
ments are  less.     Has  fits  of  passion  occasionally. — Suggestion.

18th. — Is  doing  well.     Has  not  been  in  anger  again. — Suggestion.

20th. — Is  doing  well.  The  choreic  movements  are  less  ;  he  writes
better;  the  letters  are  better  formed.  Sleeps  well  ;  woke  during  the
night  from  fear. — Suggestion.

21st. — Had  nightmare  last  night  ;  cried  for  half  an  hour,  then  had
colic,  but  no  diarrhoea.  We  do  not  notice  any  more  movements  in  the
hand. — Suggestion .

Same  condition  on  the  days  following.

24th. — Slept  well  last  night  without  nightmare  or  fear.  The  patient
is  quiet  in  the  daytime,  his  fits  of  passion  are  much  less  frequent. —
Suggestion.

25th. — Idem.  Nights  quiet.  Has  still  some  movements,  especially
in  the  right  leg  and  arm.  Had  some  difficulty  in  speaking  this  morning.
Nights  quiet. — Suggestion.

27th. — Is  doing  well.  Has  had  no  more  nightmares.  Movements
are  less.  Speaks  well.  His  mother  only  complains  that  he  still  quarrels
too  readily  with  his  sister. — Suggestion.

28th. — Idem. — Suggestion.

29th. — Is  doing  well.  The  movements  are  less.  Sleeps  well  without
waking,  and  without  nightmare.     Cannot  yet  write  easily. — Suggestion.

30th  and  31st. — Sleeps  well,  and  is  almost  entirely  well. — Suggestion.

Jan.  7th. — Although  the  suggestions  have  been  stopped  since  the
31st,  the  benefit  has  continued.  The  child  is  quite  calm,  and  is  doing
well.  There  are  still  some  few  movements  ;  he  had  one  nightmare  on
the  night  of  the  3d. — Suggestion.

10th. — The  child  is  doing  well.  His  mother  thinks  he  is  almost  com-
pletely cured.  The  attack  has  been  much  less  severe  and  of  much
shorter  duration  than  the  previous  ones.

12th. — He  comes  to  see  me  for  the  last  time  ;  continues  to  do  well.
There  is  still  slight  movement  at  times  in  the  frontal  and  facial  mus-
cles ;  almost  none  in  the  limbs.

To  sum  up,  the  affection  seems  to  have  been  checked  from  the
first  séances  ;  the  choreic  spasms  diminished  after  two  séances.
The  cerebral  excitement  diminished  during  the  days  following  ;
the  disease  was  almost  completely  checked  in  from  four  to  five
weeks.  The  two  preceding  attacks  of  chorea  lasted  three
months.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  341

Observation'  LTV. — Intense  general  chorea. — Improvement  from  the  first  séances  of
suggestion, — Almost  complete  cure  after  three  or  four  weeks,  eight  weeks  after  the
appearance  of  the  disease.

Jules  G ,  thirteen  years  old,  working  in  a  printing  establishment,

conies  to  the  hospital  on  December  6,  1886,  on  account  of  chorea.

A  year  ago  he  underwent  the  amputation  of  a  toe  in  consequence  of  a
wound  from  a  knife  which  fell  upon  his  foot.  A  week  before  All
Saints  Day  he  contracted  typhoid  fever,  which  kept  him  in  bed  fifteen
days.  During  convalescence,  a  month  ago,  his  character  changed ;  he
became  sullen,  impertinent,  and  angry  at  the  slightest  cause.  About
the  same  time  he  had  an  hysteriform  paroxysm  with  severe  spasms,
spasm  of  the  ocular  muscles  and  slight  foaming  at  the  mouth.  There
did  not  appear  to  be  any  loss  of  consciousness.  The  paroxysm  lasted
ten  minutes.  Fifteen  days  ago  he  had  a  second  crisis;  the  next  day  a
third.

The  choreic  movements  commenced  three  or  four  weeks  ago,  after  the
first  crisis;  first  the  right  hand,  then  the  left  hand,  and  then  the  left  leg
being  involved.  Fifteen  days  ago  the  left  side  was  involved,  and  during
the  past  few  days  there  have  been  grimaces  of  the  face.  This  affection
came  on  without  any  apparent  cause  ;  there  was  no  history  of  fright.

Present  condition. — Constitution  good  ;  temperament  lymphatic.  The
patient  makes  faces;  his  forehead  wrinkles  and  is  then  smoothed  out;
his  eyebrows  separate  and  are  then  drawn  close  together,  his  eyes  roll
up,  and  his  lips  are  drawn  out  every  now  and  then.  His  tongue  lies
against  the  palate  ;  he  cannot  protrude  it  from  his  mouth  ;  his  whole
head  is  bent  irregularly  upon  his  neck.  His  arms  are  involved  in
curious  movements,  limited  to  the  fingers  or  extending  to  the  entire
limb.  For  example,  when  a  pen  is  put  into  his  hand  the  child  seizes  it
with  difficulty,  turns  it  around  between  his  fingers,  is  obliged  to  use  both
hands  in  order  to  fix  it  properly,  and  when  he  tries  to  write,  cannot.
His  pen  does  not  touch  the  paper,  the  ring  and  index  fingers  are  bent
and  the  hand  is  raised  ;  sometimes  he  suddenly  lets  go  of  the  pen  and
moves  his  fingers  as  if  they  had  been  touched  with  a  red  hot  iron.
Similar  phenomena  are  present  in  the  legs.  The  child  is  told  to  get  up
out  of  bed  ;  he  makes  a  great  many  useless  movements  ;  his  arms  and
legs  are  stuck  out  in  all  directions.  He  succeeds,  however,  in  standing
up  quite  easily,  and  his  walk  is  regular.  We  notice  that  he  draws  his
leg  slowly  forward,  and  that  he  strikes  the  floor  forcibly  with  his  heel.
He  cannot  stand  on  one  leg  ;  if  he  tries  it  his  arms  and  legs  are  projected
aimlessly  in  all  directions,  the  trunk  bends  from  one  side  to  the  other,
and  the  patient  would  fall  if  he  were  not  supported.

The  other  functions  are  normal  ;  digestion  is  good.     Speech   is  diffi-

342  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

cult  and  jerky  ;  the  patient  only  pronounces  a  few  syllables  at  a  time  or
does  not  answer  immediately,  but  waits  for  a  moment  of  quiet.  His
intelligence  is  good  ;  he  is  quite  calm  and  much  less  passionate  than
when  he  was  at  home.

I  hypnotize  the  child  on  December  7,  by  holding  his  eyes  together  for
a  few  minutes.  He  is  quiet  during  his  sleep.  His  hands  are  still  in
motion  ;  his  face  is  tranquil.  Before  the  suggestion  I  do  not  succeed
in  making  him  write  a  single  letter.  During  sleep  I  make  him  write  his
name  ;  it  is  only  a  scribble,  in  which,  however,  we  can  recognize  his
name.  Upon  waking  he  writes  very  correctly  ;  but  after  this  effort,  his
hands  seem  to  be  worn  out  and  he  can  write  no  more.  The  night  is
passed  quietly  as  is  also  the  night  following. — Suggestion.

9th. — The  child  is  obedient;  lie  gets  up  and  walks  quite  well;  he  can-
not eat  alone  ;  he  has  to  be  fed  ;  he  succeeds,  however,  in  lifting  a  glass
to  his  mouth.  He  cannot  write;  the  pencil  turns  about  in  his  hand;
the  fingers  are  moved  in  every  direction  ;  he  cannot  yet  form  a  single
letter.  He  picks  up  a  pin  without  any  difficulty.  He  cannot  hold  up
his  hands  motionless.  His  arms  bend,  his  hands  come  near  together,
etc.  There  is  a  tendency  to  movements  of  the  lips,  but  the  face  is  less
disturbed.  He  gets  up  by  making  extensive  movements  with  his  arms,
but  walks  well.  His  right  leg  is  still  sometimes  suddenly  projected  in
advance.  The  patient  is  doing  well,  and  is  less  excited  than  when  at
home. — Suggestion.

10th. — Although  he  could  not  write  yesterday,  he  succeeds  in  writing
his  name  very  easily  to-day. — Suggestion.

nth. — Idem.  Has  been  quiet.  He  sees  himself  that  he  is  doing
better.  He  still  writes  with  great  difficulty,  and  only  succeeds  in  rest-
ing his  three  last  fingers  upon  the  paper  after  making  many  irregular
movements. — Daily  suggestion.

13th. — Holds  his  pencil  much  better  and  writes  his  name  rapidly.
Yesterday  he  was  able  to  go  down-stairs  and  walk  about  in  the  court,  which
he  could  not  do  before. — Since  yesterday,  also,  the  provoked  sleep  is
deeper,  and  the  restlessness  which  was  at  first  exaggerated  during  his
sleep,  is  immediately  calmed.  The  arm  remains  in  catalepsy,  with
almost  no  movement,  and  the  fingers  remain  almost  motionless.  Upon
waking,  the  patient  writes  his  name  but  cannot  write  anything  more.

141I1. — Was  more  restless  yesterday.  This  morning  he  makes  faces.
He  cannot  hold  his  arms  up  motionless.  He  writes  Gross  Ju,  and  stops
after  having  written  these  letters,  turning  his  pencil  about  in  the  hand
without  being  able  to  write  any  further.

This  condition  continues  during  the  days  following.  His  nights  are
quiet  ;  but  there  is  no  marked  improvement.  On  the  18th,  we  notice
choreic  movements  in  his  mouth  and  tongue.

Suggestive    Therapeutics,

JH-O

24th. — He  is  more  quiet  and  again  succeeds  in  writing  his  name,
though  with  difficulty.  On  28///,  he  succeeds  in  eating  unaided  ;  on  the
29th,  he  'writes  faster  and  better,  and  we  still  notice  a  slight  movement  in
the  lips  preparatory  to  speech  ;  but  this  is  all  in  the  face.  He  walks
very  well,  and  has  very  little  movement  in  his  hands.  The  movements
are  simply  sudden  and  limited.  The  improvement  continues,  so  much
so  that  on  January  10th  he  leaves  the  hospital  almost  completely  cured.

He  comes  luck  to  consultation  on  January  17th.  He  has  only  very
slight  choreic  movements.  He  can  eat  alone.  We  still  notice  a  slight
difficulty  in  the  articulation  of  words.  His  mother  brings  him  back,  be-
cause he  has  grown  very  passionate,  exacting  and  naughty  at  home. —
•stion.

19th. — Has  been  more  calm  ;  very  slight  movements.  Still  slight
awkwardness  in  right  hand. — Suggestion.

22(1. —  Is  doing  well  ;  can  press  hard  with  his  hands;  has  no  more  fits
of  passion  ;  speaks  very  well. — Suggestion.

The  patient  has  not  come  back.

To  sum  up,  a  very  intense  chorea  of  four  weeks  duration  is
promptly  relieved  after  the  first  séances  of  suggestion,  and  is
nearly  completely  cured  after  three  or  four  weeks  of  suggestion,
eight  weeks  after  the  appearance  of  the  trouble.

Observation  LY '. —  Writer's  cramp,  dating  back  three  years. — Rapid  itnprovement
after  the  first  séance. —  Transient  relapses. —  Total  ctire  after  two  months  of  suggestion.

H.  C ,  forty-seven    years  of     age,    has   been    an    accountant  for

twenty-five  years.  He  comes  to  see  me  on  November  18,  1885,  for
writer's  cramp.  He  is  a  man  of  strong  constitution,  intelligent,  not  at
all  nervous,  and  has  never  had  any  disease.  He  says  that  about  three
years  ago  he  experienced  the  first  premonitions  of  his  cramp,  in  flexion
of  his  five  fingers  after  he  had  written  five  or  six  lines.  After  resting
for  a  certain  time  he  could  again  write  several  lines,  and  then  the
cramp  would  again  appear.  These  phenomena  kept  increasing;  two
years  ago  the  cramp  appeared  after  he  had  written  three  lines  ;  a  year
ago  he  could  only  write  half  a  line  at  the  most,  without  having  the
cramp  in  flexion.  He  then  fastened  the  pen  to  his  index  finger,  and
thanks  to  this  expedient  he  could  write  pretty  well  for  three  or  four
months,  but  soon  the  other  fingers  began  to  bend  so  that  they  almost
pressed  into  the  flesh,  he  says.  For  two  months,  if  he  happened  to  be
writing  an  address,  the  cramp  would  appear,  and  all  five  fingers  would
close  when  he  got  as  far  as  Mons.  The  cramp  disappeared  when  he
laid  aside  his  pen,  and  reappeared  after  he  had  written  three  or  four
letters,  with  such  intensity  that  the  pen  would  pierce  the  paper.

344  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

When  the  fixing  of  the  pen  to  the  index  finger  no  longer  succeeded,
he  tried  another  expedient  ;  he  held  the  pen  applied  against  the
extremity  of  the  thumb,  with  the  penholder  held  horizontally  between
the  bent  fingers,  the  extremity  passing  between  the  two  last  fingers.
But  soon  the  thumb,  he  says,  pressed  so  strongly  against  the  pen,  that
he  had  to  stop.  Two  years  ago  he  had  to  leave  his  place  as  accoun-
ant  and  go  into  an  insurance  office.  For  the  last  three  months  he  has
tried  writing  with  his  left  hand.

On  the  18th  I  hypnotize  him.  He  goes  into  the  third  degree  of  sleep.
I  suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  cramp,  and  upon  waking,  he  writes
two  lines  and  a  half  before  he  is  stopped  by  the  flexion  of  the  fingers.

On  the  19th,  sleep  of  the  third  degree  is  again  induced.  Upon  wak-
ing he  writes  eight  lines  well  without  cramp.

On  the  20th,  I  put  him  into  somnambulism,  without  memory  upon
waking.  He  writes  well  when  he  wakes.  At  the  ninth  line  only  a  slight
flexion  of  the  three  last  fingers  appears,  which  is  made  to  disappear  by
simple  affirmation,  but  which  reappears  slightly  on  the  following  line.
He  also  experiences  a,certain  stiffness  of  the  wrist.

2 1  st. — He  shows  me  a  business  letter  that  he  had  written  the  even-
ing before.  He  has  scarcely  any  cramp,  "but  the  stiffness  in  his  wrist
continues.     Repetition  of  suggestion.

22d. — The  stiffness  has  disappeared  ;  he  writes  well.  When  he  is
writing  there  is  still  a  slight  tendency  to  flexion,  but  he  straightens  his
fingers  immediately.  Moreover,  before  suggestion,  he  could  not  write
a  single  letter  with  a  short  pencil,  resting  in  the  usual  manner  be-
tween the  thumb  and  index  finger.  The  flexion  was  immediate.  As
soon  as  the  pen  touched  the  paper,  he  had  to  hold  it  almost  horizon-
tally.— Since  yesterday,  he  has  been  able  to  write  with  a  short  pencil.

23d. — This  result  is  maintained  ;  he  has  felt  no  more  cramp  or
flexion  in  the  fingers. — Daily  suggestion.

24th. — He  says  that  he  is  doing  well.  His  wrist  is  still  stiff.  The
fingers  are  more  limber.  I  make  him  write  during  his  sleep,  by  suggest-
ing that  his  wrist  is  limber.  Same  condition  on  the  following  clays.  He
always  complains  of  stiffness  in  his  wrist,  which  appears  especially  after
he  has  been  writing  for  a  time.

As  I  am  obliged  to  go  away  for  two  months  on  the  30th,  I  ask  M.
Liébault  to  continue  the  suggestions.

The  following  is  what  the  patient  has  noted.

"30th. — I  write  after  the  se'ance  :  my  wrist  is  always  stiff.  I  can
make  no  movement  with  it,  which  is  very  troublesome  in  writing.  The
fingers  are  doing  well.

"  December  1. — The  wrist  has  moved  a  little,  and  it  seems  just  now
to  be  less  stiff.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  345

11  2d. — After  the  séance  and  before  leaving  M.  Liébault,  I  wrote  every
letter  with  a  pencil,  my  wrist  being  more  limber,  but  just  now  it.  has
become  stiff  again  and  my  thumb  presses  more  strongly  than  the  other
fingers.

"5th. — By  writing  very  slowly  and  continually  thinking  that  my  fingers
must  not  press,  I  do  better  ;  but  it  is  always  the  thumb  which  presses
upon  the  pen.  After  having  slept,  the  thumb  presses  less.  I  write
better,  especially  when  writing  slowly.     The  wrist  itself  is  less  stiff.

"6th. — There  is  certainly  improvement  in  the  wrist  ;  the  thumb  has
only  a  slight  tendency  to  press  upon  the  pen."

On  the  7th,  H.  C says  he  wrote   three  letters.     He  got  through

the  first  two  well.  The  third  was  not  so  good,  and  he  again  wrote  quite
badly.     The  wrist  moves  a  little  ;  the  thumb  still  presses  upon  the  pen.

On  the  16th,  the  thumb  presses  still  more  ;  however,  the  specimens
of  writing  shown  me  each  day  by  the  patient  indicate  that  he  was
writing  well.

But  the  hypnotic  sleep  has  been  less  profound  for  several  days,
which  he  atttibutes  to  the  fact  that  M.  Lie'bault  hypnotizes  him  in  a
room  full  of  people,  where  there  is  a  great  deal  of  noise,  while  with  me
he  is  hypnotized  alone  and  in  my  office,  where  it  is  quiet.  He  does  not
go  back  to  M.  Liébault,  and  the  treatment  is  discontinued  until  January
29.  after  my  return  to  Nancy.  The  flexion  of  the  thumb  pressing  upon
the  pen  had  increased,  and  hindered  improvement.

29th. — This  flexion  is  produced  frequently,  every  two  or  three  words.
The  other  fingers  are  no  longer  bent,  but  the  wrist  is  stiff.

After  a  new  se'ance  on  the  29th,  the  thumb  does  not  contract  immedi-
ately, but  at  home  the  flexion  is  reproduced.

30th. — He  writes  four  lines  at  home,  and  can  get  no  further.  Both
the  thumb  and  the  index  finger  are  flexed  ;  the  pen  falls  from  his  hand.
He  tries  in  vain  to  continue  :  the  letters  have  no  more  form.

On  February  1st,  he  writes  quite  well  before  the  suggestion  and  very
well  after  it.

2d. — He  says  that  he  writes  very  well  at  certain  times,  at  other  times
the  thumb  and  the  index  finger  bend,  and  then  he  is  forced  to  stop.
When  his  fingers  began  to  bend,  on  one  occasion,  he  felt  a  pricking  in
his  fore-arm.  He  also  experiences  this  pricking  when  he  is  quiet  and  is
not  writing,  especially  in  the  evening.

I  put  him  into  somnambulism  and  I  make  him  write  in  this  con-
dition with  his  eyes  open  :  he  writes  very  well;  I  suggest  disappearance
of  the  pricking.

3d. — He  says  he  has  no  more  pain  or  pricking;  he  writes  well.  But
when  he  writes  at  home  and  not  in  my  presence,  the  thumb  and  index
finger  bend,  after  a  time  ;    the  painful  prickling  sensation  has  ceased.

346  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

4th. — He  writes  very  well  at  my  office.  At  home  there  is  always
slight  flexion  of  the  thumb,  and  his  hand  becomes  heavy  after  a  certain
time.

5th. — He  wrote  a  letter  of  a  page  and  a  half  at  home.  The  writing
was  good  up  to  the  end,  but  his  hand  felt  tired. — He  continues  to  write
very  well  on  the  following  days.

8th. — He  still  complains  of  flexion  of  the  thumb  and  of  stiffness  in
the  wrist. — After  each  suggestion  in  my  office,  he  writes  very  well  with-
out flexion  and  without  stiffness.  This  is  not  the  case  when  he  writes
at  home.

nth. — He  was  able  to  write  an  hour  without  stopping.  At  the  end  of
this  time  only  the  thumb  began  to  bend  ;  he  rested  his  hand  for
twenty  minutes  and  was  able  to  begin  again  without  having  the  flexion
or  stiffness.

I  suggest  that  the  more  he  writes  the  better  he  will  write,  that  his
hand  will  become  limber  by  exercise  and  he  will  not  get  tired.

This  condition  continues  on  the  following  days  and  he  improves
gradually.  .  On  the  18th,  he  writes  from  an  hour  and  a  half  to  two  hours.
Only  at  the  end  of  this  time  does  the  thumb  begin  to  bend  and  his
hand  feel  stiff.

19th. — His  hand  feels  very  light  and  he  says  he  writes  as  if  he  had
never  had  anything  the  matter  with  it.

20th. — While  writing  this  morning  his  thumb  bent  two  or  three  times,
and  the  pen  fell  from  his  fingers  ;  his  writing,  however;  continues  to  be
good. — I  make  him  write  fast,  currente  calamo,  in  the  somnambulistic
condition,  with  his  eyes  open.

20th. — In  the  afternoon  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  write.  He  again
has  to  fasten  the  pen  to  his  index  finger.

The  next  day  passes  without  a  new  suggestion,  and  he  does  well,  but
cannot' write  long.  After  writing  half  an  hour  he  has  to  stop.  It  is
almost  impossible  for  him  to  address  his  letters.

23d. — He  works  all  the  morning  at  his  accounts;  after  a  certain  time,
he  feels  twitchings  in  the  back  of  his  wrist  which  prevent  his  continuing.
When  he  tries  to  go  on,  the  pen  falls  from  his  hand  ;  but  he  is  able  to
begin  again,  and  this  morning  he  no  longer  feels  any  spasm.

25th. — He  still  says  that  he  writes  very  well  at  my  office,  but  that
when  he  gets  home  his  hand  becomes  stiff  and  he  can  no  longer  write
with  the  same  ease.  I  suggest  that  he  shall  write  at  home  as  he  writes
with  me.

After  the  27th,  he  no  longer  complains  of  any  sensation  of  stiffness  or
of  flexion.  He  writes  a  good  deal  on  the  26th  and  27th,  and  does  it  well.
He  writes  letters  and  keeps  accounts  as  he  did  before  his  cramp.

He  comes  to  see   me  on  March  2d,  and  the  seances  which  were  dailv

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  347

up  to  that  time,  are  given  up  until  the  8th.  He  writes  every  day  during
this  interval  and  feels  absolutely  no  premonition  of  cramp.  "  I  write,''
says  he,  "  as  I  please."

On  the  Sih  a  new  seance.  These  se'ances  are  at  longer  intervals.
He  comes  back  on  the  nth,  13th,  16th,  22d,  27th,  and  a  complete  cure
has  been  maintained  since  the  27th  of  February.  I  still  continue  hyp-
notizing him  twice  a  week  for  a  month,  in  order  to  suppress  any  ten-
dency to  relapse.  He  has  taken  his  position  of  accountant  again,  and
writes  all  day  just  as  he  did  before  his  trouble.  The  cure  has  been
maintained.

We  know  how  refractory  writer's  cramp  often  is  to  all  medica-
tion. M.  Wolff,  a  professor  of  caligraphy  at  Frankfort-on-the-
Main,  often  succeeded  empirically  where  physicians  had  failed.

Wolff's  method  is  published  by  M.  Romain  Vigouroux  in  the
Progrès  Medical  (1882,  No.  3),  in  the  following  terms.  It  may
be  summed  up  under  two  heads  :  gymnastics  and  massage.

1st. — The  gymnastic  treatment  is  sometimes  active,  sometimes
passive.  Two  or  three  times  a  day  the  patient  should  execute  a
series  of  movements  of  the  upper  limbs,  successively,  in  all  direc-
tions. These  movements  are  generally  sudden,  the  hands  being
now  open,  now  closed.  The  number  of  movements  in  each
series,  and  consequently  the  duration  of  the  séances,  is  aug-
mented progressively  and.  varies  according  to  the  case.

The  passive  movements  consist  in  the  more  or  less  forced
stretching,  we  might  almost  say  elongation,  of  the  muscles  which
are  specially  affected.  This  is  the  most  delicate  part  of  the
treatment,  because,  according  to  M.  Wolff,  it  is  dangerous  to
exceed  a  certain  degree.  In  addition,  the  patient  repeats  this
manoeuvre  upon  himself  three  or  four  times  each  day.

Writing  exercises  begin  as  soon  as  the  spasmodic  condition  is
notably  diminished,  that  is  to  say  after  the  first  days.

2d.  —  Massage  and  friction  are  also  very  carefully  practised  by
M.  Wolff  every  day.  He  insists  upon  the  importance  of  what
we  shall  call  the  tapping  of  the  muscles.

The  duration  of  that  part  of  the  treatment  which  is  carried  on
under  M.  Wolff's  immediate  direction  is  about  fifteen  days.  A
course  of  treatment  which  after  four  or  five  se'ances  has  pro-
duced no  improvement,  ought,  according  to  him,  to  be  aban-
doned.

We  might  ask  if  suggestion  has  not  its  share    to   claim    in    the

34S  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

cures  obtained.  The  patients  come  to  a  specialist  who  is
reputed  to  cure  the  disease  with  which  they  are  affected  ;  the
specialist  affirms  the  cure.  The  manipulation  practised  for  half
an  hour,  the  massage  and  friction,  the  passive  movements
repeated  three  or  four  hundred  times  a  day,  all  these  things  con-
centrate the  attention  upon  the  idea  of  cure,  and  incite  the  brain
to  put  in  action  the  inhibition  necessary  for  the  control  of  the
spasm.

When  we  see  ignorant  bone-setters  and  quacks  succeed  in
curing  certain  sprains  and  pains,  rapidly,  by  methods  which
have  nothing  reasonable  in  them  and  sometimes  nothing
rational,  is  it  not  here  too  that  the  patient  himself,  to  a  certain
degree  realizes  or  facilitates  his  cure  by  auto-suggestion  ?

Observation  LVI. — Tetany   of  the   upper   limbs. — Attacks   of  somnambulism    and
nightmare. —  Tetany  cured  in  tiuo  séances,  the  somnambulism  in  one.

A ,  twenty  years  old,  a  shoemaker,  comes  to  consult  me  on  Janu-
ary 28,  1886,  on  account  of  tetany  of  the  upper  limbs.  He  has  morbid
antecedents.  His  mother  says  that  between  the  second  and  seven-
teenth months  of  his  life  he  had  convulsions  more  than  two  hundred
times.  Since  his  infancy  he  has  had  double  talipes  varus  equinus.
His  constitution  is  delicate,  his  disposition  lymphatic,  but  he  has  had
no  serious  illnesses.  For  the  last  four  winters  he  has  had  cramps  in
the  hands  from  six  to  ten  times  during  the  winter.  Once  only  the  legs
were  affected  at  the  same  time.

At  the  present  time,  he  complains  of  cramps  in  his  hands  and  of  a
pain  spreading  from  his  shoulder  into  his  fingers,  which  have  been
present  since  four  o'clock  yesterday.  The  three  last  fingers  on  both
hands  are  bent.  They  can  be  extended  with  pain,  but  the  flexion  is
immediately  reproduced.  The  index  finger  and  the  thumb  remain
extended.  He  can  perform  all  other  movements  well.  He  can  bend
his  elbows,  and  lift  his  arms  to  his  head.  The  arm  and  fore-arm  are
painful  upon  pressure,  especially  in  the  region  of  the  biceps.  When
this  muscle  is  pressed  flexion  of  the  fore-arm  results.

I  put  him  into  somnambulism  by  quiet  and  prolonged  suggestion,  and
I  suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  pains  and  contracture,  moving  the
joints  of  his  fingers  meanwhile.  These  movements  continue  to  be  pain-
ful during  the  hypnosis,  and  the  extension  of  the  fingers  is  not  lasting.

Upon  waking,  after  twenty  minutes,  the  cramp  and  pains  had  dimin-
ished notably,  but  had  not  disappeared.

Four  hours  later  the  cramp  disappeared  in  the  upper  limbs,  but  was

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  349

replaced  by  a  cramp  in  the  right  leg  and  heel,  which  persisted  three
hours.  Since  then  he  has  had  no  more  trouble,  until  four  o'clock  on
the  evening  of  February  8th.  At  this  time  he  was  taken  with  pains  in
the  neck  and  shoulders  without  any  apparent  cause.  At  four  o'clock  on
the  afternoon  of  the  10th,  flexion  of  both  hands  made  its  appearance,
and  has  lasted  ever  since.  He  has  had  to  be  fed.  He  has  slept  well
at  night.

On  February  nth  his  mother  brings  him  to  see  me.  The  fingers  are
flexed  into  the  palm  of  the  hand.  They  can  be  stretched  out,  but  com-
plete extension  is  very  painful,  and  the  flexion  is  instantaneously  repro-
duced.    There  is  pain  without  rigidity  in  the  neck  and  shoulders.

His  mother  tells  us  that  for  more  than  four  or  five  years  he  has  had
dreams  and  nightmares,  and  that  he  gets  up  and  goes  to  her  bed  weep-
ing.

/  hypnotize  him,  and  he  goes  into  profound  sleep,  but  memory  is  pre-
served upon  waking.  I  suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  pain  and
rigidity.  During  the  hypnosis  the  contracture  disappears;  he  extends
his  fingers  spontaneously  and  executes  every  movement.  When  he
wakes  the  relaxation  is  maintained  ;  he  only  complains  of  pain  on  the
right  side  of  his  neck.

/  hypnotize  him  a  second  time,  and  he  goes  into  deep  sleep,  with
amnesia  upon  waking.  I  suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  pain,  at  the
same  time  affirming  that  he  will  sleep  quietly  in  his  bed,  will  have  no
more  bad  dreams,  will  not  think  of  getting  up,  and  will  only  think  of
keeping  warm  in  his  bed. —  Upon  waking  the  pain  has  disappeared.

On  February  14th  his  mother  comes  to  bring  me  news  of  him.  The
upper  limbs  are  doing  very  well  ;  the  cramp  has  not  reappeared.  More-
over, he  has  slept  quietly  for  four  nights.  He  had  never  passed  two
nights  before  without  talking  in  his  dreams.

He  comes  back  to  see  me  on  March  23d  ;  at  three  o'clock  in  the
morning  he  was  taken  with  cramp  in  his  feet  and  hands.  He  had  had
no  such  attacks  for  six  weeks.  His  mother  says  that  he  has  never
passed  a  winter  in  which  he  has  been  so  free  from  them.  During  this
time  too,  he  has  dreamed  two  or  three  times  a  night,  talking  aloud,  but
he  has  not  got  up.

The  last  three  fingers  on  both  hands  are  bent.  They  can  be
extended,  but  the  flexion  is  quickly  reproduced.  The  two  other  fingers
are  in  extension  :  the  patient  cannot  open  his  hands  spontaneously
Moreover,  he  walks  unsteadily,  and  complains  of  sharp  pain  in  the
gastrocnemii.

Hypnotization  :  profound  sleep  for  half  an  hour,  passive  movements  of
flexion  and  extension  of  the  fingers.  Upon  waking  he  can  open  and
shut  his  hands  ;    but  the  fingers  still  have  a  tendency  to  bend  inward;

350  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

the  movements  of  adduction  and  abduction  of  the  thumb  are  always
difficult.  He  walks  better,  but  still  complains  of  pain  in  the  calves  of
his  legs.

After  a  new  hypnotization,  immediately  after  the  first  one  (less  pro
found  sleep),  the  pains  in  the  calves  disappear.

The  patient  has  not  come  back.

Observation    LVII. — Attacks    of    nocturnal   somnambulism. —  Temporary    cure    bj
means  of  hypnotic  suggestion.

H ,  a  grocer's  boy,  fifteen  years  old,  comes  to  see  me  in  Novem-
ber, 1885.  He  has  been  at  Nancy  three  months,  and  has  had  attacks
of  spontaneous  somnambulism  every  night  without  exception.  He  gets
up,  goes  about,  often  knocks  over  or  breaks  objects,  and  it  is  the  great-
est trouble  to  get  him  to  go  back  to  bed  again.  In  the  morning  he
remembers  nothing  about  it.  Before  coming  to  Nancy  he  had  similar
attacks,  but  they  were  much  less  frequent,  about  two  or  three  times  a
week,  he  thinks.

I  hypnotize  him  ;  he  goes  into  profound  sleep.  I  suggest  that  he  will
remain  quietly  in  his  bed,  and  that  he  will  only  think  ot  keeping  warm
when  he  is  asleep.  I  suggest  to  him  to  come  to  me  at  the  end  of  four
days.  He  comes,  in  fact,  to  tell  me  that  he  is  cured  ;  that  he  has  not
gotten  up  for  four  nights.

The  cure  lasted  three  weeks,  so  the  patient  says.  He  went  a  few
months  later  to  be  hypnotized  by  M.  Liébault.  After  four  new  séances
from  the  16th  to  the  31st  of  February,  1886,  the  somnambulism  had
ceased.  The  patient  discontinued  the  treatment  from  carelessness.
The  attacks  reappeared  after  a  certain  time.  I  have  no  doubt  that
repeated  suggestion  would  have  brought  about  a  perfect  cure.

Observation  LVIII. — Nocturnal  incontinence    of  urine   cured  by  suggestion  in   a

single   seance.

M ,  thirteen  years  old,  a  lymphatic,  delicate  child,  is  at  Nancy  at

a  boarding  school.  This  boy,  who  is  more  than  ordinarily  intelligent,
wets  his  bed  two  or  three  times  during  the  week.  He  has  not  been
able  to  break  himself  of  this  habit  since  his  infancy.

The  child  comes  to  see  me  on  October  16.  He  wet  his  bed  four
times  during  the  ten  days  preceding  this.

/hypnotize  him  on  October  16  ;  he  only  goes  into  the  second  degree  ;
suggestive  catalepsy,  memory  upon  waking.  I  suggest  that  he  will  not
wet  his  bed  again  ;  that  he  cannot  make  water  when  lying  down,  but
only  when  standing  in  the  vertical  position.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  351

He  conies  again  to  see  me  on   the    17th,   the    iSth,   and   the  23d   of
October;  since  the  time  of  the  first  suggestion  he  has  not  wet  his  bed.

Observation  I.IX. — Nocturnal  incontinence  of  urine  since  infancy,  relieved  by  a  single
ttion.

S ,  seventeen    years  old,    is  a  tall,  well-behaved,    though    rather

stupid  boy,  who  comes  to  consult  me  for  incontinence  of  urine,  which
he  has  had  since  infancy.  In  summer  he  wets  his  bed  three  or  four
times  a  week  ;  in  winter  every  night.  During  the  day  he  never  passes
water  involuntarily.  He  says  he  makes  water  about  six  times  during  the
day.  He  usually  wakes  but  once  during  the  night.  No  treatment  has,
been  tried.

He  comes  on  December  28.  /  hypnotize  him  easily  into  profound
s/cYp  ;  I  suggest  that  he  shall  wake  each  time  he  wants  to  make  water,
and  that  he  shall  not  wet  his  bed.

He  comes  regularly  until  the  31st.  He  has  not  wet  his  bed  since  the
first  suggestion  :  he  has  waked  four  times  during  the  night.  The  second
and  third  night  he  waked  three  times.  He  comes  again  on  January
7  and  on  the  10th.  He  has  not  wet  his  bed  again,  and  does  not
wake  up  more  than  twice  during  the  night.

He  has  not  come  back  again  and  I  do  not  know  whether  the  result
obtained  has  been  permanent  or  not.

Observation  LX. — Aphonia  consecutive  to  pneumonia,  cured  by  an  energetic  affirma-
tion.— Nocturnal  incontinence  of  urine  in  process  of  cure  by  suggestion.

G.  C ,  fifteen  years  old,  living  with  her  parents,  enters  the  hospi-
tal in  my  service  on  April  13,  1886,  with  a  pneumonia  involving  the
entire  lower  lobe  of  the  right  lung,  six  days  advanced.  Defervescence
takes  place  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  day,  the  16th  day  of  the
month.

On  the  third  day  of  the  pneumonia  she  developed  sore  throat  with
hoarseness  and  absolute  aphonia,  which  has  lasted  ever  since.  As  this
aphonia  has  remained  the  same  in  spite  of  defervescence,  and  in  the
absence  of  laryngeal  pain,  I  think  that  the  slight  laryngitis  which  accom-
panied the  pneumonia  does  not  account  for  such  a  complete  extinction
of  the  voice,  and  believe  that  nervous  inhibition  has  some  share  in  its
causation.

I  try  hypnotic  suggestion  on  the  17th,  18th  and  19th  of  April,  with-
out  therapeutic    result.     G.    C goes    into    somnambulism    easily,

but  does  not  carry  out  hypnotic  hallucinations,  or  post-hypnotic  sugges-
tions.

On  the  2 1  st,  after  a  hypnotization  without  result,  I  try  suggestion  in

352  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

the  waking  condition.  It  is  useless  at  first  ;  the  little  patient  laughs
easily  and  receives  my  assertions  lightly,  without  allowing  herself  to
be  impressed.  I  pretend  to  be  angry,  and  command  her  to  speak  in  a
loud  voice,  to  say  a,  b  ;  I  state  that  she  can  do  it  and  that  I  wish  her
to  do  it  ;  she  tries,  and  distinctly  articulates  a,  b,  and  then  her  name.
The  aphonia  disappears  when  she  makes  an  effort.  During  the  day
the  voice  becomes  perfect.  She  still  articulates  distinctly  on  the  next
day,  and  after  the  evening  of  the  23d  she  can  talk  as  well  as  she  could
the  clay  before.

This  is  not  all.  This  young  girl  has  had  an  infirmity  since  her
infancy;  incontinence  of  urine.  During  the  night  she  passes  water
freely  in  bed  ;  she  has  to  be  waked  three  times  in  order  to  prevent  it.
During  the  clay  she  cannot  go  more  than  an  hour  and  a  half  without
making  water.  In  consequence  of  this  infirmity  she  has  not  been  sent
to  school  ;  she  does  not  know  how  to  read  or  write.  Two  years  ago
she  spent  two  months  in  the  hospital  in  order  to  be  relieved  of  this
trouble.  She  was  treated  with  compresses  of  cold  water  applied  over
the  hypogastric  region,  but  without  result.

About  the  20th  the  patient  passed  water  freely  in  bed  every  night.
After  the  21st  I  try  the  hypnotic  suggestion  that  she  will  not  wet  her
bed,  that  she  cannot  do  it,  that  she  can  go  a  long  time  without  feeling
the  need  of  making  water.

Since  then  she  has  been  able  to  go  three  hours  during  the  day  with-
out urinating.  On  the  night  of  the  22d  she  does  not  wet  her  bed,  but
on  the  23d  she  again  does  it.

On  the  24th  she  goes  all  day  without  urinating,  and  since  this  time
has  only  urinated  twice  a  day.

Continuation  of  suggestion. — During  the  night  she  wets  her  bed  a
little,  although  she  gets  up  three  times.

I  am  away  from  Nancy  for  several  days.  The  suggestion  is  discon-
tinued. The  incontinence  of  urine  is  cured  in  regard  to  the  daytime.
During  the  night  she  still  wets  her  bed  a  little,  but  very  little.  She  is
waked  once  every  night.

Therapeutic  suggestion  is  begun  again  on  May  6.

She  does  not  wet  her  bed  during  the  night.  She  was  waked  once
during  the  night.

May  8th. — Has  not  wet  her  bed.  Was  waked  once.  I  order  her
not  to  be  waked  ;  I  suggest  that  she  shall  wake  spontaneously.

9th. — She  did  not  wake  last  night  and  did  not  wet  her  bed.

10th. — She  wet  her  bed  again;  she  attributes  this  to  tright  ;  the
patient  in  the  next  bed  died  during  the  night. — Daily  suggestion.

nth. — Wet  her  bed  very  slightly.

12th. — The  patient  was  chloroformed  yesterday  in  the  opthalmological

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  353

department  (she  has  a  pannus  clue  to  entropion)  ;  she  went  to  sleep
in  the  afternoon  and  wet  her  bed  a  little;  during  the  night,  idem.

13th,  and  14th. — She  has  not  wet  lier  bed.  Only  wakes  once  during
the  night  ;   I  suggest  that  she  shall  wake  twice.

15th. — She  wet  her  bed  very  slightly.     She  only  waked  once.

1 6th  and  17th. — She  has  not  wet  her  bed  again.  She  waked  twice
during  the  night  to  make  water.  I  repeat  this  last  suggestion  emphati-
cally, and  insist  upon  it  that  she  shall  not  forget  it  when  she  wakes.
During  the  day  she  does  not  make  water  more  than  twice  voluntarily t
On  June  1st  the  cure  may  be  considered  as  established.  For  ten  days  the
patient,  whom  I  have  ceased  to  hypnotize,  has  not  forgotten  herself  once.

M.  Liébault  has  treated  a  large  number  of  children  with  this
trouble,  generally  successfully.  Usually  from  one  to  three
séances  are  sufficient  to  insure  a  cure.  Sometimes  there  is  a
relapse  after  a  certain  number  of  days  ;  but  a  new  suggestion
re-establishes  the  cure.

The  following  are  the  results  which  M.  Liébault  has  given  me  :
"  In  seventy-seven  cases  of  incontinence  of  urine,  I  have  had
twenty-three  rapid  and  certain  cures  in  cases  from  which  I  have
heard  later  on,  and  the  cures  have  been  permanent.  Twenty-
three  rapid  cures  after  treatment,  without  hearing  from  them
again  ;  ten  slow,  certain  cures,  news  of  them  again  ;  nine  improve-
ments ;  eight  not  benefited.  Four  subjects  were  hypnotized
once  and  have  not  returned  since  ;  I  have  not  had  any  news  of
them."

Dynamic  Pareses  and  Paralyses.

Observation  LXI. — Sense  of  weight  and  muscular weakness  of the  left  upper  limb.—
Alarked  improvement  after  one  séance.

J ,  eighteen  years  old,  a  locksmith,  comes  to  see  me  on  February

25,  1885.  Ten  or  twelve  years  ago  he  felt  a  heaviness  in  his  left  hand,
which  has  persisted  ever  since  and  prevents  his  using  this  hand.  He
can  shut  it,  but  with  a  good  deal  of  difficulty.  He  opens  it  slowly  ;  he
flexes  the  arm  and  fore-arm  with  a  certain  stiffness  ;  his  fingers  feel  as
if  they  were  made  of  rubber;  he  can  only  take  hold  of  a  sheet  of  paper
with  difficulty  ;  there  is  no  pain  elsewhere,  either  spontaneous  or  on
pressure  ;  tactile  sensibility  is  preserved  ;  in  the  region  of  the  deltoid
there  is  a  sensation  of  weight  and  swelling.  There  is  trouble  with  the
left  knee  ;  upon  walking  the  movement  of  flexion  is  sudden  and  im-
presses a  gait  upon  the  foot  which  resembles  ataxia.
23

554  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

The  left  hand  registers  fifteen  or  sixteen  by  the  dynamometer;  the
right  hand  thirty-seven.

The  patient  is  hypnotized  and  goes  into  profound  sleep.  After
suggestion  and  waking,  the  dynamometer  registers  22  for  the  left  hand,
and  32  for  the  right;  he  takes  hold  of  a  sheet  of  paper  with  his  left  hand
very  well.

The  patient  is  submitted  to  a  second  hypnotization  immediately  after
the  first,  with  a  new  suggestion.  Upon  waking,  the  left  hand  registers
26  by  the  dynamometer,  the  right  31.  He  only  feels  slight  stiffness  in  his
hand  ;  he  walks  somewhat  better.

He  has  not  come  to  see  me  again.

Observation  LXII. — Dynamic  psychical  paraplegia  dating  back  two  months. — Nota-
ble improvement  after  one  seance. — Complete  cure  after  three  séances.

L ,  sixty-seven  years  old,  enters   the  hospital  on  April   12,  1884,

for  pneumonia  of  the  inferior  right  lobe  nine  days  advanced,  deferves-
cence having  already  taken  place.  The  temperature  continues  to  rise
occasionally  in  the  evening  to  380  C,  until  the  24th  of  April.  The
cough  and  expectoration  have  disappeared,  the  appetite  is  good,  and
all  the  functions  seem  normal.  Constitution  is  slightly  debilitated  by
age  and  privation  ;  but  the  disease  terminated  some  time  ago  and  the
convalescent  still  remains  in  bed.

On  May  8  I  ask  her  why  she  does  not  get  up  ;  she  then  says  that
she  cannot  stand.  Two  months  ago,  she  says  (a  month  before  her
pneumonia),  walking  became  difficult.  She  dragged  herself  about  pain-
fully, and,  since  her  pneumonia,  she  cannot  stand.  Her  sensibility  is
perfect,  the  tendon  reflexes  are  normal,  and  the  muscles  are  not  atro-
phied. Lying  in  bed  she  can  perform  any  movements.  I  make  her
get  up;  she  cannot  stand  without  leaning  against  her  bed,  her  legs
soon  bend  and  she  falls.  She  says  she  had  epileptic  seizures  during
the  active  period  of  her  life,  quite  frequently.  She  has  not  had  any
more  during  the  past  two  years.

I  do  not  find  any  sign  of  myelitis,  and  I  think  it  is  a  case  of  dynamic
weakness,  which  the  patient's  impressionability  has  transformed  into
pay  eh  ieal  paralysis.

I  hypnotize  her  on  May  8,  and  she  goes  into  profound  sleep  ;  I
suggest  that  she  can  walk.  Upon  waking,  she  stands  without  support
for  three  seconds,  showing  a  marked  tendency  to  fall  backward.

On  the  9th,  after  the  second  séance,  she  stands  better  and  takes  a  few
steps,  very  much  astonished  at  being  able  to  do  it.

On  the  10th.  after  the  third  séance,  she  walks  slowly,  without  falling,

Suggestive   Therapeutics*  355

and  without  showing  any  tendency  to  fall  back.  When  she  stands,  she
spreads  lier  legs  apart  in  order  to  make  sure  of  a  firm  basis.

On  the  nth  she  walks  about  all  day  without  support,  which  she  has
not  been  able  to  do  for  more  than  two  months.

I  still  hypnotize  her  from  time  to  time  ;  she  continues  to  walk  very
well  ;  on  the  24th  she  goes  up  and  down-stairs  alone.

She  remains  cured.

Observation  LXIII. — "  Growing  pains  "  and  muscular  weakness  in  the  loioer  limbs.
— Marked  improvement  after  the  first  seance. — Complete  cure  in  five  seances.

S ,   fifteen    and  a  half   years  old,    a  boy  of   strong  constitution,

without  any  previous  illness,  has  complained  for  the  last  six  months  of
weakness  in  his  legs,  which  has  been  accompanied  with  pain  in  the
back  of  the  thigh  for  the  last  three  weeks.  He  notices  it  in  walking
and  especially  in  going  upstairs.  When  he  walks  upon  sloping  ground
he  makes  false  steps  every  minute  ;  his  foot  turns  inward.  He  cannot
run.     He  walks  as  sailors  do,  swaying  about.

He  comes  to  see  me  on  May  30,  1885.  I  do  not  find  any  lesion,  or
any  functional  trouble  other  than  the  pain  in  the  back  of  the  thighs
and  the  difficulty  in  walking  ;  the  muscular  force  is  normal.  I  think
that  it  is  a  question  of  a  dynamic  muscular  trouble  connected  perhaps
with  growth.  The  boy  says  he  has  grown  a  head  during  the  past  six
months.

/  hypnotize  him  ;  he  goes  into  the  sleep  of  the  third  degree,  memory  being
preserved  upon  waking.  He  has  almost  no  more  pain  when  he  walks,
and  holds  himself  much  better.

31st. — He  continues  to  do  better  ;  he  only  made  two  or  three  false
steps  going  down  the  hill.  He  is  able  to  walk  from  an  hour  and  a  half
to  five  hours  without  being  fatigued,  while  before  he  got  tired  after
walking  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ;  he  still  has  pain  in  going  upstairs.
Second  séance.

June  3d. — Third  séance.  4th. — Fourth  séance.  Still  complains  of
pain  when  he  bends  his  thigh  and  when  he  gets  up.

gth. — Says  he  walked  yesterday  for  three  hours  without  fatigue  or
pain  ;  two  months  ago  could  not  have  walked  a  quarter  of  the  distance.

Suggestion  continued.

nth. — Says  he  no  longer  feels  any  pain;  no  pain  in  going  up-
stairs ;  since  the  first  suggestion  he  has  walked  without  swaying  about.

13th. — Last  séance.  He  runs,  jumps,  and  no  longer  makes  any  false
steps.     He  feels  no  more  trouble.

I  continue  to  see  the  young  man  frequently  ;  the  cure  has  persisted
up  to  this  day.

356  Suggestive   Therapeutics,

VI.

Gastro-intestinal  Affections.

Observation    LXIV. — Chronic  alcoholism. — Gastritis. — Insomnia;  weakness   in   the
legs.    Rapid  improvement  by  means  of  suggestion.

T ,  a  laborer,  fifty-two  years   old,  enters  the  hospital  on  February

9,  1884.  He  has  alcoholic  habits  contracted  in  Africa,  where  he  passed
ten  years  ,  he  boasts  of  being  able  to  drink  a  litre  of  absinthe  in  three
hours.

A  month  and  a  half  ago  he  developed  pain  in  the  right  axilla,  accom-
panied with  cough  and  expectoration.  This  pain  has  disappeared  dur-
ing the  last  four  or  five  days.  At  times  for  the  past  three  weeks  he  has
complained  that  the  passage  of  food  is  obstructed  at  a  point  near  the
lower  end  of  the  sternum.  There  is  no  vomiting  and  no  regurgitation.
After  having  eaten  he  feels  an  epigastric  swelling,  which  lasts  about  two
hours.  There  are  often  acid  eructations,  which  last  half  an  hour,  and
at  times  there  are  cramps  in  the  stomach.  His  movements  are  regular.
His  sight  has  been  troubled  for  fifteen  days.  He  has  nightmare,  sleeps
very  little,  and  his  sleep  is  disturbed.

Two  years  ago  he  says  that  he  had  left  sciatica  lasting  one  year,  which
obliged  him  to  walk  with  a  stick.  He  was  cured  in  from  eight  to  fifteeti
days  by  hyptwtic  suggestion,  by  Dr.  Litbault.

He  is  a  man  of  strong  constitution  ;  we  do  not  find  any  cardiac  or
pulmonary  trouble.  The  epigastric  region  is  sensitive  ;  the  stomach  does
not  seem  dilated,  the  liver  is  not  increased  in  size.  There  is  slight
tremor  of  the  hands,  accompanied  with  analgesia  (without  anaesthesia)
limited  to  the  upper  limbs.  He  complains  especially  of  epigastric  pains,
of  acid  eructations,  nightmares,  and  weakness  in  his  legs.

(Diagnosis;    chronic  a/coho/ism  ;    alcoholic  gastritis.)

10th. — He  is  hypnotized  :  profound  sleep:  suggestion.  The  next  day
he  says  he  ate  and  digested  better.  The  analgesia  persists,  he  still  has
nightmare. — Suggestion.

1 2th. —  Says  he  felt  well  during  the  day  yesterday  but  did  not  sleep
during  the  night.  He  again  complains  of  frontal  cephalalgia  and  of
twinges  of  pain  in  the  epigastrium,  which  disappear  by  suggestion.  He
leaves  the  hospital  on  this  day,  but  comes  back  three  times  to  be  hyp-
notized before  the  16th.

16th. — He  says  that  for  the  first  time  in  three  months  he  has  slept
quietly,  "  like  a  French  peer."  He  has  no  more  acidity  or  epigastric
pain.  He  feels  stronger,  looked  for  work  yesterday  and  engaged  him-
self as  a  grave-digger.     He  promises  that  he  will  drink  no  more  brandy  ;

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  357

nevertheless,  although  we  have  suggested  a  distaste  for  alcohol,  he  does
not  feel  it.

He  comes  the  following  year  on  January  31,  1885.  He  says  he  has
been  well  until  fifteen  days  ago.  He  complains  of  having  had  attacks
of  intermittent  fever  during  this  time.  Twenty-two  years  ago  he  had
frequent  attacks  of  fever  in  Africa,  where  he  was  a  soldier,  and  since
his  return  he  has  had  three  or  four  attacks  every  spring,  which  disappear
after  the  use  of  sulphate  of  quinine.  Since  this  fever,  he  has  experienced
weakness  in  his  limbs,  loss  of  appetite,  dislike  for  food,  and  also  a  ring-
ing sound  in  his  head  and  left  ear.

On  Februrary  2,  we  find  him  anaemic,  his  constitution  is  deterio-
rated, his  temperature  normal.  Respiratory  sounds  normal  except  for
some  sibilant  sounds  on  inspiration.

Heart  normal  ;  slight  mitral  systolic  murmur.  He  says  that  he  was
well  and  digested  his  food  well  up  to  fifteen  days  ago.

If  we  can  believe  him,  he  has  not  relapsed  into  his  alcoholic  excesses
since  last  year,  and  is  content  with  a  dram  in  the  morning.

From  some  cause,  however,  he  has  again  had  eructations  after  eating,
and  lack  of  appetite  for  the  last  fifteen  days.  He  does  not  vomit  and
his  movements  are  regular.  Finally,  during  the  same  period,  he  has
again  had  insomnia  and  nightmare.

The  fever  has  not  reappeared  since  his  admission  to  the  hospital.

He  is  hypnotized  on  the  evening  of  the  id  and  sleeps  very  well  during  the
night  without  dreaming,  waking  three  or  four  limes.  He  complains  of  a
burning  sensation  in  the  chest.     Suggestion.

4th. — Appetite  and  digestion  better.  Burning  sensation  in  the  chest
and  ringing  sound  in  the  head  and  left  ear  persist.  Suggestion  con-
tinued.

5th. — Is  doing  better.  He  slept,  but  only  until  one  o'clock  this  morn-
ing. The  burning  sensation  in  the  chest  has  greatly  diminished  in  con-
sequence of  suggestion.  The  ringing  sound  persists.  He  has  no  more
eructations. — He  demands  his  dismissal.

OBSERVAT!'  >N   LXV. — Chronic  gastritis. — Dilatation  of  the  stomach. — Marked  improve-
ment and  cessation  of  the  vomiting  in  consequence  of  suggestion,  without  complete  cure.

H ,  twenty-three   years  old,   enters   the    hospital    on  January   20,

1S85,  from  the  blind  asylum.  He  lost  his  sight  when  he  was  fourteen
years  old.  At  this  time  he  also  had  a  gastritis  which  lasted  two
months  ;  he  vomited  all  nourishment.

At  the  present  time  he  has  been  sick  for  four  years.  The  trouble
began  with  obstinate  constipation,  which  lasted  from  eight  to  ten  days.
Diarrhoea  followed  the  use  of  a  purgative  and  lasted  three  months,
accompanied  with  colic  and  slight  tenesmus.

35S  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

After  the  diarrhoea  had  existed  a  month,  attacks  of  vomiting  came  on
which  still  recur  at  intervals  of  from  ten  days  to  six  weeks.  During  this
time  there  has  been  a  sense  of  weight  in  the  stomach.  He  has
often  been  stopped  in  his  work.  Since  December  6,  there  has  been
no  intermission.  Years  ago  he  was  treated  by  washing  out  the
stomach.

We  note  :  delicate  constitution,  lymphatic  temperament,  emaciation  ;
no  fever.  Appetite  ordinarily  irregular,  sometimes  very  good.  At  the
present  time  no  appetite,  no  loathing  of  food.  Complains  of  a  sensation
of  pain  in  the  stomach  which  lasts  from  five  to  six  hours  after  eating.
Vomiting  at  times  immediately,  at  times  one  or  two  hours  after  eating.
Sometimes  at  the  evening  meal  he  vomits  what  he  has  eaten  in  the
morning.

He  often  has  eructations  which  last  the  entire  day.  They  are  fre-
quently acid,  with  pyrosis,  even  when  he  has  not  eaten.  They  appear
especially  after  the  attacks  of  vomiting.  At  times  he  is  troubled  with
hiccough.  The  vomiting  is  always  alimentary.  Frequent  pains  in  the
pit  of  the  stomach,  sensation  of  pain  and  hunger  after  vomiting.
Cramps  in  the  morning  until  he  has  eaten.  Tendency  to  constipation
for  the  last  three  months  ;  only  has  a  movement  every  four  days  ;  at
times  colic  without  diarrhoea.  Urine  scant)'. — Sometimes  complains  of
palpitation  and  of  severe  neuralgia.  At  the  present  time,  the  left  facial
nerve  is  sensitive  to  pressure.  Insomnia  provoked  by  pains.  Stomach
sounds  are  heard  as  low  as  two  inches  above  the  umbilicus  ;  the  region  is
not  sensitive.  In  the  chest,  respiration  is  slightly  bronchial  at  the  right
apex.  The  patient  has  coughed  and  expectorated  slightly  for  six  weeks.
Diagnosis;  chronic  gastritis.  Dilatation  of  the  stomach.  Incipient  tuber-
culosis. Treatment  :  washed  chalk  and  calcined  magnesia,  half  a
teaspoonful  before  each  meal.  Eight  drops  of  hydrochloric  acid  after
each  meal.

This  treatment,  in  addition  to  that  of  washing  out  the  stomach,
remains  inefficacious.  Patient  continues  to  vomit  everything  he
takes.

28th. — Hypnotization  and  energetic  suggestion  in  the  morning.  He
only  goes  into  the  first  degree  of  sleep  :  drowsiness  without  catalepsy.
Before  being  hypnotized  he  vomited  his  bouillon.

2Qth. — We  note  that  the  patient  has  not  vomited  since  the  suggestion
He  has  not  gone  for  so  long  a  time  without  vomiting  since  the  6th  of
December.

He  slept  better  last  night. — Suggestion.

30th. — Hardly  vomited  at  all  yesterday. — Milk  diet.     Sleeps  better.

On  the  following  days  he  hardly  vomits  at  all.  On  February  6,  he
eats  rare  meat  without  vomiting.     He  sleeps  quite   well,  but  sometimes

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  359

has  nightmares  still.  On  the  7th,  he  vomits  a  watery  fluid.  On  the
10th,  he  still  complains  of  bad  digestion,  but  does  not  vomit.  Induced
sleep  does  not  exceed  the  first  degree. — Asked  for  his  dismissal.

OPSERVATION  LXVI. — Gastric  troubles. — Burning  sensation  near  the  stomach. — Insom-
nia.—  Cure  in  four  seances.

Widow  C .  forty-seven  years  old,  enters  the  hospital  on  March  30,

1S86.  She  is  the  mother  of  thirteen  children,  five  of  whom  are  living;
the  last  child  was  born  twelve  years  ago  ;  her  husband  died  of  tuber-
culosis.

She  has  been  sick  for  a  week.  When  she  went  to  bed  in  the  evening
she  felt  dizzy,  as  if  sparks  of  fire  were  dancing  before  her  eyes.  Nausea,
cold  sweats,  tendency  to  syncope.  She  lay  in  bed  and  shivered  all
night  ;  sensation  of  cold  persisted  the  next  day,  accompanied  with  ex-
treme weakness  of  the  legs.  The  cough  which  she  has  had  for  some
time  became  more  severe.  For  three  or  four  nights,  she  has  felt  twinges
of  pain  in  the  temples  every  now  and  then.

Digestion  has  been  imperfect  for  twelve  years.  Appetite  usually  good,
has  grown  poor  in  the  last  three  weeks.  Epigastric  weight,  acid  eructa-
tions, glairy  regurgitations.  Movement  every  two  or  three  days.  Men-
struation normal.

16th. — Present  condition  :  weak  constitution  ;  temperament  lymphatic.
Pulse  regular.  No  fever.  Upon  examination  of  the  chest,  we  find  the
inspiration  rough  at  the  right  apex,  and  expiration  slightly  bronchial  at
the  left  apex.  Dilatation  of  the  stomach  :  sounds  as  low  as  the  umbilicus.
For  the  last  four  or  five  days  has  complained  of  a  burning  sensation,
which  she  localizes  along  the  sternum.  She  had  a  painful  spot  in  the
anterior  part  of  the  right  axilla,  which  only  lasted  ten  minutes.  Had
pain  in  temples  three  or  four  different  times  during  the  night,  lasting
half  an  hour  each  time.  Continually  has  eructations.  Vomited  once
yesterday  evening.  Had  cramps  in  stomach  all  yesterday  afternoon.
Has  not  slept  an  instant  since  her  admission  (13th  of  March).

In  the  evening  I  try  suggestion  ;  I  only  obtain  simple  drowsiness.  I
suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  existing  troubles,  and  leave  her,  telling
her  to  continue  sleeping.

17th. — Says  she  slept  from  six  o'clock  to  half-past  seven  yesterday
evening.     Her  head  is  clearer.     The  other  troubles  persist.

New  suggestion  :  patient  goes  into  somnambulism.  Upon  waking,  the
burning  sensation  in  the  sternum  has  diminished  greatly.  I  put  her  to
sleep  again  and  suggest  that  she  shall  sleep  an  hour.

18th. — Slept  two  hours  last  night.  Condition  the  same  as  yesterday;
the  burning  sensation  in  the  sternum  still  exists.  She  vomited  once.
Interscapular  pains.     Suggestion,  and  sleep  lasting  an  hour.

360  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

19th. — Slept  four  hours  last  night.  The  pains  have  greatly  diminished.
There  is  /ess  sensation  of  burning.  Has  not  vomited.  No  more  dorsal
pains,  and  no  shooting  pains  in  temples.  Only  complains  of  slight  ten-
derness over  right  temple.     Scarcely  any  eructations.

New  suggestion  :  She  sleeps  an  hour  and  a  half.

20th.— Slept  the  whole  night.  Complains  of  no  more  pain  in  the
sternum  or  elsewhere.  Eats  with  a  good  appetite  this  morning.  Feels
perfectly  well  and  asks  for  her  dismissal.

Observation  LXVII. — Parenchymatous  metritis. — Gastro-intestinal  catarrh. — ATeuro-
pat  hie  pains. —  Temporary  amelioration  by  means  op  suggestion.

A ,  31  years  old,  enters  the  clinic  on  April  25,  1885.  She  is  mar-
ried, and  is  the  mother  of  four  children,  all  of  whom  she  nursed.  She
has  been  ailing  since  her  last  confinement.  She  got  up  on  the  third
day,  and  developed  a  metrorrhagia,  which  kept  her  in  bed  three  weeks,
without  abdominal  pain.  Since  this  time  she  has  had  leucorrhcea.  The
menses  are  irregular  and  scanty,  recurring  once  every  two  months  as  a
rule.  In  December  last,  she  had  an  abcess  at  the  edge  of  the  anus
which  lasted  for  some  time,  and  an  inguinal  adenitis  on  the  left  side,
which  suppurated.

Five  or  six  weeks  before  this  abscess  appeared,  she  says  she  had  a
sensation  of  abdominal  enlargement.  After  using  a  purgative,  she  had
diarrhoea  for  a  month,  followed  by  constipation,  which  has  lasted  up  to
the  present  time.

For  the  last  two  or  three  months,  there  has  been  bloody  leucorrhcea
without  fetor,  with  occasional  discharge  of  fibrinous  shreds,  and  abdomi-
nal pains,  which  she  says  prevent  her  from  sleeping,  and  severe  colic
when  she  has  a  movement.  For  six  months  her  appetite  has  been  poor.
A  desire  to  vomit  after  each  meal  has  been  present.  She  has  lost
thirty-six  pounds  in  six  months.

On  April  28,  while  I  was  talking  to  the  patient,  she  developed  an
attack  of  weeping  and  tremor.

Temperament  lymphatico-nervous.  No  fever.  Pyrosis  lasting  from
two  to  three  hours  and  frequently  repeated.  Frequent  colic  ;  she  often
has  bloody  movements  accompanied  with  tenesmus  and  borborigmi.
Abdomen  is  flat  and  soft,  no  pain  upon  pressure  except  over  the  epi-
gastrium ;  stomach  sounds  as  low  as  the  umbilicus.  To  the  touch,  the
neck  of  the  uterus  is  low,  the  os  is  patent  and  projects  forward,  the
posterior  lip  is  indurated  and  thickened,  and  there  is  slight  retroversion.
She  has  never  had  convulsive  paroxysms,  but  has  experienced  a  sensa-
tion as  of  a  lump  rising  from  the  epigastrium  into  the  throat.  Pain
upon  pressure  of  the  right  renal  region  and  at  the  inferior  border  of  the

Suggestive   Therapeutics,  361

/ibs.  She  sometimes  has  vertigo.  Diagnosis  :  parenchymatous  metritis.
— Chronic  gastro-intestinal  catarrh. — Neuropathy,

April  2SU1. — Patient  is  hypnotised;  she  goes  into  profound  sleep  or
somnambulism. — Suggestion.

29th. — Says  she  slept  better  last  night,  but  still  complains  of  pains  in
:he  hypogastrium  and  about  the  sacrum.     Suggestion.

30th.  —  She  complains  less  of  pain,  has  no  more  in  the  sacral  region,
but  always  in  the  epigastrium.  Pressure  is  also  painful  over  the  hypogas-
trium. Has  had  no  movement  since  the  27th.  Leucorrhœa.  Insomnia.
— Suggestion.

May  2d. — A  small  abscess  is  found  in  the  left  buttock,  which  is
opened  during  hypnotic  sleep,  and  the  patient  remembers  nothing  about
it  upon  waking.  The  constipation  has  not  yielded  to  suggestion.
Rectal  injections.

3d. — Is  doing  better.     Slept  all  last  night.     Appetite  poor.

5th. — Abscess  is  doing  well.  Passed  a  good  night.  Yesterday
evening,  pain  in  right  side  of  the  abdomen,  which  disappeared  after  sugges-
tion. This  morning,  acute  tenderness  over  hypogastric  region  as  far
as  the  umbilicus.     It  diminishes  in  consequence  of  suggestion.

7th. — Since  yesterday  evening,  the  patient  has  had  painful  spots
about  the  left  breast,  which  have  prevented  her  from  sleeping.  Still
complains  of  pain  about  the  xiphoid  appendix  when  she  has  eaten.
Has  no  more  nausea,  and  no  more  leucorrhœa.  Tenderness  upon
pressure  of  the  left  interscapular  region.  Suggestion  is  continued,  but
irregularly.

10th. — She  still  complains  of  supra-umbilical  pains  after  having
eaten. — Suggestion.  In  the  evening  she  eats  without  much  appetite
but  without  pain.

13th. — Again  complains  of  a  painful  sensation  in  the  epigastrium.
Did  not  sleep  during  the  night. — Suggestion.

14th. — Yesterday  she  ate  a  little  at  mid-day  after  suggestion.  Ate
better  in  the  evening  and  slept  pretty  well  at  night.  Appetite  is  still
poor. — Suggestion.

15th. — Is  doing  well  ;  has  eaten  her  food  without  pain.

16th. — She  continues  to  do  well.     Asks  for  her  dismissal.

VII.

Various  Painfcl  Affections.
Observation  LXVIII. — Epigastralgia  relieved by  a  single  suggestion.

M ,   forty  years   old,  a  railway  employee,  comes  to  consult  me

on  May  28,  1884.  His  constitution  is  strong,  but  he  is  very  nervous.
He  came  to  me  two  months  ago  for  an  epigastric  pain,  which  disappeared
after  hypnotic  suggestion.

ô

62  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

Two  days  ago  this  pain  reappeared.  It  no  longer  exists  sponta-
neously, but  when  he  is  on  night  duty  he  is  suddenly  taken  with  sharp
pain  and  epigastric  oppression,  lasting  from  quarter  to  half  an  hour.
Then  it  disappears,  giving  place  to  a  renal  pain  which  lasts  the  same
length  of  time.  It  recurs  twice  in  the  course  of  twenty-four  hours.
Appetite  is  fair  and  digestion  good.  Pressure  over  epigastric  region
determines   very  sharp  pains.

He  goes  into  profound  sleep  upon  suggestion,  without  memory  upon  wak-
ing.     When  he  wakes  he  no  longer  feels  any  pain.

Several  months  later  he  comes  back  with  the  same  pain.  //  again
yields  entirely  to  one  hypnotic  suggestion.

Observation   LXIX.—  Slight  catarrhal  nephritis. — Epigastric  and    umbilical  pains
which  rapidly  yield  to  suggestion.

G ,   fourteen  years  old,  a  shoemaker's  apprentice,  comes  to  the

clinic  on  June  12,  1883.

At  eleven  o'clock  on  June  9,  he  had  a  chill  followed  by  fever
and  sweating.  The  next  day  he  felt  weak,  complained  of  temporal
neuralgia  on  the  right  side,  which  still  persists,  of  lack  of  appetite,  and
of  abdominal  pains. — Two  years  ago  the  boy  had  an  attack  of  chorea,
and  last  year  typhoid  fever.

He  is  delicate,  and  of  lymphatic  temperament.  Temperature  normal,
pulse  regular,  respiration  clear,  tongue  dry,  and  slightly  coated.  He
has  no  appetite,  eructations  without  nausea,  no  movement  for  four  days.
Complains  of  a  pain  in  the  epigastrium  and  in  the  right  renal  region.
Says  he  has  xanthopsia.  Urine  is  bloody,  contains  traces  of  albumen,
and  white  and  red  blood  cells.  Sp.  gr.  1012.  (Hemoglobinuria?
Slight  catarrhal  nephritis  ?  )

14th. —  Hypnotic  suggestion  ;  he  goes  into  somnambulism.  The  renal
and  epigastric  pains  disappear,  but  return  in  half  an  hour.

15th. — Feels  sharp  pain  from  the  xiphoid  appendix  as  far  as  the
umbilicus  and  about  the  borders  of  the  ribs;  the  pain  disappears
instantly  upon  hypnotic  suggestion.

19th. — Urine  is  still  bloody,  and  cloudy.  Sp.  gr.  1014,  with  traces  of
albumen.     Pains  have  not  reappeared.

In  the  evening  he  again  complains  of  pain  at  the  borders  of  the
ribs  on  both  sides.  It  disappears  immediately  after  hypnotic  sugges-
tion.

He  continues  to  do  well,  still  feels  slight  lassitude,  but  no  more  pain,
the  urine  has  become  normal.

On  July  8  he  comes  again,  complaining  of  a  pain  in  the  region  of
the  umbilicus  which  has  existed   since  day  before  yesterday,  especially

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  363

during  micturition.  He  also  complains  of  palpitation  ;  we  find  a
slight  systolic  murmur  at  the  base  of  the  heart.  Suggestion  makes  the
umbilical  pain  disappear.  It  does  not  reappear,  and  the  patient  returns
feeling  very  well,  on  July  14.

Observation   LXX. — Serere  interscapular  fain  cured  in  one  hypnotic  seance.

J ,  twenty-seven  years  old,  married,  constitution  delicate,  tempera-
ment nervous,  comes  to  consult  me  011  March  6,  1886.  Since  ten
o'clock  yesterday  morning  he  has  had  pain  in  the  left  interscapular
region,  with  a  sensation  as  of  an  iron  bar  when  he  wishes  to  bend
over.  When  resting  he  feels  no  pain,  but  if  he  wishes  even  to  lift  a
package  of  shoes  (he  is  employed  in  a  shoe-factory),  he  has  to  let  it
fall  on  account  of  the  pain.  Yesterday  evening  it  was  so  severe  that
he  had  to  be  taken  home.  He  slept  well  during  the  night,  but  this
morning  he  could  not  bend  over,  or  put  on  his  boots.

He  had  pneumonia  last  year,  which  lasted  two  months.  He  is  not
subject  to  neuralgia  and  has  no  other  nervous  affection.

Pressure  over  the  interscapular  region  and  about  the  angle  of  the
scapula  causes  very  severe  pain.

I  propose  to  hypnotize  him  by  closing  his  eyes.  He  gives  himself
up  to  it  with  a  bad  grace.  He  is  very  impressionable,  and  fears  that  I
wish  to  perform  an  operation  upon  him.  I  reassure  him  and  continue
suggestion  holding  his  eyes  closed.  His  nervous  anxiety  is  with  dif-
ficulty dissipated.  His  hands  tremble.  However,  he  goes  into  pro-
found sleep  ;  there  is  relaxation  without  catalepsy,  and  no  memory
upon  waking.  I  energetically  suggest  calmness  of  mind  ;  I  affirm  that
the  pain  has  disappeared.

Having  let  him  sleep  alone  for  about  six  minutes,  he  has  several
nervous  spasms  and  call's  out  :  "I  am  falling!"  and  then  awakens  as
if  coming  out  of  a  nightmare.  He  remembers  having  dreamed  that  he
was  falling  into  a  ditch. —  The  pain  has  almost  completely  disappeared;  he
is  surprised  at  being  able  to  bend  over,  feels  his  back  to  find  the
spot  and  does  not  find  anything.  He  lifts  a  chair  easily,  which  he
could  not  do  before.

I  hypnotize  him  a  second  time.  He  gives  himself  up  easily.  His  sleep
is  more  quiet  ;  there  are  slight  nervous  movements  in  his  hands. — I
suggest  the  complete  disappearance  of  the  pain.  Upon  waking,  he
remembers  having  heard  talking  but  does  not  know  what  I  said.  He
remembers,  however,  having  heard  me  say  that  military  music  was
playing  !  But  this  suggestion  did  not  succeed  ;  he  did  not  hear  the
music.

He   only  complains   of    a    certain  general   dulness.      There    is  not

364  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

:he  slightest  pain;  he  can  bend  over  and  lift  an  object  from  the
ground,  and  make  muscular  efforts  without  any  pain.  He  does  not
trust  his  own  feelings,  he  tries  to  find  the  painful  spot  but  does  not  suc-
ceed. He  does  not  understand  it  ;  his  astonishment  has  something
comical  about  it.

Observation  LXXI. —  Tuberadar  diathesis. — Restoration  of  sleep  and  disappearance
of  the  thoracic  pains  by  suggestion.

B ,  sixteen  years  old,  a  shoemaker's  apprentice,  enters  the  hospi-
tal on  February  15,  1885.

Six  months  ago  he  had  a  painful  spot  in  the  left  axilla  which  yielded
to  blistering  in  about  six  days.  At  the  same  time  he  had  oppression,
without  cough  or  expectoration.  He  has  always  been  able  to  work.
For  the  last  six  days,  there  has  been  palpitation  and  cough  without
expectoration  ;  appetite  medium  for  about  three  weeks.  During  the
last  three  nights  he  has  had  night  sweats.  His  parents  died  of  tuber-
culosis.

He  is  of  lymphatic  temperament,  but  good  constitution.  No  fever,
pulse  80,  and  regular.  Digestive  functions  normal,  thorax  well
formed.  The  heart  beats  normally.  Slight  systolic  murmur  at  the
base  and  over  the  carotids.  Respiratory  sounds  normal  ;  we  only  find
roughened  expiration,  with  slight  bronchial  respiration  at  the  right  apex.

(Diagnosis  :  tubercular  diathesis.)

The  evening  of  his  entrance,  hypnotic  suggestion  ;  somnambulism.

He  sleeps  well  during  the  night  ;  did  not  sleep  at  all  the  preceding
night.     Has  slept  very  little  for  two  months.

17th. — Patient  slept  very  well  again  last  night,  after  suggestion.  He
no  longer  complains  of  oppression.

18th. — He  complains  of  pain  in  the  right  shoulder,  which  disappears
immediately  after  hypnotic  suggestion.

The  thoracic  pain  does  not  reappear.  He  remains  in  the  hospital  until
the  24th,  complaining  of  nothing  more  than  slight  palpitation  of  the
heart.

Observation  LXXII. — Hypogastric  and  suprainguinal  pains  on  the  left  side,  con-
nee  ted  with  a  former  pelvic-peritonitis. —  They  disappear  in  several  séances.

B ,  twenty -one  years  old,  a  seamstress,  enters  the  service  on  Janu

ary  24,  1885.  A  year  ago  she  was  confined.  The  placenta  had  to  be
extracted  ;  part  of  it  remained.  A  week  after  she  had  fever,  which
lasted  fifteen  days,  accompanied  with  pains  in  the  left  side  of  the
abdomen.  She  nursed  the  child  for  a  week,  and  then  had  an  abscess
of  the  breast.

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  365

After  a  month  she  took  a  place  again;  her  periods  came  back  nor-
mally until  April.  In  May.  without  apparent  cause,  she  had  leucorrhoea
for  about  three  months,  without  pain.  She  came  to  the  hospital,  and,
was  treated  with  injections  of  ergotine.  The  leucorrhoea  was  stopped
and  she  left  in  June  feeling  very  well.

In  July,  she  developed  pains  in  the  left  flank,  in  the  inferior  region
of  the  left  axilla,  and  in  the  back.  These  pains  disappeared  after  blister-
ing and  hypnotization.

She  left  about  the  end  of  July,  cured.  The  periods  came  again  nor-
mally and  were  not  excessive.

For  the  last  nine  days,  she  has  again  had  pain  above  the  groin  and  in
the  hypogastrium.  The  patient  has  been  in  bed  for  a  week.  The  pains
occur  especially  in  the  evening  and  morning,  lasting  about  an  hour. —
Insomnia  for  a  week.

On  January  27,  we  note:  temperament  lymphatic,  constitution  deli-
cate. Pulse  regular,  96.  No  fever. — Abdomen  tympanitic  and  soft.
Pain  upon  deep  pressure  above  the  left  crural  arch  and  in  the  hypo-
gastrium ;  at  times  spontaneous. — The  patient  has  eaten  little  for  a
week,  but  does  not  complain  of  dislike  for  food  or  other  digestive
trouble.  Movements  normal  since  she  has  been  at  the  hospital  ;  two
months  before,  constipation  with  colic. — Hypogastric  pain  in  urinating.
— To  the  touch,  the  os  is  large  and  patent.  Slightly  sensitive  on  the
left  side.  Marked  antiflexion  of  the  uterus.  Cul-de-sac  free. — Abun-
dant non-odorous  leucorrhoea  for  three  months. — Pains  in  the  loins
co-existing  with  abdominal  pains. — no  evidences  of  hysteria.  Respira-
tion normal.     Diagnosis  :  Antiflexion  of  the  uterus  ;  old  pelvic-peritonitis.

On  the  night  of  the  26th,  the  patient  slept  a  little  in  consequence  of
hypnotic  suggestion.

27th. — In  the  morning,  hypnotization:  patient  goes  into  profound
sleep  :  the  disappearance  of  the  abdominal  pain  is  suggested.
Upon  leaking,  the  pain  upon  pressure  has  completely  disappeared.  It  re-
appears in  an  hour.

28th. — Pain  upon  pressure  of  the  hypogastrium  and  above  the  left
groin.  She  complains  moreover  of  a  pain  in  the  right  ear,  and  pressure
at  the  emergence  of  the  facial  nerve  causes  very  acute  pain. — Hypno-
tization at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning:  profound  sleep  with  automatism,
suggestive  anaesthesia,  and  amnesia  upon  waking.  I  suggest  the  dis-
appearance of  the  pains.  Upon  waking,  the  pains  have  disappeared.
Pressure  of  the  hypogastrium  and  of  the  facial  nerve  does  not  provoke
them.

29th. — Abdominal  pain  returned  about  three  o'clock  to-day.  The
facial  pain  has  not  returned.  Patient  slept  a  little  last  night.  At
eight  o'clock   this  morning,  more  severe  pain  lasting  a  quarter  of  an

3 66  Suggestive   TJicrapcuties.

hour.  At  the  present  time,  ten  o'clock,  it  only  exists  upon  pressure.^
Suggestion  :  disappearance  of  the  pain.

30th. — The  pain  did  not  reappear  during  the  day  yesterday.  This
morning  slight  pain  for  ten  minutes. — Continuation  of  suggestion.

31st. — She  had  no  more  pain  yesterday.  This  morning  it  came  back
and  was  very  severe  from  five  to  six  o'cLock. — Continuation  of  sugges-
tion without  any  other  treatment.

February  3d.  Patient  has  no  more  pains  :  the  leucorrhcea  still  per-
sists.    She  sleeps  well  at  night.

Observation  LXXIII. — Neuralgic  intercostal  pain  dating  back  pi/teen  days,  relieved
by  suggestion.

Eugenie  G ,   17  years  old.  left  the  hospital   on   June  22d,   after

having  been  there  five  weeks  for  erythema  nodosum  of  the  legs.  She
comes  to  consultation  on  September  14,  1883,  for  a  neuralgic  intercostal
pain  in  the  seventh  space  on  the  left  side,  sometimes  too,  but  rarely,  on
the  right,  dating  back  fifteen  days,  and  manifesting  itself  especially  when
she  coughs,  preventing  her  from  sleeping.  Pressure  upon  the  intercostal
space  is  painful.  She  is  hypnotized  and  goes  into  the  second  degree  of
sleep.  Upon  waking  she  feels  no  more  pain  either  spontaneous  or  upon
pressure.      2 he  patient  has  not  come  back.

Observation  LXXIV. — Obstinate  thoracic  pains  consecutive  to  pneumonia. —  Tran-
sient disappearance  after  suggestion. —  They  do  not  disappear  definitely  until  after  ten
days  of  suggestion.

L ,  of  Saverne,  thirty-three  years  old,  enters  the  hospital  on  Sep-
tember 20,  1883,  for  a  pneumonia  with  bronchitis.  He  has  been  conva-
lescent for  fifteen  days  (October  7),  and  walks  about  in  the  ward.  There
remains  a  shooting  pain  extending  from  the  left  border  of  the  ribs  to  the
level  of  the  umbilicus  on  one  side,  and  to  the  clavicle  on  the  other,  follow-
ing the  mammary  line.  The  pain  is  constant  and  very  sharp,  obliging  him
to  catch  his  breath  three  or  four  times  before  continuing  to  breathe.
Last  night,  after  having  been  out  the  day  before  and  getting  tired,  he
was  waked  at  midnight  by  an  increase  of  the  pain,  which  lasted  all
night.

Patient  is  hypnotized  October  7  ;  light  sleep  ;  suggestion.  Upon  waking
the  pain  has  manifestly  diminished.  A  sore  spot  remains  limited  to  the
border  of  the  ribs.

8th. — Was  waked  last  night  at  one  o'clock.  The  pain  had  increased
and  respiration  has  been  embarrassed  since  this  time.  To-day  the  pain
extends  from  the  umbilical  line  to  the  sixth  space.

New  hypnotic  seance. — A  first  trial  only  produces  drowsiness  without

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  367

result;  a  second  brings  about  profound  sleep.  Upon  waking,  the  pain
has  greatly  diminished  :  it  extends  from  the  umbilical  region  to  the
ninth  space;   respiration  is  accomplished  without  effort.

9th. — The  pain  returned  yesterday  at  three  o'clock.  Two  painful
spots  in  the  umbilical  and  infra-mammary  region.  Third  séance:  total
disappearance  of  the  pains.

10th. — The  pain  reappeared  at  half-past  twelve;  the  patient  could
not  sleep  after  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening.  (Two  blisters  were
applied.)

nth. — Pain  in  the  eighth  intercostal  space,  in  front  of  the  mammary
line,  very  intense,  tearing,  with  sensation  of  weight  over  the  sternum. —
It  has  disappeared  below  the  costal  border. — It  appeared  yesterday
evening  at  ten  o'clock  and  prevented  the  patient  from  sleeping. — Upon
auscultation,  there  are  always  slight  rales  at  the  right  base.  When  he
is  made  to  sit  down,  the  patient  complains  of  vertigo  due  to  his  pulmo-
nary trouble.     Cephalalgia.

After  hypnotic  suggestion,  the  painful  spot  persists  upon  pressure  ;  but
the  weight  over  the  sternum  is  less. — A  second  séance  immediately  after
the  first,  makes  the  painful  spot  disappear  as  well  as  the  cephalalgia.

At  half-past  one  this  spot  returns,  but  the  pain  is  less  severe  and
unaccompanied  with  the  sensation  of  weight  over  the  sternum.  Hyp-
notic suggestion  at  half-past  four,  makes  it  disappear  completely.

12th. — Passed  a  good  night,  no  pain.  Patient  has  slept  well  for  the
first  time.  Since  yesterday  evening  there  has  been  a  sensation  of
weight  over  the  sternum,  and  slight  burning.  Slightly  painful  spot  at
the  border  of  the  axilla. — Hypnotic  suggestion.  Upon  waking,  the
painful  spot  has  disappeared,  as  well  as  the  sensation  of  burning.
There  only  remains  a  slight  sensation  of  weight  over  the  sternum.

He  leaves  on  the  12th,  and  returns  to  the  hospital  on  the  14th.  The
painful  spot  has  not  disappeared.  Slept  well  on  the  night  of  the  12th.
Since  yesterday  morning,  he  has  again  experienced  a  sense  of  weight
over  the  sternum  and  a  sensation  of  burning  about  the  middle  of  the
sternum.  There  has  been  a  desire  to  vomit,  accompanied  with  bitter
regurgitations  this  morning. — After  hypnotic  suggestion  he  no  longer  feels
any  trouble.

15th. — Painful  spot  returned  at  half-past  eleven  in  the  morning  but
the  pain  was  less  intense.  He  slept  during  the  night,  and  this  morning
took  an  emetic  ;  he  vomited  twice  and  had  one  movement. — At  the
present  time,  the  burning  sensation  exists  along  the  whole  length  of  the
sternum. — After  hypnotic  suggestion  the  patient  feels  better,  but  the
burning  sensation  still  exists.  He  stills  complains  of  having  a  slight
sense  of  thoracic  constriction.

1 6th. — The  burning  sensation  has  disappeared  since  yesterday  morn-

368  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

ing.  Patient  only  complains  of  a  slight  feeling  of  thoracic  constriction.
— Suggestion.

17th. — He  no  longer  has  the  burning  sensation;  when  he  breathes  he
still  feels  pressure  at  the  inferior  part  of  the  sternum  and  nipple.
Yesterday,  stabbing  pain  from  five  to  six  o'clock  in  the  evening.  The
feeling  of  thoracic  constriction  reappeared  at  half-past  two. — Sugges-
tion, after  which  he  feels  slightly  relieved.  When  he  breathes  he  still
feels  two  painful  points  external  to  the  nipple.

18th. — He  feels  no  more  pain  or  burning  sensation;  nothing  but  a
sense  of  pressure  which  disappears  by  suggestion.

19th. — He  is  completely  relieved. — Suggestion.

20th. — He  continues  to  do  well,  and  only  feels  slight  pressure.  Asks
for  his  dismissal.

22d. — He  comes  back  to  show  himself  ;  is  doing  well  and  has
scarcely  any  more  trouble.

Observation  LXXV. — Painful  contusion  of  the  deltoid. — Inability  to  raise  the  arm. —
Almost  complete  cure  in  two  séances.

S ,  sixty-three  years  old,  a  workman  at  Nancy,  while  carrying   a

beam  on  September  3,  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning,  fell  and  struck
his  left  shoulder  against  a  wall.

On  September  4,  I  find  a  simple  contusion.  The  patient  cannot
lift  his  arm  or  hold  it  out  from  the  body  without  using  the  other  hand  ;
the  pain  exists  at  the  antero-internal  part  of  the  deltoid.  /  hypnotize
him  :  he  goes  into  the  second  degree  of  sleep  ;  I  suggest  the  disappear-
ance of  the  pain  and  the  possibility  of  raising  his  arm.  Upon  waking,  he
raises  it  to  450  without  using  the  other  hand,  and  as  far  as  his  head
with  the  use  of  the  other  hand.     Pain  has  much  diminished.

September  5th. — Second  séance,  third  degree.  After  the  séance,  he
can  lift  his  arm  as  far  as  his  head  and  hold  it  vertically  in  the  air.
Before  the  séance,  if  his  arm  was  lifted,  he  could  not  lower  it  gradually;
it  fell  suddenly.  At  the  present  time,  he  can  hold  it  up.  There  is  only
slight  pain  in  the  deltoid.

Observation  LXXVI. — Muscular  pain  in  the  side,  dating  back  a  month,  relieved  in
two  hypnotic  séances.

M ,  twenty-nine  years  old,  a  stone-layer,  in  good  health,  has  com-
plained for  a  month  past  of  pain  between  the  costal  border  and  the
anterior  superior  iliac  spine  on  the  right  side.  When  in  repose,  he  only
feels  a  certain  pricking.  The  pain  appears  when  he  lifts  his  arm  up  ;
when  he  has  worked  all  day  he  feels  the  pain  until  midnight.     At  the

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  369

present  time,  he  cannot  lift  his  arm  or  make  the  slightest  effort  without
sharp  pain.  I  hypnotize  him;  he  goes  into  deep  sleep  ;  remembers  upon
waking  that  he  heard  me  talking,  but  does  not  know  what  I  said.
Upon  waking  he  no  longer  complains  of  any  pain,  and  can  lift  a  chair  with
his  arm  extended  without  any  pain.

He  comes  back  to  see  me  on  October  9.  The  pain,  which  disap-
peared for  two  hours,  reappeared  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening.  At  the
present  time,  pressure  determines  a  pain  above  the  spine  of  the  ilium  ;
effort  induces  intermittent  shooting  pains.  At  the  left  border  of  the
ribs  he  also  has  painful  spots  at  times.  After  a  new  hypnotic  suggestion,
the  pain  Completely  disappears.  The  patient  has  not  come  back,  and  has
resumed  his  work.

Observation  LXXVII. — Painful  spot  in  the  side,  almost  cured  by  suggestion.

M ,  a  guard  at  the  Agincourt  station,  comes  to  consult  me  on

October  4,  1884.  A  week  ago,  in  consequence  of  a  fall,  he  had  a  con-
tusion of  the  right  side.  However,  he  continued  to  work.  I  find  a
painful  spot  upon  pressure,  near  the  right  costal  border  in  the  axillary
line.  It  is  especially  noticeable  when  he  moves  about  and  when  he
works,  and  when  he  gets  up  after  having  lain  down.

After  sleep  (third  degree)  and  suggestion,  the  painful  spot  has  almost
completely  disappeared.

Observation  LXXVIII. — Pain  in  the  epitrochlear  muscles,  dating  back  two  months. —
Cure  in  two  séances.

T ,  twenty  years  old,  a  workman  in  the  founderies  at   Pompey,

comes  to  consult  me  on  March  8,  1885.  For  two  months  he  has  had
pain  in  the  epitrochlear  muscles,  in  the  lower  third  of  the  arm  near  the
internal  border  of  the  biceps,  and  in  the  epitrochlear  group  of  muscles.
Pressure  over  this  region  gives  rise  to  acute  pain.  Last  month  patient
had  to  stop  work  for  sixteen  days  ;  he  has  worked  steadily  this
month.

I  hypnotize  him,  and  he  goes  into  somnambulism.  Upon  waking
there  is  no  more  spontaneous  pain.  He  can  grasp  powerfully  and  with-
out pain.

He  comes  back  on  the  14th.  Has  had  no  more  pain  ;  from  time  to
time  he  has  painful  pricking  sensations  near  the  epitrochlea,  lasting  usu-
ally from  one  to  two  hours.  Pressure  only  determines  pain  at  the  epi-
trochlea. The  arm  is  no  longer  sensitive  ;  the  epitrochlear  muscles  are
only  slightly  so  when  squeezed.  Second  suggestion.  Upon  waking,  he
feels  no  more  pain.
24

3  7°  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

Returns  on  the  23d. — Has  been  able  to  work  without  having  any
pain  ;  he  still  has  the  pricking  sensation  when  he  moves  his  limb
quick ly.      Third  suggestion.     Complete  cure.

Observation  LXXIX. — Pains  in  the  shoulder  and  in  the  right  upper  limb,  with  tremor
and  weakness  after  effort. — Cured  by  suggestion  in  two  séances.

V ,  a  paper  glazier,  comes  to  consult  me  on  February  n,  1887.

Six  months  ago,  while  lifting  a  heavy  box,  he  experienced  a  sharp  pain
in  the  right  arm  and  fore-arm.  In  two  clays  and  a-half  he  was  again
able  to  work  ;  but  this  pain  has  persisted  until  to-day,  in  spite  of  the
repeated  application  of  the  cautery.  He  can  lift  the  arm,  and  flex  and
extend  the  fore-arm.  But  certain  movements  of  the  latter,  pronation,
and  supination,  are  accompanied  with  tremor.  Upon  pressure  we
find  tenderness  near  the  posterior  half  of  the  deltoid,  triceps,  and
olecranon,  and  in  the  inferior  half  of  the  external  border  of  the  radius.
There  are  no  tingling  sensations.

By  the  dynamometer,  the  right  hand  gives  23;  the  left  hand  30.  J
hypnotize  hint  easily,  he  goes  into  the  third  degree.  Suggestions
repeated  for  half  an  hour,  and  passive  motion  of  the  arm.  Upon  wak-
ing, the  right  hand  gives  52  (average  of  six  trials),  the  left  hand  45.  No
longer  complains  of  pain  in  the  deltoid.  Slight  tenderness  at  the  pos-
tero-external  border  of  the  olecranon.  The  tremor  has  disappeared,
movements  are  easier  and  more  rapid.

After  the  second  suggestion,  the  pain  has  almost  completely  vanished;
it  still  exists  to  a  slight  extent  upon  pressure.     The  right  hand  registers  56.

February  12th. — The  patient  worked  better  yesterday,  and  felt  more
strength  in  his  arm.  He  slept  all  last  night  without  pain,  while  on
other  nights  he  often  had  pain  in  his  arm.  We  still  find  slight  pain  in
the  deltoid  and  in  the  elbow.  The  dynamometer  registers  56  on  the
right  side.  After  suggestion,  there  is  no  more  tenderness  of  the  deltoid,
and  only  slight  tenderness  in  the  elbow.

13th. — Continues  to  do  well.  Complains  of  no  more  spontaneous
pain.     Pressure  still  determines  slight  pain  in  the  elbow. — Suggestion.

The  patient  has  not  come  back.

VIII.

Rheumatic  Troubles.

OBSERVATION   LXXX. — Rheumatic  paralysis  of  the  fore-arm  and  right  hand. — Sensa-
tion totally  restored  in  one  seance. —  Total  cure  in  four  séances.

G ,    forty-nine  years  old,    a  laborer,    was  in  a  cafe'  on  June  21,

1884,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  when  he  suddenly  felt  that  he  could
not  lift  his  right  hand.     The  fingers  and  the  lower  third  of  the  fore-arm

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  371

were  anaesthetic  and  felt  dull  and  heavy.  Seven  years  ago,  he  had
articular  rheumatism  localized  in  the  upper  limbs  :  the  pain  and  swell-
ing lasted  four  days,  then  disappeared  ;  but  the  arms  were  paralyzed  for

six  weeks.     G has  neither  a  syphilitic  nor  an    alcoholic  history  ;  he

works  in  a  damp  atmosphere.     Diagnosis  :  rheumatic  paralysis.

He  came  to  the  dispensary  for  four  days,  and  electricity  was  used
without  result.

He  then  went  to  consult  my  former  chef  de  clinique,  Dr.  Emile  Levy,
who  found  complete  paralysis  with  anaesthesia  of  the  limb.  The  patient
could  not  make  the  slightest  movement.

Dr.  Levy  hypnotized  him  (profound  sleep).  Upon  waking,  sensibility
was  restored,  and  the  patient  could  again  lift  his  hand.

After  the  second  se'ance,  the  movements  were  still  more  pronounced.

Dr.  Levy  sent  the  patient  to  my  clinic  on  June  30.  We  find  the
right  hand  slightly  swollen.  The  middle,  fourth,  and  little  fingers  are
bent  into  the  palm  of  the  hand  at  an  angle  of  1200.  The  patient  can
grasp  well  with  the  hand.  He  straightens  the  wrist,  but  with  some  diffi-
culty.    No  anaesthesia.

After  two  hypnotic  séances,  the  patient  opens  his  hand  easily,  and
straightens  his  wrist  perfectly.     The  cure  is  complete.

Observation  LXXXI. — Former  scaptdo-humeral  rheumatic  arthritis. — Marked  im-
provement from  the  first  hypnotic  seance. — Subsequent  condition  stationary  in  spite
of  the  continuation  of  suggestion.

C ,  thirty-four  years  old,  enters    the    hospital    on    May  2,  1885.

She  is  married,  and  is  the  mother  of  two  children.  For  four  or  five  years
she  has  had  pains  in  the  right  arm  and  shoulder,  with  weakness  of  this
limb,  which  has  increased  progressively.  Since  then  she  has  not  been
able  to  lift  her  arm.

About  the  same  time  she  experienced  pain  in  the  left  arm,  which  she
was  nevertheless  able  to  use  until  December,  1884.  Since  then  she  has
not  been  able  to  lift  it.

Finally,  for  the  last  four  weeks,  she  has  complained  of  pain  in  the  left
knee  when  she  walks.  Menstruation  is  regular, — no  leucorrhcea.
Patient  digests  well  except  for  slight  occasional  acidity.  She  perspires
a  good  deal,  and  sometimes  has  an  excessive  desire  to  make  water.  She
lived  in  a  damp  house  until  two  years  ago.

On  the  4th,  we  find  :  constitution  somewhat  delicate,  temperament
lymphatic,  no  fever,  heart  and  lungs  normal.

Right  upper  limb  :  the  patient  executes  all  movements  with  the  fore-
arm. Some  movements  both  forward  and  backward  can  be  made  with
the  arm,  but  the  patient  cannot  hold  it  out  from  the  body.     Movements

Ôé  -

Suggestive    Thci'apeutics.

may  be  passively  impressed  upon  it  and  it  may  be  held  out  horizontally.
The  scapula  tends  to  follow  it.  There  is  severe  pain  limited  to  the  right
acromio-clavicular  articulation  and  extending  slightly  below  it.  The
biceps  is  not  painful  to  pressure.

Left  upper  limb  :  the  same  condition  as  to  motility.  Sharp  pain  upon
pressure  below  the  acromio-clavicular  articulation.  The  latter  is  slight-
ly tender  to  pressure.  Pressure  upon  the  head  of  the  humerus  is
painful.  The  movements  of  the  left  knee  are  free.  The  knee  is  not
tender  to  pressure.  The  fingers  are  not  painful,  and  the  joints  are  not
deformed,  but  are  abnormally  mobile.  Diagnosis  :  rheumatic  arthritis
of  the  scapulo-humeral  and  acromio-clavicular  articulations.

The  patient  is  hypnotized  :  she  goes  into  deep  sleep,  almost  without
memory  upon  waking.  After  suggestion  given  for  the  right  arm,  the
patient  can  lift  the  right  hand  to  her  head  by  bending  her  head  side-
ways, and  the  pain  in  the  shoulder  has  diminished.

On  the  evening  of  the  4th,  suggestion  and  profound  sleep.  I  impress
movements  upon  the  arm  to  aid  the  suggestion,  and  affirm  that  the  pain
will  disappear  and  that  the  patient  will  be  able  to  execute  every  move-
ment without  pain.  I  continue  the  suggestion  energetically  for  twenty
minutes.

Upon  waking,  the  pains  have  almost  entirely  disappeared  on  the  right
side;  that  of  the  left  humerus  still  persists.  The  patient  can  reach
out  for  something  held  above  her  bed  spontaneously,  and  she  can  make
slight  movements  of  abduction.  The  arms  are  easily  lifted  into  the
horizontal  position,  but  the  patient  cannot  keep  them  there  and  lets
them  fall.

On  the  7th,  she  again  complains  of  severe  pain  in  the  acromio-
clavacular  articulation  on  the  right  side,  and  at  the  head  of  the  humerus
on  the  left.  She  can  hold  both  arms  out  at  a  right  angle  from  her
body.

9th. — After  the  suggestion  given  yesterday,  she  has  no  more  sponta-
neous shooting  pains.  The  pain  upon  pressure  in  the  right  side  has
diminished.     She  lifts  her  arm  at  a  right  angle. — Suggestion.

nth. — Suggestion  ;  the  acromio-clavicular  pain  on  the  right  side  and
the  pain  in  the  humerus  on  the  left  side  have  almost  disappeared  ;  but
the  patient  still  complains  of  a  sense  of  weight  in  both  arms  which
prevents  her  from  sleeping.  She  holds  both  arms  out  at  an  angle
of  45°  from  the  body.     Same  condition  on  the  days  following.

On  the  12th  (she  has  not  been  hypnotized),  there  is  again  pain  in  the
arm  and  left  fore-arm.  During  the  night  there  has  been  a  pricking  sen-
sation in  the  left  hand.

She  is  hypnotized  on  the  13th.  She  sleeps  better  on  the  following
night  but  on  the  14th  she  still  complains  of  pain  in  the  left  arm,  and  the

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  ^ ^

entire  humerus  is  tender  to  pressure.  She  holds  out  her  left  arm  well,
but  cannot  keep  it  out. — Suggestion.

15th. — The  pain  in  the  left  humerus  disappeared  after  the  suggestion
of  yesterday.  The  patient  can  again  hold  out  the  left  arm  at  an  angle
of  450  for  a  few  minutes.  During  the  night,  she  had  shooting  pains
in  the  sheath  of  the  left  triceps. — Suggestion  in  the  evening.  She  has
no  more  pain  during  the  night.

io;h. — The  patient  has  not  been  hypnotized  for  three  days.  The  pain
has  returned,  especially  in  the  left  shoulder  and  arm.  She  sleeps  little
at  night.  Energetic  and  prolonged  suggestion  accompanied  by  passive
motion  of  the  joints  of  the  shoulder.  We  succeed  in  making  her  hold
her  arm  out  almost  vertically  during  this  sleep.  I  allow  the  patient  to
sleep  and  permit  her  to  awake  spontaneously.

20th. — Patient  still  has  slight  pain  on  the  left  side.  She  lifts  both
arms  well,  but  does  not  succeed  in  holding  them  out  horizontally.  She
slept  quite  well  during  the  night.  In  the  evening,  prolonged  suggestion
accompanied  with  passive  movement  of  the  arms.  The  arms  are  held
almost  vertically  up.

2 1  st. — She  has  no  more  pain  and  can  hold  her  arms  out  horizontally.
This  condition  is  maintained  until  the  26th.     Daily  suggestion.

26th. — She  has  scarcely  any  more  pain  at  the  level  of  the  shoulders,
but  when  she  wishes  to  lift  her  left  arm  she  complains  of  a  painful  sen-
sation in  the  fore-arm.  Nevertheless  she  can  lift  this  arm  as  high  asço0.
She  can  extend  the  right  arm  almost  horizontally. — Appetite  is  good.

During  the  night  the  pains  again  appear  in  the  shoulders.  The
patient  has  not  slept.  The  next  clay  she  does  not  eat  and  seems  to  be
exhausted.  For  several  days  she  has  yielded  to  hypnotization  with  bad
grace.     She  wishes  to  go  back  to  her  own  village  in  the  Vosges.

28th. — The  patient  is  continually  complaining.  The  right  arm  is
doing  well.  It  is  somewhat  painful.  She  can  extend  it  easily  to  a
right  angle;  but  she  complains  continually,  in  spite  of  suggestion,
of  pains  in  the  shoulder  and  left  arm.  She  eats  nothing;  her
disposition  has  become  sour.  We  learn  that  her  husband  came  to
see  her  and  that  he  did  not  wish  her  to  be  hypnotized  any  more.  She
herself  says  that  she  prefers  to  keep  her  arms  as  they  are  and  does  not
wish  to  continue  this  treatment.  We  think  that  she  has  been  submitted
to  some  counter-suggestive  influence  which  perhaps  has  neutralized  the
efficacy  of  the  treatment.     She  leaves  the  hospital  on  the  29th.

3  74  Suggestive    Titer  apetitics.

Observation    LXXXII. — Muscular  rheumatism   with   cramps  in  the  limbs. — Rapid
cure  by  suggestion.

C ,   a  gardener,   seventy-two  years   old,    enters    the    hospital  on

November  6,  1883.  For  four  weeks  he  has  complained  of  pains
throughout  the  body,  especially  in  the  linibs,  which  take  hold  of  him
two  or  three  times  a  day  and  last  three  quarters  of  an  hour.  Two  or
three  times  a  day  he  also  has  cramps  in  the  back  of  the  thigh,  causing
flexion  of  the  knees,  lasting  several  minutes.  He  is  often  exposed  to
rain,  and  was  wet  through  four  weeks  ago.  Since  this  time  he  has  had
a  cough  ;  there  is  an  opaque  mucous  sputum.  Slight  dyspnoea  when
he  walks.     His  appetite  has  always  been  good.

Patient  is  a  well-preserved  man  of  strong  constitution.  The  thorax  is
slightly  convex  and  resonant.  Respiration  is  broncho-vesicular  in  front.
Expiration  normal.  Breathing  is  broncho-vesicular  over  the  left  apex
posteriorly,  and  slightly  bronchial  over  the  supra-spinous  region.
A  few  sub-crepitant  rales  at  the  left  base.  Heart  sounds  normal.
{Slight  senile  emphysema,  bronchitis,  senile  induration  of  the  apices?)
The  joints  of  the  fingers  are  slightly  deformed  (arthritis  deformans)
and  creak  slightly  when  moved.  By  pressing  the  muscles  of  the
buttock  and  the  left  thigh,  pain  and  contractures  are  caused,  {mus-
cular rheumatism).  When  left  without  treatment  for  several  days
his  condition  remains  the  same;  cramps  every  day;  on  the  7th  three
attacks  of  cramps  in  the  legs  and  wrists  ;  on  the  8th  four  attacks  of
cramps  in  both  arms.

On  the  nth  we  note  :  the  patient  complains  of  pains  in  the  tendon  of
Achilles  and  at  the  inner  surface  of  the  thighs.  He  often  has  cramps
which  appear  simultaneously  or  alternately  in  all  the  limbs,  accom-
panied with  a  pricking  sensation,  the  fingers  and  knees  being  contract-
ured  in  semi-flexion.

After  the  12th,  the  patient  is  hypnotized  every  day  (profound  sleep)
with  suggestion.  Since  the  first  seance  he  has  had  no  more  cramps;
the  diffuse  pains  decrease  ;  they  do  not  exist  when  the  patient  is  quiet,
but  reappear  when  he  walks.

After  the  21st  he  does  well  and  has  no  more  pain  on  walking.

Observation  LXXXIII. — Rheumatic  ileo-lumbar  neuralgia. — Rapid  improvement  in
one  seance.     Perfect  cure  in  eighteen  days.

T ,    fifty- five  years    old,   enters    the   hospital   on    November    27,

1884.  She  is  a  widow  and  the  mother  of  twelve  children,  all  of  whom
have  died  as  their  father  did,  of  phthisis.

Several  clays  ago  this  woman,  who  is  usually  very  well,  was  suddenly

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  375

interrupted  in  her  work  by  a  pain  in  the  right  side,  spreading  toward
the  anterior  spine  of  the  ilium.  She  had  to  go  home,  where  she  had  a
rigor.  The  pain  was  so  intense  that  she  could  not  get  to  her  bed.
This  lumbar  pain  has  persisted  ever  since,  accompanied  with  painful
irradiations,  sometimes  in  both  legs.  Otherwise  she  is  very  well  and
has  a  good  appetite.

29th. — We  noie:  constitution  good  ;  no  fever;  patellar  bursa  on  the
left  side.  Excessively  sharp  pain  at  the  level  of  the  lumbar  vertebrae,
below  the  lower  border  of  the  ribs  on  the  right  side,  and  at  the  emer-
gence of  the  right  sciatic  nerve.  The  pain  is  less  intense  on  the  left
side.  These  pains  often  spread  to  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen  and
to  the  limbs  on  the  right  side.     {Rheumatic  iko-lumbar  neuralgia.)

Hypnotization. — The  patient  goes  into  somnambulism;  during  sleep
she  has  an  active  spontaneous  dream  ;  she  speaks  of  scrubbing  the
floor.  I  drive  away  this  dream  and  affirm  the  disappearance  of  the
pains.  Upon  waking  she  is  very  drowsy  and  goes  to  sleep  again  spon-
taneouslv,  sleeping  until  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  (from  eleven  in
the  morning).

30th. — She  is  much  better,  and  slept  well  during  the  night.  The
lumbar  region  is  only  slightly  painful.  The  sacral  region  is  still
painful  to  pressure  in  the  median  line  :  she  has  had  no  more  pain-
ful irradiations.  The  patient  can  turn  over  in  bed,  which  she  could  not
do  before.

December  1st. — She  has  again  had  very  sharp  pain  upon  pressure  of
the   sacrum,   but   the  pain   remains  limited  to  this  region.     The   loins
the  lower  border  of  the  ribs,  and  the  origin  of  the  sciatic  are  no  longer
painful.     No  more  irradiations.     Suggestion  nearly  every  day.     The  sacro-
coccygial  pain  is  persistent.

3d. — The  pain  grows  less  ;  the  patient  has  been  able  to  walk  a  little.
On  the  9th  she  has  continual  pain  when  she  gets  up  and  when  she
walks.  After  the  iSth  only  does  she  get  along  well.  Having  felt  no
pain  and  the  last  trace  of  sensitiveness  having  disappeared  on  the  20th
the  patient  asks  for  her  dismissal.

This  woman  has  never  had  any  nervous  history  but  is  an  excellent
somnambulist.     I  say  during  sleep,  "You  are  perfectly  cured.     Get  up.

Ycu  are  to  ciean  Mme.  X 's  house."     She  rises  with  her  eyes  shut,

dresses  herself,  looks  for  a  chair,  gets  upon  the  window-seat,  and  opens
and  begins  to  wash  the  window.  Then,  obedient  to  suggestion,  she
makes  her  bed  or  brushes  the  floor  of  the  ward  with  a  brush  which  is
handed  to  her.  She  works  for  several  hours.  When  suddenly  waked
she  does  not  remember  anything  and  thinks  she  has  been  sleeping
quietly  in  her  bed  or  in  a  chair.

3  76  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

Observation  LXXXIV. — Arthralgia  consecutive  to  an  arthritis. — Immediate  cure  by

suggestion.

D ,  twenty-one   years  old,  comes  to  consult   me  on  April  2d,  1884.

Three  months  ago,  after  having  wheeled  a  wheelbarrow,  he  developed
a  swelling  of  the  left  heel,  and  was  unable  to  bend  the  joint.  Six
weeks  ago  a  physician  applied  a  starched  bandage,  keeping  it  on  three
weeks  and  two  days.  The  bandage  was  taken  off  fifteen  days  ago,  and
there  was  no  improvement.

D limps  and  bends  his  knee  when  he  walks.     He  cannot  bend  the

left   heel,  which  is  painful  to  pressure.     The  swelling  has  disappeared.

On  the  2d  /  hypnotize  him  :  profound  sleep  ;  memory  perfect  upon
waking.     Suggestion  and  passive  movement  of  the  joint  during  sleep.

Upon  waking  he  bends  the  tibio-tarsial  articulation  very  well  and  spon-
taneously without  pain.  He  walks  well,  only  complaining  of  sensitive-
ness about  the  internal  malleolus.

He  has  not  come  back.  I  have  learned,  through  a  fellow-workman,
that  the  cure  has  been  maintained.

Observation  LXXXV. — Pleurodynia  helped  by  suggestion.

P ,  an  employee  on   the  chemin  de  fer  de  l'Est  at  Varangeville,

eighteen  years  old,  has  complained  for  four  days  of  a  sharp  pain  under
the  right  breast  {pleurodynia).

On  May  18,  1885,  at  my  clinic,  I  hypnotize  him  into  profound  sleep.
Upon  waking  the  pain  has  almost  completely  disappeared,  to  the  patient's
astonishment.

P returns  on  May  6,  1886.  For  the  last  six  days  he  has  com-
plained of  a  painful  spot  in  the  left  lumbar  region,  which  prevents  him
from  working.  Although  the  pain  has  decreased  since  the  2d,  the
patient  can  only  bend  to  grasp  an  object  with  difficulty.  I  put  him
into  somnambulism  and  when  he  wakes  the  pain  has  disappeared  ;  he  can
bend  over  very  easily.

Observation    LXXXVI. — Apyretic   articular   rheumatism. —  Temporary  cessation  of
the  pains  by  suggestion. — Gradual  cure.

D ,  eighteen  years  old,  a  waiter,  enters  the  hospital  on  April  13th,

1883.  He  has  just  been  in  M.  Parisot's  service  for  seven  weeks  on
account  of  sub-acute  articular  rheumatism,  of  which  he  has  had  two
successive  attacks.  He  left  after  being  in  the  hospital  two  weeks,  but
had  a  relapse  in  two  clays  and  returned  to  the  same  ward.

Having  no  pain  he  left  on  the  nth,  but  the  next  day  he  had  pain  again,
and  returned  to  our  ward  on  the  13th.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  $17

in  the  evening  he  has  intense  pain,  both  spontaneous  and  upon
pressure  in  the  insteps  and  in  the  calves;  he  limps,  and  walks  with
some  difficulty.

/  hypnotize  him  :  he  goes  into  the  third  degree.  Suggestion.
Upon  waking,  he  complains  of  no  more  pain  and  walks  well  and  without
limping.

The  next  day,  the  14th,  he  says  he  has  had  no  more  spontaneous
pains  and  he  walks  without  limping.  Pressure  of  the  tibio-tarsal  artic-
ulations, however,  still  causes  pain.

In  the  afternoon  he  complains  of  sharp  pain  in  the  groin  extending
into  the  crural  plexus.     Tenderness  in  the  calf.

I  hypnotize  him  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  ;  the  pains  disappear  in-
stantly, not  to  return.

1 6th. — In  the  evening  he  again  complains  of  severe  pain  at  the
level  of  the  malleoli  and  walks  with  difficulty,  limping.  The  pains  are
relieved  by  hypnotic  suggestion  ;  he  can  walk  and  run  for  the  time
being.

17th. — Since  this  evening  he  has  had  pain  in  the  right  supra-spinous
fossa,  near  the  anterior  border  of  the  trapezius,  near  the  inferior  part
of  the  biceps  on'  both  sides,  and  in  both  insteps.  Nevertheless  the
patient  walks  without  much  pain.  In  the  evening  hypnotic  suggestion  :
all  the  pains  disappear.

iSth. — In  the  morning  he  only  complains  of  sensitiveness  about  the
trapezius,  which  disappears  by  suggestion.

20th. — The  patient  again  feels  pain  in  the  instep;  he  can  only  stand
three  seconds  on  the  left  foot.  This  pain  is  again  relieved  by  sugges-
tion on  the  21st.

This  pain,  which  is  each  time  completely  removed  by  suggestion  re-
appears obstinately.  We  find  it  again  on  the  evening  of  the  23d  ;  it  is
driven  away  by  suggestion,  but  reappears  in  several  hours,  especially
behind  the  external  malleolus,  and  is  again  helped  by  suggestion  on  the
24th.

This  continues  about  eighteen  days,  when  the  cure  becomes  per-
manent.

Observation  LXXXVII. — Chronic  articular  rheumatism   localized  in  the  wrists  and
insteps  dating  back  three  years. — Rapid  cure  in  six  seances.

R ,  thirty  years  old,  enters  the  hospital   on   December  13,  1883.

He  has  just  come  from  the  hospital  where  chronic  diseases  are
treated  and  where  he  has  been  since  the  13th  of  September.  He  has
been  troubled  with  articular  rheumatism  for  three  years.  Disease
began  with  pain  in  the  knees,  without  noticeable  swelling,  which  did
not    prevent    him    from    continuing    his    work.      After    about     three

37S  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

weeks  this  pain  disappeared  and  was  replaced  by  another  pain  in  the
insteps  below  the  malleoli  which  lasted  two  months.  Then  a  pain  in  the
middle  of  the  arm,  and  afterwards  in  both  wrists,  developed,  which  made
motion  difficult  for  two  or  three  years,  although  the  swelling  was  not
noticeable.  The  right  wrist  was  swollen  last  July  for  three  days;  the
left  wrist  was  swollen  for  two  days  a  month  ago.  Finally,  the  feet
were  swollen  and  painful,  the  left  one  for  two  years,  the  right
for  a  month  and  a  half.  The  rheumatic  pains  have  developed  without
fever  or  reaction  ;  at  the  time  when  they  began  the  patient  was  sleep-
ing in  a  freshly  plastered  room.  At  Fronard  he  was  able  to  work  until
the  25th  of  June  in  spite  of  these  arthropathies  ;  since  this  time  the
pains  have  been  too  sharp  and  movement  too  difficult  for  him  to  con-
tinue his  work.

Present  condition:  constitution  good,  temperament  lymphatic.  Gen-
eral health  good.  Pain  in  the  articulation  of  the  right  wrist.  The
movements  of  adduction  and  abduction  are  impossible  :  when  made  by
passive  motion  they  are  very  limited  and  cause  sharp  pain  in  the  articu-
lations concerned.  The  carpal  and  carpo-metacarpal  articulations  of  the
back  of  the  hand  are  noticeably  swollen  and  painful.  The  interossei
muscles  and  those  of  the  thumb  (thenar  eminence)  are  notably  atrophied.
The  phalanges  are  free.

Same  condition  of  the  left  hand  ;  pain  especially  in  the  cubito  and
radio-carpal  articulations.  In  both  hands  then,  the  movements  of  the
wrist  are  the  ones  which  are  almost  totally  destroyed.

The  right  foot  is  swollen  at  the  level  of  the  joint  of  the  instep.  It  is
especially  painful  around  and  at  the  level  of  the  external  malleolus.

The  left  foot  is  more  swollen  at  the  level  of  the  instep  ;  the  pain
exists  especially  about  and  in  front  of  the  external  malleolus.  The
movements  of  adduction  and  abduction  are  possible,  but  painful.
Pressure  and  walking  cause  pain  in  the  malleolus.  The  patient
abducts  the  left  leg  and  cannot  stand  upon  it  alone.

14th. — Hypnotic  suggestion.  Profound  sleep.  After  the  séance  the
patient  statuts  a  short  time  upon  the  left  leg  unaided,  which  he  could  not
do  before.  He  passes  the  day  well.  He  still  has  some  pain  during  the
night.

1 6th. — Exactly  the  same  condition  is  found  as  when  patient  was
admitted:  same  condition  of  the  wrist  and  insteps.  The  patient  con-
tinually abducts  the  left  leg  in  walking  ;  he  cannot  stand  upon  the  sole
of  the  foot  without  leaning  upon  something.

Second  séance.  Hypnotic  suggestion.  Steep  is  profound  with  absence  of
memory  upoti  waking  ;  he  stands  two  or  three  seconds  upon  the  left  leg
without  leaning  upon  anything  with  his  hand.  During  the  day  he  felt
great  relief  from  pain  in  comparison  wilh  other  days.     During  the  night

Suggestive   Therapeutics,  379

he  had  no  pain.  The  right  hand  is  still  painful  about  the  head  of  the
ulna.     He  thinks  that  the  wrist  movements  are  easier.

17th. — The  wrists  are  still  painful.  Flexion  and  extension  of  the
wrists  are  easy.  Abduction  is  very  limited  and  adduction  impossible.
The  left  foot  is  still  sensitive.  After  sleep  and  suggestion,  these  pains
disappear  almost  entirely.  During  sleep,  movements  of  adduction  and
abduction  are  impressed  upon  the  hands  easily  and  painlessly,  which
was  impossible  before.  Upon  waking,  these  same  movements  are  pos-
sible, and  the  patient  stands  four  seconds  upon  the  left  foot.  Passed  a
good  night.     Night-sweat.

iSth. — Movements  of  adduction  and  abduction  continue  easy  for  the
left  hand  ;  they  were  impossible  a  month  and  a  half  ago.  They  are
also  easy  for  the  right  hand  :  he  performs  the  movement  of  abduction
without  any  pain,  which  he  has  not  been  able  to  do,  he  says,  for  three
years.  The  pain  has  almost  disappeared. — Pressure  upon  the  insteps
and  malleoli  does  not  determine  any  pain.  The  patient  walks  very
well,  without  spreading  his  legs  apart,  and  without  pain.  The  left
foot,  which  once  turned  out  easily,  no  longer  does  so.  He  says  that
for  two  years  he  has  not  walked  as  he  does  now.  He  stands  at  first
four  seconds,  then  seven  seconds  upon  this  foot,  which  has  been  an
impossibility  for  two  years.

19th,  and  20th. — This  condition  is  further  improved  by  hypnotic  sug-
gestion. On  the  20th,  he  stands  upon  the  left  foot  for  twenty  seconds  ;
he  goes  out  into  the  town  and  takes  quite  a  long  walk  without  having
any  stiffness  or  pain.

We  were  truly  surprised  at  this  great  change  ,  the  patient  was  very
much  astonished  at  being  able  to  walk  so  well.

2 1  st. — We  learn  through  the  nurse,  that  the  patient  told  the  other
patients  in  the  ward  that  he  did  not  sleep.  I  questioned  him,  and  he
says  that  he  slept.  He  remembers  absolutely  nothing,  but  refuses  to  be
hypnotized  again.  He  says  he  has  been  cured  too  quickly,  and  it  is
not  natural,  and  that  his  trouble  will  return.  This  was  at  the  begin-
ning of  our  hypnotic  experiments,  when  they  were  regarded  with  doubt
by  some  people  who  were  not  very  well  informed  about  the  subject.
We  did  not  doubt  that  a  counter-suggestive  i?ifiuence  had  been  exercised
over  the  patient,  who  became  afraid  and  left  the  hospita1  cured  and
not  ver}-  grateful.

OBSERVATION  LXXXVIII. — Muscular,    articular    and   nervous    rheumatism.      Im-
provement at  each  suggestion. — Return  of  the  pains. — Gradual  cure  in  twelve  days.

T ,  a  railroad  employee  about  fifty  years  old,  of  strong  constitu-
tion,  comes  to  consult  me    on  October   n,  1884.      Last  week  he  had

3  So  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

rheumatic  pains  in  his  limbs,  which  obliged  him  to  take  a  five  days
leave  of  absence.  He  took  up  work  again  on  March  9,  and  had  to
leave  again  on  the  nth.

I  go  to  see  him  at  home;  he  complains  of  severe  pain  in  the
lumbar  region  on  the  left  side,  which  "prevents  his  getting  up.

I  hypnotize  him  ;  profound  sleep.  Memory  confused  upon  waking.
The  pain  is  less. — During  the  night,  sharp  pains.  He  is  very  rest-
less.

12th. — There  is  sharp  pain  at  the  acromio-clavicular  articulation
on  the  left  side,  in  the  scaleni  and  in  the  lumbar  region.  He  can-
not sit  down  without  pain. — Hypnotization  at  five  o'clock  in  the
evening  ;  profound  sleep  and  suggestion.  Upon  waking  the  pain  is
less,  having  disappeared  in  the  shoulder  and  scaleni.  The  patient
can  use  a  handkerchief  with  his  left  hand  without  sitting  down,  which
the  pain  in  his  shoulder  would  not  allow  him  to  do  before  sugges-
tion.

He  continues  to  sleep  badly.  The  pains  return,  less  intense  in  the
loins  but  severe  in  the  neck  and  arms.

13th. — At  four  o'clock  temperature  38t5o°;  pain  in  the  metacarpo-
phalangeal articulation  of  the  right  index  finger,  and  in  the  right  sterno-
mastoideus,  which  is  very  sensitive.  Pain  in  the  loins  continues,  but  is
very  slight.

After  suggestion,  pains  greatly  diminished  ;  upon  pressure  there  is
only  slight  sensitiveness  in  the  sterno-mastoideus.  The  metacarpo-
phalangeal pain  has  almost  disappeared.

October  18th. — The  improvement  continued  until  yesterday.  Since
then  patient  has  again  had  pains  along  the  course  of  the  sciatics,  at
the  sciatic  foramena,  in  the  nates,  along  the  back  of  the  left  thigh,  and
along  the  postero-external  surface  of  the  leg.  These  parts  are  very
painful  upon  pressure.  Further,  there  is  tenderness  of  the  right  sterno-
mastoideus.  The  lumbar  region  is  free  from  pain.  The  axillary  tem-
perature is  38A0.  Hypnotism  and  suggestion.  Pain  much  less  upon
waking.  After  a  second  hypnotic  suggestion,  consecutive  to  the  first,
and  accompanied  with  rubbing  of  the  painful  parts,  the  pains  have  al-
most entirely  disappeared.

19th. — Slept  well  during  the  night.  Pains  have  reappeared  but  are
slight.  He  lifts  his  leg  easily.  In  the  neck  also  the  sensitiveness  is
less.  The  back  of  the  thigh  is  still  sensitive  to  pressure.  Temperature
380.  After  two  consecutive  séances  the  pain  has  almost  entirely  disap-
peared.

Since  then,  the  patient  has  continued  to  do  very  well.  His  wife
comes  to  tell  me  on  the  23d  that  he  has  no  more  trouble,  only  slight
lumbar  fatijrue.

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  3S1

He  comes  to  see  me  on  the  29th.  The  cure  has  been  maintained.
He  complains  only  of  slight  pain  in  the  left  knee,  which  disappears  at
the  last  hypnotic  suggestion.

Observation  I.XXXIX. — Poly-articular  rheumatism  cured  by  antipyrine, — Persist-
ence of  the  acromio-clavicular  and  xiphoid  f-ains. — Definitive  cure  by  suggestion  in
two  seduces.

M.    C ,  a   cooper,  thirty-three    years  old,  enters   the  hospital  on

March  16,  1886.  He  has  been  troubled  with  sub-acute  articular  rheu-
matism for  a  week  past.

He  is  a  very  strongly  constituted  man,  addicted  to  alcohol.  Upon
admission  his  temperature  is  381V,  the  pulse  112.  Pains  exist  in  the
acromio-clavicular  joints,  in  the  knees,  in  the  insteps,  about  the  left
malleoli,  and  at  the  level  of  the  last  lumbar  and  sacral  spinous  processes.
The  patient  takes  six  grammes  of  antipyrine  on  the  16th,  and  eight
grammes  on  the  17th.  The  articulations  have  been  rapidly  improved
since  the  first  days  of  the  medicine  ;  the  acromio-clavicular  pain  still
persists.

2 1  st. — The  temperature,  which  has  been  normal  since  the  morning  of
the  19th,  has  risen  to  380.  We  still  find  pain  upon  pressure  of  the
acromio-clavicular  joints,  and  of  the  head  of  the  left  humerus.  The
articular  movements  are  free.  Further,  since  night  there  has  been  a
painful  spot  near  the  xiphoid  appendix,  which  woke  the  patient  at
three  o'clock  in  the  morning  and  prevented  his  sleeping  again,  and  an-
other similar  point  at  the  level  of  the  lower  border  of  the  ribs  in  the
axillary  line  on  each  side.     Pressure  of  these  regions  causes  sharp  pain.

/  hypnotize  the  patient  :  he  falls  into  profound  sleep  rapidly,  without
memory  upon  waking.  I  suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  pains.  In
five  minutes  I  wake  him  ;  the  xiphoid  pain,  which  existed  spontaneously
and  upon  pressure,  has  totally  disappeared,  as  well  as  the  pain  in  the
acromio-clavicular  joints  and  at  the  head  of  the  left  humerus.

22d. — The  xiphoid  pain  has  not  returned;  the  acromio-clavicular
pains  reappeared  in  the  night,  more  sharply  on  the  left  side.  Xew
hypnotic  suggestion;  upon  waking  there  is  no  more  pain,  either  spontane-
ous or  upon  pressure.

23d. — The  pains  have  not  come  back.  The  patient  walks,  but  with  a
good  deal  of  difficulty;  the  articulations  are  somewhat  stiff  he  says.
After  hypnotic  suggestion,  he  walks  more  rapidly  and  more  easily.

24th. — He  walks  for  half  an  hour,  and  feels  no  more  pain  of  any
kind.

The  cure  is  maintained  ;   M.  C leaves  the  hospital  on  the  26th.

o

S  2  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

OBSERVATION  XC. — Lumbo-crural  muscular  pain  with  obstinate  sacro-sciatic  neural
gia,  dating  back  six  months. — Notable  improvement  after  several  hypnotic  séances  ;
almost  complete  cure  after  five  weeks  of  repeated  suggestion.

H.  C ,  a  plasterer,  thirty-two  years  old,  enters  the  hospital  on  Jan-
uary 30,  1886.  For  two  months  he  has  complained  of  sciatica,  character-
ized by  pains  spreading  from  the  buttock  to  the  left  foot.  At  the
commencement  the  pain  was  limited  to  the  posterior  spine  of  the  ilium.
He  was  able  to  walk  until  December,  but  a  constant  pain  in  the  loins
prevented  him  from  bending  over.  For  the  last  eight  days  he  has  not
been  able  to  get  up  or  to  stand  ;  the  pain  prevented  him  from  sleeping.
Seven  weeks  ago  he  entered  the  hospital  in  another  ward,  and  was  there
a  month,' during  which  time  he  was  ineffectually  treated  by  a  blister  and
the  application  of  the  cautery.

On  January  31  we  note:  Very  strong  constitution,  without  morbid  or
alcoholic  history.  Pain  upon  pressure  at  the  level  of  the  lumbar  spinous
processes  and  from  the  sacrum  to  the  coccyx.  This  pain  also  exists  at
the  transverse  processes,  at  the  level  of  the  iliac  crest,  at  the  level  of
the  sacro-iliac  articulation,  and  of  the  trochanter,  and  at  the  inferior
border  of  the  gluteus.  Sharp  pain  is  also  caused  by  pressure  of  the
postero-internal  muscles  of  the  thigh,  at  the  popliteal  space,  at  the  head
of  the  fibula,  and  at  the  anterior  surface  of  the  thigh  in  the  triangle  of
Scarpa.  Finally,  the  patient  complains  of  a  pricking  sensation  in  the
heel  when  he  gets  up.  Moreover,  he  cannot  stand  on  account  of  the
pain.     He  can  bend  his  foot,  knee,  and  thigh  without  pain.

He  takes  six  grammes  of  antipyrine  on  February  1  ;  a  gramme  of
sulphate  of  quinine  on  the  3d,  4th,  and  5th,  and  five  grammes  of  sali-
cylate of  soda  daily  from  the  6th  to  the  10th,  without  any  noticeable
result.  He  sleeps  better,  however.  When  he  is  resting  the  pains  are  no
longer  present,  but  reappear  on  the  least  movement.  He  lies  upon  the
right  side,  with  the  thigh  and  knee   bent,  unable  to  stretch  out  the  limb.

From  the  nth  until  the  15th  the  patient  is  hypnotized.  Although  he
is  in  the  third  degree,  with  suggestive  catalepsy  and  rotatory  automatism,
he  thinks  he  does  not  sleep,  because  he  remembers  everything  upon  wak-
ing. The  pain,  however,  has  markedly  diminished  from  the  time  of  the
second  se'ance;  the  muscles  of  the  thigh  and  of  the  ham-string  are  no
longer  painful,  but  the  entire  buttock  is  still  very  sensitive,  and  he  can-
not lie  upon  his  back  or  stretch  out  the  limb.

On  the  evening  of  the  15th  I  put  him  into  profound  sleep,  without
memory  upon  waking.  Since  then  he  has  been  convinced  that  he
sleeps.  After  suggestion,  he  is  very  much  astonished  at  being  able  to
stretch  out  his  limb  and  to  lie  upon  his  back.  But  the  pain  upon  pres-
sure  is   still  present  in  the  sacro-iliac   articulation,  and  extends   to   the

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  383

sacrum.  The  next  day  he  drags  himself  about  painfully,  limping,  and
using  a  cane.  When  he  walks  he  complains  of  pain  at  the  level  of  the
lower  border  of  the  ribs  on  the  left  side.  This  pain  disappears  instantly
by  suggestion.

Continuation  of  induced  somnambulism.  The  sacro-gluteal  pain  dimin-
ishes each  dm:,  but  returns  after  a  variable  period,  when  he  moves  about
or  walks.

19th. — In  the  evening  I  suggest  during  sleep  that  he  will  be  able  to
walk  without  a  cane.  After  waking  he  walks  about  the  ward  well  with-
out a  cane,  and  only  complaining  of  slight  pain  in  the  sacrum.  At  six
o'clock  he  has  a  chill  ;  sweats  during  the  night.

Next  day,  temperature  normal.  Patient  is  doing  well.  He  walks,
and  lies  upon  his  back.     Continuation  of  suggestion.

23d. — He  only  complains  of  slight  tenderness  over  the  coccyx  and
general  weakness  in  the  limb.

28th. — Complains  of  pain  when  he  rests  his  foot  upon  the  ground,
and  of  pain  in  the  lumbar  region.  They  disappear  by  suggestion,  and
he  walks  quite  well  during  the  day.

March  4th. — The  tempero-maxillary  articulation,  which  has  been  sen-
sitive to  pressure  since  yesterday,  is  instantly  relieved  by  hypnotic  sug-
gestion.

The  patient  walks  well,  but  still  complains  of  tenderness  at  the  back
of  the  thigh.

5th. — Walks  quite  well  but  feels  some  lumbar  pain,  which  prevents
him  from  standing  straight.  After  suggestion,  he  stands  straighter  and
walks  better.

6th. — Complains  of  tenderness  above  the  lower  border  of  the  ribs  on
the  left  side,  at  a  point  eight  centimetres  external  to  the  spine,  near  the
external  iliac  fossa,  a  little  in  front  of  the  posterior  spine  of  the  ilium,
and  over  the  ischium.     These  painful  spots  are  helped  by  suggestion.

7th. — He  continually  complains  of  a  painful  feeling  at  the  sacrum,
and  of  some  stiffness  when  he  walks.  When  he  walks  about  a  little  he
feels  tired  and  has  pain  in  the  loins.  Hypnotic  suggestion.  I  make
him  walk  quickly  during  his  sleep,  and  by  prolonged  suggestion  I  destroy
the  pain.  He  walks  without  limping,  and  when  he  wakes  no  longer
feels  any  pain.

8th. — He  again  complains  of  a  sensation  of  stiffness  in  the  sacro-lum-
bar  region,  which  prevents  him  from  standing  erect.  New  suggestion.
He  is  forced  to  walk  during  his  sleep.  He  walks  well  during  the  day
and  also  on  the  next  day,  complaining  of  nothing  but  a  certain  difficulty
in  standing  erect.  On  March  12  he  complains  of  tenderness  in  the
buttock,  which  extends  upward  as  far  as  the  angle  of  the  scapula,  espe-
cially when  he  is  walking.     This  tendency  diminishes  after  suggestion.

384  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

But  this  slight  tenderness  is  very  obstinate  ;  it  is  constantly  mani-
fested when  he  has  walked  for  some  time.  On  the  14th  and  15th  I  use
faradism  for  the  sensitive  region  during  sleep.  He  complains  of  sharp
pain  but  does  not  remember  anything  upon  waking.  Sensation  of  stiff-
ness in  the  buttock  is  less.

Since  then  he  complains  of  nothing  but  slight  tenderness  in  the  but-
tock when  he  is  walking;  this  tenderness  diminishes  daily.  On  the
17th  he  stands  erect  when  he  is  walking.  He  leaves  on  the  18th,  only
complaining  of  this  slight  trouble  which  is  very  persistent.

Observation  XCl.—Apyretic  articular  rheumatism. — Temporary  improvement  after
each  suggestion  ;  gradual  cure. — Augmentation  of  the  dynamometric  force  by  sug-
gestion.

W ,  sixteen  years  old,  a  mason,  has  been  sick  for  forty-five  days.

Since  the  beginning  of  his  trouble  he  has  had  pain  in  the  right  heel  and
at  the  posterior  internal  part  of  the  foot,  near  the  internal  tuberosity  of
the  os  calcis.  He  has  pain  when  he  walks  upon  his  heel.  In  the  same
foot  there  is  pain  with  swelling  and  inflammation  at  the  metatarso-pha-
langeal  articulation  of  the  great  right  toe.  Same  condition  of  right  foot.
Twenty-five  days  ago,  the  left  wrist  was  swollen  and  remained  so  for
eight  days;  the  patient  could  lift  nothing,  and  after  one  or  two  hours  of
work  was  obliged  to  stop.  There  is  still  slight  swelling  in  the  wrist  and
pain  in  the  carpus,  especially  near  the  head  of  the  second  metacarpal
bone.

Patient  enters  the  hospital  on  October  25,  1883,  and  I  hypnotize  him.
He  only  reaches  a  light  sleep  :  drowsiness  with  the  beginning  of  sug-
gestive catalepsv.     This  first  séance  does  not  bring  about  any  change.

Second  séance  on  the  26th. — He  says  that  the  pain  is  less,  and  he
walks  better  during  the  day.

27th. — Pains  have  returned.  They  are  perhaps  somewhat  less  severe
at  the  articulation  of  the  great  toe  and  heel  of  the  right  foot,  and  are
certainly  less  upon  pressure  of  the  wrist  and  carpus.

Third  séance,  immediate  improvement  of  the  pains.  This  improve-
ment exists  from  eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning  until  four  o'clock  ;  then
the  pains  return.     He  went  out  during  the  day.

28th. — The  wrist  is  doing  better  ;  the  patient  bends  it  more  easily,
but  he  cannot  stand  without  pain.  A  new  hypnotization  (simple  drowsi-
ness) with  suggestion,  diminishes  the  pain  slightly  ;  he  walks  better.
During  the  night  he  again  feels  very  badly.

29th. — The  left  hand  presses  the  dynamometer  to  31  ;  after  hypnotic
suggestion  to  40.  He  says  he  has  less  pain  than  before,  but  the  pain
has  not  completely  disappeared.

Suggestion  each  time  produces   a   marked  diminution    in    the   articular

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  385

pains  ;  the  patient  walks  better  each  time,  but  the  result  obtained  is  not
perfectly  maintained.

31st. — The  left  hand  gives  45  by  the  dynamometer  before  suggestion
and  52  afterward.

November  1st. — The  pains  become  less  every  day,  although  we  make
the  patient  walk  about  in  order  to  exclude  the  curative  influence  of  rest:
he  walks  better.  There  is  hardly  any  pain  in  either  heel,  but  he  still
complains  of  pain  in  the  metatarsophalangeal  articulations.  There  is
only  slight  tenderness  in  the  hand.     Suggestion  is  continued.

2d. — He  is  doing  well;  complains  of  no  more  pain,  either  spontane-
ous or  upon  pressure.  The  hand  registers  50  on  the  dynamometer
before,  and  55  after  suggestion.

4th. — He  says  he  has  more  pain  in  the  tuberosity  of  the  os  calcis,  but
complains  of  no  more  pain  in  the  metatarso-phalangeal  articulation  or  in
the  hand.  New  suggestion  ;  the  pain  in  the  os  calcis  is  less.  The
patient,  decidedly  improved,  leaves  the  hospital.

Observation"    XCII. — Rheumatic  pains  in    the   acromioclavicular  articulations  dat
ing  back  three  or  four  mouths. —  Total  cure  in  two  séances  ;  light  sleep.

Emile  L ,  a  glazier,  sixty-one  years  old,  comes  to  consult  me  on

November  31  for  rheumatic  pains  of  three  or  four  months  standing.
He  has  never  had  acute  articular  rheumatism,  but,  nine  years  ago,  he
had  an  attack  of  sciatica  lasting  three  years.

At  the  present  time  the  pains  exist  in  both  shoulders,  but  especially
on  the  right  side.  Their  seat  is  at  the  level  of  the  acromio-ciavicular
articulations.  Another  painful  spot  exists  above  the  anterior  superior
spine  of  the  ilium,  on  the  left  side.  It  is  particularly  noticeable  when
the  patient  bends.     He  has  beside  slight  pains  in  both  knees.

The  patient  is  hypnotized  on  the  31st;  first  degree,  light  sleep.  Upon
waking,  the  pains  in  the  knees  have  disappeared  ;  those  in  the  shoulders
are  much  less  sharp.  The  patient  dresses  himself  for  the  first  time  in
three  weeks  ;  the  left  shoulder  is  almost  completely  free  from  pain.

He  comes  back  on  November  3d.  New  hypnotization,  light  sleep.
Upon  waking  he  no  longer  feels  any  pain  in  his  shoulders,  but  continu-
ally a  painful  sensation  about  the  left  anterior  spine  of  the  ilium.  Im-
mediately after  a  second  hypnotization  (sleep  of  the  second  degree),  all  the
pains  haze  disappeared,  and  all  movements  are  unrestricted.

OBSERVATION  XCIII. — Rheumatic   muscular  pains,  first  in  the  left  arm,  then  in  the
right  leg. — Cure  each  time  in  a  single  séance.

Marie  X ,  ten  years  old,  comes  to  see  me  on   February  20,  i886_

She  is  usually  very  well  and  has  had  no  previous  illnesses.     For  four  or
25

386  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

five  days  she  has  complained  of  pain  in  her  right  arm.  The  arm  is  sen-
sitive to  pressure  ;  the  child  cannot  lift  it  to  her  head.  I  hypnotize  her
by  occlusion  of  the  eyelids  ;  I  suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  pain,
and  rub  her  arm.  Upon  waking,  the  child  remembers  nothing.  The
pain  has  almost  entirely  disappeared,  and-  she  can  lift  her  arm  to  her
head  easily.  During  the  day,  all  painful  sensations  disappear  and  do
not  return.

On  April  14,  the  child  comes  back.  Since  four  o'clock  yesterday
she  has  had  pain  in  the  right  leg  and  thigh.  Pressure  is  painful  over
the  anterior  surface  of  both  limbs.  She  drags  her  leg  when  she  walks.
The  knee  and  heel  are  almost  rigid.

I  put  her  into  somnambulism  again,  and  suggest  the  disappearance  of
the  pain.  Upon  waking,  she  has  almost  no  pain,  but  still  drags  her
leg,  although  not  as  much  as  before.

I  hypnotize  her  a  second  time,  and  repeat  the  suggestion.  I  make
her  walk  during  her  sleep.  Upon  waking  she  walks  very  well  and  only
drags  the  leg  very  slightly.  She  does  not  complain  of  any  more  pain.
Her  father  tells  me  the  next  day  that  she  came  skipping  home,  and  that
she  is  completely  cured.

Observation  XCIV. —  Gonorrhœal  rheumatism  dating  back  more  than  three  months. —
Filins  in  the  soles  of  the  feet,  cured  in  a  few  seances  of  suggestion. —  Very  persistent
malleolar  and  lumbo-dorsal pains. — Almost  complete  cure  in  five  séances.

D ,  thirty-seven  years   old,  a  commercial  traveller,  comes  to  the

clinic  March  19,  1887.  Last  September  he  contracted  gonorrhoea,  the
acute  duration  of  which  was  three  weeks.  He  had  two  previous  attacks
of  gonorrhoea,  one  eighteen  and  one  eleven  years  ago.

In  December,  he  developed  severe  pains  in  his  ankles  and  insteps
without  inflammation,  without  fever.  The  swelling  increased,  espe-
cially when  Jie  walked.  He  continued  to  walk,  but  with  great  difficulty,
and  with  the  use  of  a  stick.  For  fourteen  days  he  has  not  been  able  to
walk  ;  pain  no  longer  exists  when  he  is  quiet,  but  only  when  he  stands.
For  two  months  also  he  has  had  severe  pains  in  the  loins,  which  are
continuous  and  prevent  his  sleeping.

He  also  had  an  acute  conjunctivitis  which  lasted  eight  days.  At  first
there  was  pain  at  the  level  of  the  left  clavicle.  Early  in  January  pains
in  the  tempero-maxillary  articulations  lasting  fifteen  days.  Has  had
no  previous  illness.

He  is  a  man  of  strong  constitution,  well  made,  and  of  a  mixed  tem-
perament. His  feet  are  flat.  Upon  examination  on  March  21  we  do
not  find  either  swelling  or  pain  on  the  dorsal  surfaces  of  the  feet  ;  there
is  marked  swelling  below  both  internal  malleoli,  especially  on  the  right

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  387

side.  He  can  flex  and  extend  the  feet,  but  a  movement  of  dorsal
flexion  is  painful.  He  localizes  these  pains  below  the  internal  malleoli.
Upon  pressure  the  pain  is  very  severe,  at  the  level  of  both  malleoli,
more  so  on  the  right  than  on  the  left  side.  It  is  also  very  severe  in  the
soles  of  the  feet,  near  the  plantar  aponeurosis.  The  heels  are  not
tender.  The  patient  walks  with  difficulty  and  only  presses  upon  the
heel.  He  avoids  flexing  his  feet. — Further,  there  is  spontaneous  pain,
and  tenderness  upon  pressure  on  each  side  of  the  vertebral  column
from  the  angle  of  the  scapula  to  the  sacrum. — Other  functions  normal.

March  21st. — D ■  is  very  easily  put  into  deep  somnambulism  with

amnesia  upon  waking.  Suggestion. — In  spite  of  the  suggestion  he  did
not  sleep  last  night  on  account  of  dorsal  pain.  Pressure  upon  this
region  always  provokes  pain.  On  the  22d  there  was  less  pain  than  on
the  2 1  st.     Hypnotic  suggestion  is  repeated  almost  every  day.

22a. — I  make  him  walk  during  his  sleep;  when  I  have  neutralized
the  pain  by  a  vigorous  and  prolonged  suggestion  accompanied  with  rub-
bing, he  walks  well  ;  then  he  leans  the  sole  of  his  foot  on  the  ground,
which  he  could  not  do  before,  and  straightens  himself,  while  before  he
was  bent  over  by  the  dorsal  pain. — Upon  waking  he  does  well,  but  after
a  time  the  pains  reappear.

24th. — He  complains  less  of  pain  in  the  back  and  in  the  soles  of  the
feet.     But  he  did  not  sleep  during  the  night  and  was  very  restless.

25th. — Did  not  sleep  last  night.     Dorsal  pain  less.

26th. — Soles  of  the  feet  much  less  sensitive.  The  pains  persist  about
the  internal  malleoli.  Complains  of  a  painful  spot  near  the  lower
border  of  the  ribs  on  the  right  side.  He  does  not  sleep  at  night. —
During  the  hypnosis  the  patient  walks  without  pain.  But  the  result  is
not  maintained.  If  he  wants  to  walk  one  or  two  hours  afterward  the
pain  reappears.  On  the  28th  of  March,  however,  the  soles  of  the  feet
are  but  slightly  sensitive.  The  malleolar  pain  is  more  tenacious  and
persistent.  The  dorsal  pain  is  localized  in  the  lumbar  region  and  is
decreasing.

29th. — The  feet  are  doing  well.  The  pain  in  the  malleoli  is  much
less  sharp.  The  patient  walked  much  better  yesterday  than  on  the  pre-
ceding days  ;  but  he  is  always  complaining  of  pain  in  the  loins. — After
suggestion  in  the  morning  he  walks  very  well  ;  in  the  afternoon  the
pains  reappear.

30th. — The  patient  is  bent  over,  cannot  stand  up  straight,  and  com-
plains of  sharper  pains  in  the  back.  They  exist  to-day  especially  at  the
level  of  the  lower  border  of  the  ribs  on  both  sides.  Plantar  pain  has
disappeared  ;  and  we  only  find  slight  sensitiveness  at  the  internal  right
malleolus. — After  hypnotic  suggestion  the  patient  can  stand  up  and  walk
without  pain.     The  pain  comes  back  three  hours  later.

3  S  8  Sugges  tive   Therapeutics.

From  the  30th  of  March  until  the  3d  of  April  the  patient  no  longer
complains  of  any  pain  except  that  in  the  loins.  The  feet  are  doing
well.  On  April  3d  he  stands  bent  almost  double  on  account  of  this
lumbar  pain.  After  suggestion  and  rubbing  for  ten  minutes,  he  no
longer  feels  the  pain  and  walks  erect.  '  He  can  walk  for  two  hours
then  fatigue  brings  back  the  pain,  but  it  is  less  intense  than  before  in
the  right  foot.

The  renal  pain  diminishes  on  the  following  days  but  does  not  disap-
pear. Suggestion  always  suspends  it  for  two  or  three  hours,  but  does
not  suppress  it.

Suggestion  is  discontinued  through  the  Easter  vacation.  For  four
days  we  give  him  salicylate  of  soda,  dose  from  four  to  five  grammes,
which  diminishes  the  pain  for  the  time  being.  Suggestion  is  begun  again
about  the  19th.  The  lumbar  pains  no  longer  have  their  previous  inten-
sity ;  the  patient  walks  better.  There  is  still  a  slight  swelling  with  sen-
sitiveness at  the  level  of  the  internal  right  malleolus  which  is  brought
on  by  prolonged  walking.

After  the  22d  of  March  the  improvement  makes  rapid  progress:
the  patient  holds  himself  erect  and  only  complains  of  a  painful  feeling
in  the  loins.  The  feet  are  nearly  free  from  pain.  On  May  6  he  feels
hardly  any  pain  and  is  well  enough  to  take  up  his  work  again.

The  gonorrhœal  plantar  pain  yielded  rapidly  to  several
séances  of  suggestion  ;  the  malleolar  pains  resisted  for  a  longer
time.  The  lumbar  pains  were  excessively  persistent,  recurring
obstinately  after  suggestion  had  driven  them  away.  It
took  five  weeks  to  distinctly  improve  the  trouble.

Observation  XCV. — Articulai-  rheumatism  dating  back  ten  days  helped  by  the  use  of
antipyrine. — Persistence  of  acromioclavicular  pain  on  the  left  side  and  of  pain  at
the  xiphoid  appendix. — Cure  in  two  days  by  suggestion.

M ,  thirty-three  years  old,  a  cooper,  enters  the  hospital  on  March

16,  1886.  For  ten  clays  he  has  had  articular  rheumatism.  Pain  in  the
acromio-clavicular  articulations,  pain  and  swelling  in  both  knees,  ten-
derness and  swelling  at  the  level  of  the  left  malleolus.  Very  sharp
pain  upon  pressure  at  the  level  of  the  sacrum  and  the  lumbar  spinous
processes.     Alcoholic  history.

Antipyrine  is  administered  for  three  days  ;  on  the  20th,  all  the  articu-
lations are  nearly  free  from  pain.  The  temperature,  which  rose  to
38°  in  the  evening,  has  become  normal  again.

21st. — We  still  note  tenderness  in  the  acromio-clavicular  articulations
and  at  the  head  of  the  left  humerus.     This  pain  is  very  persistent,  has

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  389

existed  since  the  beginning  of  his   trouble,  and  has  resisted  antipyrine.

Moreover  during  the  night  he  complained  of  a  painful  spot  at  the
xiphoid  appendix,  which  prevented  his  sleeping.  Pressure  at  this  level
and  about  the  lower  border  of  the  ribs  on  both  sides  is  very  painful.

I  hvpnotize  the  patient,  and  he  goes  into  profound  sleep,  without
memory  upon  waking.  After  suggestion,  the  pains,  both  spontaneous
and  upon  pressure,  completely  disappear.

22cl. — The  xiphoid  pain  has  not  reappeared.  The  acromioclavicular
pains  reappeared  during  the  night,  especially  on  the  left  side  where  they
extended  to  the  head  of  the  humerus  and  to  the  spine  of  the  scapula.
After  suggestion  in  deep  sleep  the  patient  feels  no  more  pain.

23d. — Pains  have  not  reappeared  since  yesterday.  After  suggestion,
the  patient,  who  had  a  certain  stiffness  in  the  joints  of  the  lower  limbs,
and  who  walked  with  pain,  walks  much  better.  He  still  walks  well  on
the  24th,  goes  a  mile  and  a  half  on  foot,  and  no  longer  complains  of
tenderness  of  the  acromio-clavicular  articulations.     Pressure   does  not

evoke   the    pain.     M leaves  the  hospital    on  the  26th,  completely

cured.

Observation  XCVI. — Rheumatic  at  ticnlar  pains  dating  back  three  months. — Cure  by
suggestion  in  two  days.

Jeanne  M ,  seventeen  years  old,  comes  to  the  hospital  on  August

3,  1877.

Last  May  she  developed  sub-acute  articular  rheumatism,  without
fever.  The  articulations  of  the  fingers,  feet,  and  knees  were  affected.
She  walked  with  pain  until  July  1st,  when  she  was  obliged  to  take  to  her
bed  and  was  treated  with  antipyrine  and  antifebrine.  Feeling  better
she  tried  to  get  up  on  the  14th  but  could  not  stay  up  until  evening.
She  could  not  walk.  She  also  has  trouble  in  respiration.  For  the  last
eight  days  the  pains  have  increased  in  the  knees  and  feet  and  the  young
patient  is  brought  to  the  hospital  in  a  carriage,  helped  by  two  people,
and  not  able  to  stand.  Last  March  she  had  a  nervous  paroxsym  in
consequence  of  some  vexation.

She  is  a  girl  of  strong  constitution,  but  of  lymphatic  temperament,
delicate  and  quite  pale  and  thin.  Her  temperature  is  normal.  In  the
evening  it  rises  to  380,  the  pulse  rate  being  108.  Since  the  morning  of
the  5th  it  has  remained  normal.  I  find  sharp  pain  at  the  external  part
of  both  wrists,  without  swelling.  All  the  articulations  of  the  first
phalanges  are  very  much  swollen.  Pressure  determines  very  severe
pain  at  the  level  of  the  joints  of  the  index  and  middle  fingers.  The
left  knee  is  slightly  swollen  ;  sharp  pain  upon  pressure  in  both  patellar
tendons.      Pain  back  of  and  below  the   external  right   malleolus   and   at

39°  Suggestive  Therapeutics.

the  level  of  the  articulations  of  the  first  with  the  second  phalanges  of
the  last  three  right  toes.  Tenderness  to  pressure  of  the  dorsal  spinous
processes.

Heart  sounds  normal.  Respiration  normal.  Digestion  good.  Leu-
corrhcea.     Last  menstrual  period  on  July  15th.     Insomnia.

The  patient  is  put  into  deep  sleep  easily  ;  when  she  wakes  she  does  not
remember  that  she  has  been  asleep.

On  August  6,  after  two  se'ances,  she  feels  much  better.  Her  appe-
tite has  come  back;  she  did  not  eat  anything  for  a  month.  She  has
slept  well  for  two  nights,  and  feels  no  more  pain  in  her  legs,  which  she
can  move  without  the  slightest  discomfort,  and  no  more  pain  at  the
level  of  the  wrist.  The  finger  joints  are  still  swollen  and  there  is  still
tenderness  at  the  level  of  the  articulations  of  the  first  with  the  second
phalanges  of  the  fourth,  middle  and  index  fingers  of  the  right  hand.
After  suggestion  the  pains  disappear.

8th. — Has  had  no  more  pain.  Moves  the  hand,  flexes  and  extends
the  fingers  without  pain.  Appetite  good.  Patient  still  complains  of
heaviness  in  her  legs;  she  is  still  sad  and  cries  easily.  I  hypnotize  her.
I  suggest  that  she  shall  feel  strength  in  her  legs  and  that  she  shall  be
bright  and  gay.     She  awakes  laughing.

9th. — Has  no  more  pain.  Got  up  yesterday;  had  slight  nausea  ;  no
longer  complains  of  sad  feelings.

10th. — Continues  to  do  very  well  ;  appetite  good  ;  was  up  all  yester-
day afternoon.     No  more  leucorrhoea.

The  patient  remains  in  the  hospital  until  the  20th  of  August.  She
gets  up  every  day,  moves  her  arms  and  legs  without  the  slightest  dis-
comfort, and  leaves  entirely  cured.

Observation  XCVII. — Dorsal  and  metacarpophalangeal  pain  of  the  middle  finger,
of  rheumatic  origin. — Cure  in  two  days  by  suggestion.

R — : — ,  nine  years  old,  comes  to  the  hospital  on  November  16,  1885.
Three  years  ago  he  had  acute  articular  rheumatism,  which  lasted  some
time  and  prevented  his  walking.  At  the  present  time,  he  has  again
been  sick  with  rheumatism  for  three  months.  The  affection  began  with
pain  in  the  hip  which  prevented  his  walking.  Then  the  knees  and  the
ankles  were  successively  involved.  Eight  days  ago,  the  patient,  who
seemed  cured,  got  up  and  walked  about,  but  took  cold  and  had  pains  in
the  back  and  knees  again.  He  has  coughed  slightly  for  some  time.
He  has  had  palpitation  for  three  months  without  oppression.

He  is  a  boy  of  lymphatic  temperament  and  of  delicate  but  not  deteri-
orated constitution.  On  the  evening  of  the  16th  his  temperature  was
38Â0;  on  the  morning  of  the  17th,  37to°;  in  the  evening,  37x0°;  after  the

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  391

iSth  it  was  normal.  We  find  a  slight  presystolic  and  systolic  murmur
at  the  apex  of  the  heart,  and  dry  disseminated  rales.  The  left  hand  is
slightly  swollen  still  and  pressure  causes  sharp  pain  in  the  metacarpo-
phalangeal articulation  of  the  middle  finger.  The  other  joints  are  free
from  pain.  But  the  child  complains  of  sharp  pain  in  the  dorsal  region,
both  spontaneous  and  on  pressure.

This  pain  is  immediately  driven  away  by  hypnotic  suggestion  (profound
sleep)  on  the  evening  of  the  16th.  The  next  morning  /  drive  away  the
metacarpophalangeal pain.  The  child  leaves  the  hospital  on  the  20th
cured  ;  the  pains  have  not  reappeared.

Observation  XCVIII. — Rheumatic  pains  in  the  loins,   right  thigh,   and  along  the
course  of  the  sciatic  for  fifteen  days. — Cure  by  suggestion  in  ten  days.

W ,  a  machinist,  thirty-five  years  old,  enters  the  hospital  on  March

31,  1SS7.  For  fifteen  days  he  has  complained  of  shooting  pain  in  the  loins,
lower  half  of  the  back,  and  posterior  surface  of  the  thigh.  This  pain
appeared  suddenly  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening.  He  could  not  sleep,
and  was  unable  to  work  the  next  day,  March  8th.  He  has  been  in  bed
since  then.  The  pain  is  continuous,  and  accompanied  with  exacerba-
tions of  shooting  pains  which  last  five  or  ten  minutes.  He  sleeps
badly  and  is  waked  by  the  pain,  which  has  extended  from  the  nates  to
the  fold  of  the  groin.  For  eight  days  the  patient  has  complained  of
tingling  in  his  fingers,  hand  and  right  arm,  and  in  the  lower  limb  on  the
same  side.  These  tinglings  appear  two  or  three  times  a  day  and  last  five
or  six  minutes  ;  they  are  accompanied  by  a  sense  of  weight.  Patient
had  dysentery  a  year  ago,  and  was  treated  in  the  hospital  for  a  month.

Present  condition. — March  29th.  Strong  constitution.  No  fever.
The  digestive,  circulatory,  and  respiratory  functions  are  normal.  All
movements  of  the  limbs  are  normally  executed  ;  the  muscular  force  is
preserved  ;  there  is  no  exaggeration  of  the  tendon  reflexes.  Sensibility
is  normal.  Pain  exists,  spontaneous  and  on  pressure,  in  the  postero-
external surface  of  the  right  thigh  and  throughout  the  buttock.  We
also  discover  tenderness  in  the  vertebral  column  from  the  tenth  dorsal
vertebra:  to  the  coccyx  and  throughout  the  extent  of  the  vertebral
groove  on  the  right  side.     No  girdle  pain.

Diagnosis  :   spinal  or  neuro-muscular  rheumatism.

March  23d. — The  patient  is  easily  put  into  deep  sleep.     Suggestion.

Upon  waking,  the  painful  sensation  upon  pressure  persists.

2dth. — He  says  that  the  pain  is  less  intense;  he  only  experienced  a
sense  of  weight  for  ten  minutes  at  two  o'clock  this  morning.  We  find
that  the  tenderness  still  exists  in  the  thigh  and  in  the  vertebral  groove
on  the  right  side.     Suggestion.

39 2  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

25th. — Has  had  no  more  tingling  or  sense  of  weight  in  the  limbs.
Has  had  less  shooting  pain  ;  still  suffers  when  he  walks.     Suggestion.

26th. — Idem.

28th. — Is  doing  better.  The  dorsal  pains  and  those  in  the  thigh  are
less  intense.  Was  able  to  walk  somewhat  better.  The  sense  of  weight
has  disappeared.     Suggestion.

29th. —  Was  able  to  walk  yesterday  afternoon  without  much  pain.
Daily  suggestion.

30th. — Continues  to  do  well.  The  pain  in  the  loins  and  nates  has
diminished.

31st. — Only  complains  of  slight  pain  in  the  loins.

April  4th. — The  pain  has  almost  completely  disappeared.  The
patient  has  been  able  to  walk  easily.  I  suggested  that  the  slight
persistent  pain  in  the  loins  should  be  replaced  by  an  itching  sensation,
which  he  feels.

8th. — The  improvement  continues  ;  there  is  only  a  slight  sensation
about  the  loins.

W walks  well,  but  still  limps  a  little.     He  leaves  on  the  12th

almost  totally  cured.

IX.

Neuralgias.
•Observation  XCIX. — Sciatica,   dating   back   seven   weeks. — Injections  of  chloride  of
methyl  without  complete  result. — Cure  by  suggestion  in  six  days.

L ,  a  shoemaker  forty-four  years   old,  enters  the  clinic  on  May

15,  1885.  For  seven  weeks  he  has  complained  of  sciatic  pain  along  the
posterior  surface  of  the  thigh  and  especially  in  the  calf  on  the  left  side,
pain  which  increases  when  he  is  seated.  The  pains  are  continuous  ;
they  are  pricking  sensations  which  spread  from  above  downward  ;  they
increase  when  he  is  in  bed,  and   are   often   accompanied  by  a  sense  of

numbness  in  the  leg,  as  if  it  were  dead.    L has  grown  very  thin  .since

his  trouble  began.  Moreover,  he  has  coughed  and  expectorated  for  seven
years.  He  has  had  dyspnoea  for  three  or  four  years  whenever  he  made
any  effort. — He  is  a  debilitated  thin  man  of  lymphatic  disposition.
There  are  signs  of  pulmonary  emphysema  with  bronchitis.

We  discover  pain  upon  pressure  over  the  sciatic  foramen,  in  the  pop-
liteal space,  of  the  head  of  the  fibula,  at  the  middle  of  the  calf,  and
back  of  the  external  malleolus. — No  treatment  has  been  tried.  We  try
injections  of  chloride  of  methyl  on  the  17th,  18th,  and  19th  ;  the  patient
says  that  the  spontaneous  pains  have  diminished  without  having  disap-
peared; the  pain  upon  pressure  exists  and  is  quite  as  severe.

20th. — The  spontaneous  pain  being  intense,  although  less,  I  try
hypnotic  suggestion  (third  degree).     During  the  day,  the  pains  are  not  so

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  393

severe;  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  they  again  increase  and  the
patient  cannot  sleep.

21st. — New  suggestion  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning;  the  pains  are
less  severe  until  midnight;  he  wakes  and  the  pains  reappear.  Daily
continuation  of  suggestion.

26th. — Pressure  causes  scarcely  any  pain  ;  the  patient  complains  at
times  of  pain  in  the  left  leg.  On  the  whole  he  is  doing  much  better,
and  would  sleep  well  at  night  if  he  were  not  waked  by  fits  of  cough-
ing.

The  improvement  continues;  on  the  27th  we  suspend  suggestion  for
two  days.  No  more  pains  upon  pressure,  or  of  spontaneous  occurrence.
On  the  29th  he  only  complains  of  tingling  in  the  heel.  The  cure  is
maintained;  on  June  14th  L leaves  the  hospital.

OBSERVATION  C. — Sciatic  pain  dating  back  three  days,  cured  by  a  single  suggestion.

S ,  a  type-setter,  twenty-two  years  old,  enters  the  hospital  on  March

17,  1887.  On  the  evening  of  the  14th  he  was  suddenly  taken  with  pain  in
the  knee  which  he  describes  as  being  below  the  patella,  spreading  back
along  the  thigh  to  the  buttock  and  along  the  calf  to  the  tendon  of
Achilles.  He  was  still  able  to  walk,  but  it  gave  him  severe  pain  and  he
could  not  bend  his  leg.  This  pain  has  been  almost  continuous  with
exacerbations  of  shooting  pains.  Last  night  he  was  taken  with  it  twice.
The  first  time,  the  attack  lasted  half  an  hour,  the  second  time,  one  hour.
During  the  day  the  paroxysms  of  pain  seize  him  five  or  six  different
times.  In  the  interval,  the  spontaneous  pain  is  slight.  It  is  accom-
panied by  a  sense  of  weight.     Last  year,  S had  a  similar  attack  of

sciatica  which  lasted  from  the  first  of  January  to  the  end  of  May.  He
was  not  able  to  walk  during  a  whole  month.  He  has  had  no  previous
illness.

S.  has  a  good  constitution,  but  is  somewhat  delicate.  His  disposition
is  lymphatic.

On  March  18,  I  find  that  he  bends  the  thigh  and  leg  with  difficulty.
L~pon  pressure  there  is  sharp  pain  below  the  lower  border  of  the  left
ribs,  very  sharp  at  the  level  of  the  upper  border  of  the  gluteus,  at  the
sciatic  foramen,  and  all  along  the  course  of  the  sciatic  to  the  popliteal
space.  No  pain  in  the  head  of  the  fibula  or  in  the  leg.  The  other
functions  are  normal.

I  put  him  into  somnambulism  very  easily.  He  is  very  susceptible  to
suggestion,  and  to  hallucinations  in  the  waking  as  well  as  in  the  sleeping
condition. — After  suggestion,  the  pain  has  completely  disappeared  ;  the
patient  can  bend  his  leg  and  thigh.  He  has  no  more  pain  upon  press-
ure of  the  sciatic  or  below  the  border  of  the  ribs.

394  Suggestive   Thci'apcutics.

This  result  is  maintained  the  next  day.  The  patient  passed  a  very
good  night.  After  a  new  suggestion,  I  make  him  run  in  the  ward.  The
cure  remains  complete  ;  he  leaves  on  March  23d.

Observation  CI. — Sciatica  dating  back  fifteen  days. — Inefficacy  of  the  chloride  of
methyl  ami  of  the  sulphate  of  quinine. — Cure  by  suggestion  in  fifteen  days.

C ,  a  workman  sixty-three  years  old,  enters  the  clinic  on  Novem-
ber 22,  for  a  left-sided  sciatica  dating  back  fifteen  days,  and  developing
into  a  shooting  pain  starting  from  the  nates  and  extending  to  the  toes
and  accompanied  with  a  sense  of  weight.  At  the  beginning,  the  pain
was  intermittent  and  lasted  from  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  until
eleven  in  the  evening.     For  three  days  the  pain  has  been  continuous  ;

walking  has   become  difficult.     C can   only  walk  with  a  stick  and

is  obliged  to  stop  every  two  or  three  steps.

He  is  a  man  of  good  constitution,  and  of  mixed  temperament.  The
joints  of  some  of  the  fingers  are  slightly  swollen  and  present  traces  of
rheumatoid  arthritis.  Pressure  at  the  level  of  the  left  sciatic  causes
very  sharp  pain  throughout  the  limb.  On  the  23d  the  patient  is  given
an  injection  of  chloride  of  methyl  over  the  course  of  the  nerve.  The
pain  is  quieted  for  two  hours  and  then  comes  back  with  increased
severity.

The  next  day,  the  24th,  we  find  that  the  painful  spots  at  the  nates,
popliteal  space,  and  malleoli  still  exist.  New  injections  of  chloride
of  methyl.

25th. — The  pains  are  less  ;  but  the  patient  can  neither  sit  nor  stand.
Rubéfaction  by  blisters  in  the  places  marked  by  the  injections.

The  pains  having  become  as  severe  as  they  were  before  the  26th,  I
try  hypnotization  with  suggestion  (second  degree).  The  pain  is  less  during
the  day,  but  is  intense  again  in  the  evening.  It  spreads  to  the  inguinal
region.

The  suggestion  is  not  repeated.  The  condition  remains  the  same.
On  December  3,  the  patient  takes  twenty-five  centigrammes  of  antife-
brine  ;  he  perspires  profusely,  and  the  pain  diminishes  for  the  time.
On  December  5  he  takes  one  gramme  of  sulphate  of  quinine  at  four
o'clock  in  the  afternoon.     The  intense  pain  reappears  at  ten  o'clock.

On  December  6  he  takes  1.5  grammes  of  sulphate  of  quinine
between  four  and  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  He  has  attacks  of
vertigo,  and  buzzing  in  his  ears.  The  pain  reappears  at  eleven  o'clock,
though  less  severe.  It  continues  less  severe  the  next  day,  but  does  not
disappear.

8th. — He  takes  two  grammes  of  quinine  at  the  same  hour  ;  vertigo
and  buzzing  in  the  ears.     He  perspires  all  night  and  has  no  pain.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  395

The  next  day,  the  9th,  he  does  not  complain  of  spontaneous  pains
in  the  morning;  but  the  points  which  are  painful  upon  pressure  persist
at  the  sciatic  foramen,  in  the  popliteal  space,  and  at  the  head  of  the
fibula.  15ut  at  mid-day  the  spontaneous  pains  again  appear,  are  very
severe,  and  last  through  the  next  day.

Thus  the  injections  of  chloride  of  methyl  and  the  sulphate  of  quinine
have  been  of  no  avail.

nth. —  I  try  hypnotic  suggestion  again.  No  pain  during  the  day  and
very  little  during  the  night.

1 2th. — New  suggestion.  Slight  shooting  pains  during  the  day.
Sleeps  during  the  night,  waking  several  times,  but  without  pain.
Walked  better  during  the  day  than  he  has  walked  since  he  came  to  the
hospital.

13th. — We  still  find  the  painful  spots,  but  they  are  less  severe  at  the
level  of  the  sciatic  foramen,  at  the  head  of  the  fibula  and  over  the
malleoli.  Suggestion.  The  pain  reappears  in  the  evening,  but  is  slight.
Patient  sleeps  all  night.

14th. — Same  condition.

15th. — Continues  to  improve.  Slept  three  or  four  hours  during  the
night.     Daily  suggestion.

16th. — Hardly  any  pain  when  lying  down;  it  is  present  but  less
intense  when  the  patient  walks.     Upon  pressure,  also,  it  is  less.

17th. — Continues  to  improve.  Slept  pretty  well.  Persistence  of  the
painful  spots.

20th. — Patient  walked  better  yesterday.  Slept  better.  Still  com-
plains of  a  sense  of  weight  and  of  tingling  in  the  foot.

21st. — Is  doing  well.  He  still  walks  with  difficulty,  using  a  cane,
and  feels  the  heavy  sensation  in  the  foot  and  knee.  After  hypnotic
suggestion,  he  walks  much  better  and  without  using  a  cane.  The  pain  in
the  nates  and  at  the  trochanter  upon  pressure,  has  disappeared.  There
is  still  tenderness  in  the  malleolus  and  over  the  back  of  the  thigh.

On  the  following  days,  the  patient  walks  about  with  his  cane  ;  there
remain  only  slightly  painful  sensations  provoked  by  walking.  The
patient  remains  in  the  hospital  until  January  5  without  complaining,
and  leaves  entirely  cured.

Observation  CI  I. — Sciatica  dating  back  three  months. — Suppression   of  the  pains  at
each  suggestion. — Cure  in  from  three  to  four  -weeks.

P ,  forty-eight    years  old,  married,  enters  the   hospital  on    June

21,  1887,  for  sciatica.  She  has  had  no  other  illness,  but  seven  years  ago
had  an  attack  of  sciatica  less  painful  than  the  present  one,  and  which
only  lasted  two  months.

396  Suggestive   Thcrapeiitics.

Present  trouble  began  on  March  20,  with  pain  behind  the  right
external  malleolus  ;  this  pain  disappeared  after  about  a  quarter  of  an
hour  of  walking.  This  continued  for  three  weeks,  then  suddenly  the
pain  spread  from  below  upward  to  the  nates.  The  affection  has  thus
been  confined  to  the  sciatic  for  three  months.  This  pain  became
constant,  with  exacerbations  in  the  popliteal  space  lasting  two  or  three
hours.  For  three  months  she  has  walked  with  great  difficulty  and
with  a  cane,  bending  over.  Six  weeks  ago  she  had  attacks  for  eight
days,  which  appeared  every  evening  at  nine  o'clock  and  were  accom-
panied by  a  sense  of  rolling  in  the  epigastrium,  spreading  up  to  the
throat,  with  distress,  depression,  and  a  feeling  of  suffocation.  These
sensations  appeared  every  clay  and  night  and  lasted  from  quarter  to
half  an  hour.  At  the  beginning  of  her  sickness,  she  had  severe  pain
in  the  top  of  her  head.  Ever  since  there  has  been  a  feeling  of  frontal
constriction  with  weight  and  a  desire  to  vomit.  Bowels  regular.  Seven
blisters  and  the  cautery  have  been  applied  loco  dolenti.

Mme.  P is  of  somewhat  delicate  constitution,  and  of  lymphatico-

nervous  temperament.  We  find  pain  upon  pressure  at  the  ischium,  at  the
trochanter,  near  the  sciatic  foramen  and  at  the  posterior  surface  of  the
thigh.  No  malleolar  pains.  She  can  hardly  stand,  even  with  a  cane.
Tenderness  over  the  epigastrium.  No  abdominal  pains.  Menstruation
normal.  The  patient  is  sad,  demoralized,  anxious,  and  cries  easily.
No  anaesthesia.

I  hypnotize  her  from  the  time  she  enters  the  hospital,  on  June  21st.
She  reaches  the  third  degree,  and  I  tell  her  that  she  will  walk  without
pain.  After  a  vigorous  suggestion,  I  wake  her  ;  she  thinks  she  has  not
slept.  I  command  her  to  walk,  and  to  the  great  astonishment  of  all
the  other  patients  in  the  ward,  she  walks  from  one  end  of  the  ward  to
the  other  without  a  cane,  and  without  complaining  of  pain.  This  result
however  is  not  lasting.     In  the  evening  the  pains  reappear.

The  next  day,  the  22d,  after  a  new  suggestion,  the  pains  again  dis-
appear ;  she  walks,  complaining  of  nothing  but  the  painful  spot  in  the
nates.  Pains,  which  disappear  at  ten  o'clock,  reappear  at  eleven  and
last  until  eleven  in  the  evening.  A  better  night  is  passed  ;  she  sleeps
a  little.  During  the  clay  she  has  suffocating  sensations  lasting  half  an
hour.     Her  moral  condition  is,  however,  much  improved.

23d. — The  menses  appeared  this  morning.  New  suppression  of  the
pains  by  suggestion  ;  they  again  appear,  in  about  an  hour,  in  the  back
of  the  thigh,  where  they  continue  throughout  the  day.

Sleeps  quite  well  during  the  night.

25th. — No  suggestion  yesterday.  Very  sharp  pain  until  five  o'clock
in  the  evening.  Patient  goes  to  sleep;  the  pain  returns  at  seven
o'clock  ;  she   sleeps,   nevertheless,  during  a  part  of  the  night.     In   the

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  397

morning  the  pain  is  not  severe.  She  still  complains  of  depression
with  a  sensation  of  rolling  in  the  epigastrium.     Suggestion.

Condition  the  same  on  the  26th  and  27th.  After  suggestion,  the
pain  disappears,  but  reappears  in  the  evening.  She  has  slept  badly
during  the  past  two  nights.

28th. — She  takes  two  doses  (0.50  grammes)  of  antipyrine.  She  does
not  perspire  and  has  no  pain  during  the  day  ;  but  at  midnight  severe
pains  come  on  lasting  an  hour.     Then  she  goes  to  sleep  again.

29th. — In  the  morning  she  has  shooting  pains  in  the  leg;  after
suggestion  she  walks  better.

30th. — She  has  scarcely  any  more  pain.  On  the  1st  of  July  less
severe  pain  comes  on  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening  and  lasts  three
quarters  of  an  hour.  She  no  longer  complains  of  rolling  in  the
epigastrium  and  is  no  longer  sad,  but  gay,  and  amuses  herself  with  the
jokes  of  the  other  patients.     Suggestion  continued.

On  July  3  she  walks  about  all  day  without  experiencing  any  pain.
From  ten  to  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  there  is  a  paroxysm  of
pain.

After  the  4th  she  has  no  more  pain  in  the  leg.  It  is  only  when  she
rests  upon  the  foot  that  she  feels  a  shooting  pain  in  the  buttock.

5th. — Patient  walks  about  a  good  deal  and  only  complains  of  not
being  able  to  rest  easily  upon  her  foot,  on  account  of  the  pain  in  the
buttock  which  results.     She  was  restless  during  the  night.     Suggestion.

6th. — She  walks  better.  Passed  a  quiet  night.  She  continues  to  do
well  ;  has  no  more  shooting  pains.  Her  appetite  is  good  and  she  is
bright.  The  tenderness  of  the  nates  when  she  walks,  still  persists  for
some  time,  but  tends  to  diminish.  She  goes  home  on  July  22,  almost
completely  cured.  I  learn  later  that  the  cure  is  completed  and  has
been  permanent.

Thus  there  was  temporary  cessation  of  the  pain  after  the
first  suggestion.  But  the  pain  reappeared  with  persistence  ;  the
general  nervous  condition  is  rapidly  improved  in  a  few  séances.
From  three  to  four  weeks  are  needed,  however,  to  obtain  an
almost  complete  cure.

OrSERVATlON  CITI. — Neuralgia  of  the  trigeminus  lasting  a  year,  with  tic  douloureux
for  four  'weeks.  Ripid  improvement,  and  almost  complete  cure  by  suggestion  in  ten
days.

C ,  a  workman  sixty  years  old,  enters  the  hospital   on   July   27,

1885,  for  a  facial  tic  douloureux.

The  affection  began  a  year  ago  with  painful  sensations  in  the  right

39S  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

side  of  the  nose,  coming  on  several  times  a  clay  and  lasting  from  several
minutes  to  two  hours.  During  the  last  four  weeks  these  pains  have
spread  to  the  eye,  forehead,  and  all  over  the  face  on  the  same  side.
The  disease  takes  the  form  of  paroxysms,  beginning  in  the  morning,
generally  about  five  o'clock,  and  usually  lasting  from  half  an  hour  to  an
hour.  These  paroxysms  very  often  recur  both  by  day  and  at  night.  In
the  intervals  between  these  attacks  C only  feels  a  burning  sensa-
tion in  his  nose  and  jaw.  During  the  paroxysms  the  pains  are  exag-
gerated and  spread  over  the  whole  side,  being  accompanied  with  convul-
sive movements  of  the  face.

C has  a  good  constitution  and  is  well  preserved.     He  denies  any

previous  disease.  We  find  tenderness  on  pressure  throughout  the
supra-orbital  to  the  parietal  region,  in  the  upper  and  lower  eyelids,  and
pain  in  front  of  the  ear  and  at  the  emergence  of  the  trigeminus.  The
entire  cheek  is  tender,  but  to  a  less  degree.  During  the  attacks,  the
pains  are  excessive  ;  there  is  spasm  of  the  face  with  rigidity  of  the
jaw.  This  spasm  has  existed  for  four  weeks  ;  during  this  time  only
have  the  pains  spread  to  the  jaw.  Before  they  only  involved  the  fore-
head and  eye.  For  four  weeks  he  has  only  been  able  to  eat  liquid  food.
After  a  first  trial  of  hypnotization  on  the  28th,  which  was  doubtful,  but
in  consequence  of  which  the  patient  felt  better  and  said  he  slept  during
the  night,  I  hypnotize  him  on  the  30th.  I  close  his  eyes,  suggesting  quiet
and  cure,  etc.  I  invite  him  to  continue  to  sleep  for  half  an  hour.  He
continues  to  sleep,  as  if  spontaneously,  for  half  an  hour.

30th. —  Upon  waking  the  paiti  had  completely  disappeared.  It  re-
appeared half  an  hour  afterward  ;   in  the  afternoon  it  was  less  intense.

The  night  was  good.     C says  that  he  has  not  slept  as  well  for  four

or  five  weeks.  He  can  again  eat  solid  food  by  moistening  it,  but  can-
not chew  it.  The  right  side  of  the  face  is  still  sensitive  to  pressure.
No  suggestion.

31st. — Had  a  great  deal  of  pain  yesterday;  did  not  sleep  last  night. —
Suggestion.

August  2d. — The  patient  has  been  treated  with  suggestion  for  two
days  ;  each  time  he  has  been  allowed  to  sleep  for  an  hour.  He  is  much
better  and  only  has  slight  pain  localized  in  the  nose  and  right  eye,  as  at
the  beginning  of  his  affection.  The  pains  are  not  accompanied  with
spasm.  There  are  burning  sensations  which  occur  every  three  or  four
minutes.  He  has  no  more  pain  in  the  jaw,  and  has  been  able  to  eat  a
crust  of  bread,  which  he  could  not  do  four  weeks  ago.  He  slept  last
night  from  eight  o'clock  to  one  o'clock,  and  after  lying  awake  for  an
hour  slept  again  until  morning. — Suggestion.

3d. — Has  had  pain  in  the  forehead  and  nose,  at  the  upper  external
part  of  the  right  ala  of  the  nose.     At  the  points  of  emergence  of  the

Suggestive  Therapeutics.  399

supra  and  infra  orbital  nerves,  there  is  slight  tenderness  on  pressure.
There  is  scarcely  any  pain  in  the  jaw.  Nevertheless  pain  has  pre-
vented his  sleeping. — Suggestion.

4th. — Was  very  well  yesterday  and  had  almost  no  pain.  Slept  dur-
ing the  night. — No  suggestion  to-day.

5th. — Was  well  yesterday;  only  experienced  slight  pricking  sensation
in  the  nose.  At  midnight  was  awakened  by  lightning  pains  in  the  jaw
which  lasted  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Had  these  pains  again  at  about
three  o'clock.  This  morning  we  find  tenderness  of  the  nose  and  fore-
head. Pressure  is  somewhat  painful.  The  patient  can  eat. — No  sug-
gestion.

6th. — Continues  to  improve  ;  sleeps  and  eats  well  ;  only  complains  of
slight  dull  pain  in  the  nose. — Suggestion.

7th. — Has  felt  slight  pain  extending  from  the  nose  to  the  internal
part  of  the  right  side  of  the  forehead  as  far  as  the  synciput.  No  symp-
toms referable  to  the  jaw.  Sleep  was  broken  by  shooting  pains  recur-
ring every  three  or  four  minutes  and  unaccompanied  by  spasm.  The
patient  thinks  he  is  well  enough  to  begin  work  again  and  asks  for  his
dismissal.     I  make  him  promise  to  come  to  the  hospital  every  day.

9th. — He  comes  again  and  says  he  has  been  well.  Yesterday,  from
mid-day  until  evening,  he  had  slightly  painful  pricking  sensations  in  his
nose  and  forehead.  He  slept  all  night;  this  morning  he  again  com-
plains of  nasal  and  frontal  pricking  sensations.  Upon  pressure  we  only
find  tenderness  of  the  right  ala  of  the  nose.

C has  not  come  back  since.     A  patient  who  met  him   in  the

street  a  year  later  told  me  that  he  had  been  well  ever  since  and  had  had
no  more  pain.

X.

Menstrual  Troubles.
Observation  CIV. — Retardation  of  the  menstrual  period. — Suggestion  for  the  appear-
ance of  the  menses  on  a  fixed  day.

Mile.  C ,   a  teacher,  twenty-five  years  of  age,   is  a   neuropathic

patient  of  Dr.  Lie'bault's.

She  comes  to  consult  me  on  November  17th,  for  retardation  of  the
menses.  Her  last  period  began  on  October  7th.  The  menses  have  not
reappeared,  and  for  several  days  she  has  complained  of  a  sensation
of  constriction  about  the  waist,  with  swelling.  She  eats  more  than
usual  and  her  digestion  is  very  good.     She  says  that  she  is  not  pregnant.

I  put  her  into  somnambulism  easily  ;  /  suggest  that  her  period  will
begin  on  the  30M.  She  herself  repeats  in  her  sleep  that  she  will  be  ill  on
the  30th.     I  suggest  that  she  will  come  to  tell  me  about  it.

On  the  30th,  she  comes  to  tell  me  that  the  menses  appeared  in  the

400  Suggestive   TJicrapciiUcSi

morning  without  any  pain  ;  the  day  before  she  had  premonitory  symp-
toms :  pain  in  the  loins,  headache,  irritability.

I  suggest  the  next  period  for  the  28th  of December  ;  she  is  to  come  and
tell  me  about  it.

On  December  28,  she  comes  to  tell  me  that  the  menses  appeared  in
the  morning,  that  is,  according  to  the  suggestion  I  had  made.

Observation     CV. — Profuse   menstruation   every    eleven    or  fifteen    days. — Interval
increased  by  suggestion  to  twenty-eight  or  twenty-nine  days.

Mme.  H ,  thirty-five  years  old,  and  the  mother  of  three  children,

the  youngest  of  whom  is  nine  and  a  half,  is  a  woman  of  strong  constitu-
tion, slightly  obese,  and  of  medium  intelligence.  She  comes  to  consult
me  on  September  20,  1886.  She  says  that  for  the  last  sixteen  years
she  has  had  a  cold  every  year  accompanied  with  hoarseness  and  lasting
nine  months.  Four  years  ago  I  treated  her  for  one  of  these  colds  with
electricity  and  cold  water  compresses  upon  the  neck  ;  she  was  cured  in
fifteen  days.  At  the  present  time  she  has  had  hoarseness  for  nine
months,  and  oppression,  particularly  at  night.  She  has  coughed  for  the
last  three  months.  Her  sleep  is  disturbed.  She  often  has  painful
spots  at  various  parts  of  the  body

At  the  age  of  sixteen  she  had  paroxysms  of the  "  Grande  Hystérie"
with  agitation  and  loss  of  consciousness.  These  paroxysms  were  in-
duced by  the  least  contradiction,  emotion,  or  fright.  She  had  them  at
least  every  eight  or  fifteen  days  They  have  diminished  in  frequency
during  the  past  five  years.  She  has  had  two  this  year.  The  last  one,
occurring  five  months  ago,  provoked  by  trouble  with  her  children,
lasted  half  an  hour,  with  cries,  strangulation,  and  suffocation.

Before  her  first  confinement  Mme.  H menstruated  every  twenty-
one  days.  For  the  last  two  years  the  menses  have  appeared  every  fifteen
days  at  the  longest,  sometimes  every  eleven  or  thirteen  days.  The  last
period  extended  from  the  nth  to  the  15th  day.  Menstruation  is  very
abundant,  and  sometimes  accompanied  with  sharp  cramp.  Two  or
three  days  before  each  period,  she  trembles,  is  irritable  and  nervous,
and  cannot  get  on  with  her  children.  These  symptoms  disappear  with
the  appearance  of  the  menses. — The  respiratory  and  digestive  functions
are  normal.

The  patient  is  easily  put  into  somnambulism  on  the  20th.  She  im-
proves after  the  first  séance  ;  the  painful  spots  disappear  after  the
second;  the  oppression  and  hoarseness  diminish  on  the  24th.  After
the  fourth  séance,  the  hoarseness  has  totally  disappeared;  no  more  rest-
lessness at  night  and  no  more  oppression.  I  suggest  at  each  seance  that  her
next  period  will  come  on  October  9,  without  pain,  and  will  last  three  days

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  401

27  th. — Fifth  séance;  the  patient  says  she  feels  premonitory  symptoms.
Since  the  22a  (eleven  days  after  the  preceding  period),  she  lias  had
twinges  in  the  back  and  a  sensation  of  weight  in  the  stomach,  as  is  usual
at  the  approach  of  her  period.  In  the  morning  (sixteen  days  after  the
preceding  period),  she  had  headache,  which  is  now  passing  away.  Her
voice  is  clear;  she  does  not  cough  and  has  no  more  oppression.  I  sug-
gest that  all  these  premonitory  symptoms  will  disappear  and  that  she
will  menstruate  on  the  9th.

29th. — Has  been  well  since  the  last  se'ance.  Yesterday  evening  from
four  to  five  o'clock  she  had  cramps,  as  at  the  approach  of  her  period.
She  passed  a  good  night.  No  loss  of  blood.  Her  voice  is  clear;  she
says  that  at  one  time,  when  she  talked  a  little  to  her  children  or  when
she  walked,  her  voice  would  disappear  entirely.

October  1st. — Had  slight  leucorrhcea  yesterday.  Pains  this  morn-
ing for  ten  minutes,  as  at  the  approach  of  her  period.  Otherwise  is  do-
ing well.

3d. — Yesterday  evening  slight  hoarseness  and  cough.  Did  not
sleep  well  ;  woke  up  at  two  o'clock.  No  uterine  pain.  Yesterday
morning  and  this  morning  she  had  neura/gia  which  disappeared  in  the
afternoon,  together  with  nausea  and  a  desire  to  vomit,  which  lasted  an
hour.  At  the  present  time  she  still  complains  of  vertigo  and  nausea.
She  says  that  she  usually  has  these  symptoms  when  she  is  pregnant.
Suggestion  that  she  will  sleep  the  whole  night  and  that  these  symptoms
will  disappear.

5th. — Has  been  very  well  since  the  last  séance  ;  day  before  yesterday
slept  until  five  o'clock,  last  night  until  six.  Her  voice  is  still  excellent.
Slight  leucorrhœa  since  yesterday.  Infra-orbital  left  neuralgia  since
nine  or  ten  o'clock  this  morning.  I  hypnotize  her.  No  more  pain
after  the  first  séance  ;  complains  simply  of  heat  about  the  eye  and  on  the
cheek.     After  the  second  séance  this  heat  has  also  disappeared.

7th. — Complains  of  no  more  pain  ;  sleeps  well  at  night.  For  the  last
few  nights  she  has  only  gone  to  sleep  after  an  hour  of  slight  restlessness.
But  she  continues  to  sleep  well.  Yesterday  morning  when  she  got  up
she  was  again  hoarse,  and  coughed  until  she  vomited.  She  attributes
this  to  the  fact  of  having  eaten  nuts  the  day  before.  She  felt  her  throat
sore  immediately  afterward  ;  and  nuts  usually  produce  this  hoarse  feel-
ing in  her.

This  morning  she  had  slight  pain  on  respiration,  from  the  larynx  to
the  middle  of  the  sternum  ;  it  lasted  two  hours.

Has  no  more  leucorrhcea;  did  not  usually  have  it  when  she  men-
struated every  eighteen  days.

Said  that    at  one  time    she  had  headache,  especially  when   she  was
hoarse  ;  has  none  now.
26

402  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

Menses  .  appear  on  tlie  night  of  the  jth  of  October,  at  the  end  of  twenty-
six  days,  instead  of  on  the  8th  as  had  been  suggested.  She  says  in  her
sleep  that  if  it  came  a  day  earlier  it  would  be  on  account  of  fatigue  due
to  over  exertion.  The  interval  between  two  periods  had  never  been
more  than  twenty-one  days,  and  during  the  last  two  years  not  more  than
fifteen  days.  Further,  she  has  no  pain  ;  hardly  any  even  in  the  loins.
Usually  she  has  severe  pain  in  the  abdomen  and  loins  the  day  before;
they  are  less  on  the  first  day,  but  again  increase  on  the  second  day  and
last  two  or  three  days  ;  this  time  she  has  none.  She  has  also  been  less
nervous  than  usual.  On  the  8th  and  9th,  however,  she  is  slightly  irri-
tated by  her  children.

Menstruation  lasted  three  days  and  was  moderately  profuse  as  had  been
suggested,  while  as  a  rule  it  lasted  five  or  six  days,  never  less  then  rive
days.

I  see  Mme.  H again  on    October   18  ;  she  has   been  well  since.

Last  week  she  had  slight  irritation  in  her  throat  which  brought  on  cough
at  night  for  three  days.

/  suggest  the  next  period  for  the  night  of  the  ^th  of  Nove77iber,  and
that  the  menses  shall  appear,  as  a  rule,  every  four  weeks,  every  twenty-
eight  days.

Is  doing  well.  In  damp  foggy  weather  her  voice  is  at  times  husky,
but  that  is  all.

30th. — In  consequence  of  having  been  angry  and  cried  on  the  26th,
she  is  again  hoarse  and  has  a  sensation  of  constriction  in  her  throat.
Since  then,  she  has  had  pain  in  the  larynx,  and  cough  with  expectoration
in  the  morning.  No  premonitory  sign  of  menstruation.  Suggestion  at
each  se'ance.

November  7th. — Menses  appeared  on  October  31  during  the  night,  at
the  end  of  hoenty-four  days.  The  period  lasted  three  days,  and  the
patient  was  not  nervous  as  she  usually  is.  Since  the  last  se'ance  she
has  had  neither  hoarseness  nor  sore  throat.  Suggestion  of  the  period  for
November  28.

20th. — Is  doing  very  well.

27th. — Menstruation  began  on  the  evening  of  the  2$th,  about  four  or
five  o'clock  (at  the  end  of  twenty-five  days),  with  neither  pain  nor  colic.
She  felt  it  as  she  was  scrubbing  the  floor.  She  thinks  that  if  it  had  not
been  for  this  work  it  would  have  been  retarded  until  the  28th.

December  9th. — Is  doing  very  well.  Complains  this  morning  of
malaise,  with  pain  near  the  heart,  and  expectoration,  as  at  the  approach
of  her  period.     It  should  come  on  the  23d.

16th. — Has  had  no  more  pain  in  the  heart  nor  expectoration  since  the
last  suggestion.

23d. — Menstruation  appeared  on  the  20th,  the  26//;  day,  without  pain.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  403

It  lasted  hardly  three  days  and  was  slight.  Day  before  yesterday,  in
the  evening,  she  caught  cold  and  was  hoarse  yesterday.  Further,  yester-
day morning  at  ten  o'clock,  she  had  neuralgia,  and  vertigo,  vomited
once  and  had  to  lie  down  until  three  o'clock  ;  then  all  trouble  disap-
peared.

January  ioth,  1887. — The  patient  has  been  very  well;  has  had  no
more  discomfort.  Her  period  began  on  the  i$th,  the  26th  day  (as  had
been  suggested)  without  pain  or  hoarseness.  It  lasted  three  days. —
I  suggest  it  again  for  February  10th.

Februarv  ioth. — Menstruation  appeared  on  the  Sth  instead  of  the  ioth,

on  the  24th  day  instead  of  the  26th,  without  pain.     Mme.  H caught

cold  and  since  the  5th  has  been  hoarse,  has  coughed,  and  complained  of
pain  in  her  back  and  left  side.

After  suggestion  the  hoarseness  and  other  symptoms  disappear.

15th. — She  again  takes  cold  ;  has  been  hoarse  all  day.

The  next  day  the  hoarseness  disappeared.

On  the  20th  she  is  taken  with  paroxsyms  of  coughing  which  last  an
hour.     Since  then  she  has  continued  to  cough  without  being  hoarse.

25th. — I  suggest  the  disappearance  of  the  cough,  and  the  next  period
for  March  6th.

March  3d. — The  cold  disappeared  after  the  first  se'ance.  On  Feb-
ruary 26th  she  had  an  attack  of  migraine,  with  malaise,  want  of  appe-
tite, expectoration,  and  a  bad  taste  in  her  mouth.  She  has  been  well
again  for  two  days.  At  the  present  time  she  feels  a  headache  coming
on,  which  I  drive  away  by  suggestion.

23d. — Since  the  last  visit,  March  3d,  she  has  been  perfectly  well,
without  the  least  discomfort,  cough  or  hoarseness.  Menstruation  began
on  the  yth,  instead  of  on  the  6th,  that  is  to  say  on  the  27th  day  ;  was  mod-
erately abundant  and  lasted  three  clays  without  any  hoarseness.

April  2 1  st. — The  patient  menstruated  on  April  5,  that  is  on  the  29th
day.  She  expected  it  on  the  4th.  She  has  been  very  well  up  to  eight
days  ago.  Since  then  she  says  she  has  not  slept  or  eaten  anything  ;
eating  suffocates  her.  She  has  a  sensation  of  heat  about  the  head.  I
drive  away  the  discomfort  by  suggestion.

May  12th. — The  patient  comes  to  see  me  for  a  cold  dating  back  eight
days.  She  menstruated  on  May  3d,  the  2gth  day.  The  period  lasted
three  days.     Is  doing  well.

I  do  not  see  her  until  June  23d.  She  says  she  has  been  very
well  since  the  last  se'ance  :  the  cold  disappeared.  She  always  menstru-
ates cxaetly  on  the  28th  or  29th  day.

I  went  to  see  her  again  on  August  21st.  The  cure  had  lasted  ;  she
had  no  more  hoarseness.  Her  periods  eon  tinned  to  appear  regularly,  on
the.  2Sth  or  29th  day,  or  a  day  or  two  before  or  after.

404  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

To  sum  up.  A  woman  who  menstruated  profusely  for  five
or  six  days,  every  eleven  or  fifteen  days,  and  who  never  had  an
interval  of  more  than  twenty-one  days  between  two  periods,  un-
der the  influence  of  hypnotic  suggestion  comes  to  menstruate
successively  on  the  26th,  24th,  25th,  26th,  26th,  24th,  27th,  29th,
and  29th  days  and  since  then  regularly  two  days  either  before  or
after  the  28th  or  29th  da}-.

At  first  the  period  did  not  begin  exactly  on  the  day  suggested.

On  the  first  occasion,  at   the   time   when   menstruation  would

have  appeared  without  suggestion,  Mme.  H felt  premonitory

symptoms  :  twinges  in  the  back,  sensation  of  weight  in  the  stom-
ach, then  uterine  cramps  ;  then,  at  about  the  26th  day  she  ex-
perienced pain  over  her  heart,  nausea  and  vertigo.  These  were
the  usual  symptoms  of  her  being  pregnant.  The  suggestion
acted  as  an  inhibition  until  the  26th  day.  Further,  menstrua-
tion was  slight  and  only  lasted  three  days  instead  of  five  or
six.

The  following  periods  came  without  premonitory  symptoms
and  without  pain  ;  the  patient's  organism  succeeded  in  regulating
the  menstrual  interval  to  28  or  29  days  under  the  influence  of
suggestion.

Let  us  glance  at  these  observations  arranged  in  the  following
order  :

A. — Organic  diseases  of  the  nervous  system  :  10.

1.  Cerebral    hemorrhage,    hemiplegia,  hemianaesthesia   with  tremor
and  contracture.     Cure.

2.  Cerebro-spinal  disease  :    apoplectiform  attacks,  paralyses,  ulnar
neuritis.     Cure.

3.  Partial  left  hemiplegia.     Cure.

4.  Traumatic  epilepsy  with  traumatic  rheumatism.     Cure.

5.  Sensory  organic  hemianesthesia.     Cure.

6.  Diffuse  rheumatic  myelitis.     Improvement.

7.  Cerebro-spinal    insular    sclerosis.       Marked  improvement  for  six
months.

8.  Nervous  troubles  (organic  cause  ?)  in  the  brachial  plexus.     Tem-
porary suppression  of  the  symptoms.     No  Cure.

9.  Paresis,  of  traumatic  origin,  of  the  muscles  of  the  hand.     Cure.
10.  Paresis  of  the  extensors  of  the  hand  and    saturnine    anaesthesia.

Cure.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  405

B. — Hysterical  diseases  :  17.

11.  Hystero-epilepsy  in    a    man,   sensitivo-sensorial    hemianesthesia.

Cure.

12.  Hysteria,  sensitivo-sensorial   anaesthesia.      Transient  suppression
of  the  symptoms.     No  Cure.

13.  Hemiplegia  with  left  sensitivo-sensorial  hemianesthesia.     Cure.

14.  Hysterical  sensitivo-sensorial  hemianesthesia.      Cure.

15.  Hysteriform  paroxysms  with  hysterical  somnambulism.     Cure.

16.  Anesthesia.      Hysterical  spinal  pain.     Cure.

17.  Paralysis  with  hysterical  anesthesia.      Cure.

18.  Convulsive  hysteria  with  hemianesthesia.     Cure.

19.  Hysteria  :  paroxysms  of  convulsive  weeping.     Cure.

20.  Convulsive  hysteria.      Cure.

21.  Convulsive  hysteria  with  hemianesthesia.     Cure.

22.  Convulsive  hysteria.     Cure.

23.  Convulsive  hysteria  with  hemianesthesia.      Cure.

24.  Convulsive  hysteria  with  hemianesthesia.      Cure.

25.  Hysteria  with  hemianesthesia.      Cure.

26.  Hysteria  in  the  male  :  weeping  and  convulsive  paroxysms.       Curt
(at  least  temporary).

27.  Hysterical  aphonia.     Cure.

C. — Neuropathic  affections  :  18.

28.  Nervous  aphonia.      Cure.

29.  Moral  inertia  with  subjective  sensations  in  the  head.     Cure.

30.  Nervous  aphonia.      Cure.

31.  Post-epileptic  tremor,  cephalalgia,  and  insomnia.     Cure.

32.  Nervous  gastric  troubles.     Anesthesia.     Improvement.

33.  Neuropathic  pains.      Cure.

34.  Epigastric  pains.      Cure.

35.  Neuropathic  lumbar  pains.      Insomnia.      Cure.

36.  Paresis  with  sense  of  weight  in  the  right  leg.     Cure.

37.  Pains  in  the  right  leg.      Cure.

38.  Girdle-pain  and  pain  in  right  groin,  with   difficulty  in  walking,  for
twenty  months.     Cure.

39.  Insomnia,  loss  of  appetite,  mental  depression,  tremor.     Cure.

40.  Gloomy  ideas.     Insomnia,  loss  of  appetite.     Cure.

41.  Insomnia  through  habit.     Partial  cure.

42.  Cephalalgia,  intellectual  obnubilation.     Cure.

43.  Vertigo,  moral  depression  connected  with  cardiac  disease.     Cure.

44.  Laziness,  disobedience,  and  loss  of  appetite  in  a  child.     Cure.

45.  Pseudo-paraplegia  with  tremor.     Cure.

4<do  Suggestive   Thci'apeiitics.

D. —  Various  neuroses  :  15.

46.  Choreic  movements  consecutive  to  chorea.     Cure.

47.  Id.  id.  id.

48.  Choreic  movements  from  moral  emotion.     Cure.

49.  Post-choreic  tremor  in  the  hand.     Cure.

50.  Post  choreic  trouble  in  writing.      Cure.

51.  Choreic  movements  in  the  hands.     Cure.

52.  Hemi-chorea.     Rapid  improvement.      Gradual  cure.

53.  General  chorea.     Gradual  cure.

54.  Id.  id.

55.  Obstinate  writer's  cramp.     Rapid  improvement.     Gradual  cure.

56.  Attacks  of  tetany,  nocturnal  somnambulism.     Cure.

57.  Nocturnal  somnambulism.      Temporary  cure.

58.  Nocturnal  incontinence  of  urine.      Cure.

59.  Id.  id.  id.

60.  Nocturnal  incontinence  of  urine.      Aphonia  consecutive  to  pneu-
monia.    Cure.

E. — Dynamic  pareses  and  paralyses  :  3.

6t.  Sense  of  weight  with  paresis  of  the  left  arm.     Cure.

62.  Dynamic  psychical  paraplegia.      Cure.

63.  Pains  and  paresis  of  the  lower  limbs.     Cure.

F. —  Gastro-intestinal  affections  :  4.

64.  Alcoholic    gastritis    with    insomnia  and   weakness    of   the    legs.
Improvement.

65.  Chronic    gastritis.        Dilatation    of   the    stomach    and   vomiting.
Improvement.

66.  Gastric  troubles.      Burning  sensation  over  sternum.      Insomnia.
Cure.

67.  Gastro-intestinal  catarrh.     Metritis.     Neuropathy.     Improvement.

G. —  Various  painful  affections  :  12.

68.  Epigastric  pain.     Cure.

69.  Umbilical  and  epigastric  pain.     Cure.

70.  Interscapular  pain.     Cure.

71.  Thoracic  pain.     Insomnia  (Tubercular  diathesis).     Cure.

72.  Hypogastric  and  supra-inguinal  pains  on  the  left   side   connected
with  an  old  pelvic-peritonitis.     Cure.

73.  Intercostal  pain.      Cure.

74.  Thoracic  pain.      Gradual  cure.

75.  Painful  contusion  of  the  deltoid.     Cure.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  407

76.  Muscular  pain  in  the  flank.     Cure.

77.  Painful  spot  in  the  side.     Cure.

78.  Tains  in  the  epitrochlear  muscles.      Cure.

79.  Tain  in  the  shoulder  and  upper  right  limb  from  effort.      Cure.

H. — Rheumatic  affections  :   19.

So.   Rheumatic  paralysis  of  the  right  fore-arm.      Cure.

Si.  Rheumatic  scapulo-humeral  arthritis.     Improvement  without  cure.

82.  Muscular  rheumatism  with  cramp.      Cure.

83.  Ilio-lumbar  rheumatic  neuralgia.      Cure.

84.  Arthralgia  consecutive  to  an  arthritis.      Cure.

85.  Pleurodynia  and  lumbar  pain  helped  by  suggestion.     Cure.

86.  Apyretic  articular  rheumatism.      Gradual  cure.

87.  Chronic  articular  rheumatism  (wrists  and  insteps).      Cure.

88.  Muscular  articular  and  nervous  rheumatism.     Gradual  cure.

89.  Acromio-clavicular  and  xiphoid  rheumatic  pains.     Cure.

90.  Muscular  lumbo-crural  rheumatism,  with  sacro-sciatic  neuralgia.
Rapid  improvement.       Almost  total  cure.

91.  Apyretic  articular  rheumatism.      Gradual  cure.

92.  Acromio-clavicular  rheumatic  pains.      Cure.

93.  Muscular  rheumatism  in  the  arm  and  right  leg.     Cure.

94.  Gonorrheal  rheumatism.      Gradual  cure.

95.  Acromio-clavicular  and  xiphoid  articular  rheumatism.      Cure.

96.  Rheumatic  articular  pains.      Cure.

97.  Dorsal  and  metacarpophalangeal  rheumatic  pains.     Cure.

98.  Rheumatic,  dorso-lumbar,  and  sciatic  pains.      Cure.

1. — Neuralgias:  5.

99.  Rebellious  sciatica.     Cure.

100.  Recent  sciatica  helped  by  one  suggestion.     Cure.

101.  Rebellious  sciatica.      Cure.

102.  Rebellious  sciatica.      Gradual  cure.

103.  Neuralgia  of  the   trigeminus  with  facial  tic  douloureux.     Almost
complete  cure.

J.— Menstrual  troubles  :  2.

104.  Menstrual  retardation.      Suggestion  of  the  periods  for  a  fixed  day.

105.  Profuse    menstruation    every  eleven    or   fifteen    days.       Interval
lengthened  by  suggestion  to  twenty-eight  or  twenty-nine  days.

CHAPTER  II.

Suggestive  therapeutics  acts  upon  function. — Rôle  of  functional  dynamism  in  disease.
— Dangers  of  hypnotism. — Spontaneous  sleep. — Exaggerated  hypnotic  suggesti-
bility.— Suggestion  corrects  these  inconveniences. — Can  hypnotism  injure  the
cerebral  faculties? — Abuse  of  induced  hallucinations. — Susceptibility  to  halluci-
nation in  the  waking  condition. — Medical  advice.

By  relating  these  numerous  observations  I  have  tried  to  show
how  vast  is  the  field  of  suggestive  psycho-therapeutics.  It  is  not
only  in  hysteria,  in  neuroses  and  in  purely  functional  nervous
maladies  that  suggestive  therapeutics  finds  an  application.  We
have  seen  the  results  which  it  can  bring  about  in  organic  affec-
tions of  the  nervous  system,  in  chronic  articular  rheumatism,  and
in  gastric  troubles,  etc.  I  have  tried  to  explain  (see  Obs.  I.  and
II.)  by  what  mechanism  suggestion  may  act  efficaciously  in  cases
of  this  kind.  It  may  seem  puerile,  at  first  sight,  to  call  upon  the
imagination  to  cure  or  improve  functional  troubles  connected
with  cerebral  hemorrhage  or  degeneration,  with  rheumatic
arthritis  or  chronic  myelitis.  Many  physicians  will  shrug
their  shoulders  and  raise  their  hands  to  heaven,  to  protest
against  such  assertions.  May  they  reflect  and  verify,  before
protesting.  They  will  be  forced  to  bow  before  the  evidence  of
facts.

I  do  not  pretend  that  suggestion  acts  directly  upon  the  dis-
eased organ  to  suppress  vascular  congestion,  resolve  inflammatory
exudation,  and  restore  the  destroyed  or  degenerated  elements  of
the  parenchyma.  What  drug  in  the  materia  medica  is  capable
of  creating  such  a  direct  curative  activity?  Diseases  are  cured,
when  they  can  be  cured,  by  their  natural  biological  evolution.
Our  ordinary  therapeutic  methods  consist  in  putting  the  organ-
ism in  a  condition  such  that  the  restitutio  ad  integrum  may  take
place  ;  we  suppress  the  pain,  we  modify  function,  we  let  the  organ
rest,  we  calm  the  fever,  we  retard  the  pulse,  we  induce  sleep,  we
encourage  secretion  and  excretion,  and,  acting  thus,  we  permit
nature  the  healer,  or,  to  speak  in  modern  language,  we  permit
the  activity  of  the  forces  and  the  properties  inherent  in  the  bio-
logical   elements    to    accomplish    their   work.     The    therapeutic

408

Suggestive   Therapeutics.  409

agents  which  we  use  are  only  functional  medicament.  Sugges-
tion, also,  is  a  powerful  functional  medicament.

Every  organ  and  every  function  is  under  the  control  of  the
nervous  centres.  Each  element  of  the  organism  has,  so  to  speak,
its  centre  of  action  bordering  upon  the  brain.  Sensibility,  move-
ment, nutrition,  secretion,  excretion  and  calorification  are  gov-
erned, or  at  least  influenced,  by  this  central  organism,  which  pre-
sides over  the  complex  mechanism  of  animal  physiology.  This
central  organism  may  interfere  efficaciously  in  order  to  re-estab-
lish the  working  of  the  disturbed  organs  and  functions  as  far  as
possible.

I  say  as  far  as  possible.  Let  us  take  a  case  in  which  we  sup-
pose a  cerebral  hemorrhage  to  have  destroyed  the  entire  internal
capsule;  a  descending  degeneration  occurs  in  the  pyramidal  tract,
and  a  spastic  hemiplegia  is  the  result.  Here  the  motor  organ,
the  sine  qua  non  which  controls  the  movements  of  one-half  of
the  body,  is  destroyed.  No  organic  substitution  is  possible.
No  medication  can  restore  what  has  been  destroyed.  Sugges-
tion cannot,  any  more  than  other  therapeutic  means,  re-establish
a  function,  the  organ  indispensable  to  the  control  of  which  no
longer  exists.

But  let  us  suppose  that  the  hemorrhage  has  left  unharmed  a
number  of  fibres  sufficient  for  the  transmission  of  the  centrifugal
influence  of  the  will  to  the  motor  cells.  These  fibres  are  only
functionally  affected,  stunned  by  the  shock  to  the  neighboring
fibres,  affected  potentially.  Being  powerless  to  arise  spon-
taneously from  their  torpor,  suggestion  may  act  dynamically
upon  them  ;  the  psychical  activity  aroused  and  concentrated
upon  these  fibres  gives  them  a  new  stimulus,  which  revives  their
dulled  modality.  By  this  dynamogenic  excitation  the  cerebral
influx  succeeds  in  forcing  its  way  to  the  motor  cells,  and  the  in-
terrupted conductivity  being  re-established,  function   is  restored.

Now  we  have  seen  how  important  a  rôle  dynamism  plays  in
the  functions  of  the  nervous  system.  We  know  that  organic  hemi-
anesthesias obstinately  persisting  for  years  (for  four  years  in  one
of  my  cases)  have  been  rapidly  cured  by  various  methods  of  treat-
ment, electricity,  metallotherapy,  magnetotherapy,  suggestion.
We  know  that  dynamic  paralyses  and  contractures,  hysterical
and  psychical,  after  having  persisted  for  years,  defying  all  ther-
apeutic methods,  sometimes  yield  as  if  by  enchantment  to  a  vio-
lent  moral   disturbance.      There   is  nothing  exceptional   in  the

4-IO  Suggestive    Therapeutics.

living  organism  :  each  act  induced  is  susceptible  of  being  repro-
duced, because  this  act  implies  the  activity  of  a  physiological
mechanism  inherent  in  the  organism.

A  consideration  which  should  never  be  lost  sight  of  in  regard
to  therapeutics  is  this:  a  functional  trouble  may  survive  the
cause  or  the  organic  lesion  which  gave  it  birth  ;  this  trouble  is  no
longer  kept  up  by  the  lesion,  but  is  retained,  if  I  may  so  express
it,  by  the  nervous  system.  The  latter  has  a  great  tendency  for
preserving  certain  modalities  which  have  been  impressed  upon  it.
A  child  who  has  been  susceptible  to  convulsions,  repeats  these
convulsions  under  the  slightest  influence. — Spasms,  nervous
movements,  hysterical  paroxysms,  nervous  cough,  vomiting,  diar-
rhoea, etc. ,  are  acts  which  the  nervous  centres  execute  spontan-
eously, if  by  frequent  repetition  these  acts  are,  so  to  speak,  assimi-
lated by  these  centres.  Certain  pains  last  when  the  lesion  which
is  the  cause  of  them,  no  longer  exists.  For  example,  every  sur-
geon has  seen  a  limb  after  a  contusion  remain  dynamically
affected  :  the  patient  continues  to  suffer  and  the  limb  is  motion-
less :  nevertheless  the  contusion  seems  to  be  cured.  Electricity,
hydrotherapy,  massage,  moral  influence,  and  suggestion  often
interfere  efficaciously  to  drive  away  the  troubles  which  remain.

It  is  willingly  conceded  that  psychical  influence  may  have  a
certain  efficacy  in  the  domain  of  nervous  pathology:  but  it  is
more  difficult  to  conceive  that,  outside  of  this  domain,  it
may  exercise  some  influence.  Here  says  one,  is  a  chronic
rheumatic  arthritis.  The  articulation  is  diseased,  the  articu-
lar and  peri-articular  tissues  are  extensively  altered.  Do  you
pretend  to  suggest  the  resolution  of  the  lesion,  that  the  synovial
membrane  will  regain  its  normal  structure,  that  the  destroyed
cartilage  will  be  re-formed  ?

I  do  not  pretend  this.  I  have  found  from  experience  that  sug-
gestive therapeutics  is  sometimes  incontestably  efficacious  in  dis-
eases of  this  kind.  Blinded  by  prejudice,  many  will  see  and  will
deny  the  evidence  of  facts,  because  they  are  saturated  with  the
idea  of  the  infallibility  of  their  own  judgment,  because  they
close  their  eyes  systematically  to  truths  which  do  not  adapt
themselves  to  their  preconceived  ideas!

Doubtless  suggestion  can  do  nothing  for  a  dislocated  joint,  for
an  osseous  or  fibrous  anchylosis,  for  an  old  articular  fungosity.
But  such  is  not  the  case  with  all  chronic  rheumatic  arthropathies.
Here  is  a  man  whose  joints  remain  swollen  and  painful;  but  the

Suggestive  Therapeutics.  411

lesion  is  not  incompatible  with  the  joints  performing  their  func-
tions ;  it  is  susceptible  of  resolution  ;  the  cartilages  and  synovial
membranes  have  not  vet  undergone  an  irremediable  alteration  ;  it
is  the  immobility  of  the  articulation  which  may  partly  help  to
keep  up  the  lesion  ;  it  creates  retraction  of  the  articular  and  peri-
articular cellulo-fibrous  tissue  ;  it  perhaps  robs  the  synovial  mem-
brane of  its  oiling  quality  ;  it  makes  the  cartilaginous  surfaces
uneven  ;  it  maintains  a  passive  stasis  of  blood  in  the  capillaries.
Surgeons  treat  arthritis  by  prolonged  rest.  The  suggestion
which  calms  the  pain,  gives  the  patient  back  the  power  of  im-
pressing upon  the  joint  the  movements  which  are  necessary  for
its  well-being,  which  thus  restores  to  the  fibro-serous  tissues
their  suppleness,  to  the  synovial  membrane  its  oiliness,  and  to
the  capillary  circulation  its  activity,  may  act  efficaciously  to  im-
prove and  cure  the  arthropathy.

M.  Delbceuf  has  shown  by  ingenious  experiments,  that  a  sore
produced  by  burning,  for  example,  causes  less  inflammatory  re-
action, and  cicatrizes  more  quickly,  if  the  part  has  been  made  in-
sensible beforehand  by  suggestion.  "  Pain,"  says  this  eminent
psychologist,  "makes  the  patient  think  of  his  trouble;  and
thinking  of  it,  he  exaggerates  it.  Hypnotism,  which  distracts  his
attention,  acts  in  a  contrary  way  upon  the  pain  ;  it  diminishes  it
by  making  us  think  no  more  of  it."  {De  F  origine  des  effets  cura-
tifs  de  l' hypnotisme.  Bulletin  de  V Académie  royale  de  Belgique,
1877.)

Suggestion  takes  hold  of  one  of  the  elements  of  the  disease,
and  the  suppression  of  this  morbid  element  may  react  favorably
upon  the  whole  pathological  apparatus,  in  which  all  elements  are
reciprocally  dependent  one  upon  the  other.  And  what  else  do
our  usual  therapeutic  agents  do  ?  Opium,  quinine,  the  salicylates,
rubbing,  revulsion,  blisters,  massage,  electricity,  what  else  do
they  do  but  take  hold  of  the  disease  by  one  of  its  elements  ?  Have
we  many  medicines  which  possess  the  property  of  modifying  the
material  lesion  directly  ?  It  is  the  functional  respiration  which
brings  about  the  organic  respiration,  when  it  is  possible  to  bring
it  about.

I  have  said  enough  to  indicate  the  ground  I  take  in  the  expla-
nation of  the  results  of  suggestive  psycho-therapeutics.  I  was
not  acquainted  with  this  therapeutic  method  when,  in  1875,  I
wrote  the  article  Reaction,  in  the  Dictionnaire  cncyclopcdiqîie  :

"Often  the  moral  control,   that    is    to  say,    the    putting    into

412  Suggestive   TJierapcutics.

activity  of  the  psychical  functions,  has  salutary  effects.  To  con-
sole a  patient,  to  sustain  his  courage,  to  drive  away  from  his  mind
the  great  anxiety  which  consumes  him,  is  often  to  react  effica-
ciously upon  the  disease.  By  the  quiet  persuasive  voice  of  the
physician  the  patient  is  restored  as  by  a  salutary  balm,  feels  his
confidence  arise  and  his  discomfort  disappear.  Doubtless  the
psychical  alterations  which  occur  once,  persist  despite  of  all  moral
influence.  But  the  numerous  functional  troubles,  precordial
anxiety,  nervous  palpitations,  shortness  of  breath,  and  gloomy
ideas,  may  be  improved  by  a  new  modality  impressed  upon  the
nervous  centres.  Thus  is  explained,  or  rather  conceived,  the  im-
mense influence  which  a  physician  of  tact  may  exercise  over  a
patient  by  this  moral  medicine,  a  true  neurosthenic  reaction,
which  is  not  the  least  powerful  among  therapeutic  agents."

One  word  more  before  terminating  this  book,  upon  the  dangers
of  hypnotism.

Is  hypnotism  in  itself  dangerous  to  those  submitted  to  it  ?
From  experience,  I  do  not  hesitate  in  stating  that,  when  it  is
well-managed,  it  does  not  produce  the  slightest  harm.  It  does
not  interfere  with  the  functions  of  organic  life  ;  we  have  seen
that  respiration  and  circulation  are  not  influenced  in  subjects
whose  minds  are  at  rest.  If,  in  the  first  séances,  some  subjects
manifest  nervous  phenomena,  such  as  muscular  twitchings,  short-
ness of  breath,  discomfort,  acceleration  of  the  pulse;  and  if  some
hysterical  subjects  have  convulsive  paroxysms  during  the  opera-
tion, these  symptoms,  auto-suggestive  so  to  speak,  and  due  to
moral  emotion,  to  a  sentiment  of  fear,  always  disappear  in  the
following  séances,  thanks  to  a  quieting  suggestion  which  brings
back  confidence.  When  the  habit  has  been  formed,  the  subjects
go  to  sleep  peacefully  and  naturally  and  awake  in  the  same  way,
without  the  slightest  discomfort,  if  the  operator  has  been  careful
to  suggest  no  discomfort  upon  waking.

In  my  already  long  practice  I  have  never  seen  any  harm  pro-
duced by  sleep  induced  according  to  our  method,  for  the  sugges-
tion is  always  present  as  a  corrective  to  any  disagreeable  symp-
toms which  may  arise.

There  is  a  danger  which  it  is  important  to  recognize  and  which
I  am  going  to  mention.  After  having  been  hypnotized  a  certain
number  of  times,  some  subjects  preserve  a  disposition  to  go  to
sleep  spontaneously.  Some  have  been  hardly  awakened  when
they  fall  to  sleep  again  of  themselves  in  the  same  hypnotic  sleep.

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  413

Others  fall  asleep  thus  during  the  day.  This  tendency  to  auto-
hypnotization  may  be  repressed  by  suggestion.  It  is  sufficient
to  state  to  the  subject  during  sleep  that  when  once  awakened  he
will  be  completely  awake,  and  will  not  be  able  to  go  to  sleep
again  spontaneously  during  the  day.

Others  are  too  easily  susceptible  to  hypnotization  when  they
have  often  been  put  into  somnambulism.  The  first  comer  may
sometimes  put  them  into  this  condition  by  surprise,  simply  clos-
ing their  eyes.  Such  a  susceptibility  to  hypnotism  is  a  real
danger.  Delivered  over  to  the  mercy  of  any  one,  deprived  of
psychical  and  moral  resistance,  certain  somnambulists  thus
become  weak  and  are  moulded   by  the  will  of  the  suggestionists.

Those  moralists  who  are  careful  of  human  dignity,  and  who  are
pre-occupied  with  the  thought  of  such  great  possibilities  of  danger,
are  in  the  right.  They  are  right  to  condemn  a  practice  which
may  rob  man  of  his  free-will  without  the  possibility  of  resistance
on  his  part  ;  they  would  be  a  thousand  times  right,  if  the  remedy
were  not  side  by  side  with  the  evil.  When  we  foresee  such  a
tendency  in  our  cases  of  somnambulism,  we  take  care  to  say  dur-
ing sleep  (and  it  is  a  good  rule  to  follow):  "Nobody  will  be
able  to  hypnotize  you  in  order  to  relieve  you,  unless  it  be  your
physician."  And  the  subject,  obedient  to  the  command,  is
refractory  to  any  foreign  suggestion.  One  day  I  tried  to  hypno-
tize an  excellent  somnambulist  whom  I  had  already  hypnotized
several  times  ;  I  could  not  succeed.  I  called  M.  Liébault  to  aid
me  ;  he  hypnotized  her  in  a  few  seconds.  I  then  asked  her  why
I  had  not  succeeded.  She  told  me  that,  several  months  before,
M.  Beaunis  had  suggested  during  sleep  that  M.  Liébault  and
himself  were  the  only  ones  who  could  hypnotize  her.  This  idea,
written  in  her  mind,  and  of  which  she  was  not  conscious  in  the
waking  condition,  had  forewarned  her  against  me.  Thus  the
danger  of  a  too  great  susceptibility  to  suggestion  may  be  fore-
stalled by  suggestion  itself.

A  graver  apprehension  and  one  which  forces  itself  naturally
upon  our  attention,  is  the  following:  Some  one  will  say,  do  you
not  fear  that  hypnotism  may  finally  do  grave  harm  to  the  mental
faculties,  even  when  it  is  used  prudently,  and  solely  for  a  thera-
peutic end,  without  provoking  hallucinations  ?  The  mind  dulled,
the  intelligence  demoralized,  and  the  mental  activity  diminished,
the  subject  falls  into  a  condition  of  intellectual  torpor  and
remains  in  it.

414  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

Experience  alone  can  answer.  I  have  hypnotized  very  intelli-
gent people  daily,  and  sometimes  twice  a  day  for  months  and
even  years,  and  I  have  never  found  the  slightest  harm  done  to
the  faculties  of  understanding.  Cerebral  initiative  was  quite  as
active,  and  it  sometimes  became  more  active  ;  for  the  functional
troubles  from  which  the  patients  suffer,  such  as  pain,  restless-
ness, nervous  disturbance  and  insomnia,  react  in  a  harmful  way
upon  the  psychical  activity.  To  suppress  these  troubles  by  sug-
gestion, is  to  put  the  mind  into  a  condition  of  rest,  is  to  drive
away  the  impressions  which  undermine  its  functional  liberty,  is
to  protect  the  functional  integrity  of  the  organ  which  is  the  gen.
erator  of  thought.  Hypnotic  sleep  in  itself  is  beneficial  and  is
free  from  harm,  as  is  natural  sleep.

But  another  order  of  dangers  may  result  from  provoked  hallu-
cinations, and  here  I  should  speak  as  I  think.  Doubtless  inof-
fensive hallucinations  provoked  at  long  intervals,  whether  hyp-
notic or  post-hypnotic,  trouble  the  mind  momentarily,  in  the
same  way  as  do  dreams,  but  the  equilibrium  is  quickly  reestab-
lished as  soon  as  the  hallucinatory  dream  has  disappeared.

Is  it  the  same  if  these  hallucinations  are  frequently  suggested
to  the  imagination  ?  In  the  long  run  may  not  some  trouble
remain  in  the  mind?  Is  it  not  to  be  feared  that  a  more  or  less
marked  derangement  of  the  intellectual  faculties  may  survive  ?
I  should  not  like  to  state  that  certain  delicate  brains,  predis-
posed to  mental  alienation,  could  not  receive  serious  harm  from
inopportune  and  awkward  experiments  of  this  kind,  knowing
that  all  emotion,  all  violent  disturbance  can  make  an  insanity
bud  out,  the  diathetic  germ  of  which,  often  hereditary,  is
inherent  in  the  organism.  I  simply  should  say  that  in  the  many
experiments  which  I  have  performed,  I  have  never  known  any
psychical  trouble  to  result.  In  one  case  of  which  I  have  spoken,
M.  G.,  a  very  intelligent  woman,  affected  with  loco  motor  ataxia,
I  allowed  myself  to  perform  some  experiments  toward  this  end,
watching  over  her  psychical  condition  carefully,  and  ready  to
check  the  experiments  at  the  slightest  sign  of  restlessness  which
might  be  manifested.  At  different  times,  and  on  consecutive
days  I  submitted  her  to  complex,  repeated,  hypnotic,  and  post-
hypnotic hallucinations  to  be  carried  out  after  a  short  and  after
a  long  interval  ;  and  of  all  that  nothing  has  remained.  During
the  three  years  that  she  has  been  in  the  service,  in  spite  of  the
many  suggestions,  her  intelligence  has  remained  as  quick  as  it

Suggestive    Therapeutics.  415

was,  and  her  initiative  has  not  been  harmed.  I  hasten  to  add
that  this  fact  should  not  serve  as  encouragement  ;  a  like  ex-
periment is  dangerous  ;  experiments  of  provoked  hallucination
should  only  be  performed  prudently  and  with  reserve.

Another  real  danger  is  this  :  After  many  hypnotizations,  after
many  hallucinations  provoked  during  sleep,  certain  subjects
become  susceptible  to  suggestion  and  hallucination  in  the  wak-
ing condition.

Their  minds  realize  with  extreme  facility  every  conception
insinuated  ;  every  idea  becomes  an  act,  every  image  evoked
becomes  a  reality  ;  they  no  longer  distinguish  between  the  real
world  and  the  imaginary  world  suggested.  The  majority  it  is
true,  are  only  thus  susceptible  to  hallucination  through  the  one
person  who  is  accustomed  to  hypnotize  them.

But  among  these  subjects,  especially  if  the  physician  has  not
taken  the  precaution  to  attribute  a  monopoly  of  the  ability  to
give  suggestion  to  himself,  some  may  be  susceptible  to  hallu-
cination and  suggestion  at  the  hands  of  any  one  who  knows  how
to  force  it  upon  them.

And  if  this  extreme  susceptibility  to  hallucination  is  once  pro-
duced, if  this  nervous  disease  is  once  created,  it  is  not  always
easy  to  cure  or  to  improve  it  by  a  new  suggestive  interference.
But  it  is  not  necessary  to  subject  the  human  mind  to  influences
of  this  sort.  Doubtless  some  experiments  of  hallucinations
induced  from  time  to  time  are  inoffensive,  if  they  are  performed
with  reserve  ;  repeated  frequently  upon  the  same  subject  they
may  become  dangerous.

Must  we  proscribe  a  thing  which  may  be  efficacious,  because
the  abuse  of  it  is  injurious?  No  one  proscribes  wine,  alcohol,
opium,  quinine,  because  the  immoderate  or  intemperate  use  of
these  substances  may  bring  about  accidents.  Doubtless  sugges-
tion used  by  dishonest  or  awkward  men  is  a  dangerous  practice.
Law  can  and  should  intervene  to  repress  its  abuse.

Suggestion  is  only  beneficial  when  used  prudently  and  intelli-
gently for  a  therapeutic  end.  It  is  the  physician's  part  to  sepa-
rate the  useful  from  the  harmful  effect,  and  to  apply  it  to  the
relief  of  his  patients.  In  cases  where  I  believe  that  suggestive
therapeutics  has  some  chance  of  success,  I  should  deem  myself
reprehensible  as  a  physician  did  I  not  propose  it  to  my  patient,
and  did  I  not  urge  him  to  decide  to  submit  himself  to  it.

The  following  are  the  rules  to  which  I  believe   I  ought  to  bind

4 1 6  Suggestive   Therapeutics.

myself,  and  to  which  all  physicians  should  bind  themselves
before  using  hypnotism,  in  order  to  protect  their  conscience  and
professional  honor:

"  1st.  Never  hypnotize  any  subject  without  his  formal  con-
sent, or  the  consent  of  those  in  authority  over  him.

"2d.  Never  induce  sleep  except  in  the  presence  of  a  third  per-
son in  authority,  who  can  guarantee  the  good  faith  of  the  hypno-
tizer  and  the  subject.  Thus  any  trouble  may  be  avoided,  in  the
event  of  an  accusation,  or  any  suspicion  of  an  attempt  which  is
not  for  the  relief  of  the  subject."     (Beaunis.)

3d.  Never  give  to  the  hypnotized  subject,  without  his  consent,
any  other  suggestions  than  those  necessary  for  his  cure.  The
physician  has  no  rights  but  those  conferred  upon  him  by  the
patient.  He  should  limit  himself  to  the  therapeutic  suggestion  :
any  other  experiment  is  forbidden  him,  without  the  formal  con-
sent of  the  patient,  even  if  it  be  in  the  interest  of  science.  The
physician  should  not  profit  by  his  authority  over  the  patient  in
order  to  provoke  this  consent,  if  he  thinks  that  the  experiment
which  he  wishes  to  perform  may  have  the  slightest  harmful
effect.

It  is  the  application  of  suggestion  to  therapeutics  which  as  a
physician  and  clinical  professor,  I  have  felt  it  my  duty  to  study
in  a  special  way.

Resting  upon  numerous  facts,  I  have  a  right  to  affirm  that
suggestive  therapeutics  exists,  without  wishing  to  say  that  this
therapeutic  means  is  always  applicable,  or  always  efficacious.
But  it  is  frequently  both  applicable  and  efficacious.

It  was  not  for  any  idle  end,  nor  simply  to  gratify  a  vain  scien
tific  curiosity,  that  more  than  six  years  ago,  with  many  obstacles
in  my  way,  I  began  this  study,  and  have  followed  it  out  rigor-
ously in  spite  of  derision.

INDEX.

Abbot  Faria,  lectures  of,  109

Affectation,  128

Affirmation,  analgesia  by,  83

Alexander  Bertrand's  theory,  no

Amaurosis,  psychical,  46

Amnesia,  visual,  50

Anesthesia,  spontaneous  and  suggestive,  22

Anaesthesia,  suggestive,  14

Andry  and  Thouret's  report,  193

Analgesia  by  affirmation,  83

Animal  magnetism  a  phenomenon  of  sugges-
tion, 28

Answer  to  criticisms,  87

Apparatus  of  Stoeber,  47

Applications  of  doctrine  of  suggestion,  159

Author's  classification,  11

Author's  criticism  of  Binet  and  Féré's  experi-
ment's, 94

Author's  experiments,  96

Author's  theory  of  hypnotism,  125

Auto-hypnotisation,  413

Auto-suggestion,  102

Auto-suggestion,  unconscious,  214

Automatic  movements,  25

Automatic  movements  by  imitation,  26

Automatic  obedience,  29

Automatic  rotation,  7

B

Balassa's  observations,  119

Beard's  trarxoidal  states,  119

Beaunis'  tabic,  20

Berger's  theory,  121

Bernheim's  classification,  11

Bernheim's  explanation  of  variation  in  pulse

and  respiration,  74
Bernheim's  reply  to  Paul  Janet,  182
Binet  and  Féré,  criticism  on,  45
Binet  and  Féré's  criticism,  45
Binet  and  Fere's  transfer  experiments,  91
Blisters,  suggestive,  75
Bloody  stigmata  from  suggestion,  76
Bourru  and  Burot's  observations,  76
Braid's  discovery,  m
Braidism  and  Braidic  suggestion,  izi
Braid's  observations,  73
Braid's  theory,  114
Braid's  views,  28
Burcq's  theory,  195

Case  illustrating  suggestive  action  of  magner,  9a

Cases  of  catalepsy,  24

Cases  of  suggestion  at  long  intervals,  51,  52

Castellan,  story  of,  16b

Catalepsy,  cases  of,  24

Catalepsy  in  typhoid  fever,  24

Catalepsy,  suggestive,  6

Cataleptic  stage,  87

Cataplexia,  119

Cerebral  docility,  133

Chambard's  classification,  142

Characteristics  of  first  degree,  5

Characteristics  of  second  degree,  6

Characteristics  of  third  degree,  7

Characteristics  of  fourth  degree,  7

Characteristics  of  fifth  degree,  8

Characteristics  of  sixth  degree,  8

Charcot's  researches,  120

Charcot's  stages,  87

Charpignon's  theory,  115

Children,  susceptibility  of,  2

Chloroform,  hypnosis  by,  4

Circulation  and  respiration  in  hypnotism.  73

Classification  of  author,  n

Classification  of  Chambard,  142

Classification  of  Liébault,  5

Communication  of  Richet,  85

Contracture,  suggestive,  7

Correspondence,  hypnosis  by,  4

Credulity,  131

Criticism  by  Binet  and  Féré,  45

Criticism  on  Binet  and  Féré,  43

Crossed  sensibility,  80

Cures  at  Lourdes,  200

Czermak's  observations,  118

D

Dangers  of  hypnotism  412.

Dangers  of  induced  hallucinations,  414

Deafness,  psychical,  50

Deep  somnambulism,  8

Definition  of  hypnotism,  15

Degrees  of  susceptibility,  3

Delboeuf's  experiments,  411

Discovery  of  Braid,  in

Distinction  of  true  and  false  evidence,  37;

Doctrine  of  Grimes,  113

Doctrine  of  suggestion,  applications  of,  159

Donato's  method,  16

417

4i8

Suggestive    Therapeutics.

Dr.  Dod's  lectures,  113
Dr.  Philip's  essay,  115
Dreams,  spontaneous,  67
Dynamic  pareses  and  paralyses,  353

E

Effects  of  prisms,  103

Effect  of  suggestion  on  functions  of  organic

life,  74
Effect  of  verbal  suggestion,  6
Electro-biology,  113
Espinas'  views,  122
Essay  of  Dr.  Philips,  115
Examples  of  suggestion  in  waking  state,  81
Experimentation,  precautions  to   be  observed

in,  104
Experiments  of  Delboeuf,  411
Experiments  of  Forel,  76
Experiments  of  Ganzinotty,  47
Experiments  of  Kircher,  118
Experiments  of  Liégeois,  163
Experiments  of  Richet,  119
Explanation  of  Suggestion  à  longue  échéance,

144

Fascination,  16
First  category,  9
First  degree,  characteristics  of,  5
Fourth  degree,  characteristics  of,  7
Fifth  degree,  characteristics  of,  8
Fluid  theory,  28
Forel's  experiments,  76
Formula  for  inducing  hypnosis,  2
Functions  of  orgauic  life,  effect  of  suggestion
on,  74

Ganzinotty's  experiments,  47
Gastro-intestinal  affections,  356
General  Noizet's  theory,  no
Gestures,  influence  of,  2
Grimes'  doctrine,  113

H

Hack  Tuke's  observations  on  pulse  and  res-
piration, 74
Hallucinations,  negative,  43
Hallucinations,  post-hypnotic,  40
Hallucinations,  suggested,  30
Hansen's  travels,  120
Heidenhein's  results,  74
Heidenhein's  theory,  121
Hemorrhage,  suggestive,  76
Historical  sketch,  105
Hypotaxic  condition,  114
Hypnosis  by  chloroform,  4
Hypnosis  by  correspondence,  4
Hypnosis  by  telephone,  4
Hypnosis,  rapidity  of,  1
Hypnosis,  susceptibility  to,  5

Hypnotic  neurosis,  89

Hypnotic  sleep,  phenomena  of,  21

Hypnotising,  manner  of,  r

Hypnotising,   precautions  to   be   observed  in,

4.6
Hypnotism  as  an  anaesthetic,  22
Hypnotism,  author's  theory  of,  125
Hypnotism,  circulation  and  respiration  in,  73
Hypnotism,  dangers  of,  412
Hypnotism,  definition  of,  15
Hypnotism  in  surgery,  116
Hypnotism,  recent  literature  of,  123
Husson's  report,  107
Hysterical  affections,  262

I

Illusions  of  personality,  59

Illusions,  suggested,  30

Illustrations  of  somnambulistic  types,  53

Imaginary  indications,  100

Imagination  as  a  therapeutic  agent,  192

Individuality  in  somnambulism,  60

Induced  hallucinations,  dangers  of,  414

Induced  sleep,  reflections  on,  72

Inflammation,  suggestive,  75

Influence  of  gestures.  2

Influence  of  passes,  2

Influence  of  suggestion  on  vaso-motor  system,

75
Instinctive  imbecility,  179

K

Kircher's  experiments,  118

L

Lasègue's  researches,  116
Latent  memories,  144
Le  grand  Hypnotisme,  89
Lectures  of  Abbot  Faria,  109
Lethargic  stage,  87
Lids,  simple  closure  of,  3
Liébault's  classification,  5
Liébault's  method,  206
Liébault's  table,  19
Liébault's  theory,  117
Liébault's  treatise,  117
Liégeois'  experiments,  i5?
Light  somnambulism.  8
Limitation  of  visual  fie'.-i,  84
Louise  Lateau,  76
Luys'  theory,  125

M

Magnet,  therapeutic  virtue  of,  226
Magnetism  in  America,  113
Magneto-therapeutics,  193
Manner  of  hypnotising,  1
Manner  of  waking,  17
Maury's  observations,  130
Mechanism  of  suggestion,  138
Menstrual  disturbances,  399
Mesmer  and  mesmerism,  106

Suggestii  >e   Therapeutics.

419

Method  of  Donato,  iô

Method  of  forestalling  bad  effects,  413

Method  of  Liébautt,  ao6

Mind-blindness,  49

Mosso's  plethysmograph,  -4

N

Negative  hallucinations,  43
Neuralgias,  392
Neuropathic  affections,  yx>
Neuroses,  324
Neurosis,  hypnotic,  89

O

Observations  of  Ralassa,  119
Observations  of  Bourru  and  Burot,  76
Observations  of  Braid,  73
Observations  of  Czermak,  118
Observations  of  Maury,  130
Observations  of  Preyer,  119
Observations  of  Tambourini  and  Seppili,  74
Organic  affections  of  the  nervous  system,  218

Paralysis  by  suggestion,  27

Passes,  influence  of,  2

Phenomena  of  hypnotic  sleep,  21

Phenomena  of  transfer,  79

Plethysmograph  of  Mosso,  74

Post-hypnotic  acts,  31

Post-hypnotic  hallucinations,  40

Post-hypnotic  suggestions,  31

Precautions  to  be  observed  in  experimentation,

104
Precautions  to  be  observed  in  hypnotising,  416
Preyer's  observations,  119
Prisms,  effects  of,  103
Prosper  Despine's  theory,  122
Psychical  amaurosis,  46
Psychical  deafness,  50

R

Rapidity  of  hypnosis,  1

Rationale  of  suggestive  therapeutics,  408

Recent  literature  of  hypnotism,  123

Reflections  on  induced  sleep,  72

Reflex  acts,  126

Report  of  Andry  and  Thouret,  193

Report  of  Husson,  107

Researches  of  Charcot,  120

Researches  of  Lasègue,  116

Resistance  to  post-hypnotic  suggestions,  36

Results  of  Heidenbein,  74

Rheumatic  affections,  370

Richet's  communication,  85

Richet's  experiments,  119

Rumpf's  theory,  121

S

Schneider's  theory,  121

Second  category,  9

Second  degree,  characteristics  of,  6

Sensitivo-sensorial  suggestion,  38

Simple  closure  of  lids,  3

Sixth  degree,  characteristics  of,  8

Sleep  by  suggestion,  2

Sleep,  natural  and  suggested,  15

Somnambulism,  8

Somnambulism,  individuality  in,  60

Somnambulism,  types  of,  53

Somnambulistic  stage,  89

Spinal  automatism,  126

Spontaneous  and  suggested  anaesthesia,  22

Spontaneous  dreams,  67

Stages  of  Charcot.  87

Stoeber's  apparater,  &y

Story  of  Castellan,  160

Suggested  and  natural  sleep,  15

Suggested  hallucinations,  30

Suggested  illusions,  30

Suggestion  à  longue  échéance,  37

Suggestion  à  longue  échéance,  cases  of,  51,  52

Suggestion  a  longue  échéance,  explanation  of,

144
Suggestion  by  imitation,  16
Suggestion  in  lead  paralysis,  260
Suggestion  in  the  waking  state,  78
Suggestion,  mechanism  of,  138
Suggestion,  post-hypnotic,  31
Suggestion,  sensitivo-sensorial,  38
Suggestion,  therapeutic,  202
Suggestive  anaesthesia,  14
Suggestive  blisters,  75
Sugg'estive  catalepsy,  6
Suggestive  contracture,  7
Suggestive  education,  3
Suggestive  hemorrhage,  76
Suggestive  inflammation,  75
Suggestive  therapeutics,  rationale  of,  408
Susceptibility,  degrees  of,  3
Susceptibility  of  children,  2
Susceptibility  to  hypnosis,  5
Surgery,  hypnotism  in,  116
Synopsis  of  cases,  404

Table  of  Beaunis,  20

Table  of  Liébault,  19

Tambourini  and  Seppili,  observations  of,  74

Telephone,  hypnosis  by,  4

The  Tisza-Eslar  affair,  167

Therapeutic  suggestion,  202

Therapeutic  virtue  of  the  magnet,  226

Theory  of  Alexander  Bertrand,  no

Theory  of  Berger,  121

Theory  of  Braid,  114

Theory  of  Burcq,  195

Theory  of  Charpignon,  115

Theory  of  Heidenhein,  121

Theory  of  Liébault,  117

Theory  of  Luys,  123

Theory  of  General  Noizet,  no

Theory  of  Prosper  Despine,  122

Theory  of  Rumpf,  121

420

Suggestive   TJicrapeutics.

Theory  of  Schneider,  121

Third  degree,  characteristics  of,  7

Trancoidal  states  of  Beard,  119

Transfer  experiments  of  Binet  and  Féré,  91

Transfer,  phenomena  of,  79

Transitional  grades,  8

Treatise  of  Liébault,  117

Types  of  somnambulism,  53

U

Unclassified  painful  affections,  3d
Unconscious  auto-suggesticn,  2:4
Unconscious  cerebration,  156

Variations  in  pulse  and  respiration,  Bernheim's

explanation  of,  74
Verbal  suggestion,  effect  of,  6
Views  of  Beard,  28
Views  of  Espinas,  122
Visual  field,  limitation  of,  84
Visual  amnesia,  50

.V

Waking,  manner  of,  17

Wolff's  method  in  writer's  cramp,  347

Writer's  cramp,  Wolffs  method  in,  347

Ik      f

^&^T^i
