J&t. itfetnatto.


LIFE AND WORKS
OF SAINT BERNARD,

ABBOT OF CLA1RVAUX.
EDITED BY

DOM. JOHN MABILLON,

Presbyter  and  Monk  of  the  Benedictine  Congregation  of  S.  Maur.

Translated  and  Edited  with  Additional  Notes,

BY

SAMUEL  J.  EALES,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,

Sometime Principal of  S. Boniface College, Warminster.


SECOND EDITION.


VOL. I.


LONDON:  BURNS  &  OATES  LIMITED.

NEW YORK, CINCINNATI & CHICAGO:  BENZIGER  BROTHERS.


EMMANUBi

A


$  t  fo  je  s :

SOUTH  COUNTIES  PRESS  LIMITED.

.NOV  20  1350


CONTENTS.


I.  PREFACE  TO  ENGLISH  EDITION

II.  GENERAL  PREFACE... ...  i

III.  BERNARDINE  CHRONOLOGY ...  76

IV.  LIST  WITH  DATES  OF  S.  BERNARD'S  LETTERS...  gi
V.  LETTERS  No.  I.  TO  No.  CXLV  ... ...  107


PREFACE

TO

THE ENGLISH EDITION.


THERE  are  so  many  things  to  be  said  respecting  the  career
and  the  writings  of  S.  Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  and  so  high  are
the  praises  which  must,  on  any  just  view  of  his  character,  be
considered  his  due,  that  an  eloquence  not  less  than  his  own
would  be  needed  to  give  adequate  expression  to  them.

He  was  an  untiring  and  transcendently  able  labourer ;
and  that  in  many  fields.  In  all  his  manifold  activities
are  manifest  an  intellect  vigorous  and  splendid,  and  a
magnetic  attractiveness  of  personal  character  which  never
failed  to  influence  and  win  over  others  to  his  views.  His
entire  disinterestedness,  his  remarkable  industry,  the  soul-
subduing  eloquence  which  seems  to  have  been  equally
effective  in  France  and  in  Italy,  over  the  sturdy  burghers
of  Liege  and  the  turbulent  population  of  Milan,  and  above
all  the  wonderful  piety  and  saintliness  which  formed  the
noblest  and  the  most  engaging  of  his  gifts — these  qualities,
and  the  actions  which  came  out  of  them,  rendered  him
the  ornament,  as  he  was  more  than  any  other  man,  the
leader,  of  his  own  time,  and  have  drawn  upon  him  the
admiration  of  succeeding  ages.

We  have  to  look  at  S.  Bernard  in  more  than  one  capacity.
First  and  chiefly,  he  was  a  monk,  for  he  lived  in  an  age
when  the  most  elevated  religious  enthusiasm  inevitably
took  the  form  of  the  monastic  vocation.  Nor  is  it  difficult


viii  PRFEACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.

to  see  why  this  was  necessarily  the  case.  In  the  eleventh
and  twelfth  centuries  war,  public  or  private,  was  the  chief
business  of  princes  and  nobles,  and  a  constant  incident  of
the  daily  life  of  the  masses  of  the  common  people.  But
always  when  the  world  lives  in  a  state  of  war,  religion  is
driven  to  take  the  incorporated  or  associate  (i.e.,  the
monastic)  form  by  a  kind  of  unconscious  reaction,  and
indeed,  in  order  to  maintain  its  existence  at  all.  Exagger
ated  forms  generate  each  other  in  turn  ;  and  the  idealized
unworldliness  of  the  monastic  theory  was  the  virtual  protest,
and  a  very  needful  one,  against  the  coarseness  and  cruelty  of
the  world  as  it  stood.  Monastic  institutions  satisfied,  in  fact,
the  conscience  of  the  age,  and  were  popular  because  they
did  so.  Even  so  gifted  a  man  as  Bernard,  we  may  venture
to  believe,  would  not  have  been  nearly  so  influential  had  he
been  anything  but  a  monk  ;  because  monachism  was  the
expression,  and  the  necessary  expression,  of  the  religious
sentiment  of  those  times.  How  deeply  the  monastic  theory
was  graven  into  the  consciousness  of  the  twelfth  century  is
shown  by  the  practical  paradox  attempted,  and  actually
accomplished  for  a  time,  in  the  welding  together  of  charac
ters  absolutely  contradictory — the  soldier  and  the  monk,—
in  the  Knights  Templars,  the  Knights  of  Calatrava  and
Alcantara,  and  other  military  Orders.

S.  Bernard,  then,  was  a  monk  and  an  ascetic,  and  as  such
the  foremost  in  power  and  influence  of  his  time.  He  was
not  only  practically  the  founder  of  the  great  Cistercian
Order,  which  was  frequently  called  by  his  name,1  but  to  him
was  owing  in  great  measure,  though  not  wholly,  that
general  reform  of  the  monastic  Orders  which  restored  for  a
time  the  austerity  of  the  ancient  discipline,  and  even  sur-

1  The  monks  of  Abbeys  dependent  upon  Clairvaux,  were  frequently  called
Hernardines.


PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.  ix

passed  it.  So  great  was  the  enthusiasm  which  he  inspired
that  thousands  of  eager  postulants,  drawn  from  all  classes,
crowded  into  the  convents  which  were  reorganized  or
founded  by  him.  Knights,  nobles,  ladies  of  the  highest
rank,  were  among  these  ardent  devotees,  and  that  in  large
numbers.  Even  reigning  sovereigns,  in  not  a  few  instances,
descended  from  their  thrones  before  middle  life  was  well
over  and  entered  some  convent.  Clairvaux,  while  he  pre
sided  over  it,  sent  out  parties  of  its  monks  to  found  new
monasteries,  at  the  average  rate  of  four  every  year,  as  may
be  noted  in  our  Table  of  Bernardine  Chronology.  At  the
death  of  S.  Bernard  the  number  of  Cistercian  Abbeys
exceeded  five  hundred,  and  to  such  a  degree  did  this
enthusiasm  grow  that  in  1142  the  kingdom  of  Portugal
declared  itself  a  fief  of  the  Abbey  of  Clairvaux.  Under
the  influence  of  S.  Bernard  the  endurance  of  austerities
became  a  passion  to  be  eagerly  sought,  not  a  penance  re
luctantly  submitted  to,  and  the  heavier  and  sharper  was  the
Cross  voluntarily  borne,  the  greater  was  held  to  be  its  glory.
Not  only  was  he  the  head  of  this  great  Order,  but  for  a
whole  generation  his  influence  was  paramount  over  the
Church.  He  was,  more  than  any  of  the  Popes  who  succeeded
each  other  at  such  short  intervals,  "  the  governing  head  of
Christendom,"1  to  whom  every  subject  of  importance  was
sure  to  be,  in  some  form,  referred,  and  the  expression  of
whose  view  was  equivalent  to  a  judgment  upon  it.  He  had
received,  in  the  view  of  his  contemporaries,  unctio  ilia  qux
docet  de  omnibus.  His  voice  was  the  most  trusted  and
authoritative  in  Europe,  though  he  was  no  Bishop  nor
Archbishop,  but  only  a  simple  Abbot.  When,  at  the  Council
of  Etampes,  he  opened  his  mouth  to  declare  to  King  Louis
VI.  and  all  the  prelates  of  France  that  Innocent,  and  he

1  Milman,  Latin  Christianity,  B.  viii.  p.  302.


X  PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.

alone,  was  the  legitimate  Pope,  his  words  were  taken  as  the
decision  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  unhesitatingly  acted  upon.
Henry  I.  of  England,  the  Emperor  Lothair  of  Germany,  and
the  Count  of  Aquitaine,  yielded  to  the  force  of  his  argu
ments,  or  to  the  winning  power  of  his  remarkable  per
sonality,  and  acknowledged  Innocent  as  Pope,  abandoning
his  rival.

It  is  no  wonder  that  to  those  who  looked  on  at  these
astonishing  facts,  occurring  one  after  another,  the  character
and  the  powers  of  the  Abbot  of  Clairvaux  should  have  seemed
truly  Apostolic.  They  saw  what  in  that  age  seemed  mar
vellous  in  the  extreme — a  monk,  poor,  infirm,  and  obscure,
yet  the  counsellor,  reverenced  and  obeyed,  of  sovereigns,
and  even  of  Popes.  Nor  was  there  any  adventitious  or
worldly  reason  to  account  for  this  profound  influence  which
he  exercised.  In  him  the  ascendency  of  a  higher  intellect,
of  a  nobler  spiritual  nature,  a  purer  and  more  elevated
purpose,  of  a  truly  religious  force,  in  short,  was  felt  by  all.
A  halo  of  sanctity  surrounded  the  head  of  the  humble
Bernard,  and  whenever  a  difficult  question  of  ecclesiastical
polity  or  of  personal  duty  perplexed  Prince,  or  Bishop,  or
monk,  the  great  Abbot  of  Clairvaux  was  constantly  the
chosen  referee.  It  would  be  easy  to  adduce  instances  of
this,  even  from  the  few  specimens  of  letters  to  him  which
are  still  extant,  although  the  great  mass  of  his  correspond
ence  has  naturally  perished.

As  a  theologian  he  was  equally  distinguished.  Though
he  was  not  unacquainted  with  the  writings  of  the  Fathers
and  earlier  commentators,  his  own  expositions  owe  little  to
these.  They  have  an  individuality  that  shows  them  to  be
the  utterances  of  a  single  mind.  He  treats  all  subjects  on
the  grand  scale ;  refers  all  actions  to  spiritual  standards,
and  both  illustrates  and  determines  the  question  he  is


PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.  xi

treating  by  principles  and  sanctions  drawn  from  the  most
unexpected  quarters,  and  frequently  from  the  most  awful
heights  of  authority.  He  has  the  imagination  of  a  poet  ;
and  his  works  are  full  of  word-pictures  which  glow  and
sparkle  like  gems,  even  at  the  present  day,  through  the
medium  of  the  stiff  and  scholastic  Latin  in  which  they  are
set.  In  his  writings  there  are  not  a  few  of  those

jewels  five-words-long

That  on  the  stretched  forefinger  of  all  Time
Sparkle  for  ever.

Mysticism  from  his  mouth  drops  most  of  its  question
able  tendencies,  and  becomes  a  thing  to  charm  the  de
votional  mind,  and  to  lift  the  thoughtful  into  new  and
loftier  regions  of  emotion.  He  is  a  mystic  undoubtedly,
but  after  the  manner  of  S.  Ephrem  Syrus  and  S.  Gregory
the  Great  rather  than  of  Eckart  (b.  1260),  Tauler  (b.  1290),
or  even  of  his  contemporaries  Hugo  and  Richard  of  S.
Victor,  though  these  latter  approach  much  nearer  to  him
than  the  former.  It  is  essentially  a  pure  and  spiritual
mysticism  that  he  inculcates,  clear  of  all  the  actual  sounds,
sights,  and  odours,  celestial  music,  Elysian  fragrance,
miraculous  visitations,  such  as  appear  for  example  in  the
writings  of  S.  Theresa;  though  no  doubt  occasional  ex
travagances  of  language  may  be  found  in  his  writings,
particularly  in  his  Sermons  on  the  Canticles.  Once,  indeed,
he  relates  that  the  Saviour  came  down  from  heaven,  and
entered  into  his  soul;  but  he  relates  even  this  great  distinc
tion  shown  to  him  hesitatingly  and  with  a  reluctance  and
modesty  in  every  way  honourable  to  him.  And  he  takes
care  to  make  it  quite  clear  that  this  was  a  purely  spiritual
event,  attended  by  no  outward  manifestations  :  "  Ita  igitur
intrans  ad  me  aliquoties  Verbum  Sponsus,  nullis  unquam
introitum  suum  indiciis  innotescere  fecit,  non  voce,  non


Xll  PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.

specie,  nonincessa.  Nullis  denique  suis  motibus  compertum
est  mihi,  nullis  meis  sensibus  illapsiim  penetralibus  meis  :
tantum  ex  motu  cordis  sicut  prscfatus  sum,  intellexi
prsesentiam  ejus  ;  et  ex  fugd  -vitiorum,  carnaliumque
compress tone  affectuum  .  .  .  percepi  utcunque  speciem
decor  is  ejus."  *

To  a  certain  extent  it  is  no  doubt  the  case  that  besides
being  a  mystical  theologian,  he  was  a  mystic  in  another
sense,  that  of  being  a  thcurgist,  i.e.,  one  who  claimed  to
exercise  supernatural  power.  It  is  unquestionable  that  he
is  said  by  his  biographers  to  have  performed  vast  numbers  of
miracles.  At  some  periods  of  his  life,  e.g.,  during  his  pro
gress  through  the  cities  of  north  Italy  on  behalf  of  Pope
Innocent,  and  his  preaching  of  the  Second  Crusade  in  the
Rhineland,  almost  every  action  of  his  was  regarded  as
miraculous,  and  every  word  he  spoke  as  a  prophecy.  The
possessed,  the  blind,  the  deaf  and  dumb,  the  fever  stricken,
and  even  the  dying,  he  cured  by  the  laying  on  of  his  hands.
He  worked  marvellous  cures  with  the  sign  of  the  Cross,
with  the  sacramental  Elements,  with  the  touch  of  his  vest
ments.  He  is  said  to  have  once  performed  thirty-six
miraculous  cures  in  a  single  day ;  and  it  was  calculated
that  during  this  Rhineland  mission  he  healed  an  average
of  thirty  persons  daily.  One  of  the  most  striking — we  had
almost  written  of  the  most  awful — instances  in  history  of
the  magnificent  power  of  a  firmly-rooted  faith,  is  the
account  of  S.  Bernard's  confronting  William,  Count  of
Aquitaine,  bearing  in  his  hands  the  sacramental  species,
and  thus  breaking  down  his  opposition  to  the  religious
peace  of  the  State.

But  this  subject  of  S.  Bernard's  miracles  we  have  only
space  just  to  mention  here,  and  must  hope  to  be  enabled

i  Serm.  in  Cantica,  Ixxiv,  5,  6.


PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.  xiii

to  consider  it  at  greater  length  in  the  Life  of  S.  Bernard,
which  will,  it  is  hoped,  conclude  this  edition  of  his
works.

For  a  similar  reason  we  merely  refer  to  Bernard  in  his
capacity  as  the  antagonist  of  the  brilliant  and  able  Peter
Abaelard ;  as  the  mission-preacher  among  the  simple
countrymen  of  Languedoc  ;  or,  lastly,  as  the  Apostle  of  the
Second  Crusade,  that  unfortunate  enterprise  in  which  so
many  predictions  were  falsified,  and  so  many  lives  hope
lessly  thrown  away.

Bernard  being  such  as  he  was,  it  is  a  matter  of  surprise
that  his  works,  almost  alone  among  those  of  the  Fathers,
have  never  yet  appeared  in  the  English  language.  To  the
English  reader  the  Sermons  and  Treatises  of  "  The  Last  of
the  Fathers  "  are  a  rich  mine,  as  yet  unworked  and  almost
unknown.  Sundry  versions  of  parts  of  the  Works  have
been  published  by  various  persons  at  long  intervals.


The  following  will  be  found  (it  is believed)  a  tolerably  complete  English
bibliography  of  this  subject : —

1.  The  Meditatons  of  Saint  Bernard,  translated  by  a  Student  of  the  Unyversity

of  Cambrydge. (Wynkyn  the  Worde  [sic],  Westmester,  1496,  and  again

in  IS4S-)1

2.  An  Epistle  called  the  golden  epistle  (T.  God  fray,  London),  1530.  (?)

3.  „  „  „  Edited  by  Robert  Whetford  (Wynkyn
de  Worde,  London),  1531.  (?)

4.  An  Epistle  called  the  golden  epistle. (Rob.  Wyer,  London,  1531-)

5.  A  compedius  and  a  moche  fruytefull  treatyse  of  well  liuynge. Translated

by  Thomas  Paynell,  London,  Thomas  Petyt. 8vo.2

6.  How  to  Live  Well. Translated  by  C.  B.  Tyrwhitt. Oxford. 1886.


1  This  is  Meditationes  piissimcE,  not  by  S.  Bernard.

2  The  date  of  this  may  be  gathered  approximately  from  the  fact  that  it  contains
a  dedication  to  the  Princess  Mary,  daughter  of  K.  Henry  VIII.,  i.e.,  between  1526
and  1553. There  is  another  edition  by  John  Byddell,  n.  d.  I2mo. This  is  the
Liber  de  mudo  lene  Vivendi,  ad  Sororem,  which  is  probably  not  by  S.  Bernard.
Mabillon  says  of  it  that  "  it  is  consistent  neither  with  the  circumstances  of
Bernard  nor  those  of  his  sister  Humbeline."


XIV  PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.

7.  Devout  Meditations  of  S.  Bernard,  Or,  his  Book  of  the  Soul,  made  English

by  G.  Stanhope. 1701.

8.  S.  Bernard  his  Meditations,  by  W.  P.,  M'r.  of  Arts  in  Cambridge. 1631.

9.  A  Monomachie  of  Motives  in  the  Mind  of  Man. A.  Fleming. 1582.

10.  A  Hive  of  sacred  Honicombes. Translated  by  A.  Batt. Doway,  1631.

11.  Christian  Doctrine  and  Practice  in  the  Twelfth  Century. (Small  Books  on

Great  Subjects.) London. 1841.

12.  Flowers  of  S.  Bernard,  selected  and  translated. London. 1870.

13.  The  Virgin  Mother  of  God. Selections  from  S.  Bernard  arr.  and  trans,  by

a  Secular  Priest. London  and  Derby. 1886.

14.  Sermon  on  Cant.  I,  5,  on  the  death  of  his  brother  Gerard. 1858.

15.  Sermons for  the  Seasons of the Church. Trans,  by VV. B. Flower.

London. 1861.

1 6.  Four  Homilies  on  the  Incarnation. Edinburgh. 1843.

17.  Glories  of  the  Virgin  Mother. By  a  Catholic  Priest. Boston  (U.S.). 1869.

1 8.  S.  Bernard  on  the Love of God. Transl.  by  M.  C.  and  C. Patmore

London, ist  ed.  1881  ;  2nd,  1884.

19.  The  Holy  War. Trans,  by  S.  R.  M[aitland]. Gloucester. 1827.

20.  Letter  of  S. Bernard  to  Thomas  of  Beverley,  on  Conversion. Trans,  by

R.  Collins. 1856.

21.  The  Mystic  Vine.1 Trans,  by  W.  R.  Brownlow. 1873.

22.  ,,  ,,  Translated  by  Samuel  J.  Bales,  D.C.L. London. 1889.

23.  A  Legendary  Psalter  of  S.  Bernard. London:  Percy  Society. 1842.

24.  Rhythmical  Prayer  to  the  Sacred  Members  of  Jesus. Rendered  into  Eng

lish  Rhythm  by  C.  M.  Shapcote. London. 1879.

25.  S. Bernard's  Verses  containing  the unstable felicitic of  this  wayfaring

world. (R.  Edwards,  Poet) 1596.

26.  The  same. R.  Collier. 1867.

27.  A  joyful  ballad  of  the  Name  of  Jesus. Trans,  by  T.  G.  Crippen. London.

1867.

28.  The  Jubilee  Rhythm  of  S.  Bernard. Trans,  by  Alfred  Edersheim,  D.D.

London. 1867.

BIOGRAPHIES.

29.  Life  of  S.  Bernard. Dublin. 1854.

30.  Life  of  S.  Bernard. Derby. 1858.

31.  Biography of S. Bernard  (Four Ecclesiastical Biographies), by J. H.

Gurney. S.P.C.K. 1864.

32.  Bernard  of  Clairvaux. A  Biography,  by  T.  M.  Lindsay. 1882.

33.  The  Life  and  Times  of  S.  Bernard. By  Dr.  Augustus  Neander. Trans.

from  the  German  by  Matilda  Wrench. London. I2mo. 1843.

34.  Life  and  Times  of  S.  Bernard. By  James  Cotter  Morison,  M.A. London.

1884.

35.  The  Sweet  Song  of  S.  Bernard Cjesu  !  dulcis  memoria),  newly  translated

by  the  Rev.  George  Peirce  Grar.tham. London:  s.d, 1886.  (?)

1  This  is  not  by  S.  Bernard,  though  it  has  long  been  printed  with  his  works.


PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.  xv

It  ought,  however,  to  be  mentioned  here  that  it  was
at  one  time  proposed  by  the  Rev.  Frederick  Oakeley,
then  Fellow  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford,  and  the  Rev.  J.  S.
Brewer,  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford,  to  translate  and  publish
a  complete  edition  of  the  Works  of  S.  Bernard.  Their  pro
spectus  (which  is  now  before  the  Editor)  was  issued,  it  is
believed,  about  1844;  but  events  which  speedily  followed
prevented  its  being  carried  out.

The  present  Edition  may  be  regarded  as  a  revival  of  that
plan.  One  single  aim  has  been,  and  will  be,  pursued
throughout  by  the  Editor:  that  of  producing  a  translation
as  faithful  and  complete  as  possible ;  and  the  Notes  have
been  confined  to  elucidations  or  illustrations  of  the  text
without  any  comment  whatever  from  a  doctrinal  point  of
view.  The  following  observations  made  by  the  two  scholars
just  mentioned,  in  their  original  proposal,  may  be  quoted
here,  as  they  exactly  express  the  position  taken  up  in  the
present  Edition,  and  the  reasons  for  it : —

"  It  is  to  be  distinctly  understood  that  the  various  parties
who  may  be  concerned  in  this  undertaking  pledge  themselves
by  the  act  no  farther  than  to  the  opinion  that  it  is,  on  the
whole,  desirable  to  promote  acquaintance  with  the  writings
of  this  great  Saint,  and  that  in  an  unmutilated  form.  Any
omission  would  seem  to  involve  an  expression  of  opinion
both  upon  the  part  excluded  and  the  part  retained."

The  Editor  feels  that  the  right  course  is :  to  avoid  in
truding  the  expression  of  his  personal  view  of  S.  Bernard's
writings,  as  they  are  one  after  another  translated :  to  put
before  readers,  to  the  best  of  his  power,  the  exact  equiva
lent  of  what  his  author  wrote :  and  then  to  leave  it  to  speak
for  itself.  He  can  hardly  hope  that  in  so  great  a  mass  of
translation  some  inaccuracies  will  not  have  crept  in  ;  but  a
certain  degree  of  consideration  will  no  doubt  be  given  to


xvi  PREFACE  TO THE ENGLISH EDITION,

one  who  presents  these  writings  for  the  first  time  in  Eng
lish.  Letters  127-173  and  175-298  (both  inclusive),  with
their  appendant  notes,  have  been  translated  by  the  Rev.  W.
F.  Cobb,  B.A.,  T.C.D.  All  the  rest,  with  the  Prefaces,
Chronology,  and  Notes,  by  the  Editor,  and  he  is  also  re
sponsible  for  the  whole.  Notes  which  he  has  added  are  dis
tinguished  by  the  letter  [E.],  or  by  [Trans.].

The  references  to  Scripture  have  been  made  accordant
with  the  Authorized  Version,  and  the  wording  of  that  Ver
sion  has  been  generally  adhered  to.  But  S.  Bernard,  of
course,  quotes  the  Vulgate;  and  the  Vulgate  has  many
renderings  peculiar  to  itself,  upon  which,  not  unfrequently,
he  founds  his  exposition  or  his  argument,  which  would  be
deprived  of  much  of  its  appropriateness,  or  even  rendered
altogether  meaningless,  by  the  substitution  of  other  words
in  the  quotation.  When  this  is  the  case,  a  translation  of
the  text  of  the  Vulgate  is  given,  distinguished  by  the  note

(VULG.).

Vols.  I.  and  II.  are  occupied  mostly  with  the  General
Introduction  and  the  Letters,  which  it  seemed  imperative  to
give  first.  But  the  characteristic  excellences  of  S.  Ber
nard's  writings  will  be  put  fairly  before  the  reader  in  Vols.
III.  and  IV.,  which  will  contain  a  mass  of  S.  Bernard's  Ser
mons  for  the  Christian  year,  and  will,  it  is  hoped,  be  issued
at  the  end  of  1889.

SOLI DEO GLORIA.

SAMUEL  J.  EALES.


GENERAL PREFACE

OF DOM JOHN MABILLON
To HIS SECOND EDITION OF  THE

WORKS OF S. BERNARD.


I.  After  I  had  given  the  first-fruits  of  my  studies  to  the
works  of  S.  Bernard,  I  never  so  far  put  out  of  my  mind  that
first  edition  of  them  as  to  cease  to  think  of  completing,  of
perfecting,  and  if  I  saw  the  necessity,  of  entirely  recasting
it.  Since  I  was  at  that  time  very  young,  and  an  unskilful
beginner,  when  I  set  my  hand  to  that  first  task,  I  did  not
think  the  work  so  perfect  and  correct  in  all  respects,  as
that  with  longer  experience  and  greater  literary  skill,  I
should  not  be  able  to  find  many  passages  in  Bernard  of  which
the  text  might  be  better  established,  and  the  meaning  made
clearer  by  more  laborious  notes.  Wherefore,  although  in
course  of  time,  the  direction  of  my  studies  had  taken  me
far  away  from  that  great  Doctor,  yet  my  memory  of  the
holy  man  and  my  affection  for  him  remained  so  great,  that
whenever  in  reading  and  studying  other  authors,  anything
came  before  me  which  might  later  on  be  of  use  to  me  for
settling  the  text  of  his  works,  or  illustrating  it,  I  carefully
made  note  of  it,  and  laid  it  aside  in  readiness  for  the  pre
paration,  in  due  time,  of  a  second  edition.  During  a  long
period  my  other  labours  altogether  absorbed  my  attention  so
as  to  hinder  my  occupying  myself  with  such  a  task  ;  but  at
length  the  taste  for  other  literary  occupations  weakened,
and  in  these  times  of  continual  wars,  grew  cold,  and  I  was
left  \vith  my  S.  Bernard  only  on  my  hands,  as  the  occupa
tion  of  that  leisure  which  advancing  age  afforded,  as  it  had
been  of  the  first  years  of  my  manhood.  Gladly  then,

VOL. I.  i


2  GENERAL PREFACE.

by  the  indulgence  of  my  Superiors,  did  I  devote  this  leisure
to  throwing  fresh  light  upon  an  author  who  so  well  deserves
his  high  repute  ;  and  I  cannot  refrain  from  saying  that  my
coadjutors,  and  I  myself,  have  devoted  all  our  care  and
diligence  to  make  this  edition,  not  so  much  a  reissue  of  the
former,  as  an  entirely  new,  and  as  far  as  we  could  make  it,
a  perfected  edition.

II.  There  will,  perhaps,  be  some  who  disapprove  of  these
repeated  editions,  and  blame  them  as  being  of  more  incon
venience  than  advantage  in  study.  Nor  do  I  deny  that  it
would  be  very  desirable  that  authors  should,  in  the  very
first  edition,  be  presented  in  as  near  an  approach  to  per
fection  as  is  possible  to  be  attained.  But  those  who  are
acquainted  with  that  kind  of  labour  are  not  ignorant  of  the
difficulty,  not  to  say  the  absolute  impossibility,  of  succeeding
in  editing  perfectly  an  author  whose  works  are  contained  in
so  great  a  number  of  ancient  copies,  scattered  in  places  far
removed  from  each  other,  and  presenting  among  themselves
so  great  a  number  of  differences.  So  that  after  much  and

o

long  labour  in  getting  together  a  great  number  of  copies,
and  not  only  of  complete  volumes,  but  of  leaves  scattered
here  and  there,  there  is  sometimes  need  of  an  ^Idipus  as
an  interpreter  to  determine  the  text  of  the  author  in  the
midst  of  a  crowd  of  variant  readings,  to  correct  passages
which  had  been  badly  treated,  to  throw  light  upon  obscuri
ties,  and  to  distinguish  between  works  which  are  authentic
and  others  which  are  not.  To  succeed  in  all  these  objects,
and  to  produce  at  the  first  attempt  a  perfect  work,  there
will  be  need  of  a  genius  and  a  degree  of  good  fortune,
which  I  am  far  from  possessing,  nor  do  I  know  whether
anyone  could  claim  to  have  it.  However  that  may  be,  I
prefer  to  ask  pardon  for  the  fault  of  rashness  (if  the  fact  be
so)  in  attempting  my  first  edition,  than  either  to  increase
my  fault  by  making  excuses,  or  to  leave  my  former  edition
imperfect.  This  is  why  I  have  thought  it  my  duty  to


GENERAL PREFACE.  3

undertake  a  new  and  more  correct  one,  executed  with
greater  care.  I  have,  then,  collated  anew  the  text  of  the
holy  Doctor  with  the  most  ancient  copies  that  I  could
procure ;  and  lastly,  have  bound  myself  \vith  my  com
panions  once  more  to  the  wearisome  labours  of  the  printing
office,  being  cheered  by  an  assured  confidence  that  those
who  are  wise  will  welcome  not  ungratefully  my  plan  and  my
new  labours,  especially  when  they  shall  know  the  reasons
which  have  prompted  the  undertaking  of  this  new  edition,
and  have  understood  fully  the  advantages  which,  as  I  hope,
it  will  offer.

§  I.  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  EDITIONS  OF  THE  WORKS  OF
S.  BERNARD  :  THE  CAUSES,  REASONS,  ADVANTAGES,
AND  USEFULNESS  OF  THIS  NEW  EDITION.

III.  In  the  first  place,  nothing  shows  more  the  value  and
the  merit  of  the  works  of  S.  Bernard,  than  the  number  of
editions  which  have  appeared  of  them,  both  before  and  after
the  invention  of  printing.  The  number  of  these  is  a  proof
how  eagerly  the  works  of  Bernard  were  procured  by  many
persons,  and  how  much  they  were  read  and  admired  by  all ;
nor  is  this  to  be  wondered  at ;  for  in  his  writings  shines
forth  an  intellect  endued  with  nobility,  power,  and  eleva
tion,  united  with  gentleness,  urbanity,  and  virtue.  Elo
quence  is  natural  to  him,  an  eloquence  unpretending  and
unforced,  though  not  without  ornament.  His  style  is
nervous,  his  discourse  vigorous,  his  language  appropriate,
his  thoughts  elevated,  his  sentiments  pious,  his  humour  not
laboured,  his  whole  discourse  breathing  of  God  and  heavenly
things.  The  fire  of  his  zeal  burns  not  to  consume,  but  to  in
flame  with  itself.  He  makes  the  point  of  his  weapon  felt,  and
pierces,  not  to  irritate  but  to  move  to  action.  He  criticizes,
he  blames,  but  so  as  to  attract,  not  to  excite  antipathy.
He  accuses,  he  threatens,  he  terrifies,  but  always  in  love,
never  in  anger.  He  soothes,  but  does  not  flatter;  he


4  GENERAL PREFACE.

praises,  but without extravagance. He urges, but with
kindness;  he  reproves,  without  being  offensive  ;  he  charms,
he  pleases,  and  he  delights. His  discourse,  says  Sixtus  of
Sienna,  is  everywhere  sweet,  and  yet  fiery;  it  so  delights  and,
at  the  same  time,  inflames,  that  honey  and  milk  seem  to  flow
together  from  his  persuasive  tongue,  while  jets  of  fire  and
flame  burst  from  his  heart  of  fire. As  for  his  knowledge,  it
was  far  beyond  the  common,  and  was  fed  with  the  sap  and
the  very  words  of  the  Holy  Scripture;  and  he  so  took  into
his  heart  the  sayings  of  the  Fathers  as  to  make  them  entirely
his  own. He  writes  with  such  originality  of  Divine  things,
of grace and free-will, of the  office and of the  proper
character  of  Bishops,  of  clerks,  of  monks,  or  of  lay  people,
that  his  teaching  shows  him  to  be,  as  it  were,  a  fountain,
not  a  river  or  canal.1 Can  we  wonder  if  a  man  so  gifted  is
appreciated  and  his  works  sought  out,  read,  and  studied  by
all  the  world  ? If  editions  of  them  without  number  appear,
and if  learned  and  experienced  men employ  their  labour
to  augment, illustrate, and  restore  them  to  their  original
integrity  ? If  Rome  herself,  lady  and  mistress  of  the  world,
which once  received  with  veneration  the  instructions  and
even  the  reprimands  of Bernard  ;  if  Rome,  I  say,  herself
suffered  the  Books  de  Consideratione,  which  were  first  pre
sented to Eugenius  III., which Nicolas  V.  caused  to  be
copied out  with the greatest  care, at  length  to  be  pub
lished  from the Papal Press under Clement VIII., and
would  have  published  the  entire  works  of  Bernard  if  Gerard
Voss  had  been  willing  to  undertake  to  edit  them  ? What
is  less  to  be  wondered  at  after  this,  is  that  in  the  capital  of
France,  of  which  Bernard  is  one  of  the  greatest  lights,  he
has  deservedly  received  the  honour  of  the  Royal  Press.

IV.  There are, however, other causes, some  of them
proper  and  even  necessary,  why  so  many  editions  and  col
lations of  the  works of Bernard  have  been  made. One,
1  Which  borrows  its  stream  from  elsewhere. — [E.]


GENERAL PREFACE.  5

and,  indeed,  the  chief  is,  that  the  writings  of  the  holy
Doctor  have  been  very  widely  scattered  in  various  and
very  numerous  MSS.,  of  which  not  all  could  possibly  find
place  in  a  first  edition.  These  are  brought  to  the  light
one  after  the  other  as  fast  as  they  fall  into  the  hands  or
come  to  the  knowledge  of  scholars.

The  first  edition  appears  to  have  been  that  which  Peter
Schoeffer  issued  at  Mayence  in  1475;  it  contained  Sermons
de  Tempore,  those  de  Sanctis,  also  those  de  Diversis,  and
the  Book  ad  Milites  Templi,  with  some  others,  rightly
attributed  to  Bernard.

About  the  same  time  appeared  at  Rouen,  without  any
date,  three  Treatises  of  the  blessed  Father,  viz.,  the  Books
de  Consider atione,  the  Apologia  to  Abbot  William,  and
the  Book  de  Prsecepto  et  Dispensatione.

In  1481  appeared  at  Brussels  an  edition,  without  name
of  editor  or  printer,  which  contained  the  Sermons  de  Tern-
pore  and  de  Sanctis,  and  certain  of  the  Letters  then  pub
lished  for  the  first  time.

In  1494,  at  Paris,  an  edition  containing  three  hundred
and  ten  Letters,  with  the  Sermons  in  Cantica,  edited  and
corrected  by  Magister  Rouald,  Doctor  in  Theology.

The  edition  of  Spires  appeared  in  1501.  Two  years
later  appeared  that  of  Venice,  but  without  the  Letters,  and
already  occupied  to  the  extent  of  almost  half  by  apocry
phal  writings  and  works  of  other  authors.

Possevin  places  that  of  Brescia  in  the  year  1495  ;  it  con
tained  the  Homilies  on  the  Missus  est,  and  some  other
Treatises.

The  first  edition  of  S.  Bernard  containing  almost  all  his
collected  works  is  that  of  Paris,  in  1508,  called  the  Seraphic
edition  ;  and  is  said  at  the  commencement  to  comprise  the
works  of  S.  Bernard  the  Doctor,  mellifluous  and  devoted,
compared  then  for  the  first  time,  and  with  the  greatest  care,
with  the  originals  in  the  library  of  Clairvaux,  and  arranged


6  GENERAL PREFACE.

into  a  single  volume  by  the  care  and  industry  of  Magister
John  Bocard,  and  at  the  cost  of  John  Lepetit,  sworn
librarian  of  the  University  of  Paris.

Six  years  later,  in  1515,  Jodocus  Clictoveus,  of  Nieu-
port,  revised  the  preceding  edition  and  republished  it  at
Lyons,  the  printer  being  a  German,  John  Klein,  adding  to
it  the  Sermons  in  Cantica  of  Gilbert  of  Hoyland  ;  it  was
then  many  times  reprinted  both  at  Paris  and  at  Lyons.  In
1520  appeared  another  edition  at  Lyons  by  two  monks  of
Clairvaux,  Lambert  Deschamps  and  Laurence  of  Dantzig,
much  more  correct  than  all  the  others.

After  these  appeared  many  other  editions,  which  I  pass
over  without  notice  to  come  to  that  which  Francis  Comestor,
of  Arnay-le-Duc,  a  fellow  of  the  College  of  the  Sorbonne,
undertook,  to  contain  all  the  works  of  the  holy  Doctor,  with
an  Epistle  Dedicatory  to  Louis  de  Rie,  Bishop  of  Geneva,
in  which  he  says  that,  in  examining  the  ancient  books,  in
which  the  library  of  the  College  of  the  Sorbonne  was  then
very  rich,  he  had  happened  upon  an  Appendix  to  the  Book
de  Diligendo  Deo,  which  was  not  found  in  any  preceding
edition,  and  afterwards  upon  a  Treatise  de  Amore  Dei  ac
Dignitate  Amor  is  ;  he  printed  these  books  with  the  works
of  S.  Bernard,  at  the  office  of  the  Veuve  Claude  Chevallon
in  1547.

This  edition  was  reprinted  many  times,  which,  however,
did  not  prevent  Antoine  Marcellin  from  publishing  another
at  Bale  in  1552,  which  was  printed  by  John  Hervage.  He
prepared  it,  he  says,  with  the  greatest  care,  after  consulting
very  ancient  copies,  and  examined  the  whole  works  afresh
and  gave  them  in  a  different  order,  so  that  the  Sermons
were  put  in  the  first  place,  the  Letters  followed,  then  the
Treatises,  and  lastly  the  writings  attributed  to  S.  Bernard,
with  some  by  other  authors.

Before  the  edition  of  which  we  have  just  spoken,  one
appeared  at  Venice,  of  which  mention  is  made  by  John


GENERAL PREFACE.  y

Guillot,  of  Champagne,  in  the  preface  he  wrote  for  the
edition  of  Nivelles,  published  at  Paris  in  1572,  and  in  which
he  speaks  of  a  collation  of  the  various  texts  undertaken  by
the  theologians  of  the  Faculty  of  Paris,  who  corrected  the
latest  editions  as  well  according  to  their  own  knowledge  as
with  the  help  of  all  the  MSS.  they  could  draw  from  the
various  libraries  of  France.  So  that,  says  Guillot,  to
attempt  to  correct  again  after  so  many  scholars,  and  those
of  such  mark,  would  be  to  try  to  cure  a  man  already  quite
well,  which  did  not  all  the  same  prevent  his  declaring  that  he
had  made  many  important  corrections.  He  divided,  also,  into
chapters,  with  analytic  titles,  the  Books  de  Consider atione,
addressed  to  Pope  Eugenius,  and  the  Book  de  Prxcepto  et
Dispensatione,  the  text  of  which  Henry  Cuyck,  of  Gutten-
berg,  had  corrected  by  collation  with  seven  MS.  copies.  He
takes  great  care,  also,  to  separate  the  authentic  works  of  S.
Bernard  from  those  which  are  spurious,  and  to  arrange  the
former  in  a  more  reasonable  and  convenient  order.  Never
theless,  Guillot  leaves  among  the  genuine  works  some
spurious,  either  already  included,  or  added  for  the  first
time;  also  Flowers  collected  from  the  works  of  S.  Bernard.

But  six  years  previously,  in  1566,  had  appeared  at  Paris,
the  publishers  being  William  Merlin  and  Sebastian  de
Nivelles,  another  edition;  the  Letter  from  the  same  Francis
Comestor,  who  was  lately  mentioned  with  praise,  to  the
Bishop  of  Geneva,  being  prefixed.  It  was  enlarged  by  an
Appendix  Hcrvagiana  published  at  Bale  by  the  successors
of  John  Hervage,  under  the  care  of  James  Pamelius,  of
Bruges,  who  published  also  sixteen  brief  Sermons  by  S.
Bernard,  the  Parable  concerning  Christ  and  the  Church,  a
book  of  Soliloquies,  and  some  other  writings  attributed  to
Bernard.

The  same  year  Louis  le  Mire,  of  Rosay,  caused  to  be
printed  at  Paris,  by  Charlotte  Guillard,  another  Appendix
which  he  had  received  from  Francis  Comestor.


8  GENERAL PREFACE.

I  pass  over  a  great  many  other  editions  which  appeared
during  this  epoch.  Indeed,  scarcely  a  year  passed  without
its  being  signalized  by  the  appearance  of  one.  The  finest
of  all  is  that  which  appeared  in  1586  under  the  sign  of  the
Ship,  with  a  Letter  Dedicatory  from  John  Guillot,  to  the
Reverend  Father  Guy  de  Chartres,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  and
a  preface  from  the  same  to  the  reader.

In  1575  Hubert  Lescot,  Regular  Canon,  made  a  transla
tion  into  French  of  the  greater  number  of  the  Sermons
and  Treatises  of  S.  Bernard,  but  without  the  Letters.  These
latter  were  added  in  1622,  having  been  translated  by  Philip
le  Bel,  Doctor  of  the  Faculty  of  Paris,  according  to  what  is
stated  in  the  latest  version  by  the  Reverend  Father  Gabriel,
de  S.  Malachi  des  Feuillants.1

V.  As  for  the  editions  of  S.  Bernard  which  have  appeared
in our age, it would almost  be a never-ending task to
enumerate  them,  nor  is  it  at  all  necessary. Two  only  I  am
glad to note, that of Edmund Tiraquellius, a  monk of
Citeaux, in  the year 1601, the other of Jean Picard in
1609,  with  notes,  some  additional  Letters,  and  an Epistle
Dedicatory  of Tiraquellius  to  R. P.  Edmund  de  la  Croix,
Abbot  of  Citeaux,  and  also  a  Letter  and  Preface  of  Guillot.

This  edition  of  Picard  appeared  also  in  the  same  year  at
Antwerp,  printed  by  John  Keerberg,  and  after  that  was  re
printed  many  times  ;  until,  in  1641,  appeared  the  best  and
most  accurate  of  all,  that  of  James  Merlon  Horst,  a  most
pious  and  learned  man.  That  edition  threw  all  others  into
the  shade,  and  was  reprinted  frequently.

VI.  It will  be well to  say a  few  words  respecting  the
mode  in  which  this  worthy  man  has  prepared  his  edition.
In  the  first  place  he  expresses  his  wonder  that  since  of  all
the  Fathers  of  the  Church  there  is  none  whose  works  are
more frequently read  than  Bernard,  he  should  be  at the

1  This  is  a  reformed  Cistercian  Order  founded  by  Jean  de  la  Barriere,  Abbot
of  Feuillans,  with  the  permission  of  Gregory  XIII.  The  habit  is  white. — [E.]


GENERAL PREFACE.  g

same  time  that  one  of  whom  the  editions  had  been  up  to
that  time  most  neglected,  so  that  they  seemed  to  become
worse  and  more  defective  the  more  they  were  multiplied,
as  if  that  Father  either  did  not  need  any  care  at  all,  or
was  unworthy  of  it.  He  declares  that  this  was  the  cause
which  had  moved  him  to  set  his  hand  to  cure  this  evil.  He
had  submitted  the  whole  of  the  works  to  exact  and  severe
criticism,  and  divided  them  into  six  volumes,  of  which  the
first  contained  the  Letters ;  the  second  the  Sermons  de
Tempore  and  de  Sanctis ;  the  third  the  Sermons  in  Cantica ;
the  fourth  various  Treatises  ;  the  fifth  those  writings  which
are  not  by  S.  Bernard  ;  and  the  sixth,  those  of  the  two
disciples  of  the  Holy  Doctor,  Gilbert  and  Guerric.  It  is  he,
also,  who  divided  the  Treatises  into  chapters  and  sections,
and  has  prefixed  analytical  summaries  to  each  Letter  and
Treatise.  He  spared  neither  labour  nor  expense  to  procure
all  the  editions  of  S.  Bernard  which  he  could  find  in  the
libraries  of  different  countries,  although  he  was  not  suc
cessful  in  obtaining  some  of  the  works  of  that  Father,  of
which  Possevin  and  others  have  given  a  list.  Besides
'  these  a  great  many  introductions  are  added,  the  life  of  S.
Bernard  in  seven  books,  with  various  Elogia  of  the  Saint,
and  a  chronology.  Finally,  he  has  inserted  lengthy  Notes,
besides  those  shorter  ones  which  are  inserted  in  the  margin
throughout  the  work,  with  very  full  Indexes  of  the  places  of
Scripture,  of  subjects,  and  of  the  names  mentioned  by  S.
Bernard.  The  reader  cannot  help  recognizing  the  immense
labour  with  which  he  has  endeavoured  to  make  his  edition
absolutely  accurate.  Unfortunately  the  work  of  the  printer
has  not  altogether  corresponded  to  his  wishes.  This  learned
man  was  preparing  an  edition  more  complete  and  more
careful  still  when  he  died,  on  the  2oth  April,  1644.

VII.  Nevertheless  it  cannot  be  questioned  that  Horst
was  happily  enabled  to  bring  that  first  edition  to  a  degree
of  perfection  as  complete  as  was  possible  to  a  man  who,


10  GENERAL PREFACE.

though  learned,  diligent,  and  most  studious  of  his  author,
was  working  alone:  so  that  his  edition  was  received  with
both  hands  (as  the  saying  is),  approved  and  very  often
reprinted  in  various  countries  and  places.  But  our  illus
trious  Claude  Cantelou,  having  collated,  at  the  order  of  our
superiors,  the  text  of  Horst  with  many  MSS.  in  France,
discovered  in  his  work  certain  faults  which  required  to  be
corrected  by  the  aid  of  our  Codices,  and  he  published  the
corrected  text  of  the  Sermons  de  Tempore  and  de  Sanctis
in  a  new  form.  He  was  preparing  with  the  same  care  to
publish  the  rest  of  the  works  of  S.  Bernard,  when  he  died,
and  left  his  work  for  me  to  continue.  I  was  then  a  young
man  ;  a  novice  and  inexperienced  in  the  literary  art,  and  it
would  never  have  occurred  to  me  to  put  my  labour  and  know
ledge  into  comparison  with  those  of  the  learned  Horst,  if
our  Superior  General,  the  Reverend  Abbot  Bernard  Aude-
bert,  of  pious  memory,  had  not  overcome  my  scruples  and
my  reluctance  to  continue  the  work  of  Cantelou  after  his
death.  I  obeyed,  however,  though  unwillingly,  and  with
the  useful  and  valuable  help  of  James  Lannoy,  who  put  at
my  disposal  all  the  originals  of  S.  Bernard's  works  which
existed  in  the  library  of  Citeaux,  of  which  he  was  abbot,  I
succeeded  at  length  in  producing  an  edition  in  larger
and  also  in  smaller  size  of  S.  Bernard,  as  perfect — I  do
not  say  as  it  might  and  ought  to  have  been,  but  as  good
as  my  young  inexperience  was  able  to  make  it,  or  rather
as  the  selfishness  of  the  printer,  who  showed  himself
more  careful  to  serve  his  own  interests  than  those  of
the  public,  would  allow  it  to  be.

VIII.  But  with  time  and  experience  in  that  kind  of  labour,
I  accumulated,  day  by  day,  more  materials  which  would  be
of  use  for  another  and  much  improved  edition  of  Bernard,
and  I  continued,  as  I  have  said,  diligently  to  collect  these,  in
order  that  when  time  and  leisure  should  permit,  I  might
make  such  an  edition  more  correct,  more  elegant,  and  more


GENERAL PREFACE.  I  I

perfect.  But  when  I  set  myself  to  the  work  I  found  myself
confronted  by  another  difficulty,  arising  from  the  unhappy
state  of  the  laws  which  ruled  the  press,  and  from  which  I
extricated  myself  at  last  in  any  way  I  could,  as  if  taking
refuge  in  any  harbour  attainable  from  a  storm,  and  in  a
manner  which  there  is  no  need  to  detail  here.

IX.  Although  it  is  entirely  foreign  to  my  habit  and  to  my
intention  to  extol  my  own  work,  yet  it  is  proper  here  to
show,  in  the  first  place,  in  what  respects  this  latest  edition
differs, as well from that of Horst as from my  former
one. I have, first, had  the  advantage of being  able to
collate  a  number  of  ancient  MSS.  which  I  had  not  seen  at
the  time  of  my  former  edition,  both  those  which  I  consulted
and  studied  in  the  provinces  that  I  traversed,  and  in  the
Colbertine  Library,  where  Stephen  Baluze,  a  man  born  to
help  and  develop  learned  pursuits,  had  assembled  a  great
many  copies  since  my  first  edition  had  appeared. I  have
thus  been  able  out  of  the  various  readings  to  select  and
restore  to  the  text  those  which  seemed  most  to  accord  with
the manner and sentiments of Bernard, which pursuit
requires  an  extensive  acquaintance  with  old  books,  a  tact
acquired  by  habitude  only,  and  a  riper  judgment  than  the
general  run  of  educated  persons  suppose,  who  regard  us  as
collectors  of  spiders'  webs  when  they  see  the  importance
that  we  attach  to  those  things  which  they  regard  as  trifles;
but,  let  that  class  of  men  think  what  they  please  respecting
me;  I  do  not  desire  the  applause  of  men  for  my  work,  but  to
render  service  to  the  Church  and  to  the  literary  fraternity.

X.  Nor  have  I  employed  the  resources  of  criticism  only
in restoring  the  text,  but  also in  separating  the  general
writings of Bernard from  the suppositious  and  spurious
writings  which  had  made  their  way  among  the  genuine,  as
well  in  the  edition  of  Horst  as in  my former  one. Thus
I  have  expunged  two  Letters  of  Bernard  Brito  which  Horst
had  placed  among  those  of  our  Bernard; I  have  rejected


12  GENERAL PREFACE.

four  or  five  Sermons  from  those  de  Tempore  and  de
Sanctis ;  I  have  rejected  also  a  Book  of  Declamations,
and  some  others  which  were  shown  by  clear  signs  and
arguments  not  to  be  from  the  pen  of  Bernard.

XI.  For  that  work  of  criticism  I  have  found  of  great
assistance,  not  only  the  writers  of  the  Lives  of  S.  Bernard,
and  chiefly  Geoffrey,  which  contain  a  list  of  the  principal
works  of  the  holy  Doctor,  but  also  the  old  MSS.,  the  cita
tions  of  ancient  authors,  and,  most  of  all,  the  ancient
Collection  from  the  writings  of  Bernard,  which  is  called
Book  of  Flowers,  Florilegium  and  Bernardinus,  first  edited
at  Paris  in  1503.  It  is  much  to  be  preferred  to  another
collection  which  was  made  in  1571  by  a  Canon  Regular
named  Hubert  Scutepuits,  and  intruded  by  John  Picard
into  his  edition  of  Bernard.  That  first  Collection  is  far
more  ancient,  and  an  old  MS.  copy  at  Citeaux  has  supplied
to  us  the  name  of  the  author,  for  we  find  in  it  these  words,
with  an  inscription  following: — "Here  begins  a  prologue
of  Bernardinus,  which  Dom  Willermus,  monk  of  S.  Martin
of  Tournay,  has  extracted  and  compiled  from  the  books
and  sayings  of  the  holy  Bernard,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux."
That  prologue  begins  thus  : — "  As  I  was  not  greatly
occupied  in  any  pursuit,"  etc.,  as  in  the  editions  in
which  the  name  of  the  author  is  wanting;  but  it  is  easily
inferred  that  he  must  have  lived  in  the  thirteenth  century,
from  the  age  of  the  MSS.  in  which  this  Collection  is  found.
The  Collector  does,  indeed,  praise  certain  Treatises  as  being
Bernard's,  which  are  not  his,  viz.,  the  Letter  to  the  Brethren
of  Mont  Dieu,  Meditations,  and  Book  of  Declamations ;
but,  nevertheless,  his  authority  is  of  considerable  weight,
especially  in  recognizing  the  Sermons  of  Bernard.  Thus
every  time  that  a  doubt  arises  on  any  passage  of  his
writings,  as  in  the  Sermons  de  Diver  sis,  it  seemed  advisable
to  note  these  citations  out  of  Bernardinus.  Nor  is  it
wonderful  that  both  the  Letter  to  the  Brethren  of  Mont


GENERAL PREFACE.  13

Dieu,  the  Declamations,  and  the  Meditations  are  brought
forward  in  that  Collection  under  the  name  of  Bernard,  since
S.  Bonaventure  makes  the  same  mistake  as  to  that  much-
praised  epistle,  and  the  Books  of  Declamations  and  Medita
tions  appear  to  be  centos  out  of  the  writings  of  Bernard,  as
I  shall  point  out  in  the  proper  places.

XII.  Besides  criticism  of  the  books,  I  have  made  some
changes  in  Horst's  arrangement,  both  of  the  volumes  and
of  the  treatises. He  had  placed  the  Sermons  de  Tempore
and  de  Sanctis  after  the  Letters ;  then  came  the  Sermons
in  Cantica  and,  lastly,  the  Opuscula  and  the  Treatises. It
appeared  to  me  better  that  the  Opuscula  and  the  Treatises
should follow  the  Letters, since the  former are, for  the
most  part,  written  in  the  form  of  letters,  or  have  even  been
transferred out of that  class to rank among  the  latter.
From  this  order  it results  that  the  Sermons  de  Tempore
and  de  Sanctis  fall  into  the  third  place,  and  those  in  Cantica
into the fourth. In the fifth place I have added the
Sermons  of  Gilbert  on  the  same  subject,  being  a  continua
tion  of  those  of  Bernard. As  to  the  fifth  and  sixth  volumes,
I  will  speak  more  at  length in  the  Preface  to  Vol.  v.  or
even  in  those  to  the  earlier  volumes.

XIII.  In order  that all  the genuine works of Bernard
might  be  contained  in  one  volume,  I  have  placed  at  the  end
of  Tome  vi.  or  Vol.  ii.  the  Books  of  his  Life  and  Actions,
which  Horst  had  put  at  the  beginning  of  his  first  volume,
so that neither should the allied works of  Bernard  be
separated  from  each  other,  nor  the  size  of  the  volumes  be
made  very unequal. At  the end  of  the  first  and of  the
second  volume  I  have  placed  very  full  indexes,  the  former
of  the  genuine  works  of  Bernard,  the  latter  of  those  not  by
him.

XIV.  The more lengthy notes and observations with
which  the  Letters  and  other  works  of  S.  Bernard  had  been
enriched  by  Horst,  or  formerly  by  myself,  have  been  thrown


14  GENERAL PREFACE.

together  at  the  end  of  each  Tome.  To  the  first  Tome  a  short
Chronology  is  prefixed,  which  may  serve  to  throw  light
upon  the  notes  and  provide  a  solid  framework  into  which
they  may  be  fitted.  Such  is  the  character  of  the  improve
ments  that  I  have  introduced  into  this  new  edition  of
Bernard.

XV.  To  come  in  particular  to  the  examination  of  Tome
i.,  which  contains  the  Letters  of  Bernard,  I  have  devoted  no
little labour to correcting, arranging, illustrating, and
adding  to  them.

For  corrections  I  have  consulted  the  MSS.  in  various
libraries ;  of  the  Vatican,  of  the  Colbertine,  those  of  S.
Peter  at  Ghent,  and  of  Orval  in  Belgium  ;  besides  those
which  I  used  in  my  former  edition.  From  one  MS.  at
Corbey  I  have  restored  certain  inscriptions  of  some
importance.  By  the  aid  of  that  MS.,  and  of  two  others  in
the  Colbertine  of  good  rank,  bearing  the  numbers  of  1410
and  2476,  and  containing  the  Opuscula  of  S.  Bernard,  with
which  I  have  collated  the  same  Opuscula,  I  have  added  for
each  Letter  marginal  notes,  which  briefly  explain  any
historical  facts  referred  to.

XVI.  Respecting  the  order  of  the  Letters,  I  have  long
hesitated  whether  to  retain  the  received  order  or  to  adopt  a
new one. There were reasons for each course. The
antiquity  of  the  existing  order  was  a  reason  for  retaining  it,
for it  appears  to have  been adopted  while Bernard was
still  living,  at  least  as  far  as  the  first  310  Letters,  of  which  the
last  is  addressed  to  Arnold,  Abbot  of Bonneval ;  while  as
for  the  others,  which  were  scattered  here  and  there,  it  was
not  until  later  that  they  were  united  to  the  great  body  of
Letters  ; nor  all  at  once,  but  only  at  intervals,  as  they  came
to  the  knowledge  of  the  editors  or  collectors. Then  one
other  reason  was  in  favour  of  the  ancient  order,  viz.,  that  in
it  the  order  of  time  was,  on  the  whole,  preserved ;  whereas
it  was  to  be  feared  that  more  inconvenience  than  usefulness


GENERAL PREFACE.  15

would  follow  any  change  of  the  received  order,  because  of
the  numerous  citations  of  the  Letters  numbered  on  that
ancient  method,  without  mentioning  the  fixed  and  solemn
order  of  the  ancient  copies.  What,  on  the  contrary,  strongly
made  for  the  opposite  course  was  the  intolerable  confusion
of  certain  Letters  which  were  arranged  at  a  considerable
distance  before  those  to  which  they  were  the  replies.
From  this  results  the  farther  inconvenience  that  the  parts
of  a  subject  are  by  this  faulty  arrangement  detached  from
each  other.  In  these  difficulties  it  seemed  best,  on  the
whole,  to  take  a  middle  way,  and  while  retaining  the
received  order  for  the  first  310  Letters,  to  arrange  the  re
mainder  in  order  of  time,  noting  in  the  margin  the  number
by  which  each  had  previously  been  marked.  When  in  con
sequence  of  this  new  arrangement  it  happens  that  a  Letter
ought  to  follow  some  other,  we  warn  the  reader  to  defer  it
until  the  other  has  been  first  read ;  in  that  manner  we  have
both  respected  the  old  order,  and  avoided  the  confusion
that  a  new  one  would  have  caused.

We  have  said  that  the  old  order,  in  which  we  read  the
Letters  of  S.  Bernard,  seems  to  have  been  established  even
in  the  lifetime  of  their  author  ;  we  find  the  proof  of  this
in  William,  formerly  Abbot  of  S.  Thierry,  who  died  before
Bernard.  For  he,  in  the  first  book  of  his  Life  of  the  Holy
Doctor,  evidently  written  during  the  life  of  Bernard,  reports
that  his  Letter  to  his  relative  Robert  (n.  50),  which  had  not
been  wetted  in  the  midst  of  a  shower  of  rain,  "  was  not
unjustly  placed  first  by  his  brethren  in  the  volume  of  his
Letters  because  of  so  great  a  miracle."  The  author  of  the
third  Life,  who  is  no  other,  as  we  think,  than  Geoffrey,  his
secretary,  relates  that  that  arrangement  was  made  by  him.

XVII.  The  order  of  the  Letters  is,  nevertheless,  not  quite
uniform  in  all  the  old  copies,  although  in  most  of  them
there  is  no  great  difference  up  to  Letter  310.  There  are
not  quite  so  many  as  this  in  some  copies,  from  which  we


l6  GENERAL PREFACE.

gather  that  there  were,  not  one  collection  of  the  Letters
only,  but  many. In  the  three  Vatican  MSS.  these  Letters
are  included. Of  these  the  finest,  No.  662,  contains  296,  in
nearly the same order  as that  of  the  editions  ; the  last
of  these  is  the  Letter  addressed  to  the  Irish  Brethren  on
the death of  the blessed Malachi. In  another  MS.,  No.
664,  there  is  the  same  order  in  282  Letters  ; of  which  the
last  is  that  to  Hugh,  Knight  of  the  Temple. The  third,
No.  663,  contains  240  Letters,  arranged  in  an  order  entirely
different ; so  that  the  first  of  that  collection,  addressed  to
Cardinal Haimeric,  is  the  3i3th  in  previous  editions,  and
the  last,  addressed  to  Pope  Eugenius  on  the  subject  of  the
Bishop  of  Autun,  is  the  275th. In  all  the  other  MSS.  the
order  is  pretty  nearly  the  same  as  in  the  printed  collections,
with  the  exception of the MS.  at S.  Peter  of  Ghent,  in
which  the  collection is  divided  into  three  parts,  the  first
containing 100  Letters,  the  second 164,  the  third 76; in
which  the  last  is  from  John  of  Casa  Mario  to  Bernard,  and
that  preceding  it,  from Bernard  to  Rorgon of  Abbeville.
And  perhaps  in  no  other  MS.  are  more  Letters  of  Bernard
collected  than  in  that of  Ghent ;  and  Willermus,  the  monk
of  Tournay,  must  have  had  this  MS.,  or  one  similar  to  it,
under  his  eyes  in  writing  his  Bernardinus,  which  was  just
now  praised,  since  he quotes  the  Letters  as of  the  first,
second,  or  third  part. But  in  the  MS.  at  Clairvaux  of  the
Cistercian  Order  there  are  307  Letters,  and  in  that  at  Orval
306 ; each  of  these  having  in  the  last  place  the  Letter  to
Abbot  Arnold,  which  was  certainly  the  last  which  Bernard
wrote. It  was without doubt the former of these  two
collections that John of Salisbury (Letter 96) begged
Peter  de  Celles  to  send  to  him,  as  he  thanks  him  "for  the
Letters  of  the  blessed  Bernard  "  in  the  following  one.

XVIII.  To  speak  now  of  the  Letters  added  in  this  edition
(which  are  in  the  last  place  to  be  treated  of),  we  ought  to
premise  that  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Letters  of  Bernard,


GENERAL PREFACE.  17

which  appeared  at  Brussels  in  1481  and  at  Paris  in  1494,
there  were  only  310  Letters,  of  which  the  antepenultimate
is  that  to  Arnold,  Abbot  of  Chartres,  the  penultimate  to  the
Irish  Brethren  on  the  death  of  the  holy  Bishop  Malachi,  and
the  last  to  Guy,  Abbot  of  Moustier-Ramey.  But  the  edition
of  1520,  executed  by  two  monks  of  Clairvaux,  as  we  have
said  above,  contained  in  all  351  Letters,  of  which  the  last  is
addressed  to  the  novice  Hugh,  who  was  afterwards  Abbot
of  Bonneval.  The  Letter  to  Arnold  is  the  3ioth,  and  that
to  the  Irish  the  3iith.  The  reason  for  this  difference  is
that  in  the  former  edition  two  Letters  are  wanting,  viz.,  the
84th,  which  is  the  second  to  Simon,  Abbot  of  S.  Nicholas,
and  the  i47th,  to  Peter,  Abbot  of  Cluny.  Jodocus  Clictoveus,
in  his  edition  of  1515  and  those  following,  has  only  350
Letters  in  all  ;  he  has  omitted  that  to  the  novice  Hugh,
which  was  inserted  by  Antonio  Marcellino  into  the  edition
of  Bale  of  1552,  and  in  all  those  which  followed  up  to  that
of  John  Picard.  This  last  editor  added  seventeen  new
Letters  to  those  already  known,  but  without  arranging  them
in  order.  Two  of  these  Letters  are  placed  at  the  head  of
those  which  he  drew  from  the  MS.  of  Pithon  ;  the  others
were  not  published  till  long  after.  He  had  found  them  in
his  library  at  S.  Victor.

Horst  omitted  certain  Letters  which  had  been  wrongly
included,  and  so  reduced  the  number  to  366;  to  which  he
added  two  spurious  Letters  of  Bernard  de  Brito,  seventeen
genuine  from  certain  English  MSS.,  and  one  of  the  Abbot
Fastred  to  finish  his  volume,  which  brought  the  number  to
386.

I  had  myself  included  eleven  new  Letters  in  my  first
edition,  and  in  this  the  number  has  risen  to  482.  This
includes  not  only  the  twenty-eight  Letters  of  Bernard
recently  discovered  in  Germany,  and  added  in  the  form  of
an  Appendix  to  an  edition  of  Horst  published  at  Cologne,
but  also  some  other  Letters  of  the  Saint  found  elsewhere,

VOL.  I.  2


1 8  GENERAL PREFACE.

and  some  Letters  addressed  to  him,  or  written  concerning
him,  which  seemed  necessary  for  full  understanding  of
those  which  he  himself  wrote.

I  have  divided  all  these  Letters  into  three  parts,  of
which  the  first  comprises  the  310  former  Letters  retaining
their  ancient  and  common  order;  the  second  to  the  454th
comprises  the  rest  of  the  genuine  epistles  of  Bernard ;  the
third  the  doubtful,  the  spurious,  and  those  written  by  others.
These  are  the  chief  matters  which  have  occupied  my  atten
tion  in  editing  the  first  Tome  ;  other  things  the  diligent
Reader  will  easily  observe.

XIX.  I  may  state  here  that  the  Works  of  Bernard,  which
Horst  complained  were  lying  hidden  in  various  libraries,  are
not  from  the  pen  of  the  Saint ;  a  fact  which  I  have  been
able  to  ascertain.  Thus  the  book  on  the  Hexaemeron  is  by
Arnold,  Abbot  of  Bonneval  in  the  Chartrain  ;  the  Com
mentary  on  the  Penitential  Psalms  by  Innocent  III. ;  the
Exposition  of  the  Psalm  Afferte  (Ps.  xxix)  by  Richard  of
S.  Victor;  another  upon  Ps.  1.  by  Urban  II.  A  Commentary
on  the  Epistles  of  S.  Paul  is,  according  to  Possevin,  by
Bernard  of  Clavone,  an  Augustine  monk.  A  Commentary
on  the  Apocalypse  has  been  wrongly  attributed  by  Caramuel
to  Bernard,  which  Commentary,  being  placed  in  a  MS.
next  following  some  works  of  Bernard,  under  the  title  of
"  cujusdam  "  (of  a  certain  author),  Caramuel  read  "  ejus-
dem  "  (of  the  same  author),  and  so  ascribed  it  to  Bernard,
like  the  preceding.  I  am  convinced  that  with  the  exception
of  certain  Letters  which  have  not  been  yet  brought  to  light,
there  remain  no  important  works  of  Bernard  unpublished.
These  are  : — A  Letter  to  Hugh,  Abbot  of  Pontigny,  as
appears  from  the  first  paragraph  of  Letter  33,  addressed  to
the  same  Abbot ;  two  to  Innocent  II.  against  Peter  of
Besanfon,  from  Letter  195  ;  one  to  the  same  on  behalf  of
Peter  of  Pisa,  from  the  end  of  Letter  213.  We  learn  also
from  the  commencement  of  Letter  253  that  he  had  addressed


GENERAL PREFACE.  ig

many  Letters  to  the  same  Pontiff  on  behalf  of  the  introduc
tion  of  Premonstratensian  monks  into  the  Monastery  of  S.
Paul  at  Verdun.  There  is  also  in  Letter  203,  to  Atto,
reference  made  to  a  Letter  to  Ansellus,  sub-deacon  of
Troyes;  in  the  beginning  of  Letter  223,  to  Joscelin,  to  an
apologetic  Letter  to  Suger;  in  Letter  233,  to  the  same,  to
two  Letters  to  John  de  Buzay ;  in  the  end  of  Letter  284  to
Pope  Eugenius,  to  another  addressed  to  the  same  Pope  in
favour  of  the  Bishop  of  Claremont.  The  monk  Hermann
of  Tournay  speaks  also  of  a  Letter  which  Bernard  wrote  to
Pope  Eugenius  on  behalf  of  a  monastery  at  Tournay  (No.
H5).1  The  Letter  formerly  numbered  358,  now  376,  makes
mention  of  an  encyclical  Letter  against  duels,  addressed  to
the  Archbishops  of  Rheims  and  Sens,  the  Bishops  of
Soissons  and  Autun,  and  the  Counts  Theobald  and  Raoul.
Furthermore,  Peter  the  Venerable  repeats,  in  his  Letter  num
bered  388  among  those  of  Bernard,  some  words  of  a  Letter
which  the  holy  Doctor  had  written  on  behalf  of  a  certain
English  abbot,  "as  if  judgment  were  subverted,"  etc.,  which
I  do  not  remember  to  have  read  in  any  of  Bernard's  Letters.
XX.  Ordericus  Vitalis  also  mentions  a  Letter  of  Bernard
to  Natalis,  Abbot  of  Rebais,  on  behalf  of  the  monks  of
Utica,  whose  abbot,  named  Guarin,  was  begging  for  the
relics  of  S.  Evroult  from  Abbot  Natalis  : — "  Geoffrey  de
clared  that  he  had  the  intention  of  going  to  Clairvaux,  and
asked  him  to  go  thither  with  him,  to  which  he  consented
willingly.  They  came  them  both  together  to  Clairvaux
with  all  their  attendants.  They  wrere  received  hospitably  by
the  brothers  of  that  community,  who  strictly  observe  the
Rule  of  S.  Benedict.  They  asked  to  see  Dom  Bernard,
the  Abbot  of  that  monastery,  and  having  spoken  with  him
and  asked  of  him  many  questions,  they  found  in  him  great
wisdom.  He  replied  to  all  their  questions,  treated
eloquently  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  satisfied  all  their

1  Spicileg,  Tom.  ii.  p.  483.


20  GENERAL PREFACE.

wishes.  When  he  heard  of  the  cause  of  the  Religious  of
Utica,  he  kindly  came  to  the  aid  of  Abbot  Guarin,  and
wrote  a  persuasive  Letter  to  the  community  of  Rebais.  .  .  .
Abbot  Guarin  presented  this  Letter  of  the  venerable  Ber
nard  to  these  Religious,  who  received  it  with  pleasure,  and
willingly  determined  to  comply  with  the  request  made."
Thus  writes  Ordericus  in  his  sixth  book.

XXI.  Furthermore,  Ademar  of Angouleme says in  his
Chronicle,  when  treating  of  the  origin  of  the  Carthusians :

«  This  Order,  as  Bernard  bears  witness,  holds  the  first

place  among  ecclesiastical  Orders, not on  account  of  its
antiquity,  but  by  the  power  of  its  sanctity. Wherefore  he
calls  it  the  most  beautiful  column  of  the  Church,"  which
words  are  not  found  in  any  of  the  published  works  of  S.
Bernard.

XXII.  Finally,  John  Picard  cites  from  John de  Manburg
in  his  treatise  Concerning  the  manner  of  life  of  Regular
Canons,  a  letter  addressed  by  Bernard  to  Fulk,  from  which
Manburg  has  quoted these  words: — "Instead  of  wearing
black  or  grey  furs  round  the  neck,  they  wear  furs  coloured
purple  like  women." If  these  words  were  quoted  from  any
Letter  of  Bernard  it  has  not  been  yet  published,  but  in  the
second  Letter  from  Bernard  to  Fulk,  par.  1 1 ,  there  are  to  be
found  expressions  similar in sense,  although not  exactly
alike  in  words. It  is  the  same  in  the  passage  which  Picard
cites  also  from  Manburg  as  being  still  inedited. It  is  con
tained  in  substance in  the  de  Consideratione,  B. iv.  n. 12,
concerning  the  qualities  requisite  for  a  Cardinal.

This  is  all  that  it  seems  necessary  or  interesting  to  say
by  way  of  preface  to  this  new  edition  of  the  Letters  of  S.
Bernard.

§  II.  OF THE SANCTITY  AND LEARNING OF BERNARD,

AND  HIS  AUTHORITY  IN  THE  CHURCH.
XXIII. Before proceeding farther it will be well to
consider  the  two  titles  which  are  commonly  bestowed  upon


GENERAL PREFACE.  21

Bernard,  viz.,  that  he  is  called  Doctor  Mellifluus  (the
sweet-tongued  or  honied-worded  Doctor),  and  the  Last  of
'the  Fathers,  though  not  unequal  to  the  first.  The  title  of
Doctor  has  been  yielded  by  the  Church  to  those  whose
teaching  has  been  approved  by  its  general  voice,  particu
larly  when  that  teaching  is  united  with  sanctity  of  life.
She  gives  the  name  of  Fathers  to  those  whom  their
sanctity,  their  teaching,  and  at  the  same  time  their
antiquity,  unite  to  distinguish ;  teaching,  I  mean,  of  the
Holy  Scripture  and  of  the  tradition  of  the  Church,  rather
than  of  philosophical  reasonings.

Therefore  holy  men  illustrious  by  their  teaching  may  be
called  Doctors  immediately  after  their  death,  but  the  name
of  Fathers  is  reserved  for  those  whom  a  certain  antiquity
long  since  acknowledged  renders  venerable,  at  the  same
time  that  they  are  distinguished  by  a  method  of  treating
the  subjects  on  which  they  have  touched,  quite  different
from  the  method  of  philosophical  deduction.  Each  of  these
titles  of  honour  Bernard  has  deservedly  obtained.

As  for  the  first,  it  was  bestowed  upon  him  by  Pope
Alexander  III.,  even  in  the  very  Mass  of  his  canonization,
when  he  read  the  Gospel  reserved  exclusively  for  the  holy
Doctors,  and  commencing  by  these  words:  "  Yc  are  the
salt  of  the  earth"  etc.  (S.  Matt.  v.  13).  Pope  Innocent
III.  confirmed  that  title  of  honour  in  eloquent  words  in  the
Collect  which  he  composed  for  the  Festival  of  S.  Bernard,
and  in  which  he  is  called  "  The  Blessed  Abbot  Bernard  and
Illustrious  Doctor."1

The  appellative  of  Mellifluus  (whose  words  are  sweet  as
honey)  is  more  recent,  and  the  holy  Doctor  was  first  called
by  it  by  Theophilus  Reynauld  in  a  singular  little  book
which  is  entitled  the  "  Gallic  Bee  "  (Apis  Gallicana].  The
first  editors  of  his  works  who  gave  him  that  title  on  the
first  page  of  their  volumes  are — first,  the  editor  of  the

1 Doctor  Egregiw.


22  GENERAL PREFACE.

edition  of  Lyons  in  1508,  then  Jodocus  Clictoveus  in  1515,
and  also  the  two  monks  of  Clairvaux,  whom  I  have  already
highly  praised  ;  and  Horst  restored  the  use  of  the  same
name  after  it  had  fallen  into  neglect ;  but  among  all  his
praises  the  very  best  is  this  :  That  merely  his  name  at  the
head  of  his  works  is  a  title  sufficient  to  recommend  them.
There  can  be  no  praise  beyond  that  for  an  author  ;  but  if
there  is  any  other  epithet  that  befits  Bernard,  it  is  surely
this  of  OeoSiSafcros  (taught  of  God),  bestowed  upon  him  by
other  authors ;  since  the  knowledge  with  which  he  was
endued  seems  to  have  been  not  so  much  acquired  by
human  powers  as  infused  into  him  from  above.

XXIV.  That  he  was,  notwithstanding,  wanting  neither  in
labour  nor  industry  in  reading  and  studying  both  sacred  and
profane  authors  is  clear  from  the  manner  in  which  he  some
times  quotes  them.  Without  doubt,  he  had  learned  and
studied  profane  authors  in  his  youth  and  when  he  was  still
in  the  world ;  and  these  would  sometimes  come  back  to  his
memory  in  his  old  age.  As  to  theological  subjects,  he
studied  them  with  care  and  industry  when  he  became  a
monk.  How  extensive  and  profound  his  knowledge  of  them
was  may  be  gathered,  in  the  first  place,  from  two  of  his
Sermons  in  Cantica,  the  8oth  and  8  ist,  where  he  discourses
in  terms  so  just  and  so  elevated  upon  the  image  of  God,  in
the  word  and  in  the  soul,  and  on  the  homogeneity  of  the
Divine  Nature,  that  no  one  before  or  after  him  has  sur
passed  them.  A  similar  remark  must  be  made  upon  his
Letter  (190)  to  Pope  Innocent,  in  which  he  sets  forth
wonderfully  the  satisfaction  which  Christ  has  obtained  for
us  by  His  suffering  ;  and  his  knowledge  of  the  Canons,  as
shown  in  those  famous  Books  de  Consideratione,  is  incom
parable.  Hence  is  confirmed  that  saying  of  Leo  the  Great:
"  The  true  love  of  that  which  is  just  contains  within  itself
both  the  precepts  of  Apostles  and  the  authority  of  Canons."
Finally,  the  holy  Doctor  was  versed  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,


GENERAL PREFACE.  23

by  continual  perusal  of  them,  to  such  a  degree,  and  his
writings  show  so  plainly  everywhere  his  use  of  that  know
ledge,  that,  to  employ  the  words  of  Sixtus  of  Sienna,  they
may  be  called  truly  centos  from  the  sacred  volumes,  so
studded  are  they  everywhere  with  phrases  drawn  from  the
Old  and  New  Testament  as  to  form  a  jewelled  mosaic,  so
skilfully  and  aptly  introduced,  that  they  might  be  thought
to  be  suggested  by  the  subject.  And  if  it  is  not  becoming
to  make  use  of  the  Holy  Scripture  in  that  way  at  all  times,
and  upon  every  subject,  yet  it  can  hardly  be  disapproved
when  treating  of  sacred  things.  Upon  this  point  may  be
adduced  the  words  of  the  Apostle  Peter:  If  any  man  speak
let  him  speak  as  the  oracles  of  God  (i  S.  Peter  iv.  n).  It
may  be  said,  indeed,  that  Bernard  sometimes  employs
various  texts  of  Scripture  in  a  sense  unfounded  and  far
from  literal,  so  that  he  seems  rather  to  play  upon  the  words
quoted,  than  to  expound  their  real  sense ;  but  it  is  easy  to
reply  that,  there  being  in  Scripture  manifold  senses,  the  holy
man  believed  that  he  might  choose  that  sense  which  seemed
to  him  proper  to  edification,  especially  when  he  was  not
treating  of  any  doctrine  of  the  faith,  but  only  proposed  to
himself  to  enlarge  upon  some  pious  thought,  and  thereby
to  attract  the  attention  and  delight  of  his  hearers.

XXV.  That  S.  Bernard  was  not  only  versed  in  Holy
Scripture,  but  also  had  a  knowledge  of  the  writings  of  the
holy  Fathers,  as  extensive  as  his  numerous  occupations  had
permitted  him  to  obtain,  no  one  will  doubt  who  has
diligently  perused  his  writings.  He  names  them  from  time
to  time,  and  praises  their  sayings  ;  and  their  teaching  is
to  be  found  throughout  all  his  works.  Thus,  when  he  says
that  he  has  only  had  "  the  oaks  and  beeches  of  the  forest
for  masters"  (Life,  B.  i.  n.  23),  he  must  be  understood  to
speak  in  the  sense  that  he  himself  suggests  to  Cardinals  in
the  fourth  Book  de  Consideratione,  n.  12,  viz.,  that  "in  every
matter  we  ought  to  count  more  upon  prayer  than  upon


24  GENERAL PREFACE.

one's  own  industry  or  labour,"  which  Geoffrey  has  rightly
applied  to  Bernard  in  this  very  matter  (Life,  B.  iii. i). But
how  greatly  he  profited  from  the  reading  of  the  Fathers,
especially  from  S.  Augustine,  is  shown  easily  by  his  Treatise
de  Gratia  et  Libra  Arbitrio,  which  is  a  kind  of  learned  and
able  summary  of  Augustine's  teaching  on  that  subject. He
joins  Ambrose  to  Augustine  in  his Letter  n, or  rather  his
Treatise  addressed  to  Hugo  of  S.  Victor ;  and  he  adds  that
from  these  two  columns  of  the  Church  he  will  not  easily  be
drawn  away. He  praises  Athanasius  in  his  tenth  Treatise
against  Peter  Abaelard  ; and  not  unfrequently  Gregory  the
Great  also. Finally,  in  terminating  his  Homilies  de  Laudi-
bus  Virginis,  he  acknowledges  that  he  has  borrowed  many
things  from  the  Fathers.  It  is  a  wonderful  thing  indeed  that
the  holy  man,  though  suffering  under  so  many  complaints
and  such  weak  health,  though  distracted  by  so many  cares
and  duties,  not  only  those  belonging  to  the  community  (and
these  could  have  been  neither  few  nor  light  in  so  numerous
a  household  of  monks  as  that  over  which  he  presided),  but
also,  and  chiefly,  public  affairs,  about  which  he  was  con
sulted,  should  yet  have  been  able  either  to  read  so  many
books  or  to  succeed  in  the  composition  of  works  so  eloquent
and  so  learned  ; so  wonderful  indeed  that  no  one  can  doubt
that,  beyond  the noble nature and rare  intelligence  with
which  he  had  been  gifted  at  his  birth,  a  certain  assistance  of
Divine  wisdom  must  have  been  bestowed  upon  him  to  enable
him  to  speak,  act,  teach,  and  write  as  he  did. Thus  Geoffrey
reports  that  he  had  "  sometimes  acknowledged  that  when  in
meditation  or  prayer  he  had  seemed  to  see  the  whole  Scrip
ture  placed  and opened  before  his  eyes  "  (Life, B. iii.  n.
7). But he was accustomed to say  that  he  ascertained
better  the  meaning  of  the  Scriptures  "  by  drinking  from
the  original  fountain  itself,  than  from  the  streams  running
from  it,  that  is,  the  expositions  of  the  text ;  yet  he  used
to  peruse  pious  and  orthodox  expositors,  not  with  the  idea


GENERAL PREFACE.  25

of  preferring  his  own  opinion  to  theirs,  but  in  order  to  form
his  own  upon  theirs ;  and  following  faithfully  the  track
made  by  them,  he  too  used  to  quench  his  thirst  at  the
fountain  whence  they  had  drank  before  him"  (Ibid.  i.  24).
This  reverence  of  the  holy  Doctor  towards  the  ancient
Fathers  shines  forth  everywhere  in  his  writings,  as  in  Letter
98,  n.  i,  Serm.  v.  in  Cantica,  n.  6,  and  elsewhere.  He  had
leisure  to  devote  himself  to  the  study  of  them,  during
the  long  continued  malady  under  which  he  suffered,  and
which  obliged  him  during  the  early  years  of  his  office  of
Abbot  to  withdraw  himself  from  the  society  of  his
brethren,  and  to  live  as  a  private  person  in  the  monastery.
He  only  did  this  at  first,  according  to  the  account  of  Abbot
William,  in  obedience  to  the  express  command  of  William,
Bishop  of  Chalons,  and  of  the  Abbots  of  his  order;  but
afterwards  the  progress  of  the  disease  made  it  impossible
for  him  to  do  otherwise  (Ibid.  i.  33,  40).  Abbot  William
saw  him  when  he  was  relieved  of  the  management,  internal
and  external,  of  the  monastery,  "  rejoicing  to  be  able  to
think  of  nothing  but  God  and  the  salvation  of  his  own  soul,
and  enjoying,  as  it  were,  the  delights  of  Paradise."  Then
the  holy  man  discoursed  to  him  of  the  Canticles,  as  he  did
at  greater  length  later  on.  When  Bernard  had  recovered
a  little  health,  he  devolved  a  part  of  the  administration  of
the  monastery  upon  his  brother  Gerard,  which  left  him
sufficient  leisure  for  the  study  of  the  Holy  Scripture,  and  in
his  twenty-first  Sermon  in  Cantica  he  attributes  to  that
leisure  all  the  progress  that  he  had  made  in  his  spiritual
studies.  We  learn  from  Sermon  51,  n.  3,  on  the  same
subject,  that  these  were  his  occupations  ;  prayer,  reading,
composition,  meditation,  and  such  like.  It  was  in  such
pursuits  that  the  blessed  Father  spent  the  fifteen  years  of
his  life  which  elapsed  from  the  foundation  of  Clairvaux  to
the  schism  of  Peter  Leonis,  at  which  period,  being  brought
into  connection  with  great  public  events  and  questions  of


26  GENERAL PREFACE.

considerable  difficulty,  he  so  acquitted  himself  with  regard
to  them  as  to  excite  the  admiration  with  which  the  whole
of  Europe,  not  to  say  the  whole  world,  afterwards  regarded
him.

XXVI.  It  was  not  without  reason,  therefore,  that  Nicholas
Lefevre,  a  great  man  and  preceptor  of  Louis  the  Just,  was
accustomed  to  say,  as  we  are  told  by  Francis  Balbus  in  his
Life,  that  while  he  had  the  highest  admiration  for  all  the
Fathers,  he  especially  admired  the  divine  (divus]  Augustine,
whose  works  he  habitually  read,  and  among  more  recent
writers  the  divine  Bernard,  whom  he  called  the  Last  of  the
Fathers,  and  certainly  as  there  is  none  of  the  ancients  who
went  before  him  who  merited  better  than  Bernard  the
praise  of  being  second  to  Augustine,  so  there  is  none  of
those  who  came  after  him  ;  since  in  none  is  there  either  a
sanctity  made  more  illustrious  by  actions  and  even  by
miracles,  a  doctrine  more  pure,  a  severer  respect  for
tradition,  an  eloquence  more  splendid  in  speech  and  in
writing,  or  finally,  an  influence  more  widely  diffused  or
more  powerful.  To  use  the  words  of  William,  "  What  man
is  there  to  whose  will  as  well  the  highest  secular
authority,  as  the  highest  ecclesiastical,  deferred,  and  to
whose  advice  it  humbled  itself?  Proud  kings,  princes,  and
tyrants,  soldiers,  and  even  robbers  so  fear  and  even  rever
ence  him,  that  the  saying  may  seem  to  have  been  fulfilled,
which  we  read  in  the  Gospel  that  the  Lord  spoke  to  His
disciples  :  Behold  I  give  you  power  to  tread  upon  serpents
and  scorpions,  etc.  (S.  Luke  x.  19).  But  among  spiritual
persons  .  .  .  there  is  in  him  an  authority  of  quite  a
different  kind.  For  just  as  it  is  said  by  the  Prophet  con
cerning  those  sacred  Living  Beings,  that  when  there  was  a
Voice  from  the  firmament  that  was  over  their  heads,  they
stood  and  let  down  their  wings,  so  at  the  present  time
everywhere  in  the  world,  men  of  spiritual  faculty  when  they
hear  him  speak  or  teach  are  silent  themselves,  and  yield


GENERAL PREFACE.  27

the  precedence  to  him,  submitting  their  senses  and  their
intellect  to  his.  One  sees  a  proof  of  this  in  his  writings,
etc."  (Life,  B.  i.  n.  70).  Rightly,  therefore,  says  the
Monk  Caesar  Heisterbach,  that  his  authority  was  so  great
"  that  the  purple-clad  Fathers  of  the  Church,  the  kings  and
princes  of  the  world,  used  to  speak  through  the  mouth  of
Bernard  alone,  as  through  an  oracle  recognized  by  the  whole
world  (De  Miraculis,  B.  xiv.  c.  17).  This  estimation  in
which  the  holy  Doctor  was  held  has  continued  even  to  our
own  day,  as  is  shown  by  the  testimonies  of  illustrious  men
concerning  him,  among  whom  Bartholomseus  a  Martyribus,
the  pious  Bishop  of  Braga,  a  student  and  admirer  of
Bernard,  ought  to  hold  no  small  place.

XXVII.  What  drew  to  him,  in  his  life -time,  so  great
authority  in  the  eyes  of  all,  was  his  extraordinary  humility,
even  in  the  midst  of  honours.  He  himself  ranked  this
virtue  higher  than  any  (De  Laudibus  Virg.,  Horn.  iv.  n.  9).
This  is  what  Ernald  says  :  "  His  life  is  full  of  things
admirable  and  worthy  of  praise.  Some  admire  his  teaching,
others  his  character,  others  his  miracles,  and  I,"  he  says,
"  render  honour  to  all  these.  But  there  is  something
which  I  place  above  them  all,  and  to  which  I  render  more
willing  admiration  ;  it  is  that  being  a  vessel  of  election,  and
boldly  upholding  the  Saviour's  name  before  nations  and
kings,  seeing  himself  obeyed  by  all  the  princes  of  the  world,
and  the  Bishops  in  every  nation  listening  for  his  opinion,
his  advice,  by  a  singular  privilege,  reverenced  by  the
Roman  Church  herself ;  nations  and  kingdoms  being  sub
jected  to  him,  as  if  by  a  general  delegation  ;  and  when  his
actions  and  his  words  were  supported  even  by  miracles,
which  is  a  thing  still  more  glorious,  he  was  never  thrown
off  his  balance,  never  thought  of  himself  more  highly  than
he  ought.  On  the  contrary,  he  always  thought  humbly  of
himself,  considered  himself  not  the  author,  but  the  in
strument,  of  mighty  works ;  and  when  in  the  universal


28  GENERAL PREFACE.

judgment  he  was  raised  above  all,  he  was  the  lowest  of  all
in  his  own"  (Life,  B.  ii.  n.  25).  "  His  heartfelt  humility
overcame  in  him  the  elevation  forced  upon  him,  nor  was  the
whole  world  able  to  do  so  much  to  exalt  him,  as  he  to  keep
himself  humble"  (Ibid.,  in.  22).  Nor  did  such  profound
sentiments  of  humility  lower  him  in  the  opinion  of  others,
but  on  the  contrary  raised  him  the  more,  and  "  the  more
modest  and  humble  he  showred  himself,  the  more  important
were  the  services  he  rendered  to  the  people  of  God  in  the
knowledge  of  their  salvation"  (Ibid.,  iii.  n.  8).

XXVIII.  To  the  sanctity  of  the  Father  Abbot  responded
in  his  sons  the  sentiments  of  piety  and  perfection  of  life,
which  redounded  to  his  glory.  The  entire  Roman  Court
was  a  witness  to  this,  when  it  accompanied  Pope  Innocent
to  Clairvaux.  "  The  Bishops  wept  and  the  Pontiff  himself.
All  wondered  at  the  gravity  of  demeanour  in  that  com
munity  on  an  occasion  so  solemn,  so  happy  for  them.
Their  eyes  were  fixed  upon  the  ground,  nor  wandered  in
curiosity  around  the  assembly.  It  might  have  been  thought
that  their  eyes  were  closed  ;  they  saw  no  one,  although
they  were  themselves  seen  by  all.  The  Roman1  saw
nothing  that  was  precious  in  that  monastery ;  no  costly
furniture  met  the  eye.  They  saw  nothing  in  the  chapel
but  the  bare  walls.  The  only  thing  that  ambition  could
envy  was  the  characters  of  the  brethren,  and  this  was  not  a
costly  treasure  for  the  brethren,  since  piety  is  not  diminished
when  it  is  shared  by  another"  (Ibid.,  B.  ii.  6).  It  was  on
these  columns  that  the  authority  of  Bernard  was  reared,
and  by  these  guards  that  it  was  protected.  "  But  the
sweetness  of  his  character  tempered  the  austerity  of  his
life,  and  his  sanctity  preserved  his  authority,  as  if  he  had
brought  from  heaven  to  make  visible  among  men  a  marvel
of  purity  more  than  human,  and  sought  for  in  the  presence
of  God"  (Life,  B.  iii.  21  ;  B.  i.  28).  His  sanctity  and  purity

' Pontiff.


GENERAL PREFACE.  29

were  attested  by  miracles  which  were  so  remarkable  and
famous  that  his  enemies  themselves  acknowledge  them,  so
numerous  and  frequent  that  Bernard  himself  wras  struck
with  wonder,  as  Geoffrey  testifies  (Life,  B.  iii.  20).

XXIX.  As  his  influence  was  so  great  we  cannot  wonder
that  he  was  able,  as  William  reports,  "  to  revive  the  ancient
religious  fervour in  the  monastic  order" (Life, B. i.  42),
and,  according  to  the  narrative  of  Geoffrey,  "  to  correct  the
corrupted  manners  of  Catholics,  to  restrain  the  violence  of
schismatics,  and  to  confound  the  error  of  heretics  "  (Life,
B.  iii.  12). With  what  power  he  did  all  these  things  is
shown  by  the  history  of  his  life,  by  his  own  writings,  and,
most  of  all,  by  his  Letters.

§  III.  WITH  WHAT  SUCCESS  BERNARD  LABOURED  IN
REFORMING  THE  LIVES  OF  THE  CLERGY,  THE  MONKS,
AND  THE  LAY  PEOPLE.

XXX.  This holy man grieved over and deplored the
morals  of  his  age,  which  were  everywhere  corrupted, and
particularly  those  of  the  ministers  of  the  Church,  of  whom
he  brought  many  to  a  better  life. Such  was  the  influence
of his words and of his preaching that he altogether
renewed  the  appearance  of  the  Church  and  of  the  clergy,
particularly  in  France,  and  restored  it  to  its  ancient  virtue
and earnestness. It  was to him that the elevation of
Eugenius,  a  very  holy  man,  to  the  See  of  Rome  was  due;
and  he  instructed  and  animated  in  him  all  Roman  Pontiffs
to  the  right  and  legitimate  administration  of  the  duties  of
their  charge  by  the  admirable  books  which  he  put  forth  de
Consider atione. Among Bishops he recalled Henry of
Sens  and  Stephen  of  Paris  from  living  as  courtiers,  to  a
manner  of  life  worthy  of  their  Episcopal  order; many  also
of his own Religious he caused to be elevated to the
Episcopate  to  serve  as  an  example  to  other  Bishops  (Life,
B.  ii.  49). To  all of  the  clerical  order  he  has  given  salu-


30  GENERAL PREFACE.

tary  warning  in  his  sermon  addressed  to  clerics  de  Conver-
sione.

Concerning  the  Episcopal  office  and  character,  Letter  42,
to  Henry,  Bishop  of  Sens,  may  first  be  consulted.  It  is
counted  among  the  Treatises  and  placed  now  in  Vol.  ii.
Rightly,  therefore,  in  the  History  of  the  Bishops  of  Verdun,
is  Bernard  spoken  of  as  "  he  on  whose  counsels  the  Church
of  France,  and  the  Realm  of  France,  too,  are  firmly  founded
at  the  present  day"  (Spicileg.,  Vol.  ii.  p.  311).

XXXI.  He  had,  in  speaking,  an  extraordinary  charm,  "  of
which  his  pen,  however  elegant  it  might  be,  could  not  repro
duce  the  warmth  and  sweetness." God  had  bestowed  upon
him the gift of speech, equally learned, pleasing, and
persuasive. "  He  knew  how  to  adapt  what  he  had  to  say
to  the  need  of  the  hearer,  whether  consolation  was  needed
or  entreaty,  exhortation  or  blame  ; he  knew  when  and  by
whom  each  was  required,  and  this  is  apparent  even  now  in
reading  his  writings,  though  they  are  far  from  having  the
same  effect  as  his  words  had  upon  those  who  heard  them  "
(Life,  iii.  7). If  his  writings are  able  to  produce  such  an
impression  upon  the reader,  how  much  greater  must  his
words  have  done  upon  those  who  heard  them  ? It  is  not
wonderful,  therefore,  that  God  should  have  done  so  many
and  such  great  things  by  his  means  for  the  salvation  of  men
of  his  time.

XXXII.  But  who  could  possibly  recount  all the  efforts
that he made to resuscitate the ancient  fervour of  the
monastic  orders  ? Some  idea  of  this  may  be formed  by
going  through  his  admirable  letters  and  writings  upon  this
subject,  his  Book  de  Prascepto  et  Dispensatione,  his  Apology
to Abbot William, and various Sermons. In these he
encourages  monks  to  retain  with  care,  and  to  re-establish
with zeal, the original institutions of the Fathers of
monachism, that is, works of penitence, mortifications,
modesty  and  humility,  poverty,  contempt  of  the  world,  love


GENERAL PREFACE.  31

of  solitude  and  silence,  and  zeal  for  continual  advance,  upon
which  he  saw  that  the  whole  monastic  life  turned  and
depended.  Hence  Peter  the  Venerable  calls  him,  not  un
deservedly,  "  the  strong  and  milk-white  column,  on  which
the  edifice  of  the  monastic  order  is  supported,"  and  "  the
brilliant  star,  whose  glowing  and  luminous  rays  give  light,
as  it  were — that  is,  by  his  example  and  his  preaching — not
only  to  monks,  but  the  whole  of  the  Latin  Church  in  his
time  "  (Letter  228,  n.  30).

XXXIII.  Laurence  of  Liege,  in  his  Lives  of  the  Bishops
of  Verdun,  compares  the  Orders  of  Citeaux  and  of  Pre-
montre  to  the  two  Cherubim  which  shadowed  the  Mercv

j

Seat ;  one  of  those,  that  of  Citeaux,  under  the  guidance  of
Bernard,  that  Abbot  of  holy  memory,  recalled  to  the  original
rule  of  Apostolic  life  the  monastic  Order  wrhich  in  his  time
had  almost  lapsed.  ''  That  Order  of  Citeaux,"  he  continues,
"  spread,  in  the  space  of  three  years,  into  as  many  as  two
hundred  abbeys  of  great  reputation,  merit,  and  number  of
Religious,  and  began  to  be  diffused  even  among  the
barbarous  Sarmatians  and  the  farthest  Scythians  "  (Spicileg.,
V.  xii.  p.  325).  So  powerful  and  widespread  was  the  repu
tation  of  Bernard  for  sanctity  and  that  of  his  disciples  !
Hence  it  came  about  that  Bernard  himself  was  held  to  be,
as  it  were,  the  founder  of  the  Cistercian  Order,  of  which  he
was,  in  fact,  the  child  and  scholar.  In  his  time  the  Cistercian
Order  took  the  name  of  Clairvaux  from  his  monastery,  and
men  began  afterwards  even  to  call  the  Order  by  the  name
of  S.  Bernard,  although  Innocent  VIII.  had  forbidden  that  in
his  letter  of  union  between  the  two  monasteries  of  Clairvaux
and  Citeaux.  Hence  in  the  letter  of  Albero,  Bishop  of
Verdun,  cited  by  Laurence  of  Liege,  of  whom  we  have
spoken  above,  the  abbots  of  Trois-Fontaines,  and  of
Caladia  are  regarded  as  being  of  the  Order  of  Clairvaux
(loc.  cit.,  p.  222),  and  Peter  de  Celles  speaks  of  "  the  Order
of  Citeaux  or  Clairvaux"  in  B.  i.  Letter  24.  So  in  a  letter


32  GENERAL PREFACE.

of  Samson,  Bishop  of  Rheims,  he  makes  mention  more  than
once  of  the  Order  of  Clairvaux  (Letter  435).  It  is  true
that  by  these  words,  "  the  Order  of  Clairvaux,"  the  single
monastery  at  Clairvaux  with  those  dependent  upon  it  is
intended  rather  than  the  whole  Order.

XXXIV.  It  does  not  seem  necessary  to  explain  in  this
place  how  austere  and  rigorous  was  the  life  of  the
Religious  of  Citeaux  or  Clairvaux  under  Bernard,  since  that
is  shown  with  the  greatest  exactness  in  the  letters  and
writings  of  Bernard,  as  well  as  in  his  Life,  especially  in
B.  i.  5,  in  which  the  first  inhabitants  of  Clairvaux  are  said
to  have  served  God  "  in  poorness  of  spirit,  in  hunger  and
thirst,  in  cold  and  nakedness,  and  in  many  watches ;  fre
quently  they  had  no  food  except  the  leaves  of  the  beech  tree
boiled,  and  bread  made  of  barley,  vetches,  and  millet."
Bernard  himself  in  his  Letter  to  Robert  (n.  i.)  says  that  the
delicacies  of  the  Monks  of  Citeaux  were  "  vegetables,  beans,
pottage,  and  coarse  bread  with  water."  Fastred  makes
similar  statements  in  his  Letter,  which  may  be  read  among
those  of  Bernard.  Stephen  of  Tournay  declares  (Letter  72)
that  "so  great  is  their  frugality  in  food  that  they  use  only
these  two  dishes — either  beans  or  pulse  from  the  field,  cab
bage  or  vegetables  from  the  garden.  As  for  fish  they  use
it  so  rarely  that  scarcely  more  than  the  name  of  it  is  known
among  them."  Many  more  details  are  given  by  the  same
author  and  by  Peter  of  Celles.  This  austerity  of  the
Order  was  kept  up  not  only  to  the  end  bf  the  twelfth
century,  as  appears  from  Peter  of  Blois  (Letter  82),  but
even  beyond  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth,  according  to
James  de  Vitry,  who  says  of  them  :  "  Meat  they  do  not  eat
except  in  severe  illness,  and  they  commonly  abstain  even
from  the  use  of  fish,  eggs,  milk,  and  cheese."  (Hist.
Orient,  et  Occid.  c.  13.)  We  see  the  same  severity  of  life
revived  even  in  our  own  day  in  France  in  the  pious  monks  of
Notre  Dame  de  la  Trappe,  and  in  those  who  have  imitated


GENERAL PREFACE.  33

them,  who  by  the  purity  and  austerity  of  their  life,  by
their  love  of  solitude,  their  silence,  their  labour,  and  other
religious  virtues,  show  that  to  be  possible  in  fact,  which  we
read  of,  but  scarcely  believe,  of  Bernard  and  his  disciples.

XXXV.  James  deVitry  adds  in  the  following  chapter  that
women,  who  by  reason  of  the  weakness  of  their  sex had
not  dared  "from the  beginning of  the Order" to carry
austerity to such a degree of severity, did at length
imitate  this  example. Even  in  the  lifetime  of  Bernard  the
female  sex  was  not  altogether  a  stranger  to  the rigorous
observance of  the Rule ;  as  we  learn from Hermann, a
monk of  Laon, who  says in  his  Book  of  the  Miracles of
the  B.  Virgin  (B.  iii.  c.  17)  that  there  was  near  Laon  a  little
convent  of  virgins  of  the  Cistercian observance,  which  the
Bishop Bartholomew had founded, in which the nuns,
under  their  Abbess Guiberga, "  had renounced  the  use  of
garments  of  linen  and  the  use  of  furs,  and  used  only  tunics
of wool, which  they  had spun  and  woven themselves  ; "
and  that  they  cultivated  the earth,  clearing  the  woodland
with axe and hoe, tearing out brambles and thorns,
labouring  with  their own hands, seeking in  silence  their
daily  bread,  and imitating  in all respects the life  of  the
monks  of  Clairvaux.

XXXVI.  It  would  be  too  long  to  adduce  the  names  of  all
the illustrious persons, of both  one  and  the other  sex,
whom  we  know  to  have  been induced  by  Bernard  to  enter
the  monastic  life. Of such  were  Henry,  son  of Louis  VI.
King  of  France,  Ermengarde  Duchess  of  Brittany,  Adelais,
Duchess of Lorraine, and innumerable men and  women
besides, but it is no less true and admirable that he
persuaded  men  who  remained  in  the  world  to  adopt  a  pious
and religious habit of life. Beyond all princes Count
Theobald  attached  himself  to  him,  put  himself  and  all  his
resources  at  the  disposal of  the monastery  of  Clairvaux,
put  his  very  soul  into  the  hands  of  the  Abbot,  and,  laying

VOL.  I.  3


34  GENERAL PREFACE.

down  his  princely  dignity,  showed  himself  among  the
servants  of  God  as  a  fellow-servant  and  not  a  lord,  so  that
he  would  obey  in  all  things  whatsoever  the  lowest  in  the
house  had  demanded  of  him  (Life,  ii.  52.)  Abbot  Ernald,
from  whom  we  have  quoted  these  words,  is  a  witness  how
much  so  great  a  prince  was  able  to  do  at  the  advice  and
entreaty  of  Bernard,  both  in  constructing,  endowing,  and
assisting  monasteries,  in  relieving  the  poor,  and  in  the
discharge  of  his  high  duties  as  sovereign,  and  Bernard's
Letters  testify  to  the  same  thing.  We  learn  also  from  the
1 1 8th  Letter  of  Bernard  that  Beatrice,  a  lady  as  dis
tinguished  by  her  piety  as  her  birth,  was  glad  to  emulate
the  pious  example  of  Theobald.  Lastly,  I  may  cite  as  an
example  how  great  was  the  influence  which  Bernard
exercised  in  correcting  the  lives  of  men ;  the  con
version  of  William,  Duke  of  Aquitaine,  whom  he  changed
from  a  determined  schismatic  to  be  a  most  obedient
and  pious  prince.  To  sum  up  all  in  a  few  words
with  Geoffrey :  "  What  crimes  has  he  not  condemned ;
what  hatreds  has  he  not  composed  ;  what  scandals  has  he
not  put  an  end  to  ;  what  schisms  has  he  not  extinguished  ;
what  heresies  has  he  not  confuted  ! "  But  these  two  last
subjects,  viz.,  the  schisms  and  the  heresies,  require  from  us
special  description.

§  IV. OF THE SCHISM OF ANACLETUS, WHICH WAS

PUT AN END TO BY S. BERNARD.

XXXVII.  Although  Baronius  and  other  ecclesiastical
historians  have  written  much  concerning  the  schism  which
after  the  death  of  Honorius  II.,  in  1130,  arose  between
Innocent  and  Anacletus,  there  still  remain  points  requiring  a
fuller  explication,  which  I  shall  endeavour  to  supply  from
my  reading  of  ancient  documents,  so  as  to  illustrate  the
Letters  of  Bernard  upon  this  subject.  And  that  we  may
proceed  in  due  order  we  have  first  to  inquire  who  or  what


GENERAL PREFACE.  35

before  the  schism  were  Gregory,  Cardinal  of  S.  Angelo,
and  Peter  Leonis  (for  these  were  the  original  names  of
Innocent  and  Anacletus).  Then  we  will  examine  with  care
the  election  of  Innocent,  its  circumstances  and  conditions,
and  the  opposition  of  Anacletus,  and,  lastly,  the  con
sequence  following  from  all  these  facts.

XXXVIII.  Peter  Leonis,  a  Roman  of  the  Leonine  family,
was  at  first  a  monk  at  Cluny,  and  was  by  Paschal  II.  (if  we
may  believe  Onuphrius)  created  Cardinal  deacon,  with  the
title  of  SS.  Cosmas  and  Damian  ;  afterwards  he  was  created
by  Callistus  II.  Cardinal  presbyter  of  S.  Maria  trans  Tiberim,
title  of  Callistus,  in  1120.  We  learn  from  the  Chronicle  of
Maurigny  "that  this  Peter  was  son  of  Peter  who  was  son  of
Leo.  But  Leo,  when  he  made  his  passover^  that  is  when
he  was  converted  from  Judaism  to  Christianity,  was  baptized
by  Leo  (Leo.  IX.)  and  had  the  honour  to  receive  his  name."
"This  man,"  that  is  to  say  the  convert  Leo,  "because  he
was  very  learned,  attained  to  great  honour  in  the  Court  of
Rome.  He  had  a  son  named  Peter  who  afterwards  acquired
great  power  and  reputation.  About  that  time  began
between  the  Sovereign  of  Germany,  who  was  by  succession
from  Charles  the  Great  Patrician  of  Rome,  and  the  Roman
Church,  that  most  violent  quarrel  respecting  investitures.
In  the  war  which  followed  that  man  Leo  showed  himself  so
strenuous  in  arms,  so  provident  in  counsel,  and  so  faithful
to  the  Roman  Church  that  the  Pope  honoured  him  with  a
particular  friendship,  and  confided  to  him,  with  the  defence
of  the  other  fortifications  of  Rome,  the  guard  of  the  Tower
of  Crescentius,  a  kind  of  strong  castle  which  resembled  a
second  Rome,  and  which  is  constructed  on  the  right  bank
of  the  Tiber  and  at  the  head  of  the  bridge  which  is  thrown
across  the  river.  From  thence  his  greatness  was  wonder
fully  increased  ;  his  reputation  became  every  day  higher,
and  he  grew  continually  in  riches,  possessions,  and  honours."

1  Pascha. There  is  a  kind  of  play  upon  the  word  here. — [E.]


36  GENERAL PREFACE.

I  have  quoted  this  passage  in  full,  since  our  view  of  what
was  done  will  depend  in  great  measure  upon  the  descent
of  Peter,  his  Jewish  origin,  his  power,  and  to  recall  the
name  of  the  tower  of  Crescentius  (which  they  call  the
Castle  of  S.  Angelo),  in  which  Anacletus  found  a  safe
asylum.  The  author  of  this  Chronicle  continues  :  "  Among
the  numerous  children  of  each  sex  of  which  this  kind  of
Antichrist  boasted  must  be  counted  this  Peter  of  whom  we
are  speaking  now  ;  he  is  reported  in  a  letter  to  have  been
called  by  some  '  the  precursor  of  Antichrist.'  ):  I  believe,
however,  that  he  was  not  called  thus  until  after  the  great
event  of  his  life  and  the  consequences  which  followed  from
it.  "  He  repaired,"  continues  our  author,  "  to  France,  and
pursued  his  studies  in  Paris  ;  and  when  he  was  returning
into  his  own  country  he  assumed  the  monastic  habit  at
Cluny,  that  very  rich  and  holy  community.  After  having
practised  there  for  a  certain  time  the  rules  of  a  religious
life,  he  was  recalled  to  the  Court  of  Pope  Paschal  II.  at  the
request  of  his  father ;  and  was  made  Cardinal  in  the  time
of  Pope  Callistus  with  the  same  Gregory  who  afterwards
became  Pope  Innocent  II.  Then  he  was  sent  into  France
to  hold  councils  at  Chartres  and  Beauvais."  There  is  no
mention  here  of  the  title  of  Cardinal  deacon,  which,  accord
ing  to  Onuphrius,  he  had  received  from  Pope  Paschal.  On
this  matter  the  authority  of  the  Chronographer  of  Maurigny
is  the  better,  as  he  was  a  contemporary  of  Peter  Leonis.

XXXIX.  Gregory  was,  it  is  said,  created  Cardinal  deacon,
with  the  title  of  S.  Angelo,  by  Urban  II.,  then  sent  into
Gaul  as  Legate  by  Callistus  II.  with  Peter  Leonis  in
1124,  and  proceeded  with  him  to  Seez,  in  Neustria,  as
Ordericus  reports.1  This  is  how  Vincent  describes  the
legation  : — "  The  most  excellent  Cardinals,  Gregory  and
Peter  Leonis,  between  whom  later  on  there  was  a  schism
as  to  the  Papacy,  having  been  sent  into  France,  performed

1 Ord.,  xii.  p.  877.


GENERAL PREFACE.  37

their  commission  at  Limoges,  and  during  that  time  made  a
visit  to  the  man  of  God,  Stephen."1  Duchesne  reports
that  they  both  attached  their  signatures  to  the  constitution
of  Abbot  Suger  in  1125  as  Legates  in  these  terms  : — "I,
Peter,  Cardinal  presbyter  and  Legate  of  the  Apostolic  See,
approve  and  confirm.  I,  Gregory,  Cardinal  deacon  of  S.
Angelo  and  Legate  of  the  Apostolic  See,"  etc.2  At  the
same  time  Bernard  wrote  many  epistles  to  a  certain
Cardinal  deacon  named  Peter,  who  was  also  Legate  ;  they
are  numbered  97  and  following.  This  Peter  I  once
supposed,  with  Manrique,  to  have  been  Peter  Leonis.  But
since  that  Peter  to  whom  Bernard  writes  appears  to  have
been  Cardinal  deacon,  not  presbyter,  these  letters  cannot
have  been  addressed  to  Peter  Leonis,  who  was  at  that  time
Cardinal  priest,  as  we  gather  from  the  story  of  Onuphrius
and  from  some  other  writers,  as  well  as  from  the  signature
of  Peter  himself,  which  I  have  reported  above,  and  from  the
testimony  of  Suger,  which  I  am  about  to  adduce.  Perhaps
this  Peter,  Cardinal  deacon  and  Legate,  to  whom  Bernard
addressed  the  Letters  we  have  referred  to,  was  the  same
who  came  into  Gaul  by  the  command  of  Pope  Honorius
against  Pontius,  the  deposed  Abbot  of  Cluny,  and  his
supporters ;  of  which  step  Peter  the  Venerable  speaks
thus  : — "  The  venerable  Pope  Callistus  of  whom  I  have
written  above  had  then  departed  this  life,  and  Pope
Honorius  was  his  worthy  successor.  He  at  the  news  of
the  violent  disputes  at  Cluny  sent  as  Legate  de  latere  the
lord  Cardinal  Peter,  with  whom  was  joined  Hubald,  Primate
of  Lyons,  and  he  condemned  with  a  terrible  anathema
Pontius  and  all  his  supporters,  who  were  then  called
Pontians."  But  it  is  not  easy  to  decide  of  what  title  this  Peter
was  Cardinal,  for  there  were  more  Cardinals  of  that  name
about  that  time  besides  Peter  Leonis,  namely,  Peter,  Bishop
of  Porto  ;  Peter  of  Pisa,  of  the  title  of  S.  Susanna ;  Peter

1  Life  of  Stephen  de  Grandmonl,  B.  ii.  49.  2  Chesnius,  iv.  p.  547.


38  GENERAL PREFACE.

of  Burgundy,  of  the  title  of  S.  Marcellus  ;  Peter,  Cardinal  of
S.^quitius,  who  was  promoted  in  1125  in  the  first  creation
of  Cardinals  by  Honorius ;  Peter,  Cardinal  presbyter  of  S.
Anastasia  in  the  following  year  ;  and,  lastly,  Peter,  Cardinal
deacon,  of  the  title  of  S.  Adrian,  two  years  later.  But  the
Letters  of  Bernard  seem  to  have  been  written  before  the
creation  of  these  two.1

XL.  In  the  meantime  Pope  Honorius  died,  in  the  middle
of  February,  1130.  The  Chronicle  of  Maurigny  makes  this
date  1 1 29,  since  it  counts  the  year  in  the  French  manner,
beginning  from  Easter.  "  Then,"  says  the  same  author,
"  the  Cardinals  who  were  present  at  Rome  with  the
Chancellor  Haimeric,  and  had  been  present  at  the  last
moments  of  Honorius,  set  over  themselves  a  certain
Gregory,"  him,  that  is  to  say,  whom  we  have  just  now
mentioned,  "  a  man  distinguished  for  knowledge  and  piety,
and  clothe  him,  a  little  too  hastily  as  is  said  by  some,  in
the  Pontifical  insignia.  They  say  that  this  wras  done  by  a
dispensation,  so  that  they  might  frustrate  the  intrigues  of
a  certain  Peter  who  seemed  to  be  aspiring  to  the  Papacy
by  secular  means.  This  was  Peter,  son  of  Peter,  son  of
Leo,"  and  so  on  as  I  have  related  above  concerning  him.
Suger  explains  the  circumstances  very  clearly  in  his  Life  of
Louis  the  Fat,  where  he  says  :  "  At  the  death  of  Honorius
the  elder  and  wiser  dignitaries  of  the  Roman  Church,  for
the  purpose  of  avoiding  any  tumult  in  the  Church,
agreed  that  this  important  election  should  take  place  in
common,  according  to  the  Roman  custom,  in  the  Church  of
S.  Mark,  and  not  elsewhere."  But  "those  Cardinals  whom
duty  or  personal  intimacy  retained  around  Honorius,  not
daring  to  assemble  in  that  place  through  fear  of  the  Roman
population,  who  were  in  a  state  of  tumult,  elected  as
Pontiff,  before  the  decease  of  Honorius  was  generally
known,  Gregory,  Cardinal  deacon  of  S.  Angelo,  a  person  of

1  Milman  (Lat.  Christ,  iv.  300  note)  expresses  a  doubt  whether  S.  Bernard's
correspondent  was  not,  after  all,  Peter  Leonis,  notwithstanding  Mabillon's
argument :  but  apparently  without  reason. — [E.]


GENERAL PREFACE.  39

high  character.  But  those  who  favoured  the  party  of
Peter  Leonis,  having  invited  others  according  to  the  agree
ment  in  the  Church  of  S.  Mark,  assembled  there  ;  and
when  the  death  of  the  lord  Pope  was  known  they  elected
by  vote  the  same  Peter  Leonis,  Cardinal  presbyter,  with  the
consent  of  many  Bishops,  Cardinals,  clergy,  and  Roman
nobles,  and  thus  was  this  pernicious  schism  caused.  The
election  of  Innocent  was,  therefore,  the  first  in  date,
but  it  was  made  hastily  and  without  the  attendance  of  all
the  electors.  But,"  continues  Suger,  "  as  the  party  of
Peter  Leonis  prevailed  at  Rome,  both  by  the  influence  of
his  family  and  by  the  favour  of  the  Roman  nobility,"  Innocent
left  Rome,  embarked  for  France,  and  "  sending  messengers
to  King  Louis,"  entreated  his  assistance.  Therefore  Louis
summoned  at  Etampes  "  a  Council  of  Archbishops,  Bishops,
Abbots,  and  Religious  in  order  to  inquire  not  so  much
concerning  the  election  as  concerning  the  person  elected."
This  Council  declared  for  Innocent,  under  the  influence  of
Bernard,  in  whose  judgment  the  whole  of  the  Council
coincided  by  their  vote,  as  Ernald  declares  (Life,  B.  ii.  c.
i).  In  consequence  of  this  Suger,  as  he  himself  reports,
was  commanded  by  the  King  to  go  to  meet  Innocent  at  the
Abbey  of  Cluny,  whose  Abbot,  Peter  the  Venerable,  had,
with  his  monks,  declared  for  Innocent,  although  Anacletus
had  formerly  been  a  monk  there,  as  I  shall  note  afterwards
upon  Letter  126.  The  King  himself,  with  the  Queen  and
his  children,  went  to  meet  the  Pope  as  far  as  the  Benedic
tine  Abbey  of  Fleury,  where  "  he  prostrated  himself  at  his
feet,  as  if  doing  reverence  at  the  sepulchre  of  Peter."
Following  his  example,  Henry,  King  of  England,  came  like
wise  "to  Chartresto  meet  Innocent,  and  devoutly  prostrated
himself  at  his  feet  "  and  promised  him  obedience  for  him
self  and  his  subjects.  But  Innocent  "in  the  course  of  his
visitation  to  the  Church  of  France  arrived  in  Lorraine.
The  Emperor  Lothair  came  to  meet  him  in  the  city  of
Liege  with  an  enormous  attendance  of  Archbishops,


40  GENERAL PREFACE.

Bishops,  and  dignitaries  of  his  realm,  and  in  the  midst  of
the  great  square  before  the  cathedral  church,  as  if  he  had
been  the  Pope's  equerry,  approaching  him  respectfully  on
foot  in  the  midst  of  his  procession,  he  kept  off  with  one
hand  the  crowd  with  a  rod,  and  with  the  other  he  led  by
the  bridle  the  white  horse  on  which  the  Pope  was  mounted,
like  a  servant  conducting  his  lord.  Then,  as  the  ground
was  sloping,  he  supported  and  almost  carried  him,  and  thus
greatly  increased  the  dignity  of  His  Paternity  (the  Pope)
in  the  eyes  of  all."  All  this  took  place  in  1130.  Although
Suger  says  nothing  here  of  Bernard,  we  know  from  Ernald
that  he  was  a  constant  companion  of  Innocent's  journey
throughout  France.

XLI.  Before  going  on  to  other  subjects  it  will  not  be  out
of  place  to  remark  here  what  took  place  at  Liege.  The
Annals  of  Magdebourg,  or  Saxon  MSS.,  inform  us  under
the  year  1131:  "The  Sunday  before  Mid-Lent,  March
22nd,  was  held  at  Liege  a  very  distinguished  assembly  of
Bishops  and  Princes,  thirty-six  in  number,  in  presence  of
the  Apostolic  lord  Innocent,  of  the  Emperor  Lothair,  with
the  Empress,  where  many  wise  decisions  were  made  for  the
good  both  of  the  Church  and  of  the  State.  There  also
Otto,  Bishop  of  Halberstadt,  who  had  been  deprived  of  his
See  three  years  before,  was  restored  to  it  by  the  interces
sion  of  the  Emperor  and  the  Princes.  Ernald  reports  that
in  that  assembly  was  brought  forward  also  the  question  of
investitures,  which  at  length  Lothair,  by  the  influence  of
Bernard,  restored  to  the  Church.  This  Council  was  preceded
by  a  synod  at  Wissembourg,  as  one  of  the  authors  of  the
Annals  of  Magdebourg  contemporary  with  these  events
asserts.  There  was  in  the  month  of  October  a  Council  of
sixteen  Bishops  assembled  at  Wissembourg  by  the  Emperor,
at  which  was  present  the  Archbishop  of  Ravenna,  as  Legate
of  the  Apostolic  See,  where  Gregory,  who  as  Innocent  had
prevailed  over  Peter  Leonis  in  the  election  of  a  Pope,  was


GENERAL PREFACE.  41

recognized  and  confirmed  by  the  Emperor  Lothair,  and  all
there  present.

XLII.  After  the  assembly  at  Liege  Innocent  returned
into  France  (as  Suger  relates)  and  passed  the  feast  of
Easter  at  S.  Denis.  "  Three  days  after  Easter  he  went  to
Paris,  and  then  when  he  had  spent  some  time  in  visiting
the  churches  of  France,  and  in  supplying  his  penury  from
their  abundant  wealth,  he  chose  to  take  up  his  abode  at
Compiegne."  Some  time  after  (Suger  declares)  he  held
a  Council  at  Rheims,  the  opening  of  which  Dodechin
fixes  on  October  igth,  and  in  which  Louis  the  Younger
received  on  the  25th  of  the  same  month  the  insignia  of
royalty  from  the  hands  of  Innocent,  as  Robert,  who  has
continued  the  Chronicle  of  Sigebert,  states.  The  Saxon
MS.  Annals  report  under  1131,  "Pope  Innocent  on  the
Feast  of  S.  Luke  having  again  assembled  together  many  of
the  clergy  and  laity,"  that  is  after  the  Synod  at  Liege,
"  held  at  Rheims  another  assembly  for  some  days,  over
which  he  presided."  Suger  adds  that  having  dismissed
this  Council  the  Pope  made  some  stay  at  Autun,  and  at
length  returned  into  Italy  with  Lothair.

XLIII.  Ernald  (Life,'\\.c.  i)  places  the  Council  at  Rheims
before  that  at  Liege,  and  writes  that  Innocent  proceeded
from  Liege  to  Clairvaux,  and  after  a  short  delay  in  France
returned  to  Rome  in  the  company  of  Lothair.  But  it  is
quite  clear  that  the  synod  at  Rheims  was  later  than  that  at
Liege,  as  well  from  the  narrative  of  Suger  as  from  the  Saxon
Annals,  and  especially  from  the  Chronicle  of  Maurigny,  in
which  the  journey  of  Innocent  is  carefully  described.  The
chronicler,  in  fact,  relates  that  Innocent,  after  having  been
recognized  at  Chartres  as  legitimate  Pope  by  King  Henry
of  England,  "  resolved  to  proceed  to  the  Court  of  Lothair,
Patrician  of  Rome,  Emperor,  and  as  his  first  stage  on  leaving
Chartres  was  at  Maurigny,"  which  is  a  Benedictine  Abbey
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Etampes,  and  in  his  company,  besides


42  GENERAL PREFACE.

Bishops  and  Cardinals,  was  "  Bernard,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
who  was  the  most  famous  preacher  of  the  Divine  Word  at
that  time  in  the  whole  of  France,"  and  Peter  Abaelard,
Monk  and  Abbot,  who  is  called  "  a  religious  man,  who  holds
an  excellent  school  of  theology."  When  the  Pope  had
consecrated  the  Church  of  Maurigny,  "  on  the  third  morning
he  departed  with  his  company  and  proceeded  to  his  con
ference,  which  was  at  Liege  .  .  .  then,  returning  to  Gaul,
he  remained  a  long  time  at  Autun  until  the  time  drew  near
for  the  meeting  of  the  Council,  which  had  been  summoned
to  assemble  at  Rheims  on  the  Festival  of  S.  Luke  the
Evangelist ;  then  having  gained  over  to  his  cause  Geoffrey
Martel  of  Tours  ...  he  returned  to  Paris,  passing  by
Orleans  and  Etampes."  In  the  meantime  he  heard  of  the
death  of  Philip,  whom  his  father  had  associated  with  him
in  the  kingdom.  Profoundly  grieved  by  this  news  he  sends
as  his  legates  a  latere  to  console  the  King  two  venerable
Bishops,  "  Geoffrey  of  Chalons,  and  Matthew  of  Albano."
Then  proceeding  to  Rheims  he  solemnly  anointed  Louis  as
King  in  a  fully-attended  synod.  He  received  at  the  same
time  letters  of  obedience  and  fidelity  from  the  Emperor
Lothair  and  from  Henry,  King  of  England,  as  well  as  from
Hildefonso  the  Elder,  King  of  Hither  Spain,  and  Hildefonso
the  Younger,  King  of  Farther  Spain.  Besides  this,  it  filled
the  Pontiff  with  great  joy  to  receive  "  a  letter  from  the  most
excellent  hermits  of  the  Chartreux,  which  was  borne  by  a
certain  venerable  Abbot  of  the  Cistercian  Order,  and  read
in  full  Council  by  Geoffrey,  Bishop  of  Chartres."  This
Abbot  was  Hugo,  of  Pontigny,  as  the  letter  bears  witness,
which  the  same  Chronicler  inserts  at  the  end  of  his  second
volume.  At  the  commencement  of  the  third  he  adds  that  "a
little  after  the  Council  of  Rheims  Innocent  returned  to  Rome,
but  because  Peter,  his  unjust  rival,  had  drawn  to  his  own
side  the  greater  part  of  the  city,  Innocent  was  able  to
obtain  only  the  Church  of  S.  Peter,  which  is  the  seat  of  the


GENERAL PREFACE.  43

dignity  of  the  holy  priesthood,  but  Peter  occupied  as  his
residence  the  palace  of  the  Lateran,  to  which  belongs
Imperial  dignity."  Upon  this  matter  there  is  a  letter  of  the
Emperor  Lothair  in  the  Spicilegium,  Vol.  vi.,  in  which
Norbert,  Archbishop  of  Magdebourg,  has  the  title  of
Chancellor.  He  was  acting  as  the  deputy  of  Bruno,  of
Cologne,  who  had  not  proceeded  into  Italy  with  the  Emperor
(Chron.  Saxon.)  But  Innocent  for  the  sake  of  the  City  of
Rome  withdrew  to  Pisa,  where  he  remained  until  the  death
of  Peter,  which  took  place  in  1137.

XLIV.  In  the  meantime  Peter,  or  Anacletus,  left  no  means
unattempted  to  bring  over  persons  of  influence  to  his  side.
Among  Bishops,  Gerard  of  Angouleme  adhered  to  him,
who  since  he  had  fulfilled  the  functions  of  legate  under  the
two  last  Popes  had  it  much  at  heart  to  obtain  the  same
honour  from  Anacletus  also.  He  gained  over  to  Anacletus
William,  Count  of  Poitou.  Furthermore,  Anacletus,  in
order  to  bring  over  Roger,  Duke  of  Apulia,  to  his  party,
gave  him  his  own  sister  in  marriage  and  crowned  him
King  of  Sicily,  as  Ordericus  states  (B.  xii.  p.  498).
Among  the  letters  of  Peter  Leonis,  in  which  he  takes  upon
him  the  name  of  Pope,  which  have  been  preserved  in  the  MS.
of  Casinum,  and  published  in  part  by  Baronius,  there  is
one  in  which  he  complains  vehemently  of  the  Abbot  of
Farfa,  whom,  because  he  was  opposed  to  himself,  he  has,
as  he  says,  "  stricken  writh  the  sting  of  the  Church,"  i.e.,
"condemned  with  a  sentence  of  excommunication."

XLV.  All  these  troubles  and  divisions  which  we  have
detailed,  perhaps  at  greater  length  than  was  necessary,
gave  much  occupation  to  Bernard,  who  wrote  letter  after
letter  in  every  direction  to  bring  over  schismatics  to
Innocent  and  to  keep  those  who  were  faithful  to  their  duty.
He  undertook  various  journeys  also  for  the  same  cause,  as
we  infer  from  the  following  epistles  and  from  his  Life
(B.  ii.  6  and  7).


44  GENERAL PREFACE.

XLVI.  We  now  have  to  speak  of  Gerard,  Bishop  of
Angouleme,  of  whom  Arnulf,  then  Archdeacon  of  Seez,  and
afterwards  Bishop  of  Lisieux,  has  left  us  a  portrait  in  the
treatise  which  he  wrote  against  him,  and  which  our  brother
Achery  has  published  in  Vol.  ii.  of  the  Spicilegium.  "He
was  Norman  by  birth  ;  the  poverty  of  his  parents  obliged
him  to  leave  his  father's  house,  and  was  at  length  elected
Bishop  of  Angouleme  by  a  chance,"  as  there  was  a
division  among  the  electors,  and  his  election  offered  "  a
certain  means  of  escape"  from  the  difficulty  in  which  they
were.  Then  he  began  to  confer  the  dignities  of  his  Church
upon  his  nephews,  born  in  a  low  condition,1  to  shut  his  eyes
to  crimes  and  leave  them  unpunished,  to  seek  and  to  obtain
the  dignity  of  legate  from  the  Pontiff,  to  act  haughtily,  to
convoke  Councils  and  synods  in  a  spirit  of  ostentation.
Arnulf  adds  that  when  Innocent  was  elected,  Gerard  at  first
favoured  him,  but  not  having  been  able  to  obtain  the
dignity  of  legate  from  him  he  threw  himself  into  the  party
of  Peter  Leonis,  by  whom  a  new  commission  as  legate  was
granted  to  him,  embracing  all  the  countries  between  the
Alps  and  the  ocean  of  the  west.  And  it  was  added  that
"  wherever  he  should  set  his  foot  there  he  should  have  the
power  of  legate."  When  he  was  reinvested  with  this
dignity  he  endeavoured  to  gain  over  the  Kings  of  England
and  the  two  Spains  to  the  party  of  Anacletus,  but  without
success.  He  deposed  the  Bishops  of  Poitiers  and  Limoges
and  replaced  them  by  unworthy  men.  He  imposed  himself,
Gerard,  upon  the  See  of  Bordeaux,  being  at  once  Bishop  and
Archbishop,  which  Ernald  also  states  (Life,  B.  ii.  c.  5).
Then  Arnulf  says,  addressing  Gerard,  and  enumerating  .the
partisans  of  Anacletus,  "that  unbelieving  troop  whom  you
follow  compose  all  the  supporters  of  Peter  Leonis ;  it  is  not
yet  purged  from  the  leaven  of  Jewish  corruption,  and  that
tyrant,  whom  Sicily,  the  nurse  of  tyrants,  sustains  ...  it

1 Obscuro  loco.


GENERAL PREFACE.  45

has  in  its  ranks  only  the  Count  of  Poitou,  a  man  devoted  to
pleasures, a  man sensual, not  capable  of  comprehending
spiritual  mysteries,  given  over  to  the  error  because  of  the
refusal  of  a  request  unlawful  to  be  granted." These  are  the
supporters  of  Anacletus. "While  to  our  side," continues
Arnulf,  "  we  have  the  adhesion  of  the  Emperor,  every  king,
every  prince,  every  man  almost  who  is  worthy  to  bear  the
Christian  name. But  in  that  universal  consent,  those  whose
adhesion  is most  significant  to  my  eyes,  whose  authority
strikes  me,  influences  me,  and  commands  my  obedience,  are
the  men  to  \vhom  it  has  been  given  to  know  the  mysteries
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  whose  conversation  seems  to  be
already  in  heaven  ; such  are  they  in  truth  who  dwell  among
the perpetual snows of the Chartreuse, and they who,
shining  forth  from  Citeaux  or  Cluny,  fill  all  the  world  with
the  rays  of  their  light." Thus  speaks  Arnulf  to  Gerard,
whom, nevertheless, others praise,  but the authority  of
Arnulf ought  to  weigh most with us. "  I have  written
nothing,"  he  says,  "  but  what  I  either  myself  knew  person
ally  or  have  received  on  good  authority,  or  which  is  not,  at
least,  affirmed  by  public  report." There  is  more  respect
ing  Gerard in  the notes  to Letter 127. Gerard died in
1136. Then Geoffrey, Bishop of Chartres, received  the
command  of  Innocent  to  traverse  the  whole  of  France,  and
especially  Aquitaine,  and  to  destroy  with  his  own  hands  all
the  altars  which  Gerard,  the  author  and  supporter  of  that
rebellion, or which Gilo, Bishop of Tusculum, or their
accomplices had consecrated in the time of  the  schism,
"with  benediction  and  unction  of  chrism,"  as  we  read  in  the
Chronicle  of  Maurigny, B. iii. But  we  are  lingering  too
long  upon  these  matters. Those  who  wish  to  learn  more
respecting  the  sentiments, life,  and  character  of  Innocent
and Anacletus may consult the treatise of Arnulf just
quoted. There  is  a  letter  of Paschal II. respecting  the
Legation  of  Gerard  to  be  found  in  Spicileg.,  B.  iii.,  and  in


46  GENERAL PREFACE.

B.  iv.  an  account  of  the  Synod of  Laon,  at  which  he  pre
sided  in  1 109.

XLVII.  It  may  be  seen  (as  we  have  already  said)  by  the
Life  and  in  the  Letters  of  Bernard  how  many  journeys  he
accomplished,  and  howT  much  trouble  he  went  through  in
the  long  and  unhappy  time  of  that  schism.  Thus  he  thrice
travelled  into  Italy  upon  this  account,  and  it  was  thanks  to
his  efforts,  that  the  schism  was  terminated  by  the  death  of
Anacletus  in  1138.  For  although  the  schismatics  gave  him
a  successor  in  the  anti-pope  Victor,  it  was  "  not  so  much  in
order  to  prolong  the  division  as  to  find,  by  delay,  a  suitable
opportunity  to  reconcile  themselves  with  Pope  Innocent,"
and,  in  fact,  Victor  himself  came  by  night  "  to  the  holy
man" — that  is,  to  Bernard — "and  he  induced  him  to  lay
aside  the  insignia  of  Papal  dignity  which  he  had  assumed,
and  conducted  him  to  the  feet  of  Innocent"  (Life,  ii.  47).
Such  was  the  end  of  this  long  and  calamitous  schism.

XLVIII.  In  sign  of  gratitude  for  so  great  a  service,  which
was  due  principally  to  Bernard,  Innocent  freed  by  his  own
authority  the  possessions  of  the  Cistercian  Order  from  the
tithes  payable  upon  them,  without  even  consulting  those  to
whom  the  tithes  belonged.  From  these  new  divisions  arose,
which  caused  no  little  trouble  and  annoyance  to  Bernard.
The  monks  of  Cluny,  in  particular,  complained  loudly  against
this  exemption,  which  deprived  them,  without  compensa
tion,  of  a  great  part  of  their  revenues,  and  their  irritation
rose  to  such  a  point  that  the  monks  of  Gigny  destroyed  to
the  very  ground  a  neighbouring  monastery  of  the  Cistercians
named  Moiremont.  The  detailed  account  of  this  melan
choly  event  will  be  found  in  two  Letters  numbered  229  and
283,  the  former  from  Peter  the  Venerable,  and  the  latter
from  Bernard,  and  in  the  notes  upon  these.  Nor  was  this
contest  immediately  closed,  but  in  process  of  time  extended
into  other  countries  also.

XLIX.  We  may  infer  this  from  Letter  82,  which  Peter  of


GENERAL PREFACE.  47

Blois  wrote  in  the  name  of  Richard,  Archbishop  of  Canter
bury,  "  To  the  Abbot  and  the  Convent  of  Citeaux  ;  "  for  in
this  letter,  after  beginning  with  praises  of  the  Cistercians,
he  goes  on  to  say  that  "  their  reputation  is  in  one  respect
stained  by  their  refusal  to  pay  to  other  monks  and  to  the
clergy  the  tithes  which  are  due  from  them,"  the  writer  con
tinues,  "  and  whence  comes  this  injurious  exemption  that
you  should  be  freed  from  the  payment  of  tithes,  to  which
your  lands  were  liable  before  they  came  into  your  hands,
and  which  have  hitherto  been  paid,  not  writh  respect  to  the
persons  holding  them,  but  by  the  necessary  liability  of  the
land  ?  If  those  lands  had  passed  into  your  possession,
wherefore  is  the  right  of  another  person  over  them  in  this
respect  to  be  endangered  ?  For,  in  common  fairness,  when
the  lands  passed  to  you  they  passed  with  the  burden  that
was  upon  them."  And  when  the  privilege  accorded  to  the
Cistercians  by  Pope  Innocent  was  brought  forward  as  an
argument  against  him,  he  replies  that  such  a  privilege
''  might  be  borne  with  for  a  while,  since  necessity  had  been
the  cause  of  its  introduction  at  a  time  when  the  Order" —
that  is,  of  Citeaux — "  was  happy  in  its  poverty,  and  gladly
shared  with  the  poor  its  scanty  resources."  But  now  that
its  possessions  were  multiplied,  "  even  beyond  all  measure,"
such  a  privilege  must  be  considered  rather  to  minister  to
the  ambition  of  the  Order  than  to  be  a  means  of  assistance
to  piety.  "  Furthermore,  whatever  may  be  the  extent  of  the
privileges  of  the  Roman  Church,  they  cannot  be  made  use
of  to  usurp  unjustly  that  which  belongs  to  another."  At
length,  if  the  Cistercians  shall  show  themselves  pertinacious
and  unyielding  in  this  matter,  Richard  threatens  that  he
will  bind  in  the  bond  of  anathema  all  persons  "who  shall
either  give  or  sell  anything  to  the  Cistercians "  to  the
hindrance  of  the  right  of  tithes,  and  that  he  will  appeal  to
the  throne  of  the  Supreme  Judge  "  that  none  may  absolve
from  the  bond  of  this  excommunication."  He  goes  even


48  GENERAL PREFACE.

farther  still,  since  he  threatens  to  invoke  the  help  of  the
secular  arm  in  favour  of  the  spiritual  power,  and  to  confis
cate  all  that  shall  have  been  sold  or  given  to  the  Cistercians
against  the  decree  which  he  has  pronounced.  This  is  what
we  read  in  the  letter  of  Peter  of  Blois.

L.  Geoffrey,  Prior  of  Vigeois,  makes  similar  complaints
on  the  same  subject  in  his  Chronicle  (Labbe,  Biblioth.  ii.
p.  328),  in  which,  after  praising  the  Cistercians  because
they  gave  many  alms  from  the  proceeds  of  their  own  labour,
because  they  sang  their  offices  in  choir,  according  to  the
Rule,  and  for  many  other  good  actions,  he  yet  notes  this
against  them,  that  they  took  the  lands  and  refused  to  pay
the  tithes  due  to  others  ;  without  counting  this,  that  they
indiscreetly  threw  into  obscurity  the  memory  of  certain
saints.  He  wrote  this  about  the  close  of  the  twelfth  cen
tury,  at  which  time  the  tempest  raised  by  the  exemption
from  tithe  decreed  by  Innocent  in  favour  of  the  Cistercians
had  not  yet  subsided.

§  V.  CONCERNING  THE  ERRORS  OE  PETER  ABAELARD
AND  OF  GILBERT  DE  LA  PORREE,  AND  S.  BERNARD'S
REFUTATION  OF  THEM.

LI.  This  circumstance  added  no  little  to  the  glory  of
Bernard,  that  he  had  no  others  as  adversaries  than  the
partisans  of  error  or  heresy,  nor  did  he  attack  the  men  so
much  as  their  errors.  Chief  among  the  former  class  must
be  reckoned  Peter  Abaelard  and  Gilbert  or  Gislebert  de  la
Porree.  Among  heretics,  the  worst  was  Henry  and  his
followers,  who  were  called  Henricians  from  him.  We  shall
treat  here  of  the  two  former,  and  of  Henry  and  his  followers
in  the  next  paragraph.

LI  I.  Peter  Abaelard  gives  a  vivid  description  of  himself
in  his  history  of  his  calamities  ;  afterwards  Otto,  Bishop  of
Frisingen,  has  sketched  him  with  a  kindly  pen.  You  have
an  epitome  of  his  life  in  my  Notes  to  Letter  187  of  Bernard,


GENERAL PREFACE.  49

where  the  defenders  and  supporters  of  Abaelard  are  refuted.
Here  we  need  only  give  a  summary  of  what  Bernard  did
against  him.  Then  we  shall  show  by  the  words  of  his
defenders  themselves  how  unjust  those  are  towards  the
truth,  who  declare  themselves  in  his  favour  in  the  con
troversy,  rather  than  in  that  of  S.  Bernard.

LIII.  First,  we  will  commence  by  observing  that  long
before  his  collision  with  Bernard  he  had  been  cited  by
Conon,  Legate  of  the  Holy  See,  to  the  Council  held  at
Soissons  in  1121;  and  in  it,  his  Book  on  Theology,  in  which
erroneous  propositions  were  contained,  was  committed  to
the  flames,  the  author  being  confined  in  the  monastery  of
S.  Medard.  When  he  was  dismissed  thence,  he  proceeded
to  disseminate  his  views  in  all  directions,  and  grievously
resenting  the  imputation  of  being  a  heretic,  which  was
thrown  upon  him  by  many  people,  and  of  which  lie
suspected  that  Bernard  was  the  origin,  he  cited  him  to  the
Council  of  Soissons,  in  1140,  or  it  might  be  said,  dragged
him  thither,  so  unwilling  was  Bernard  to  come.

There,  in  presence  of  the  Bishops  and  other  illustrious
clergy  of  the  second  order,  Abaelard  himself  was  heard  a
second  time  and  confuted  by  Bernard,  his  doctrine  ex
amined  and  again  proscribed,  but  the  author  was  left
unpunished,  because  he  had  appealed  to  the  Apostolic  See.
But  as  he  heard  that  the  sentence  of  the  synod  had  been
approved  by  Innocent  II.,  he  desisted  from  his  appeal,  and  on
the  advice  of  Peter  the  Venerable  retired  into  the  monastery
of  Cluny,  and  at  last  made  a  pious  ending  of  his  days  in  a
monastery  at  Chalons  sur  Saone.

LIV.  Bernard  wrote  against  Abaelard  various  Letters,  of
which  the  most  important  is  one  to  Pope  Innocent  (Letter
190),  which  is  placed  eleventh  among  the  Treatises.  In  this
letter  Bernard  names  briefly  the  chief  heads  of  the  errors
which  he  had  found  in  the  writings  of  Abaelard,  and
logically  refutes  them.  In  this  edition  I  place,  following

VOL.  I.  4


50  GENERAL PREFACE.

the  Vatican  MS.,  at  the  head  of  this  Letter,  or  rather
Treatise,  fourteen  propositions  extracted  by  Bernard  from
the  writings  of  Abaelard  which  were  submitted  to  Innocent
at  the  same  time  as  the  Letter.  I  shall  treat  at  length  the
whole  of  this  controversy  in  an  Admonition  prefixed  to  this
particular  Treatise.  For  the  present  I  content  myself
with  adding  some  particulars  respecting  the  defenders  of
Abaelard.

LV.  In  the  first  place  must  be  quoted  Abaelard  himself,
who  in  his  Apology  complains  that  many  errors  had  been
imputed  to  him  "  by  malice,"  and  particularly  that  he  had
said  "  the  Father  is  all  powerful,  the  Son  powerful,  and  the
Holy  Spirit  without  power,"  which  words  he  repudiates  as
''  not  merely  heretical,  but  diabolical,"  and  affirms  that  they
cannot  be  found  in  his  writings.  But  of  this  and  other
heads  of  accusations  I  shall  speak  in  observations  on
Treatise  n.  Abaelard  confesses,  however,  in  the  course  of
his  Apology,  that  he  had  written  "  some  things  that  he
ought  not,  by  error;"  but  protests  that  he  had  written
nothing  "through  malice  or  through  pride,"  and  adds  that
if  through  his  much  speaking,  some  expressions  had  escaped
him  which  were  to  be  regretted,  he  was  always  prepared
"  to  correct,  or  altogether  retract,  what  he  had  spoken  ill ;  "
and  finally,  that  he  was  a  son  of  the  Church,  and  "  received
what  she  receives,  and  rejected  what  she  rejects."  Well
and  good ;  I  have  no  wish  to  prove  Abaelard  to  have  been
a  heretic;  it  is  sufficient  for  the  cause  of  Bernard  to  show
that  he  erred  in  certain  respects,  and  this  indeed  he  himself
does  not  deny.

LVI.  But  how  far  does  the  testimony  of  Otto  of  Frisingen
tell  against  the  holy  Doctor  or  in  favour  of  Abaelard  ?  He
says  that  "  Bernard  had  a  fervent  jealousy  for  the  Christian
religion,  and  was  credulous  from  his  habitual  gentleness  of
character,"  so  that  he  had  little  love  for  those  Professors  who
attached  too  much  importance  to  their  human  reasonings


GENERAL PREFACE.  51

and  their  worldly  wisdom,  "  and  if  anything  was  reported
of  such  persons  which  seemed  to  show  that  they  were  out
of  harmony  with  the  Christian  faith,  he  listened  willingly  to
it"  (Otto,  B.  i.  c.  47).  But  this  judgment  is  rather  praise
than  blame  for  the  holy  Doctor,  since  there  is  nothing
more  in  the  duty  of  a  Catholic  Doctor  than  to  repress  as
soon  as  possible  men  of  that  class,  who  attach  too  much
value  to  their  philosophical  reasonings,  especially  when
they  devise  new  terms  of  philosophy,  wrhich  may  easily  lead
into  error  incautious  persons.  I  may  adopt  the  words  of
William,  that  "the  excess  of  zeal  which  is  blamed  in  him  will
be  itself  praiseworthy  to  pious  minds  .  .  .  happy  is  he  to  whom
the  only  crime  which  can  be  imputed  is  that  which  others
are  accustomed  to  consider  as  doing  them  honour"  {Life,
B.  i.  41).  But  Otto  himself,  although  he  favours  Abaelard,
yet  acknowledges  that  he  had  weakened  too  much  the
distinctions  between  the  Three  Persons  of  the  holy  Trinity,
not  having  followed  good  precedents,  "  and  that  because  of
this  he  was  considered  a  Sabellian  heretic  in  the  provincial
synod  of  Soissons."  How  then  can  it  be  wondered  at,  if
repeating  the  same  errors  a  second  time  he  was  regarded
with  extreme  suspicion  by  lovers  of  the  orthodox  faith  ?

LVII.  I  need  not  say  much  of  Berengarius  of  Poitiers,
who  wrote  an  Apology  for  Abaelard,  who  had  been  his
teacher,  against  the  synod  of  Soissons  and  against  Bernard
himself;  as  well  because  he  was  a  man  of  little  or  no
authority,  as  because  he,  when  he  returned  to  a  better  mind,
was  unwilling  to  continue  to  be  "  the  defender  of  the  pro
positions  objected  to  Abaelard  because,  although  they  might
not  be  unorthodox,  yet  they  sounded  distinctly  suspicious,"
and  he  would  have  suppressed  his  book  if  he  had  been  able,
as  he  declares  in  his  letter  to  the  Bishop  of  Mende.  And
although  we  have  no  longer  all  the  books  of  Abaelard  in
which  he  had  disseminated  his  errors,  yet  in  those  which
remain  there  is  no  lack  of  "difficult  and  dangerous"


52  GENERAL PREFACE.

passages,  as  the  Paris  theologians  have  detected,  and  have
placed  at  the  head  of  his  works  a  kind  of  antidote  to
destroy  the  effect  of  the  more  dangerous  of  these.  It
would  have  been  very  desirable  that  the  Apologetic  Preface
should  have  been  expunged  from  thence.  But  enough  has
been  said  of  Abaelard.

LVIII.  The  condemnation  of  Gilbert  de  la  Porree,  Bishop
of  Poitiers,  excited  no  less  angry  feeling  against  Bernard
than  that  against  Abaelard.  According  to  Otto  of  Frisingen,.
Gilbert  "was  born  at  Poitiers,  studied  there,  afterwards-
became  a  teacher,  and  from  a  teacher  he  finished  by  being
Bishop  of  the  same  city.  From  his  youth  he  subjected
himself  to  the  training  of  the  most  renowned  masters,  and
relying  more  on  their  knowledge  than  his  own  intellect,  he
acquired  from  them  learning  solid  and  profound "  (Otto,.
B.  i.  c.  46),  wrhile  praise  of  his  knowledge  was  enhanced
by  the  gravity  of  his  character.  These  masters  were,  "  firstr
Hilary  of  Poitiers,  then  Bernard  of  Chartres,  and  finally
two  brothers  named  Anselm  and  Ralph,  both  of  Laon."
This  Hilary  was  no  other,  I  think,  than  the  great  Bishop
Hilary  of  Poitiers,  whose  authority,  as  Geoffrey  declares,
Gilbert  abused.  Bernard  of  Chartres  is  not  otherwise
known  to  me  than  by  the  testimony  of  Otto ;  as  for  Ralph
of  Laon,  he  was  well  known  to  Guibert,  to  a  monk
named  Hermann,  of  Laon,  and  to  Geoffrey,  the  secretary
of  S.  Bernard,  as  was  also  his  brother  Anselm,  Dean  of
Laon.  In  his  Commentaries  on  the  Psalms,  on  the
Epistles  of  S.  Paul,  and  upon  Boethius,  he  indulges  in
philosophical  speculations  concerning  the  Divinity  and
other  truths  of  religion  beyond  w-hat  is  permissible.  Otto
states  that  "  there  were  among  other  opinions  which  were
objected  to  him  four  propositions  concerning  the  Divine
Majesty,  namely: — That  the  Divine  Essence  is  not  God;
that  the  properties  of  the  Persons  are  not  the  Persons
themselves;  that  the  Divine  Persons  cannot  be  predicated  in


GENERAL PREFACE.  53

any  proposition  ;  that  the  Divine  Nature  is  not  incarnate."
I  will  speak  more  fully  upon  these  in  later  chapters.  Minor
errors  also  were  objected  to  him,  namely,  that  "no  one
except  Christ  had  any  merit,  that  no  one  should  be  baptized
except  those  ordained  to  salvation,"  and  other  opinions  of
that  kind  which  Geoffrey  reports.  (Treatise  against  the
opinions  of  Gilbert,  in  the  Appendix.)

LIX.  Gilbert  having  given  utterance  to  all  these  errors
in  a  sermon  which  he  preached  to  an  assembly  of  his
clergy,  his  two  Archdeacons,  Arnold  and  Calo,  report  the
matter  to  Eugenius  III.,  who  was  then  at  Sienna,  in
Tuscany,  and  was  coming  into  France.  He  remitted  the
examination  of  the  cause  to  France.  In  the  meantime
the  Archdeacons  obtain  the  support  of  Bernard  for  their
side.  An  examination  was  made  of  the  accused  doctrines
at  Auxerre  and  at  Paris,  and  they  were  condemned  at  a
Council  at  Rheims  in  1148.  Otto  reports  briefly  what  was
done  in  each  of  these  assemblies,  but  Geoffrey,  the  secretary
of  Bernard,  gives  a  more  detailed  account.  He  even  wrote
a  short  history  of  the  proceedings  respecting  them  at  the
Council  of  Rheims,  and  forty  years  later  he  wrote  a  letter
on  the  subject  to  Henry,  Cardinal  Bishop  of  Albano.
Both  his  letter  and  this  history  will  be  found  at  the  end  of
Vol.  vi.

LX.  I  have  found  no  particulars  respecting  this  assembly
at  Auxerre,  of  which  only  Otto  makes  mention  ;  but  there
are,  on  the  contrary,  many  details  given  of  the  proceedings
of  that  at  Paris.  Geoffrey  states  that  it  was  held  "  at  the
Festival  of  Easter,"  and  therefore  it  must  have  been  in
1147  ;  since  we  learn  from  Otto  that  the  Council  assembled
at  Rheims  "during  the  Lent"  of  the  following  year,
and  the  Appendix  to  Sigebert  fixes  it  as  the  22nd
March.  "  Gilbert  appeared  then  before  the  Pope,  the
Cardinals,  the  Bishops,  and  other  venerable  and  learned
men,  to  explain  himself  on  the  points  upon  which  he


54  GENERAL PREFACE.

was  accused.  The  debate  lasted  for  several  days.  There
appeared  against  him  two  celebrated  doctors,  Adam  de
Petit-Pont,  a  very  acute  reasoner,  and  recently  made
Canon  of  the  Cathedral  of  Paris,  and  Hugh  de  Champ-
fleury,  Chancellor  of  the  King,  who  affirmed  upon  their
oath  that  they  had  heard  from  the  mouth  of  Gilbert
certain  of  the  incriminated  propositions.  In  the  midst  of
the  discussion  which  followed  upon  this,  it  was  declared
that  Gilbert  had  said  amongst  other  things  that  '  I  confess  that
God  the  Father  is  God  in  one  sense,  and  Father  in  another
sense  ;  yet  not  both  God  and  Father  in  the  same  sense.'
Joscelin,  Bishop  of  Soissons,  was  particularly  indignant  at
this  declaration.  All  this  took  place  on  the  first  day.
Another  time  he  was  accused  of  having  in  a  prosa1  con
cerning  the  Holy  Trinity  said  that  the  '  three  Persons  were
three  individuals.'  The  Archbishop  of  Rouen  (Hugh  the
Third  of  that  name)  made  the  matter  worse  by  saying  that
it  would  have  been  better  to  say  that  God  is  one  individual."
This  is  the  account  which  Otto,  Bishop  of  Frisingen,  gives
of  the  Council  of  Paris  (Otto,  B.  i.  c.  51-52).

LXI.  Geoffrey  relates  it  a  little  differently,  and  makes  the
synod  at  Viterbo  which  was  held  upon  the  same  subject  to
have  preceded  it.  He  mentions  but  one  informer  against
Gilbert  to  the  Pope,  the  Archdeacon  Arnold,  upon  whom
he  bestows  the  cognomen  Pince-sans-rire  [=  gut  non
ridet,  i.e.,  a  dry  joker].  But  in  the  meeting  at  Paris  he
opposes  Bernard  to  Gilbert  as  his  only  adversary,  "whose
concern  it  was  wherever  he  might  be  to  defend  every
interest  of  our  Lord  Christ.  When  Gilbert  was  required
to  produce  his  Commentary  on  Boethius,  in  which  were
contained  some  suspected  propositions,  he  replied  that  he
had  it  not  at  hand.  But  he  denied  that  he  had  ever  taught
or  believed  '  that  the  Divine  Nature  was  not  God,'  etc.,  and

1  Sequence,  i.e.,  a  species  of  rhythmical  introduction  to  the  Gospel  in  the
Liturgy.  The  laws  of  metre  were  not  strictly  observed  in  it. —  [E.j


GENERAL PREFACE.  55

he  called  in  witness  of  this  two  of  his  disciples,  Rotold,
then  Bishop  of  Evreux,  and  afterwards  Archbishop  of
Rouen,  and  the  Magister  Ivo  of  Chartres,  another  person
without  doubt  than  the  illustrious  Bishop  of  Chartres  of
that  name."  I  think  that  this  man  was  a  regular  Canon
of  the  Abbey  of  S.  Victor,  near  Paris,  and  afterwards
created  Cardinal  by  Innocent  II.,  to  whom  Bernard's  Letter
193  was  addressed.  To  put  an  end  to  these  altercations
the  Pope  orders  that  the  book  in  question  should  be  brought
to  a  future  Council  "  which  he  proposed  to  hold  during  the
same  year  at  Rheims ; "  and  although  it  was  deferred  to
mid-Lent  of  the  following  year,  it  was  none  the  less  held
within  a  year  from  the  meeting  at  Paris,  since  that  was
held,  as  we  have  said  above,  during  the  preceding  Easter.

LXII.  "  In  the  meantime  the  Exposition  of  Boethius  by
Gilbert  was,  by  order  of  the  Pope,  sent  to  Godescalc,  then
Abbot  of  Mont  S.  Eloi,  near  Arras,  and  afterwards  Bishop
of  the  same  town,  in  order  that  he  might  examine  it;  he
noted  in  it  many  suspicious  propositions,  to  each  of  which
he  opposed  the  teaching  of  the  holy  Fathers  extracted  from
their  works.  Alberic,  Bishop  of  Ostia  and  Legate  in
Aquitaine,  would  have  brought  forward  the  most  ample
information  regarding  the  life  and  conduct  of  Gilbert  if  he
had  not  been  removed  by  a  premature  death  a  little  before
these  discussions.  At  length,  at  the  Council  of  Rheims/'
came  on  the  discussion  of  the  propositions  noted  by  Gode
scalc  ;  but  as  he  was  not  a  practised  speaker  the  book  of
Gilbert,  and  also  the  passages  of  the  holy  Fathers  noted  by
Godescalc,  were  delivered  by  the  lord  Pope  to  S.  Bernard.
The  Council  contained  Bishops  from  the  four  realms  of
France,  Germany,  England,  and  Spain.  Among  these  were
personages  of  great  renown  and  of  no  little  learning,
Geoffrey  de  1'Oratoire,  Archbishop  of  Bordeaux,  whose
suffragan  Gilbert  was  ;  Milo,  Bishop  of  Terouanne  ;  Joscelin,
Bishop  of  Soissons  ;  and  Suger,  Abbot  of  S.  Denis,  to  whom


56  GENERAL PREFACE.

Louis,  King  of  France,  when  setting  out  for  Jerusalem,  had
committed  the  administration  of  his  entire  realm ;  and,
indeed,  says  Otto,  he  did  this  according  to  the  prerogative
of  that  community  (Otto,  B.  i.  c.  55).  Geoffrey,  although
he  did  not  approve  the  teaching  of  Gilbert,  was  favourable
to  his  person.

LXIII.  At  the  first  session  of  the  Council  Gilbert  called  his
clerks  to  bring  in  various  enormous  volumes,  complaining
that  his  adversaries  had  quoted  against  him  only  mutilated
texts.  Then  Bernard  spoke  thus:  "What  need  is  there  to
delay  longer  about  expressions  of  that  kind  ?  The  origin
of  this  scandal  arises  from  nothing  else  but  this — that  a
great  many  persons  believe  that  you  think  and  teach  that
the  Divine  Essence  or  Nature,  the  Divinity,  Wisdom,
Goodness,  Greatness  are  not  God,  but  the  Form  in  which
God  is.  If  this  is  what  you  believe,  avow  it  openly  or  deny
it."  He  dared  to  affirm,  that  all  this  was  the  Form  of  God  and
not  God  Himself.  Then  Bernard  replied  :  "  Behold  !  here  we
have  what  we  were  seeking  ;  let  that  confession  be  written
down."  So  the  supreme  Pontiff  directed  ;  and  then  Dom
Henry  of  Pisa,  who  was  then  sub-deacon  of  the  Roman
Church,  and  who  at  a  later  time  became  a  monk  at  Clair-
vaux,  the  Abbot  of  S.  Anastasius,  and  finally  Cardinal  priest,
with  the  title  of  SS.  Nereus  and  Achilles,  brought  at  his
command  pen,  ink,  and  paper.  But  while  he  was  drawing
up  the  record  of  that  avowal  of  Gilbert,  the  latter  cried  out,
addressing  himself  to  Bernard  :  "  And  do  you  write  also
that  the  Divinity  is  God."  To  this  Bernard  replied:  "Let
it  be  written  with  an  iron  pen,  with  a  point  of  diamond."
After  much  disputation  on  one  side  and  the  other,  the
Cardinals  declared  that  they  would  reserve  their  judgment.
At  this  the  Bishops  murmur  greatly  because  the  Cardinals
reserved  to  themselves  alone  the  decision  of  the  cause,  and
charged  Bernard  that  he  should  draw  up  articles  of  faith  in
an  opposite  sense  to  those  for  which  Gilbert  was  accused,


GENERAL PREFACE.  57

fearing  lest  (since  there  were  many  supporters  of  Gilbert
among  the  Cardinals)  the  Council  should  be  dissolved  with
out  any  decision.  Therefore  Bernard  did  this.  Then  the
Bishops  subscribed  these  articles,  and  sent  them  by  Hugh,
Bishop  of  Autun,  Milo,  Bishop  of  Terouanne,  and  Abbot
Suger  to  the  Pope,  begging  him  to  confirm  them,  which
Eugenius  did  without  difficulty.  At  length  Gilbert,  being
summoned  before  the  assembly  which  had  met  in  the  noble
palace  called  Tau  (the  palace  of  the  Archbishop  of  Rheims
was  thus  called  because  of  the  shape  of  the  battlements,
which  recalled  the  form  of  the  Greek  letter  T),  he  abjured
spontaneously  all  the  errors  contained  in  each  of  his  pro
positions.  The  Pope  condemned  them  all  likewise,  with
the  book  of  the  author  of  them,  and  strictly  forbade  that
anyone  should  dare  to  read  or  transcribe  that  book  until
the  Roman  Church  had  corrected  it.  Gilbert  having  said
that  he  would  make  the  corrections  that  the  Pope  required,
the  Pope  refused  permission  for  him  to  do  so.  This  is  in
brief  summary  the  account  of  Geoffrey.

LXIV.  The  account  of  Otto  gives  some  details  which  are
wanting  in  that  of  Geoffrey,  and  in  some  respects  does  not
agree  with  it.  Thus,  he  places  the  examination  of  Gilbert
as  having  been  entered  upon  "  when  the  synod  was  finished
and  the  decrees  promulgated  ;  "  then  he  says  that  it  was
"after  the  week  of  Mid-Lent,  and  when  the  time  of  the
sacred  Passion  of  the  Lord  was  beginning  to  draw  on,  that
Gilbert  was  brought  up  for  judgment;  and  that  when  he
had  read  from  the  books  of  the  orthodox  Fathers  passages
in  his  defence,  it  was  Pope  Eugenius,  who  was  fatigued  with
all  these  quotations,  and  not  Bernard,  as  Geoffrey  asserts,
who  required  that  Gilbert  should  say  simply  "  whether  he
believed  that  the  supreme  Essence  was  God,"  and  that  he,
wearied  by  the  lengthened  reading,  replied,  without  con
sideration,  "  Not,"  which  avowal  the  secretary  of  the
Council  immediately  caught  up  from  his  mouth.  After  the


58  GENERAL PREFACE.

dismissal  of  the  assembly  he  says  that  Gilbert  employed  the
rest  of  the  day  and  the  following  night  in  assuring  himself
of  the  support  of  his  friends  among  the  Cardinals,  of  whom
he  had  no  small  number.

LXV.  The  next  morning  the  record  of  the  proceedings
was  read,  and  the  Bishop  was  called  upon  to  reply ;  but  he
at  length  so  explained  his  view  that,  if  the  Name  of  God
were  taken  to  denote  His  very  Nature,  he  allowed  that  it
was  God ;  but  if  it  were  understood  to  denote  a  Divine
Person,  then  he  could  not  subscribe  to  that,  for  fear  (he
said)  that  if  he  did  so,  without  qualification,  he  might  be  led
to  allow  that,  whatever  might  be  affirmed  of  either  Person,
the  same  might  equally  be  affirmed  of  the  Divine  Essence  ;
and  so  "be  led  on  to  say  that  as  the  Person  of  the  Son  had
become  incarnate  and  had  suffered,  so  the  Divine  Essence
had  also  been  incarnated  and  had  suffered/'  He  supported
this  distinction  by  passages  drawn  from  the  works  of  the
Fathers  Theodoret  and  Hilary,  and  also  by  the  authority  of
a  Council  of  Toledo :  il  and  when  the  Abbot  of  Clairvaux
wished  to  determine  the  sense  of  this  last  authority,  and
employed  certain  words  which  were  not  pleasing  to  the
Cardinals,"  Gilbert  demanded  that  they  might  be  written
down,  to  which  Bernard  agreed,  using  the  words  which
Geoffrey  records,  "  Let  them  be  written  with  a  pen  of  iron
and  point  of  diamond."  At  length  the  holy  Abbot  assem
bled  with  the  Bishops,  and,  together  with  them,  drew  up  a
profession  of  faith  opposed  to  the  propositions  of  Gilbert,
which  act  of  the  clergy  of  France  so  grievously  offended
the  sacred  college  of  Cardinals  that  they  complained  of  the
matter  to  the  Pope,  both  against  the  Bishops  and  against
Bernard  himself,  because  they  had  ventured  by  drawing  up
their  profession  of  faith  without  even  consulting  the
Cardinals,  to  put  the  last  touch,  as  it  were,  to  the  final
sentence,  which  office  belonged  to  the  Roman  See.  Ber
nard  being  at  length  called  upon  by  the  Pontiff  to  give


GENERAL PREFACE.  59

satisfaction  to  the  Cardinals,  replied,  with  deference  and
humility,  that  neither  he  himself,  nor  the  lords  the  Bishops
had  made  any  definition  with  respect  to  the  articles  in
question  ;  but  having  been  challenged  by  the  same  Bishop
of  Poitiers  to  write  down  his  profession  of  faith,  he  had  not
been  willing  to  do  that  alone,  but  had  simply  taken  the
Bishops  as  witnesses  of  his  views  to  give  more  authority  by
their  witness  to  that  which  was  asked  of  him.  At  this
explanation  so  full  of  humility  and  modesty,  the  previous
indignation  of  the  Cardinals  was  appeased,  on  condition,
however,  that  the  writing  just  read  having  been  drawn  up
without  reference  to  the  Curia,  should  not  be  taken  for  a
Creed  in  the  Church,  as  being  deficient  in  the  needful
weight  of  authority.  "And  thus  no  decision  could  be
arrived  at  concerning  the  three  propositions,  because  of
the  excitement  which  had  before  been  raised."  Otto
declares  that  this  was  not  strange,  and  he  adds  that  Gilbert
differed  from  the  other  Bishops  on  a  fourth  point  also,
"  since  they  professed  that  the  Divine  Nature  was  Incarnate
but  in  the  Son."  But  Gilbert,  "that  the  Person  of  the
Son  was  incarnate  not  without  his  Nature.  The  Roman
Pontiff  spoke  only  on  the  first  point,  and  defined  that  in
theology  no  separation  can  be  made  between  the  Nature
and  the  Person,  and  that  the  Divine  Essence  should  be
called  God  not  only  in  an  ablative  sense,1  but  also  in  a
nominative  sense."2  Gilbert  reverently  accepted  the  de
cision  of  the  Pope,  restored  his  Archdeacons  to  favour,  and
returned  to  his  diocese  "  in  full  honour,  and  in  the  com
pleteness  of  his  powers."

LXVI.  In  all  these  accounts  it  is  evident  that  Otto
strongly  favoured  Gilbert,  therefore  it  is  not  to  be  wondered
at  that  at  the  end  of  his  account  he  should  add  that  it  is
doubtful  whether  "  in  this  matter  the  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
being  subject  as  a  man  to  the  weakness  of  human  nature,

1 ?.e.,  by  way  of  abstraction  or  predicate  apparently. —  [E.] 3  Nomen.


60  GENERAL PREFACE.

was  not  deceived,  or  whether  the  Bishop,  being  a  very
learned  and  accomplished  man,  did  not  simply  escape  the
judgment  of  the  Church  by  cleverly  concealing  his  real
meaning."  But  Radevic  relates  that  Otto,  when  very  near
his  death,  caused  his  book  to  be  brought  in  which  he  had
written  this,  and  delivered  it  to  certain  religious  men,
"  that  whatever  he  had  said  on  behalf  of  the  opinions  of
Magister  Gilbert  which  might  do  harm  to  anyone  might
be  corrected  according  to  their  judgment."1

Rightly  does  Geoffrey  refer  his  readers  with  respect  to
the  whole  of  this  disputation  to  the  Sermons  of  Bernard  in
Cantica,  especially  to  Sermon  80,  in  which  the  holy  man
does  not  hesitate  to  declare  that  those  are  heretics  who
persist  in  defending  the  opinion  of  Gilbert,  although  he
refrains  from  mentioning  the  name  of  the  author  because  of
his  submission.

§  VI.  OF THE HENRICIANS AND OF OTHER HERETICS
WHO  WERE  REFUTED  BY  BERNARD.

LXVII.  Gilbert  and  Abaelard,  who  had  fallen  into  theo
logical  errors  by  a  perverse  employment  of  philosophy,
Bernard  overcame  by  reason  and  authority.  He  overcame
equally  by  his  actions  and  his  example  many  heretics  who
at  that  time  infested  the  various  provinces  of  France.
These  were,  in  Flanders,  Tanchelm,  a  native  of  Antwerp  ;
in  Provence,  Peter  de  Bruys,  whose  followers  were  called
Petrobrusians ;  and  in  Aquitaine  Henry.  Others  there
were,  but  without  any  well-known  leader,  in  Lorraine  and
in  the  districts  about  Cologne,  whom  we  will  therefore  call
Colognians.  To  these  may  be  added  all  the  followers  of
Arnold  of  Brescia.

LXVIII.  It  appears  from  the  Life  of  S.  Norbert  that  he
opposed  Tanchelm  and  his  eager  assaults,  and  that
Frederick,  Bishop  of  Cologne,  "  hindered  their  advance  and

1 Radevicus,  B.  ii.  c.  1 1.


GENERAL PREFACE.  6l

their  attacks  "  in  the  diocese  of  Maastricht :  and  on  this
subject  there  is  a  letter  in  Tengnagel  from  this  Church  to
the  same  Frederick  about  "  the  seducer  Tanchelm,"  which
gives  an  account  of  his  heresy  and  its  origin.  Peter  the
Venerable  also  laboured  against  the  Petrobrusians,  and
wrote  a  treatise  in  order  to  refute  them.  The  zeal  of
Bernard  for  the  Christian  cause  was  exercised  chiefly
against  the  heresy  of  the  Henricians,  which  he  industriously
harassed  by  speech  and  writing.  His  Letters  240  and  241
should  be  read  on  this  subject,  and  the  Life  of  Bernard,  by
Geoffrey,  B.  iii.  c.  6,  to  all  of  which  we  will  add  some
further  information  from  other  sources.

LXIX.  Henry,  whom  the  holy  man,  and  Geoffrey  after
him,  calls  "  an  apostate  monk,"  is  also  called  "  a  false
hermit"  in  the  Acts  of  the  Bishop  of  Mans  (Analecta,
Vol.  iii.),  where  his  character  and  his  perverse  actions  are
accurately  described.  In  what  place  he  was  born  the  words
used  do  not  indicate  precisely.  "About  the  same  time,"
that  is  to  say,  under  Bishop  Hildebert,  "  a  certain  hypocrite
appeared  on  the  confines  of  these  regions  whose  depraved
character  and  whose  detestable  doctrines  rendered  him
worthy  of  the  punishment  of  being  thrown  to  scorpions  in
the  manner  of  parricides."  He  under  a  feigned  show  of
learning  and  sanctity  committed  horrible  excesses.  He
was  wont  to  boast  that  he  could  recognize  at  the  first
glance  the  faults  of  all  men,  even  those  which  were  un
known  to  anyone.  He  sent  to  Mans  two  of  his  disciples,
who  arrived  in  the  suburbs  of  the  city  on  Ash  Wednesday.
"  They  bore,  according  to  the  custom  of  their  master,
staves  and  a  banner  of  the  Cross,  and  resembled  penitents
in  all  respects  by  the  colour  of  their  garments,  and  by
their  kind  of  life.  The  inhabitants  of  Mans,  being  deceived
by  these  appearances,  welcomed  them  as  if  they  had  been
angels.  Even  the  Bishop  Hildebert  received  them  kindly,
and  as  he  was  on  the  point  of  setting  out  "  on  a  journey  to


62  GENERAL PREFACE.

Rome,"  he  "  enjoined  his  archdeacons  amongst  other  things
to  permit  the  pseudo-hermit,  Henry,  to  enter  peaceably  into
the  town  and  to  preach  to  the  people/'  which  he  had  after
wards  reason  bitterly  to  repent.  Perhaps  it  may  be  inferred
from  this  that  Henry  was  originally  from  the  neighbourhood
of  Mans,  where  he  commenced  to  disseminate  the  venom
of  his  perverse  doctrine.  If  he  had  made  himself  known
elsewhere  already,  Hildebert,  who  was  a  prelate  both
learned  and  vigilant,  would  not  so  easily  have  given  him
access  into  his  city.  But  it  may  possibly  be  the  case  that
he  had  come  from  a  distant  region,  perhaps  from  Italy,  as  I
am  about  to  explain.

LXX.  Scarcely  had  Henry  entered  into  the  city  than
"  the  common  people,  as  they  were  accustomed  to  do,
applauded  his  novelties."  Many  of  the  clerks  also  supplied
him  with  food,  and  prepared  for  him  a  platform  from
whence  he  might  address  the  great  crowds  of  people,
which  he  did  with  "  marvellous  eloquence."  The  effect  of
his  addresses  was  to  excite  the  anger  of  the  people  against
the  ecclesiastics  of  the  town.  They  were  treated  "  like
heathens  and  publicans,  so  that  great  threatenings  were
uttered  against  their  domestics,  nor  would  anyone  buy  any
thing  from  them  or  sell  anything  to  them."  They  even
went  so  far  as  "to  determine  not  only  to  pull  down  their
houses  and  pillage  their  goods,  but  also  to  stone  them  or
to  hang  them  to  the  gibbet,  had  not  the  sovereign  and  the
nobles  resisted  their  wicked  intentions."

LXXI.  When  the  turn  which  things  had  taken  was  but
too  late  perceived,  the  clergy  of  Mans  forbade,  by  a  written
notice,  the  preaching  of  Henry  and  his  followers.  Where
fore  Henry,  the  return  of  Hildebert  being  made  known,
"retired  into  the  village  of  S.  Carileph,"  by  no  means  desist
ing  from  his  endeavours,  but  breaking  out  into  more  violent
proceedings  day  by  day.  When  Hildebert,  on  his  return
from  his  Roman  journey,  wished  to  give  his  benediction  to


GENERAL PREFACE.  63

the  people,  they  being  led  away  by  the  preaching  of  the
heretic,  treated  him  with  great  disrespect.  Then  he  went
to  meet  the  deceiver,  demanded  of  him  "  whether  he  had
received  sacred  Orders,  and  if  so,  what  ?  "  He  replied  that
he  was  a  deacon  ;  and  having  been  bidden  to  depart  out  of
that  province,  "he  fled  secretly,  and  would  have  spread  his
serpentine  venom  and  troubled  other  regions  in  like
manner,  but  that  happily  his  reputation  preceded  him."  All
that  we  have  said  upon  this  subject  is  from  the  Acts  of
Hildebert.

LXXII.  During  this  time,  two  disciples  of  Henry,  Cyprian
and  Peter,  renounced  their  errors,  as  an  encyclical  letter  of
Hildebert  (n.  78)  declares.  In  this  their  master  is  thus
depicted:  ''This  was  Henri,  a  principal  snare  of  the  devil
and  well-known  soldier  of  antichrist.  Taken  captive  by
his  appearance  of  religion  and  knowledge,  these  two
brothers  long  adhered  to  him,  until  both  the  turpitude  of
his  life  and  the  errors  of  his  doctrine  became  evident  to
them.  When  they  had  become  convinced  that  his  ways
were  not  right,  their  eyes  were  opened  as  to  their  condition,
and  they  came  to  present  themselves  to  us.  He  had  so
infested  our  diocese  with  his  doctrines,  that  our  clergy  had
scarcely  the  liberty  to  oppose  and  confute  them  even  within
the  walls  of  their  Churches."  It  was  thus  that  Hildebert
was  convinced,  though  very  late,  of  the  danger  to  which  he
had  exposed  himself  by  an  incautious  approbation  of  un
known  teachers,  who  under  an  appearance  of  piety  corrupt
the  minds  of  their  hearers.

LXXIII.  It  is  clear  from  what  precedes,  that  this  Henry
infested  the  diocese  of  Mans  long  before  he  approached  the
neighbourhood  of  Toulouse,  whence  Bernard  expelled  him  :
since  the  journey  to  Rome,  which  Hildebert  undertook
while  he  was  yet  Bishop  of  Mans  and  during  the  time  of
which  that  wicked  deceiver  sowed  the  tares  among  the
people  of  Mans,  must  have  taken  place  before  1125,  in


64  GENERAL PREFACE.

which  year  Hildebert  became  Archbishop  of  Tours.  But
Bernard,  on  the  other  hand,  did  not  go  into  the  neighbour
hood  of  Toulouse  before  1147.  In  his  Letter  241,  which  he
wrote  from  Toulouse  to  Count  Hildefonsus,  the  holy  man
expresses  himself  in  these  terms  :  "  Inquire  if  you  please,  in
what  manner  he  has  departed  from  the  city  of  Lausanne,  from
Mans,  from  Poitiers,  and  from  Bordeaux."  It  appears  that
such  was  the  itinerary  of  that  apostate  in  his  wanderings.
He  began  to  preach  at  Lausanne,  from  whence  he  went  to
Mans  ;^ perhaps  he  had  come  to  Lausanne  from  Italy,  from
which  rubbish  of  this  kind,  relics  of  the  Manichaeans,  passed
over  into  every  part  of  France.  Such  were  those  heretics
called  Cameracenses  who  had  come  out  of  Italy  and  were  in
1025  condemned  at  the  Council  of  Arras.  About  the  same
time  some  of  them  were  burnt  at  Orleans,  and  indeed  the
Exordium  Cisterciense  (Life,  B.  vii.  c.  17)  calls  the
Henricians  by  the  name  of  Manichaeans,  where  it  is
reported  that  the  legate  of  the  Pope  and  other  Bishops
assembled  at  Toulouse  with  our  Saint,  "  in  order  to  confute
the  heresy  of  the  Manichaeans."  The  most  illustrious  Bishop
of  Meaux,  in  the  excellent  work  which  he  has  written  con
cerning  the  Variations  of  Heretics,  has  clearly  shown  (B.  xi.)
in  what  manner  these  heretics  and  their  followers  merited
the  name  of  Manichaeans  since  they  shared  their  errors.

LXXIV.  The  same  Henrician  heretics  spread  also  in  the
diocese  of  Perigueux,  under  the  leadership  of  a  certain
Pontius,  as  I  learn  in  a  letter  from  Heribert,  in  Vol.  iii.  of
my  Analecta,  where  the  peculiar  tenets  of  those  Pontians
are  set  out.  This  explains  why  Bernard  repaired  to  the
people  of  Perigord  or  to  Perigueux,  as  appears  from  Part  iii.
of  Book  vi.,  which  is  that  of  his  miracles  ;  it  is  related  in
Par.  4,  that  he  found  many  Arians  at  Toulouse,  and  put  them
to  flight  as  he  had  done  the  heretic  Henry.  Not  only  this,
but  the  same  Henry  having  been  previously  condemned  in
a  Council  at  Pisa,  is  said  to  have  been  committed  to


GENERAL PREFACE.  65

Bernard  in  order  that  he  might  become  a  monk  at  Clairvaux.
But  he,  after  he  had  received  a  letter  from  Bernard  to  the
inmates  of  Clairvaux,  preferred  to  persist  obstinately  in  the
error  which  he  had  once  taken  up,  rather  than  to  return  in
this  brief  and  easy  manner  to  the  way  of  salvation.

LXXV.  Bernard  depicts  Henry  in  vivid  colours  in  his
Letter  251  already  quoted.  He  represents  him  as  a  man
well-educated  and  having  an  appearance  of  piety,  but  given
over  to  gaming  and  to  bad  women.  He  enumerates  as  his
errors  these  :  He  made  no  account  of  priests  and  persons  in
holy  Orders,  he  abolished  sacraments  and  festivals,  and
refused  baptism  to  infants.  Of  another  class  was  that
heretic,  who  is  mentioned  by  Hildebert  in  his  Letter  51,
who  rejected  intercessions  of  saints,  and  endeavoured,
without  success,  to  draw  Hildebert  himself  into  giving
patronage  to  his  sect.  But  whether  those  heretics  whom
Bernard  addresses  himself  to  confute  in  his  Sermons  65  and
66,  super  Cantica,  are  the  same  as  the  Henricians  we  must
now  inquire.

LXXVI.  I  was  myself  at  one  time  of  the  opinion  that
they  were  the  same,  but  the  discovery  of  a  letter  of  Ever-
vinus,  Abbot  of  Steinfeld,  which  was  the  occasion  of  these
two  Sermons,  made  me  change  my  opinion.  Those  heretics
were,  in  fact,  from  Cologne,  and,  though  they  shared  in
some  points  the  errors  of  the  Henricians,  they  differed  from
them  in  many  respects.  Evervinus  divided  the  heretics
from  Cologne  into  two  classes.  One  class  pretended  that
they  alone  constituted  the  Church,  since  they  only  walked
in  the  footsteps  of  Christ.  In  respect  of  food  they  forbade
the  use  of  milk  and  whatever  was  made  of  it.  In  their
sacraments  they  covered  themselves  with  a  veil.  They
asserted  that  they  consecrated  every  day  their  food  and
their  drink  to  be  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ,  and  that
other  people  in  their  sacraments  were  far  distant  from  the
truth.  Besides  the  baptism  of  water  they  employed  another

VOL.  I.  5


66  GENERAL PREFACE.

in  fire  and  the  spirit  by  the  imposition  of  hands  alone.  Our
baptism  they  rejected,  as  also  marriage.  Finally  they
declared  that  whomsoever  was  chosen  or  baptized  among
them  had  the  power  of  baptizing  others  whom  he  thought
worthy,  and  of  consecrating  upon  their  altar  (mensa]  the
Body  and  Blood  of  Christ.

LXXVII.  The  others  refused  to  the  priests  of  the  Church
as  living  in  a  worldly  manner  the  power  of  consecrating  and
of  administering  the  other  sacraments,  baptism  excepted,
which  latter  they  used  to  confer,  not  on  children,  but  on
adults  alone.  Every  marriage  contracted  between  persons
who  had  ceased  to  be  virgin  they  regarded  as  fornication.
Lastly,  they  rejected  the  prayers  of  saints,  fasting,  and
other  bodily  mortifications  ;  also  purgatory  and  prayers  for
the  dead.

LXXVIII.  The  Henrician  heretics  and  those  of  Cologne,
therefore,  were  of  similar  views,  inasmuch  as  they  held  in
hatred  the  ministers  of  the  Church,  the  sacraments,  the
baptism  of  infants,  and  marriage.  They  differed  only  in  a
few  particulars  which  arose  from  a  certain  variety  of  dis
position  than  from  opposing  principles.  In  one  word,  they
were  different  branches,  but  they  sprang  from  the  same
root.  I  have  no  doubt  that  these  heretics  of  Cologne  were
produced  from  the  workshop  of  Tanchelm.  He  was  a  lay
man,  as  Abaelard  asserts,  who  disseminated  his  errors  in
Flanders,  and  especially  at  Antwerp,  and  at  length  arrived
at  such  a  point  of  madness  that  he  used  to  call  himself  the
Son  of  God,  and  caused  a  temple  to  be  built  to  himself,  it
is  said,  by  the  people  whom  he  had  seduced.  For  this
reason  there  was  founded  by  the  Bishop  of  Tournay,  under
whose  jurisdiction  that  place  then  was,  a  company  of  twelve
clerics  in  the  Church  of  S.  Michael  at  Antwerp,  in  order
that  they  should  combat  these  impious  dogmas,  which
church  was  afterwards  given  over  to  S.  Norbert.  What
were  the  perverse  dogmas  of  Tanchelm  I  learn  from  a  Letter


GENERAL PREFACE.  67

of  the  Church  at  Maastricht  to  Frederick,  Bishop  of  Cologne,
"  Concerning  the  seducer,  Tanchelm."  He  used  to  say
that  "  the  Churches  of  God  ought  to  be  considered  places
of  prostitution  ;  that  what  was  done  by  the  priest's  office  at
the  table  of  the  Lord  was  absolutely  nothing  ;  that  the  sacra
ments  ought  to  be  called  pollutions,  and  that  their  efficacy
came  to  them  from  the  holiness  and  the  merits  of  the
ministers  who  performed  them,"  all  of  which  agree  per
fectly  well  with  the  wild  fancies  of  the  heretics  previously
named.  A  certain  presbyter,  Evervacher,  "  apostatizing
from  his  priestly  dignity,  adhered  to  the  service  of  that
•execrable  man  and  followed  him  to  Rome."  The  same
person  did  much  harm  afterwards  to  the  Church  at
Maestricht.  The  whole  clergy  of  that  city  returned  thanks
to  Frederick  because  "he  hindered  the  progress  and  success"
•of  Tanchelm,  from  which  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  his  errors
had  penetrated  even  into  the  diocese  of  Maestricht,  and  as
far  as  Cologne,  as  is  evident  from  the  Letter  of  Evervinus,
and  that  those  heretics  of  Cologne  arose  from  the  same
author.

LXXIX.  Hugo  Metellus,  who  was  then  a  canon  regular
<of  Toul,  is  a  witness  in  his  Letter  to  Henry,  Bishop  of  that
city,  that  a  scourge  of  the  same  kind  had  crept  in  upon  the
:soil  of  Toul.  "  There  are  hiding  in  your  diocese,"  he  says,
"  or  rather  are  beginning  to  show  themselves,  men  who  are
•destructive,  who  would  be  more  truly  called  by  the  name  of
.savage  beasts,  since  they  live  in  a  similar  way,  for  they
condemn  Marriage,  they  abhor  Baptism,  they  make  a
mockery  of  the  Sacraments  of  the  Church,  and  they  abhor
the  very  name  of  Christian."  These  were,  without  doubt,
the  miserable  and  ill-omened  disciples  of  the  heretics  of
Cologne.

LXXX.  To  the  Henricians  succeeded,  or  rather  were
.added,  men  of  the  same  stamp,  who  called  themselves
Cathari,  that  is  to  say,  the  pure ;  whose  errors  Bonacursus,


68  GENERAL PREFACE.

who  was  at  first  their  master  at  Milan,  has  laid  bare  and
confuted  in  a  book  which  has  been  published  in  Spicilegium,
B.  iii.  These  have  much  affinity  with  the  tenets  of  the
Manichaeans,  as  also  with  those  of  the  other  heretics  whom
we  have  mentioned  above.  It  is  to  the  Cathari  that  Gilbert
of  Hoiland  seems  to  make  allusion  in  his  Sermon  36,  in
Cantica,  n.  6.  "  There  shoot  up,"  he  says,  "  in  these  days
certain  trees  which  our  Heavenly  Father  hath  not  planted,
trees  whose  origin  is  not  from  our  Libanus.  These  are  the
men  who  boast  of  their  endurance  in  labour,  their  patience
under  injuries,  and  their  endurance  of  poverty.  They  seem
to  be  cedars,  but  they  are  not  those  of  Libanus.  Their
heart  and  conscience  is  defiled."  Ecbert,  Abbot  of  Schonoue,
also  wrote  Sermons  against  the  Cathari,  which  still  remain.

LXXXI.  Bonacursus  associates  the  Passagiens  and  the
Arnoldists  with  the  Cathari,  the  former  because  they  declared
that  all  the  rites  of  the  Mosaic  Law  ought  to  be  observed.
They  equally  denied  the  divinity  of  the  Son  and  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  rejected  the  authority  of  all  the  Doctors  of
the  Catholic  Church,  as  they  did  also  and  chiefly  that  of  the
Roman  Church.  The  latter — that  is,  the  Arnoldists —
thought  that  "  the  Sacraments  of  the  Church  ought  to  be
avoided  because  of  the  corruption  of  the  clergy."

LXXXII.  They  took  this  name,  I  imagine,  from  that
factious  man  Arnold,  who,  under  pretext  of  restoring
liberty  and  the  Republic  at  Rome,  desired  all  the  temporal
rights  of  the  Pontiff  to  be  abrogated,  and  to  leave  him  only
the  power  over  spiritual  things  with  tithes  and  free  will
offerings.  He  was  born  at  Brescia,  and  was  a  clerk  of  the
Church  of  that  town.  He  had  been  a  disciple  of  Peter  Abae-
lard,  and  had  a  strong  liking  for  new  and  singular  opinions,,
as  Otto  of  Frisingen  testifies.  After  having  studied  in
France  he  returned  to  Italy,  and  assumed  the  habit  of  the
Religious,  the  better  to  deceive  the  unwary ;  which,  how
ever,  did  not  prevent  him  from  being  a  hater  of  monks,  and


GENERAL PREFACE.  69

especially  of  the  clergy.  While  he  flattered  laymen,  he
used  to  say  that  neither  clerks  who  had  property,  nor
Bishops  who  had  rights  of  temporal  lordship,  nor  monks
who  held  lands,  could  possibly  be  saved,  but  that  all  these
things  pertained  to  the  sovereign.  Besides  this,  he  is  said
not  to  have  held  correct  opinions  respecting  the  Sacrament
of  the  Altar,  nor  the  Baptism  of  infants"  (Otto  Fris.,  B.
ii.  20).  Thus  he  was  infected  with  the  errors  of  the
Petrobrusians  and  Henricians.  Innocent  II.  expelled  him
from  Italy  and  obliged  him  to  retire  to  Zurich  in  Switzer
land.  Having  heard  of  the  death  of  Innocent,  he  returned
to  Rome  at  the  beginning  of  the  pontificate  of  Eugenius,
and,  finding  the  city  ill-disposed  towards  the  new  Pontiff,  he
blew  upon  the  flame  of  sedition.  This  reached  so  great  a
height  that  the  Cardinals  were  maltreated,  some  of  them
wounded,  and  Eugenius  himself  driven  from  Rome.
Bernard  undertook  the  cause  of  the  Pontiff,  and  wrote  to
the  Romans  a  magnificent  Letter  on  this  subject  (Letter  243).
He  addressed  another  in  the  same  sense  to  the  Emperor
Conrad,  whom  the  Romans  had  endeavoured  without
success  by  a  Letter,  given  by  Otto  (B.  i.  28),  to  draw  over
to  their  side.  Thus  our  Saint  was  never  found  wanting  to
any  needful  work,  nor  to  any  necessity  of  the  Church  ;  he
seemed  to  have  been  born  only  to  labour  for  the  common
interest  of  the  Christian  Republic.  At  last  Arnold  was
.apprehended,  attached  to  a  post  by  order  of  the  prefect  of
that  Rome  which  he  had  so  greatly  flattered,  and  his  body
reduced  to  ashes,  "  so  that  his  remains  might  not  be  held  in
veneration  by  the  foolish  populace."  Much  more  respecting
him  may  be  read  in  Otto  and  in  the  Notes  from  that  author
to  Letter  195  of  Bernard.

§  VII. OF THE CRUSADE PREACHED BY S. BERNARD

AND  ITS  UNHAPPY  ISSUE.

LXXXIII. One of  the  last  labours of  Bernard  was  the
preaching of an expedition into  the Holy Land, which


JO  GENERAL PREFACE.

enterprise  was  for  him  the  source  of  great  labour  and
anxiety,  as  may  be  easily  understood  both  from  his  Life  and
his  writings.  Otto  of  Frisingen  attributes  to  Louis  the
Younger,  King  of  France,  the  idea  of  this  expedition.  He
felt  himself  strongly  influenced  by  the  idea  of  making  a
voyage  to  the  Holy  Places,  as  his  brother  Philip,  who  was
"  bound  by  the  same  vow,"  had  been  prevented  by  death
from  fulfilling  it.  He  imparted  his  design  to  the  chief
noblemen  of  his  court,  and  they  determined  to  take  the
advice  of  Bernard  on  that  subject.  The  holy  abbot  being
then  summoned,  was  of  opinion  that  a  matter  of  such
great  importance  should  be  referred  "  to  the  consideration
of  the  Roman  Pontiff."  Eugenius  sanctioned  and  greatly
approved  the  project,  and  "committed  to  the  Abbot  of
Clairvaux  full  power  of  preaching  and  of  exciting  the  zeal
of  all  to  this  enterprise,  since  he  was  regarded  as  a  prophet
or  apostle  among  all  the  peoples  of  France  and  Germany."
Bernard  obeyed  the  Apostolic  letter,  "and  having  raised  the
minds  of  very  many  persons  to  a  high  pitch  of  enthusiasm
for  the  expedition  beyond  the  sea,  he  gave  the  Cross  at
Vezelay  to  King  Louis,  to  Thierry,  Count  of  Flanders,  to
Henry,  son  of  Theobald,  Count  of  Blois,  and  to  other  barons
and  nobles."

LXXXIV.  In  the  meantime  a  certain  monk,  named
Ralph,  whilst  preaching  the  Crusade  also  in  Germany,
excited  the  Christians  to  commence  by  the  murder  of  the
Jews.  Bernard  repressed  his  zeal  by  a  Letter,  and  he  himself
undertook  to  preach  the  Crusade  in  the  east  of  France,
that  is  to  say,  in  that  region  of  Germany  which  borders  on
the  Rhine.  Then  the  Emperor  Conrad  summoned  a  general
assembly  at  Spires,  whither  Bernard  proceeded,  and,  "by  the
working  of  many  miracles,  both  in  private  and  public,  he
persuaded  the  Emperor  Conrad  and  his  nephew  Frederick
and  other  princes  and  illustrious  persons  to  take  the  Cross."
Frederick,  Duke  of  Suabia,  whom  his  son  had  greatly


GENERAL PREFACE.  71

displeased  by  taking  the  Cross,  he  succeeded  in  appeasing;
he  ordered  the  monk  Ralph  to  return  to  his  cloister,  and  in
his  place  he  gave  to  Conrad,  who  was  travelling  through
Bavaria,  Adam,  Abbot  of  Eberach,  to  help  him  in  urging  on
the  departure  of  the  expedition.  There  is  extant  a  Letter  of
Bernard  (n.  363)  on  this  subject  addressed  to  the  peoples
of  the  East  of  France  ;  it  is  followed  by  a  Letter  addressed
to  Henry,  Archbishop  of  Mayence,  to  beg  him  to  repress
the  zeal  of  Ralph.  "  Thus,"  continues  Otto,  "  not  only  the
whole  of  the  Roman  Empire,  but  also  the  neighbouring
realms,  Western  France,  England,  Pannonia,  and  many
other  peoples  and  nations,  rose  to  take  the  Cross  on  hearing
of  this  expedition,  and  almost  the  entire  West  became
peaceful,  so  that  it  was  regarded  as  a  crime  not  only  to
excite  private  quarrels,  but  also  for  any  one  to  bear  arms  in
public."

LXXXV.  So  great  an  impression  upon  the  whole  of  the
West  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  preaching  of  Bernard  ;  but
when  the  success  of  the  expedition  did  not  answer  to  the
hopes  and  prayers  of  the  people,  all  the  obloquy  of  the  ill-
success  was  thrown  upon  him  also,  as  is  customary  with
mortals  who  judge  of  things  according  to  their  issue;  nor
was  there  anything  that  ever  caused  greater  grief  to
Bernard  than  that,  not  for  his  own  sake,  but  for  the  cause  of
God.  Thus  he  says  at  the  commencement  of  Book  ii.  Of
Consideration  :  "  If  it  is  needful  for  one  of  two  things  to

o

happen,  I  prefer  that  the  murmurs  of  the  multitude  should
be  against  me  rather  than  against  God  It  would  be  a
happy  thing  for  me  if  the  world  would  deign  to  use  me  for  a
shield  to  ward  off  blows  directed  against  Him.  Willingly
do  I  accept  the  detraction  of  evil  tongues,"  etc.  The
unfortunate  issue  of  that  enterprise  threw  such  a  gloom
over  the  minds  of  almost  all  that  the  holy  Doctor  pro
nounced  him  happy  "  who  had  not  been  scandalized  by  it."
But  how  great  was  the  sorrow  of  Bernard  himself  appears


72  GENERAL PREFACE.

both  from  Letter  288,  which  he  wrote  upon  that  subject
from  his  bed  of  suffering,  caused  probably  by  grief  of  mind,
and  from  the  Letter  of  John,  Abbot  of  Casa  Mario,  to
Bernard  himself,  which  is  now  numbered  386  among  those
of  Bernard,  in  which  the  author  tries  to  console  our  Saint,
whom  he  had  heard  was  deeply  afflicted  on  account  of  the
unfortunate  issue  of  the  expedition.

LXXXVI.  Yet  there  were  not  wanting  those  who  came
forward  to  defend  Bernard,  among  whom  must  be  reckoned,
and  not  in  the  last  place,  Otto,  Bishop  of  Frisingen,  who
was  not  in  the  habit  of  greatly  favouring  Bernard.  Hr
makes  a  digression  in  his  Book  de  Gestis  Friderici  (chap.
Ix.)  to  excuse  the  failure  of  that  expedition,  in  which  he
himself  had  taken  part.  At  the  end  of  an  excursus,  philo
sophical  rather  than  historical,  he  thus  concludes  in  favour
of  Bernard  :  "Yet  if  we  should  say  that  that  holy  Abbot
was  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  rouse  us  to  that  enter
prise,  but  that  we,  disobeying  the  salutary  commandments
of  God  by  our  pride  and  our  licence,  have  deservedly  com
promised  both  the  success  of  the  undertaking  and  the  safety
of  those  engaged  in  it,  we  should  say  nothing  contrary
to  ancient  examples  and  arguments."  Yet  one  thing,  he
adds,  namely,  that  "  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  are  not
always  subject  to  the  prophets,"  desiring,  no  doubt,  to
indicate  by  these  words  that  it  is  not  absolutely  certain  that
Bernard  had  spoken  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit
respecting  that  expedition,  when  he  conjectured  what  the
event  of  it  would  be.

LXXXVII.  And  yet  Bernard  himself,  at  the  beginning  of
B.  ii.  de  Consideratione,  written  to  Pope  Eugenius,  when
trying  to  defend  that  enterprise  from  calumny,  does  not
hesitate  to  say  that  he  was  impelled  from  above  to  what  he
did.  "We  have  spoken  of  peace,"  he  says,  "and  there  is
no  peace ;  we  have  promised  success,  and  behold  con
fusion."  Then  he  adds  these  words  in  his  own  defence  :


GENERAL PREFACE.  73

"  Can  it  be  said  that  I  acted  rashly  or  lightly  in  that  matter?
1  have  run,  indeed,  in  it  not  (as  the  Apostle  says)  as  un
certainly,  but  at  your  bidding,  or  rather  at  the  bidding  of
God,  through  you."  And  a  little  farther  on  he  supposes  his
adversaries  to  reproach  him  thus  :  "  How  do  we  know  that
your  word  comes  from  the  Lord  ?  What  sign  doest  thou
that  we  may  believe  thee  ?  "  And  addressing  himself  to
Eugenius  he  replies  thus  :  "'I  have  nothing  to  reply  to  that ;
modesty  constrains  me  to  be  silent.  Do  you  reply  for  me
and  for  yourself  according  to  what  you  have  heard  and  seen."
In  which  words  he,  without  doubt,  makes  a  modest  refer
ence  to  the  miracles  done  by  him  for  the  confirmation  of  his
preaching.

LXXXVIII.  But  of  all  his  apologists  Geoffrey,  his  disciple,
best  vindicates  his  master  from  reproaches  (Life,  B.  iii.  c.
4).  He  first  remarks  that  Bernard  was  not  the  original
author  of  the  enterprise  ;  "in  fact,  the  proved  necessity  of
the  Crusade  had  already  won  over  the  minds  of  many
persons  when  he  was  called  into  counsel  once  and  again  by
the  King  of  France,  and  entrusted  with  the  matter  also,
by  letters  from  the  Pope  ;  nor  did  he  consent  to  open  his
mouth  upon  this  subject  nor  to  give  advice  to  the  people
until  he  was  bidden  by  the  express  communication  of  the
Pontiff  himself  to  lay  the  matter  before  peoples  and  princes
as  the  tongue  of  the  Roman  Church."  His  preaching,
undertaken  by  him  as  a  matter  of  obedience,  \vas  at  length
confirmed  from  on  high  by  so  many  and  so  great  miracles
and  signs  that  "  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  relate  them  or
even  to  enumerate  them."  Finally,  that  if  the  Eastern
Church  did  not  obtain  freedom  by  that  expedition,  at  all
events  the  Church  on  high  attained  a  joy  proportioned  to
the  number  of  those  who,  by  their  death,  "  rendered  up
their  souls  to  Christ  in  the  fruit  of  penitence  and  purified
by  many  tribulations."  And,  indeed,  this  was  the  very
truth  which  John,  the  holy  Abbot  of  Casa  Mario,


74  GENERAL PREFACE.

signified  to  Bernard  had  been  made  known  to  him  by
revelation.

LXXXIX.  But  why  do  we  delay  in  justifying  Bernard  ?
His  authority  has  long  been  so  great  in  the  eyes  of  all,  even
of  the  heterodox,  that  his  life,  his  extraordinary  sanctity,
and  his  teaching  are  approved  by  the  general  opinion  and
praise  of  all.

XC.  So  much  it  seemed  proper  to  me  to  say  by  way  of
Preface  to  this  new  edition  of  the  Works  of  S.  Bernard.  It"
it  shall  seem  careful  and  accurate  to  the  learned,  my  friends
and  the  companions  of  my  studies,  Dom  Michael  Germain,
D.  Thierry  Ruinart,  and  also  D.  Edmond  Martene,  who
have  expended  their  labour  upon  this  edition  with  much
love  and  industry,  will  have  the  praise.  For  myself  I  ask
but  one  reward,  as  I  have  proposed  to  myself  but  one  end,
that  the  fruit  of  my  labour  should  be,  if  only  in  some  small
degree,  serviceable  and  useful  to  the  admirers  of  S.Bernard,
to  the  Church,  and  to  the  entire  Christian  world.


To  this  preface  in  the  fourth  edition,  from  which  \ve  have  trans
lated,  the  following  note  is  appended  :—

Such,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  words,  were  the  prefatory
observations  made  by  D.  John  Mabillon  to  his  second  edition  of
S.  Bernard,  which  we  reproduce  in  preference  to  others,  inasmuch
as  it  is  considered  of  higher  value  by  the  studious.  In  the  year
1719  appeared  a  third  edition,  with  various  additions,  respecting
which  we  read  at  the  end  of  Mabillon's  preface  as  follows  : — •

"  D.  Massuet  had  made  a  beginning  of  labour  upon  this  edition,
and  would  have  proceeded  with  it  had  not  an  untimely  death  put  a
period  to  his  studies.  To  him  are  owing,  in  Vol.  i.,  two  recently
discovered  Letters,  Nos.  418  and  419,  a  third  drawn  from  the
Miscellanea  of  Baluze,  No.  425,  and  also  two  charters,  whereof  the
former  is  for  the  monasteries  of  Lisieux  and  S.  Evre,  and  the  other
for  the  monastery  of  S.  Amand  de  Boisse.  In  the  second  volume
there  will  be  found  new  :  The  third  book  of  the  Epistle  to  the


GENERAL PREFACE.  75

Brethren  of  Mont  Dieu,  and  the  Adtnonitio  of  D.  Massuet,  in  which
he  claims  the  entire  Epistle,  which  was  ascribed  to  William  of
S.  Thierry,  as  having  been  written  by  Guigo,  fifth  Prior  of  the
Grande  Chartreuse.  Also  another  Observatio  of  the  same  writer
which  assigns  the  Treatise  de  Contemplando  Deo,  and  that  de  Natura
d  Dignitate  Amoris  to  William  of  S.  Thierry.  Lastly,  the  Letter
of  Tromund,  monk  of  Clairvaux,  respecting  the  canonization  of
S.  Bernard,  which  has  not  before  been  published."

In  this  fourth  edition  we  have  not  omitted  these  additions,  and
we  have  furthermore  included  thirty-six  Letters  of  S.  Bernard  which,
after  the  above  editions  were  completed,  D.  Martene  transcribed
from  MSS.,  viz.,  thirty-four  from  the  Vedastine,  one  from  that  of
Anchin,  and  another  spurious  one  from  Verdun,  and  first  made
public  in  his  Amplissima  Collectio  Veterum  Scriptorum,  etc.,
Tom.  I.,  pp.  725-744.  Of  these  the  first  is  numbered  in  the
common  order  of  the  Letters,  420,  and  the  thirty-fifth,
454,  the  spurious  one,  455.  Also  a  Hymn  of  the  holy  Doctor,
which  in  the  same  Collection  (Tom.  i.  p.  746)  D.  Martene  has
brought  forward  from  the  Aldenberg  MS.,  and  as  it  is  in  the  praise
of  S.  Malachi,  it  finds  an  appropriate  place  in  Vol.  ii.,  after  the
Life  of  that  Bishop.  In  order  that  this  new  edition  might  be  the
more  correct,!  have  consulted  not  only  three  examples  of  Mabillon,
but  also  some  older  copies.


BERNARDINE CHRONOLOGY.


A.D.

1091.  The  fourth  year  of  Pope  Urban  II.,  the  35th  of  the
Emperor  Henry  IV.,  the  3ist  of  Philip  I.,  King  of
France,  BERNARD  was  born  in  the  castle  called  Fon
taines,  near  Dijon,  in  Burgundy.  His  father  was
Tescelin  Sorus,  lord  of  Fontaines ;  his  mother  Alith,
daughter  of  Bernard,  lord  of  Montbar.  His  paternal
house  was  lately,  by  the  gift  of  Louis  XIII.,  King  of
France,  granted  to  the  Feuillant  Fathers  for  a  convent.

1098.  B. Robert, Abbot of Molesmes, taking with him
twenty-one  monks  of  the  same  house,  withdrew  into
the desert of Citeaux, and there founded a new
monastery, in the Diocese of Chalons, about five
leagues  from Dijon, with the approval  and  help  of
Walter, Bishop  of  Chalons,  and  Hugh,  Archbishop  of
Lyons.

1099.  Death  of  Urban II. He is  succeeded by Paschal
II.,  who  had  been  a  monk  of  Cluny.

B.  Robert,  on  the  complaints  of  the  monks  of
Molesmes,  is  commanded  by  the  Pope  to  return  to
Molesmes.  He  is  succeeded  at  Citeaux  by  Prior
Alberic.  This  year  the  Church  is  dedicated  to  the
honour  of  B.  V.  M.

noo.  This  year  the  monks  John  and  Ilbodus  are  sent  to
Rome  with  commendatory  Letters.  Paschal  II.  con
firms  the  foundation  of  Citeaux,  and  confers  privileges
upon  it.

1101.  Abbot  Alberic  institutes  a  stricter  observance  of  the
Rule  of  S.  Benedict.

1 1 02.  Odo, Duke  of  Burgundy,  founder  of  Citeaux,  dies,
and  is  buried  in  the  Abbey  Church. In  the  same  year
his  son  Henry  puts  on  the  monastic  habit  there.


BERNARDINK CHRONOLOGY.  77

A.D.

1 103.  The  Cistercians  are  believed  to  have  changed  from  a
black habit  to  a  white ; and  they  propose  to recite
daily  the  office  of  the  B.  V.  M.
i  105.  Alith,  mother  of S.  Bernard,  is  believed  to  have  died

this  year.

1109. B.  Alberic,  second  Abbot  of  Citeaux,  died  this  year,

having  sat  9^  years. He  is  succeeded  by  B.  Stephen

Harding, of a noble English family, and formerly

Prior.

i  no. In  this  year  died  B.  Robert,  Abbot  of  Molesmes,  and

first  founder  of  Citeaux.

1113.  Is  to  be  noted  for  the  conversion  of  B.  Bernard.  He
entered  the  community  at  Clairvaux,  then  under  Abbot
Stephen,  with  thirty  companions,  and  thereby  made  it
well  known.  The  Cistercian  Order  begun  from  that
time  to  flourish  greatly.

In the same year Ferte (Firmitas], the eldest
daughter-house  of  Citeaux,  was  founded  in  the  Diocese
of  Chalons. The  first  Abbot  was  Bertrand.
114.  Bernard  prays  for  and  obtains  the  ability  to  reap,
which  his  weakness  of  body  had  hitherto  prevented.

Pontigny,  the  second  daughter-house  of  Citeaux,  is
founded  four  leagues  from  Autun.  The  Church  of  this
community  was  afterwards  built  by  Theobald,  Count  of
Champagne,  who  was  styled  the  founder.  The  first
Abbot  was  Hugo  of  Macon,  afterwards  Bishop  of
Autun,  to  whom  Bernard  wrote  many  Letters.
1115.  In  this  year  were  founded  Clairvaux  and  Morimund,
third  and  fourth  daughter-houses  of  Citeaux.  The
former  not  by  Theobald,  as  some  think  (confounding
the  translation  of  Clairvaux  in  1135  with  its  founda
tion),  but  by  Hugo,  Count  of  Troyes,  and  Bernard  was
made  Abbot  of  it,  being  then  in  his  twenty-fourth
year.

Morimund  was  in  the  same  diocese,  and  was  founded
by  Odalric  d'Egremont,  and  Adeline,  his  wife,  Lords  of
Choiseul.  These  four  abbeys  were  the  daughter-


.7  8  BERNARDINE CHRONOLOGY.

A.D.

houses  of  Citeaux  in  the  first  degree,  as  it  were,  and  it
was  from  them  that  in  after-time  others  arose.

Arnold  was  first  Abbot  of  Morimund,  to  whom
Letter  4.

1116.  The  first  general chapter of the  Cistercian Order
called  together  by  B.  Stephen. It  was  to  be  summoned
each  year  afterwards  on  the  i3th  September.

1117.  Bernard,  being  enfeebled  by  illness,  is  by  the  inter
position  of  William,  Bishop  of  Chalons,  committed  to
a  country  doctor  for  medical  treatment. In  the  same
year, or  about  that  time, is  believed to  have taken
place  the  conversion of Tescelin,  father  of  Bernard,
who  died  not  long  after  in  the  reputation  of  sanctity.

1118.  In  this  year  began  the  Order  of  the  Soldiers  of  the
Temple, founded  by Hugh de Payen and  Geoffrey
d'Aldhemar, and confirmed in a  Council  at  Treves,
1128.

There  was  also  founded  the  monastery  of  Trois
Fontaines,  in  the  Diocese  of  Chalons,  first  daughter-
house  of  Clairvaux.  The  first  Abbot  was  Roger,  the
second  Guy,  to  whom  Letters  69,  70.

Also  Fontenay,  a  second  daughter-house,  in  the
Diocese  of  Autun.  The  first  Abbot  was  Godfrey,  a
relative  of  Bernard.  He  afterwards  returned  to  Clair
vaux,  where  he  became  the  third  Prior,  and  at  length
Bishop  of  Langres.

1119.  In this  year  was completed the thirty  articles or
chapters,  fixing  the usages  of the  Cistercian Order,
and  commonly  called  the  Charter  of  Charity. It  was
drawn  up  by  B. Stephen,  Abbot  of  Citeaux,  with  the
assent  of  his  co-abbots,  twelve  in  all,  and  approved  by
Pope  Callistus  II.

1 120.  S.  Norbert,  whom  Bernard  calls  "  the  reed-pipe  of  the
Holy  Spirit" (Letter  56),  founds  the  Praemonstraten-
sian  Order  in  a  spot  of  the  territory  of  Laon,  commonly
known  as  Premontre.

1 1 21.  A  Synod  is  held  at  Soissons  against  Peter  Abaelard,


BERNARDINE  CHRONOLOGY.  79

A.D.

under  the  presidency  of  Conon,  Bishop  of  Praeneste,
Legate  of  the  Holy  See,  in  which  Peter  himself  was
obliged  to  commit  his  book  on  the  Trinity  to  the
flames.  William  of  Champeaux,  Bishop  of  Chalons,
died  this  year.

The  monastery  of  Foigny  founded,  in  the  Diocese  of
Laon,  to  whose  Abbot,  Rainald,  Bernard  wrote  Letters
72-74.

1 122.  Peter  Maurice  de  Montboisier,  called  the  Venerable,
an  Auvergnat,  and  a  very  dear  friend  of  Bernard,  was
made  Abbot  of  Cluny.

1123.  About  this  year  Peter,  Abbot  of  Ferte,  was  chosen
to be Bishop of Tarentum, being the first of the
Cistercian Order to become a  Bishop, and  was  suc
ceeded  by  Bartholomew,  brother  of  Bernard.

Suger  elected  Abbot  of  S.  Denys  in  succession  to
Abbot  Adam.

1125.  Death of the Emperor, Henry V., and a  disputed
succession.

In  the  same  year  a  severe  famine  in  France  and
Burgundy,  which  gives  extensive  exercise  to  the  charity
of  Bernard.

1126.  Otto,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Frisingen,  a  well-known
chronicler,  enters  upon  the  monastic  state  in  the  com
munity  of  Morimund.

1127.  About this time Stephen, who from having  been
Chancellor  had  become  Bishop  of  Paris,  was  reclaimed
by  the  admonitions  of  Bernard  from  living  the  life  of  a
mere  courtier  to  a  more  faithful  fulfilment  of  the  duties
of  his  office. He  was  harshly  treated  and  persecuted  by
King  Louis,  but  was  at  length  restored  to  favour  by  the
efforts  of Bernard. Henry,  Archbishop  of Sens,  who
not  long  after  fell under  the  royal displeasure for  a
similar  cause,  was  also  defended  by  him. See  Letter
45  and  notes.

The  monastery  of  Igny,  fourth  daughter-house  of
Clairvaux,  was  founded  in  the  Diocese  of  Rheims.  The


80  BERNARDINE CHRONOLOGY.

A.D.

first  Abbot  was  Humbert,  who  not  long  after  resigned
his  post  through  love  of  quiet,  and  returned  to  Clair-
vaux,  for  which  Bernard,  then  in  Italy,  wrote  him  a
letter  of  severe  reprimand  (Letter  141).  The  second
Abbot  was  Guerric,  a  man  famed  alike  for  his  piety
and  his  writings.

1128.  A  Council  held  at  Troyes,  under  Matthew,  Bishop  of
Albano, at  which were present Stephen, Abbot of
Citeaux,  Bernard,  of  Clairvaux,  and  other  Abbots  of  the
same  Order. In it  a  white  habit  (to  which  Eugenius
III.  afterwards  added  a  red  cross)  was  prescribed  for
the Knights of  the Temple,  and  a  Rule  drawn up  to
govern  the  Order.

O

Regny  founded  in Diocese  of  Auxerre.

1129.  The  same  Legate  holds  a  Council  at  Chalons;  where
by  the  advice  of  Bernard,  Henry,  Bishop  of  Verdun,
was  deposed  from  his See and another Bishop  ap
pointed.

Monastery  of  Ourcamp  (He  de  France),  in  the
Diocese  of  S.  Cloud,  founded  by  the  Bishop  Simon.

1130.  Death of Pope Honorius II. and schism in the
Church,  caused  by  an  election  to  the  Papacy  disputed
between  Gregory  (Innocent) and Peter  Leonis (Ana-
el  etus). Bernard  energetically  supported  the  cause  of
Innocent  for  eight  years.

In  the  same  year  Bernard  firmly  refused  the  vacant
Archbishopric  of  Genoa.  Also  Baldwin,  in  a  Council
held  at  Clermont,  was  admitted  to  the  College  of
Cardinals  ;  he  was  the  first  Cistercian  to  be  raised  to
that  rank.

1131.  Pope Innocent is magnificently received at Liege,
having come into France late in the former year.
Bernard induces Lothair  to  abandon  his  demand  for
the  cession  of  investitures,  and  the  Pope  crowns  him
King  of  Germany  in  the  same  place. The  Imperial
diadem is  to  be  conferred  in  Rome  two  years  later.
After  this  he  crowned  the  young  Prince  Louis  in  place


BERNARDINE CHRONOLOGY.  8l

A.D.

of  his  dead  brother ;  then  consecrated  a  church  at
Cluny ;  and  after  that  visited  Clairvaux  and  other
churches,  Bernard  accompanying  him  everywhere.  In
this  year  also  Bernard  was  elected  to  the  Bishopric
of  Chalons,  but  firmly  declined  it.

In  this  year  was  the  murder  of  Thomas,  Prior  of  S.
Victor,  at  Paris,  by  the  nephews  of  Theobald  Notier,
Archdeacon  of  Paris.  In  this  year  were  founded  the
following  daughter  houses  :—

Moreruela,  in  Castile.

S.  John  of  Tarouca,  in  Portugal.

Longpont,  in  the  Diocese  of  Soissons.

Charlieu,  in  the  Diocese  of  Besanfon.

Bonnemont,  in  Savoy ; Diocese  of  Geneva.

Rievaulx,  in  England  ; Diocese  of  York.

1132.  Bernard  proceeded  into  Italy  after  departure  of  Pope
Innocent ; reconciled the Pisans and Genoese, and
modestly but  decidedly  rejected  the  Archbishopric  of
Genoa, once more  offered  to  him.

At  this  time  arose  that  great  controversy  between
the  Cluniacs  and  Cistercians,  arising  out  of  the
exemption  of  the  latter  from  tithes  by  Pope  Innocent.
See  Letters  228,  283.

In  this  year  were  founded  : —

Vaucelles,  in  Diocese  of  Cambrai  (Letter  186).

Fountains  (Tres  fontes],  in  England,  Diocese  of
York  (Letters  92,  94).

1133.  S. Bernard, since  the forces  of  Innocent  \vere  not
sufficient  for  taking  Rome (the  Emperor  Lothair  had
supplied him with 2,000 soldiers only), wrote to
Henry,  King  of  England,  to  beg  help. But  at  length
Innocent  obtained  entrance  into  Rome,  and  crowned
Lothair  in  the  Lateran  Church.  When  Lothair  returned
home  Innocent  was  obliged  to  retire  to  Pisa,  whence
Bernard  was  sent  into  Germany  to  reconcile  Conrad
to  the  Emperor  Lothair. At  this  time  the  holy  Abbot
sent  the  congratulatory  Letter  to  the  Pisans,  because

VOL. I.  6


82  BERNARDINE CHRONOLOGY.

A.D.

they  had  resisted  the  attempts  of  Anacletus  to  win
them  over  to  his  party  (Letter  130).  On  this  journey
took  place  the  conversion  of  Mascelin  (Life,  iv.  3),
and  also  of  the  Duchess  of  Lorraine.

1 134.  A  Council  was  held  at  Pisa,  at  which  Bernard  attended
by command of  Pope Innocent, having  made peace
between Lothair  and  Conrad. He  had  great  difficulty
to  avoid  accepting  the  Archbishopric  of  Milan,  which
was  pertinaciously  pressed  upon  him.

He  founded  a  monastery  of  his  Order  at  Chiaravalle
(Chara-Vallis],  near  Milan.  Then  he  proceeded  to
Paris  and  Cremona  to  reconcile  those  cities  ;  but  not
having  succeeded  at  Cremona,  he  notified  their  ob
stinacy  to  Innocent  (Letter  318).

In  the  meantime,  after  the  Council,  Norbert,  founder
of  the  Praemonstratensian  Order,  departed  this  life  ;
also  Stephen,  Abbot  of  Citeaux,  who  was  at  length
succeeded  by  Raynald,  son  of  Milo,  Count  of  Bar-sur-
Seine.

There  were  founded  this  year  Hemmerode,  in  the
Diocese  of  Treves,  and  Vauclaire  (Vallts-Clara),  in
that  of  Laon.  The  first  Abbot  (of  the  latter)  was  Henry
Murdach,  to  whom  Letter  321.

1135.  Bernard,  after  his  return  through Milan  from Italy,
was  enabled  to  accomplish  the  transfer  of  Clairvaux  to
a  more  convenient  site  (Life, ii. 5). Scarcely  had  he
settled  there  than  he  was  sent,  with  Geoffrey,  Bishop
of  Chartres,  into  Aquitaine,  to  reclaim  William,  Count
of  Poitou,  and  other  schismatics  led  away  by  Gerard,
Bishop  of  Angouleme  (c.  6). A  little  after  his  return
he  undertook  his  Exposition  of  the  Canticles,  at  the
request of another  Bernard,  viz.,  Desportes, Prior  of
the  Chartreuse (Letters 153, 154).

This  year  were  founded  : —

Buzay,  in  the  Diocese  of  Nantes,  by  Ermengarde,
Countess  of  Brittany,  whom  he  had  recalled  from
worldly  vanity  during  his  journey  just  mentioned


BEKNARDINE CHRONOLOGY.  83

A.D.

(Letters  116,  117). The  first  Abbot  was  John,  to

whom  Letter  232.

Hautecombe,  in  the  Diocese  of  Geneva.
Grace  de  Dieu,  in  Diocese  of  Saintes.
Eberbach,  in  Diocese  of  Mentz.

1 136.  Guy,  the  eldest  of  Bernard's  brothers,  died  away  from
Clairvaux,  according  to  his  brother's  prediction  (Life,
ii.  12),  namely,  at  Pontigny.

This  year  were  founded  : —

Balerne,  Diocese  of  Besancon  ;  first  Abbot,  Burchard,

to  whom  Letter  146.
Maison Dieu,  on  the  Cher,  in  Diocese  of  Bourges  ;

the  first  Abbot  was  Robert,  cousin of  Bernard,  to

whom  Letter  i.

Auberive,  Diocese  of  Langres.
There  was  also  adopted  the  Abbey  des  Alpes,  in  the

Diocese of Geneva ; Guarine, the Abbot, and

afterwards Bishop of Sion, urging  the transfer

(Letter  253).

1137.  Bernard  is  summoned  into  Italy  for  the  third  time  by
Innocent,  the  cause  of  Anacletus  being  still  supported
by  his  great  partisan  Roger  of  Sicily.

In  this  year  were  founded  : —

Di  Columba,  Diocese  of  Placentia,  in  Italy.

Bocchia,  Diocese  of  Vesprin in Hungary  (although

this  is  referred  by  some  to  1153).
There  was  also  adopted  the  monastery  of  Valparaiso

(formerly  Bellus-Fons],  in  Spain.

1138.  The Emperor Lothair II. died this year, and  was
succeeded  by Conrad,  Duke  of  Franconia,  his  former
rival.

Also  the  Antipope  Anacletus.  The  successor  to  him
elected  by  the  Cardinals  of  his  party,  Cardinal  Gregory,
called  Victor,  resigned  the  Papal  insignia  into  the  hands
of  Bernard,  and  submitted  to  Innocent,  thus  closing
the  schism,  in  great  measure  through  the  zeal  and
prudence  of  Bernard.  "  But  the  holy  Abbot,  leaving


84  BERNARDINE  CHRONOLOGY.

A.D.

the  Roman  Court  without  delay,  returned  into  France,,
nor  would  he  bring  back  anything  with  him  by  way
of  gift  or  recompense,  beyond  a  tooth  of  S.  Caesarius,
and  other  relics  of  saints"  (Life,  iv.  i).  His  brother
Gerard  died  this  year.  He  now  resumed  his  work  on
the  Canticles,  which  had  been  interrupted.

In  this  year  Rainald,  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  died  ;.
and  after  two  years  Samson,  Bishop  of  Chartres,  was
made  his  successor,  Bernard  himself  having  declined
the  dignity.

This  year  was  founded  the  monastery  of  Nisors,
Diocese  of  Lyons,  over  which  was  set  Alberic,  to  whom
Letter  173.

There  was  adopted  also  that  of  Dunes,  Diocese  of
Bruges.  The  first  Abbot  was  Robert,  who  afterwards
succeeded  Bernard  at  Clairvaux.  To  him  Letter  324.

1139.  Lateran  Council  assembled  at  Rome. In  this  year
Malachi, Primate  of  Ireland,  visited  Clairvaux  on  his
way  to  Rome. He  left  there  six  of  his  companions  to
be  trained in the Cistercian Rule, that they might
introduce  it  into  Ireland.

1 140.  A  Council  held  at  Sens,  in  which  the  errors  of  Abaelard
are  condemned. He  retired  to  Cluny,  and  two  years
later  died  at  the  monastery  of  S.  Marcellus,  Chalons,,
where  he  had  gone  for  medical  treatment.

There  were  founded  this  year  : —

Clairmarais,  Diocese  of  S.  Omer.

Blancheland,  Diocese  of  S.  David's,  Wales.

Ossera,  Diocese  of  Orense,  Gallicia.

Rivour,  Diocese  of  Troyes,  over  whom  was  set  Alan,
afterwards  Bishop  of  Autun,  compiler  of  a  Life  of
S.  Bernard.

Also  Pope  Innocent  handed  over  to  the  monks  of
Clairvaux  for  reorganization  the  monastery  of  S.
Anastasius,  at  Aquae  Salviae ;  and  there  was  set  over  it
Bernard  of  Pisa,  a  disciple  of  S.  Bernard,  who  after
wards  was  called  to  the  Roman  See  as  Eugenius  III.


BERXARDINE  CHRONOLOGY.  85

A.D.

Also  were  adopted  that  of  Benchor,1  conveyed  by
Archbishop  Malachi  ;  and  of  Casamaria  in  Veroli,  Italy.
1141.  Pope  Innocent  laid  King  Louis  under  an  interdict
because  he  refused  to  receive  the  Archbishop  of
Bourges,  whom,  however,  he  did  at  length  receive,  and
then  was  absolved  from  an  oath  which  he  had  un
reasonably  taken  (Letter  218  onwards).

In  this  year  the  same  King  Louis  attacked  Theobald,
Count  of  Champagne,  and  laid  waste  his  territories
(Letters  217,  220,  222,  223).

At  this  time  occurred  the  death  of  Humbeline,  sister
of  Bernard  (Life,  i.  6).

This  year  was  founded  the  Abbey  of  Mellifont,  in
the  Diocese  of  Armagh,  Ireland,  by  the  efforts  of  Arch
bishop  Malachi.  It  consisted  of  the  companions  whom
he  had  left  at  Clairvaux  for  training,  with  some  others
(Letters  356,  357).

.1 142.  Ivo,  cardinal  presbyter,  was  sent  into  France  to  pro
nounce  sentence  against  Ralph,  Count  of  Vermandois,
who  having  repudiated  his  former  wife  Eleanor,  niece
of  Count  Theobald,  had  married  Petronilla,  the  daughter
of  William,  Duke  of  Aquitaine,  sister  of  the  Queen
(Letters  216,  217,  220,  221).

Alfonso,  King  of  Portugal,  gave  himself  as  tribu
tary,  and  his  realm  to  be  a  fief  of  the  Abbey  of
Clairvaux,  and  assigned  to  it  a  payment  of  fifty  double
Marabotines  of  fine  gold.3

In  this  year  died  Hugo  of  S.  Victor,  called  a  second
Augustine  for  his  own  age,  an  intimate  friend  and
admirer  of  Bernard  (Letter  70).

About  this  time  were  founded  : —

Melon,  Diocese  of  Tuy,  in  Gallicia.

Sobrado,  Diocese  of  Compostella.

Haute  Crete,  Diocese  of  Lausanne,  in  Savoy.

1  Ancient  name  of  Bangor  co.  Down.

2  The  Abbey  actually  tried  in  \"t%  to  make  good  its  claim  "under  this  charter.
-[E.]


86  BERNARDINE CHRONOLOGY.

A.D.

1143.  Pope  Innocent  died  in  this  year,  and  was  succeeded
by Guido  de  Castello,  called  Celestine  II.,  to whom
Letters  234,  235.

Founded  this  year  : —

Alvastern,  Diocese  Linkoping,  Sweden.

Nidal,  in  the  same  (some  writers  put  this  four  years

later).

Belle  Perche,  Diocese  of  Montauban.
Meyra,  in  Gallicia; Diocese  of  Lucon.

1144.  Pope  Celestine  died.

Bernard  succeeded  in  making  peace  between  King
Louis  and  Count  Theobald  (Letters  220  and  onwards
should  be  read).

In  this  year  died  Bartholomew,  Abbot  of  Ferte,
brother  of  S.  Bernard.  Also  Stephen  of  Chalons,
Cardinal  Bishop  of  Praeneste,  a  member  of  the
Cistercian  Order,  a  man  of  great  sanctity,  to  whom
Bernard  wrote  various  Letters.

Founded : —

Beaulieu,  in  Diocese  of  Rhodez.

1145.  Pope  Lucius  died  this  year,  and  was  succeeded  by
Bernard, Abbot of Aquas Salvias, as Eugenius III.
(Letter  237  and  onwards). At  this  time  Bernard  was
consulted by  King Louis respecting  a  Crusade, and
devolved  the  decision  upon  the  Pope.

Founded  : —

La  Pres,  in  Diocese  of  Bourges.

1146.  Council  held  at  Chartres  to  consider  of  the  Crusade,
to  which  Peter  the  Venerable  was  invited  (Letter  364),
but  was  not  able  to  come,  as  we  collect  from  his  reply
(B.  vi.,  L.  1 8). Bernard  was,  by  the  direction  of  Euge
nius, chosen as chief advocate  of this  warfare. He
exhorted  the  peoples  of Germany,  of  Eastern  France,
the Bavarians,  the English, etc.,  both  by  letters  and
by preaching, to take the Cross, and was greatly
assisted  by  many  miracles  (Letters  363-365,  and  Book
of  the  Miracles  of  S.  Bernard).


BERNARDINE CHRONOLOGY.  87

A.D.

Founded  : —

Boxley,  in  Diocese  of  Canterbury,  England.
Villars,  in  Diocese  of  Namur,  Brabant.  This  founda
tion the Auctarium Gemblacense fixes in the
following  year  in  these  words  : — "  Twelve  monks
with  their  Abbot,  Laurence,  and  five  lay  brethren
(conversi),  sent  by  B.  Bernard  from  Clairvaux  into
Brabant,  erected  the  monastery  at  Villars."
1147. Pope  Eugenius  was driven  from Rome by Arnold
(Letter  242),  and  took  refuge  in  Gaul,  being  received
in Paris  with  great  honour  by  King Louis,  who  had
taken  the  Cross  in  the  previous  year,  on  Palm  Sunday,
and  with  him  his  brother,  Robert  and  Geoffrey,  Count
of  Mellent. The  King  set  off into  Syria  against  the
Saracens  on  June  14.

In  a  Synod  at  Etampes  the  administration  of  France
was  committed  to  Suger,  Abbot  of  St.  Denys,  Gilbert
being  present.

Bernard,  with  Alberic,  Cardinal  Bishop  of  Ostia  and
Legate,  and  Geoffrey,  Bishop  of  Chartres,  proceeded
into  Aquitaine  against  the  heretic  Henry  (General
Preface,  and  Letter  241).

In  this  year  Alfonso,  King  of  Portugal,  having  taken
the  city  of  Santarem  by  the  intercessions  of  S.  Bernard,
sent  letters asking for  monks  to  be  sent  that  he  may
found a monastery of the Cistercian Order in his
kingdom.
Founded : —
Alcobaca, Diocese of Lisbon, in Portugal, by  the

before-mentioned  king.
Vauricher,  in  Diocese  of  Bayeux.
Margan,  in  Wales.
Espina,  in  Diocese  of  Palancia,  in  Castile,  by  Sanchia,

the  sister  of  King  Alfonso  (Letter  301).
Also  the monastery of Grandselve, in Diocese of
Toulouse,  of  the  Order  of  S.  Benedict,  was  adopted,  its
Abbot,  Bernard,  passing  over  himself  with  the  whole
house  (Letter  242).


88  BERNARDINE CHRONOLOGY.

A.D.

1148.  This  year  Pope  Eugenius  was  present  at  a  general
council  of  the  Cistercian  Order,  and  consecrated  a  new
cemetery  for  them.  Taking  leave  of  the  brethren,  not
without  tears,  he  returned  into  Italy.

After  the  departure  of  Eugenius  from  France,
S.  Malachi,  Primate  of  Ireland,  who  was  on  his  way
to  Rome,  to  apply  to  the  Pontiff  for  the  pallium,
happily  departed  this  life  at  the  place  he  most  wished,
namely,  Clairvaux,  and  at  the  time  also,  namely,  on  the
very  day  of  the  solemn  commemoration  of  all  the
departed.  His  memory  began  to  be  held  famous
immediately  upon  his  death  (see  the  Epistle  Consola
tory,  374,  to  the  Irish  ;  also  his  Life,  by  S.  Bernard  ;
and  two  Sermons  delivered  at  the  time  of  his  burial).
The  new  building  for  the  Abbey  of  Clairvaux  was  com
pleted  at  the  very  time  that  S.  Malachi  was  lying  at
the  point  of  death,  and  the  bones  of  the  venerable
Fathers  which  at  first  had  slept  in  the  old  monastery
were  translated  from  the  old  cemetery  to  the  new  on
the  Festival  of  All  Saints  (Sermon  i.  on  S.  Malachi,  n.
i).  His  canonization  is  in  the  Chronicle  of  Clairvaux
(given  by  Chifflet),  referred  to  1192.

In  the  same  year  died  the  blessed  Humbert,  Abbot
of  Igny.  (For  proof  of  this  date  see  note  on  a  Sermon
delivered  by  Bernard  on  his  death.)

Founded : —

Cambroane,  in  the  Diocese  of  Cambray.  The  first
Abbot  was  Fastrade,  from  Clairvaux,  which  latter
Abbey  he  was  the  head  of  after  Robert.

Also  was  adopted  Alne,  in  the  Diocese  of  Liege,  pre
viously  a  Benedictine  Abbey,  and  afterwards  a  house
of  Regular  Canons.

Also  in  this  year  Serlo,  Abbot  of  Savigny,  submitted
his  own  abbey  and  thirty  other  monasteries  depending
upon  it ;  viz.,  the  Benedictine  Abbey  of  Savigny,  in
the  Diocese  of  Avranches,  to  Clairvaux,  during  the
meeting  of  the  great  Chapter  of  Citeaux  ;  and  four  also


BERNARDINK CHRONOLOGY.
A.D.


were  adopted  from  Stephen,  the  founder  and  father  of
the  rising  community  of  Obazin,  in  the  Diocese  of
Limoges.

1149.  In  this  year  King  Louis  returned  to  France  after  the
unsuccessful issue of the Crusade (see Letter 386  ;
Lib.  de  Consideratione,  ii.  i  ; and  Life,  iii.  4). When
making  preparations  for  a  new  expedition  he  was  dis
suaded  by  the  Cistercians,  as  Abbot  Robert  reports  in
his  Chronicle,  under  A.D.  1150.

In  the  same  year  Henry,  brother  of  King  Louis
(Chronicle  of  Tours),  who  had  before  been  Treasurer
of  S.  Martin  at  Tours  and  afterwards  had  put  on  the
monastic  habit  at  Clairvaux,  was  made  Archbishop  of
Beauvais  (see  Letter  307  and  notes).

Founded  this  year  : —

Font-Morigny,  Diocese  of  Bourges.

Aubepierre,  Diocese  of  Limoges.

Lonway,  Diocese  of  Langres.

Looz,  Diocese  of  Tournay.

Also  adopted,  Boulancourt,  a  house  of  Regular
Canons,  in  the  Diocese  of  Troyes.

1150.  Bernard  sends  Book  ii.  of  his  de  Consider atione  to
Pope  Eugenius,  now,  after  many  conflicts, in  posses
sion  of  Rome,  and  makes  it  include  an  apology  for  the
recent  design  of  a  Crusade. He  receives  a  consolatory
letter  from  John,  Abbot  of  Casa  Maria,  in  the  town  of
Veroli  (now  Letter  386  among  those  of  Bernard).

1151.  Abbot  Rainald, of  Citeaux,  died  towards  the  end  of
the preceding year, and was now succeeded by
Goswin,  Abbot  of  Bonnevaux,  in Poitou  (Letter  270).

This  year  died  Hugo,  Bishop  of  Auxerre.  Respect
ing  the  election  of  his  successor,  see  Letters  261,  274,
and  onwards.

Also  Suger,  Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  to  whom,  when  on
his  death-bed,  Bernard  wrote  Letter  266.

Founded  the  Monastery  of  Hesron,  in  Diocese  of
Roskild,  Denmark.


9°  BERNARDINE  CHRONOLOGY.

A.D.

1152.  This  year  died  Theobald,  Count  of  Champagne,  a
man  of  distinguished  piety,  the  friend  and  patron  of
S.  Bernard.  He  was  buried  in  the  monastery  of
Lagny,  on  the  Marne,  of  which  he  was  patron  (advo-
catus}.  Bernard  wrote  to  him  Letter  271  not  long
before  his  death.

Adopted this year the Abbey of Moreilles, in
Diocese  of  Maillezais. Also  (about  this  time)  Armen-
tera,  in  Diocese  of  Compostella,  Gallicia.
Founded : —

Abbey  of  Clermont, in Diocese  of  Mans.
JI53- Pope  Eugenius  died  this  year.

Not  long  after  died  the  holy  Doctor  Bernard,  worn
out  with  many  labours  for  God  and  the  Church.  Though
his  strength  was  consumed  by  violent  disease  since
the  middle  of  the  winter,  as  he  writes  in  Letters  288,
307,  308,  he  had  succeeded  in  making  peace  between
the  townsmen  of  Metz.  He  rested  in  peace  himself  at
length,  on  the  i8th  of  August,  at  nine  o'clock  a.m.,  in
his  sixty-third  year,  in  the  fortieth  year  of  his  monastic
profession,  and  in  the  thirty-eighth  year  of  office  as
Abbot.  Bernard  was  succeeded  by  Robert,  Abbot  of
Dunes.

In  this  very  week  Ascalon,  the  strongest  city  in
Palestine,  was  taken  by  the  Christians,  according  to
the  frequently  repeated  promise  of  the  Saint  (Life,  iii.
4)-

Founded  this  year  monasteries  at  : —
Peyrouse,  Diocese  of  Perigueux.
Mores,  Diocese  of  Langres.
And  adopted  :—

Abbey  of  Monte  Ramo,  in  Diocese  of  Orense,  in
Gallicia.


LIST  AND ORDER OF THE
LETTERS  OF S.  BERNARD,  ABBOT.


II.


DATE.

ing.


1120.


V.
VI.
VII.

1125.
1125.

1126.

VIII.

1131.

IX.

1132.

X.

XI.

1132.
1125.

XII.
XIII.

1125.

1126.

XIV.

1126.

XV.

1126.

XVI.

1  126.

XVII.
XVIII.
XIX.

1127.
1  127.
1127.

PAGE

To  his  cousin  Robert,  who  had
withdrawn  from  the  Cister
cian  Order  to  the  Cluniac ... 107
To  a  youth  named  Fulk,  who
afterwards  was  Archdeacon
of  Langres  ... ... ... 120

To the regular Canons of

Horicourt 131

To Arnold, Abbot of Mori-

mond  133

To  a  monk,  Adam ... ... 137

To  Bruno,  of  Cologne  ... 138

To  the  monk  Adam ... ... 140

To  Bruno,  Archbishop  elect  of
Cologne ... ... ... 159

To  the  same,  then  Archbishop
of  Cologne  ... ... ... 162

To  the  same ... ... ... 163

To  Guigues  the  Prior,  and  the
other monks of the Grand
Chartreuse ... ... ... 164

To  the  same ... ... ... 175

To  Pope  Honorius ... ... 176

To  the  same ... ... ... 177

To  Haimeric,  the  Chancellor. .. 178
To  Peter,  Cardinal  Presbyter. . . 179
To  Peter,  Cardinal  Deacon ... 179
To  the  same ... ... ... 181

To  the  same  . 18^


LIST AND ORDER OF THE


XX.

XXI.
XXII.

XXIII.
XXIV.

XXV.

XXVI.

XXVII.

XXVIII.

XXIX.

XXX.

XXXI.


XXXIII.

XXXIV.

XXXV.

XXXVI.

XXXVII.

XXXVIII.

XXXIX.

XL.

XLI.

XLII.

XLIII.

XLIV.

XLV.

XLVI.

XLVII.


DATE.

1127.
1127.
1128.

1128.
1130.

1130.
1130.
H35-

H35-

1 126.
1126.
1125.


XXXII.  1 1 20.


1 1 20.
1 1 20.

1128.
1128.
1128.

1128.

1127.
1127.
1127.
1127.

1128.
1128.

1127.
1127.
1127.


195

196


PAGE

To Haimeric, the Chancellor  186
To  Matthew,  the  Legate ... 186
To Humbald, Archbishop of
Lyons,  and  Legate... ... 188

To  Atto,  Bishop  of  Troyes ... 188
To  Gilbert,  Bishop  of  London,
Universal  Doctor ... ... 192

To  Hugo,  Archbishop  of  Rouen 193
To  Guy,  Bishop  of  Lausanne... 195
To  Ardutio,  or  Ardutius,  Bishop

Elect  of  Geneva
To  the  same  when  Bishop
To  Stephen,  Bishop  of  Metz... 198
To  Albero,  Primicerius  of  Metz 199
To  Hugo,  Count  of  Champagne,
who  had  become  a  Knight  of
the  Temple... ... ... 200

To  the  Abbot  of  S.  Nicasius,  at
Rheims ... ...  ... 202

To  Hugo,  Abbot  of  Pontigny. . . 205
To  Drago,  or  Drogo,  a  monk... 207
To  Magister  Hugo  Farset
To  the  same ...
To  Theobald,  Count  of  Cham
pagne  211

To  the  same

To  the  same ...

To  the  same ...

To  the  same ...

To  Henry,  Archbishop  of  Sens1  218

To  the  same ... ... ...218

To  the  same ... ... ...219

To  Louis,  King  of  France ... 219
To  Pope  Honorius  II.  ... 221

To  the  same  Pope  in  the  name


208

2IO


213

215
217
217


1  This  is  the  Treatise  De  Moribus  et  Officio  Episcoporum.


LETTERS OF S. BERNARD, ABBOT.


93


XLVIII.

XLIX.


L.

LI.

LII.

LIII.

LIV.

LV.


DATE.


1130.

1128.


1128.

1128.
1128.
1128.
1136.
1128.


LVI.

1128.

LYII.

1128.

LVIII.

1126.

LIX.

1129.

LX.

1128.

LXI.

1125.

LXII.

1  129.

LXIII.

1128.

LXIV.

1  129.

LXV.

1  129.

LXVI.

1129.

LXVII.

1125.

LXVIII.

1125.

LXIX.

1125.

LXX.

1125.

LXXI.

1  127.

LXXII.

1127.

LXXIII.

1127.

PAGE

of  Geoffrey,  Bishop  of  Char-
tres ... ... ... ... 222

To  Haimeric,  the  Chancellor... 224
To Pope Honorius,  on  behalf
of Henry, Archbishop of


228
229

230
231

232
233

234

235
237

238


Sens.

To  the  same ...

To  Haimeric,  the  Chancellor...

To  the  same ...

To  the  same ...

To  the  same ...

To  Geoffrey,  Bishop  of  Char-
tres  ...

To  the  same ...

To  the  same ...

To  Ebal,  Bishop  of  Chalons-
sur-Marne  ...

To  Guilencus,  Bishop  of  Lan-
gres  ...  ...  ...  ...  240

To  the  same ... ... ... 241

To  Ricuin,  Bishop  of  Toul ... 242

To  Henry,  Bishop  of  Verdun...

To  the  same ...

To  Alexander,  Bishop  of  Lin
coln  ...

To  Alvisus,  Abbot  of Anchin  247

To  Geoffrey,  Abbot  of  S.
Medard

To  the  Monks  of  Flay

To  the  same ...

To  Guy,  Abbot  of  Trois  Fon
taines

To  the  same ...

To  the  Monks  of  the  same
place  ...  ...  ...  264

To  Rainald,  Abbot  of  Foigny. . . 264


243
244

245


250
252

255

258
261


To  the  same


269


94


LIST AND ORDER OF THE


LXXXIII. II2Q.


DATE.  PAGE

LXXIV. 1127. To  the  same ... ... ... 271

LXXV. 1127. To  Artaud,  Abbot  of  Prully  ... 272
LXXVI. 1127. To  the  Abbot  of  the  Regular

Canons  of  S.  Pierremont ... 273

LXXVII. 1127. ToMagisterHugo,  of  S.Victor1  275
LXXVIII. 1127. ToSuger,  Abbot  of  S.Denys... 275

LXXIX. 1130. To  Abbot  Luke  288

LXXX. 1130. To  Guy,  Abbot  of  Molesmes... 290
LXXXI. 1130. To  Gerard,  Abbot  of  Pottieres  292
LXXXII. 1128. To  the  Abbot  of S.  John, at

Chartres ... ... ... 293

To  Simon,  Abbot  of  S.  Nicho
las ...  ... 295

To  the  same ... ... ... 297

To  the  same  William... ... 299

To  the  same ... ... ... 303

To  the  Regular  Canon  Oger. . . 304
To  the  same ... ... ...314

To  the  same ... ... ...318

To  the  same ... ... ...  320

To the  Abbots assembled at
Soissons ... ... ... 322

XCII. 1132. To  Henry,  King  of  England... 325
XCIII. 1132. To  Henry,  Bishop  of  Winches
ter ... ... ... ... 326

XCIV. 1132. To the Abbot of a certain
monastery at York, from
which the Prior had de
parted, taking several Re
ligious  with  him ... ... 327

XCV. 1132. To Thurstan, Archbishop of

York... ... ... ... 330

XCVI.  1132.  To  Richard,  Abbot  of  Foun
tains,  and  his  companions,
who  had  passed  over  to  the


LXXXIV.

1  129.

LXXXV.

1125.

LXXXVI.

1130.

LXXXVII.

1126.

LXXXVIII.

1  127.

LXXXIX.

1  127.

XC.

1  127.

XCI.

1130.

1 Placed  amonir  the  Treatises.


LETTERS OF S. BERNARD, ABBOT.


95


DATE.


XCVII.  II32.

XCVIII.  II32.

XCIX.  1132.

C.  1132.

CI.  1132.

CII.  1132.

cm.  1132.

CIV.  1132.

CV.  1132.

CVI.  1132.

CVII.  1132.

CVIII.  1132.


CIX.  1132.

CX.  1132.

CXI.  1132.

CXII.  1132.

CXIII.  1132.

CXIV.  1132.

CXV.  1132.

CXVI.  1132.

CXVII.  1132.


PAGE


331

333

334
34i
342
342
343

345
347
350


Cistercian  Order  from
another

To  the  Duke  Conrad  ...

Concerning  the  Maccabees,  but
to  whom  written  is  unknown

To  a  certain  Monk

To  a  certain  Bishop ...

To  certain  Monks

To  a  certain  Abbot

To  the  brother  of  William,  a
Monk  of  Clairvaux  . . .

To  Magister  Walter,  of  Chau-
mont.

To  Romanus,  sub-deacon  of
the  Roman  Curia  ...

To Magister  Henry Murdach  352

To  Thomas,  Provost  of  Bever
ly  •••  354

To  Thomas,  of  S.  Omer,  after
he  had  broken  his  promise
of  adopting  a  change  of  life  364

To  the  illustrious  youth,  Geof
frey  de  Perrone,  and  his
comrades

A  consolatory  letter  to  the
parents  of  Geoffrey ...

In  the  person  of  Elias,  a  monk,
to  his  parents

To  Geoffrey  of  Lisieux

To  the  Virgin  Sophia.

To  another  holy  Virgin

To  another  holy  Virgin,  of  the
Convent  of  S.  Mary,  of
Troyes  ...  385

To  Ermengarde,  formerly
Countess  of  Brittany  ...  387

To  the  same ... ... ... 388


368

371

372
375
376
382


LIST AND ORDER OF THE


DATE.

CXVIII. 1132.

CXIX. II32.

CXX. 1132.

CXXI. 1132.

CXXII. 1130.

CXXIII. 1130.
CXXIV. 1131.

CXXV. 1131.
CXXVI. 1131.

\

CXXVII. 1132.


CXXVIII.
CXXIX.

cxxx.

CXXXI.

CXXXII.

CXXXIII.

CXXXIV.


1132.
1133-
1133-
1135-

"34-

1134-
1134-


CXXXV.  1135.

CXXXVI.  1134-

CXXXVII.  1134.

CXXXVIII.  1133.

CXXXIX.  1135.

CXL.  1135.


PAGE

To  Beatrice,  a  noble  and  reli
gious  lady ... ... ... 389

To  the  Duke  and Duchess  of
Lorraine ... ... ... 390

To  the  Duchess  of  Lorraine  ...  391
To  the  Duchess  of  Burgundy. . .  392
To  Abbot  Bernard,  from  Hilde-

bert,  Archbishop  of  Tours... 393
To  Hildebert,  Reply  of  Abbot

Bernard 395

To  the  same,  who  had  not  yet
acknowledged  the  lord  Inno
cent  as  Pope  ... ... 396

To Magister Geoffrey, of

Loretto 399

To  the Bishops  of Aquitaine,
against Gerard of Angou-
leme... ... ... ...  400

To  William,  Count  of  Poictiers,
and  Duke of  Aquitaine, in
the person  of Hugo, Duke
of  Burgundy  ... ... 416

To  the  same ... ... ...  418

To  the  citizens  of  Genoa ...  419
To  the  citizens  of  Pisa  ...  422

To  the  citizens  of  Milan ... 423
To  the  clergy  of  Milan  ... 426

To  all  the  citizens  of  Milan  ... 427
To  the  novices  lately  converted
at  Milan ...  ...  428

To  Peter,  Bishop  of  Pavia . . .  429
To  Pope  Innocent ... ... 430

To the Empress of the
Romans ... ... ...  431

To  Henry,  King  of  England  433
To  the  Emperor  Lothair  ...  434
To  the  same  ...  ...  ...  437


LETTERS OF S. BERNARD. ABBOT.


97


CXLI.

CXLII.

CXLIII.

CXLIV.

CXLV.

CXLVI.

CXLVII.

CXLVIII.

CXLIX.

CL.

CLI.


CLIII.

CLIV.
CLY.

CLVI.
CLVII.

CLVIII.

CLIX.

CLX.

CLXI.

CLXII.

CLXIII.

VOL.  I.


DATE.

II38.
II38.

"35-
"37-
"37-


1138.
1138.
1138.

"33-

"33-


CLII. 1135.


1136.
H35-


"35-
"33-

"33-
H33-
"33-
"33-


PAGE

To  Humbert,  Abbot  of  Igny... 438
To  the  Monks  of  the  Abbey  of

the  Alps ... ... ... 440

To  his  monks  of  Clairvaux ... 442
To  the  same ... ... ... 444

To  the Abbots assembled  at

Citeaux ... ... ... 447

To  Burchard,  Abbot  of  Balerne  468
To  Peter,  Abbot  of  Cluny . . . 469
To  the  same ... ... ... 472

To  the  same ... ... ... 472

To  Pope  Innocent ... ... 473

To Philip, intrusive Arch
bishop  of  Tours ...  ... 478

To Pope Innocent, on  behalf

of  the  Bishop  of  Troves . . . 479
To  Bernard  Desportes  ... 480

To  the  same ... ... ... 482

To  Pope  Innocent  on  behalf  of

the  same  when  elected ... 483
To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the

clergy  of  Orleans ... ... 484

To  Haimeric,  on  behalf  of the

same  ... ... ... 485

To Pope Innocent, on the

murder  of  Magister  Thomas,

Prior  of  S.  Victor,  at  Paris 486
To the  same,  in  the name of

Stephen,  Bishop  of  Paris  ... 491
To  Haimeric,  in  the  name  of

the  same  Bishop ... ... 492

To Pope Innocent, on the

murder  of  Archembald ... 493
To Haimeric, on the

subject


same


To John of Crema, Cardinal
Presbyter,  on  the  same ... 495

7


LIST AND ORDKR OF THK


CLXIV.

CLXV.


CLXVI.
CLXVII.


DATE.

1138.

II38.


II38.
II38.


PAGE


CLXVIII. 1138.


CLXIX,
CLXX.

CLXXI.
CLXXII.

CLXXIII.
CLXXIV.

CLXXV.
CLXXVI.


CLXXVI  I.

CLXXVI  II.

CLXXIX.

CLXXX.

CLXXXI.

CLXXXII.

CLXXXIII.

CLXXXIV.

CLXXXV.


1138.
1138.


H39-

"39-
1 140.

"35-
H35-


"39-

"39-

1136.


495


500
501

5°3


510


To  Pope  Innocent,  in  the  matter

of  the  Church  of  Langres  . . .

To Falco, Dean, and Guido,

Treasurer,  of  the Church  of

Lyons

To  Pope  Innocent
To the same, on the same

business
To  the  Bishops  and  Cardinals

of  the  Roman  Curia
To  Pope  Innocent
To Louis  the Younger,  King

of  France
To  Pope  Innocent
To the  same,  in the  name  of

Godfrey,  Bishop  of Langres  510
To  Falco  ... 511

To  the  Canons  of  Lyons,  upon

the  Conception  of  S.  Mary 512
To  the  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem 518
To Pope Innocent, in the
person  of  Albero,  Archbishop
of  Treves ...  ... 520

To  the  same,  in  the  person  of
the  same ...  ... ... 522

To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the

same  523

To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the

same

To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the
same  ... ...

To  Haimeric,  the  Chancellor... 529
To  Henry,  Archbishop  of  Sens  530
To  Conrad,  Kingof  the  Romans  531
To  Pope  Innocent ... ... 532

, To  Eustace,  the  occupier  of  the

See  of  Valence ... ... 532


527


LETTERS OF S. BERNARD, ABBOT.


99


DATE.

CLXXXVI. 1140.
CLXXXVII. 1140.


CLXXXVIII.  1140.

CLXXXIX.  1140.

CXC.  1 140.

CXCI.  1140.

CXCII.  1140.

•CXCIII.  1140.

CXCIV.  1140.

CXCY.  1140.

CXCVI.  1140.

CXCVII.  1141.

CXCVIII.  1141.

CXCIX.  1141.

CC.  1140.

CCI.  1140.


537


541


PAGE

To  Simon,  son  of  the  Castellan
of  Cambray . . .  ...  ...  536

To  the  Bishops  of  the  Pro
vince  of  Sens,  to  call  them
to  an  assembly  against
Peter  Abaelard

To  the  Bishops  and  Cardinals
of  the  Curia,  on  the  same
subject

To  Pope  Innocent,  on  the  same
subject

To  Pope  Innocent,  upon
certain  heads  of  Abaelard' s
errors

To  Pope  Innocent,  in  the
person  of  the  Archbishop  of
Rheims

To  Magister  Guido  Du  Chatel,
on  the  matter  of  Peter  Abae
lard  ...

To  Cardinal  Ivo,  on  the  same
subject


549


593


The  rescript  of  Pope  Innocent,

on  the  same  subject
To  the Bishop of  Constance,

about  Arnold  of  Brescia ...
To the Legate  Guido,  on  the

same  subject


594


595


598


60 1


To Peter, Dean of Besancon  603
To  Pope  Innocent ... ... 604

To  the  same ...  ... 606

To  Magister  Ulger,  Bishop  of
Angers,  on the quarrel  be
tween him  and  the Abbess
of  Fontevraud
To  Baldwin,  Abbot  of  Rieti  ..


100


LIST AND ORDER OF THE


DATE.

CCII.  1144.

CCIII.  1140.

CCIV.  1140.

CCV.  1140.

CCVI.  1140.

CCVII.  1139.

CCVIII.  1139.

CCIX.  1139.

CCX.  1139.


CCXI. 1139.
CCXII. 1139-


CCXIII. 1139.
CCXIV. 1140.


CCXV.  1140.

CCXVI.  1142.

CCXVII.  1142.

CCXVIII.  1143.

CCXIX.  1143.

CCXX.  1143.

CCXXI.  1142.

CCXXII.  1142.


PAGE

To  the  clergy  of  Sens  ... 612

To  Atto,  the  Bishop  of  Troyes

and  his  Clergy 613

To  the  Abbot  of  S.  Aubin ... 614
To  the  Bishop  of  Rochester... 614
To  the  Queen  of  Jerusalem  ... 616
To  Roger,  King  of  Sicily ... 617
To  the  same ...  . ..  618

To  the  same ...  ... 619

To Pope Innocent, on  behalf
of Samson, Bishop of
Rheims  ... 620-

To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the
Archbishop of Canterbury,
and  the  Bishop  of  London... 621
To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the
deposed Bishop of Sala
manca

To  the  same,  in  protest
To the same, on behalf of
Nicholas, Bishop of Cam-
bray,  and  Abbot  Godeschalc  624
To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the
Bishop  of  Auxerre... ... 625

To the same, about Count

Ralph and his  wife  ... 626

To the same, on behalf of

Count  Theobald
His  last  letter  to  the  same,  in

self-defence. . .
To  three  Bishops  of  the  Curia,

and  to  Gerard  the  Chancellor  630
To  Louis,  King  of  France ... 634
To  the  same ...  . 635.

To  Joscelyn,  Bishop  of  Sois-
sons,  and  Suger,  Abbot  of
S.  Denys  .


LETTERS OF S. BERNARD, ABBOT.


101


CCXXIII.

CCXXIV.

ccxxv.

CCXXVI.

CCXXVII.

CCXXVIII.


CCXXIX. 1143.


ccxxx.

1143-

CCXXXI.

1143-

CCXXXII.

1143-

CCXXXIII.
CCXXXIV.

"43-
"43-

ccxxxv.

"43-

CCXXXVI.

"43-

CCXXXVII.

1  145.

CCXXXVII  I.
CCXXXIX.


"45-


To  the  Bishop  of  Soissons . . .

To  Stephen,  Bishop  of  Prae-
neste

To  the  Bishop  of  Soissons . . .

To  Louis,  King  of  France

To  the  Bishop  of  Soissons . . .

To  Peter,  Abbot  of  Cluny,
complaining  that  he  did  not
write  to  him  ...  ...  651

A  letter  of  Peter  the  Vener
able,  Abbot  of  Cluny,  to
Abbot  Bernard  ...  ...  654

To  three  Bishops :  of  Ostia,
Tusculum,  and  Praeneste  . . .  682

To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the
Abbot  of  Lagny  683

To  the  same,  against  the  Abbot
of  S.  Theofred  686

To  John,  Abbot  of  Buzay ... 687

To  Herbert,  Abbot  of  S.
Stephen  of  Dijon  ...  ...  689

To  Pope  Celestine,  about  the
contested  election  at  York. . .  690

To  the  whole  Roman  Curia,  on
the  same  subject  ...  ...  693

To  the  same,  when  the  Abbot
of  S.  Anastasius  was  elected
Pope  Eugenius  ...  ...  695

First  letter  to Pope  Eugenius  698

To  the  same,  about  the  con
tested  election  at  York  ...  703

To  the  same,  on  the  same
subject  ...  ...  ...  705

To  Hildefonsus,  Count  of  S.
Eloy,  on  the  subject  of  the
heretic,  Henry  ...  ...  707


102


LIST AM) ORDER OF THE


DATE.
CCXLII. 1147.

CCXLIII. 1146.


CCXLIV.
CCXLV.

CCXLVI.
CCXLVII.

CCXLVI  1 1.

CCXLIX.

CCL.

CCLI.

CCLII.

CCLIII.
CCLIV.

CCLV.

CCLVI.
CCLVII.

CCLVIII.
CCLIX.

CCLX.
CCLXI.

CCLXII.
CCLXIII.


7I2


717


PAGE
To the people of Toulouse,

after  his  return ... ... 710

To the Romans, when they

revolted against Pope

Eugenius
To Conrad, King of the

Romans
To Pope  Eugenius,  on  behalf

of  the  Bishop  of  Orleans  ... 719
To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the

same Bishop  when  deposed 721
To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the

Archbishop  of  Rheims
To  the  same ...
To  the  same ...
To  Bernard,  Prior  of  Portae  ...
To  Pope  Eugenius
To the same,  about the con
tested  election  at  York
To  the  Abbot  of  Premontre  ...
To Warren, Abbot of the

Abbey  in  the  Alps
To  Louis,  King  of  France
To  Pope  Eugenius
To the same, on behalf of

brother  Philip
To the same, on behalf of

brother  Rualene
To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the

same...

To  Abbot  Rualene
To Pope Innocent, on behalf

of  the  Abbot  of  S.  Urban  ...
To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the

monks  of  S.  Mary  sur  Meuse 757
To  the  Bishop  of  Soissons,  on

behalf  of  the  Abbot  of  Chezy 758


723
727
729
729
732

733
735


752
754

755
756

757


LETTERS OF S. BERNARD, ABBOT.


103


DATE.

CCLXIV.  1149.

CCLXV.  1149.

CCLXVI.  1151.

CCLXVII.  1151.

CCLXVIII.  1151.

CCLXIX.  1151.

CCLXX.  1151.

CCLXXI.  1151.

CCLXXII.  1152.


CCLXXIII. 1150.
CCLXXIV. 1151.


CCLXXV.  1151.

CCLXXVI.  1151.

CCLXXVII.  1146.

CCLXXVIII.  1150.

CCLXXIX.  1152.

CCLXXX.  1152.

CCLXXXI.  1152.

CCLXXXII.  1152.

CCLXXXIII.  1150.


.PAGE

Letter  of  Abbot  Peter,  of
Cluny,  to  Abbot  Bernard...  759

To  Peter  of  Cluny,  reply  of
Bernard

To  Suger,  Abbot  of  S.  Denys

To  the  Abbot  of  Cluny

To  Pope  Eugenius

To  the  same ...

To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the
Carthusians...  ...  ...  765

To  Theobald,  Count  of  Cham
pagne  ...  ...  768

To  the  Bishop  of  Laon ... 770

Epistle  of  Pope  Eugenius  to  the
Cistercian  Chapter,  prefixed
to  Letter  273  ...  ...  770

To  Pope  Eugenius ... ... 773

To Hu£o, Abbot of Trois

O *

Fontaines,  when  he  was  at

Rome  ...  ... 775

To  Pope  Eugenius,  to  support

the  election  at  Auxerre  ...  776
To  the  same,  to  reverse  the

will  of  the  Bishop  of  Auxerre  777
To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the

Abbot  of  Cluny  779

To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the

Bishop  of  Beauvais  ... 780

To  Count  Henry ... ... 7^2

To  Pope  Eugenius,  on  the

trouble  at  Auxerre... ... 782

To  Abbot  Bruno,  of  Charavalle  786
To  Louis,  King  of  France,  on

behalf  of  the  Bishop-elect  of

Auxerre ... ... ... 787

To  Pope  Eugenius,  on  behalf

of  the  monks  of  Moiremont  788


104


LIST AND ORDER OF THE


DATE.  PAGE

CCLXXXIV. 1151. To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the

Archbishop of  Rheims  and
others  ... ... ... 790

CCLXXXV. 1153. To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  Odo,

Abbot  of  S.  Denys... ... 791

CCLXXXVI. 1153. To  the  same,  on  behalf  of  the

same  ... ... ... 793

CCLXXXVII. 1153. To the Bishop of Ostia, on

behalf  of  the  same  Abbot  ... 794
CCLXXXVIII. 1153. To  his  uncle  Andrew,  a  Knight

of  the  Temple ... ... 794

CCLXXX1X. 1153. To  the  Queen  of  Jerusalem  ... 797
CCXC. 1152. To  the  Bishop  of  Ostia,  about

Cardinal  Jordan ... ... 799

CCXCI. 1152. To  Pope  Eugenius,  on  behalf
of  the  church  of  S.  Eugendus,
in  the  Jura  ...  ...  ... 800

CCXCII. 1152. To  a  certain  secular  who  endea
voured  to  dissuade  Peter,  his
relative,  from  takingthe vows  801
CCXCIII. 1150. To  Peter,  Abbot  of  Moustier-
la-Celle,  on  behalf  of  a  monk
of Chezy,  who had passed
over  to  Clairvaux ... ... 802

CCXCIV. 1150. To  Pope  Eugenius,  on  behalf

of  the  Bishop  of  Le  Mans... 803
CCXCV. 1150. To  Cardinal  Henry,  on  behalf

of  the  same  Bishop  ... 804

CCXCVI. 1150. To the Bishop of Ostia, on

behalf  of  the  same  Bishop... 804
CCXCVII. 1150. To the Abbot of Montier-
Ramey,  on  behalf  of  a  run
away  monk... ... ... 805

CCXCVIII. 1151. To Pope  Eugenius,  about  his

secretary,  Nicolas  ... ... 805

CCXCIX. 1150. To  the  Count  of  Angouleme,  on

behalf  of  the  monks  at  Boissy  807


LETTERS OF S. BERNARD, ABBOT.


105


DATE.  PAGE

CCC. 1152. To  the  Countess  of  Blois ... 807
CCCI. 1149. To  Sanchia,  sister  of  the  Em
peror  of  Spain ... ... Hog

CCCII. 1149- To  the  Legates  of  the  HolySee,
on  behalf  of  the  Archbishop
of  Mayence.. . ... . .. 811

CCCIII. 1 149. To  Louis  the  Younger,  King  of

France  ... ... ... 812

CCCIV. 1153- To  the  same ... ... ...813

CCCV. 1153- To  Pope  Eugenius ... ... 814

CCCVI. 1151. To  the  Bishop  of  Ostia,  respect
ing  the  election  of  Thorold,
Abbot  of  Trois  Fontaines  ... 815
CCCVII. 1153. To  the  same ... ... ... 820

CCCVIII. 1153. To  Alfonso,  King  of  Portugal 823
CCCIX. 1153. To  Pope  Eugenius ... ... 824

CCCX. 1153. To  Arnold  of  Chartres,  Abbot

of  Bonneval.. .  ... 825

CCCXI. 1125. To  Haimeric,  Chancellor  of  the

Roman  Curia  ...  ... 827

CCCXII. 1130. To Raynald, Archbishop of

Rheims ... ... ... 830

CCCXIII. 1132. To  Geoffrey,  Abbot  of  S.  Mary

at  York ... ... ...831

CCCXIV. 1134. To  Pope  Innocent ... ... 835

CCCXV. 1134. To  Matilda,  Queen  of  England  837
CCCXVI. 1134. To  Henry,  Archbishop  of  Sens,

and  the  Chancellor  Haimeric  838
CCCXVII. 1138. To  his  Prior,  Godfrey  ... 839

CCCXVIII. 1138. To  Pope  Innocent 840

CCCXIX. 1138. To Thurstan, Archbishop of

York  ... ... ... 840

CCCXX. 1138. To  Alexander,  Prior  of  Foun
tains,  and  his  brethren ... 842

CCCXXI. 1138. To  Abbot  Henry  Murdach ...844
CCCXXII. 1138. To  Hugo,  a  novice ... ... 845

CCCXXIII. 1139. To  Pope  Innocent ... ... 847


io6


LIST AND ORDKR OF THK


CCCXXIV.
CCCXXY.


DATK.

(Circn)

1139-
1139-


CCCXXVI. 1139.


CCCXXVII.


CCCXXVIII.

1  140.

CCCXXIX.

1  140.

cccxxx.

1  140.

CCCXXXI.

1  140.

CCCXXXII.

1  140.

CCCXXXIII.

1  140.

CCCXXXIV.

1140.

cccxxxv.

1  140.

CCCXXXVI.

1  140.

CCCXXXVII.

1  140.

CCCXXXVIII. 1140.


To  Robert,  Abbot  of  Dunes  . . . 850

To  the  same,  about  the  novice
Idier .--851

From  Abbot  WTilliam  to  Geoff
rey,  Bishop  of  Chartres,  and
Bernard,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux  851

Reply  of  Bernard  to  Abbot
William  ...  855

To  the  Roman  Pontiff  ... 856

To  the  Bishop  of  Limoges . . . 858
To  Pope  Innocent ... ... 859

To Stephen, Cardinal,

Bishop  of  Palestrina
To  Cardinal  G.
To  Cardinal  G.
To  Guy,  Abbot  of  Pisa
To  a  certain  Cardinal  Presbyter  865
To  a  certain  Abbot ... ... 866

To  Pope  Innocent,  in  the  name

of  the  Bishops  of  France  . . .
To Haimeric, Cardinal and

Chancellor .


and


867


871


CCCXXXIX.

1  140.

To  Pope  Innocent ... ... 873

CCCXL.

1  140.

To  the  same ... ... ... 875

CCCXLI.

1  140.

To Malachi, Archbishop of

Ireland ... ... ... 875

CCCXLII.

1  140.

To  Joscelyn,  Bishop  of  Soissons  877

CCCXLI  11.

1  140.

From Abbot Bernard  of  Italy

to  Pope  Innocent ... ... 879

CCCXLIV.

1  140.

From the same Bernard to

Abbot  Bernard  of  Clairvaux  88  1

CCCXLV.

1  140.

To  the  brethren  of  S.  Anasta-

sius ... ... 883

(Circa)

CCCXLVI.

II4I.

To  Pope  Innocent ... ... 885

CCCXLVII.

II4I.

To  Pope  Innocent ... ... 886

LETTERS OF S. BERNARD, ABBOT.


DATE.

CCCXLVIII. 1141.

CCCXLIX. 1141.

CCCL.

CCCLI.

CCCLII.


CCCLXIV.
CCCLXV.

CCCLXVI.

CCCLXVII.

CCCLXVIII.

CCCLXIX.

CCCLXX.

CCCLXXI.

CCCLXXII.


1141.
1 141
1131.


(Circa)

CCCLIII. 1141.
CCCLIY. 1142.


CCCLV.  1142.

CCCLVI.  1141.

CCCLVII.  1142.

CCCLVIII.  1142.

CCCLIX.  1143.

CCCLX.  1143.

CCCLXI.  1144.

CCCLXII.  1145.

CCCLXIII.  1146.


1 146.
1 146.

1 146.
1147.
1147.
1147.
1147.
1147.
1147.


To  Pope  Innocent
To  Pope  Innocent
To  Pope  Innocent
To  Pope  Innocent
Privilegium  granted  by  Pope
Innocent  II.  to  S.  Bernard


PAGE

,  887
.  889
.  890
.  890


891


To  William,  Abbot  of  Rievaulx  893
To  Milisendis,  Queen  of  Jeru


salem

To  Milisendis,  Queen  of  Jeru
salem  ... ... ... 896

To Malachi, Archbishop of

Ireland ... ... ... 897

To Malachi, Archbishop of

Ireland ... ... ... 897

To  Pope  Celestine ... ... 900

The Brethren  of  Clairvaux  to

Pope  Celestine ... ... 900

To  William,  Abbot  of  Rievaulx  902
To  Theobald, Archbishop of

Canterbury  ... ... 903

To Robert Pullen, Cardinal

and  Chancellor
To  the  Clergy  and  people  of

Eastern  France
To  Peter,  Abbot  of  Cluny . . .
To Henry, Archbishop of

Mayence ...

To  the  Abbess  Hildegarde ...
To  the  Chancellor  G.
To  the  Cardinal  Deacon  G.  ...
To  Abbot  Suger
To  Abbot  Suger
To  Abbot  Suger
To  P.,  Bishop  of Palencia  in

Spain ... ... ...  922


904

906
911

913


917
917
919
920
921


I06B LIST AND ORDER OF THE LETTERS OF S. BERNARD.

DATE.  PAGE

CCCLXXIII. 1147. The  Abbot  of  Sp.  to  S.Bernard  925
CCCLXXIV. 1 148. To  the  Brethren  in  Ireland,  on

the death of B. Bishop

Malachi 926

CCCLXXV. 1148. To  Ida,  Countess  of  Nevers... 929
CCCLXXVI. 1149. To  Abbot  Suger ... ... 930

CCCLXXVII. 1149. To  Abbot  Suger  ...931

CCCLXXVIII. 1149. To  Abbot  Suger  . ..  933

CCCLXXIX. 1149. To  Abbot  Suger  .-934

CCCLXXX. 1149. To  Abbot  Suger ... ...  934


LETTER I. (Circa 1119.)

To  HIS  COUSIN  ROBERT,  WHO  HAD  WITHDRAWN  FROM
THE  CISTERCIAN  ORDER  TO  THE  CLUNIAC.

He  recalls,  'with  wonderful  gentleness,  and  affection  more
than  fatherly,  Robert,  his  relative  ;  -who,  induced  either  by
shrinking  from  a  very  severe  Rule,  the  attraction  of  a  freer
life,  or  the  blandishments  and  cunning  suggestions  of
others,  had  withdrawn  from  the  Cistercian  Order  to  the
Cluniac.

i.  I  have  waited  long  enough,  my  dear  son  Robert,  per
haps  too  long,  [hoping]  that  the  grace  of  God  might  deign
to  visit  both  your  soul  and  mine,  inspiring  you  with  salutary
contrition  and  me  with  joy  for  your  repentance.  But  since
my  hope  is  so  far  not  fulfilled,  I  am  no  longer  able  to  hide
my  grief  or  express  my  anxiety.  Thus,  though  wounded,  I
am  obliged  to  call  upon  my  assailant ;  despised,  to  ask  for
the  pity  of  him  who  contemns  me  ;  though  injured,  to  make
satisfaction  to  my  injurer;  and  in  fine,  against  all  rule,  to
beseech  him  who  ought  to  beseech  me.  Extreme  grief
does  not  deliberate  or  observe  limits,  is  not  ashamed,  does
not  fear  loss  of  dignity;  it  disregards  measure,  and  rule,
and  order.  The  powers  of  the  mind  are  wholly  occupied  in
relieving  itself,  by  any  means,  of  what  causes  it  pain,  or  in
obtaining  what  it  suffers  to  be  without.  But  you  say :  I
have  not  injured  nor  despised  anyone,  but  rather,  being
scorned  and  injured  in  many  ways,  I  have  fled  from  my
enemy.  Whom  have  I  injured  in  fleeing  from  injuries?  Is
it  not  better  to  withdraw  from  the  persecutor  than  to  resist
him  ?- — to  fly  the  striker  than  to  strike  back  ?  Truly,  I  allow
it.  Not  to  contend  have  I  begun  to  write,  but  to  bring  con-


108  LETTKR I.

tention  to  an  end.  The  pursuer — not  the  fugitive — is  to  be
blamed  for  a  flight  from  persecution.  I  pass  over  what  has
been  done.  I  do  not  ask  why  or  how.  I  do  not  discuss
whose  is  the  fault,  and  I  wish  to  bury  all  remembrance  of
wrongs.  Such  [discussions]  are  wont  to  arouse,  not  to
soften,  differences.  I  speak  only  of  what  is  more  to  my
heart — unhappy  that  I  am — to  be  deprived  of  you,  and  not
to  see  you,  death  for  whom  would  be  to  me  life,  and
without  whom  life  is  death  !  I  do  not  ask  why  you  went
away.  I  complain  only  because  you  have  not  returned.  I
speak  not  of  the  causes  of  your  departure,  but  of  the  delay
of  your  return.  Return  only,  and  there  shall  be  peace.
Return,  and  it  shall  suffice,  and  I  will  sing  with  joy,  He  was
dead  and  is  alive  again  ;  he  was  lost  and  is  found!
(S.  Luke  xv.  32).

2.  Surely  it  was  my  fault  that  you  departed.  I  was  rigid  to
a  delicate  youth  ;  I  was  severe,  and  treated  harshly  a  sensi
tive  mind.  When  you  were  here  you  were  wont,  as  far  as
I  remember,  to  murmur  against  me,  and  since,  as  I  have
heard,  you  do  not  cease  to  blame  me,  though  absent.  It
shall  not  be  laid  to  your  charge.  I  might,  perhaps,  allege
that  it  was  my  duty  to  restrain  the  passions  of  petulant
youth,  and  that  those  harsh  beginnings  of  strict  discipline
are  needful  in  early  years,  as  the  Scripture  bears  witness  :
Chasten  thy  son  with  a  rod,  and  thou  shalt  deliver  his  soul
from  death  (Prov.  xxiii.  13)  ;  and,  again,  Whom  the  Lord
loveth  lie  chasteneth,  and  scour geth  every  son  whom  lie
receiveth  (Heb.  xii.  6),  and  that  More  wholesome  are  the
wounds  of  a  friend  t/ian  t/ie  kisses  of  an  enemy  (Prov.
xxvii.  6).  But  let  it  be,  as  I  said,  that  it  was  by  my  fault
you  went  away ;  only  let  there  be  no  contention  about
the  offence  to  hinder  the  amends  for  it.  I  have,  perhaps,
sometimes  and  in  some  matters  acted  unwisely  towards
you,  but  never  have  I  been  ill-disposed.  Therefore,  spare
the  penitent,  or  at  least  have  consideration  for  one  who
speaks  frankly  to  you.  If  you  fear  for  the  future  you  shall
find  me  not  what  I  was,  because  I  think  that  you  are  not
what  you  were.  A  changed  person  yourself,  you  shall  find


LKTTKR I.  log

me  changed,  and  him  whom  you  before  feared  as  a  master
you  may  safely  embrace  as  a  companion.  Therefore,
whether  you  withdrew  by  my  fault,  as  you  think  and  I  do
not  dispute,  or  by  your  own,  as  many  think,  although  I  do
not  maintain  it,  or  by  our  common  fault,  as  I  incline  to
think,  if  for  this  reason  you  demur  to  return,  you  alone  shall
be  without  excuse.  Would  you  be  free  from  all  blame?
Return.  If  you  acknowledge  your  fault,  I  forgive  it.  Do
you  also  forgive  me  where  I  acknowledge  mine,  otherwise
either  you  are  too  indulgent  to  yourself,  when  you  are
conscious  of  your  fault  and  yet  will  not  acknowledge  it,  or
you  are  too  unmerciful  to  me,  whom  you  will  not  forgive
even  when  I  make  amends.

3.  Now,  if  you  are  unwilling  to  return,  seek  some  other
excuse  wherewith  to  flatter  your  conscience,  for  henceforth
there  will  be  no  reason  lor  you  to  dread  the  severity  of  my
rule.  You  need  not  fear  that  I  shall  be  too  severe  to  you

J

when  you  are  here,  seeing  that  I  abase  myself  with  my  whole
heart  to  you  when  absent,  and  am  bound  to  you  by  entire
.affection.  I  practise  humility,  I  promise  love,  and  do  you  still
fear?  You  have  fled  from  a  stern  [ruler]  ;  return  to  a  gentle
one.  Let  my  lenity  recall  you,  since  my  severity  drove  you
away.  See,  my  son,  how  I  wish  to  recall  you—  not  in  fear
again  and  in  the  spirit  of  servitude,  but  in  the  spirit  of  filial
adoption,  in  which  you  may  call  and  not  be  disappointed,
Abba,  Father  .'  (Rom.  viii.  15).  Though  you  have  caused  me
so  great  grief  I  use  not  threats  and  terrors,  but  caresses  and
entreaties.  Others  would,  perhaps,  employ  different  means  ;
would  lay  before  you  your  offence,  would  remind  you
of  your  vow,  and  awake  in  you  the  fear  of  judgment-
They  would  reproach  you  with  disobedience,  with  apostacy
in  abandoning  a  coarse  garment  for  a  fine  habit,  a  diet  of
vegetables  for  dainties,  and,  in  fine,  poverty  for  riches.  But
I  know  that  you  are  more  easily  induced  by  love  than  com
pelled  by  fear,  and  I  have  not  thought  it  needful  to  goad
the  unresisting,  to  terrify  the  frightened,  to  confound  still
more  him  who  blushes.  But  would  it  not  seem  an  unheard-
of  thing  that  a  youth,  modest,  simple,  and  retiring,  should


110  LETTER I.

have  dared  to  violate  his  vow,  to  leave  the  place  of  his  pro
fession  against  the  will  of  his  brethren,  the  authority  of  his
master,  the  obligation  of  his  rule  ?  Yet  it  is  not  more  strange
than  that  the  piety  of  David  should  have  been  beguiled
(2  Sam.  xi.),  the  wisdom  of  Solomon  mocked  (i  Kings  xi.),
the  strength  of  Samson  rendered  vain  (Judges  xvi.).  What
wonder  that  he  who  deceived  our  first  parents  and  expelled
them  from  Paradise  should  have  seduced  an  inexperienced
young  man  in  the  midst  of  a  desert  solitude  !  Add  to  this
that  he  has  not  been  led  away  by  beauty,  as  the  elders  of
Babylon  (Hist,  of  Susan.,  8),  nor  by  the  love  of  money,  as
Gehazi  (2  Kings  v.  20),  nor  by  ambitious  desires,  as  Julian
the  Apostate,  but  holiness  deceived  him,  religion  seduced
him,  the  authority  of  his  elders  led  him  astray.  Do  you  ask
how  ?

4.  A  certain  great  Prior  was  sent  forth  by  his  superiors  :
and  he,  a  wolf  disguised in  sheep's  clothing,  was  admitted
into the sheepfold. He attracts, he allures, he flatters  ;
the  preacher  of  a  new  Gospel,  he  commends  drunkenness,
condemns frugality; voluntary poverty  he calls misery;
fasts, vigils, silence, the labour of the hands, he  styles
folly  ; but, on  the contrary, sloth he names contempla
tion  ; gluttony, loquacity, inquisitiveness, in short, every
kind of  excess,  he  calls discretion. What,  he says, does
God delight in our sufferings? Where does Scripture
bid anyone to  slay  himself  ? W'hat sort of religion is
it  to  dig  the  earth,  to  cut  wood,  to  carry  manure? Is  it
not  the  declaration  of the  Truth,  /  will  have mercy  and
not sacrifice (S. Matt. ix. 13, Ezek. xxxiii. n, S. Matt.
v.  7). Why  has  God  created  food  if  it  is  not  permitted  to
eat  it  ?  or  given  us  bodies  if  we  must  not  sustain  them  ?

o

And  then,  He  that  is  evil  to  himself,  to  whom  will  he  be
good  (Ecclus.  xiv.  5).  What  wise  man  ever  hated  his  own
flesh  ?  (Eph.  v.  29).

5.  Thus  with  such pleadings  a  too  credulous youth is
seduced  ; he  follows  his  deluder,  he  is  led  to  Cluny  ; he  is
shorn,  shaven,  washed  ; in  place  of his  worn,  cheap,  rustic
clothes  he  is  clad  in  new,  fashionable,  and costly  ones,  and


LETTER I.  Ill

thus  he  is  taken  into  the  convent.  And  with  what  honour,
triumph,  and  observance  !  He,  a  youth,  is  set  above  his
equals,  above  his  seniors  ;  the  entire  brotherhood  favours,
compliments,  congratulates  him  ;  they  all  rejoice  as  victors
when  they  divide  the  spoil.  O,  good  Jesus  !  how  many
things  are  done  for  the  destruction  of  one  poor  soul !
Whose  heart,  however  firm,  would  not  grow  soft?  whose
inner  eye,  however  spiritual  it  might  be,  would  not  be  con
fused  ?  Among  such  distractions  who  could  consult  his
conscience,  who  could  either  recognize  truth,  or  maintain
humility  ?

6.  Application is made on his account to Rome.
Apostolic  authority  is  approached  ;  and  that  the  Pope may
not  refuse  his  consent,  it  is  suggested  to  him  that  [the  youth
when]  an  infant  was  offered  to  that  monastery  by  his  parents.
There  was  no  one  to  contradict  this  ; judgment  was  given
upon  a  mere  statement,  and  against  the  absent. Those  who
did  the  injury  are  justified,  those  who  suffered  it  put  off  alto
gether,  and  the  offender  absolved  without  making  satisfac
tion. Too  mild  a  sentence  of  absolution  is  confirmed  by  a
cruel privilege, which, when reported, encouraged and
rendered  secure  the  ill-assured  victim  of  bad  advice. And
among  these  things  a  soul  may  perish  for  which  Christ  died,
because the Cluniacs choose  ! Profession is  made upon
profession,  vows  which  will not  be  loosed  and cannot  be
kept, and since the first agreement is made invalid, a
pretext  is  found  for  a  second,  and  sin  heaped  upon  sin.

7.  May  He  speedily  come  who  will  right  wrongs  judicially
done  and  put  to  shame  unlawful  oaths,  who  will  right  those
that suffer wrong, will judge the poor in justice, and
contend  with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the  earth  ! To  Thy
tribunal, O, Lord  Jesus, I  appeal ;  to  Thee I commit  my
cause,  O,  Lord God of Sabaoth, who  judgest  justly, and
triest  the reins  and  the  hearts  (Jer.  xi.  20),  whose  eyes,  as
they  cannot  deceive,  so  they cannot  be  deceived. Thou
seest  who  seeks  the  things  which  are  Thine,  and  who  seeks
his  own  (i  Cor.  xiii.  5). Thou  knowest  with  what  gentle
ness  I  have  succoured  him  in  all  his  temptations,  with  what


112  LETTER I.

groanings  I  have  wearied  for  him  the  ears  of  Thy  Holiness,
how  troubled  I  used  to  be  by  his  faults  and  escapades.
And  now  I  fear  that  it  was  in  vain.  For  I  think,  as  far  as  I
have  tried,  that  it  is  for  the  profit  neither  of  the  mind  or
body  of  a  young  man,  by  himself  sufficiently  eager  and
inexperienced,  to  apply  to  the  one  such  stimulants,  to  the
other  such  incentives  to  vanity.  Therefore,  Lord  Jesus,  be
Thou  my  judge ;  let  my  sentence  come  forth  from  Thy
presence,  let  Thine  eyes  look  upon  the  thing  that  is  equal
(Ps.  xvii.  2).

8.  Let  them  see  and  judge  which  ought  rather  to  stand
good,  the  vow  of  a  father  respecting  his  son  or  that  of  the
son  respecting  himself,  especially  when  he  has  made  the
vow  even  more  perfect.  Let  them  see  how  Thy  servant,
our  law-giver  Benedict,1  would  have  decided;  whether  what
was  done  respecting  a  young  infant,  without  his  knowledge,
or  what  he  himself  afterwards  did  advisedly  of  his  own
accord,  when  he  was  of  an  age  to  speak  for  himself,  should
hold  good.  It  is  clear  that  he  was  promised  only,  not
given.  The  petition  which  the  Rule  prescribes  was  not
made  on  his  behalf  by  the  parents,  nor  his  hand  with  the
petition  folded  in  the  covering  of  the  altar,  so  that  he  might
be  offered  before  witnesses.  A  [piece  of]  ground  is  shown
which  is  said  to  have  been  given  with  him  and  for  him.
But  if  they  received  him  with  the  ground,  why  did  they  not
keep  him  as  well  as  the  ground  ?  Did  they,  perhaps,
require  more  than  its  fruit,  or  value  the  land  more  than
this  soul  ?  Otherwise,  if  offered  to  the  monastery,  what
was  he  seeking  in  the  world  ?  If  he  were  to  be  brought  up
for  God,  why  was  he  abandoned  to  the  devil  ?  Why  was
Christ's  sheep  found  a  prey  to  the  wolf?  From  the  world
you  came,  Robert,  yourself  being  witness,  not  from  Cluny,
when  you  came  to  Citeaux.  You  requested  admission,  you

1  According  to  the  Rule  of  S.  Benedict  (Cap.  lix.)  the  simple  promise  of  the
parents  to  devote  a  child  to  the  Order  was  not  binding.  There  must  have  been
a  solemn  offering  of  the  child,  according  to  prescribed  forms,  during  which  he
was  clad  in  the  monastic  habit.

It  does  not  appear  whether  there  had  been  any  such  formal  offering  of  the
young  Robert.  —  [E.]


LETTER I.  113

begged,  you  entreated  ;  but  were  put  off  for  two  years,  on
account  of  your  tender  age,  though  you  were  most  un
willing  to  wait.  Which  time  being  patiently  and  blame
lessly  fulfilled,  you  begged  with  many  prayers  and  even  (if
you  remember)  tears,  and  at  length  obtained,  the  wished-for
favour  and  the  entrance  [into  the  Order]  which  you  had  so
desired.  After  this,  being  patiently  proved  for  a  year,
according  to  the  Rule,  and  your  demeanour  being  resolved
and  without  reproach,  you  were  professed  at  your  own
\vish ;  then  first  you  discarded  the  secular  dress  and  put
on  the  religious  habit.

9.  O,  foolish  boy  !  who  has  enchanted  you  that  you  should
not  fulfil  the  vows  of  your  owrn  lips  ?  Shall  you  not  be
justified  or  be  condemned  out  of  your  own  mouth?  Why
are  you  careful  about  your  parent's  vow  and  forgetful  of
your  own,  forgetting  that  out  of  your  mouth,  not  of  his,  you
will  be  judged?  Who  can  flatter  you  with  talk  about  an
apostolical  absolution,  while  the  Word  of  God  itself  holds
your  conscience  bound  ?  No  one,  He  says,  putting  his
hand  to  the  plough,  and  looking  back,  is  Jit  for  the  kingdom
of  God  (S.  Luke  ix.  62).  Question  your  own  heart,  your
intention  ;  let  your  conscience  answer  you  why  you  fled,
why  you  deserted  your  Order,  your  brethren,  your  place,
and  me;  me,  who  am  near  you  in  blood  and  still  nearer  in
spirit.  If  you  are  now  living  more  severely,  more  correctly,
more  perfectly  than  before,  then  you  may  be  confident  that
you  have  not  looked  back,  and  glory  with  the  Apostle  who
says  :  Forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind  and  pressing
forward  unto  the  things  that  are  before,  I  press  unto
the  mark  (Philipp.  iii.  13).  But  if  it  is  otherwise,  be  not
high-minded,  but  fear ;  because  whatever  indulgence  you
give  to  yourself  in  food,  in  unnecessary  dress,  in  idle  words,
in  unregulated  and  inquisitive  licence,  beyond  what  you
have  promised  and  have  observed  here,  this  beyond  doubt
is  a  looking  back,  a  wandering  from  the  path  ;  in  short,  an
apostacy.1

1  A  stern  declaration  indeed  against  monks  who,  seeking  greater  laxity,  held
lightly  the  obligations  of  their  Rule.  See  Letters  313,  382,  and  Serm.  iii.  on  Ps.  xc.
VOL.  I.  8


114  LETTER I.

10.  And  these  things  I  say  to  you,  my  son,  not  to  distress
you,  but  to  warn  you,  for  though  you  have  many  teachers
in  Christ,  you  have not  many  fathers  (i  Cor.  iv.  14). For
(if  you  should  deem  it  of  any  value)  both  by  word  and  by
my  example  have I  begotten  you to religion. Does it
please  you  that  another  person  should  glory  in  you,  who
has  laboured  not  at  all  for  you  and  in  you  ? Like  as  to  the
harlot  before  Solomon,  so  it  has  happened  to  me  : namely,
to  her  whose  little  son  had  been  secretly  taken  away  by
another,  who  had  overlaid  and  destroyed  her  own  (i  Kings
iii.  20).

1 1 .  Now  for  what  advantage  to  you,  or  for  what  need  of
yours,  have  our  friends  endeavoured  to  do  this  ? For  as  for
me,  if  I  had  ever  offended  them in anything  (which  I  am
not  conscious  of  having  done),  I  would  at  once  have  made
full  amends. But  it  is  strange  if  I  have  not  sustained  the
worse  reprisal ; if  (that  is  to  say)  I  have  been  able  to  do
them  some  such  injury,  as  I  have  now  endured  from  them.
For  I  protest  that  they  have  taken,  not  the  bone  of  my  bones
nor  flesh  of  my  flesh,  but  the  very  joy  of  my  heart,  the  fruit  of
my  spirit,  the  crown  of  my  hope,  and  (as  I  verily  feel)  the  half
of  my  soul. And  why  ? Perhaps  they  pitied  you,  and  not
bearing  to  see  the  blind  leading  the  blind,  they  took  you  to
their  own  leading,  that  you  might  not  perish  under  mine.
But  could  not  you  be  saved,  unless  I  were  despoiled  ? And
would  that  you  maybe  saved  even  without  me  !  But  is  your
salvation  likely  to  be  more  advanced  by  nicety  of  dress,  and
abundance  of  dainties,  than  by  frugality  of  dress  and  living  ?
If soft and warm garments,  fine  and costly cloths, full
sleeves,  an  ample  hood,  a  thick  and  soft  coverlet,  and  fine
linen1 make a saint,  why  should not I also follow  the

1  Bernard  notes  here  the  different  kinds  of  clothing  which  were  in  use  among
the  Cluniacs,  and  which  the  Cistercians  had  rejected  as  contrary  to  the  Rule.  We
may  see  in  the  little  "  Exordium  Cisterciense  "  that  they  had  rejected  "  frocks,
furred  tunics,  linen  shirts,  drawers,  cowls  ;  also  mattresses,  and  bed-clothes."
Also  in  "  The  Book  of  Institutes,"  c.  15,  "  hoods  lined  with  wool  "  are  rejected.
We  see  in  the  MS.  Customs  of  CLuny,  by  Bernard  of  Cluny,  c.  30,  that  among
other  things  it  was  permitted  to  a  monk  of  that  monastery  to  have  as  articles
of  dress  "two  frocks,  two  hoods,  two  shirts,  and  three  furred  tunics, "and  for  the


LETTER I.  115

example  ?  But  these  are  the  comforts  of  the  sick,  not  the
weapons  of  combatants.  For  those  who  wear  soft  clothing
are  in  kings'  houses  (S.  Matt.  xi.  8).  Wine  and  fine  flour,
mead  and  fat  things,  fight  for  the  body,  not  the  soul.  With
broiled  meats  the  flesh,  not  the  soul,  is  made  fat.  Many
brethren  in  Egypt  long  served  God  without  using  even
fish.1  Pepper,  ginger,  cumin,  sage,  and  a  thousand
kinds  of  things  pickled,  delight  indeed  the  palate,  but
inflame  the  passions.  And  do  you  place  security  in  these
things  ?  or  suppose  that  you  can  spend  your  youth  safely
thus  ?  Salt,  with  hunger,  is  sufficient  condiment  to  one
who  lives  soberly  and  prudently;  but  if  hunger  is  not
waited  for,  it  becomes  needful  to  excite  it  with  I  know  not
what  potions.

12.  But  what  shall  he  do,  you  say,  who  cannot  live  other
wise  ? I  know  that  you  are  delicate  and  would  not  be  able

bed  "  a  pillow,  a  sheet,  a  counterpane,  a  blanket,  and  a  rug."  The  frocks
differed  from  the  hoods  both  in  form  and  material,  because  the  hood  had  only  a
narrow  cowl,  and  either  no  sleeves  at  all  or  very  narrow  ones.  The  frock,  on
the  contrary,  had  very  ample  sleeves  and  hood,  and  it  was  made  of  costly  cloth,
which  was  called  froccu*  or  Jl occ us  (whence  the  name  fn>c k).  Among  our
selves  the  hood  is  still  commonly  calledyZoccfw.  The  Cistercians  call  it  generally
coulle  (say  cowl),  because  of  their  repugnance  to  frocks.  The  "  coopertorium
silvestre"  of  which  S.  Bernard  speaks  was  a  kind  of  outside  wrap  made  of  the
skins  of  animals  hunted  in  the  forest.  In  his  Apology,  addressed  to  William,
n.  24,  Bernard  of  Cluny  attacks  the  "  cattinum  "  and  "coverings  which  do  not
permit  you  to  remain  uncovered,  either  of  lamb's  skin  or  cat's  skin,  that  of  hares,
nor  in  short,  of  any  other  kind  of  higher  price." — See  Life,  B.  iv.  c.  36.

1  It  appears  by  this  that  the  monks  of  Citeaux  used  fish  only  rarely,  and
when  upon  a  journey  (see  Life,  B.  vii.  c.  20),  nor  eggs,  as  will  be  seen  from
what  follows.  We  learn  the  practice  with  regard  to  eggs  from  a  Letter  of  Abbot
Fastred,  printed  at  the  end  of  those  of  S.  Bernard.  A  novice,  in  distaste  of  all
food  during  his  last  illness,  "  felt  a  desire  for  a  cooked  egg,"  but  he  observed
abstinence  to  the  end.  The  same  author  tells  us  that  "  vegetables  were  cooked
without  oil  or  fat,"  and  Bernard  himself  speaks  of  "  broths  made  with  flour
....  with  oil  and  honey  added,"  not  butter,  which  he  eat  "  with  scruple"  to
warm  his  stomach.  In  this  letter  and  the  following  one,  which  is  from  Peter
di  Roya,  we  see  that  the  monks  of  Clairvaux  drank  a  kind  of  beer,  sometimes
pure  water,  "  rarely  wine,"  and  even  then  mixed  with  much  water,  which
Humbert  used  for  his  infirmities,  but  only  out  of  obedience  (Bernard,  Serm.  on
Saints,  n.  4;  Life,  B.  i.  n.  46;  Serm.  30  on  the  Canticles).  Joannes  Eremita
(Lift  of  Bernard,  B.  ii.  n.  10)  speaks  of  the  vine  as  being  held  under  malediction
at  Clairvaux.


Il6  LETTER I.

to  endure  a  harder  life,  but  that  is  only  because  you  are
accustomed  to  these  things.  But  what  if  you  could  make
yourself  able  ?  Do  you  ask  how  ?  Rise,  gird  yourself,  shake
off  sloth,  use  your  powers,  move  your  arms,  open  those
folded  hands,  do  something  useful,  and  you  will  soon  find
that  you  have  appetite  for  what  takes  away  hunger  without
pampering  the  palate.  Many  things  which,  when  idle,
you  turn  from,  after  labour  you  will  take  with  relish.
Cabbage,  beans,  pottage,  coarse  bread,1  with  water,  are  little
appetizing,  I  allow,  to  an  idle  person,  but  they  seem  great
delicacies  to  one  who  has  laboured.  Having  become
unaccustomed  to  tunics,2  you  are  perhaps  afraid  to  take
to  wear  them  again,  as  being  too  cold  in  winter  and  too
hot  in  summer ;  but  have  you  ever  read,  He  who  fears  the
hoar  frost  the  snow  shall  fall  upon  him  ?  (Job  vi.  16).
Idleness  produces  distaste,  exercise,  hunger.  You  fear
watchings,  fastings,  and  the  labour  of  the  hands ;  but
these  things  are  trifles  to  him  who  meditates  on  the
everlasting  burnings.  Then  the  remembrance  of  the  outer
darkness  causes  you  not  to  shudder  at  solitude.  If  you
remember  that  every  idle  word  shall  be  called  in  question
(S.  Matt.  xii.  36),  silence  will  not  greatly  displease  you.
That  eternal  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth,  if  brought
before  the  eyes  of  the  heart,  will  render  hard  mat  or  soft
couch  the  same  thing  to  you.  Finally,  if  you  have  faithfully
kept  watch  the  whole  time  of  the  night  which  the  Rule
prescribes,  with  Psalms  (Rule  of  S.  Bened.,  cap.  ix.  seqq.),
hard  indeed  will  be  the  couch  on  which  you  will  not  sleep
soundly.

13.  Rise,  soldier  of  Christ,  shake  off  the  dust,  return  to
the  battle  whence  you  have  fled,  fight  more  bravely  after
your  flight,  and  you  shall  conquer  the  more  gloriously.  Christ
has  indeed  many  soldiers  who  have  set  out  bravely,  stood

1  The  Life  (B.  ii.  n.  6)  shows  us  what  kind  of  bread  was  used  at  this  time
at  Clairvaux.  Fastred,  in  his  letter  cited  above,  says  that  it  was  made  of  oats.

-  The  monks  of  Citeaux  wore  their  tunics  immediately  upon  the  skin,  without
any  garment  of  wool  or  linen  between,  but  not  the  goats'  hair  cilicium  (Lifet
B.  i.  n.  39).


LETTER I.  Iiy

fast  and  overcome,  but  few,  who  having  turned  back  from
flight  and  dared  anew  the  peril  which  they  had  evaded,  have
put  to  flight  the  enemies  from  whom  they  had  fled.  And  be
cause  every  rare  thing  is  precious,  I  rejoice  that  you  should  be
of  those  who  shall  appear  the  more  glorious  the  rarer  they
are.  But  do  not  think  that  because  you  have  fled  from  the
fight,  you  have  escaped  from  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  The
adversary  overtakes  you  with  more  pleasure  when  flying
than  he  resists  you  when  combating,  and  strikes  more
boldly  at  your  back  than  he  attacks  face  to  face.  Are  you
securely  taking  your  morning  slumbers,  when  at  that  time
Christ  rose  from  the  dead;  and  thus  unarmed,  at  once  more
timid  yourself  and  less  formidable  to  enemies  ?  A  multitude
of  armed  ones  have  surrounded  your  house,  and  you  are  sleep
ing?  Already  they  ascend  the  mound,  they  pull  down  the
palisade,  they  rush  in  at  the  postern  door.  Is  it  safer  for
you  that  they  should  find  you  alone  than  with  others —
naked  in  your  bed  than  armed  and  in  the  field  ?  Rise  up,
seize  your  arms,  and  fly  to  your  fellow  soldiers  whom  you
have  deserted.  Let  fear  itself  join  you  again  to  those  from
whom  it  parted  you.  Why  do  you,  O,  effeminate  warrior,
shrink  from  the  weight  and  hardness  of  your  weapons  ?  The
adversary  pressing  on  you  and  the  darts  flying  around  will
make  the  shield,  the  cuirass,  and  the  helmet  seem  to  be  no
burden.  Even  the  bravest  soldiers  have  fears  when  the
trumpet  sounds  before  the  combat,  but  when  they  are  in  the
thick  of  the  fight,  the  hope  of  victory  and  the  fear  of  being
overcome  renders  them  intrepid.  But  what  can  you  fear
when  the  unanimity  of  your  brethren  and  fellow  combatants
fortifies  you  on  all  sides,  when  the  Angels  stand  beside  you,
when  Christ,  the  leader  of  the  war,  will  go  before  you,
cheering  His  own  on  to  victory,  and  saying,  Be  of  good
cheer  ;  I  have  overcome  the  -world  !  (S.  John  xvi.  33).  If
Christ  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?  (Rom.  viii.  '31).
You  can  fight  safely  when  you  are  sure  of  victory.  Safe,
indeed,  is  warfare  with  and  for  Christ,  for,  though  wounded,
prostrate,  trampled  on,  killed,  if  possible,  a  thousand  times,
yet,  if  only  you  do  not  fly,  you  shall  not  lose  the  victory.


Il8  LETTER I.

Flight,  flight  alone  can  take  it  from  you.  Woe  to  you  if,  in
declining  the  fight,  you  lose  at  once  the  victory  and  the
crown  ;  which  may  God  avert  from  you,  my  dearest  son,
since  your  condemnation  will  be  the  greater,  if  I  have
rightly  charged  you  in  this  my  letter.1

1  This  Letter  was  dictated  by  Bernard  in  the  open  air,  "  in  the  midst  of  rain
without  rain,"  as  says  William,  Abbot  of  S.  Thierry  (Life  of  S.  Bernard,  B.  i.
c.  2),  and  because  of  this  marvel  was  placed  before  the  other  Letters.  The  place
where  this  took  place,  close  to  Clairvaux,  was  marked  by  a  little  oratory  in
memory  of  it.  It  was  written  by  William,  afterwards  first  Abbot  of  Rievaulx,.
in  England,  to  whom  some  refer,  but  wrongly,  those  praises  with  which  Gilbert
of  Holland,  in  his  Sermon  41  (in  Cantica),  commemorates  a  certain  Abbot  of
Rievaulx,  without  doubt  the  successor  of  William,  by  name  Aelred,  who  died,
according  to  Pitsaeus,  in  1 1 66.  For  it  can  hardly  be  the  case  that  this  William  of
Rievaulx,  who  died  1 146,  was  praised  by  Gilbert  in  that  sermon,  which  is  in
the  form  of  a  funeral  oration,  as  if  he  were  recently  dead.  Now  Gilbert  himself
undertook  the  continuation  of  his  explanation  of  the  Canticles  only  after  the
death  of  S.  Bernard,  which  happened  in  1153,  and  in  Sermon  30  he  mentions
the  schism  excited  by  the  Emperor  Frederick  against  Alexander  III.  in  1159.

Robert,  to  whom  this  Letter  was  addressed,  is  called  a  relative  of  Bernard  in
this  Letter,  n.  9,  and  in  Letter  32,  n.  3.  Joannes  Eremita,  an  author  of  that
time,  speaks  thus  of  him  in  his  Life  <>f  S.  Bernard,  B.  i.  c.  2,  n.  5  : — "  He  was
nephew  of  the  same  matron,"  namely,  Alith,  mother  of  S.  Bernard,  "  of  whom
we  are  going  to  speak,  and  son  of  her  sister.  It  was  to  him  that  the  blessed
Bernard  addressed  the  first  of  his  Letters.''  He  is  said  to  have  lived  sixty-seven
years  as  a  monk.  Peter  ChifHet,  a  monk  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  in  an  appendix
to  his  dissertation  on  the  illustrious  origin  of  S.  Bernard,  suggests  that  the
mother  of  Robert  was  Diana,  wife  of  Otho  de  Chatillon  de  Montbar,  and  in  that
case  Robert  would  have  been  called  the  nephew  of  S.  Bernard,  either  by  the
mere  fancy  of  the  person  who  collected  his  Letters,  or  by  a  mode  of  speaking  once
common,  which  allowed  the  children  of  two  brothers  or  of  two  sisters,  as  well  as
those  of  a  brother  and  of  a  sister,  to  be  called  nephew,  provided  that  it  was  the
younger  alone  who  received  that  title  from  his  cousin  older  than  himself.  And
it  is  sufficiently  clear  that  this  was  the  relation  of  Robert  to  S.  Bernard,  as  well
from  this  Letter  as  from  B.  i.  of  the  Life,  c.  2.

As  to  the  date  of  this  Letter,  it  seems  to  have  been  written  about  1119.  It
would  appear  that  Robert  made  his  solemn  profession  among  the  Cistercians  in
1113.  When  the  monks  of  Cluny  heard  of  this  they  had  recourse  to  an  under
hand  proceeding  to  bring  him  back  to  them.  The  Exordium  Cisterc.  Dis.  3,
c.  9,  thus  refers  to  this  : — ''  In  the  meantime  the  Cluniac  brothers,  hearing  that
the  young  man  had  given  himself  to  the  Cistercian  Order,  were  exceedingly
indignant.  ...  As  they  did  not  presume  to  demand  him  publicly,  being  over
awed  by  the  reputation  of  the  blessed  Bernard,  they  resorted  to  a  more  crafty
proceeding.  A  certain  Prior  was  sent,"  etc.  In  the  meantime  S.  Bernard  long
concealed  his  feelings,  as  he  says  in  the  commencement  of  this  Letter,  but  at


LETTER I.  119

length,  not  being  able  to  restrain  his  grief,  he  wrote  this  Letter,  which  did  not,
however,  bring  Robert  back,  as  he  complains  in  Letter  32,  until  he  was  sent
back  by  Peter  the  Venerable.

That  Robert  made  his  profession  in  1 1 16  is  apparently  shown  thus  :  Almost
all  writers,  both  within  and  without  our  Order,  think  that  Robert  was  one  of
those  thirty  friends  whom  Bernard  withdrew  from  the  world  and  took  with  him
to  Citeaux,  which,  indeed,  Bernard  himself  seems  to  indicate  in  these  words  of
this  Letter: — "  For  (if  you  should  deem  it  of  any  value),  both  by  word  and  my
example,  have  I  begotten  you  to  religion."  Then,  on  account  of  his  extreme
youth,  his  admission  to  Citeaux  was  put  off  for  two  years,  after  which  he  was
received  to  make  his  novitiate,  as  Bernard  asserts  also  in  n.  8,  and  Bernard
entered  Citeaux  in  11  (3,  to  which  date,  if  the  two  years  of  waiting  and  one  of
probation  be  added,  we  have  1116  as  the  date  of  Robert's  profession.

This  argument  is  much  strengthened  by  the  authority  of  the  Exordium  already
cited,  where  it  is  said  that  Robert  was  admitted  to  his  probation  at  Citeaux  before
Bernard  was  set  over  Clairvaux,  that  is  to  say,  before  1115,  in  which  year
Clairvaux  was  founded,  for  the  Exordium  speaks  thus: — "  Dom  Robert,
formerly  Abbot  of  Maison  Dieu  and  a  relative  of  the  blessed  Bernard  according
to  the  flesh,  in  his  youth  had  taken  upon  him  the  light  and  easy  yoke  of  the
Lord  at  Citeaux.  But  afterwards,  when  that  most  reverend  man  of  God,
Bernard,  was  made  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  he  was  trained  up  under  him  in  that
monastery  in  spiritual  discipline.''  From  this  it  appears  that  the  departure  of
Robert  from  Clairvaux,  or  rather  his  being  decoyed  away,  is  to  be  attributed  to
the  design  and  the  influence  of  Pontius,  Abbot  of  Cluny  from  i  109  to  1 122,  and
that  it  was  not  under  the  government  of  Peter  the  Venerable,  who  succeeded
Pontius  after  Hugo  II.  had  been  abbot  for  three  months  only,  as  appears  from
the  Chronicle  of  Cluny.  It  is  very  certain  that  Peter,  who  was  a  great  lover  of
peace  and  uprightness,  would  not  have  been  likely  to  send  a  prior  to  Clairvaux
to  draw  away  a  young  man,  or,  even  if  that  be  thought  possible,  the  sending
back  of  Robert  would  not  have  been  counted  among  the  benefits  and  offices  of
charity  which  he  had  done  to  S.  Bernard,  for  he  would  not  have  been  able  to
confer  a  benefit  in  repairing  an  injustice,  for  he  writes  thus  in  a  certain  epistle
to  Bernard  (B.  6,  ep.  35): — "  Why,  then,  my  dear  friend,  do  you  not  wish  to
give  me,  at  least  for  a  month,  one  of  your  monks,  when  I  have  given  up  to  you,
induced  by  love  towards  you,  Robert  your  relation,  .Gamier,  and  certain
others,  not  for  a  month,  but  permanently  ? " — from  which  it  is  to  be  remarked
in  passing,  not  only  that  Robert  returned  to  Clairvaux,  but  that  he  was  sent
back  by  Peter  in  the  beginning  of  his  abbacy  at  Cluny.  He  was  sent  later  on
by  Bernard  as  Abbot  to  Maison  Dieu,  in  the  Diocese  of  Dijon.


120  LETTER II.


LETTER II. (Circa A.D. 1120.)

To A YOUTH NAMED FULK, WHO AFTERWARDS WAS
ARCHDEACON  OF  LANGRES.

He  gravely  -warns  Fulk,  a  Canon  Regular,  whom  an
uncle  had  by  persuasions  and  promises  drawn  back  to  the
world,  TO  obey  God  and  be  faithful  to  Him  rather  than  to
his  uncle.

To  the  honourable  young  man  Fulk,  Brother  Bernard,  a
sinner,  wishes  such  joy  in  youth  as  in  old  age  he  will  not
regret.

i .  I  do  not  wonder  at  your  surprise  ;  I  should  wonder  if  you
were  not  surprised  that  I  should  write  to  you,  a  countryman
to  a  citizen,  a  monk  to  a  scholastic,1  there  being  no  apparent
or  pressing  reason  for  so  doing.  But  if  you  recall  what  is
written — •/  am  debtor  both  to  the  wise  and  to  the  unwise
(Rom.  i.  14),  and  that  Charity  seeketh  not  her  own  (i  Cor.
xiii.  5) — perhaps  you  will  understand  that  what  it  orders  is
not  mere  presumption.  For  it  is  Charity  which  compels  me
to  reprove  you ;  to  condole  with  you,  though  you  do  not
grieve ;  to  pity  you,  though  you  do  not  think  yourself
pitiable.  Nor  shall  it  be  unserviceable  to  you  to  hear
patiently  why  you  are  compassionated.  In  feeling  your  pain
you  may  get  rid  of  its  cause,  and  knowing  your  misery
begin  to  cease  to  be  miserable.  O,  Charity,  good  mother
who  both  nourishest  the  weak,  employest  the  vigorous,  and
blamest  the  restless,  using  various  expedients  with  various
people,  as  loving  all  her  sons  !  She  blames  with  gentleness,
and  with  simplicity  praises.  It  is  she  who  is  the  mother  of
men  and  angels,  and  makes  the  peace  not  only  of  earth  but
of  heaven.  It  is  she  who,  rendering  God  favourable  to
man,  has  reconciled  man  to  God ;  she,  my  Fulk,  makes
those  brethren,  with  wrhom  you  once  shared  pleasant
bread,  to  dwell  in  one  manner  of  life  in  a  house  (Ps.

1 Either  a  canon  holding  a  prebend  of  theology  or  simply  a  student — here
probably  the  former. But  see  n.  7. — [E.]


LETTER II.  121

Ixviii.  6). Such  and  so  honourable  a  parent  complains  of
being  injured,  of  being  wounded  by  you.

2.  But  in  what  have  I  injured,  you  reply,  or  wounded  her?
In  this,  without  doubt,  that  you  whom  she  had  taken  in  her
maternal  bosom  and  nourished  with  her  milk,  have  untimely
withdrawn  yourself,  and  having  known  the  sweetness  of  the
milk  which  can train  you  up  for  salvation,  have rejected
and disdained it so quickly and carelessly. O, most
foolish  boy  !  boy  more  in  understanding  than  in  age  !  who
has  fascinated  you  to  depart  so  quickly  from  a  course  so
well  begun  ? My  uncle,  you  will say. So Adam once
threw  the  blame  of  sin  upon  his  wife,  and  his  wife  upon  the
serpent,  to  excuse  themselves  ;  yet  each  received  the  well-
deserved sentence  of  their  own fault. I  am unwilling  to
accuse  the dean  ; I  am  unwilling  that  you  should  excuse
yourself  by  this  means,  for  you  are  inexcusable. His  fault
does  not  excuse  yours. But  what  did  he  do  ? Did  he  use
violence  ? Did  he  take  you  by  force  ? Nay, he  begged,
not insisted ; attracted  you  by  flatteries, not  dragged  you
by  violence. Who  forced  you to  yield  to  his  flatteries  ?
He  had  not  yet  given  up  what  was  his  own. What  wonder
that  he  should  reclaim  you,  who  wast  his  ! If  he demands
a  lamb  from  the  flock, a  calf  from  the  herd,  and  no  one
disputes  his  right,  who  can  wonder  that  having  lost you,
who  are of  more value in  his  sight  than  many  lambs  or
calves,  he  should  reclaim  you  ? Probably  he  does not  aim
at  that  degree  of  perfection  of  which  it  is  said,  If  any  one
has  taken  away  thy  goods,  seek  them  not  again (S.  Luke
vi.  30). But  you,  who  had  already  rejected  the  world,  what
had  you  to  do with  following  a  man  of  the  world  ? The
timid  sheep  flies  when the  wolf approaches  ;  the gentle
dove  when  she  sees  the  hawk  ; the  mouse,  though  hungry,
dares  not  leave  his  hole  when  the  cat  is  prowling  around  ;  and
yet  you,  when  thousawesta  thief  thou  consent edst  with  him
(Ps.  1.  18). For  what  else  than  a  thief  shall  I  call  him  who
has  not  hesitated  to  steal  that  most  precious  pearl  of  Christ,
your  soul  ?

3.  I  should  wish,  if  it  were  possible,  to  pass  over  his  fault,


122  LETTER II.

lest  the  truth  should  obtain  for  me  only  hatred  and  no
result.  But  I  am  not  able,  I  confess,  to  pass  a  man
untouched,  who  up  to  this  very  day  is  found  to  have
resisted  the  Holy  Spirit  with  all  his  power.  For  he  who
does  not  hinder  evil  when  he  can,  even  although  the  evil
purpose  may  be  frustrated,  is  not  clear  of  that  purpose.
Assuredly  he  tried  to  damp  my  fervour  when  it  was  new,
but,  thanks  to  God,  he  did  not  succeed.  Another  nephew
of  his,  Guarike,  your  kinsman,  he  much  opposed,  but  what
harm  did  he  do?  On  the  contrary,  he  was  of  service.  For
the  old  man  at  length  unwillingly  desisted  from  persecution,
and  as  the  youth,  his  nephew,  remained  unsubdued,  he  was
the  more  meritorious  for  his  temptation.  But,  alas  !  how
was  he  able  to  overcome  you,  who  was  not  able  to  overcome
him  ?  Was  he  stronger  or  more  prudent  than  you  ?
Assuredly  those  who  knew  both  before  preferred  Fulk  to
Guarike.  But  the  event  of  the  combat  showed  that  men's
judgment  had  erred.

4.  But  what  shall  I  say  concerning  the  malice  of  an  uncle
who  withdraws  his  own  nephews  from  the  Christian  warfare
to  drag  them  with  himself  to  perdition  ?  Is  it  thus  he  is
accustomed  to  benefit  his  friends  ?  Those  whom  Christ
calls  to  abide  with  Him  for  ever  this  uncle  calls  back  to  burn
with  him  for  evermore.  I  wonder  if  Christ  is  not  reproving
him  when  he  says,  How  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy
nephews  as  a  hen  gathers  her  chickens  under  her  wings  and
thou  wouldest  not  ?  Behold  thy  house  is  left  unto  thee
desolate  (S.  Matt,  xxiii.  37).  Christ  says,  Suffer  the  little
children  to  come  unto  Me,  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of
heaven  (S.  Matt.  xix.  14).  This  uncle  says,  Suffer  my
nephews  to  burn  with  me.  Christ  says,  They  are  Mine;
they  ought  to  serve  Me.  But  their  uncle  says,  They  ought
to  perish  with  me.  Christ  says,  They  are  mine,  I  have
redeemed  them.  But  I,  says  the  uncle,  have  brought  them
up.  You,  indeed,  says  Christ,  have  fed  them,  but  with  My
bread,  not  thine ;  while  I  have  redeemed  them  not  with
thy  blood,  but  Mine  own.  Thus  the  uncle,  according  to  the
flesh,  struggles  against  the  Father  of  spirits  for  his  nephews.


LETTER II.  123

whom  he  disinherits  of  heavenly  possessions  while  he
desires  to  load  them  with  earthly.  Yet  Christ,  not  con
sidering  it  robbery  to  draw  to  Himself  those  whom  He  has
made  and  redeemed  with  His  own  blood,  has  done  when
they  came  to  Him,  what  He  had  before  promised,  Him  who
cometh  unto  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out  (S.  John  vi.  37).
He  opened  gladly  to  Fulk,  the  first  who  knocked,  and  made
him  glad  also.  What  more  ?  he  put  off  the  old  man  and
put  on  the  new,  and  showed  forth  in  his  character  and  life  the
canonical  function  which  had  existed  in  name  alone.  The
report  of  it  flies  abroad,  to  Christ,  a  sweet  savour ;  and
the  novelty  of  the  thing  diffused  on  all  sides  brought  it  to
the  ears  of  his  uncle.

5.  What  then  did  the  carnal  guardian,  who  lost  the  carnal
solace  of  the  flesh  which  he  had  brought  up  and  loved  after
a  carnal  fashion  ?  Although  to  others  the  event  was  a
savour  of  life  unto  life  (2  Cor.  ii.  16),  not  so  to  him.
Wherefore  ?  Because  the  carnal  man  receiveth  not  the
things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  foolishness  unto
him  (i  Cor.  ii.  14).  For  if  he  had  the  spirit  of  Christ  he
would  not  so  greatly  lament  on  account  of  the  flesh  that  which
he  rejoiced  over  on  account  of  the  spirit.  But  because  he
relishes  earthly  things,  not  those  which  are  above,  he  is  sad
and  troubled,  and  reflects  thus  within  himself  :  What  do  I
hear?  Woe  is  me  !  from  what  hope  have  I  fallen  !  Ought  he
to  do  anything  without  my  advice  and  permission  ?  What
right,  what  law,  what  justice,  what  reason  is  it,  that  him,
whom  I  have  nourished  up  from  infancy,  another  person
should  have  the  good  of  when  grown  up  ?  Now  that  my
head  is  white,  alas  !  I  shall  spend  the  remainder  of  my  life
in  grief,  because  the  staff  of  my  old  age  has  deserted  me.
Woe  is  me  !  if  this  night  my  soul  is  required  of  me,  whose
shall  those  things  be  which  I  have  prepared  ?  My  store
houses  are  full,  disgorging  this  one  into  that,  my  sheep
fruitful,  abounding  in  their  goings  forth  ;  my  oxen  fat,  and
for  whom  shall  these  remain  ?  My  lands,  my  meadows,
my  houses,  my  vases  of  gold  and  of  silver,  for  whom  have
they  been  amassed  ?  Certain  of  the  richer  and  more


124  LETTER II.

profitable  honours  of  my  Church  I  had  acquired  for  myself  ;
the  rest,  although  I  could  not  have  them,  I  hoped  that  Fulk
should.  What  then  shall  I  do  ?  Because  of  him  shall  I
lose  so  much  ?  For  whatever  I  possess,  without  him,  I
reckon  as  lost.  Rather  than  that  I  will  both  retain  them,
and  recall  him  if  I  can.  What  is  done  cannot  be  undone  ;
what  is  heard  cannot  be  concealed.  Fulk  is  a  Canon  Regular,
and  if  he  returns  to  the  world  will  be  remarked  and  dis
graced.  But  it  is  better  to  hear  that  about  him  than  to  live
without  him.  Let  integrity  yield  to  convenience,  shame  to
necessity.  I  prefer  not  to  spare  the  ingenuousness  of  a
youth,  rather  than  to  undergo  miserable  melancholy.

6.  Adopting  then  this  counsel  of  the  flesh,  forgetful  of
reason  and  law,  as  it  were  a  lion  prepared  for  prey,  and  as  a
lioness  robbed  of  her  whelp,  raging  and  roaring,  not
respecting  holy  things,  he  burst  into  the  dwelling  of  the
saints,  in  which  Christ  had  hidden  his  young  soldier  from
the  strife  of  tongues,  who  was  one  day  to  be  adjoined  to  the
company  of  Angels.  He  demands  that  his  nephew  be
restored  to  him  ;  he  loudly  complains  that  by  him  he  had
been  wrongly  deserted  ;  while  Christ  resists,  saying,  Un
happy  man,  what  are  you  doing?  Why  do  you  rob?
Why  persecute  Me  ?  Is  it  not  enough  that  you  have  taken
away  your  own  soul  from  Me,  and  the  souls  of  many  others
by  your  example,  but  you  must  tear  him  also  from  My
hand  with  impious  daring  ?  Do  you  not  fear  the
coming  judgment,  or  do  you  despise  My  terrors  ?
Upon  whom  do  you  wage  war  ?  Upon  the  terrible  One,
who  takes  away  the  spirit  of  princes  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  12).  Mad
man,  return  to  thyself.  Remember  thy  last  end  and  sin
not,  call  to  mind  with  salutary  fear  what  you  are.
And  thou,  O  youth,  He  says,  if  thou  dost  assent  and
agree  to  his  wishes  thou  shalt  die  the  death.1  Remem
ber  that  Lot's  wife  was,  indeed,  delivered  from  Sodom

1  Bernard  usually  shows  himself  very  doubtful  of  the  salvation  of  those  who,
having  been  called  by  God  to  the  religious  state,  had  not  yielded  to  their  voca
tion,  and  much  more  of  those  who,  having  entered  it,  though  not  made  profes
sion,  had  returned  to  the  world.  See  Letters  107  and  108.  But  Fulk  had
actually  made  profession.


LETTER II.  125

because  she  believed  God,  but  was  transformed  in  the
way  because  she  looked  back  (Gen.  xix.  26).  Learn  in
the  Gospel  that  he  who  has  once  put  his  hand  to  the  plough
to  him  it  is  not  permitted  to  look  back  (Luke  ix.  62).  Your
uncle,  who  has  already  lost  his  own  soul,  seeks  yours.  The
words  of  his  mouth  are  iniquity  and  guile.  Do  not  learn,,
my  son,  to  do  evil  (Ps.  xxxvi.  4).  Do  not  turn  aside  to
vanities  and  falsehoods  (Ps.  xl.  4).  Behold  in  the  way  in
which  you  walk  he  hides  snares — he  has  stretched  nets..
His  discourses  are  smooth  as  butter,  and  yet  they  are  sharp
spears  (Ps.  Iv.  21).  See,  my  son,  that  you  are  not  taken
with  lying  lips  and  a  deceitful  tongue.  Let  divine  fear
transfix  your  flesh,  that  the  desire  of  the  flesh  may  not
deceive  you.  It  flatters,  but  under  its  tongue  is  suffering
and  sorrow  ;  it  weeps,  but  betrays  ;  it  betrays  to  catch  the
poor  when  it  has  attracted  him  (Ps.  x.  9).  Beware,  I  say,
My  son,  that  you  do  not  confer  with  flesh  and  blood  (Gal.  i.
1 6),  for  My  sword  shall  devour  flesh  (Deut.  xxxii.  42).
Despise  entreaties  and  promises.  He  promises  great  things,
but  I  greater  ;  he  offers  more,  but  I  most  of  all.  Will  you
throw  away  heavenly  things  for  earthly,  eternal  for  temporal  ?
Otherwise  it  behoves  you  to  dissolve  the  vows  which  your
lips  have  pronounced.  He  is  rightly  required  to  dissolve
who  was  not  forced  to  vow,  for,  although  I  did  not  repulse
you  when  you  knocked,  I  did  not  oblige  you  to  enter.
You  cannot,  therefore,  put  aside  what  you  promised  of
your  own  accord.  Behold  each  of  you  I  warn,  and
to  each  give  salutary  counsel.  Do  not  you,  He  says
to  the  uncle,  draw  back  a  regular  to  the  world,  for  in  so
doing  you  make  him  to  apostatize.  Do  not  you,  a  regular,,
follow  the  secular  life,  for  in  so  doing  you  persecute
Me.  If  you  seduce  a  soul  for  which  I  died  you  make  your
self  an  enemy  of  My  cross.  He  who  does  not  gather  with
Me  scatters  (S.  Matt.  xii.  30).  How  much  more  he  who>
scatters  what  has  been  gathered  ?  And  you,  if  you  consent
to  him  you  dissent  from  Me,  for  he  who  is  not  with  Me  is-
against  Me  (ibid.}.  How  much  more  is  he  who  was  with
Me  against  Me  if  he  deserts  ?  You,  if  you  lead  astray  a  boy
who  has  come  to  Me,  shall  be  adjudged  a  seducer  and  pro-


126  LETTER II.

faner,  but  you,  if  you  destroy  what  you  had  built,  shall  make
yourself  a  deceiver.  Both  of  you  must  stand  at  My  tribunal
and  by  Me  be  judged — the  one  for  his  prevarication,  the
other  for  the  leading  astray ;  and  if  the  one  shall  die  in  his
iniquity  his  blood  shall  be  required  at  the  hand  of  his
seducer  (Ezek.  iii.  18).  These  and  similar  warnings  Thou,

0  Christ,  didst  invisibly  thunder  to  each,  I  appeal  to  their
conscience  as  witness. Thou  didst  knock  at  the  doors  of
the  mind  of  each  with  kindly  terrors. Who  would  not  fear
them  and  recover  wisdom in fearing,  unless it  were  one
like  the  deaf  adder,  that  stoppeth  her  ear  and  refuseth  to
hear  the  -voice  of  the  charmer,  charm  he  never  so  -wisely
(Ps.  Iviii.  4,  5),  who  either  does  not  hear,  or  pretends  that
he  hears  not  ?

7.  But  how  far  do  I  draw  out  this  letter,  already
too  long,  before  speaking  of  a  thing  that  is  worthy
only  of  silence  ?  In  what  circuitous  paths  do  I  ap
proach  the  truth,  fearing  to  draw  the  veil  from  shame  !

1  say with shame. That what is known to many I
cannot conceal if  I would. But  why  with  shame  ? Why
should  I  be  ashamed  to  write  what  it  did  not  shame  them
to do  ? If  they  are ashamed to hear  what they shame
lessly  did,  let  them  not  be  ashamed  to  amend  what  they  were
reluctant  to  hear. Alas  !  neither  fear  nor  reason  could  keep
back  the  one  from  seduction,  nor  shame  or  his  profession
the other  from  prevarication. What more  ? A  deceitful
tongue  fits  hasty  words  ; it  conceiveth  sorrow,  and  brings
forth  iniquity. Your  Church  received  its  scholar,  whom it
had  better  have  been  without. So  formerly  Lyons  recovered,
without  credit,  by  the  zeal  and  pertinacity  of  its  dean,  its
canon  whom  it  had  well  lost,  the  nephew  of  the  same  dean.
Just  as  the  one  snatched  Fulk  from  S.  Augustine,  so  the
other  Othbert  from  S.  Benedict. How  much  more  beautiful
that  a  religious  youth  should  draw  to  himself  a  worldly  old
man,  and  so  each  should  be  victorious,  than  that  the  worldly
should  draw  back  to  himself  the  religious,  in  which  each  is
vanquished  ! Oh,  unhappy  old  man  ! Oh,  cruel  uncle  !  who,
already  decrepit and  soon  about  to  die,  before dying  have
slain  the  soul  of  your  nephew,  whom  you  have  deprived  of


LETTER II.  127

the  inheritance  of  Christ  in  order  that  you  might  have  an
heir  of  your  sins.  But  he  who  is  evil  to  himself,  to  whom
is  he  good  ?  He  preferred  to  have  a  successor  in  his  riches
rather  than  an  intercessor  for  his  iniquities.

8.  But  what  have  I  to  do  with Deans,  who are  our  in
structors,  and  have  acquired  authority  in  the  Churches.  They
hold  the  key  of  knowledge,  and  take  the  highest  seats  in  the
synagogues. They  judge  their  subjects  at  their  will,  they  re
call  fugitives,  and  when  they  are  recalled  scatter  them  again
as  they  choose. What  have  I  to  do  with  that  ? I  confess
that  because  of  you,  my  Fulk,  I  have  exceeded  somewhat  the
degree  proper  to  my  humility  in  speaking  of  these,  since I
wished  to  be  indulgent  to  your  fault,  and  make  your  shame
little  in  comparison. I  pass  over  these  that  they  may  not
have  ground  to  rail,  not  at  the  blame,  but  at  him  who  blames,
for  they  would  rather  find  fault  with my  presumption  than
occupy  themselves  with  their  own  correction. At  all  events
it  is  not  a  prince  of  the  Church  that  I  have  undertaken  to
reprimand, but a young student, gentle and obedient.
Unless,  perhaps,  you  show  yourself  to  be  a  child  in  sense,
not  in  malice,  and  object  to  my  boldness,  saying,  What  has
he  to  do  with  me  ? Wrhat  do  the  faults  which  I  commit
matter  to  him  ? Am  I  a  monk  ? And  to  this  I  confess  I
have  nothing  to  answer,  except  that  I  counted,  in  addressing
myself  to  you,  on  the  sweetness  of  character  with  which
you  are  endowed  by  nature,  and  that  I  was  actuated  by  the
love  of  God,  to  which  I  appealed  in  the  first  words  of  my
letter. It  was  in  zeal  for  Him  that,  pitying  your  error  and
your unhappiness, I  was moved to interfere beyond my
custom  in  order  to  save  you,  although  you  were  not  mine.1
Your  serious  fall  and  miserable  case  has  moved  me  thus  to
presume. For  whom  of  your  contemporaries  have  you  seen
me  reprimand  ? To  whom  have  I  ever  addressed  even  the
briefest  letter  ? Not  that  I regarded  them  as  saints,  nor
had  nothing  to  blame  in  them.

9.  Why,  then,  you  will  say,  do  you  blame  me  especially,
when in  others  you see  what  you might, perhaps, more

1  i.e.,  not  owing  me  obedience  as  a  monk.


128  LETTER II.

justly  find  fault  with  ?  To  which  I  reply:  Because  of  the
excessiveness  of  your  error,  of  the  enormity  of  your  fault,
for  although  many  others  live  loosely,  without  rule  and  dis
cipline,  yet  they  have  not  yet  professed  obedience  to  these.
They  are  sinners  indeed,  but  not  apostates.  But  you,  how
ever  honourably  and  quietly  you  may  live,  although  you
may  conduct  yourself  chastely,  soberly,  and  religiously,  yet
your  piety  is  not  acceptable  to  God,  because  it  is  rendered
valueless  by  the  violation  of  your  vow.  Therefore,  beloved,
do  not  compare  yourself  with  your  contemporaries,  from
whom  the  profession  which  you  have  made  separates  you,
nor  flatter  yourself  so  much  because  of  your  self-restraint
in  comparison  with  men  of  the  world,  since  the  Lord  says
to  you,  /  would  thou  wert  hot  or  cold  (Apoc.  iii.  15,  16).
Here  is  plainly  shown  that  you  please  God  less,  being  luke
warm,  than  if  you  were  even  such  as  those  are,  entirely  cold
towards  Him.  For  them  God  waits  patiently  until  their
cold  shall  pass  into  heat,  but  you  He  sees  with  displeasure
to  have  fallen  away  to  lukewarmness,  after  having  been
fervent  in  warmth.  And  because  I  have  found  thee  luke
warm,  He  says,  /  will  vomit  thee  from  My  mouth  (ibid.},
and  deservedly,  because  you  have  returned  to  your  vomit
and  rejected  His  grace  !

10.  Alas!  how  have  you  so  soon  grown  weary  of  the
Saviour,  of  whom  it  is  written,  Honey  and  milk  are  under
His  tongue  (Cantic.  iv.  u).  I  wonder  that  nourishment  so
sweet  should  be  distasteful  to  you,  if  you  have  tasted  how
sweet  the  Lord  is.  Or  perhaps  you  have  not  yet  tasted  and
do  not  know  how  sweet  is  Christ,  so  that  you  do  not  desire
what  you  have  not  tried;  or  if  you  have,  then  your  taste  is
surely  depraved.  He  is  the  Wisdom  of  God  who  says  :  He
who  eats  of  Me  shall  always  hunger,  and  he  who  drinks  of
Me  shall  never  cease  to  desire  to  drink  again  (Ecclus.  xxiv.
29).  But  how  can  he  hunger  or  thirst  for  Christ  who  is  full
of  the  husks  of  wine?  You  cannot  drink  of  the  cup  of
Christ  and  of  the  cup  of  demons  (i  Cor.  x.  21).  The  cup  of
demons  is  pride,  detraction,  envy,  debauch,  and  drunkenness,
with  which  when  your  mind  and  body  are  saturated,  Christ


LETTER II.


129


will  find  in  you  no  place.  Do  not  wonder  at  what  I  say.  In
the  house  of  your  uncle  you  are  not  able  to  drink  deep  of  the
fulness  of  the  house  of  God.  Why,  you  say  ?  Because  it  is  a
house  of  [carnal]  delights.  Now,  as  fire  and  water  cannot  be
together,  so  the  delights  of  the  spirit  and  those  of  the  flesh
are  incompatible.  Christ  will  not  deign  to  pour  His  wine,
which  is  more  sweet  than  honey  and  the  honeycomb,  into
the  soul  of  him  whom  He  finds  among  his  cups  breathing
forth  the  fumes  of  wine.  Where  there  is  delicate  variety  of
food,  where  the  richness  and  splendour  of  the  service  of  the
table  delights  equally  the  eyes  and  the  stomach,  the  food  of
heaven  is  wanting  to  the  soul.  Rejoice,  O,  young  man,  in
thy  youth  !  but  then,  when  temporal  joy  departs  in  time  to
come,  everlasting  sorrow  will  possess  thee  !  May  God  pre
serve  you,  His  child,  from  this.  May  He  rather  destroy  the
deceiving  and  perfidious  lips  of  those  who  give  you  such
advice,  who  say  to  you  every  day,  Good,  good  !  and  who
seek  your  soul  !  They  are  those  with  whom  you  are  dwell
ing,  and  who  corrupt  the  good  manners  of  a  young  man  by
their  evil  communications  (colloquia  :  otherwise  counsels,
consilia}.

ii.  But  now  how  long  before  you  will  come  out  from
their  midst  ?  What  do  you  in  the  town  who  had  chosen  the
cloister,  or  what  have  you  to  do  with  the  world  which  you
had  renounced  ?  The  lines  have  fallen  to  you  in  pleasant
places,  and  do  you  sigh  after  earthly  riches  ?  If  you  wish
to  have  both  together,  it  will  be  said  to  you  soon,  Remember,
my  son,  that  you  have  received  your  good  things  when  you
were  in  life  (S.  Luke  xvi.  25).  You  have  received,  He  said,
not  you  have  seized  ;  so  that  you  may  not  shelter  yourself
under  the  vain  excuse,  that  you  are  content  with  what  is
your  own,  and  do  not  seize  what  belongs  to  another.  And,
after  all,  what  are  those  goods  which  you  call  yours  ?  The
benefices  of  the  Church  ?  Certainly ;  you  do  well  in
rising  to  keep  vigil,  in  going  to  Mass,  in  assisting  at  the
day  and  night  offices,  so  you  do  not  take  the  prsebend
of  the  Church  without  return.  It  is  just  that  he  who

serves  the  Altar  should  live  from  the  Altar. It  is  granted
VOL. I.  9


130  LETTER II.

therefore  to  you  that  if  you  serve  well  at  the  Altar  you
should  live  from  it,  but  not  that  you  should  live  in  luxury
and  splendour  at  its  expense,  that  you  should  take  its
revenues  to  provide  yourself  with  gilded  reins,  ornamented
saddles,  silver  spurs,  furs  of  all  kinds,  and  purple  ornaments
to  cover  your  hands  and  adorn  your  neck.  Whatsoever
you  take  from  the  Altar,  in  short,  beyond  necessary  food
and  simple  dress,  is  not  yours,  and  it  is  rapine  and  even
sacrilege.  The  Wise  man  prayed  for  necessary  sustenance,
not  for  things  superfluous  (Prov.  xxx.  8).  The  Apostle  says,
having  food  and  clothing  (i  Tim.  vi.  8),  not  food  and  mag
nificent  dress.  And  a  certain  other  saint  says,  if  the  Lord
shall  give  me  bread  to  eat  and  raiment  to  cover  me  (Gen.
xxviii.  20).  Take  notice,  to  cover  me.  So  then  let  us  too
be  content  with  raiment  to  cover  us,  not  with  luxurious  and
costly  clothing  which  is  worn  to  please  women,  and  makes
the  wearers  like  them.  But  you  say:  Those  with  whom  I
associate  do  this ;  if  I  do  not  do  as  others,  I  shall  be  re
marked  for  singularity.  Wherefore  I  say,  go  forth  from  the
midst  of  them;  that  you  may  not  either  live  with  singularity
in  the  eyes  of  the  town  or  perish  by  the  example  of  others.

12.  What  do  you  do  in  the  town  at  all,  O  effeminate
soldier?  Your  fellow  soldiers  whom  you  have  deserted  by
flight  are  fighting  and  overcoming;  they  knock  and  they
enter  in,  they  seize  heaven  and  reign  while  you  scour  the
streets  and  squares,  sitting  upon  your  ambling  courser,
and  clad  in  purple  and  fine  linen.  These  are  the  orna
ments  of  peace,  not  the  weapons  of  war.  Or  do  you  say,
Peace,  and  there  is  no  peace  (Ezekiel  xiii.  10).  The
purple  tunic  does  not  put  to  flight  lust,  and  pride,  and
avarice,  nor  does  it  protect  against  other  fiery  darts  of
the  enemy.  Lastly,  it  does  not  ward  off  from  you  the
fever  which  you  more  fear,  nor  secure  you  from  death.
Where  are  your  warlike  weapons,  the  shield  of  faith,
the  helmet  of  salvation,  the  breast-plate  of  patience?  Why
do  you  tremble  ?  there  are  more  with  us  than  with  our
enemies.  Take  your  arms,  recover  your  strength  while  yet
the  combat  lasts;  Angels  are  spectators  and  helpers,  the


LETTER II.  131

Lord  himself  is  your  aid  and  your  support,  who  will  teach
your  hands  to  war  and  your  ringers  to  light  (Psalm  cxliv.  i).
Let  us  come  to  the  help  of  our  brothers,  lest  if  they  fight
without  us  they  vanquish  without  us,  and  without  us  enter
into  heaven;  lest,  last  of  all,  when  the  door  has  been  shut  it
be  replied  from  within  to  us  knocking  too  late,  Verily  I
say  unto  you,  I  know  you  not  (S.  Matthew  xxv.  12).  Make
yourself  known  then  and  seen  beforehand,  lest  you  be
unknown  for  glory  and  known  only  for  punishment.  If
Christ  recognizes  you  in  the  strife,  He  will  recognize  you  in
heaven,  and  as  He  has  promised,  will  manifest  Himself  to  you
(S.  John  xiv.  21).  If  only  you  by  repenting  and  returning
will  show  yourself  such  as  to  be  able  to  say  with  confidence
Then  shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am  known  (i  Corinthians
xiii.  12).  In  the  meantime  I  have  by  these  admonitions
knocked  sufficiently  at  the  heart  of  a  young  man  modest
and  docile  ;  and  nothing  remains  for  me  now  than  to  knock
by  my  prayers  also,  for  him,  at  the  door  of  the  Divine
Mercy,  that  the  Lord  may  finish  my  work  if  my  remon
strances  have  found  his  heart  ever  so  little  softened,  so
that  I  may  speedily  rejoice  over  him  with  great  joy.


LETTER  III. (Circa 1120.)
To  THE  CANONS  REGULAR  OK  HoRRicouRT.1

Their  praises  inspire  him  with  more  fear  than  satis
faction.  They  ought  not  to  put  any  obstacle  in  the  way  of
the  religious  profession  of  certain  regular  canons  of  S.
Augustine,  whom  he  has  received  at  Clairvaux.

To  the  Superior  of  the  holy  body  of  clerics  and  servants
of  God  who  are  in  the  place  which  is  called  Horricourt,  and
to  their  disciples:  the  little  flock  of  the  brothers  of  Clairvaux,
and  their  very  humble  servant,  Brother  Bernard,  wish  health,
and  power  to  walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  to  see  all  things  in  a
spiritual  manner.

1  The  title  of  this  letter  follows  a  MS.  at  Corbty.  It  does  not  appear  who
these  regular  canons  were.


132  LETTER III.

Your  letter,  in  which  you  have  addressed  to  us  an  ex
hortation  so  salutary  and  profitable,  brings  us  convincing-
proof  of  your  knowledge  and  charity,  which  we  admire,  and
for  which  we  thank  you.  But  that  which  you  have  so
kindly  prefixed  by  way  of  praise  of  me  is,  I  fear,  not
founded  on  experience,  although  you  have  thus  given  me  an
excellent  occasion  to  practise  humility  if  I  know  how  to
profit  by  it.  Yet  it  has  excited  great  fear  in  me,  who  know
myself  to  be  far  below  what  you  imagine.  For  which  of  us
who  takes  heed  to  his  ways  can  listen  without  either  great
fear  or  great  danger,  to  praises  of  himself  so  great  and  so
undeserved  ?  It  is  not  safe  for  any  one  to  commit  himself  to
his  own  judgment  or  even  to  the  judgment  of  another  ;  for
He  ivho  judgeth  us  is  the  Lord  (i  Corinthians  iv.  4).  As
to  the  brothers  concerning  whose  safety  we  recognize  that
your  charity  has  been  solicitous,  that  we  should  return  them
to  you  unharmed ;  know  that  by  the  advice  and  persuasion
of  many  illustrious  persons,  and  chiefly  of  that  very  distin
guished  man  William,  Bishop  of  Chalons,1  they  have  taken
refuge  with  us,  and  have  begged  us  with  earnest  supplica
tion  to  receive  them,  which  we  have  done.  Though  they
have  quitted  the  rule  of  S.  Augustine  for  that  of  S.  Bene
dict  in  order  to  embrace  a  stricter  life,  yet  they  do  not  de
part  from  the  rule  of  Him,  who  is  the  one  Master  in  heaven

1  This  was  William  of  Champeaux,  a  friend  of  S.  Bernard,  who  died  in  1121.
He  had  given  up  teaching  before  he  was  a  Bishop  in  order  to  withdraw  into  the
Monastery  of  S.  Victor,  near  Paris.  Hildebert,  then  Bishop  of  Mans,  congratu
lates  him  on  this  in  a  Letter  which  has  been  printed  without  a  title,  but  which  in
the  MS.  of  S.  Taurinus  of  Evreux  is  inscribed  to  William  of  Champeaux.  In
the  Chronicle  of  Maurigny  it  is  said  that  "  when  the  Cardinal  legate  Conon  came
in  1 1  20  to  that  monastery,  near  Etampes,  he  had  with  him  as  helper  the  great
William  of  Chalons,  who  had  presided  over  schools  of  the  highest  rank  (that  is
of  theology),  and  then,  having  a  zeal  for  God,  shone  in  the  knowledge  of  the
Divine  Scriptures  above  all  the  bishops  of  Gaul.1'  He  attained  to  the  see  of
Chalons  in  the  year  1113.  It  was  this  William  who  consecrated  S.  Bernard
abbot,  and  had  such  a  high  regard  for  him,  that  when  the  Saint  had  fallen  into
serious  illness  he  undertook  his  cure.  Robert  Hoveden,  in  the  first  part  of  his
Annals,  writes  thus  under  the  year  1121:  "  William  of  Champeaux,  Bishop  of
Chalons,  eight  days  before  his  death  having  put  on  the  monastic  habit  (that  is,
when  taken  with  mortal  illness,  according  to  the  custom  of  those  times),  departed
this  life."  He  was  buried  at  Clairvaux  in  a  chapel  which  he  had  built.


LETTER III.  133

and  in  earth  ;  nor  do  they  make  void  that  first  faith  which
they  promised  among  you,  and  which,  indeed,  they  pro
mised,  first  of  all,  in  baptism.  They  being  such,  therefore,  and
having  been  so  received,  we  are  far  from  thinking  that  your
sense  of  right  will  be  injured  by  our  having  received  them,
or  that  you  ought  to  take  it  ill  if  we  retain  them  ;  yet  if
they  desist  from  their  resolution  during  the  year  of  proba
tion  which  the  Rule  requires,  and  desire  to  return  to  you,  be
assured  that  we  shall  not  detain  them  against  their  will.  In
any  case,  most  holy  brethren,  you  would  be  wrong  to  resist,
by  an  ill-considered  and  useless  anathema,  the  spirit  of
liberty  which  is  in  them  ;  unless,  perchance  (which  may
God  avert !),  you  study  more  to  promote  your  own  interests
than  those  of  Jesus  Christ.

LETTER  IV. (Circa 1127.)
To  ARNOLD,  ABBOT  OF  MoRiMOND.1

He  recalls  Abbot  Arnold,  who  had  rashly  left  his  monas
tery  and  was  wandering  abroad,  to  the  care  of  it.

To  the  Lord  Abbot  Arnold,  Brother  Bernard,  Abbot of

Clairvaux,  desires  the  spirit  of  compunction  and  prudence.

i. First  of all  I  have  to  inform  you  that  the  Abbot  of

1  Morimond  was  the  fourth  (or,  as  some  writers  say,  the  third)  daughter
house  of  Citeaux.  It  was  in  the  Diocese  of  Langres,  and  was  founded  in  1115.
The  first  abbot  was  this  Arnold,  a  young  man  of  great  promise,  of  a  noble
family  of  Cologne,  and  brother  of  Frederick,  then  Archbishop  of  Cologne.  After  he
had  been  at  the  head  of  it  for  ten  years,  being  molested  by  his  secular  neighbours
and  harassed  by  the  disobedience  of  his  monks,  he  deserted  the  monastery,
taking  some  monks  with  him.  The  four  chief  of  these  were  Adam  (to  whom
Letter  V.  was  addressed),  Everard,  Henry,  and  Conrad.  At  this  time  Stephen,
Abbot  of  Citeaux,  was  detained  in  Flanders  by  the  affairs  of  the  Order;  but
Bernard  exerted  himself  to  recall  the  fugitives  by  letters  to  Arnold,  Adam
(L'p.  vi.),  and  also  to  Bruno,  a  nobleman  of  Cologne,  who  afterwards  succeeded
Frederick,  to  beg  him  to  take  steps  for  their  return.  But  to  no  purpose,  for
Arnold  died  in  Belgium  in  1126.  After  this  Bernard  wrote  again  to  Adam,
threatening  him  with  excommunication  unless  he  submitted,  which  he  seems
happily  to  have  effected  ;  and  the  Cistercian  writers  commonly  suppose  this  man
to  be  the  Adam  who  presided  over  a  monastery  of  the  Order  and  died  at  length
in  the  odour  of  sanctity.


134  LETTER IV.

Citeaux  has  not  yet  returned  from  Flanders,  whither  he  had
gone,  passing  by  this  place  a  little  before  your  messenger
came  to  us,  and  because  of  this  he  has  not  yet  received  the
letter  which  you  charged  to  be  presented  to  him,  and
hitherto  is  ignorant  of  the  great  novelty  which  you  have
presumed  to  undertake.  He  would  be  happy,  I  consider,
to  be  ignorant  of  such  deplorable  rumours  as  long  as
possible.  As  for  yourself,  that  you  should  forbid  me  to  write
to  you,  and  should  declare  useless  the  efforts  I  should  have
made  to  try  to  dispose  you  to  return,  because  you  say  that
your  course  is  irrevocably  taken,  makes  me  despair.  Per
haps,  indeed,  I  ought  not  in  reason  to  obey  you  in  this;  but
in  truth,  the  grief  I  feel  will  not  suffer  me  to  keep  silence  ;
and  more,  if  I  knew  for  certain  where  I  should  meet  you,  I
would  rather  have  come  to  you,  than  have  sent  this  letter,  to
try  if  I  should  have  more  success  in  person  than  my  letter
is  likely  to  obtain.  Perhaps  you  smile  at  my  unfounded
confidence,  inasmuch  as  you  are  conscious  of  your  own
strength  of  purpose,  and  hope  that  no  force,  no  prayers,  no
persistence  would  be  able  to  bend  it.  But  I  am  not  dis
trustful  of  His  power  who  said:  All  things  are  possible
to  him  that  believeth  (S.  Mark  ix.  22).  And  I  do  not
hesitate  to  apply  to  myself  that  saying :  /  can  do  all
things  in  Him  who  strengtheneth  me  (Philip,  iv.  13).
Although  I  myself  am  not  ignorant  of  the  obstinacy  of
your  stony  heart,  yet  would  that  I  could  now  take  you
aside  to  plead  with  you,  whether  successfully  or  not.  Then
I  would  put  before  you  face  to  face  not  only  in  words  but
in  looks  and  in  countenance  what  I  have  in  my  heart
against  you,  whether  uselessly  or  not,  I  cannot  tell.  Then
I  would  fall  at  your  feet,  I  would  embrace  your  knees  ;
and  falling  upon  your  neck  would  kiss  that  head  which  is
so  dear  to  me,  and  which  has  borne  many  years  with  me
the  gentle  yoke  of  Christ.  Weeping,  I  would  beg  and
entreat  you  with  all  my  energy,  by  Jesus  Christ,  to  spare
His  Cross  by  which  He  has  redeemed  those  whom  you,  as
far  as  in  you  lies,  are  destroying ;  has  collected  those  whom
you  are  dispersing.  You  are  destroying,  I  say,  those  whom


LETTER IV.  135

you  desert,  and  dispersing  those  whom  you  take  with  you,
for  each  of  whom  I  fear  an  equal  peril,  though  of  a  different
kind.  And,  lastly,  spare  also  us  your  friends  to  whom
you  have  left  nothing  but  grief  and  tears,  although  un
deserved.  If  it  had  been  permitted  to  me,  I  could  have
influenced  you,  perhaps,  by  the  feelings  of  the  heart,  though
not  by  reason  ;  and  the  tenderness  of  a  brother  would,
perhaps,  have  softened  that  iron  heart  which  now  refuses
to  yield  even  to  the  fear  of  Christ.  But,  alas  !  even  this
opportunity  you  have  taken  away  from  us.

2.  O,  powerful  support  of  our  Order!  Listen  patiently,
I  beg,  to  your  friend,  though  absent,  who  cannot  bear  your
entire  departure,  and  who  feels  with  you  to  the  very
marrow  your  sufferings  and  dangers.  Do  you  not  fear,  O,
great  support  of  our  Order,  that  by  your  fall  its  entire
ruin  will  surely  and  speedily  follow  ?  But  I,  you  say,  do
not  fall  ;  I  know  what  I  am  doing,  I  have  a  good  con
science.  Be  it  so.  I  believe  you  in  what  you  say  of
yourself,  but  what  of  us,  who  by  your  departure  must  groan
under  the  heavy  weight  of  scandal,  and  trembling  expect
still  heavier  perils  to  come  ?  Or  do  you  know  all  that,  and
yet  pretend  not  to  know  ?  How  do  you  pretend  that  you
have  not  made  ruin  for  yourself  when  you  have  drawn  ruin
upon  many  others  ?  You  were  not  placed  in  this  post  to
do  what  was  useful  to  yourself,  but  rather  that  which  was
useful  to  others  ;  then  ought  you  not  to  seek  not  the  things
which  are  your  own,  but  those  which  are  for  Jesus  Christ?
How,  I  ask,  will  you  depart  in  safety,  who  have  taken  away
by  your  departure  every  kind  of  security  from  the  flock
committed  to  you  for  ever?  Who  will  protect  them  from
the  attacking  wolves,  who  will  console  them  in  tribulations,
provide  for  them  in  temptations,  and  resist  for  them  the
roaring  lion  who  seeks  whom  he  may  devour  ?  They  will
be  exposed,  without  doubt,  to  the  bites  of  the  wicked,  who
devour  the  flock  of  Christ  as  bread.  Alas  !  what  will  be
the  fate  of  those  new  plantations  of  Christ,  which,  by  your
hands,  He  had  set  in  divers  places,  in  the  spots  of  horror
and  solitude  ?  Who  will  dig  around,  who  nourish  them,


136  LETTER IV.

surround  them  by  a  hedge,  and  cut  back  with  care  the  greedy
shoots  which  exhaust  their  strength  ?  Either,  when  the
\vind  of  temptations  shall  blow,  these  ill  rooted  ones  shall
easily  be  rooted  up,  or  growing  up  among  thickets  of
thorns  will  be  choked  by  them,  as  there  is  none  to  clear
them  away,  and  thus  will  bring  forth  no  fruit.

3.  This  being  so,  consider  what  is  this  good  which  you
have  done,  and  whether  it  can  be  called  good,  in  the  midst
of  such  evil  consequences.  However  worthy  the  fruits  of
penitence  that  you  flatter  yourself  you  will  make,  will  they
not  be  necessarily  choked  in  the  midst  of  thorns  ?  Do  you
not,  in  fact,  sin,  even  if  you  offer  rightly,  if  you  do  not
rightly  divide  the  victim  P1

Will  you  say  that  you  rightly  divide  when  you  trouble
yourself  only  about  your  own  soul,  and  deprive  those  sons
who  were  committed  to  you  of  a  father's  care?  O,  un
happy  ones,  and  to  be  pitied  ;  the  more  that  they  see  them
selves  orphaned  even  while  their  father  lives !  Then,
iarther,  ought  you  not  to  have  doubted  whether  you  were
doing  well,  even  for  your  own  soul,  to  venture  on  a  step  so  un
exampled  without  the  advice  of  your  brethren  and  co-abbots,
without  the  permission  of  your  father  and  master  ?  It  must
also  raise  against  you  the  indignation  of  many,  that  you  have
led  away  withyou  weak  youths  and  delicate  young  men.  Or,  if
they  were  strong  and  robust,  then  they  were  indispensable  to
the  house  now  desolate  ;  but  if  (as  I  have  said)  weak  and
delicate,  they  will  not  be  fit  to  endure  the  fatigues  of  a
hard  and  laborious  journey.  And  we  cannot  believe  that
your  remaining  over  them  is  because  you  wish  still  to  direct
their  souls,  since  we  know  that  you  propose  to  lay  down  the
burden  of  the  pastoral  charge  of  them,  and  henceforth  to  live
for  yourself  alone.  And,  furthermore,  it  would  be  unfitting
that  without  being  called  you  should  presumptuously
resume  in  one  place  a  burden  which  against  rule  you  have
rashly  laid  down  in  another.  But  you  know  all  these

1  In  Gen.  iv.  7  the  i,xx.  reads:  oiix  iav  opQlas  Trpoffevtyxys  opOHs  St  fj-fj  citXys
^1/j.apres  ;  if  thou  didst,  offer  rigktli/,  but  didst  nut  rightly  divide,  hast  thou  nut
sinned  ' — [E.]


LETTER IV.  137

things,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  press  upon  you  superfluous
words ;  but,  in  conclusion,  I  faithfully  promise  that  if  you
ever  give  me  the  opportunity  of  converse  with  you  I  will
strive  to  find  for  you  a  means  of  doing  as  far  as  may  be
with  permission,  and  therefore  in  peace  of  mind,  what  you
are  now  attempting  lawlessly  and  with  peril.  Farewell.


LETTER V. (A.D. 1125.)

TO A MONK ADAM.

Bernard  exhorts  him  not  to  adhere  to  Arnold,  the
Abbot  of  Morimond,  nor  make  himself  the  companion  of
his  journey ,  or  rather  wandering.

1.  Your  humility,  which  is  well  known  to me,  and  the
circumstances  of  peril in  which  you  stand, oblige  me  to
address  you  earnestly  and reprehend  you  in  plain  words.
O, foolish one  ! who has  bewitched  you to withdraw  so
hastily  from  the  salutary  rule  of  life  in  which  you  equally
with  me (God is  witness) were  lately  agreed  ? Consider
your  ways,  O  foolish  one,  and  turn  your  steps  towards  the
testimonies  of  the  Lord. Do  you  not  remember  that  you
first dedicated the first fruits of your conversion at
Marmoutiers  j1 then  that you were put under my  poor
direction at Foigny,2  and  that you made  your  final  pro
fession  at  Morimond  ? Was  it  not  there  again  that  at  my
suggestion  you  frankly  renounced  the  journeying,  or  rather
wandering, suggested to  you  by Abbot Arnold, and  you
saw  clearly  that  company  with  him  was  forbidden  to  you
if  he  himself  was  not  able  to go forth  lawfully  ? What
then  ? Can  you  say  that  he  departs in a  lawful manner
who  has  left  a  lamentable  scandal  amongst  those  committed
to  him,  not  waiting  for  the  licence  of  his  superior  ?

2.  But to what purpose, you may ask, are all these
details  ? That  I  may  show  you  your  manifest  inconstancy  ;

1  The  monastery  of  Marmoutiers  was  near  Tours. See  Letter  397.
-  In  the  Diocese  of  Laon. See  Letter  72.


138  LETTER V.

that  I  may  show  you  clearly  that  you  say  both  Yes  and  No  ;
that  I  may  force  you  to  recognize  and  blush  for  your  errors,
and  to  learn,  though  late,  from  the  Apostle  that  we  must
not  believe  every  spirit  (i  S.  John  iv.  i).  Learn  from
Solomon  to  have  many  friends,  but  to  choose  one  counsellor
among  a  thousand  (Ecclus.  vi.  6)  ;  learn  from  the  ex
ample  of  the  Forerunner  of  the  Lord  not  to  wear  soft
clothing  nor  to  be  blown  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine,
like  a  reed  shaken  with  the  wind  (S.  Matt.  xi.  7,  8)  ;
learn  from  the  Gospel  to  build  thy  house  upon  a  rock
(S.  Matt.  vii.  24)  ;  learn  also  with  the  disciples  not  to
forget  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent  with  the  simplicity  of  the
dove  (S.  Matt.  x.  16)  ;  and  both  from  these  as  from  a
great  many  other  testimonies  of  Scripture  you  may  get  to
understand  how  greatly  that  seducer  has  deceived  you,
who,  since  he  was  not  able  to  arrest  the  beginning  of  good
in  you,  envied  your  perseverance,  considering  without
doubt  that  it  would  be  sufficient  for  his  malicious  purpose
if  he  could  take  away  from  you  this  one  and  only  virtue
which  would  assure  you  the  crown.  I  beg  you,  therefore,
by  the  bowels  of  the  mercy  of  Christ,  that  you  wander
abroad  no  more,  or  at  least  not  before  you  come  to  speak
with  me  at  a  place  convenient  to  us  both,  and  consider
what  remedy  may  be  found  for  the  very  great  evils  which
from  your  departure  we  either  feel  have  happened  or  feel
will  happen.  Farewell.


LETTER VI. (A.D. 1125.)

TO BRUNO OF COLOGNE.1

Bernard  begs  him  to  take  means  for  bringing  back
certain  wandering  monks  of  Morimond  to  their  monastery  ~

To  the  very  dear  and  most  illustrious  lord  Bruno,  Brother
Bernard,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health,  and
whatever  good  the  prayers  of  a  sinner  can  bring.

1  Afterwards  Archbishop  of  Cologne. See  Letters  8,  9.


LETTER VI.  139

Since  the  day  when  we  had  the  pleasure  to  become
acquainted  at  Rheims  I  trust  I  have  retained  some  small
share  in  your  remembrance ;  and  because  of  this  I  do  not
write  to  you  timidly,  as  to  a  stranger,  but  freely  and
confidently,  as  to  a  well-known  and  familiar  friend.

1.  Arnold, Abbot  of Morimond, has lately  quitted his
monastery  and  scandalized  our  entire  Order  by  his  breach
of rule, because he neither  waited for  the advice of  his
brother  abbots  before  carrying  out  a  plan  of  so  doubtful  a
nature, nor for the licence or assent of the Abbot of
Clairvaux, under  whose authority  he was. But being  a
man  under  authority  and  having  soldiers  under  him,  while
he  proudly  threw  off  the  yoke  of  his  superior,  he  still  more
proudly  kept  his  own  yoke  upon  those  subjected  to  him.
Thus of a great multitude of monks, whom uselessly
traversing  sea  and  land  he  had  gathered  together,  not  for
Christ,  but  for  himself,  abandoning  a  few  only,  and  those
the  simpler  and  least  fervent,  he  has  taken  the  better  and
more  perfect  as  sharers  of  his  error. Among  whom,  three
whose  withdrawal  has much  troubled me,  he  has  dared  to
win  over  and  take  away  with him, namely, Everard  our1
brother,  Adam,  whom  you  have  known  well,  and  that  noble
youth  Conrad,  whom  some  time  ago, not  without  scandal,
he  carried  off  from  Cologne. Whom,  if  you  would  kindly
take the trouble, I  feel sure that  you  would  be  able  to
recover.

2.  Concerning  Arnold himself, I have long  known  his
obstinacy and unbending mind, and I  do not wish to
trouble  you  with  useless  efforts  to  recall  him. But  I  have
heard  that  Everard,  Adam,  and  some  of  the  other  brethren
of  the  same  company,  are  now  staying  in  your  neighbour
hood. If  that  is  the  case,  it  would  be  well  if  you  would  go
yourself at once to  see  them,  would  win them  over by
entreaty,  convince  them  by  reason,  and  strengthen  in  them
the  simplicity  of  the  dove  with  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent.
Make  them understand  that obedience should not hold
them  to  a  man  who  has  not  himself  been  obedient ; that

1  Otherwise,  ytmr.


140  LETTER VI.

they  cannot  lawfully  follow  a  superior  who  is  unlawfully
\vandering  abroad  ;  nor  be  drawn  away  to  desert  the  Order
they  have  professed  for  the  sake  of  a  man  who  has  dis
regarded  its  Rule  ;  that  the  Apostle  bids  us  not  to  hesitate
to  declare  anathema  even  an  angel  from  heaven,  who
should  preach  another  gospel ;  and  that  by  the  same
Apostle  they  are  taught  to  withdraw  themselves  from  any
brother  that  ivalketh  disorderly  (2  Thess.  iii.  6).  Who
may  teach  you  also  to  be  not  high-minded  nor  trust  in
uncertain  riches  (i  Tim.  vi.  17),  until  Christ  shall  claim  for
Himself  His  true  disciple,  proved  by  his  renunciation  of  all
things.  Farewell.


LETTER VII. (A.D. 1126.)
To  THE MONK ADAM.1

I.  If  you  remain  yet  in  that  spirit  of  charity  which  I  either
knew  or  believed  to  be  with  you  formerly,  you  would
certainly  feel  the  condemnation  with  which  charity  must
regard  the  scandal  which  you  have  given  to  the  weak.
For  charity  would  not  offend  charity,  nor  scorn  when  it
feels  itself  offended.  For  it  cannot  deny  itself,  nor  be
divided  against  itself.  Its  function  is  rather  to  draw-
together  things  divided ;  and  it  is  far  from  dividing  those
that  are  joined.  Now,  if  that  remained  in  you,  as  I  have
said,  it  would  not  keep  silent,  it  would  not  rest  uncon
cerned,  nor  pretend  indifference,  but  it  would  without  doubt
whisper  with  groans  and  uneasiness  at  the  bottom  of  your
pious  heart  that  saying,  Who  is  offended,  and  I  burn  not
(2  Cor.  xi.  29).  If,  then,  it  is  kind,  it  loves  peace,  and
rejoices  in  unity;  it  produces  them,  cements  them,
strengthens  them,  and  wherever  it  reigns  it  makes  the
bond  of  peace.  As,  then,  you  are  in  opposition  to  that
true  mother  of  peace  and  concord,  on  what  ground,  I  ask

1  The  MS.  iii  the  Royal  Library  is  inscribed  :  De  Discretions  Oledientice :  Of
Discernment  in  OL-edicnce.  This  Letter  was  written  affr  the  death  of  Abbot
Arnold,  which  took  place  in  Belgium  in  the  year  1 1  26.


LETTER VII.  141

you,  do  you  presume  that  your  sacrifice,  whatever  it  may
be,  will  be  accepted  by  God,  when  without  it  even
martyrdom  profiteth  nothing  (i  Cor.  xiii.  3)  ?  Or,  on  what
ground  do  you  trust  that  you  are  not  the  enemy  of  charity
when  breaking  unity,  rending  the  bond  of  peace,  you
lacerate  her  bowels,  treating  with  such  cruelty  their  dear
pledges,  which  you  neither  have  borne  nor  do  bear?  You
must  lay  down,  then,  the  offering,  whatever  it  may  be,
which  you  are  preparing  to  lay  on  the  altar,  and  hasten  to
go  and  reconcile  yourself  not  with  one  of  your  brethren
only,  but  with  the  entire  body.  The  whole  body  of  the
fraternity,  grievously  wounded  by  your  withdrawal,  as  by
the  stroke  of  a  sword,  utters  its  complaints  against  you  and
the  few  with  you,  saying  :  The  sons  of  my  mother  have
fought  against  me  (Cant.  i.  5).  And  rightly  ;  for  who  is  not
with  her,  is  against  her.  Can  you  think  that  a  mother,  as
tender  as  charity,  can  hear  without  emotion  the  complaint,
so  just,  of  a  community  which  is  to  her  as  a  daughter?
Therefore,  joining  her  tears  with  ours,  she  says,  /  have
nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled
against  me  (Isa.  i.  2).  Charity  is  God  Himself.  Christ  is
our  peace,  who  hath  made  both  one  (Eph.  ii.  14).  Unity  is
the  mystery  even  of  the  Holy  Trinity.  What  place,  then,
in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  God  has  he  who  is  an
enemy  of  charity,  peace,  and  unity?

2.  My  abbot,  perhaps  you  will  say,  has  obliged  me  to
follow  him— ought  I  then  to  have  been  disobedient  ?  But
you  cannot  have  forgotten  the  conclusion  to  which  we  came
one  day  after  a  long  discussion  together  upon  that  scanda
lous  project  which  even  then  you  were  meditating.  If  you
had  remained  in  that  conclusion,  now  it  might  have  been
not  unfitly  said  of  you,  Blessed  is  the  man  who  hath  not
walked  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly  (Ps.  i.  i).  But  let  it
be  so.  Sons  ought,  no  doubt,  to  obey  a  father;  scholars  a
teacher.  An  abbot  may  lead  his  monks  where  he  shall
please,  and  teach  them  what  he  thinks  proper  ;  but  this
is  only  as  long  as  he  lives.  Now  that  he  is  dead,  whom  you
were  bound  to  hear  as  a  teacher  and  to  follow  as  a  guide,


142  LETTER VII.

why  are  you  still  delaying  to  make  amends  for  the  grave
scandal  that  you  have  occasioned  ?  What  hinders  you  now
to  give  ear,  I  do  not  say  to  me  when  I  recall  you,  but  to  our
God,  when  He  mercifully  does  so  by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah,
Shall  they  fall  and  not  arise  ?  Shall  he  turn  away  and
not  return  ?  (Jer.  viii.  4).  Or  has  your  abbot,  when  dying,
forbidden  you  ever  to  rise  again  after  your  fall,  or  ever  to
speak  of  your  return  ?  Is  it  necessary  for  you  to  obey  him
even  when  dead — to  obey  him  against  charity  and  at  the
peril  of  your  soul  ?  You  would  allow,  I  suppose,  that  the
bond  between  an  abbot  and  his  monks  is  by  no  means
so  strong  or  tenacious  as  that  of  married  persons,  whom
God  Himself  and  not  man  has  bound  with  an  inviolable
sacrament — as  the  Saviour  says  :  What  God  hath  joined
together  let  no  man  put  asunder  (S.  Matt.  xix.  6).  But  the
Apostle  asserts  that  when  the  husband  is  dead  the  wife  is
freed  from  the  law  of  her  husband  (Rom.  vii.  2),  and  do  you
consider  yourself  bound  by  the  law  of  your  dead  abbot,  and
this  against  a  law  which  is  more  binding  still,  that  of
charity?

3.  These  things  I  say,  yet  I  do  not  think  that  you  ought
to  have  yielded  to  him  in  this  even  when  living,  or  that  thus
to  have  yielded  ought  to  be  called  obedience.  For  it  is  of
that  kind  of  obedience  that  it  is  said  in  general  :  The  Lord
shall  lead  forth  with  the  workers  of  iniquity  those  who
deviate  in  their  obedience  (Ps.  cxxv.  5,  VULG.).  And  that
no  one  may  contend  that  obedience  to  an  abbot,  even  in
things  evil,  is  free  from  that  penalty,  there  are  words  else
where  still  more  precise :  The  son  shall  not  bear  the
iniquity  of  the  father,  and  the  father  shall  not  bear  the
iniquity  of  the  son  (Ezek.  xviii.  20).  From  these,  then,  it
appears  clearly  that  those  who  command  things  evil  are  not
to  be  obeyed,  especially  when  in  yielding  to  wrong  com
mands,  in  which  you  appear  to  obey  man,  you  show  your
self  plainly  disobedient  to  God,  who  has  forbidden  every
thing  that  is  evil.  For  it  is  altogether  unreasonable  to
profess  yourself  obedient  when  you  know  that  you  are
violating  obedience  due  to  the  superior  on  account  of  the


LETTER VII.  143

inferior,  that  is,  to  the  Divine  on  account  of  the  human.
What  then  ?  God  forbids  what  man  orders  ;  and  shall  I  be
deaf  to  the  voice  of  God  and  listen  to  that  of  man  ?  The
Apostles  did  not  understand  the  matter  thus  when  they
said,  We  must  obey  God  rather  than  men  (Acts  v.  29).
Does  not  the  Lord  in  the  Gospel  blame  the  Pharisees  :  Ye
transgress  the  com?nandment  of  God  on  account  of  your
traditions  (S.  Matt.  xv.  3).  And  by  Isaiah:  In  vain  they
worship  Me,  he  says,  teaching  the  commands  and  doctrines
of  men  (Is.  xxix.  13).  And  also  to  our  first  father.1
Because  thou  hast  obeyed  thy  wife  rather  than  Me,  the
earth  shall  be  rebellious  to  thy  work  (Gen.  iii.  17).  There
fore  to  do  evil,  whosoever  it  be  that  bids,  is  shown  not
to  be  obedience,  but  disobedience.

4.  To  make  this  principle  clear,  we  must  note  that  some
actions  are  wholly  good,  others  wholly  evil :  and  in  these  no
obedience  is  to  be  rendered  to  men.  For  the  former  are
not  to  be  omitted  by  us,  even  if  they  are  prohibited  [by
men] :  nor  the  latter  done,  even  though  they  are  commanded.
But,  besides  these,  there  are  actions  between  the  two,  and
which  may  be  good  or  evil  according  to  circumstances  of
place,  time,  manner,  or  person,  and  in  these  obedience  has
its  place,  as  it  was  in  the  matter  of  the  tree  of  the  know
ledge  of  good  and  evil,  which  was  in  the  midst  of  Paradise.
When  these  are  in  question,  it  is  not  right  to  prefer  our
own  judgment  to  that  of  our  superiors,  so  as  to  take  no
heed  of  what  they  order  or  forbid.  Let  us  see  whether  it
be  not  such  a  case  that  I  have  condemned  in  you,  and
whether  you  ought  not  to  be  condemned.  For  clearness,  I
will  subjoin  examples  of  the  distinction  which  I  have  just
made.  Faith,  hope,  charity,  and  others  of  that  class  are
wholly  good  ;  it  cannot  be  wrong  to  command,  or  to  practise
them,  nor  right  to  forbid  them,  or  to  neglect  the  practice  of
them.  Theft,  sacrilege,  adultery,  and  all  other  such  vices  are
wholly  evil ;  it  can  never  be  right  to  practise  or  to  order  them,
nor  wrong  to  forbid  or  avoid  them.  The  law  is  not  made  for

i  Protoplastus,  the  first  formed. Tertullian, E.ihurt. ad  Castil.,  cap. 2,  an  1
Adv.  Jiid.,  c.  13.  calls  Adam  arU  Eve Proloptasti. —  [E.J


144  LETTER VII.

things  of  this  kind,  for  the  prohibition  of  no  person  has
the  power  to  render  null  the  commandments  given,  nor  the
command  of  any  to  render  lawful  the  things  prohibited.
There  are,  finally,  things  of  a  middle  kind  which  are  not  in
themselves  good  or  evil ;  they  may  be  indifferently  either
prescribed  or  forbidden,  and  in  these  things  an  inferior
never  sins  in  obeying.  Such  are,  for  example,  fasting,
watching,  reading,  and  such  like.  But  some  things  which
are  of  this  middle  kind  often  pass  the  bounds  of  indiffer-
ency,  and  become  the  one  or  the  other.  Thus,  marriage  is
neither  prescribed  nor  forbidden,  but  when  it  is  made  may
not  be  dissolved.  That,  therefore,  which  before  the  nuptials
was  a  thing  of  the  middle  kind  obtains  the  force  of  a  thing
wholly  good  in  regard  to  the  married  pair.  Also,  it  is  a
thing  indifferent  for  a  man  in  secular  life  to  possess  or  not
to  possess  property  of  his  own  ;  but  to  a  monk,  who  is  not
allowed  to  possess  anything,  it  is  wholly  evil.

5.  Do  you  see  now,  brother,  to  which  branch  of  my
division  your  action  belongs  ?  If  it  is  to  be  put  among
things  wholly  good  it  is  praiseworthy :  if  among  those
wholly  evil  it  is  greatly  to  be  blamed  :  but  if  it  is  to  be
placed  among  those  of  the  middle  kind  you  may,  perhaps,
find  in  your  obedience  an  excuse  for  your  first  departure,
but  your  delay  in  returning  is  not  at  all  excusable,  since
that  was  not  from  obedience.  For  when  your  abbot  was
dead,  if  he  had  previously  ordered  anything  which  was  not
fitting,  the  former  discussion  has  shown  you  that  you  were
no  longer  bound  to  obey  him.  And  although  the  matter  is
now  sufficiently  clear  by  itself,  yet  because  of  some  who
seek  for  occasion  to  object  when  reason  does  not  support
them,  I  will  put  the  matter  clearly  again,  so  that  every
shade  of  doubt  may  disappear,  and  I  will  show  you  that
your  obedience  and  your  leaving  your  monastery  were
neither  wholly  good  nor  partly  good,  but  plainly  wholly
evil.  Concerning  him  who  is  dead,  I  am  silent ;  he  has
now  God  alone  for  his  judge,  and  to  his  own  Lord  he
either  stands  or  falls;  that  God  may  not  say  with  righteous
anger,  "  Men  have  taken  away  from  me  even  the  right  to


LETTER VII.  145

judge."  However,  for  the  instruction  of  the  living  I  dis
cuss,  not  even  what  he  has  done,  but  what  he  has  ordered  ;
whether,  that  is  to  say,  his  order  ought  to  have  been  obli
gatory,  inasmuch  as  a  widespreading  scandal  has  followed
upon  it.  And  I  say  this  first ;  that  if  there  are  any  who
followed  him  when  he  wrongly  left  his  cloister,  but  who
followed  in  simplicity,  and  without  suspecting  any  evil,
supposing  that  he  had  license  to  go  forth  from  the  Bishop
of  Langres  and  the  Abbot  of  Citeaux  (for  to  each  of  these
was  he  responsible) ;  and  it  is  not  incredible  that  some  of
those  who  were  of  his  company  may  so  have  believed  ;  this,
my  censure,  does  not  touch  them,  provided  that  when  they
knew  the  truth,  they  returned  without  delay.

6.  Therefore  my  discourse  is  against  those  only,  or  rather
for  those,  who  knowingly  and  purposely  put  their  hands  into
the  fire  ;  who  being  conscious  of  his  presumption,  yet  fol
lowed  him  who  presumed,  without  caring  for  the  prohibition
of  the  Apostle,  and  his  precept,  to  withdraw  from  every
brother  who  walks  disorderly  (2  Thess.  iii.  6).  Despising  also
the  voice  of  the  Lord  himself,  He  u<ho  gathercth  not  with
me  scattereth  (S.  Matt.  xii.  30).  To  you,  brethren,  belongs
clearly  and  specially  that  reproach  spoken  by  Jeremiah,
which  I  recall  with  grief :  This  is  a  nation  that  obeyeth  not
t/ie  voice  of  t lie  Lord  their  God  (Jer.  vii.  28).  For  clearly
that  is  the  Voice  of  God  pointing  out  His  enemy  from  the
work  that  he  does,  and,  as  it  were,  showing  him  with  a
stretched  ringer  to  ward  off  simple  souls  from  his  ungodly
example  :  He  who  is  not  with  Me,  He  says,  scatters ;  ought
you  to  have  followed  a  disperser  ?  And  when  God  invites
you  to  unite  with  Him,  ought  you  rather  to  follow  a  man
who  wishes  to  disperse  you  ?  He  scorned  his  superiors,  he
exposed  his  inferiors  to  danger,  he  deeply  troubled  his
brethren,  and  yet  ye  seeing  a  thief  joined  yourself  with  him  !
I  had  determined  to  be  silent  concerning  him  who  is  dead,
but  I  am  obliged,  I  confess,  to  proceed  still  a  little  further,
since  I  cannot  blame  your  obedience,  if  his  command  is  not
shown  to  be  altogether  improper.  Since  the  orders  and  the
actions  of  the  man  were  similar  to  each  other,  it  seems

VOL.  I.  10


146  LETTER VII.

impossible  to  praise  or  to  blame  the  one  without  the  other.
Now  it  is  very  clear  that  orders  of  that  kind  ought  not  to
have  been  obeyed,  since  they  were  contrary  to  the  law  of
God.  For  who  can  suppose  that  the  institutions  of  our
Fathers  are  not  to  be  preferred  to  those  of  lesser  persons,
or  that  the  general  rules  of  the  Order  must  not  prevail  over
the  commands  of  private  persons  ?  For  we  have  this  in  the
Rule  of  S.  Benedict.1

7.  I  should  be  able,  indeed,  to  bring  forward  the  Abbot
of  Citeauxasa  witness,  who,  as  being  superior  to  your  abbot
as  a  father  to  a  son,  as  a  master  to  a  disciple,  and,  in  a  word,
as  an  abbot  to  a  monk  committed  to  his  charge,  rightly
complains  that  you  have  held  him  in  contempt  because  of
the  other.  I  might  speak  also  of  the  Bishop,  whose  consent
was  not  waited  for,  a  contempt  which  was  inexcusable,
since  the  Lord  says  of  such  and  to  such :  He  who  despises
you  despises  Me  (S.  Luke  x.  16).  But  as  to  both  these
might  be  opposed  and  preferred  the  authority  of  the
Roman  Pontiff  as  more  weighty  :  by  whose  license  it  is
said  that  you  have  taken  care  to  secure  yourselves  (the
question  of  that  license  shall  be  discussed  in  its  proper
place),  [see  below,  No.  9],  I  rather  bring  forward  such
an  one  as  you  dare  not  set  yourself  against.  Most
surely  He  is  the  Supreme  Pontiff,  who  by  His  own
blood  entered  in  once  and  alone  into  the  Holy  Place
to  obtain  eternal  redemption  (Heb.  ix.  12),  and  de
nounces  with  a  terrible  voice,  in  the  Gospel,  that  none
should  dare  to  give  scandal  to  even  the  least  of  His  little
ones  (S.  Matt,  xviii.  6).  I  should  say  nothing  if  the  evil
had  not  proceeded  farther.  An  easy  forgiveness  would
follow  a  fault  which  has  no  grave  consequences.  But  at
present  there  is  no  doubt  that  you  have  preferred  the
commands  of  a  man  to  that  of  God,  and  have  thus
scandalized  very  many.  What  man  of  any  sense  would  say
that  such  an  audacious  act  was  good,  or  could  become  good,
by  the  direction  of  any  man,  whatever  his  dignity?  And  if
it  is  not  good,  nor  can  become  good,  without  doubt  it  is

1  Reg.  Cap.  71.


LETTER VII.  147

wholly  evil.  Whence  it  follows  that  since  your  withdrawal
was  to  the  scandal  of  many,  and  by  this  contrary  to  the  law
of  God,  since  it  is  neither  wholly  good  nor  even  of  a  middle
kind,  it  is,  therefore,  wholly  and  altogether  evil ;  because
that  which  is  wholly  is  always  such,  and  that  of  a  middle
kind  can  become  so.

8.  How then can either  the  permission of your  abbot
avail  to  make  that  permissible  which  is  (as  we  have  already
shown  beyond  question)  wholly  evil,  since  (as  we  have  said
above) things  of  this kind,  that is  things  purely  evil,  can
never  be  rightly  ordered  nor  permissibly  done  ? Do  you
see  how  futile  is  the  excuse  you  draw  from obedience  to
a  man  when  you  are  convicted  of  a  transgression  against
God  ? I  hardly  suppose  that  you  would  resort  to  that  reply
of  the  Lord  respecting  the  scandal  given  to  the  Pharisees,
Let  them  alone,  they  be  blind  leaders  of  the  blind  (S.  Matt,
xv.  14),  and  that  as  He  attached  no  value  to  their  objections,
so  you  attach  no  value  to  ours  ; for  you  know  that  there  is
no  comparison  in  this  respect  between  Him  and  you. But
if  you  make  comparison  of  persons,  you  find  that  on  one
side  it  is  the  proud  Pharisees  who  are  scandalized,  on  the
other  the  poor  of  Jesus  Christ ; and  as  to  the  cause  of  the
scandal,  in the one case it is presumption, in the other
truth. Again,  as  I  have  shown  above,  you  have  not  only
preferred a  human to  a Divine  command,  but  that of  a
private  person  to  a  public  rule,  and  this  alone  would  suffice
for  proof  ;  but  the  custom  and  Rule,  not  only  of  our  Order,
but of all monasteries, seems to cry out against your
unexampled  innovation  and  unparalleled  presumption.

9.  You  had  then  just  reason  to  fear,  and  were  rightly  dis
trustful  of  the  goodness  of  your  cause  when,  in  order  to  still
the  pangs  of  your  consciences,  you  tried  to  have  recourse  to
the  Holy  See. O,  vain  remedy  !  which  is  nothing  else  than
to  seek girdles,  like our  first  parents, for your  ulcerated
consciences,  that  is,  to  hide  the  ill  instead  of  curing  it.  We.
have  asked  and  obtained (they  say) the]  permission  of  the
Pope. Would  that  you  had  asked  not  his  permission,  but
his  advice  ;  that  is  to  say,  not  that  he  would  permit  you  to  do


LETTER VII.


it, but  whether it  was  a  thing permitted to  you to  do  !
Why,  then,  did  you  solicit  his  permission  ?  Was  it  to  render
lawful that  which was not so? Then  you  wished  to  do
what was  not lawful;  but  what  was not lawful was evil.
The  intention,  therefore,  was  evil,  which  tended  towards
evil. Perhaps  you  would  say  that  the  wrong  thing  which
you  demanded  permission  to  do  ceased  to  be  such  if  it  was
done  by  virtue  of  a  permission. But  that  has  been  already
excluded  above  by  an  irrefragable  reason. For  when  God
said,  Do  not  despise  one  of  these  little  ones  -who  believe  in
Me, He did not add also, Unless  with  permission; nor
when  He  said,  Take  care  not  to  give  scandal  to  one  of  these
little  ones  (S.  Matt,  xviii.  6-10),  did  He  limit  it  by  adding,
Without  licence. It  is  then  certain  that except  when  the
necessary  interests  of  the  truth  require,  it  is  not  permitted
to  anyone  to  give  any  scandal,  neither  to  order  it,  nor  to
consent to it. Yet you think that permission is  to  be
obtained  to  do  so. But  to  what  purpose  ? Was  it  that  you
might  sin  with  more  liberty  and  fewer  scruples,  and,  there
fore, with just so much the more danger? Wonder
ful  precaution, marvellous prudence! They had  already
devised evil in their heart, but they were cautious
not  to  carry  it  out  in  action  except  with  permission. They
conceived  in  sorrow,  but  they  did  not  bring  forth  iniquity
until  the  Pope  had  afforded  his  consent  to  that  unrighteous
birth. With what advantage? or, at least, with what
lessening  of  the  evil  ? Is  it  likely  that  either  an evil  will
cease  to  be  or  even  be  rendered  less  because  the  Pope  has
consented  to  it  ? But  who  will  deny  it  to  be  a  bad  thing  to
give  consent  to  evil  ? Which,  notwithstanding,  I  do  not  in
any  way  believe  that  the Pope  would  have  done,  unless  he
had  been either  deceived by falsehood or  overcome  by
importunity. In fact, unless it had been so, would he
weakly  have  given you  permission  to  sow  scandal,  to  raise
up schisms, to distress friends, to trouble the peace of
brethren,  to  throw  into  confusion  their  unity,  and,  above  all,
to  despise  your  own  Bishop  ? And  under  what  necessity  he
should  have  acted  thus  I  have  no  need  to  say,  since  the  issue


LETTER VII.  149

of  the  matter  sufficiently  shows.  For  I  see  with  grief  that
YOU  have  gone  forth,  but  I  do  not  see  that  you  have  profited
in  doing  so.

10.  Thus, in your  opinion, to  give  assent  to  so  great
and  weighty  evils is to show obedience,  to  render  assist
ance,  to  behave  with  moderation  and  gentleness. Do  you*
then, endeavour  to whitewash the most  detestable  vices
under  the  name  of  virtues  ? Or  do  you  think  that  you  can
injure  virtues  without  doing  injury  to  the Lord  of  virtues  ?
You hide the vainest presumption, the most shameful
levity,  the  cruellest  division  under  the  names  of  obedience,
moderation,  gentleness, and you  soil  those  sacred  names
with  the  vices  hidden  under  them. May I never  emulate
this obedience  : such  moderation  can never be pleasing
to me, or rather seems to resemble molestation ; may
gentleness of this kind ever be far from me. Such
obedience is worse than any revolt : such moderation
passes  all  bounds. Shall  I  say  that  it  goes  beyond  them  or
does  not  come up to  them  ? Perhaps  it  would  be  more
adequate  to  say  that it is  altogether  without  measure  or
bound. Of  what  kind  is  that  gentleness  which  irritates  the
ears  of  all  the  hearers  ? And  yet  I  beg  you  to  show  some
sign  of  it  now  on  my  behalf. Since  you  are  so  patient  that
you  do  not  contend  with  anybody,  even  with  one  who  tries
to  drag  you  away  to  forbidden  ground,  permit  me,  too,  I
beg  of you,  to treat with you now  somewhat  more  un
restrainedly. Otherwise I have merited  much  evil  from
you  if  you  think  that  you  must  resent  from me  alone  what
you  are  accustomed  to  resent  from  no  one  else.

11.  Well,  then,  I  call your  own  conscience  to  witness.
Was  it willingly  or  unwillingly  that  you  went  forth? If
willingly,  then  it  was  not  from obedience. If  unwillingly,
you  seem  to  have  had  some  suspicion  of the  order  which
you carried out with reluctance. But when there is
suspicion, there consideration is necessary. But you,
either  to  display  your  patience or  to  exercise  it,  obeyed
without  discussion,  and  suffered  yourself  to  be  taken  away,
not  only  without  your own  volition,  but  even  against  your


150  LETTER VII.

conscience.  O,  patience  worthy  of  all  impatience  !  1
cannot,  I  confess,  help  being  angry  with  this  most  ques
tionable  patience.  You  saw  that  he  was  a  scatterer  and
yet  you  followed  him  ;  you  heard  him  directing  what  was
scandalous  and  yet  you  obeyed  him  !  True  patience  con
sists  in  doing  or  in  suffering  what  is  displeasing  to  us,  not
what  is  forbidden  to  us.  A  strange  thing  !  You  listened
to  that  man  softly  murmuring,  but  not  to  God  openly  pro
testing  in  such  words  as  these,  like  a  clap  of  thunder  from
heaven,  Woe  to  him  through  whom  scandal  cometh  (S.  Matt.
xviii.  7).  And  to  be  the  better  heard,  not  only  does  the
Lord  Himself  cry  aloud,  but  His  Blood  cries  with  a  terrible
voice  to  make  even  the  deaf  hear.  Its  pouring  forth  is  its
cry.  Since  it  was  poured  forth  for  the  children  of  God  who
were  scattered  abroad  that  it  might  gather  them  together
into  one,  it  justly  murmurs  against  the  scatterers.  He  whose
constant  duty  it  is  to  collect  souls  together  hates  without
doubt  those  who  scatter  them.  Loud  is  His  voice  and  piercing
which  calls  bodies  from  their  graves  and  souls  from  Hades.
That  trumpet  blast  calls  together  heaven  and  earth  and  the
things  that  are  with  them,  giving  them  peace.  Its  sound
has  gone  out  unto  the  whole  world,  and  yet  it  has  not  been
able  to  burst  through  your  deafness  !  What  a  voice  of
power  and  magnificence  when  the  words  are  spoken :
Let  the  Lord  arise  and  let  His  enemies  be  scattered  (Ps.
Ixviii.  2).  And  again:  Disperse  them  by  Thy  power,  O
Lord,  my  protector,  and  put  them  down  (Ps.  lix.  12).  It
is  the  blood  of  Christ,  brother  Adam,  which  raises  its  voice
as  a  sounding  trumpet  on  behalf  of  pious  assemblies
against  wicked  scatterers  ;  it  has  been  poured  forth  to
bring  together  those  who  were  dispersed,  and  it  threatens
to  disperse  those  who  scatter.  If  you  do  not  hear  His
voice,  then  listen  to  that  which  rolls  from  His  side.  For
how  could  He  not  hear  His  own  blood  who  heard  the  blood
of  Abel  ?

12.  But  what  is  this  to  me?  you  say.  It  concerns  one
whom  it  was  not  right  for  me  to  contradict.  The  disciple
is  not  above  his  master ;  and  it  was  to  be  taught,  not  to


LETTER VII.  151

teach,  that  I  attached  myself  to  him.  As  a  hearer,  it
became  me  to  follow,  not  to  go  before,  my  preceptor.
O,  simple  one,  the  Paulus  of  these  times  !  If  only  he  had
shown  himself  another  Antony,1  so  that  you  had  no  occa
sion  to  discuss  the  least  word  that  fell  from  his  lips,  but
only  to  obey  it  without  hesitation  !  What  exemplary
obedience  !  The  least  word,  an  iota,  which  drops  from  the
lips  of  his  superiors  finds  him  obedient  !  He  does  not
examine  what  is  enjoined,  he  is  content  because  it  is
enjoined!2  And  this  is  obedience  without  delay.  If  this
is  a  right  view  of  duty,  then  without  cause  do  we  read  in
the  Church  :  Prove  all  things,  hold  fast  that  which  is
good  (i  Thess.  v.  21).  If  this  is  a  right  view,  let  us  blot
out  of  the  book  of  the  Gospel  Be  ye  wise  as  serpents,
for  the  words  following  would  suffice,  and  harmless  as
doves  (S.  Matt.  x.  16).  I  do  not  say  that  inferiors  are
to  make  themselves  judges  of  the  orders  of  those  set
over  them,  in  which  it  may  be  taken  for  granted  that
nothing  is  ordered  contrary  to  the  Divine  laws,  but  I
assert  that  prudence  also  is  necessary  to  notice  if  any
thing  does  so  contradict,  and  freedom  firmly  to  pronounce
against  these.  But  you  reply,  I  have  nothing  to  do  with
examining  what  he  orders;  it  is  his  duty  to  do  that  before
ordering.  Tell  me,  I  pray  you,  if  a  sword  were  put  into
your  hand  and  he  bade  you  turn  it  against  his  throat,  would
you  obey  ?  Or  if  he  ordered  you  to  fling  yourself  headlong
into  the  fire,  or  into  the  water,  would  you  do  it  ?  If  you
did  not  even  hinder  him  from  such  acts  as  these  to  the  best
of  your  ability,  would  not  you  be  held  guilty  of  the  crime
of  homicide  ?  Come,  then,  see  that  you  have  done  nothing

1  Antony,  who  was  called  by  S.  Athanasius  "  the  founder  of  asceticism,"  and
"  a  model  for  monks,"  is  called  "  Abbas,1'  though  he  was  more  properly  a
hermit,  and  always  refused  to  take  oversight  of  a  monastery.  He  was  born  at
Coma,  in  Upper  Egypt,  about  A.D.  250.  The  Paulus  here  mentioned  was  a
disciple  of  Antony.  He  was  remarkable  for  his  childlike  docility,  on  account
of  which  he  was  surnamed  Simplex,  and  notwithstanding  a  certain  dulness
of  intellect  seems  to  have  shown  sometimes  remarkable  discernment  of
character. — [E.]

2  This  clause  is  wanting  in  some  MSS.


152  LETTER VII.

but  co-operate  in  his  crime  under  the  pretext  of  obedience.
Do  you  not  know  that  it  has  been  said  by  a  certain  person
(for  you  would  not,  perhaps,  give  credence  to  me)  that  it
would  be  better  to  be  sunk  in  the  depths  of  the  sea  than  to
give  scandals  (S.  Matt,  xviii.  6).  Why  has  He  said  this
unless  that  He  wished  to  signify  that  in  comparison  to  the
terrible  punishments  that  are  reserved  for  the  scandalous,
temporal  death  would  seem  scarcely  a  punishment  but  an
advantage  ?  Why,  then,  did  you  help  him  to  make  a
scandal  ?  For  you  did  so  in  following  and  obeying  him.
Would  it  not  have  been  better,  according  to  the  declaration
of  the  Truth  I  have  quoted,  to  hang  a  millstone  from  his
neck  and  so  to  plunge  him  in  the  depth  of  the  sea  ?  What
then  ?  You  that  were  so  obedient  a  disciple,  who  could  not
bear  that  he,  your  father  and  master,  should  be  separated
from  you  for  a  single  instant,  for  a  foot  breadth  (as  it  is
said),  you  have  not  hesitated  to  fall  into  the  ditch  behind
him  with  your  eyes  wide  open,  like  another  Balaam  ?  Did
you  think  that  you  were  labouring  for  his  happiness  when
you  showed  toward  him  an  obedience  more  hurtful  for  him
than  death  ?  Truly,  now,  I  experience  how  true  is  that
saying  :  A  man's  foes  shall  be  they  of  his  own  household
(Micah  vii.  6).  If  you  see  and  feel  this,  do  you  not  groan
if  you  perceive  what  you  have  done  ?  And  if  you  do  per
ceive,  do  you  not  tremble?  For,  indeed,  your  obedience  (it
is  not  my  judgment,  but  that  of  the  Truth  Himself)  has
been  worse  for  him  than  death.

13.  If  you  are  now  convinced  of  this,  I  do  not  know  how
you  can  help  trembling  and  hastening  to  repair  your  fault.
Otherwise  what  conscience  of  wrong  will  you  carry  hence
to  that  terrible  tribunal  where  the  Judge  will  not  need
witness,  where  the  Truth  will  scan  even  purposes,  and
penetrate  in  search  of  faults  to  the  hidden  places  of  the
heart,  where,  in  short,  that  Divine  look  will  try  the  most
secret  recesses  of  minds,  and  at  the  sudden  shining  of  that
Sun  of  justice  all  the  windings  of  human  souls  will  be  spread
open  and  give  to  the  light  whatever,  whether  good  or  evil,
they  were  hiding?  Then,  brother  Adam,  those  who  commit


LETTER VII.  153

a  sin,  and  those  who  consent  to  it  will  be  punished  with  equal
chastisement.  Then  thieves  and  the  associates  of  thieves
will  listen  to  a  similar  sentence  ;  the  seducers  and  the  seduced
will  undergo  an  equal  judgment.  Cease,  then,  to  say
again,  What  is  it  to  me  ?  Let  him  see  to  it.  Can  you  touch
pitch  and  say  I  am  not  defiled  ?  Can  you  hide  fire  in  your
bosom  and  not  be  burned  ?  Can  you  have  your  portion
with  adulterers  without  resembling  them  in  some  respect  ?
Isaiah  did  not  think  so,  for  he  reproached  himself  not  only
because  he  was  himself  unclean,  but  also  because  he  was
the  companion  of  the  unclean  :  Because,  he  says,  /  am  a
man  of  unclean  lips  and  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of
unclean  lips  (Isaiah  vi.  5).  For  he  blames  himself  not
because  he  dwelt  among  sinners,  but  because  he  has  not
condemned  their  sins.  For,  so  he  says  :  Woe  is  me  because
I  have  been  silent  (Isaiah  vi.  5,  VULG.).  But  when  did  he
consent  to  the  doing  of  evil,  that  he  blames  himself  not  to
have  condemned  it  in  others  ?  And  did  not  David  also  feel
that  he  was  defiled  by  the  contact  of  sin  when  he  said  :
With  men  that  work  iniquity,  and  I  will  not  communicate
with  their  chosen  friends  (Ps.  cxl.  4,  VULG.).  Or  when
he  made  this  prayer :  Cleanse  me  O  Lord  from  my  secret
sins,  and  spare  Thy  servant  from  the  offences  of  others
(Ps.  xix.  12-13,  VULG.).  Wherefore  he  strove  to  avoid
the  society  of  sinners  in  order  not  to  share  in  their  faults.
For  he  says  farther :  /  have  not  sat  in  the  council  of  vanity,
and  I  will  not  enter  into  the  company  of  those  who  do
unjustly  (Ps.  xxv.  4-5,  VULG.).  And  then  he  adds  :  7
have  hated  the  congregation  of  evil  doers,  and  will  not  sit
with  the  wicked  (ibid.}.  Finally,  hear  the  counsel  of  the
wise  man  :  My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee,  consent  thou  not
(Prov.  i.  10).

14.  Have  you,  then,  against  these  and  innumerable  other
and  similar  testimonies  of  the  truth,  thought  that  you  ought
to  obey  anybody  ?  O,  odious  perversity  !  The  virtue  of
obedience  which  always  wars  on  behalf  of  truth,  is  arrayed
against  truth.  Happy  the  disobedience  of  brother  Henry,
who  soon  repenting  of  his  error  and  retracing  his  steps,  has


154  LETTER VII.

the  happiness  of  not  persisting  longer  in  such  an  obedience.
The  fruits  of  disobedience  are  sweeter  and  to  be  preferred
[to  this]  ;  and  now  he  tastes  them  with  a  good  conscience
in  the  peaceable  and  constant  practice  of  the  duties  of  his
profession  in  the  midst  of  his  brethren,  and  in  the  bosom
of  the  Order  to  which  he  has  devoted  himself  ;  while  some
of  his  former  companions  are  breaking  the  hearts  of  their
ancient  brethren  by  the  scandals  they  are  making  !  Whose
disobedience  of  slackness  and  omission,  if  the  choice  were
given  me,  I  would  even  prefer,  with  his  sense  of  penitence,
than  the  punctilious  obedience  of  such  as  these,  with
scandal.  For  I  consider  that  he  does  better  for  the  keeping
unity  in  the  bond  of  peace  who  obeys  charity,  though  dis
obedient  to  his  abbot,  than  those  who  so  defer  to  a  single
man  as  to  prefer  one  to  the  whole  body.  I  might  boldly
add  even  this,  that  it  is  preferable  to  risk  disobedience  to
one  person  than  to  endanger  the  vows  of  our  own  pro
fession  and  all  the  other  advantages  of  religion.

15.  Since, not  to  speak  of other  obligations,  there  are
two  principal ones to  be observed by all dwellers  in a
monastery, obedience to the abbot and stability or
constancy. But  one  of  these  ought  not  to  be  fulfilled  to  the
prejudice  of  the  other,  so  that  you  should  thus  show your
self  constant  in  your  place  as  not  to  be  above  being  subject
to  the  superior, and  so  obey  the  superior as not  to  lose
constancy. Thus  if  you  would  disapprove  of  a  monk,  how
ever  constant  in  his  cloister,  who  was  too  proud  to  obey  the
orders  of  his  superior,  can you  wronder  that  we  blame  an
obedience  which  served  you  as  the  cause  or  occasion  for
deserting  your  place,  especially  when  in  making  a  religious
profession  constancy  is  vowed  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  be  at
all subordinated to  the  will of  the  abbot under  whom  a
monk  may  be  placed.

1 6.  But  perhaps  you may  turn  what I  say  against  me,
asking  what  I  have  done  with  the  constancy  which  ought  to
have  kept  me  at  Citeaux,  whereas  I  now  dwell  elsewhere.
To  which  I  reply,  I  am,  indeed,  a  Cistercian  monk  professed
in  that  place,  and  was  sent  forth  by  my  abbot  to  where  I


LETTER VII.  155

now  dwell,  but  sent  forth  in  peace  without  scandal,  without
disorder,  according  to  our  usages  and  constitutions.  As
long,  therefore,  as  I  persevere  in  the  same  peace  and
concord  in  which  I  was  sent  forth,  as  long  as  I  stand  fast  in
unity,  I  do  not  prefer  my  private  interests  to  those  of  the
community.  I  remain  peaceful  and  obedient  in  the  place
where  I  have  been  posted.  I  say  that  my  conscience  is  at
peace,  because  I  observe  faithfully  the  stability  I  have
promised.  How  do  I  compromise  my  vow  of  stability  when
I  do  not  break  the  bond  of  concord,  nor  desert  the  firm
ground  of  peace  ?  If  obedience  keeps  my  body  far  distant
from  Citeaux,  the  offering  of  the  same  devotions  and  a
manner  of  life  in  every  way  similar  hold  my  spirit  always
present  there.  But  the  day  on  which  I  shall  begin  to  live,
according  to  other  laws  (which  may  God  avert),  to  practise
other  customs,  to  perform  different  observances,  to  introduce
novelties  and  customs  from  without,  I  shall  be  a  transgressor
of  my  vows,  and  I  shall  no  longer  think  that  I  am  observing
the  constancy  that  I  promised.  I  say,  then,  that  an  abbot
ought  to  be  obeyed  in  all  things,  but  saving  the  oath  of  the
Order.  But  you  having  made  profession,  according  to  the
Rule  of  S.  Benedict,  where  you  promised  obedience,  you
promised  also  constancy.  And  if  you  have,  indeed,  obeyed,
but  have  not  been  constant  by  offending  in  one  point,  you
are  made  an  offender  in  all,  and  if  in  all,  then  in  obedience
itself.

17.  Do  you  see,  then,  the  proper  scope  of  your
obedience  ?  How  can  it  excuse  your  want  of  constancy,
which  is  not  even  of  weight  to  justify  itself?  Everyone
knows  that  a  person  makes  his  profession  solemnly  and
regularly  in  the  presence  of  the  abbot.  That  profession  is
made,  therefore,  in  his  presence  only,  not  at  his  discretion
also.  The  abbot  is  employed  as  the  witness,  and  not  the
arbiter  of  the  profession  ;  the  helper  of  its  fulfilment,  not  an
assistant  to  the  breach  of  it  ;  to  punish  and  not  to  authorize
bad  faith.  What,  then  ?  Do  I  place  in  the  hand  of  the
abbot  the  vows  that  I  have  taken,  without  exception  ratified
by  my  mouth  and  signed  by  my  hand  in  presence  of  God  and


156  LETTER VII.

His  Saints?  Do  I  not  hear  out  of  the  Rule  (Rule  of  S.
Benedict  C.  58)  that  if  I  ever  do  otherwise  I  shall  be  con
demned  by  God,  whom  I  have  mocked  ?  If  my  abbot  or
even  an  angel  from  heaven  should  order  me  to  do  some
thing  contrary  to  my  vow,  I  would  boldly  refuse  an
obedience  of  this  kind,  wThich  would  make  me  a  transgressor
of  my  own  oath  and  make  me  swear  falsely  by  the  name  of
my  God,  for  I  know,  according  to  the  truth  of  Scripture,
that  out  of  my  own  mouth  I  must  either  be  condemned  or
justified  (S.  Luke  xix.  22),  and  because  The  mouth  which
lies  slays  the  soul  (Wisd.  i.  u),  and  that  we  chant  with
truth  before  God,  Thou  wilt  destroy  all  those  who  speak
falsehood  (Ps.  v.  6),  and  because  everyone  shall  bear  his
own  burden  (Gal.  vi.  5),  and  everyone  shall  give  account
of  himself  to  God  (Rom.  xiv.  12).  If  it  were  otherwise
with  me,  with  what  front  could  I  dare  to  lie  in  the  presence
of  God  and  His  angels,  when  singing  that  verse  from  the
Psalm  :  /  will  render  unto  Thee  my  vows,  which  my  lips
have  uttered  (Ps.  Ivi.  13,  14).

In  fact,  the  abbot  himself  ought  to  consider  the  advice
which  the  Rule  gives,  addressing  itself  to  him  in  particular,
"that  he  should  maintain  the  present  Rule  in  all  respects,"
and  also,  which  is  universally  directed,  and  no  exception
made,  "that  all  should  follow  the  Rule  as  guide  and
mistress,  nor  is  it  to  be  rashly  deviated  from  by  any "
(Rule  of  S.  Bened.  capp.  Ixiv.  3).  Thus  I  have  determined
to  follow  him  as  master  always  and  everywhere,  but  on  the
condition  never  to  deviate  from  the  authority  of  the  Rule,
which,  as  he  himself  is  witness,  I  have  sworn  and  determined
to  keep.

1 8.  Let  me,  briefly,  treat  another  objection  which  may
possibly  be  made  to  me,  and  I  will  bring  to  a  close  an
epistle  which  is  already  too  long.  It  seems  that  I  may  be
reproached  with  acting  otherwise  than  I  speak.  For  I  may
be  asked,  if  I  condemn  those  who  have  deserted  their
monastery,  not  only  with  the  consent  of  their  abbot,  but  at
his  command,  on  what  principle  do  I  receive  and  retain
those  who  from  other  monasteries,  who,  breaking  their


LETTER VII.  157

vow  of  constancy  and  contemning  the  authority  of  their
superiors,  come  to  our  Order?  To  which  my  reply  will  be
brief,  but  dangerous  ;  for  I  fear  that  what  I  shall  say  will
displease  certain  persons.  But  I  fear  still  more  lest  by
concealing  the  truth  I  should  sing  untruly  in  the  Church
those  words  of  the  Psalmist :  /  have  not  hid  my  righteous
ness  within  my  heart :  my  talk  hath  been  of  Thy  truth  and
of  Thy  salvation  (Ps.  xl.  12).  I  receive  them,  then,  for  this
reason,  because  I  do  not  consider  that  they  are  wrong  to
quit  the  monastery,  in  which  they  were  able,  indeed,  to
make  vows  to  God,  but  by  no  means  to  perform  them,  to
enter  into  another  house  where  they  may  better  serve  God,
Who  is  everywhere,  and  who  repair  the  wrong  done  by  the
breach  of  their  vow  of  constancy  by  the  perfect  performance
of  all  other  duties  of  the  religious  life.  If  this  displeases  any
one,  and  he  murmurs  against  a  man  thus  seeking  his  own
salvation,  the  Author  of  salvation  Himself  shall  reply  for
him:  Is  thine  eye  evil  because,  he  is  good?  (S.  Matt.  xx.
15).  Whosoever  thou  art  who  enviest  the  salvation  of
another,  care  rather  for  thine  own.  Dost  thou  not  know
that  by  the  envy  of  the  devil  deat/i  entered  into  the  world  ?
(Wisd.  ii.  24).  Take  heed,  therefore,  to  thyself.  For  if
there  is  envy  there  is  death  ;  surely,  thou  canst  not  both  be
envious  and  live.  Why  seek  a  quarrel  with  thy  brother,
since  he  seeks  only  the  best  means  of  fulfilling  the  vows
which  he  has  made  ?  If  the  man  seeks  in  what  place  or  in
what  manner  he  may  best  discharge  what  he  has  promised
to  God,  what  wrong  has  he  done  to  you  ?  Perhaps,  if  you
held  him  your  debtor  for  a  sum  of  money,  however  small,
you  would  oblige  him  to  compass  sea  and  dry  land  until
he  rendered  you  the  whole  debt,  even  to  the  last  farthing.
What,  then,  has  your  God  deserved  from  you  that  you  are
not  willing  for  Him,  too,  to  receive  what  is  due?  But  in
envying  one  you  render  two  hostile  ;  since  you  are  trying
both  to  defraud  the  lord  of  the  service  due  from  his
servant,  and  to  deprive  the  servant  of  the  favour  of  his
lord.  Wherefore  do  you  not  imitate  him,  and  yourself
discharge  what  is  due  from  you  ?  Do  you  think  that  your


158  LETTER VII.

debt,  too,  will  not  be  required  of  you  ?  Or  do  you  not
rather  fear  to  irritate  God  against  you  the  more  by  wickedly
saying  in  your  heart,  He  will  not  require  it  ?

19.  What,  you  say  to  me,  do  you  then  condemn  all  who
do  not  do  likewise? No; but  hear  what  I  do  think  about
them,  and  do  not make futile accusations. Why  do  you
wish  to  make  me  odious  to  many  thousands  of  holy  men,
who,  under  the same profession  as  I,  though  not living  in
the  same  manner,  either  live  holily  or  have  died  blessed
deaths  ? I do  not  fail  to  remember  that  God  has  left  to
Himself  seven  thousand  men  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee
before  Baal (i Kings xix.  18). Listen  to  me,  then,  man
envious and calumnious. I have said that I think men
coming  to  us  from  other  monasteries  ought  to  be  received.
Have  I  blamed  those  who  do  not  come  ? The  one  class  I
excuse, but I do not accuse the other. It is only the
envious  whom  I  cannot  excuse,  nor, indeed,  am  I  willing  to
do  so. These  being  excepted, I  think  that  if  any  others
wish  to  pass  to  a  stricter  Rule,  but  fear  to  do  so  because  of
scandal,  or  are  hindered  by  some  bodily  weakness,  do  not
sin, provided that they  study  to  live a  holy,  pious,  and
regulated  life  in  the  place  where  they  are. For  if  by  the
custom  of their monastery  relaxations of  the Rule  have
been introduced, either  that  very  charity,  in which they
hesitate to remove to a  better on account of causing
scandal, may,  perhaps,  be  an excuse  for  this  ; according
to that  saying  Charity  covers  a  multitude  of  sins  (i  Peter
iv. 8), or the humility in which one conscious of his
infirmity regards  himself  as  imperfect,  for  it  is  said God
gives  grace  unto  the  humble  (S.James  iv.  6).

20.  Many things I have written, dear brother, and,
perhaps,  it  was  not  needful to  use so  many  words,  for  an
intelligence  such  as  yours,  quick  in  understanding  what  is
said, and a will well-disposed to follow good counsel.
But  although  I  have  written  specially  to  you,  yet  so  many
words  need  not  have  been  written  on  your  account,  but  for
those  for  whom  they  may  be  needful. But  I  warn  you,  as
my  own  former  and  intimate  friend,  in  few  words  and  with


LETTER VII.  159

all  confidence,  not  to  keep  longer  in  suspense,  at  the  great
peril  of  your  own  soul,  the  souls  of  those  who  are  desiring
and  awaiting  your  return.  You  hold  now  in  your  hands  (if
I  do  not  mistake)  both  your  own  eternal  life  and  death,  and
theirs  who  are  with  you  ;  for  I  judge  that  whatever  you
decide  or  do  they  will  do  also.  Otherwise,  announce  to
them  the  grave  judgment  which  has  been  rightly  passed
with  respect  to  them  by  all  the  Abbots  of  our  Order.
Those  who  return  shall  live,  those  who  resist  shall  die.


LETTER  VIII. (A.D. 1131.)
To  BRUNO,1 ARCHBISHOP ELECT  OF  COLOGNE.

Bernard  having  been  consulted  by  Bruno  as  to  whether
he  ought  to  accept  the  See  of  Cologne,  so  replies  as  to  hold
him  in  suspense,  and  render  him  in  awe  of  the  burden  of
so  great  a  charge.  He  advises  him  to  seek  counsel  of  God
in  prayer.

i.  You  seek  counsel  from  me,  most  illustrious  Bruno,  as  to
whether  you  ought  to  accept  the  Episcopate,  to  wrhich  it  is
desired  to  advance  you.  What  mortal  can  presume  to
decide  this  for  you  ?  If  God  calls  you,  who  can  dare  to  dis
suade  you,  but  if  He  does  not  call  you,  who  may  counsel  you
to  draw  near  ?  Whether  the  calling  is  of  God  or  not  who
can  know,  except  the  Spirit,  who  searcheth  even  the  deep
things  of  God,  or  one  to  whom  God  Himself  has  revealed
it  ?  That  which  renders  advice  still  more  doubtful  is  the
humble,  but  still  terrible,  confession  in  your  letter,  in  which
you  accuse  your  own  past  life  gravely,  but,  as  I  fully  believe,
in  sincerity  and  truth.  And  it  is  undeniable  that  such  a  life

1  Bruno,  son  of  Engelbert,  Count  of  Altena,  was  consecrated,  in  1 132,  by
William,  Cardinal  Bishop  of  Praeneste,  and  succeeded  Frederick  in  the  See  of
Cologne.  In  the  year  1136  he  proceeded  into  Italy  with  the  Emperor  Lothair,
and  died  in  that  year.  He  was  buried  in  the  church  of  S.  Nicholas,  at  Bari,  in
Apulia  A  short  time  after  his  death  his  tomb  was  \iolated,  as  was  that  of
Duke  Raoul,  by  Roger,  Prince  of  Sicily  ;  their  bodies  were  dragged  through  the
street,  and  mutilated  with  cruelty  more  than  barbarous.  The  chronicler  Otto
of  Frisingen  calls  him  "  a  learned  man."


l6o  LETTER VIII.

is  unworthy  of  a  function  so  holy  and  exalted.  On  the
other  hand,  you  are  very  right  to  fear  (and  I  fear  the  same
with  you)  if,  because  of  the  unworthiness  you  feel,  you
fail  to  make  profitable  use  of  the  talent  of  knowledge  com
mitted  to  you,  unless  you  could,  perhaps,  find  another  way,
less  abundant,  perhaps,  but  also  less  perilous,  of  making
increase  from  it.  I  tremble,  I  confess  it,  for  I  ought  to  say
to  you  as  to  myself  what  I  feel :  I  tremble,  I  say,  at  the
thought  of  the  state  whence,  and  that  whither,  you  are
called,  especially  since  no  period  of  penitence  has  inter
vened  to  prepare  you  for  the  perilous  transition  from  the
one  to  the  other.  And,  indeed,  the  right  order  requires
that  you  should  study  to  care  for  your  own  conscience
before  charging  yourself  with  the  care  of  those  of  others.
That  is  the  first  step  of  piety,  of  which  it  is  written,  To  pity
tliine  own  soul  is  pleasing  unto  the  Lord  (Ecclus.  xxx.
23).  It  is  from  this  first  step  that  a  well-ordered  charity
proceeds  by  a  straight  path  to  the  love  of  one's  neighbour,
for  the  precept  is  to  love  him  as  ourselves.  But  if  you
are  about  to  love  the  souls  that  would  be  confided  to
you  as  you  have  loved  your  own  hitherto,  I  would  prefer
not  to  be  confided  rather  than  be  so  loved.  But  if  you
shall  have  first  learned  to  love  yourself  then  you  will  know,
perhaps,  ho\v  you  should  love  me.

2.  But  what  if  God  should  quicken  His  grace  and  multiply
His  mercy  upon  you,  and  His  clemency  is  able  more  quickly
to  replace  the  soul  in  a  state  of  grace  than  daily  penitence  ?
Blessed,  indeed,  is  he  unto  whom  the  Lord  will  not  impute
sin  (Ps.  xxxii.  2),  for  who  shall  bring  accusation  against  the
elect  of  God?  If  God  justifies,  who  is  he  that  condemns?
This  short  road  to  salvation  that  holy  thief  attained,  who
in  one  and  the  same  day  both  confessed  his  iniquities  and
entered  into  glory.  He  was  content  to  pass  by  the  cross
as  by  a  short  bridge  from  the  religion  of  death1  unto  the
land  of  the  living,  and  from  this  foul  mire  into  the  paradise
of  joy  (S.  Luke  xxiii.  43).  This  sudden  remedy  of  piety
that  sinful  woman  happily  obtained,  in  whose  soul  grace  of

1 Unlikeness.


LETTER VIII.  l6l

a  sudden  began  to  abound,  where  offences  had  so  abounded.
Without  much  labour  of  penitence  her  sins  were  pardoned,
because  she  loved  much  (S.  Luke  vii.  37-50),  and  in  a  short
time  she  merited  to  receive  that  amplitude  of  charity  which,
as  it  is  written,  covers  the  multitude  of  sins  (i  S.  Peter  iv.
8).  This  double  benefit  and  most  rapid  goodness  also  that
paralytic  in  the  Gospel  experienced,  being  cured  first  in  the
soul,  then  in  the  body.

3.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  obtain  the  speedy  forgiveness  of
sins,  and  another  to  be  borne  in  a  brief  space  from  the  sins
themselves  to  the  badges (fillets) of  high dignities in  the
Church. Yet I see that Matthew from the receipt of
custom  was  raised  to  the  supreme  honour  of  the  Aposto-
late. But  this  again  troubles  me,  because  he  did  not  hear
with  the  other  Apostles  the  charge,  Go  yc  into  all  the  world
and  prcacJi  the  Gospel  to  every  creature  (S.  Mark  xvi.  15),
until  after  lie  had  done  penitence,  accompanying  the  Lord
whithersoever  He  went,  bearing  long  privation  and  remain
ing  with  Him  in  His  temptations. I  am  not  greatly  reassured,
though  S.  Ambrose  was  taken  from  the  judge's  tribunal  to
the  priesthood,  because  he  had  from  a  boy  led  a  pure  and
clean  life,  though  in  the  world,  and  then  he  endeavoured  to
avoid  the  Episcopate  even  by  flight  and  by  hiding  himself
and  many  other  means. Again,  if  Saul  also  was  suddenly
changed  into  Paul,  a  vessel  of  election,  the  Doctor  of  the
Gentiles, and  this be  adduced  as  an example,  it entirely
destroys  the  similarity  of  the  two  cases  to  observe  that  he,
therefore,  obtained  mercy  because,  as  he  himself  says, he
sinned  ignorantly  in  unbelief.1 Besides,  if  such  incidents,
done  for  good  and  useful  purposes,  can  be  cited,  it  should
be, not  as examples,  but  as marvels,  and  it  can  be  truly
said  of  them,  This  is  the  change  of  the  right  hand  of  the
Hig/iest  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  10).

4.  In  the  meantime  let  these  provisional  replies  to  your

1  i  Tim.  i.  13.  But  surely  the  inference  that  the  writer  should  have  drawn
was  that  S.  Paul's  sudden  transformation  was  combined  with  and  to  be  attri
buted  to  his  Baptism  :  "  cui  prorsus  innovate  per  Baptismum  omnia  veterasint
dimissa." — [E.J

VOL. I.  II


162  LETTER VIII.

queries  suffice.  If  I  do  not  express  a  decisive  opinion,  it  is
because  I  do  not  myself  feel  assured.  This  must  needs  be
the  case,  for  the  gift  of  prophecy  and  of  wisdom  only  could
resolve  your  doubt.  For  who  could  draw  clear  water  out  of
a  muddy  pool  ?  Yet  there  is  one  thing  that  I  can  do  for  a
friend  without  danger,  and  with  the  assurance  of  a  good
result ;  that  is  to  offer  to  God  my  petition  that  He  will
assist  you  in  this  matter.  Leaving,  therefore,  to  Him  the
secret  things  of  His  Providence,  of  which  we  are  ignorant,
I  will  beg  Him,  with  humble  prayer  and  earnest  supplica
tion,  that  He  will  work  in  you  and  with  respect  to  you  that
which  shall  be  for  His  glory,  and  at  the  same  time  for  your
good.  And  you  have  also  the  Lord  Norbert,1  whom  you  may
conveniently  consult  in  person  on  all  such  subjects.  For
that  good  man  is  more  fitted  than  I  to  explain  the  myste
rious  acts  of  Providence,  as  he  is  nearer  to  God  by  his
holiness.

LETTER  IX. (A.D. 1132.)
To  THE  SAME,  THEN  ARCHBISHOP  OF  COLOGNE.

He  exhorts  Bruno, then recently  created  Archbishop  of
Cologne,  to  fear.

I  have  received  with  respect  the  Letter  of  your  Grace,
and  have  attended  with  care  to  what  you  have  enjoined.  If
I  have  succeeded,  you  will  have  proof.  But  enough  respect
ing  that.  Permit  me  in  the  same  spirit  of  charity  to  say  what
follows.  If  it  is  certain  that  all  those  who  are  called  to  the
ministry,  are  chosen  also  to  the  Kingdom,  certainly  the
Archbishop  of  Cologne  is  secure  of  his  own  salvation.  But
if  Saul  was  chosen  to  the  kingdom,  and  Judas  to  the  priest
hood,  by  no  other  than  God  Himself,  and  it  cannot  be  dis
proved  that  Scripture  asserts  this,  then  it  is  needful  for  even
the  Archbishop  of  Cologne  to  fear.  But  if  that  declaration
holds  good  even  in  our  own  time  (and  it  is  true  that  it  does)

1  The  founder  of  the  Prcemonstratensian  Onkr. See  respecting  him  Letter


LETTER IX.  163

that  not  many  noble,  not  many  powerful,  not  many  wise
are  called  by  God  (i  Cor.  i.  26),  has  not  the  Archbishop  of
Cologne  a  triple  cause  for  fearing  ?  Let  us,  then,  who  are
raised  to  high  dignities,  study  not  to  be  high-minded,  but
to  fear,  and  condescend  to  those  of  low  estate.  Have  they
made  you  chief  ?  it  is  said,  be  among  them  as  one  of  the
rest  (Ecclus.  xxxii.  i)  ;  and  again,  The  greater  tliou  art,
the  more  humble  thyself  in  all  things  (Ecclus.  xxx.  18).  It
is  the  counsel  of  the  wise,  and  listen  to  that  of  Wisdom
Himself,  who  says  He  that  is  greatest  among  you,  let  him
be  as  the  younger  (S.  Luke  xxii.  26).  We  know  from  other
passages  that  those  who  have  authority  will  have  to  meet  a
strict  judgment  (Wisd.  vi.  5).  Fear,  then,  ye  that  are
powerful.  The  servant,  also,  that  knoweth  his  Lord's  will,
and  doeth  it  not,  he  shall  beat  with  many  stripes  (S.  Luke
xii.  47).  FYar,  then,  ye  that  are  learned.  Let  the  noble
fear,  for  the  Judge  of  all  is  not  an  acceptor  of  persons.
That  triple  bond  of  necessary  reason  for  fear  will  be  very
difficult  to  break  through.  Do  I  seem  hard  because  I  do
not  flatter,  because  I  inculcate  fear,  which  is  the  beginning
of  wisdom,  upon  a  friend  ?  May  it  be  granted  to  me  always
so  to  benefit  my  friends  ;  that  is,  by  inspiring  into  them  a
salutary  fear,  rather  than  to  deceive  them  by  flattery.  To
that  He  incites  me  who  says  :  Happy  is  the  man  who  feareth
alway  (Prov.  xxviii.  14);  and  He  deters  me  from  flattery
who  says  :  O  My  people,  they  ivho  flatter  t/iee  cause  thee
to  err  (Is.  iii.  12,  VuLG.).


LETTER  X.  (A.D.  1132.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  incites  Bruno  to a  just  zeal  for  the  punishment  of

crime.

The  duty  of  your  office,  and  the  injunction  of  the  Holy
See,  lay  upon  you  a  double  obligation  to  punish  a  crime  so
enormous.  Yet  I  think  it  not  superfluous  that  the  admoni-


164  LETTER X.

tion  of  a  friend  should  be  added  in  a  matter  of  such  import
ance.  I  wish  the  one  whom  I  regard  as  father  and  friend
to  be  admonished  of  this,  to  punish  in  every  case  that
requires  it,  and  with  a  due  degree  of  severity  ;  so  that  you
should  not  only  visit  an  offence  that  is  before  you  with  a
just  chastisement,  but  should  also  restrain  the  hearer  from
rashly  imitating  it.

LETTER  XI. (Circa  A.D. 1125.)

TO  GUIGUES,1  THE  PRIOR,  AND  TO  THE  OTHER  MONKS  OF
THE  GRAND  CHARTREUSE.

He  discourses  much  and  piously  of  the  law  of  true  and
sincere  charity,  of  its  signs,  its  degrees,  its  effects,  and  of
its  perfection  which  is  reserved  for  Heaven  (P  atria}.

Brother  Bernard,  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health  eternal  to
the  most  reverend  among  fathers,  and  to  the  dearest  among
friends,  Guigues,  Prior  of  the  Grande  Chartreuse,  and  to
the  holy  Monks  who  are  with  him.

i.  I  have  received  the  letter  of  your  Holiness  as  joyfully
as  I  had  long  and  eagerly  desired  it.  I  have  read  it,  and  the
letters  which  I  pronounced  with  my  mouth,  I  felt,  as  it
were,  sparks  of  fire  in  my  heart,  which  warmed  my  heart
within  me;  as  coming  from  that  fire  which  the  Lord  has  sent
upon  the  earth  (S.  Luke  xii.  49).  How  great  a  fire  must
glow  in  those  meditations  from  which  such  sparks  fly  forth  !

1  His  name  was  de  Castro,  and  he  was  a  Frenchman  by  birth.  He  was  the
fifth  General  Prior  of  the  Grand  Chartreuse  from  B.  Bruno,  and  the  first  writer
of  the  Statutes.  He  was  held  in  much  affection  by  Bernard,  as  appears  both
from  this  Letter  and  from  Book  III.  of  the  Life  of  St.  Bernard,  c.  i.  Peter
the  Venerable  speaks  of  him  in  Letter  388  thus  :  <:  He  was  in  his  time  the  flower
and  glory  of  religion."  In  the  fortieth  Letter  of  Book  IV.,  addressed  to  Basil,
successor  of  Guigues  in  the  rule  of  the  Grand  Chartreuse,  he  says  : — "  I  had
determined  to  renew  with  you  those  old  and  sacred  meetings  of  your  predecessor,
Guigues,  of  happy  memory,  held  frequently  with  me,  in  which  I  used  to  be  so
fired  by  the  flashes,  as  it  were,  of  wisdom  proceeding  from  his  mouth  that  I  was
of  necessity  almost  lost  to  the  perception  of  all  human  things."  He  rendered
his  soul  to  the  Lord,  not  without  report  of  sanctity,  in  (or  about)  the  2jthyear  of
his  priorate,  the  year  1 137,  but  in  the  53rd  year  from  the  founding  of  the  Order.


LETTER XI.


165


This,  your  inspired  and  inspiring  salutation,  was  to  me,  I
confess,  not  as  if  coming  from  man,  but  like  words  descend
ing  surely  from  Him  who  sent  the  salutation  to  Jacob.  It
is  not  for  me,  in  fact,  a  simple  salutation  given  in  passing,
according  to  the  custom  and  usage  of  men,  but  it  is  plainly
from  the  very  bowels  of  charity,  as  I  feel,  that  this  benedic
tion,  so  sweet  and  so  unhoped  for,  has  come  forth.  I  pray  God
to  bless  you,  who  have  had  the  goodness  to  prevent  me  with
benedictions  of  such  sweetness,  that  confidence  is  granted
to  me,  your  humble  servant,  to  reply,  since  you  have  first
written  ;  for  though  I  had  meditated  writing,  I  had  hitherto
not  presumed  to  do  so.  For  I  feared  to  trouble,  by  my
eager  scribbling,  the  holy  quiet  which  you  have  in  the  Lord,
and  the  religious  silence  which  isolates  you  from  the  world.
I  feared,  also,  to  interrupt,  even  for  a  moment,  those
mysterious  whispers  from  God,  and  to  pour  my  words  into
ears  always  occupied  with  the  secret  praises  of  heaven.  1
feared  to  become  as  one  who  would  trouble  even  Moses  on
the  mountain,  Elias  in  the  desert,  or  Samuel  watching  in
the  temple,  if  I  had  tried  to  turn  away  ever  so  little,  minds
occupied  with  divine  communion.  Samuel  cries  out  :  Speak,
Lord,  for  Thy  servant  hearctJi  (i  Sam.  iii.  10).  And  should
I  presume  to  make  myself  heard?  I  feared,  I  say,  lest
presenting  myself  out  of  season  before  you,  as  it  were  to
David  engaged  in  flight,  or  abiding  in  solitude,  you  might
not  wish  to  listen,  and  might  say,  "  Excuse  me,  I  cannot
hear  thee  now  ;  I  prefer  rather  to  give  ear  to  words  sweeter
than  thine."  I  will  hear  what  the  Lord  God  will  say  unto
me  ;  for  He  shall  speak  peace  unto  His  people,  and  to  His
saints,  and  to  those  who  are  converted  at  heart  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.
9,  VULG.).  Or,  at  least,  this  :  Depart  from  me,  ye  evil-
disposed,  and  I  will  study  the  commandments  of  my  God
(Ps.  cxix.  115).  For  could  I  be  so  rash  as  to  dare  to  arouse
the  much-loved  spouse  sweetly  resting  in  the  arms  of  her
bridegroom  as  lone;  as  she  will  ?  Should  I  not  hear  from

o  o

her  on  the  instant :  Do  not  be  troublesome  to  me  ;  /  am  for
My  Beloved,  and  My  Beloved  is  for  Me  ;  He  feedeth  among
the  lilies  (Cant.  ii.  16).


1 66  LETTER XI.

2.  But  what  I  do  not  dare  to  do,  charity  dares,  and  with
all  confidence  knocks  at  the  door  of  a  friend,  thinking  that
she  ought  by  no  means  to  suffer  repulse,  who  knows
herself  to  be  the  mother  of  friendships  ;  nor  does  she  fear
to  interrupt  for  an  instant  your  rest,  though  so  pleasant,  to
speak  to  you  of  her  own  task.  She,  when  she  will,  causes
you  to  withdraw  from  being  alone  with  God ;  she,  also,
when  she  willed,  made  you  attentive  to  me;  so  that  you  did
not  regard  it  as  unworthy  of  you,  not  merely  to  benignantly
endure  my  speaking,  but  more,  to  urge  me  to  break  the
silence.  I  esteem  the  kindness,  I  admire  the  worthiness,  I
praise  and  venerate  the  pure  rejoicing  with  which  you  glory
in  the  Lord,  for  thejidvances  in  virtue  which,  as  you  suppose,
I  have  made.  I  am  proud  of  so  great  a  testimony,  and
esteem  myself  happy  in  a  friendship  so  grateful  to  me  as
that  of  the  servants  of  God  towards  me.  This  is  now  my
glory,  this  is  my  joy  and  the  rejoicing  of  my  heart,  that  not
in  vain  I  have  lifted  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  mountains
whence  there  has  now  come  to  me  help  of  no  small  value.
These  mountains  have  already  distilled  sweetness  for  me;
and  I  continue  to  hope  that  they  will  do  so  until  our  valleys

shall  abound  with  fruit. That  day  shall  be  always  for  me  a

• •  •  •/

day  of  festival  and  perpetual memorial,  in  which  I  had  they

honour  to  see  and  to  receive  that  worthy  man,  by  whom  it  has
come  about  that  I  should  be  received  into  your  hearts.  And,
indeed,  you  had  received  me  even  before,  if  I  may  judge  by
your  letter  ;  but  now  with  a  more  close  and  intimate  friend
ship,  since,  as  I  find,  he  brought  back  to  you  too  favourable
reports  concerning  me  which,  doubtless,  he  believed,  though
without  sufficient  cause.  For,  as  a  faithful  and  pious  man,
God  forbid  that  he  should  speak  otherwise  than  he  believed.
And  truly  I  experience  in  myself  what  the  Saviour  says  :
He -who  receives  a  righteous  man  in  tlie  name  of  a  righteous
man  shall  receive  a  righteous  man  's  reward  (S.  Matt.  x.  41).
I  have  said,  the  reward  of  a  righteous  man,  because  I  am
regarded  as  righteous,  only  through  receiving  one  who  is
righteous.  If  he  has  reported  of  me  something  more  than
that,  he  has  spoken  not  so  much  according  to  the  truth  of


LETTER XI.  167

the  case  as  according  to  the  simplicity  and  goodness  of  his
heart.  You  have  heard,  you  have  believed,  you  have
rejoiced,  and  have  written,  thereby  giving  me  no  little  joy,
not  only  because  I  have  been  honoured  with  a  degree  of
praise  and  a  high  place  in  the  estimation  of  your  Holi
ness,  but  also  because  all  the  sincerity  of  your  souls  has
made  itself  known  to  me  in  no  small  measure.  In  few  words,
you  have  shown  to  me  with  what  spirit  you  are  animated.

3.  I  rejoice,  therefore,  and  congratulate  you  on  your
sincerity  and  goodness  as  I  congratulate  myself  on  the
edification  which  you  have  afforded  to  me.  That  is,
indeed,  true  and  sincere  charity,  and  must  be  considered
to  proceed  from  a  heart  altogether  pure  and  a  good
conscience  and  faith  unfeigned,  with  which  we  love  our
neighbour  as  ourself.  For  he  who  loves  only  the  good
that  himself  has  done,  or,  at  least,  loves  it  more  than  that  of
others,  does  not  love  good  for  its  own  sake,  but  on  account

O

of  himself,  and  he  who  is  such  cannot  do  as  the  prophet
says  :  Give  thanks  unto  the  Lord ,  because  He  is  good  (Ps.
cxviii.  i).  He  gives  thanks,  indeed,  perhaps,  because  the
Lord  is  good  to  him,  not  because  He  is  good  in  Himself.
Wherefore  let  him  understand  that  this  reproach  from  the
same  prophet  is  directed  against  him  :  Tliey  will  praise
thee  when  thou  doest  well  unto  thy  own  soul  (Ps.  xlix.  18).
One  man  praises  the  Lord  because  He  is  mighty  ;  another
because  He  is  good  unto  him  ;  and,  again,  another  simply
because  He  is  good.  The  first  is  a  slave,  and  fears  for  him
self ;  the  second  mercenary,  and  desires  somewhat  for  him
self;  but  the  third  is  a  son,  and  gives  praise  to  his  Father.
Therefore  both  he  who  fears  and  he  who  desires  are  each
working  for  his  own  advantage  ;  charity  which  is  in  him
alone  who  is  a  son,  seeketh  not  her  own.  Wherefore  I
think  that  it  was  of  charity  that  was  spoken,  The  law  of  the
Lord  is  pure,  converting  the  soul  (Ps.  xix.  7),  because  it  is
that  alone  which  can  turn  away  the  mind  from  the  love  of
itself  and  of  the  world  and  direct  it  towards  God.  Neither
fear  nor  selfish  love  converts  the  soul.  They  change  some
times  the  outward  appearance  or  the  actions,  but  never


1 68  LETTER XI.

affect  the  heart.  No  doubt  even  the  slave  does  sometimes
the  work  of  God,  but  because  he  does  it  not  of  his  own  free
will  he  remains  still  in  his  hardness.  The  mercenary
person  does  it  also,  but  not  out  of  kindness,  only  as  drawn
by  his  own  particular  advantage.  Where  there  is  distinc
tion  of  persons,  there  are  personal  interests,  and  where  there
are  personal  interests  there  is  a  limit  of  willingness,  and
there,  without  doubt,  a  rusting  meanness.  Let  the  very
fear  by  which  he  is  constrained  be  a  law  to  the  slave,  let
the  greedy  desire,  with  which  the  mercenary  is  bound,  be  a
law  to  him,  since  it  is  by  it  that  he  is  drawn  away  and
enticed.  But  of  these  neither  is  without  fault  or  is  able  to
convert  the  soul.  But  charity  does  convert  souls  when
it  fills  them  with  disinterested  zeal.

4.  Now,  I  should  say  that  this  charity  is  faultless  in  him
who  has  become  accustomed  to  retain  nothing  for  himself
out  of  that  which  is  his  own.  He  who  keeps  nothing  for
himself  gives  to  God  quite  certainly  all  that  he  has,  and  that
which  belongs  to  God  cannot  be  unclean.  Thus  that  pure
law  of  the  Lord  is  no  other  than  charity,  which  seeks  not
what  is  advantageous  to  herself,  but  that  which  profits
others.  But  law  is  said  to  be  of  the  Lord,  either  because
He  Himself  lives  by  it  or  because  no  one  possesses  it  except
by  His  gift.  Nor  let  it  seem  absurd  what  I  have  said,  that
even  God  lives  by  law,  since  I  declared  that  this  law  was  no
other  than  charity.  For  what  but  charity  preserves  in  the
supreme  and  blessed  Trinity  that  lofty  and  unspeakable
unity  Avhich  it  has  ?  It  is  law,  then,  and  charity  the  law  of
the  Lord,  which  maintains  in  a  wonderful  manner  the
Trinity  in  Unity  and  binds  It  in  the  bond  of  peace.  Yet  let
no  one  think  that  I  here  take  charity  for  a  quality  or  a
certain  accident  in  God,  or  otherwise  to  say  that  in  God
(which  God  forbid)  there  is  something  which  is  not  God ;
but  I  say  that  it  is  the  very  substance  of  God.  I  say  nothing-
new  or  unheard  of,  for  S.  John  says  God  is  lo~ce  (i  S.  John
iv.  1 6).

It  is  then  right  to  say  that  charity  is  God,  and  at  the  same
time  the  gift  of  God. Therefore  Charity  gives  charity,  the


LETTER XI.  169

substantial  :  gives  the  accidental.  Where  the  word  signifies
the  Giver  it  is  a  name  of  the  substance,  and  where  the  thing
p-iven,  it  is  a  name  of  the  accident.  This  is  the  eternal  law,

•O

Creator  and  Ruler  of  the  Universe.  Since  all  things  have
been  made  through  it  in  weight  and  measure  and  number,
and  nothing  is  left  without  law,  not  even  He  who  is  the  Law
of  all  things,  vet  He  is  Himself  none  other  than  the  law

O  *

which  rules  Him,  a  law  uncreated  as  He.

5.  But  the  slave  and  the  mercenary  have  a  law,  not  from
God,  but  which  they  have  made  for  themselves — the  one  by
not  loving  God,  the  other  by  loving  something  else  more
than  Him.  They  have,  I  say,  a  law  which  is  their  own  and
not  of  the  Lord,  to  which,  nevertheless,  their  own  is  sub
jected  ;  nor  are  they  able  to  withdraw  themselves  from  the
unchangeable  order  of  the  divine  law,  though  each  should
make  a  law  for  himself.  I  would  say,  then,  that  a  person
makes  a  law  for  himself  when  he  prefers  his  own  will  to  the
common  and  eternal  law,  perversely  wishing  to  imitate  his
Creator;  so  that  as  He  is  a  law  unto  Himself,  and  is  under
no  authority  but  His  Own,  so  the  man  also  will  be  his  own
master,  will  make  his  own  will  a  law  to  himself.  Alas  !
what  a  heavy  and  insupportable  yoke  upon  all  the  sons  of
Adam,  which  weighs  upon  and  bows  down  our  necks,  so  that
our  life  is  drawn  near  to  the  grave.  Unhappy  man  that
I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?
(Rom.  vii.  24)  with  which  I  am  so  weighed  down
that  unless  the  Lord  had  helped  me,  my  soul  would  almost
have  dwelt  in  the  grave  (Ps.  xciv.  17).  With  this  load  was
he  burdened  who  groaned,  saying :  Why  hast  Thou  set  me
as  a  mark  against  Thee,  so  that  I  am  a  burden  to  myself?
(Job  vii.  20).  Where  he  says,  /  am  made  a  burden  to
myself,  he  showed  that  he  was  a  law  unto  himself,  and  the
law  no  other  than  he  himself  had  made  it.  But  when,
speaking  to  God,  he  commenced  by  saying,  Thou  hast  set
me  as  a  mark  against  Thee,  he  showed  that  he  had  not
escaped  from  the  Divine  law.  For  this  is  the  property  of
that  eternal  and  just  law  of  God,  that  he  who  would  not  be

1  Mabillon  reads  sittstantica,  but  another  reading  is  sut-stuntia. —  [E.]


170  LETTER XI.

ruled  with  gentleness  by  God,  should  be  ruled  as  a  punish
ment  by  his  own  self;  and  that  all  those  who  have  willingly
thrown  off  the  gentle  yoke  and  light  burden  of  charity
should  bear  unwillingly  the  insupportable  burden  of  their
own  will.

6.  Thus  the  everlasting  law  does  in  a  wonderful  manner,
to  him  who  is  a  fugitive  from  its  power,  both  make  him  an
adversary  and  retain  him  as  a  subject;  for  while,  on  the
one  hand,  he  has  not  escaped  from  the  law  of  justice,  by
which  he  is  dealt  with  according  to  his  merits,  on  the  other
he  does  not  remain  with  God  in  His  light,  or  peace,  or
glory.  He  is  subjected  to  power,  and  excluded  from
happiness.  O  Lord,  my  God,  why  dost  T/wit  not  take  away
inv  sin,  and  pardon  my  transgression  ?  (Job  vii.  21).  So
that  throwing  down  the  heavy  weight  of  my  own  will,  I
may  breathe  easily  under  the  light  burden  of  charity  ;  that
I  may  not  be  overborne  any  longer  by  servile  fear,  nor
allured  by  selfish  cupidity,  but  may  be  impelled  by  Thy
spirit,  the  spirit  of  liberty,  which  i-;  that  of  Thy  children.
Who  is  it  who  witnesses  to  inv  spirit  that  I,  too,  am  one  of
Thy  children,  since  Thy  law  is  mine,  and  as  Thou  art,  so
am  I  also,  in  this  world?  For  it  is  quite  certain  that  those  who
do  this  which  the  Apostle  says  owe  no  one  anything  except
t)  love  one  another  (Rom.  xiii.  8)  are  themselves  as  God  is
in  this  world,  nor  are  they  slaves  or  mercenaries,  but  sons.
Therefore  neither  are  sons  without  law,  unless,  perhaps,
some  one  should  think  the  contrary  because  of  this  which  is
written,  the  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man  (i  Tim..
i.  9).  But  it  ought  to  be  remembered  that  the  law  promul
gated  in  fear  by  a  spirit  of  slavery  is  one  thing,  and  that
given  sweetly  and  gently  by  the  spirit  of  liberty  is  another.
Those  who  are  sons  are  not  obliged  to  submit  to  the  first.

O

but  they  are  always  under  the  rule  of  the  second.  Do  you
wish  to  hear  why  it  is  said  that  law  is  not  made  for  the
righteous  ?  You  have  not  received,  he  says,  the  spirit  of
slavery  again  in  fear.  Or  why,  nevertheless,  they  are
always  under  the  rule  of  the  law  of  charity?  But  ye  have
received  the  spirit  of  tJic  adoption  of  sons  (Rom.  viii.  15)..


LETTER XI.  iyi

Listen,  now,  in  what  manner  the  righteous  man  confesses
that  at  the  same  time  he  is  and  is  not  under  the  law.
/  became,  he  says,  to  those  which  were  under  the  law  as
being  under  the  law,  although  I  myself  was  not  tinder  the
law  :  but  to  those  u'/io  were  without  law,  I  was  as  being
without  law,  since  I  was  not  without  the  law  of  God -but  in
the  law  of  Christ  (i  Cor.  ix.  20,  21).  Whence  it  is  not
accurately  said  the  righteous  have  no  law,  or  the  righteous  are
without  law,  but  that  the  law  was  not  made  for  the  righteous;
that  is,  it  is  not,  as  it  were,  imposed  upon  unwilling
subjects,  but  given  freely  to  willing  hearts  by  Him  to
whose  sweet  inspiration  it  is  due.  Wherefore  the  Lord
also  beautifully  says,  Take  My  yoke  upon  you  (S.  Matt.  xi.
29).  As  if  He  would  say,  I  do  not  impose  it  upon  you
against  your  will,  take  it  if  you  are  willing;  otherwise  you
will  find  not  rest,  but  labour,  for  your  souls.

7.  The  law  of  charity,  then,  is  good  and  sweet,  it  is  not
only  light  and  sweet  to  bear,  but  it  renders  bearable  and
lio-lit  the  laws  even  of  slaves  and  mercenaries.  But  it  does

o

not  destroy  these,  but  brings  about  their  fulfilment,  as  the
Lord  says,  /  am  not  come  to  destroy  the  law,  but  to  fulfil
(S.  Matt.  v.  17).  The  one  it  moderates,  the  other  it
reduces  to  order,  and  each  it  lightens.  Charity  will  never
be  without  fear,  but  that  fear  is  good  ;  it  will  never  be
without  any  thought  of  interest,  but  that  a  restrained  and
moderated  one.  Charity,  therefore,  perfects  the  law  of  the
slave  when  it  inspires  a  generous  devotion,  and  that  of  the
mercenary  when  it  gives  a  better  direction  to  interested
wishes.  So,  then,  devotion  mixed  with  fear  does  not
annul  those  last,  but  purifies  them,  only  it  takes  away  the
fear  of  punishment  which  servile  fear  is  never  exempt  from;
and  this  fear  is  clean  and  filial,  enduring  for  ever  (Ps.
xix.  g).  For  that  which  is  written,  perfect  love  takes  away
fear  (i  S.  John  iv.  18),  is  to  be  understood  of  the  fear  of
punishment,  which  is  never  wanting,  as  we  have  said,  to
slavish  fear.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  common  mode  of  speech
which  consists  in  putting  the  cause  for  the  effect.  As  for
cupidity,  it  is  then  rightly  directed  by  the  charity  which


172  LETTER XI.

is  joined  with  it,  since  ceasing  altogether  to  desire  things
which  are  evil,  it  begins  to  prefer  those  which  are  better,
nor  does  it  desire  good  things  except  in  order  to  reach
those  which  are  better;  which  when,  by  the  grace  of  God,
it  has  fully  obtained,  the  body  and  all  the  good  things
which  belong  to  the  body  will  be  loved  only  for  the  sake
of  the  soul,  the  soul  for  the  sake  of  God,  and  God  alone  for
Himself.


8.  However,  as  we  are  in  fleshly  bodies,  and  are  born
of  the  desire  of  the  flesh,  it  is  of  necessity  that  our  desire,
or  affection,  should  begin  from  the  flesh  ;  but  if  it  is  rightly
directed,  advancing  step  by  step  under  the  guidance  of
grace,  it  will  at  length  be  perfected  by  the  Spirit,  because
t/iat  is  not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is
natural ,  and  afterwards  that  which  is  spiritual ;  and  it  is
needful  that  we  should  first  bear  the  image  of  the  earthly
and  afterwards  t/iat  of  the  heavenly  (i  Cor.  xv.  46,  49).
First,  then,  a  man  loves  his  own  self  for  self's  sake,  since
he  is  flesh,  and  he  cannot  have  any  taste  except  for  things
in  relation  with  him  ;  but  when  he  sees  that  he  is  not  able
to  subsist  by  himself,  that  God  is,  as  it  were,  necessary  to
him,  he  begins  to  inquire  and  to  love  God  by  faith.  Thus
he  loves  God  in  the  second  place,  but  because  of  his  own
interest,  and  not  for  the  sake  of  God  Himself.  But  when,  on
account  of  his  own  necessity,  he  has  begun  to  worship  Him
and  to  approach  Him  by  meditation,  by  reading,  by  prayer,
by  obedience,  he  comes  little  by  little  to  know  God  with  a
certain  familiarity,  and  in  consequence  to  find  Him  sweet
and  kind  ;  and  thus  having  tasted  how  sweet  the  Lord  is,
he  passes  to  the  third  stage,  and  thus  loves  God  no  longer
on  account  of  his  own  interest,  but  for  the  sake  of  God
Himself.  Once  arrived  there,  he  remains  stationary,  and  I
know  not  if  in  this  life  man  is  truly  able  to  rise  to  the
fourth  degree,  which  is,  no  longer  to  love  himself  except  for
the  sake  of  God.  Those  who  have  made  trial  of  this  (if
there  be  any)  may  assert  it  to  be  attainable  ;  to  me,  I
confess,  it  appears  impossible.  It  will  be  so  without  doubt
when  the  good  and  faithful  servant  shall  have  been  brought


LKTTKR XI.  173

into  the  joy  of  his  Lord,  and  inebriated  with  the  fulness  of
the  house  of  God.  For  being,  as  it  were,  exhilarate,  he
shall  in  a  wonderful  way  be  forgetful  of  himself,  he  shall
lose  the  consciousness  of  what  he  is,  and  being  absorbed
altogether  in  God,  shall  attach  himself  unto  Him  with  all
his  powers,  shall  thenceforth  be  one  spirit  with  Him.

9. I  consider  that  the  prophet  referred  to  this  when  he
said:  /  will  enter  into  the  powers  of  the  Lord  : O,  Lord,  I
will  ma kc  me ut ion  of  T/iy  righteousness  only  (Ps.  Ixxi.  16).
He knew well that when he entered into  the spiritual
powers  of  God  he  would  be  freed  from  all  the  infirmities  of
the  flesh,  and  would have no longer  to  think  of  them,  but
would be occupied only with the perfections of God.
Then,  for  certain,  each  of  the  members  of  Christ  would  be
able to say of himself, what Paul said of their Head :
If  we  Jiai'C  known Christ  according  to the  flesh,  yet  now
li.cnccforth  know  ive  Him no more (2  Cor.  v.  16). There
no one knows himself according to the flesh, because
flesh  and  blood  will  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  (i  Cor.
xv.  50). Not  that  the  substance  of  flesh  will  not  be  there,
but  that  every  fleshly  necessity  will  be  away  ; the  love  of
the  flesh  is  to  be  absorbed  into  the love  of  the  spirit,  and
the  weak  human  passions  which exist at present  will  be
absorbed into powers divine. Then  the net of charity,
which  is  now  drawn  through  a  great  and  vast  sea,  and  does  !
not cease  to  bring  together from every  kind of fish,  at
length drawn to the shore, shall retain only  the good,  j
rejecting  the  bad. And while in  this  life  charity  fills  with
all  kinds  of  fishes  the  vast  spaces  of  its  net,  suiting  itself  to
all  according  to  the  time,  making, in  a  sense,  its  own,  and
partaking  of  the  good  and  evil  fortunes  of  all,  it  is  accustomed
not  only  to  rejoice  with  them  that  rejoice,  but  to  weep  with
them  that  weep.  But  when  it  shall  have  reached  the  shore  [of
eternity],  casting  away  as  evil  fish  all  that  it  bore  with  grief
before,  it  will  retain  those  only  which  are  sources  of  pleasure
and  gladness. Then  Paul  will  no  longer  be  weak  with  the
weak,  or  be  scandalized with  those  who  are  scandalized,
since  scandal  and  weakness  will  be  far  away. We  ought


174  LETTER XI.

not  to  thjnk  that  he  will  still  let  fall  tears  over  those  who
have  not  repented  here  below ;  and  as  it  is  certain  that
there  will  no  longer  be  sinners,  so  there  will  be  no  one  to
repent.  Far  be  it  from  us  to  think  that  he  will  mourn  and
deplore  those  whose  portion  is  everlasting  fire  with  the
devil  and  his  angels,  when  in  that  City  of  God  which  the
streams  of  that  river  make  glad  (Ps.  xlvi.  4),  the  gates  of
which  the  Lord  loves  more  than  all  the  dwellings  of  Jacob
(Ps.  Ixxxvii.  2),  because  in  those  dwellings,  although  the
joy  of  victory  is  sometimes  tasted,  yet  the  combat  always
continues,  and  sometimes  the  struggle  is  for  life  ;  but  in
that  dear  country  there  is  no  place  for  adversity  or  sorrow,
as  in  that  Psalm  we  sing :  The  abiding  place  of  all  those
who  rejoice  is  in  Thee  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  7,  VULG.),  and  again  :
Everlasting  joy  shall  be  unto  them  (Is.  Ixi.  7).  How,  then,
shall  any  remembrance  be  of  mercy,  where  the  justice  of
God  shall  be  alone  remembered  ?  There  can  be  no  feeling
of  compassion  called  into  exercise  where  there  shall  be  no
place  for  misery,  or  occasion  for  pity.

10.  I  am  impelled  to  prolong  this  already  lengthy  dis
course,  dearly  beloved  and  much  longed-for  brethren,  by
the  very  strong  desire  I  have  of  conversing  with  you  ;  but
there  are  three  things  which  show  me  that  I  ought  to  come
to  an  end.  First,  that  I  fear  to  be  burdensome  to  you  ;  that
I  am  ashamed  to  show  myself  so  loquacious ;  third,  that  I
am  pressed  by  domestic  cares.  In  conclusion,  I  beg  you
to  have  compassion  for  me,  and  if  you  have  rejoiced  for  the
good  things  you  have  heard  of  me,  sympathize  with  me
also,  I  pray,  in  my  too  real  temptations  and  cares.  He
who  related  these  things  to  you  has,  no  doubt,  seen  some
few  little  things,  and  has  valued  these  little  things  as  great,
while  your  indulgence  has  easily  believed  what  it  willingly
heard.  I  felicitate  you,  indeed,  on  that  charity  which
believes  all  things  (i  Cor.  xiii.  7).  But  I  am  confounded
by  the  truth  which  knows  all  things.  I  beg  you  to  believe
me  in  what  I  say  of  myself  rather  than  another  who  has
only  seen  me  from  without.  No  man  knowcth  the  things
that  are  in  a  man  save  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  him


LETTER XII.  175

(i  Cor.  ii.  n).  I  assure  you  that  I  do  not  speak  of  myself
by  conjecture,  but  out  of  full  knowledge,  and  that  I  am  not
such  as  I  am  believed  and  said  to  be.  I  feel  assured  of
this,  and  confess  it  frankly ;  that  so  I  may  obtain  your
special  prayers,  and  thus  may  become  such  as  your  letter
sets  forth,  than  which  there  is  nothing  I  desire  more.


LETTER XII.

To  THE  SAME.
He  commends  himself  to  their  prayers.

To  the  very  dear  Lord  and  Reverend  father  Guigues,
Prior  of  the  Grande  Chartreuse,  and  to  the  holy  brethren
who  are  with  him,  Brother  Bernard  of  Clairvaux  offers  his
humble  service.

In  the  first  place,  when  lately  I  approached  your  parts,  I
was  prevented  by  unfavourable  circumstances  from  coming
to  see  you  and  to  make  your  acquaintance  ;  and  although
my  excuse  may  perhaps  be  satisfactory  to  you,  I  am  not
able,  I  confess,  to  pardon  myself  for  missing  the  oppor
tunity.  It  is  a  vexation  to  me  that  my  occupations  brought
it  about,  not  that  I  should  neglect  to  come  to  see  you,  but
that  I  was  unable  to  do  so.  This  I  frequently  have  to
endure,  and  therefore  my  anger  is  frequently  excited.
Would  that  I  were  worthy  to  receive  the  sympathy  of  all
my  kind  friends.  Otherwise  I  shall  be  doubly  unhappy  if
my  disappointment  does  not  excite  your  pity.  But  I  give
you  an  opportunity,  my  brethren,  of  exercising  brotherly
compassion  towards  me,  not  that  I  merit  it.  Pity  me  not
because  I  am  worthy,  but  because  I  am  poor  and  needy.
Justice  inquires  into  the  merit  of  the  suppliant,  but  mercy
only  looks  to  his  unhappiness.  True  mercy  does  not  judge,
but  feels ;  does  not  discuss  the  occasion  which  presents
itself,  but  seizes  it.  When  affection  calls  us,  reason  is  silent.
When  Samuel  wept  over  Saul  it  was  by  a  feeling  of  pity,
and  not  of  approval  (i  Samuel  xv.  13).  David  shed  tears


176  LETTKK XIII.

over  his  parricidal  son,  and  although  they  were  profitless,  yet
they  were  pious.  Therefore  do  ye  pity  me  (because  I  need
it,  not  because  I  merit  it),  ye  who  have  obtained  from  God
the  grace  to  serve  Him  without  fear,  far  from  the  tumults  of
the  world  from  which  ye  are  freed.  Happy  those  whom
He  has  hidden  in  His  tabernacle  in  the  day  of  evil
men  ;  they  shall  trust  in  the  shadow  of  His  wings  until  the
iniquity  be  overpast.  As  for  me,  poor,  unhappy,  and
miserable,  labour  is  my  portion.  I  seem  to  be  as  a  little
imHedged  bird  almost  constantly  out  of  the  shelter  of  its
nest,  exposed  to  wind  and  tempest.  I  am  troubled,  and  I
stao-o-er  like  a  drunken  man,  and  my  whole  conscience  is
gnawed  with  care.  Pity  me,  then  ;  for  although  I  do  not
merit  pity  I  need  it,  as  I  have  said.


LETTER  XIII.  (A.D. 1126.)
To  THE  LORD  POPE  HONORIUS.

He begs  that the election of  Albert to the See  of
Chalons-sur-M arne  may  be  ratified.

To  the  supreme  Pontiff  Honorius,  a  certain  brother,  a
monk  by  profession,  and  by  his  life  a  sinner,  sends  his
humble  duty.

It  is  said  that  over  you  the  prayer  of  a  poor  man  has
more  power  than  the  will  of  the  powerful.  The  thought  of
this  singular  nobleness  in  you,  as  well  as  the  suggestion  of
charity,  impels  me  to  write  without  fear  to  your  Highness.
1  speak  to  you,  my  lord,  with  regard  to  the  Church  of

i  Alberic  had  a  school  in  Rheims.  "  A  man  most  illustrious  for  his  know
ledge  of  literature  and  his  sound  judgment,"  says  Robert  de  Monte  of  him.  Peter
Abaelard,  his  rival,  calls  him  "  Remensis,"  and  "  a  disciple  of  William  de  Cham-
peaux;'  (Hist.  Calamit.  suar.  cap.  5).  He  is  said  to  have  been  a  "fellow
scholar"  with  Abaelard  (Epist.  Heloissa;  ii.),  but  became  a  strong  opponent  of  the
novel  speculations  of  the  latter,  and  it  was  by  his  efforts  in  great  measure  in  the
Council  of  Soissons  that  Abaelard  was  obliged  to  commit  to  the  flames  his  Book
on  the  Trinity.

The  letter  and  commendation  before  us  does  not  seem  to  have  been  successful
in  its  purpose.  But  it  appears  that  Alberic  succeeded  to  the  See  of  Bourges  at
the  death  of  its  Bishop,  Ulgrinus,  some  time  after  1128.


LETTER XIV.


77


Chalons,  and  I  neither  am  able,  nor  ought  I,  to  conceal  from
you  as  far  as  my  ability  extends,  the  danger  to  which  it  is
exposed.  In  fact,  being  in  its  neighbourhood,  I  feel  already
that  the  peace  of  this  Church  will  speedily  be  profoundly
troubled,  if  your  Holiness  should  not  be  able  to  assent  to
the  election  of  that  distinguished  man,  that  is,  of  Magister
Alberic,  which  has  united  the  suffrages  of  the  whole  clergy
and  the  people  in  an  equal  vote.  On  that  subject,  if  you
should  deign  to  inquire  or  to  care  for  my  opinion,  I  would
say  that  that  man  is  of  a  faith  irreproachable,  that  his
doctrine  is  sound,  and  that  he  has  shown  prudence  both  in
divine  and  human  things  ;  and  I  hope  that  in  the  House  of
God  (if  by  Him  he  should  be  chosen)  he  would  be  a  vessel
of  honour,  and  would  be  of  service  not  only  to  that  house,,
but  to  the  whole  of  the  Gallican  Church.  It  is  now  for
your  wisdom  to  judge,  whether  I  am  right  in  asking  from
you  the  giving  of  a  dispensation  from  which  such  good
effects  may  be  expected.


LETTER  XIV. (Circa  A.D. 1126.)
To  THE  SAME  POPE  HONOR lus.

lie  commends  the cause of  the  Church  of  Dijon  to  the-

Pontiff.

To  the  Supreme  Pontiff  HONORIUS,  Brother  BERNARD,
called  to  be  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health,  and  all  that
the  prayers  of  a  sinner  can  do  in  his  behalf.

God,  whom  we  venerate  in  you,  knows  the  respectful  fear
with  which  I  write  to  you.  But  charity,  who  governs  both
you  and  me,  makes  me  bold  so  to  do.  Being  requested  by
the  Church  of  Dijon,1  I  have  undertaken  to  make  request

1  This  wss  the  convent  of  monks  of  St.  Benignus,  at  Dijon,  which,  as  he
says  in  the  following  Letter,  he  held  in  greataffection,  because  of  the  antiquity
of  their  house.  It  was  in  the  Church  of  that  house  that  the  f  ither  and  mother
of  Bernard  svere  buried.  It  was  not  until  long  after  that  they  were  taken  up  to
be  carried  to  Clairvaux.  The  writers  of  that  age,  including  Bjrnard,  as  we  see
in  this  nnd  many  others  of  his  Letters,  use  the  words  Chinc/i  and  Monastery

VOL.  I.  12


178  LETTER XV.

.on  its  behalf. But  I  almost  doubt  what  I  ought  precisely  to
.ask  for  it. For,  as it is  unjust  to  try  to  obtain  anything
•contrary  to  justice,  either  by  entreaty  or  by  purchase,  so  it
is  superfluous  before  one  who  loves  justice  to  make  great
•efforts  on  behalf  of  that  which  is  just. But  although  I  do
not  know  precisely  what  request  it  is  best  to  make,  yet  I
have  full  confidence  that  your  kindness  will  not  be  unfruit
ful,  especially  in  the  cause  of  Religious.1 And,  indeed,  I
know  not  what  your  Holiness may  think  good  to  decide
after  a  careful  examination  of  the  matter,  but  I  can  bear
witness  that  I  have  heard,  and  frequently  do  hear,  that  the
Abbey  of Dijon  has  possessed  by  long  and uncontested
tenure  that2  which  the  people  of  Luxeuil  are  contesting  with
them,  so  that  the  older  inhabitants  of  the  neighbourhood
are  astonished,  and  indignant  at  the  unfounded  claim.


LETTER  XV.  (In  the  same  year  as  the  preceding.}
To  HAIMERIC  THE  CHANCELLOR.

To  the  illustrious  lord  HAIMERIC,  Chancellor  of  the  Apos
tolic  See,  BERNARD  of  Clairvaux  wishes  health,  and  the
grace  to  follow  the  Apostle,  forgetting  the  things 'which  arc
behind,  and  looking  forward  to  those  which  are  before.

Our  friends  are  not  ignorant  of  your  friendship  for  me,
and  if  I  were  desirous  of  keeping  the  fruit  of  so  great
felicity  to  myself  they  would  show  themselves  jealous.  The
monks  of  Dijon  are  very  dear  to  me,  because  of  the  ancient
associations  of  that  Church.  I  beg  you  to  let  them  experi-

indiscriminately  to  denote  a  convent  of  monks.  See  Letters  39,  60,  339,  392,
394,  39;,  etc.,  while  it  is  not  rare  to  find  the  word  Monastery  employed  for
Church*  The  Church  of  S.  Benignus  is  simply  called  the  Church  of  Dijon,
because  it  is  the  principal  Church  of  the  town.

1  Bernard  and other writers not  unfrequemly  use this name to designate
monks,  as  in  Letters  45  and  202,  and  in  Sermon  26,  de  Diversis,  n.  2.  Gregory
the  Great  long  before  uses  the  same  term  (Book  i.  Ep.  59).

2  The  dispute  was  respecting  two  little  chapels  of  Clermont  and  of  Vignory,
and  was  not  closed  until  a  decision  of  Stephen,  Archbishop  of  Vienna,  assisted
by  some  other  Bishops. (Perard  in  Burgundicis  Monumentis,  pp.  224  and  228.)


LETTER XVI.


ence  that  affection,  whether  yours  for  me  or  mine  for  them
is  not  without  its  influence.  Justice,  nevertheless,  being
done  in  all  respects,  against  which  it  is  not  right,  even  for
a  friend,  to  desire  anything.


LETT  ER XVI. (The  same  year  as  the  preceding.}
To  PETER,  CARDINAL  PRESBYTER.

To  his  very  dear  lord  PETER,  Cardinal  Presbyter,  Brother
BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health  everlasting.

I  have  no  cause  to  plead  with  you  ;  yet  the  cause  of  the
monks  of  Dijon,  because  they  are  Religious,  I  regard  as
mine.  Take  their  cause  in  hand  as  if  it  were  mine;  yet
so  mine  that  it  may  be  also  that  of  justice.  I  believe,  how
ever,  that  their  cause  is  just;  and  the  whole  country  testifies


with


me.


LETTER XVII. (Circa A.D. 1127.)
To  PETER,  CARDINAL  DEACON.!

He  excuses  himself  that  he  has  not  come  when  sum
moned,  and  replies  respecting  some  of  his  writings' -which
arc  asked  for .

To  the  venerable  lord  PETER,  Cardinal  Deacon  of  the
Roman  Church,  Brother  BERNARD  wishes  health  and  entire
devotedness.

That  I  have  not  come  to  you  as  you  commanded  has  been
caused  not  by  my  sloth,  but  by  a  graver  reason.  It  is  that,
if  you  will  permit  me  to  say  so  with  all  the  respect  which
is  due  to  you,  and  all  good  men,  I  have  taken  a  resolution

1  This  Peter  is  without  doubt  another  person  from  Peter  Leonis,  who  was
equally  legate,  but  Cardinal  Presbyter.  He  seems  to  be  the  same  whom  Pope
Hononus  II.  sent  into  France  at  the  beginning  of  his  pontificate  as  legate
a  Later,  against  Ponce  and  his  followers,  as  Peter  the  Venerable  declares  in  his
second  book  On  Miracles,  c,  ,3.  Or  he  may  have  been  Peter  de  Fontaines  a
compatriot  of  S.  Bernard,  created  Cardinal  A.D.  .120,  on  the  title  of  S  Mar
cellus,  by  Pope  Callixtus  II.


l8o  LKTTKR XVII.

not  again  to  go  out  of  my  monastery,  unless  for  precise
causes  ;  and  I  see  at  present  nothing  of  that  kind  which
would  permit  me  to  carry  out  your  wish,  and  gratify
my  own  by  coming  to  you.  But  you,  what  are  you  doing
with  respect  to  that  promise  of  coming  here  which  your
former  letter  contained  ?  We  are  awaiting  it  still.  What
the  writings  were,  which  you  had  before  ordered  to  be  pre
pared  for  you  [otherwise,  for  us]  and  now  ask  for,  I  am
absolutely  ignorant,  and,  therefore,  I  have  done  nothing.
For  I  do  not  remember  to  have  written  any  book  on  morals
which  I  should  think  worthy  of  the  attention  of  your
Excellency.1

Some  of  the  brethren  have  drawn  up  in  their  own  way
certain  fragments  of  my  instructions  as  they  have  heard
them.  Of  whom  one  is  conveniently  near  to  you,  viz.r
Gebuin,  Precentor  and  Archdeacon  of  Troves.  You  can
easily,  if  you  wish,  obtain  of  him  the  notes  drawn  up  by  him.
Yet  if  your  occupation  would  leave  you  the  time,  and  you
should  think  fit  to  pay  to  your  humble  sons  the  visit  which
you  promised,  and  which  they  have  been  expecting,  I  would
do  all  in  my  power  to  give  you  satisfaction,  if  I  have  in
my  writings  anything  which  could  please  you,  or  if  I  were
able  to  compose  any  work  which  should  seem  worthy  of  you;
for  I  greatly  esteem  your  high  reputation.  I  respect  that
care  and  zeal  about  holy  things  which  I  have  heard  of  in
you,  and  I  should  regard  myself  as  very  happy  if  these  un
polished  writings,  which  are  a  part  of  my  duty,  should  be  in
any  respect  agreeable  to  you.

i  Bernard  gives  usually  the  title  of  Excellency  to  Cardinals.  Sometimes  lie
calls  them  Holiness.  But  the  name  of  Excellency  is  also  given  to  the  secular
princes  as  to  the  Pope,  and  even  to  Bishops.


LETTER XVIII.  l8l

LETTER XVIII. (Circa A.D. 1127.)

TO THE SAME.1

He  protests  against  the  reputation  for  holiness  which  is
attributed  to  him,  and  promises  to  communicate  the
treatises  which  he  has  written.

i.  Even  if  I  should  give  myself  to  you  entirely  that
would  be  too  little  a  thing  still  in  my  eyes,  to  have
recompensed  towards  you  even  the  half  of  the  kindly
feeling  which  you  express  towards  my  humility.  I  con
gratulate  myself,  indeed,  on  the  honour  which  you  have
done  me;  but  my  joy,  I  confess,  is  tempered  by  the
thought  that  it  is  not  anything  I  have  accomplished,  but
only  an  opinion  of  my  merit  which  has  brought  me  this
favour.  I  should  be  greatly  ashamed  to  permit  myself  in
vain  complacency  when  I  feel  assured  that  what  is  loved  or
respected  in  me  is  not,  indeed,  what  I  am,  but  what  I  am
thought  to  be;  for  when  I  am  thus  loved  it  is  not  then  I  that
am  loved,  but  something  in  me,  I  know  not  what,  and
which  is  not  me,  is  loved  in  my  stead.2  I  say  that  I  know
not,  but,  to  speak  more  truly,  I  know  very  well  that  it  is
nothing.  For  whatever  is  thought  to  exist,  and  does  not,
is  nothing.  The  love  and  he  who  feels  it  is  real  enough,
but  the  object  of  the  love  does  not  exist.  That  such  should
be  capable  of  inspiring  love  is  wonderful,  but  still  more  it  is
regrettable.  It  is  from  that  we  are  able  to  feel  whence  and
whither  we  go,  what  we  have  lost,  what  we  find.  By
remaining  united  to  Him,  who  is  the  real  Being,  and  who
is  always  happy,  we  also  shall  attain  a  continued  and  happy
existence.  By  remaining  united  to  Him,  I  said;  that  is,  not
only  by  knowledge,  but  by  love.  For  certain  of  the  sons
of  Adam  when  they  had  known  God,  glorified  Him  not  as
God,  nor  were  thankful,  but  became  vain  in  their  imagina-

1  The  title  of  this  Letter  is  not  the  same  in  all  the  manuscripts.  Colbertinus
n.  1410,  and  that  of  the  library  of  Compiegne  have  to  the  same  Haimerie  ;  three
other  Colbertine  MSS.  to  the  .same,  that  is  to  say  to  Peter  the  Deacon,  which,  as
Mabillon  thinks,  is  to  be  preferred.

This  resembles  a  passage  in  S.  Augustine,  Ep.  143,  n.  3.


1-82  LETTER XVIII.

tions  (Rom.  i.  21).  Rightly,  then,  were  their  foolish  licarts
darkened,  because  since  they  recognized  the  truth  and
despised  it,  they  were  justly  punished  for  their  fault  by
losing  the  power  to  recognize  it.  Alas  !  in  thus  adhering
to  the  truth  by  the  mind,  but  with  the  heart  departing  from
it,  and  loving  vanity  in  its  place,  man  became  himself  a  vain
thine.  And  what  is  more  vain  than  to  love  vanity,  and

O  *

what  is  more  repugnant  to  justice  than  to  despise  the
truth?  What  is  more  just  than  that  the  power  to  recognize
the  truth  should  be  withdrawn  from  those  who  have  despised
it,  and  that  those  who  did  not  glorify  the  truth  when  they
recognized  it  should  lose  the  power  of  boasting  of  the
knowledge  ?  Thus  the  love  of  vanity  is  the  contempt  of
truth,  and  the  contempt  of  truth  the  cause  of  our  blindness.
And  because  they  did  not  like,  he  says,  to  retain  God  in
their  knowledge,  He  gave  tliem  over  unto  a  reprobate  mind
(Rom.  i.  28).

2.  From  this  blindness,  then,  it  follows  that  we  frequently
love  and  approve  that  which  is  not  for  that  which  is;
since  while  we  are  in  this  body  we  are  wandering  from
Him  who  is  the  Fulness  of  Existence.  And  what  is  man,
O  God,  except  that  Thou  hast  taken  knowledge  of  Him  ?  If
the  knowledge  of  God  is  the  cause  that  man  is  anything,
the  want  of  this  makes  him  nothing.  But  He  who  calls
those  things  which  are  not  as  though  they  were,  pitying
those  reduced  in  a  manner  to  nothing,  and  not  yet  able  to
contemplate  in  its  reality,  and  to  embrace  by  love  that
hidden  manna,  concerning  which  the  Apostle  says  :  Your
life  is  hidden  -with  Christ  in  God  (Cor.  iii.  3).  But  in  the
meantime  He  has  given  us  to  taste  it  by  faith  and  to  seek
for  by  strong  desire.  By  these  two  we  are  brought  for  the
second  time  from  not  being,  to  begin  to  be  that  His  (new)
creature,  which  one  day  shall  pass  into  a  perfect  man,  into
the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.  That,
without  doubt,  shall  take  place,  when  righteousness  shall  be
turned  into  judgment,  that  is,  faith  into  knowledge,  the
righteousness  which  is  of  faith  into  the  righteousness  of
full  knowledge,  and  also  the  hope  of  this  state  of  exile  shall


LETTER XVIII.  183

be  changed  into  the  fulness  of  love. For  if  faith  and  love

O

begin  during  the  exile,  knowledge  and  love  render  perfect
those  in  the  Presence  of  God.  For  as  faith  leads  to  full
knowledge,  so  hope  leads  to  perfect  love,  and,  as  it  is  said,
If  ye  will  not  believe  ye  shall  not  understand  (Is.  vii.  9,
ace.  to  Ixx.),  so  it  may  equally  be  said  with  fitness,  if  you
have  not  hoped,  you  will  not  perfectly  love.  Knowledge
then  is  the  fruit  of  faith,  perfect  charity  of  hope.  In  the
meantime  the  just  lives  by  faith  (Hab.  ii.  4),  but  he  is  not
happy  except  by  knowledge  ;  and  he  aspires  towards  God
as  the  hart  desires  the  water-brooks ;  but  the  blessed  drinks
with  joy  from  the  fountain  of  the  Saviour,  that  is,  he
delights  in  the  fulness  of  love.

O

3.  Thus  understanding  and  love,  that  is,  the  knowledge
of  and  delight  in  the  truth,  are,  perhaps,  as  it  were,  the  two
arms  of  the  soul,  with  which  it  embraces  and  comprehends
with  all  saints  the  length  and  breadth,  the  height  and
depth,  that  is  the  eternity,  the  love,  the  goodness,  and  the
wisdom  of  God.  And  what  are  all  these  but  Christ?  He
is  eternity,  because  ''this  is  life  eternal  to  know  Thee  the
true  God  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  Thou  hast  sent  "  (S.  John
xvii.  3).  He  is  Love,  because  He  is  God,  and  God  is  Love
(i  S.  John  iv.  1 6).  He  is  both  the  Goodness  of  God  and
the  Wisdom  of  God  (i  Cor.  i.  24),  but  when  shall  these
things  be?  When  shall  we  see  Him  as  He  is?  For  the
expectation  of  the  creature  waitcth  for  the  revelation  of
the  sons  of  God.  For  the  creature  was  subjected  unto
vanity,  not  •willingly  (Rom.  viii.  19,  20).  It  is  that  vanity
diffused  through  all  which  makes  us  desire  to  be  praised
even  when  we  are  blameable,  and  not  to  be  willing  to
praise  those  whom  we  know  to  be  worthy  of  it.  But  this
too  is  vain,  that  we,  in  our  ignorance,  frequently  praise  what
is  not,  and  are  silent  about  what  is.  What  shall  we  say  to
this,  but  that  the  children  of  men  are  vain,  the  children
of  men  are  deceitful  upon  the  weights,  so  that  they  deceive
each  other  by  vanity  (Ps.  Ixi.  9,  Ixx.).  \Ve  praise  falsely,
and  are  foolishly  pleased,  so  that  they  are  vain  who  are
praised,  and  they  false  who  praise.  Some  flatter  and  are


184  LETTER XVIII.

deceptive,  others  praise  what  they  think  deserving,  and  are
deceived  ;  others  pride  themselves  in  the  commendations
which  are  addressed  to  them,  and  are  vain.  The  only  wise
man  is  he  who  says  with  the  Apostle  :  /  forbear,  lest  any
man  should  think  of  me  above  that  which  he  secth  me  to  be
or  t/,a  '-  lie  hearcth  of  me  (2  Cor.  xii.  6).

4.  For  the  present  I  have  noted  down  these  things  too
hastily  (because  of  this  in  not  so  finished  a  way),  rather
than  dictated  them  for  you,  perhaps  also  at  greater  length
than  I  should,  but  to  the  best  of  my  poor  ability.  But  that
my  letter  may  finish  at  the  point  whence  it  began,  I  beg
you  not  to  be  too  credulous  of  uncertain  rumour  about  me,
which,  as  you  know  well,  is  accustomed  to  be  wrong  both
in  giving  praise  and  in  attaching  blame.  Be  so  kind,  if  you
please,  as  to  weigh  your  praises,  and  examine  with  care
how  far  your  friendship  for  me  and  your  favour  are  well-
founded,  thus  they  will  be  the  more  acceptable  from  my
friend  as  they  are  fitted  to  my  humble  merit.  Thus  when
praise  hhall  have  proceeded  from  grave  judgment,  and  not
from  the  error  of  the  vulgar,  if  it  is  more  moderate  it  will
be  at  the  same  time  more  easy  to  bear.  I  assure  you  that
what  attaches  me  (humble  person  as  I  am),  to  you  is  the
zeal,  industry,  and  sincerity  with  which  you  employ  your
self,  as  they  say,  in  the  accomplishment  of  your  charge  in
holy  things.  May  it  be  always  thus  with  you  that  this  may
be  said  of  you  always  with  truth.  I  send  you  the  book
which  you  desire  to  have  in  order  to  copy ;  as  for  the  other
treatises  of  mine  which  you  wish  that  I  should  send,  they
are  but  few,  and  contain  nothing  which  I  should  think
worthy  of  your  attention,  yet  because  I  should  prefer  that
my  want  of  intelligence  should  be  blamed  rather  than  my
goodwill,  and  I  would  rather  endanger  my  inexperience
than  my  obedience  in  your  sight,  be  so  good  as  to  let  me
know  by  the  present  messenger  which  of  my  treatises  you
wish  that  I  should  send  you,  so  that  I  may  ask  for  them
again  from  those  persons  to  whom  they  have  been  lent,  and
send  them  wherever  you  shall  direct.  That  you  may  know
what  you  wish  for,  I  may  say  that  I  have  written  a  little


LETTER XIX.  185

took  on  Humility,  four  Homilies  on  the  Praises  of  the
Virgin  Mother  (for  the  little  book  has  this  title),  upon  that
passage  of  S.  Luke  where  it  is  said  the  Angel  Gabriel  was
sent  (S.  Luke  i.  26).  Also  an  Apology  dedicated  to  a  certain
friend1  of  mine,  in  which  I  have  treated  of  some  of  our
•observances,  that  is  to  say,  those  of  Citeaux,  and  those  of
Cluny.  I  have  also  written  a  few  Letters  to  various  persons,
.and  finally,  there  are  some  of  my  discourses  which  the
brethren  who  heard  them  have  reproduced  in  their  own
words  and  keep  them  in  their  hands.  Would  that  any  of
Ihe  simple  productions  of  mv  humble  powers  might  be  of
.any  service  to  you,  but  I  do  not  dare  to  expect  it.


LETTER  XIX. (Circa  A.D. 1127.)

To  THF,  SAME.
He coin-mends  the  deputies- from Rhcims.

It  is  the  time  for  me  to  ask  the  fulfilment  of  your  promise,
so  as  to  prove  that  I  have  not  been  wrong  in  putting  all  my
confidence  in  you,  since  I  have  had  the  honour  to  make  your
.acquaintance  and  obtain  your  friendship.  Be  assured  that
I  shall  regard  as  done  to  myself  whatever  assistance  you  are
able  to  give  to  these  deputies  from  Rheims.  I  venture  to
make  this  request,  not  because  I  think  myself  of  so  great
importance,  but  because  you  have  made  me  the  promise.
\\  hether  you  have  done  well,  it  is  for  you  to  see.

1  This  was  William,  Abbot  of  Saint  Thierry,  and  the  Apology  will  be  found
in  a  subsequent  volume.

-  Mabillon  says :  I  find  nothing  in  Marlot  about  this  deputation.  Perhaps  it
•was  sent  to  Honorius  to  obtain  of  him  the  Pallium  for  Raynald  de  Martini,
who  had  been  translated  from  the  See  of  Angers  to  that  of  Rheims,  in  1124.
'But  the  following  Letter  speaks  of  another  matter.


*  LETTER XX.

LETTER XX. (Circa  A.D. 1127.)
To  HAIMKRIC,  THK  CHAXCELLOR,  ox  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

To  the  illustrious  Lord  HAIMERIC,  Chancellor  of  the  Holy
Roman  See,  Brother  BERXARD,  of  Clairvaux,  health  and
prayers.

Since  I  have  once  begun,  permit  me  to  speak  to  you,
even  though  I  shall  make  myself  importunate;  but  importu
nate  for  charity,  truth,  and  justice.  For  although  I  am  not  of
sufficient  importance  to  have  at  Rome  business  of  my  own,
yet  I  do  not  regard  any  of  the  affairs  of  God  as  things  in
which  I  have  no  concern.  Wherefore,  if  I  have  with  you
still  the  favour  which  many  people  suppose,  permit  me  to
beg  you  to  forward  the  deputies  of  the  Lord  Archbishop  of
Rheims  in  their  present  business.  I  am  sure  that  they
neither  resist  for  themselves  nor  ask  from  another  anything
but  what  is  just.

LETTER XXI. (Towards  the  end  of  A.D.  1 127.)
To MATTHEW.  THE LEGATE.1

He  excuses  himself  very  ski/fully  for  not  having  obeyed
the  summons  to  take  part  hi  settling  certain  affairs.

I.  My  heart  was,  indeed,  prepared  to  obey;  not  so  my
body.  It  was  burned  up  by  the  heats  of  an  acute  and
violent  fever,  and  exhausted  by  sweats,  so  that  it  was  too
weak  to  carry  out  the  impulse  of  the  spirit.  I  wished,
then,  to  go,  but  my  good  will  was  hindered  by  the  obstacle
which  I  have  mentioned.  Whether  this  was  truly  so,  let
my  friends  themselves  judge,  who,  disregarding  every

1  He  was  born  of  noble  parents  in  the  province  of  Rheims.  He  became  a
canon  of  Rheims,  then  a  monk  of  the  Order  of  Cluny  in  the  Monastery  of  S.
Martin  des  Champs,  Paris ;  at  length  Bishop  of  Albano,  and  was  created
Cardinal  by  Honorius  II.  in  ti25,  and  being  sent  into  France  as  Legate  pre
sided  over  the  Council  at  Troves  in  1 1 28.  which  was  assembled  by  his
authority;  and  Bernard  was  obliged  to  attend,  notwithstanding  his  unwilling
ness.


LETTER XXI.  187

excuse  that  I  can  make,  avail  themselves  of  the  bonds  of
obedience  to  my  superiors  to  draw  me  out  of  my  cloister
into  cities.  I  beg  them  to  remark  that  this  reason  is  not  a
pretext  of  my  own  invention,  but  a  cause  of  much  suffering
to  me;  that  they  may  thus  learn  that  no  project  can  pre
vail  against  the  will  of  God.  If  I  should  reply  to  them,
/  have  put  off  my  coat,  hou<  shall  I  put  it  on  ?  I
hare  washed  my  feet,  how  shall  I  defile  them  ?  (Cant.  v.
3),  they  \vould  at  once  be  indignant.  But  now  let  them
either  object  to  or  acquiesce  in  the  ruling  of  Providence,
for  it  is  that  which  has  brought  about,  that  even  if  I  wish  to
go  forth,  I  am  not  in  health  to  do  so.

2.  But  the  cause  is  great,  they  say,  the  necessity  weighty.
They  must,  then,  'have  recourse  to  some  one  suitable  to
settle  great  matters.  If  they  think  me  such  an  one,  I  not
only  think,  but  know,  that  I  am  not.  Furthermore,  whether
the  matters  are  great  or  small,  to  which  they  so  earnestly
invite  me,  they  are  not  my  concern.  Now,  I  inquire,  Are
the  matters  easy  or  difficult  which  you  are  so  anxious  to  lay
upon  your  friend,  to  the  troubling  of  his  peace  ?  If  easy,
they  can  be  settled  without  me  ;  if  difficult,  they  cannot
be  dealt  with  by  me,  unless,  perhaps,  I  am  so  estimated  as
to  be  thought  capable  of  doing  what  no  one  else  can  do,
and  for  whom  great  and  impossible  affairs  are  to  be
reserved.  But  if  it  be  so,  O,  Lord  my  God,  how  are  Thy
designs  so  frustrated  in  me  only  ?  Why  hast  Thou  put
under  a  bushel  the  lamp,  which  could  shine  upon  a  candle
stick  ;  or,  to  speak  more  plainly,  why  hast  Thou  made  me
a  monk  and  hidden  me  in  Thy  sanctuary  during  the  day  of
evil,  if  I  were  a  man  necessary  to  the  world,  without  whom
bishops  are  not  able  to  transact  their  business  ?  But  this,
again,  is  a  service  that  my  friends  have  done  me,  that  now
I  seem  to  speak  with  discomposure  to  a  man  whom  I  am
accustomed  to  think  of  with  serenity,  and  with  the  utmost
pleasure.  But  you  know  (I  say  it  to  you,  my  father)  that  so
far  from  feeling  anger,  I  am  prepared  to  keep  your  com
mands.  But  it  will  be  a  mark  of  your  indulgence  to  spare
me  whenever  you  find  it  possible  to  do  so.


1 88  LETTER XXII.

LETTER XXII. (Before  A.D.  1128.)

To  HuMBALD,1  ARCHBISHOP  OF  LYONS  AND  LEGATE.

He  commends  the  cause  of  the  Bishop  of  Meaux.

To  the  most  Reverend  Lord  and  Father  HUMBALD,  Arch
bishop  of  Lyons  and  Legate  of  the  Roman  See,  Brother
BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  health  and  all  that  the  prayers
of  a  sinner  can  avail  on  his  behalf.

The  Lord  Bishop  of  Meaux2  was  on  his  road  to  visit  us,  as
it  happened,  when  he  received  your  letter.  Since  he
wished  to  reply  before  leaving  us,  he  begged  me  to  join  in
a  letter  with  him,  in  the  hope  that  as  I  have  the  honour  to  be
known  to  you,  it  might  help  to  forward  his  business.  I
could  not  deny  what  he  wished,  and  have  thought  it  well  to
make  this  known  to  your  Reverence  in  a  few  friendlv
words  :  because  if  you  shall  listen  to  the  complaints  of
men  who  love  only  their  own  selves,  and  seek  those  things
that  are  their  own,  against  a  Bishop  who  regards  only  those
that  are  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  will  be  agreeable  neither  to  your
duty  nor  to  your  office.


LETTER  XXIII.  (Circa  A.D. 1128.)
To  ATTO,  BISHOP  OF  TROVES.

Bishop  At  to  Jiad,  in  a  sickness  which  lie  believed  mortal,
distributed  all  his  goods  to  the  poor.  When  he  was  restored
to  health,  Bernard  writes  to  console  him,  and  praises
wliat  he  had  done.3

To  a  poor  Bishop,  a  poor  abbot,  wishes  health  and  that
he  may  attain  the  reward  of  poverty,  which  is  the  kingdom
of  heaven.

1  Ordericus  calls  him  Humbert,  and  others  Ilumbaud. From  Archdeacon  of
Autun  he  became  Archbishop  of  Lyons,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  Pontificate
of Honorius II. was  joined  in  the  function  of Legate  with  Cardinal  Peter  de
Fontaines.

2  This  was  without  doubt  Burchard,  not  Manasses  II.,  his  successor.

3  Hato,  or  Atto,  is thought  to  have  been  a  Cluniac  monk. But  this  was
apparently  not  so. He  seems  to  have  lived  long  after  the  incident  here  referred
to,  and  died  at  length  at  Cluny  in  A.D.  1 145.


LETTER XXIII.  189

i.  I  should  praise  you,  and  rightly,  did  not  that  saying-
restrain  me,  Praise  no  man  before  his  death  (Ecclus.  xi.
28).  It  is  certain  that  you  have  done  a  thing  worthy  of
praise  :  but  the  praise  is  to  be  ascribed  to  Him,  from  whom
you  have  received  both  to  will  and  to  do  what  is  praise
worthy.  We  glorify  God,  therefore,  by  you  and  working  in
you  ;  who  also  has  willed  to  be  glorified  in  you,  only  that  He
may  render  you  glorious  also.  Who,  since  He  is  glorious
in  His  Majesty,  deigns  to  appear  glorious  in  His  Saints
also,  that  He  may  not  have  glory  alone.  For  although  He
Himself  is  sufficient  unto  Himself  in  an  infinity  of  glory,
yet  He  seeks  glory  also  in  His  Saints,  not  that  His  own
may  be  increased,  but  that  He  may  partake  it  with  them.
For  He  knows  them  that  are  His  :  but  we  do  not  easily
know  them  except  He  shall  deign  to  reveal  them  to  us.  1
know,  indeed,  of  what  kind  of  men  it  was  written  :  They
are  not  in  the  trouble  of  men,  and  shall  not  be  plagued
Kith  men  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  5).  I  know  without  doubt  that  those
words  do  not  concern  you.  I  know  also  that  it  is  written
again,  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chaste  net  li ,  and  sconrgeth
every  son  whom  He  receiveth  (Prov.  iii.  12,  and  Hebrews
xii.  6),  and  when  I  see  you  stricken  and  thereby  amended,
can  1  infer  anything  else  than  that  you  are  of  the  number  of
His  children  ?  I  do  not  wish  for  a  clearer  proof  that  He
has  corrected  you  than  your  very  poverty  itself.  A  noble
title  is  that  of  poverty,  which  God  Himself  commands  by
the  mouth  of  the  Prophet,  saying,  /  am  a  man  who  sees  my
poverty  (Lam.  iii.  I,  VULG.).1  This  title  ennobles  you
more,  and  renders  you  more  illustrious,  than  all  the  treasures
of  the  kings  of  the  earth.

2.  I  know  that  I  have  set  down  out  of  Scripture
just  now  that  a  man  is  not  to  be  praised  during  his  life.
But  how  can  I  refrain  from  the  praise  of  him  who  no  longer
runs  after  gold,  and  who  disdains  to  put  his  confidence  in
the  treasures  of  the  world  ?  Of  such  a  man  Scripture  thus
speaks  :  Who  is  lie  and  we  10 ill  call  him  blessed  ?  For  he

1  The  A.V.  more  literally,  affliction.  S.  Bernard  enlarges  on  this  subject  in
Ser.  2  de  Ccena  Domini. —  [E.]


LETTER XXIII.

has  done  wonderful  things  in  his  life  (Ecclus.  xxxi.  8,9).
Perhaps  man,  indeed,  is  not  to  be  praised  during  his  life,
inasmuch  as  it  is  a  struggle  upon  the  earth  ;  yet  ought  he
not  to  be  praised  when  he  is  dead  unto  sin  and  lives  unto
God  ?  That  praise  is  indeed  vain  and  seductive  which  is
addressed  to  a  sinner  in  his  passions  ;  whosoever  calls  him
happy  leads  him  into  error,  but  will  not  the  life  of  him  who
is  able  to  say,  I  live, yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  (Gal.
ii.  20)  be  praiseworthy  and  much  to  be  commended  ?
When,  then,  a  man  is  praised  in  whom  not  himself,  but
Christ,  lives,  he  is  praised,  not  in  his  own  life,  but  in  the  life
of  Christ,  and  because  of  this  he  is  not  praised  against  the
Scripture  which  forbids  a  man  to  be  praised  in  his  life.

Why,  then,  shall  he  not  be  worthy  of  my  praises  of  whom
God  deigns  to  accept  the  praises  to  His  Name  ?  As  David
says,  the  poor  and  needy  shall  give  praise  unto  Thy  Name
(Ps.  Ixxiv.  21).

3.  Job  is  praised  because  he  bore  the  loss  of  his  goods
patiently,  and  shall  a  Bishop  not  be  praised  who  has  both
parted  with  them  of  his  own  accord,  and  distributed  them
liberally  ? He  has  not  waited  until  death  came,  when  he
would  have it in his power  neither  to  give  nor  to  retain
anything :  which  many  do,  whose  testament  has  no  force
until  they  have  ceased  to  live,  but  while  still  placed  between
the  hope  of  life  and  fear  of  death,  it  was  then  that  in  life,
and  with  goodwill,  he  shared his goods  among  the  poor,
that  his  righteousness  might  remain  for  ever  and  ever  (Ps.
cxii.  9). Would  the  money  itself  have  remained  similarly
for  ever  and  ever  ? Good  is  the  recompense  of  righteous
ness  for  money  when  in  exchange  for  that  which  could  not
be  held  fast. A  price  is  given  which  remains  happily  for
ever,  for  righteousness  is  incomparably  better  than  money,
because  the  one  enriches  and  fills  only  the  chest,  but  the
other  the  soul. Then  the  priests  of  God  are  clothed  with
righteousness, and  thus  far more richly and  becomingly
than  in  robes  of  gold  or  silk.

4.  But render  thanks  to  God  who  has  inspired  in  you


LETTER XXIII.


IQ1


a  glorious  contempt  of  the  transitory  glory  belonging  to
these  things,  and  at  the  same  time  stricken  you  with  a
salutary  fear  of  the  peril  to  your  soul.  O,  wonderful  good
ness  of  God  towards  you  !  He  has  made  you  have  trial  of
death  so  that  you  might  not  die  ;  and  made  you  fear  it,  to
preserve  you  from  its  stroke.  This  He  has  done,  so  that
your  goods  might  not  be  dearer  to  you  than  yourself.  A
devouring  fear  was  raging  in  the  very  marrow  of  your
bones,  and  hindering  the  relief  of  perspiration,  the  disease
grew  graver  day  by  day.  And  now  the  limbs  without
grow  cold,  while  within  burned  a  devouring  fire  which
wasted  the  viscera,  already  exhausted  by  long  deprivation
of  nourishment.  Speedily  the  pale  and  doleful  image  of
death  was  before  your  eyes.  But  behold  a  voice,  as  it
were  from  heaven,  was  heard  :  /  am  He  i^lw  destroys  (not
thee,  but)  thy  iniquities  (Is.  xliii.  25)  ;  and  speedily  when
the  priest  of  God  had  distributed  all  his  goods  to  the  poor,
that  as  a  poor  man  he  might  die,  suddenly  the  sweat  long
unhoped-for  burst  forth  from  all  its  fountains ;  health
came  back  equally  both  to  body  and  soul,  and  clearly
showed  that  what  God  promises  in  Scripture  had  been
fulfilled  in  you:  I  kill  and  I  make  al  he  ;  I  wound  and  I  heal ;
neitJier  is  tlicre  any  that  can  deliver  out  of  My  hand
(Deut.  xxxii.  39).  He  has  stricken  the  flesh  to  save  the
soul;  He  has  slain  avarice  that  you  might  live  unto
righteousness.  Now  that  you  are  restored  to  life  and
health,  we  hope  that  none  will  be  able  to  snatch  you  from
the  hands  of  God,  provided  that  you  do  not  lose  sight  of
that  counsel  in  the  Gospel :  Behold  thoit  art  made  whole  ;
sin  no  more  lest  a  icorsc  tiling  come  unto  thee  (S.  John  v.
14).  And  if  thy  kind  Father  forewarns  thee  of  this,  it  is
because  He  does  not  desire  it  to  happen ;  because  he
willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  should
be  converted  and  live.  And  rightly.  For  what  advantage
would  there  be  in  the  death  of  a  sinner?  The  grave  will
not  confess  God,  nor  will  death  praise  Him  ;  but  you  who
are  living,  do  you  bless  the  Lord  and  say  :  I  shall  not  die,  but


IQ2  LETTKK XXIII.

live  and  declare  the  works  of  the  Lord ;  tJiou  hast  thrust
sore  at  »ie  that  I  migh t  fall ,  but  the  Lord  helped  me  (Ps..
cxviii.  17,  13).

LETTER XXIV. (Circa  A.D.  1 130.)
To  GILBERT,  BISHOP  OF  LONDON,  UNIVERSAL  DOCTOR. r

He  praises  Gilbert , u'ho  practised  poverty  in  the  station

of  Bishop.

The  report  of  your  conduct  has  spread  far  and  wide,  and'
has  given  to  those  whom  it  has  reached  an  odour  of  great
sweetness.  The  love  of  riches  is  extinct ;  what  sweetness
results  !  charity  reigns  ;  what  a  delight  to  all !  All  recog
nize  you  for  a  truly  wise  man,  who  has  trodden  under  foot
the  great  enemy  with  true  wisdom;  and  this  is  most  worthy
of  your  name  and  of  your  priesthood.  It  was  fitting  that
your  special3  philosophy  should  shine  forth  by  such  a  proof,
and  that  you  should  crown  all  your  distinguished  learning
by  such  a  completion.  That  is  the  true  and  unquestionable
wisdom  which  contemns  filthy  lucre  and  judges  it  a  thing
unworthy  [that  philosophy  should]  dwell  under  the  same
roof  as  the  service  of  idols.  That  the  Magister  Gilbert
should  become  a  bishop  was  not  a  great  thing;  but
that  a  Bishop  of  London  should  embrace  a  life  of
poverty,3  that  is,  indeed,  grand.  For  the  greatness  of
the  dignity  could  not  add  glory  to  your  name ;  but
the  humility  of  poverty  has  highly  exalted  it.  To  bear

1  He was so called because he  was  acquainted  with and excelled  in  all
branches  of  the  learning  of  that  time,  as Bernard  writes  in  this  place. Before
becoming  bishop he had been Canon of Autun,  and the  Necrology  of  that
Church  records that "  on the 4th August there died Magister Gilbert, of
venerable  memory,  a  distinguished  commentator  on  the  Old  and  New  Testa
ment,  canon  of  this  Church,  and  afterwards Bishop  of  London. Besides  other
ornaments  for  this  Church  which  he  sent  out  of England,  he  presented  to  the
same  Church  82  pounds,"  etc. He was  1'ishop  of  London  from  A.D.  1128  to
A.D. 1133.

2  Otherwise,  spiritual.

3  Henry  of  Huntingdon,  however,  in  a  Letter  on  the  Contempt  of  the  World,
preserved  in  the  Spicilegium,  Book  viii.,  attributes  this  to  a  feeling  of  avarice-
on  the  part  of  Gilbert.


LETTER XXIV.  193

poverty  with  an  equal  mind,  that  is  the  virtue  of  patience  ;
to  seek  it  of  one's  own  accord  is  the  height  of  wisdom.  He
is  praised  and  regarded  as  admirable  who  does  not  go  out
of  his  way  after  money  ;  and  shall  he  who  renounces  it  have
no  higher  praise  ?  Unless  that  clear  reason  sees  nothing  to
be  wondered  at  in  the  fact  that  a  wise  man  acts  wisely;  and
he  is  wise  who  having  acquired  all  the  science  of  the  learned
of  this  world,  and  having  great  enjoyment  in  acquiring  them,
has  studied  all  the  Scriptures  so  as  to  make  their  meaning
new  again.  What  then  ?  You  have  dispersed,  you  have
given  to  the  poor,  but  money.  But  what  is  money  to  that
righteousness  which  you  have  gained  for  it  ?  His  righteous
ness,  it  is  said,  endureth  for  ever  (Ps.  cxii.  9).  Is  it  so
with  money  ?  Then  it  is  a  desirable  and  honourable  ex
change  to  give  that  which  passes  away  for  that  which
endures.  May  it  be  granted  to  you  always  so  to  purchase,
O,  admirable  and  praiseworthy  Magister  !  It  remains  that
your  noble  beginning  should  attain  an  ending  worthy  of  it ;
and  the  tail  of  the  victim  be  joined  to  the  head.1  I  have
gladly  received  your  benediction,  which  the  perfectness  of
your  virtue  renders  the  more  precious  to  me.  The  bearer
of  this  letter,  though  exceedingly  respectable  for  his  own
sake,  I  desire  to  commend  for  my  sake  also,  to  your  Great
ness.  He  is  exceedingly  dear  to  me  for  his  goodness  and
piety.

LETTER XXV. (A.D. 1130.)
To  HUGO,  ARCHBISHOP  OF  RouEN.3

He  exhorts  Hugo  to  strive  to  be  patient  and  peaceable
among  his  Rouennais,  and  at  the  same  time  to  temper  his
zeal  with  discretion.

i.  If  malice  grows  every  day,  yet  let  it  not  prevail;  if  it  is
boisterous,  let  it  not  trouble  your  peace.  The  waves  of  the

1  A  familiar  phrase  with  Bernard  to  signify  perseverance;  from  Levit. iii.  7.
See  the  notes  to  Letter  78.  Peter  Cellensis,  Book  v.  i,  Letter  8,  says  : Beware  of
the  tail ; it  is  only  in  the  tail,  that  is  in  the  end  of  things,  that  praise  or  blame
can  be  awarded.

2  Respecting  his  election,  which  took  place  in A.D. 1130, there  is  extant  a
Letter of the Ckrgy of  Rouen to Pope  Honorius II. (Spici/eg. B. iii. p.

VOL.  I.  13


IQ4  LETTER XXV.

sea  are  mighty,  but  the  Lord  in  heaven  is  mightier,  and  the
mercy  from  on  high  has  dwelt  with  you,  illustrious  father,
as  you  know,  with  extreme  goodness  even  until  now.  For
by  a  kindly  Providence  you  are  no  sooner  set  to  preside
over  sinners  than  you  are  associated  with  the  good  and
pious,  by  whose  example  and  company  you  may  become
good,  and  so  may  be  able  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  sinners
without  ceasing  to  be  righteous.  And,  indeed,  to  be
righteous  among  the  righteous  assures  salvation,  but  to  be
so  among  sinners  assures  also  praise.  The  one  is  easy  and
sure,  the  other  as  meritorious  as  difficult.  For  the  task  is
as  it  were  to  touch  pitch  and  not  to  be  defiled  therewith,  to
walk  in  fire  without  being  injured,  and  in  the  shadows
without  being  dark.  The  Egyptians  formerly  were  in  dark
ness  that  might  be  felt,  while  of  the  people  of  God  the
Scripture  says  Wheresoever  Israel  was  it  was  light  (Exod.
x.  23).  David  was  a  true  Israelite,  and,  therefore,  spoke
with  preciseness  that  he  dwelt  not  "in  Cedar,"  but  with  the
dwellers  in  Cedar  (Ps.  cxx.  5),  and  as  one  who  habitually
dwelt  in  the  light,  although  his  bodily  abode  was  with  the
dwellers  in  Cedar  [Kedar].  Wherefore  also  he  blames
certain  persons  as  not  being  true  Israelites,  because  they
were  mingled  among  the  heathen  and  learned  their  works,
and  it  became  a  snare  unto  them  (Ps.  cvi.  35,  36).

2.  I  say,  then,  that  it  was  sufficient  when  you  were  at
Cluny  to  keep  yourself  innocent,  as  it  is  written,  With  an
innocent  man  Thou  shalt  be  innocent  (Ps.  xvii.  26,  VULG.).
But  now  that  you  are  among  the  Rouennais  (otherwise,  at
Rouen]  you  have  need  of  patience,  as  the  Apostle  teaches  :
The  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive,  but  be  patient
towards  all  (2  Tim.  ii.  24).  Nor  must  he  be  only  patient,  so

151)  in  which  these  words  occur: — "We  have  chosen  with  one  voice  for
Bishop  our  [your?]  son  Hugo,  Abbot  of  Reading.  He  was  first  a  monk  at
Cluny,  then  first  Abbot  of  Reading,  in  England,  in  the  Diocese  of  Salisbury."
In  the  same  Letter  is  added  : — "  Upon  which  we  have  sought  and  obtained  the
consent  of  our  Lord  Henry,  King  of  the  English,  from  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury,
also  under  whose  charge  he  discharged  his  office  of  abbot,  we  requested  his
return  to  us  free  and  discharged  from  obligation,"  etc.  Ordericus  mentions  his
election  B.  i  2  adjinem.


LETTER XXVI.  195

as  not  to  be  overcome  of  evil,  but  also  pacific,  to  overcome
evil  with  good.  The  one  that  you  may  bear  with  evil  per
sons,  the  other  that  you  may  do  good  to  those  whom  you
thus  bear  with.  In  your  patience  possess  your  soul
(S.  Luke  xxi.  19),  but  be  also  pacific,  that  you  may  have
control  also  over  the  souls  committed  to  you.  What  so
great  glory  as  to  be  able  to  say,  With  those  who  hated  peace
I  was  pacific  (Ps.  cxx.  7).  Be,  then,  patient,  because  you
are  among  evil  men ;  be  pacific,  because  you  have  such  to
govern.  Let  your  charity  be  zealous,  but  moderate  your
severity  for  a  time.  Censure  should,  indeed,  never  be  alto
gether  foregone,  but  it  may  often  be  profitably  intermitted.
The  vigour  of  justice  should  be  always  keen,  but  never
precipitate.  As  not  everything  that  is  pleasing  is  per
missible,  so  not  everything  permissible  is  expedient.  You
know  all  this  better  than  I,  and,  therefore,  I  do  not  insist
farther.  I  beg  you  to  pray  for  me  earnestly,  because  I  do
not  cease  to  fall  into  sin.


LETTER XXVI. (Circa A.D. 1130.)
To  GUY,  BISHOP  OF  LAUSANNE.

You  have  undertaken  great  things ;  you  have  need  of
courage.  You  have  become  a  watcher  for  the  house  of
Israel ;  you  have  need  of  prudence.  You  are  a  debtor  both
to  the  wise  and  unwise ;  you  have  need  of  righteousness.

Lastly,  you  have,  above  all,  need  of  temperance  and  self-
control,  so  that  one  who  has  preached  to  others  may  not
become  (which  may  God  forbid  !)  a  reprobate.


LETTER XXVII. (Circa A.D. 1135.)
To  ARDUTIO  (OR  ARDUTIUS),  BISHOP  ELECT  OF  GENEVA.

He  warns  him  that  he  must  attribute  his  election  to  the
grace  of  God,  and  strive  thenceforth  faithfully  to  co
operate  with  it.


196  LETTER XXVII.

I am  glad  to  believe  that  your election,  which  I  have
heard  was  effected  with  so  complete  an  assent  both  of  the
clergy  and  people,  was  from  God. I  congratulate  you  on
His  grace,  and  I  do  not  speak  of  your  merits,  since we
ought not  to render  to  you excessive praise, but to  re
cognize  that,  not  because  of  works  of  righteousness  which
you  have  done,  but  according  to His  mercy  He  has  done
this  for  you. If  you  (which  may  God  forbid  !)  should  think
otherwise,  your  exaltation  will  be  to  your  ruin. But  if  you
acknowledge  it  to  be  of  grace,  see  that you  receive  it  not
in vain. Make  your  actions and  your  desires good, and
your  ministry  holy  ;  and  if  sanctity  of  life  has  not  preceded,
let  it  at  least  follow  your  elevation. Then  I  shall  acknow
ledge  that  you  have  been  prevented  with  the  blessings  of
grace,  and  shall  hope  that  after  these  you  will  receive  still
better  graces. I  shall  be  in  joy  and  gladness  that  a  good
and faithful servant has  been  set  over  the family  of  the
Lord,  and you shall come  to  be  as  a  son powerful  and
happy, meet  to be set over all  the  good things of the
Father. Otherwise,  if  it  delights  you  to  be  in  higher  place
rather in holier mind, I shall expect to see, not your
reward,  but  your  destruction. I  hope,  and  pray  God,  that
it  may  not  be  thus  with  you  ;  and  am  prepared,  if  there is
need,  to  render  my  aid,  as  far  as  in  me  lies,  to  assist  you  in
whatever  you  think  proper  and  expedient.


LETTER XXVIII.  (In  the Same Year.)
To  THE  SAME,  WHEN  BISHOP.

He  exhorts  him to  adorn  the  dignity  which  he  had  ob
tained  without  preceding  merits,  by  a  holy  life.

I.  Charity  gives  me  boldness,  my  very  dear  friend,  to
speak  to  you  with  great  confidence.  The  episcopal  seat  which
you  have  lately  obtained  requires  a  man  of  many  merits  ;
and  I  see  with  grief  none  of  these  in  you,  or  at  least  not
sufficient,  to  have  preceded  your  elevation.  For  your  mode


LETTER XXVIII.  IQ7

of  life  and  your  past  occupations  seem  in  nowise  to  have
been  befitting  the  episcopal  office.  What  then  ?  Would  you
say,  Is  not  God  able  of  this  stone  to  raise  up  a  son  of
Abraham  ?  Is  not  God  able  to  bring  about  that  the  good
works  which  ought  to  have  gone  before  my  episcopate  may
follow  it  ?  Certainly  He  is,  and  I  desire  nothing  better
than  this,  if  it  should  be  so.  I  know  not  why,  but  that
sudden  change  wrought  by  the  right  hand  of  the  Highest
will  please  me  more  than  if  the  merits  of  your  former  life
pleaded  for  you.  Then  I  could  say,  This  is  the  Lord's  doing ;
it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes  (Ps.  cxviii.  23).  So  Paul,  from
a  persecutor,  became  the  Doctor  of  the  Gentiles ;  so
Matthew  was  called  from  the  toll-booth,  so  Ambrose  was
taken  from  the  palace,  the  one  to  the  Episcopate,  the  other
to  the  Apostolate.  So  I  have  known  many  others  who
have  been  usefully  raised  to  the  Episcopate,  from  the
habits  and  pursuits  of  secular  life.  How  many  times  it  has
been  the  case  that  where  sin  abounded,  grace  also  did
much  more  abound  ?

2.  So  then,  my  dear  friend,  encouraged  by  these  examples
and  others  like  them,  gird  up  your  loins,  and  make  your
actions  and  pursuits  henceforth  good ;  let  your  latest
actions  make  the  old  forgotten,  and  the  correction  of
your  mature  life  blot  out  the  demerits  of  your  youth.
Take  care  to  imitate  Paul  in  honouring  your  ministry.  You
will  render  it  honourable  by  gravity  of  manners,  by  wise
plans,  by  honourable  actions.  It  is  these  which  most
ennoble  and  adorn  the  Episcopal  office.  Do  nothing  without
taking  counsel,  yet  not  of  all,  nor  of  the  first  comer,  but  of
good  men.  Have  good  men  in  your  confidence,  in  your
service,  dwelling  in  your  house,  who  may  be  at  once  the
guardians  and  the  witnesses  of  your  honourable  life.  For
in  this  you  will  approve  yourself  a  good  man  if  you  have
the  testimony  of  the  good.  I  commend  to  your  piety  my
poor  brethren  who  are  in  your  diocese,  especially  those  of
Bonnemont,  in  the  Alps,  and  of  Hautecombe.  By  your
bounty  towards  these  I  shall  see  what  degree  of  affection
you  have  for  me.


198  LETTER XXIX.

LETTER  XXIX.  (Circa  A.D.  1126.)
To  STEPHEN,  BISHOP  OF  METz.1

He congratulates  Stephen on the restored  peace of  the
Church,  -which  he  says  is  due  only  to  the  bounty  of  God.

To  STEPHEN,  by  the  Grace  of  God,  the  strenuous  minister
of  the  Church  of  Metz,  his  humble  brethren  in  Christ  from
Clairvaux,  wish  health  and  assure  him  of  their  prayers.

From  the  day  when,  if  you  remember,  you  deigned  to
associate  yourself  with  our  community,  and  to  commend
yourself  humbly  to  our  prayers,  I  have  always  been
anxious,  as  I  ought,  to  know  something  of  your  state,  and
have  frequently  inquired  as  I  was  able  respecting  your
welfare,  from  those  who  could  inform  me,  earnestly  de
siring  and  praying  that  your  work  and  all  your  undertakings
might  be  prospered  in  God,  and  your  steps  directed  in  the
path  of  His  commandments.  I  bless  God  who  has  not
rejected  my  prayer  nor  turned  His  mercy  from  you,  who
has  made  me  glad  by  the  coming  of  this  venerable  brother
William,  in  whom  I  have  not  less  confidence  than  in  myself,
and  who  has  informed  us  of  your  good  health  and  prosperity,
and  of  the  restoration  of  peace  to  your  Church  by  your
means.  I  congratulate  you  upon  it,  but  I  render  glory  to
God,  knowing  that  all  you  are  able  to  do  is  of  Him,  and
not  of  yourself.  Which  also  I  venture  as  a  friend  to  warn
you  always  to  keep  before  your  mind,  that  you  may  not  fall
into  a  kind  of  powerlessness  either  to  be  or  to  do  anything,
if  you  should  think  otherwise,  and  attribute  to  your  own
merits  'or  powers  (which  God  forbid)  the  least  of  your
successes.  Otherwise  it  is  to  be  feared  that  your  peace
will  be  turned  into  trouble,  your  prosperity  into  adversity,
by  a  just  judgment  of  Him  who  is  accustomed  to  resist  the

1  He  succeeded  to  the  See  in  A.D.  1120,  on  the  deposition  of  Adalbero,  the
fourth  Bishop  of  Metz  of  that  name,  as  I  find  in  the  abridged  annals  of  S.
Vincent,  at  Metz,  adjusted  to  the  Paschal  Cycle,  in  which  Stephen  is  related  to
have  died  on  2gth  Dec.,  A.D.  1 163.  Bernard  makes  grave  complaints  of  him  in
Letters  177  and  178.


LETTER XXX.  199

proud,  but  give  grace  unto  the  humble  ;  who  not  only  is
holy  with  the  holy,  but  perverse  with  the  perverse  man,  as
we  read  in  the  Psalm  (Ps.  xviii.  26),  who  not  only  makes
peace,  but  creates  evil,  as  is  described  by  the  Prophet
(Is.  xlv.  7).

LETTER  XXX. (Circa  A.D. 1126.)
To  ALBERO,  PRIMICERIUS  OF  METZ.1

He  warns  Albero  to  wait  God's  good  time  for  the  com
pletion  of  a  certain  business  which  he  was  hurrying  on,
and  that  He  requires  us  rather  to  do  good  for  a  good
reason  than  from  an  interested  motive.

To  the  very  honourable  ALBERO,  by  the  Grace  of  God
Primicerius  of  the  Church  of  Metz,  the  brethren  who  serve
God  to  the  best  of  their  power  at  Clairvaux,  health  and
their  prayers.

We  have  formerly  heard  and  seen,  and  now  have  expe
rienced  for  ourselves,  your  faithful  zeal  in  the  things  of
God.  But  although  you  were  favourable  and  your  Bishop
gave  prompt  assent  to  the  things  proposed  to  him  by  the
brethren  whom  we  last  sent  to  you,  after  your  counsel :
as  our  first  duty  is  to  know  God's  good  pleasure  in  all  things,

1  Mabillon  observes  :  ''  I  find  three  persons  of  the  same  name  who  have  borne
one  after  the  other  this  title  at  this  epoch.  I  believe  that  this  Letter  is  addressed
to  the  second  Albero,  who  became  later  on  Archbishop  of  Treves.''  Bernard  had
much  affection  for  him,  and  it  was  on  his  behalf  that  the  Letters  176-180  were
written.

The  title  Primicerius  is  generally  derived  from  qui  in  prima  cerd  hceres
scrip/us,  and  hence  it  denoted  the  chief  in  any  department.  It  was  used  in
Italian  Cathedrals  especially,  i.  In  the  abbey  of  Monte  Casino  it  denoted  the
chief  over  the  scriptorium  where  MSS.  were  copied.  2.  The  chief  of  the
Canlovum  Schola,  founded  by  Pope  Hilarius,  and  extended  by  Pope  Gregory
the  Great,  for  the  improvement  of  singing.  Similarly  at  Aberdeen  Cathedral
the  precentor  was  called  by  that  title,  and  in  other  cathedrals  it  denoted  the  chief
chanter;  3.  A  chief  notary;  4.  The  Chancellor  of  a  Cathedral;  5.  In  the
Church  of  S.  Stephen,  at  Metz,  the  title  was  given  to  the  first  of  the  canons,
who  was  privileged  (among  other  marks  of  honour)  to  wear  a  cross  on  the
breast,  to  use  a  purple  vestment,  and  to  take  the  chief  place  in  choir  and
chapter.  [From  Mabillon  (and  elsewhere). — E.]


200  LETTER XXXI.

especially  in  matters  of  religion,  and  to  know  what  is  His
good  pleasure  in  that  matter,  we  have  thought  it  advisable,
as  was  agreed  between  our  brethren  and  your  Bishop,  not
to  abandon,  but  to  defer  until  after  the  harvest  (that  time
being  convenient  in  itself  and  for  you),  the  execution  of  a
design  of  which  your  assistance  prepares  and  facilitates
the  progress,  and  your  help  will  bring,  as  soon  as  possible,
to  an  honourable  conclusion.  But  now  if  your  Bishop,  and
you  yourself,  are  still  in  the  same  mind  as  before,  we  have
still  more  confidence  that  it  is  the  will  of  God,  and  that
there  is  nothing  better  to  do  than  what  you  propose.  So
that  we  hope  to  satisfy  your  pious  desire  (which  is  shared
by  us  also)  according  as  it  was  determined  on.  I  think
that  to  be  accepted  by  God,  we  ought  to  study  as  much  as
in  us  lies,  to  be  burdensome  to  no  one,  that  it  may  not
seem  that  we  (which  may  God  forbid)  seek  His  glory  less
than  our  own  interests ;  and  especially  that  it  would  not  be
pleasing  to  God,  nor  would  be  in  accordance  with  our
manner  of  life,  to  make  ourselves  troublesome  to  you  when
there  is  no  need  for  an  occasion  of  that  kind  ;  nor  to  with
draw  you  from  your  other  greater  and  more  pressing  occu
pations.

LETTER  XXXI.  (A.D. 1125.)

To  Huco,1  COUNT  OF  CHAMPAGNE,  WHO  HAD  BECOME
A  KNIGHT  OF  THE  TEMPLE.

He  congratulates  Hugo  on  having  entered  into  a  military
Order,  and  promises  remembrance  of  his  benefits.

If  for  the cause of  God  you have, from being Count,
become  a  simple  soldier,  and  from  a  rich  man  have  become

1  He  was  son  of  Theobald  III.,  Count  of  Champagne.  Hugo  showed
extreme  munificence  towards  religious  houses  in  general,  and  especially  towards
the  monasteries  of  Moustier  Ramey  and  Molesme.  He  was  at  first  Count  of
Bar  sur  Aube,  then  of  Troyes,  after  the  death  of  his  brother  Eudes.  But  having
suppressed  the  names  of  those  counties  when  uniting  them  in  his  own  person,
he  was  the  cause  that  his  successors  took  the  title  of  Counts  of  Champagne  in
lieu  of  that  of  Counts  of  Bar  sur  Aube  and  Troyes,  which  they  had  hitherto


LETTER XXXI.  2OI

a  poor  one,  I  congratulate  you  in  the  first  place  as  is  right,
and  in  you  I  glorify  God,  knowing  that  this  is  the  work  of
the  Right  Hand  of  the  Most  High.  But  I  do  not,  I  confess,
anticipate  without  great  regret  being  deprived,  by  the
secret  Providence  of  God,  of  your  valued  presence,  and
never  more  seeing  you,  in  whose  company  I  would  wish
always  to  be,  were  it  possible.  What  then  ?  Can  I  forget
your  friendship  of  old  standing,  and  the  benefits  which  you
have  so  liberally  bestowed  upon  our  House?1  May  God

borne  (Frai^ois  ChifHet).  He  went  three  times  on  pilgrimage  to  the  Holy  Land
— the  first  time  in  A.D.  1113.  the  second  in  A.D.  1121,  and  the  third  when  he
joined  the  Order  of  the  Templars,  which  was  in  A.D.  1125  (Alberic,  Chronicle).
When  about  to  undertake  this  voyage  beyond  the  sea,  if  Peter  Pithon  is  to  be
believed  (says  ChifHet),  he  sold  his  county  to  Theobald,  son  of  his  brother
Stephen,  disinherited  his  son  Eudes,  and  left  enceinte  his  second  wife,  whom  he
had  married  after  his  marriage  with  Constance,  daughter  of  Philip  I.,  King  of
France,  had  been  dissolved  because  of  consanguinity  in  1 104.  He  died  beyond
the  sea  on  the  I4th  June.

This  Hugo  is  another  person  from  Hugo,  Master  of  the  Knights  of  the
Temple,  to  whom  Bernard  directed  his  exhortation  Ad  Milites  Templi.

1  It  was  Count  Hugo  who  had  given  to  Bernard  and  his  monks  the  district  of
Clairvaux  and  its  dependencies,  and  may  merit  to  be  called  by  the  name  of  their
Founder.  As  that  fact  has  hitherto  been  noticed  but  by  few,  we  give  here  the
deed  of  donation  itself,  of  which  we  owe  the  publication  to  ChifHet,  whom  we
have  already  had  often  occasion  to  quote.  He  has  copied  it  from  the  autograph
at  Clairvaux,  and  first  published  it  in  his  Dissertation  : —

"  In  Nomine  Sanctae  et  Individuae  Trinitatis  incipit  charta  Comitis  Hugonis.
Notum  sit  omnibus  praesentibus  et  futuris,  quod  ego  Comes  Trecensis,  Do  Deo,
et  beatae  Mariae  et  fratribus  Clarae  Vallis,  locum  ipsum  qui  vocatur  Clara- Vallis,
cum  pertinentiis  agris,  pratis,  vineis,  silvis  et  aquis,  nihil  omnino  mihi  aut
hseredibus  meis  retinens.  Unde  testes  Acardus  Remensis  et  Petrus,  et  Robertus
Aurelianensis  milites  mei.  Et  sciendum  quod  Gaufridus  Felonia  dat  pasturas
suas  in  finagio  de  Juvencourt,  tarn  in  bosco  quam  in  piano,  omni  tempore :  et
si  aliquod  damnum  intulerint  animalia  dictorum  fratrum,  solum  capitale
restituetur  sine  emenda.  Haec  autem  omnia  dedi  in  praesentia  supradictorum
testium.  Sciendum  quoque  est,  quod  dominus  Josbertus  de  Firmitate,  cog-
nomine  Rufus,  et  dominus  Rainaudus  de  Perceris  dederunt  eisdem  fratribus
pasturam  et  usuarium  per  totam  terrain  suam,  et  praecipue  in  aquis,  silvis,
pratis,  in  finagio  de  Perrecin.  Hujus  rei  testes  sunt  Acardus  Remensis  et
Robertus  milites  mei.  Item  sciendum  quoque  est,  quod  ego  Hugo  Comes
Trecensis  laudo  et  concedo  eisdem  fratribus  libere  et  quiete  possidere  terram  et
silvam  de  Aretela.  Has  donationes  confirmamus  ego  Joscerannus  Lingonensis
Episcopus,  et  ego  Hugo  Comes  Trecensis  de  sigillo  et  annulo  meo."

As  to  the  year  of  foundation,  which  is  not  specified  in  this  deed,  ChifHet,  fol
lowing  the  Chronograph  of  S.  Marianus,  of  Auxerre,  refers  it  to  June  A.D.  1 114.


202  LETTER XXXII.

Himself,  for  whose  love  you  have  done  this,  hold  you  in
perpetual  remembrance.  Nor  will  we  be  ungrateful,  but
will  keep  in  mind  the  recollection  of  your  great  kindness,
and  will  show  it,  if  possible,  in  our  actions.  O,  how
willingly  would  I  have  provided  for  the  needs  both  of  your
body  and  of  your  soul,  if  it  had  been  granted  to  us  to  pass
our  lives  together !  But  as  that  is  not  possible,  it  only
remains  to  assure  you  that  though  we  cannot  have  you
present  with  us,  we  shall  always  pray  for  you  in  your
absence.


LETTER XXXII. (Circa A.D. 1120.)
To  THE  ABBOT  OF  SAINT  NICASIUS  AT  RHEiMS.1

He  consoles  this  abbot  for  the  departure  of  the  Monk
Drogo  and  his  transfer  to  another  monastery,  and  exhorts
him  to  patience.

i.  How  much  I  sympathize  with  your  trouble  only  He
knows  who  bore  the  griefs  of  all  in  His  own  body.  How

All  agree  as  to  the  month;  as  to  the  year,  the  documents,  both  domestic  and
from  external  sources,  seem  to  negative  it,  and  among  others  the  Exordium
C is ter dense  (Dist.  ii.  cap  i),  also  the  tablet  attached  to  the  tomb  of  S.  Bernard,
plainly  say  A.U.  1115.  It  seemed  better,  therefore,  to  adhere  to  the  opinion  long
since  received,  considering  that  Bernard  had  scarcely  made  his  profession  in
June,  1114,  and  Hugo  himself,  who  made  the  grant,  was  still  occupied  in  the
East.  Clairvaux  was  then  founded  by  Hugo,  Count  of  Champagne,  and  trans
ferred  in  1 135  to  a  larger  site  with  the  aid  of  Count  Theobald,  his  successor,  and
new  buildings  erected.  Wherefore  some  have  given  him  the  name  of  the  first
founder,  confounding  the  removal  with  the  foundation.

1  Drogo,  respecting  whom  Letters  32-34  were  written,  seems  not  to
have  persevered  in  the  Cistercian  Order,  from  whence  he  was  recalled  at  length
before  making  profession  by  the  importunate  complaints  of  his  Abbot,  Jorannus,
to  whom  this  Letter.  He  seems  to  have  been  the  same  who,  when  the  monks
were  expelled  from  the  convent  of  S.  John,  at  Laon,  led  thither  a  company  of
monks,  over  whom  from  being  Prior  of  S.  Nicasius,  at  Rheims,  he  was  set  as
their  first  abbot  in  1 1  28,  as  appears  from  Letter  48.  Later  on  he  was  made
Cardinal  and  Bishop  of  Ostia  by  Innocent  II.  in  1136  (as  our  Acherius  proves
in  his  notes  toGuibert).  He  died  in  i  138.

As  for  the  Abbot  Jorannus,  how  the  Convent  of  S.  Nicasius  flourished  under
his  rule  is  shown  by  the  number  of  distinguished  men  who  went  out  from  it  to
carry  far  and  wide  its  rule  and  discipline.  For,  besides  this  Drogo,  Geoffrey,


LETTER XXXII.  203

willingly  would  I  advise  you  if  I  knew  what  to  say,  or  help
you  if  I  were  able,  as  efficaciously  as  I  would  wish  that
He  who  knows  and  can  do  all  things  should  advise  and
assist  me  in  all  my  necessities.  If  brother  Drogo  had  con
sulted  me  about  leaving  your  house  I  should  by  no  means
have  agreed  with  him ;  and  now  that  he  has  left,  if  he  were
to  apply  to  enter  into  mine  I  should  not  receive  him.  All
that  I  was  able  to  do  in  those  circumstances  I  have  done  for
you,  and  have  written,1  as  you  know,  to  the  abbot  who
has  received  him.  After  this,  reverend  father,  what  is
there  more  that  I  am  able  to  do  on  your  behalf  ?
And  as  regards  yourself,  your  Holiness  knows  well  with  me
that  men  are  accustomed  to  be  perfected  not  only  in  hope,
but  also  to  glory  in  tribulation.  The  Scripture  consoles
them,  saying:  The  furnace  proveth  the  potter's  vessels,  and
temptation  the  righteous  man  (Ecclus.  xxvii.  6,  VULG.)  ;
The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  them  that  are  of  a  contrite  heart
(Ps.  xxxiv.  1 8);  and  We  must  through  much  tribulation
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  (Acts  xiv.  21) ;  and  All  who
will  live  godly  in  Christ  suffer  persecution  (2  Tim.  iii.  12).
Yet  none  the  less  ought  we  to  sympathize  with  our  friends
whom  we  see  placed  in  care  and  grief ;  because  we  do  not
know  what  will  be  the  issue  of  such,  and  fear  lest  it  may  be
for  ill ;  since  whilst,  indeed,  to  saints  and  the  elect  tribulation
worketh  patience,  patience  experience,  experience  hope,
and  hope  maketh  not  ashamed  (Rom.  v.  3-5),  to  the  con-
demnable  and  reprobate,  on  the  contrary,  tribulation  causes
discouragement,  and  discouragement  confusion,  and  con
fusion  despair,  which  destroys  them.

and  after  him  William,  were  chosen  Abbots  of  S.  Thierry,  at  Rheims.  Simon
was  Abbot  of  S.  Nicholas  clu  Bois,  in  the  Diocese  of  Laon,  to  whom  Letters  83  and
84  were  addressed ;  Arnulf  at  Gembloux,  as  the  Auctarium  of  that  monastery
bears  witness.  As  for  Jorannus  himself,  induced  by  his  love  of  solitude,  he
entered  the  Carthusian  Order  in  the  Monastery  of  Mons  Dei  A.D.  1138,  where  he
so  distinguished  himself  that  Pope  Innocent  II.  made  him  Cardinal,  but  since,
when  this  Letter  was  written,  Robert,  the  relative  of  S.  Bernard,  had  not  yet  been
restored  to  him,  as  the  holy  Doctor  here  asserts,  it  follows  that  its  date  should
be  about  A.D.  1 120.

1  This  Letter  is  lost,  as  appears  from  the  following,  in  which  some  parts  of  it
are  quoted.


204  LETTER XXXII.

2.  In  order, then,  that  this dreadful tempest  may  not
submerge  you,  nor  the  frightful  abyss  swallow  you  up,  and
the  unfathomable  pit  shut  her  mouth  upon  you,  employ  all
the  efforts  of  your  prudence  not  to  be  overcome  of  evil,  but
to  overcome  evil  with  good. You  will  overcome  if  you  fix
solidly  your  hope  in  God,  and  wait  patiently  the  issue  of  the
affair. If  that  monk  shall return  to  a sense  of his  duty,
whether  for  fear  of  you,  or  because  of  his  own  painful  con
dition,  well  and  good ; but  if  not, it  is  good for  you to
humble  yourself  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  nor  to  wish
uselessly  to  resist  His  supreme ordering; because  if  it  is
of  God  it  cannot  be  undone. You  should  rather  endeavour
to  repress  the  sparkles of  your  indignation,  however  just,
by  a  reflection  which  a  certain  saint  is  said  in  a  similar  case
to  have  uttered. For  when  some  of  his  monks  were  mixing
demands  with  bitter  reproaches  because  he  did  not  require
back  again  a  fugitive  who  had  fled  to  another  monastery  in
defiance  of  his  authority,  "  By  no  means,"  he  said,  "  where
soever  he  may  be,  if  he  is  a  good  man,  he  is  mine."

3.  I  should  be  wrong  to  counsel  you  thus,  if  I did  not
oblige  myself  to  act  thus. For  when  one  of  my  brethren,
not  only  a  professed  religious,  but  also  nearly  akin  to  me,1
was  received  and  retained  at  Cluny  against  my  will  I  was
afflicted,  indeed,  but  endured  it  in  silence,  praying  both  for
them  that  they  might  be  willing  to  return  the  fugitive,  and
for  him, that  he might  be  willing  of  his  own  accord  to
return ; but  if  not,  leaving  the  charge  of  my  vengeance  to
Him  who  shall  render  judgment  to  the  patient  and  contend
in equity for the meek of  the earth. Please to warn
Brother  Hugo,  of  Lausanne,  with  your  own  mouth,  and  as
from  me,  not  to  believe  every  spirit,  and  not  to  be  induced
rashly  to  desert  the certain  for  the  uncertain. Let  him
remember  that  perseverance  alone  is  always  attacked  by
the  devil,  because  it  is  the  only  virtue  which  has  the  assur
ance  of  being  crowned. It  will  be  safer  for  him  simply  to
persevere in the  vocation wherein he  is  called than  to

1  This  was  Robert,  to  whom  Letter  I.  was  addressed.


LETTER XXXIII.  205

renounce  it  under  the  pretext  of  a  life  more  perfect,  at  the
risk  of  not  being  found  equal  to  that  which  he  had  the  pre
sumption  to  attempt.


LETTER XXXIII. (Circa  A.D.  1 120.)
To  HUGO,  ABBOT  OF  PONTIGNY.

He  "writes  more  plainly  his  views  about  the  reception
of  Drogo,  and  removes  unfavourable  suspicion  from
himself.

To  his  very  dear  brother,  Hugo,  Lord  Abbot,  Brother
Bernard,  of  Clairvaux,  health  and  all  that  he  desires  for
himself.

i.  In  my  former  letter  I,  as  far  as  I  can  understand  from
yours,  wrote  less  clearly  than  I  wished,  or  you  understood  it
otherwise  than  you  ought.  When  I  spoke  of  the  conse
quences  that  might  follow  to  you  from  the  reception  of
that  monk,  I  truly  feared,  and  fear  still,  as  I  wrote.  But  in
writing  to  you  thus  I  had  no  intention  of  persuading  you  or
giving  you  advice ;  nor  certainly,  as  you  write,  did  I  think
that  he  ought  to  be  sent  back,  since  I  have  long  known  his
very  strong  desire,  and  I  ought  rather  to  congratulate  him
that  he  has  now  accomplished  it.  But  as  his  abbot,  my
intimate  friend,  and  the  Archbishop  of  Rheims  required  of
me  a  letter  pressingly  demanding  him  back,  in  order
that  I  might  take  off  every  suspicion  from  myself,  if  it  were
possible,  I  took  pains  to  dictate  as  well  as  I  could  such  a
letter,  in  terms  which  would  both  satisfy  them  and  forewarn
you  of  the  reproaches  which  would  be  made  against  you  by
them,  by  not  concealing  them  from  you.  I  believed  that
your  sagacity  would  be  able  to  understand  my  intention  in
that  letter  at  once,  especially  when  reading  the  note  which
you  remember  I  placed  at  the  end  of  it,  that  it  should  be
read  by  you  in  the  same  spirit  it  was  written  by  me.  For
after  having  set  out  the  evils  which  not  unreasonably  I
feared  for  you,  I  went  on  :  "  It  is  for  you  to  see  whether


206  LETTER XXXIII.

you  prefer  to  endure  all  these  things  or  to  send  him  away ;
the  matter  does  not  concern  me."  These  very  words  were
used  by  me,  or  nearly  these,  and  when  I  wrote  thus  at  the
end,  how  else  could  I  secretly  intimate  to  you  that  all  that
I  had  said  previously  was  spoken  by  way  of  complaisance,
not  to  say  of  pretence  ?

2.  But  as  for  what  you  have  written,  that  I  should  have
charged  your  messenger  to  say  to  the  same  monk,  that  if
he  wished  to  enter  our  Order  his  absolution  should  be
privately  obtained,  I  declare  to  you  that  it  is  not  true.  How
could  I  suppose  or  hope  that  I  could  receive  a  monk  from  a
monastery  so  well  known  to  me,  and  whom  I  did  not  think
that  even  you  could  retain  without  great  scandal  ?  But  let  it
be  so.  Suppose  that  I  envied  you  that  monk,  and  desired  to
attract  him  to  me;  and  that  I  was  hoping  or  fancying  that  I
might  be  able  to  do  something  towards  obtaining  his  abso
lution.  But  is  it  for  a  moment  to  be  believed  that  I  should
be  willing  to  lay  open  this  plan  of  mine  which  I  had  con
cocted  against  his  own  monastery  to  the  very  messenger
whom  you  had  sent  to  me  ?  But  to  convince  you  that  what
you  have  believed  hitherto  concerning  my  affection  towards
you  is  well  founded,  I  feel  myself  obliged,  for  you  even  more
than  for  me,  to  redouble  my  efforts,  as  I  have  done  up  to  the
present,  so  that  our  friendship  may  not  altogether  be  dis
solved,  but  be  made  more  close  and  strong.  What  can  I
say  to  you  more?  I,  at  least,  could  not  believe  you  capable
of  such  an  action,  as  you  have  without  ground  suspected  me
of.  Concerning  another  matter,  your  Blessedness  knows
that  Count  Theobald  has  received  my  letter  of  recommen
dation  for  Humbert,  but  he  has  not  as  yet  replied  to  me.
What  you  could  do  as  to  this  your  piety  will  best  suggest,
if  you  will  have  the  kindness  to  consider  the  miserable
state  of  a  man  unjustly  stricken  with  exile.


LETTER XXXIV.  207

LETTER XXXIV. (Circa  A.D. 1120.)
To  DROGO,1  THE  MONK.

He congratulates  Drogo on  having  embraced  a more
severe  rule,  and  exhorts  him  to  perseverance.

MY  VERY  DEAR  DROGO,

i.  I  find  more  than  ever  justified  the  great  affection
which  I  have  long  felt  for  you.  You  appeared  to  me  before
very  lovable  and  accomplished  in  many  things,  but  I  had
felt  that  there  was  something  in  you  worthy  of  higher
admiration  than  anything  that  I  had  seen  or  heard  of  you.
Had  you  already  heard  the  voice  of  the  celestial  Spouse,  in
whose  arms  your  soul  was  closely  clasped  ?  Had  you  heard
His  voice  saying  to  your  soul,  His  modest  turtle,  Thou  art
all  fair,  My  love ;  there  is  no  spot  in  thee  ?  (Cant.  iv.  7).
Who  would  believe  that  which  you  have  done  ?  The  whole
city  is  full  of  talk  of  your  virtues  and  piety,  so  that  it  was
not  believed  possible  that  anything  could  be  added  to  all
your  good  qualities,  and  then  you,  quitting  your  monastery
as  a  secular  might  quit  the  world,  were  not  ashamed  to  lay
the  burden  of  new  observances  and  of  a  more  severe  Rule
upon  your  neck,  already  worn  with  the  yoke  of  Christ !  In
you  now,  brother,  we  verify  that  saying,  When  a  man  hath
arrived  at  perfection  then  he  beginneth  (Ecclus.  xviii.  7).
The  mark,  then,  of  your  perfectness  is  that  you  have  now
commenced,  and  in  that  you  did  not  judge  of  that  you  had
attained  you  prove  that  you  have  done  so,  for  no  one  is
perfect  who  does  not  desire  to  be  more  perfect,  and  a  man
shows  himself  more  perfect,  inasmuch  as  he  aspires  to
greater  perfection.

2.  But  behold,  my  dear  friend,  he  by  whose  envy  death
entered  into  the  world  has  bent  his  bow  and  prepared  him
self.  Being  driven  from  your  heart,  he  has  lost  his  power
within,  and  therefore  he  will  rage  as  much  as  is  in  his  power

1  In  the  Colbertine  MS.,  1410,  and  in  that  of  Compiegne  ad  H ug  <t-  Drag  one  TO,
although  Drogo  is  used  in  the  body  of  the  Letter.  The  name  is  compounded
from  that  of  Hugo,  Abbot  of  Pontigny,  with  whom  Drogo  was  in  great  favour.


208  LETTER XXXIV.

without.  And,  to  speak  more  plainly,  do  you  not  know  that
the  Pharisees  are  scandalized  at  what  you  have  done  ?  But
remember  that  there  are  scandals  about  which  one  ought
not  to  be  greatly  troubled,  according  to  the  reply  of  the
Lord,  when  He  said,  Let  them  alone,  they  are  blind  and
leaders  of  the  blind  (S.  Matt.  xv.  14).  For  would  it  be
better  that  a  scandal  should  arise  than  that  the  truth  should
be  abandoned?  (Greg.  Horn.  7  in  Ezekiel).  Remember
who  it  was  who  was  born  for  the  fall  and  rising  again  of
many  (S.  Luke  ii.  34),  and  do  not  wonder  if  you,  too,  are  to
some  as  an  odour  of  life  unto  life,  and  to  others  as  an  odour
of  death  unto  death.  If  they  have  directed  maledictions
against  you,  if  they  have  launched  at  you  darts  of  anathema,
hear  Isaac  replying  for  you,  He  who  shall  curse  thee  shall
be  himself  cursed,  and  he  who  shall  bless  thee  shall  be
loaded  -with  blessings  (Gen.  xxvii.  29).  And  you,  fortified
by  the  safe  defence  of  your  conscience,  reply  inwardly  and
say,  Though  a  host  should  encamp  against  me  my  heart
shall  not  fear ,  although  war  should  rise  against  me  in  this
should  I  hope  (Ps.  xxvii.  3).  For  you  shall  not  be  con
founded  when  you  speak  thus  with  your  enemies  in  the
gate;  but  I  trust  in  the  Lord  that  if  you  stand  firm  against
the  first  blows  and  do  not  yield  either  to  their  promises  or
threats,  you  will  speedily  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet.
Then  the  righteous  shall  see  and  rejoice,  and  sinners  shall
be  reduced  to  silence.


LETTER XXXV. (A.D. 1128.)
To  MAGISTER  HUGO  FARsrr.1

He  commends  to  him  the  cause  of  a  certain  Humbert,
and  -warns  him  not  to  blush  at  retracting  a  certain
erroneous  opinion.

To  his  very  dear  brother  and  co-abbot,  Brother  BERNARD,
health  and  assurance  of  the  most  sincere  affection.

1  I  find  many  of  this  name  about  this  period.  Two  monks  :  the  one  of  Lagny,
who  is  praised  in  the  sixth  book  of  the  Res  Diplomatica  (p.  585),  the  other  of
S.  Lucian  of  Beauvais,  of  whom  the  Necrology  makes  mention  thus  :  "  The


LETTER XXXV.


209


I  commend  to  your  protection,  with  the  greatest  confi
dence  in  your  goodness,  the  poor  man  Humbert,  who  is  said
to  have  been  unjustly  disinherited. I  have  undertaken,  for
the  love  of  God,  to  plead his  cause  with  your  Count,  and  I
hope  that  you  will  help  me,  with  the  assistance  of  the Lord
of  Heaven,  to  reconcile  him  with  his  earthly  prince,  so  that
he  may  be  restored  to  his  country,  his  wife  and  children,
his  property  and  friends;  for  by  taking  the  trouble  to  effect
this  you  will  both  free  from  the  hands  of  a  sinner  a  man
who  is  in  distress,  and  will  be  labouring  at  the  same  time
for  the  welfare  of  his  oppressor. You  will show  yourself
helpful  to  me  in  no  small  degree,  without  mentioning  that
by  performing  the  office  of  a  peacemaker  you  will  prepare
for  yourself  a  high  place  among  the  children  of  God. Let
us  speak  now  of  another  matter. It  has  been  reported  to
you,  as  I  hear,  that  I have  thrown into  the  fire  the  letter
that  your  Holiness  lately  favoured  me  with. Be  so  kind  as
to  believe  that  I  preserve  it  carefully,  for  would  it  not  have
been  the  effect  of  envy,  or  rather of  madness, rashly to
condemn  a  work  useful  and  praiseworthy,  in  which  there
was nothing but what was sound in faith, salutary in
doctrine, and tending  to spiritual edification  ? I ought,
however,  to  except  one  passage,  because  between friends
no  timid  and  dangerous  flattery  ought  to influence  them
against  the  truth. One  passage, I confess, troubled  and
still  troubles  me,  that  in  which  you  endeavoured  to  sustain

2^th  March  died  Hugo  Farsit,  a  professed  monk."  It  may  be  the  same  who  is
mentioned  in  the  History  of  Louvet,  p.  555.  There  was  a  third  Hugo  Farsit,
who  was  Canon  Regular  of  S.  John  des  Vignes,  who  is  praised  in  the  Necrot»gi/
of  the  Church  of  Soissons.  Abaelard  mentions  a  fourth  of  that  name  in  his
Sermon  on  S.  John  Baptist,  p.  967,  wheie  he  makes  mention  of  S.  Norbert  and
of  Hugo  Farsit,  the  companion  of  his  Apostolate,  perhaps  Hugo.  Abbot  of  Pro-
montre  and  successor  over  the  Order,  who  was  his  first  and  most  remarkable
disciple,  and  to  whom  Letter  253  was  addressed.

I  think  that  he  to  whom  the  present  Letter  was  addressed  was  the  same  to
whom  Hugo  Metellus,  at  that  time  Canon  Regular  of  Toul  in  Lorraine,
inscribed  Letter  34  of  the  MS.,  "  To  Hugo  of  Chartres,  the  venerable  Magister."
In  fact,  Hugo,  of  whom  S.  Bernard  speaks,  was  abbot  of  a  monastery  situated
on  the  lands  of  Theobald,  Count  of  Champagne,  at  Blois  or  at  Chartres,  accord
ing  to  some  writers.
VOL.  I.


210  LETTER XXXVI.

and  defend  in  beginning  your  work  an  opinion  which  you
had  put  forth  already  in  an  interview  between  us  respecting
the  Sacraments.  If  you  will  reflect  upon  the  doctrine  that
you  supported  in  that  interview  you  will  see  whether  it
agrees  or  no  with  the  teaching  of  the  Church.  It  will  be  a
mark  of  your  candour  and  humility  not  to  be  ashamed  to  be
corrected  if  you  have  ever  held  an  opinion  not  conformable
to  sound  doctrine.  Farewell.


LETTER XXXVI. (A..D. 1128.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  replies  to  the  letter  of  Hugo,  and  advises  him  to
desist  from  impugning  the  doctrine  of  a  Bishop,  then  dead.

To  his  very  dear  friend  now  as  formerly,  and  by  the
grace  of  God,  holy  Abbot  HUGO,  Brother  BERNARD  of
Clairvaux,  health  and  the  assurance  of  sincere  and  undi-
minished  affection.

I  intended  to  reply  more  at  length,  as  it  was  my  duty,  to
the  letter  of  your  Worthiness,  which  was  shorter  than  I
desired,  though  longer  than  I  deserved,  but  the  haste  of
your  messenger  did  not  permit.  Nevertheless,  that  he  may
not  depart  with  his  hands  quite  empty,  I  send  in  haste  these
few  lines  in  reply  to  the  much  longer  letter,  for  which  I
acknowledge  myself  the  debtor.  I  commence  by  saying,  in
few  but  sincere  words,  as  to  an  old  and  dear  friend,  to
whom  I  also  am  dear,  that  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart  I
hold  you  for  a  Catholic,  a  holy  man,  and  one  very  dear  to
me.  As  to  the  purity  of  your  faith,  I  trust  your  own  con
fession  ;  your  high  reputation  vouches  for  the  holiness  of
your  life,  and  as  for  the  affection  which  I  have  said  that  I
feel  towards  you,  my  own  heart  is  a  sufficient  witness.

You  protest  that  you  do  not  retain  the  least  vestige  of
that  opinion,  which  rightly,  in  my  judgment,  raised  scruples
in  my  simple  mind,  and  I  receive  the  assurance  as  willingly
as  I  read  with  gladness  in  your  last  letter  the  concise  state-


LETTER XXXVII.  211

ment  of  most  pure  truth,  so  that  I  would  rather  believe  that
it  is  I  who  have  wrongly  understood  you  than  that  you  had
put  forth  any  proposition  contrary  to  the  faith.  Now,  per
mit  me  to  advise  you,  with  brotherly  boldness,  not  to  attack,
now  that  he  is  dead,  the  doctrine  of  a  Bishop,1  as  holy  as
learned,  whom  you  have  left  unmolested  while  he  lived,  lest
in  blaming  one  not  now  able  to  answer  for  himself  you  may
hear  the  whole  Church  replying  for  him,  and  seem  to  have
acted  more  from  a  want  of  charity  than  from  love  of  the
truth.  For  Humbert,  as  I  have  begged  you,  so  I  repeat  my
request,  that  you  will  afford  him,  as  far  as  you  are  able,
your  advice  and  protection.  Farewell.


LETTER XXXVII. (A.D. 1128.)
To  THEOBALD,  COUNT  OF  CHAMPAGNE.2

He  expresses  astonishment  at  having  been  refused,  in
the  cause  of  Humbert,  though  he  asked  nothing  but  "what
was  right  and  just ;  he  warns  the  Count,  by  the  remem
brance  of  the  Supreme  Judge,  not  to  deny  help  and  mercy
to  an  unfortunate  man.

To  the  noble  Prince  THEOBALD,  BERNARD,  the  unprofit
able  servant  of  the  servants  of  God  who  are  in  Clairvaux,
health  and  peace.

1  If  I  do  not  mistake,  this  was  William  of  Champeaux,  Bishop  of  Chalons-
sur-Marne,  a  man  for  whom  Bernard  had  the  greatest  affection.

3  Many  and  high  encomiums  upon  him  are  read  in  the  writers  of  his  age.
Anselm  of  Gembloux  speaks  thus  of  him  in  the  year  1 134  :  "Count  Theobald
of  Blois,  or  Chartres,  was  distinguished  among  all  the  princes  of  France  by  his
scrupulous  justice.  He  was  a  pious  man,  a  familiar  associate  of  good  monks
and  clergy,  a  defender  of  the  Church,  a  helper  of  the  poor,  and  consoler  of  the
afflicted;  prudent  and  discreet  in  the  conduct  of  affairs,  justly  severe  to  offenders.''
A  monk  of  Autun,  named  Hugo,  renders  to  him  the  same  praise  A.D.  1136.
As  regards  his  zeal  for  justice,  which  Anselm  specially  commends,  a  striking
example  is  found  in  Letter  39,  and  others,  from  which  we  learn  with  what  vigour
he  dared,  first  of  all,  or  among  the  first,  to  repress  the  single  combats  which
were  tolerated  elsewhere  by  all  other  princes.  The  Canons  had  long  forbidden
them  to  Clerks,  as  Bishop  Ivo,  of  Chartres,  declares  in  his  Letter  247.  Ernald
•of  Bonnevaux,  like  Geoffrey,  speaks  with  admiration  of  the  works  of  charity  and


212  LETTER XXXVII.

i. I  am  very  grateful  that  you  have  been  so  good,  as  I
have  heard,  as  to  be  anxious  about  my  poor  health  ;  and
while  I  see  in  this  a  proof  of  your  worthiness  towards  me,
I cannot  doubt  of  the love  that  you have  towards  God;
for  unless  for  that  reason,  when  would one of  your  high
rank  deign  to  know  so  humble  a  person  as  myself? Since,
then,  it  is  certain  that  you  love  God,  and  me  because  of
Him, I  wonder  the more  that  a  small  petition,  preferred
through  confidence  in  God,  and  neither  unjust,  as  I  think,
nor  unreasonable,  should  have  been  refused  to  me  by  you.
If  I  had  asked  of  you  gold  or  silver,  or  something  of  that
kind1  [either  I  am  much  deceived  as  to  your  goodness,  or  I
should  certainly  have  received  it]. But  what,  I say,  had I
asked? Already,  without asking, I have received very
many  gifts  of  your  generosity. But  this  one  thing  which  I
requested  from  you,2  not  for  my  own  sake,  but  in  the  name
of  God,  much  more  in  your  interest  than  my  own. What
cause  was there  that I did  not  merit  the  granting  of  it?
Did  you  think  it  an  unworthy  thing  of  me  to  ask,  or  of  you
to  grant, that you should have mercy  upon a  Christian
man,  whatever  might  be  the  crime  of  which  he  was  accused
before you,  after  clearing himself  of it? If  you  do  not
believe  that  he  has  fully  cleared  himself  because  he  did  not
do  this  in  your  court,  at  least  permit  him  to  present  himself
there  to  establish  his  innocence,  and  thus  obtain  indulgence.
2.  Are  you  ignorant  of  the  threatenings  of  Him  who  has
said, When  my  time  shall  be  come  I  shall  judge  the  judg
ments  themselves  (Ps. Ixv.  2,  VuLG.)  ? And  if  He  judges
the  judgments  much  more  the  injustices. Do  you  not  fear
what is written again, With -what measure ye have

mercy  of  Theobald  (Life  of  S.  Bernard,  B.  ii.  c.  8).  Also  the  (new)  Letter  416.
He  was  buried  in  the  Benedictine  monastery  at  Lagny-sur-Marne,  of  which  he
was  patron  and  protector,  as  we  see  from  Bernard's  Letter  230.  This  abbey
was  founded  by  Heribert,  Count  of  Champagne,  in  A.D.  990,  and  thtre  the
porphyry  tomb  of  Count  Theobald  may  still  be  seen.

1  So  the  S.  Germanus  MS. Others  omit  these  words.

2  Hence  it  appears  that  this  was  not  the first  Letter written  on behalf  of
Humbert, but  that  Letter  39  was  prior  in  time,  and  from  this  we  learn  the
country  of  Humbert,  and  the  punishment  inflicted  upon  him.


LETTER XXXVIII.  213

•measured  it  shall  be  again  measured  to  you  (S.  Matt,
vii.  2)  ?  Do  you  not  know  that  if  it  is  easy  for  you  to
deprive  Humbert  of  his  heritage,  it  is  as  easy — it  is  even  in
comparably  more  easy — for  God  to  deprive  Count  Theobald
(which  may  God  forbid)  of  his  ?  And  even  in  such  cases
where  the  fault  appears  so  open  and  inexcusable  as  that
there  is  no  opportunity  left  for  mercy  except  at  the  cost  of
justice,  even  then  it  is  only  with  fear  and  regret  that  you
ought  to  punish,  more  because  obliged  by  the  duty  of  your
office  than  from  a  desire  to  inflict  punishment.  But  when
the  crime  charged  is  either  not  certainly  known,  or  is
capable  of  excuse,  not  only  ought  you  not  to  deny,  but
ought  most  willingly  to  embrace  an  opportunity  for  pardon
ing,  and  be  glad  that  when  justice  is  secured  your  mercy
and  indulgence  have  found  place.

I  supplicate  your  Highness,  then,  for  the  second  time  to
have  pity  upon  Humbert,  as  you  would  that  God  should
have  pity  upon  you;  and  to  lend  an  ear  either  to  that  gentle
promise  of  the  Lord,  Blessed  are  the  merciful  for  they
shall  obtain  mercy  (S.  Matt.  v.  7),  or  to  that  terrible  threat,
He  shall  have  judgment  -without  mercy  that  hath  showed
no  mercy  (S.  James  ii.  13).  Farewell.


LETTER XXXVIII. (A.D. 1128.)
To  THE  SAME,  ON  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

To  the  very  pious  Prince  THEOBALD,  BERNARD,  Abbot
of  Clairvaux,  health  and  prayers.

i.  I  am  greatly  afraid  lest  I  should  at  length  become
troublesome  by  too  presumptuously  pouring  my  frequent
appeals  into  your  much-occupied  ears.  But  what  can  I  do  ?
If  I  fear  to  offend  you  by  writing  to  you  too  often,  how
much  more  ought  I  to  fear  to  offend  God,  to  whom  still
greater  fear  is  due,  by  not  interceding  for  an  unfortunate
man  ?  Besides,  pardon  me  for  saying  that  I  am  unable  to  see
without  pitying  the  misery  of  that  unfortunate,  on  whose


214  LETTER XXXVIII.

behalf  I  return  again  to  weary  you  with  my  prayers.  It  is
still  about  Humbert  that  I  speak.  His  lot  is  the  more
unhappy  that  from  having  been  rich  he  has  become  poor
and  a  beggar  for  daily  bread.  I  cannot  but  compassionate
his  widow  and  orphans,  who  are  the  more  unhappy  because
deprived  of  their  father  while  he  is  yet  alive.  I  render  you
thanks  for  the  favour  that  you  have  been  so  gracious  as  to
accord  me  in  this  matter,  in  deigning  to  permit  that
Humbert  should  come  himself  to  make  his  defence  before
you,  and  in  doing  him  the  justice  not  to  listen  to  his
slanderers.  To  perfect  your  work  of  charity,  you  had
arranged  most  kindly  that  his  patrimony  should  be  restored
to  his  wife  and  children ;  and  I  cannot  but  wonder  that
your  charitable  orders  in  this  respect  wrere  not  at  once
carried  out.

2..  When  we  receive,  perhaps,  from  other  princes  words
untrue  or  untrustworthy,  it  is  something  neither  new  nor
wonderful  to  us.  But  in  the  case  of  Count  Theobald  it  is
a  matter  of  great  surprise  that  his  Yes  and  No  should  be
without  weight,  since  a  word  from  him  is  for  us  equivalent
to  an  oath,  and  a  slight  untruth  is  regarded  as  a  grave
perjury;  since  of  all  the  virtues  which  dignify  your  high
rank  and  render  your  name  celebrated  throughout  the  whole
world,  the  chief  and  the  most  extolled  is  your  steadfast
truthfulness.  Who,  then,  has  tried  to  weaken,  either  by
artifice  or  counsel,  the  intrepid  firmness  of  your  soul  ?
who,  I  say,  has  endeavoured  to  enfeeble  by  his  fraud  your
purpose  so  holy,  so  noble,  so  exemplary  for  all  princes  ?
Falsely,  not  truly,  does  he  love  you,  perfidiously,  not  faith
fully,  does  he  counsel  you,  who  tries  to  obscure  because  of
his  cupidity  your  glorious  reputation  for  truth,  and  endea
vours  by  some  malicious  motive  to  render  vain  a  word  that
your  mouth  has  spoken — a  word  not  less  pleasing  to  God
that  it  is  worthy  of  you  ;  as  just  as  it  is  pious,  and  pious  as
just.  I  entreat  you,  then,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  that  you
pursue  your  good  purpose,  and  not  permit  the  wicked  to
boast  that  the  poor  man  is  ruined  ;  rather  take  means  for
the  full  carrying  out  of  the  promise  you  have  made,  to


LETTER XXXIX.  215

Dom.  Norbert  and  to  me,  that  you  would  restore  the  patri
mony  of  Humbert  to  his  wife  and  children. Farewell.


LETTER XXXIX. (A.D. 1127.)

TO THE SAME.1

He  commends  the  causes  of  various  people  to  Theobald  ;
then  he  urges  him  to  treat  with  honour  and  reverence  the
Bishops  assembled  at  Troyes  to  be  present  at  a  Council.

i.  Among  the  many  signs  of  condescension  which  you
are  pleased  to  display  towards  me,  which  arouse  my
grateful  affection,  that  which  I  feel  most  is  that,  although
I  know  I  have  ventured  to  address  your  Highness  on  behalf
of  many  people,  I  never  remember  to  have  experienced  a
repulse  from  you.  Having  naturally  become  more  confident,
therefore,  I  approach  you  without  hesitation  to  recommend
to  you  the  Canons  of  Larzicourt.3

I  do  not  ask  any  favour  for  them,  because  I  have  so  much
trust  in  your  justice  and  observance  of  law  that  I  think  if
your  enemy  came  to  plead  a  cause  in  your  Court  he  need
not  fear  that  he  would  not  receive  justice;  but  this  is  the
supplication  which  I  from  a  distance  unite  with  them,  and
for  them,  to  make  :  both  that  you  would  accord  to  them  a
speedy  and  favourable  access  to  the  presence  of  your
Serenity,  which  I  know  they  greatly  need,  in  order  that

1  After having  addressed  other  requests  in  this  Letter  to  Count  Theobald,
Bernard  intercedes  for  an  unfortunate  man named Humbert,  who has  been
vanquished  in  a  duel,  and  in  consequence  deprived  by  order  of  the  prince,  not
only  of  his  property,  but  also  of  sight,  so  that  he  had  no  means  of  sustaining
his  miserable  existence. The  penalty  of  his  fault  was  cruel,  and  the  charitable
heart  of  Bernard  was  profoundly  distressed ;  but  so  severe  a  remedy  was  called
for  by  the  great  and  inveterate  evil  of  these  single  combats. Sirmund  speaks
of  the  great  frequency  and  mischievous  consequences  of  these in  his  notes  to
Geoffrey  of  Vendome,  B.  iii.  ep.  38  ;  Duchesne  ad  Bibli'thecam Cluniacensem,
and  others. Compare  Lttter  376  of  S.  Bernard.

2  These  were  Regular  Canons  of  S.  Augustine. Larzicourt  is  in  the  Deanery
of  Pertois,  Diocese  of  Chalons-sur-Marne ;  the  Jesuit  Fathers  possessed  a  Priory
there  in  the  time  of  Mabillon.


2l6  LETTER XXXIX.

their  neighbours  may  render  them  the  respect  which  their
piety  deserves,  and  which  they  will  do  when  they  learn
your  good  disposition  towards  them ;  and  that  if  any  of
your  soldiers  or  officials  have  acted  unjustly  towards  them,
they  may  understand  that  they  must  not  henceforth  trouble
their  Godly  peace  without  incurring  your  displeasure.

2.  I have  another  request  respectfully  to  make. I met
lately,  when  passing  through  Bar,  a  woman  very  much  to
be  pitied ; she was in great trouble, and my  heart was
moved  on hearing  her  sufferings. She  begged  with  tears
and  prayers  that  I  would  intercede  for  her  with  you. She
is  the  wife  of  that  man  of  yours,  Belin,  whom  you  were
obliged  to  punish  some  time  since  for  an  offence  which  he
had  committed. Have  mercy  upon  her,  that  God  may  have
mercy  also  upon  you.

3.  Since  I  have  once  begun,  I  will  continue  to  speak  with
my  lord. In  a  duel  which  has  lately  been  fought  in  the
presence  of  the  Prevot  of  Bar,  the  vanquished1  was  con
demned  by  your  order  to  lose  his  eyes  on  the  spot;  but,
besides  this,  as  if  it  were  not  enough  to  be  vanquished  and
to  lose  his  sight,  he  was  deprived  of  all  his  goods, as he
complains,  by  your  people. Your  benevolence  will  find it
just  that  they  should  restore  to  him  sufficient  to  sustain  his
miserable  life  ;  and,  besides,  the  offence  of  the  father  ought
not  to  be imputed to his innocent  children. Let them,
then,  at  least  succeed  to  the  father's  possessions  if  he  has
any.

4.  In  conclusion,  I  would  beg  you  to  treat  with  all  the
honour,  of  which  they  are  well  worthy,  those  holy  Bishops
who  have  assembled in  your  capital  to  consider  together
matters  of  religion. Deign  also  to  show  yourself  devoted
and  obedient  as  far  as  you  can  in  all  things  to  the  Legate
himself,  who  has  chosen  to  honour  you  and  your  capital  by
the  holding  of  so  important  a  Council.2 And  be  so  kind  as

1  This  was  Humbert,  on  whose  behalf  Bernard  wrote  this  Letter  before  Letter

37-

'2  This  was  the  Council  of  Troyes  in  1 128,  which  is  referred  to  in  Letter  21  to
the  Legate  Matthew.


LETTER XL.  21  7

to  give  your  support  and  assent  to  the  measures  and  the  reso
lutions  which  he  shall  judge  advisable  for  the  promotion  of
good  ;  but  especially  I  beg  you  to  receive  with  honour  the
Bishop  of  Langres,  who  is  your  Bishop  as  well  as  mine,  and
for  the  fief  l  which  you  hold  of  his  Church  you  ought  to
render  the  due  homage.2  With  humble  respect,  farewell.


LETTER XL. (Circa A.D. 1127.)

To  THE  SAME.
He  commends  a  poor  religious  to  Theobald.

I  commend  unto  you  two  things  in  this  man  whom  you
see:  poverty  and  piety,  that  if  you  do  not  compassionate  the
one  in  him  you  may  reverence  the  other,  and  may  not  deny
to  him  what  he  has  come  so  far,  and  at  the  price  of  so  many
fatigues,  to  ask  of  you.  Give  him,  then,  some  help,  if  not
for  his  sake,  at  least  for  your  own  ;  for  if  he  has  need  of  you
because  he  is  poor,  you  have  as  much  and,  indeed,  more
need  of  him  because  he  is  a  religious.  Finally,  of  all  those
many  people  whom  I  have  sent  unto  you  for  the  same
cause,  I  do  not  know  if  there  has  been  one  other  on  whom
you  might  bestow  a  benefit  with  greater  certainty  that  it
would  be  pleasing  to  God.  Farewell.


LETTER  XLI. (In  the  same  year.}

To  THE  SAME.
He  recommends  to  him  an  aged  religious.

I  fear  that  you  are  troubled  by  my  frequent  scribblings,
but  the  law  of  Christ  and  the  necessity  of  friends  drives  me
to  this  opportunity.  I  entreat  you  not  to  send  away  empty
this  aged  man  whom  I  have  recommended  to  you.  He  is

1  Casamentum. That  is,  a  property  dependent  from  the  house  (Casa)  of the
Lord.

2  Hominium  or  homagium.


2l8  LETTER XLII.

aged  as  you  see,  and  of  a  good  and  religious  house,  as  I
know.  Besides  this,  I  would  ask  you  to  be  so  good  as  to
give  him  a  letter  to  the  King,  your  uncle,1  whom  he  is
going  to  seek.  I  would  wish  that  all  the  servants  of  God
might  become,  if  it  were  possible,  your  debtors,  so  that  they
may  receive  you  one  day  into  the  everlasting  habitations  in
return  for  the  mammon  of  iniquity  which  you  share  with
them.  Farewell.

LETTER XLII.

To  HENRY,  ARCHBISHOP  OF  SENS.

This  Letter  deserved  a  place  among  the  Treatises,  and  we
have  removed  it  thither  under  this  title :  De  Moribus  et
OJficio  Episcoporum  Tractatus,  or  Letter  42  to  Henry,
Archbishop  of  Sens.

LETTER XLIII. (Circa A.D. 1128.)

To  THE  SAME  HENRY.
He  writes  on  behalf  of  the  Abbey  of  Molesme.

The  kind  reception  which  you  gave  to  my  last  request
gives  me  room  to  hope  to  obtain  what  I  now  ask.  I  would
first  express  my  most  earnest  thanks  for  your  previous
kindness,  and  then  venture  to  beg  that  you  would  make  me
a  second  time  your  debtor,  namely,  by  permitting  the
Abbey  of  Molesme  to  possess  freely  the  Church,2  on  account
of  which  they  are  grieved  to  have  lost  the  favour  of  your

1  Henry  I.,  King  of  England,  uncle  of  Theobald  (Emaldus  Vit.  Bernard  B.  ii.
sub  finem,  and  Robert  du  Mont  under  A.D.  1151),  by  Adela,  daughter  of  William
the  Conqueror,  sister  of  Henry  I.,  and  mother  of  Theobald.

-  A  house  of  the  Benedictines,  in  the  Diocese  of  Langres,  founded  by  Abbot
Robert,  who  was  also  Abbot  of  Citeaux  ;  it  was  that  reason  which  caused
Bernard  to  care  always  for  the  interests  of  that  Abbey.  See  Letters  44,  60,  and
80.  Peter  de  Celles  speaks  of  it  thus  in  his  fourteenth  Letter  to  the  monks  of
Molesme,  B.  vii.:  "  Molesme  is  a  hen  full  of  plumes  and  furnished  with  wings.
How  many  and  great  offspring  has  it  produced  ?  From  it  has  emerged  the
original  germ  of  Citeaux.''  The  reference  in  this  Letter,  as  in  the  following,  is
to  the  Church  of  Senan,  which  was  formerly  a  Priory  in  the  Diocese  of  Sens  and
Deanery  of  Courtenay.


LETTER XLIV.  219

Serenity,  and  which  it  is  certain  that  they  possessed  in  the
time  of  your  predecessors. Farewell.


LETTER XLIV. (Circa A.D. 1128.)
To  THE  SAME,  ON  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

You  see  how  often  I  count  on  your  bounty,  so  that  I  do
not  fear,  although  I  have  received  so  much  from  you,  to
make  myself  again  an  importunate  suppliant  and  to  weary
you  with  new  demands.  My  presumption,  indeed,  is  great,
but  it  does  not  merit  indignation,  since  it  is  caused  by
affection  and  not  by  want  of  consideration.  Your  Paternity
remembers,  I  doubt  not,  that  when  I  was  lately  at  Troyes
you  were  so  good  as  to  relinquish  for  the  love  of  God,  and  at
my  entreaty,  all  the  claims  which  you  had  made  against  the
monks  of  Molesme  on  the  Church  at  Senan.  Now,  the  same
monks  complain  that  I  know  not  what  new,  and,  as  they  say,
undue  praerogatives  are  asserted  over  the  forenamed  Church.
I  beseech  you  that  these  also  may  be  remitted,  and  trust  that
in  this  even  you  will  not  refuse  me,  so  that,  as  you  have
granted  me  the  greater  favours,  so  I  may  be  successful  in
obtaining  the  lesser.  Farewell.


LETTER XLV. (A.D. 1127.)
To  Louis,  KING  OF  FRANCE.1

The  monks  of  Citeaux  take  the  liberty  to  address  grave
reproaches  to  King  Louis  for  his  hostility  to  and  injuries
inflicted  upon  the  Bishop  of  Paris,  and  declare  that  they
will  bring  the  cause  before  the  Pope  if  the  King  does  not
desist.

To  Louis,  the  glorious  King  of  France,  STEPHEN,  Abbot
of  Citeaux,  and  the  whole  assembly  of  the  abbots  and
brethren  of  Citeaux,  wish  health,  prosperity,  and  peace  in
Christ  Jesus.

i.  The  King  of  heaven  and  earth  has  given  you  a  kingdom

1  Louis  VI.,  "  the  Fat."


220  LETTER XLV.

on  earth,  and  will  bestow  upon  you  one  in  heaven  if  you
study  to  govern  with  justice  and  wisdom  that  which  you
have  received.  This  is  what  we  wish  for  you,  and  ;pray  for
on  your  behalf,  that  you  may  reign  here  faithfully,  and
there  in  happiness.  But  why  do  you  of  late  put  so  many
obstacles  in  the  way  of  our  prayers  for  you,  which,  if  you
recollect,  you  formerly  with  such  humility  requested  ?
With  what  confidence  can  we  now  presume  to  lift  up  our
hands  for  you  to  the  Spouse  of  the  Church,  while  you  so
inconsiderately,  and  without  the  slightest  cause  (as  we
think),  afflict  the  Church?  Grave  indeed  is  the  complaint
she  lays  against  you  before  her  Spouse  and  Lord,  that  she
finds  you  an  opposer  whom  she  accepted  as  a  protector.
Have  you  reflected  whom  you  are  thus  attacking?  Not
really  the  Bishop  of  Paris,1  but  the  Lord  of  Paradise,  a
terrible  God  "who  cuts  off  the  spirit  of  Princes  (Ps.  Ixx.
12),  and  who  has  said  to  Bishops,  He  who  despiseth  you
despiseth  me  (S.  Luke  x.  16).

2.  That  is  what  we  have  to  say  to  you.  Perhaps  we
have  to  say  it  with  boldness,  but  at  the  same  time  in  love ;
and  for  your  sake  we  pray  you  heartily,  in  the  name  of  the
friendship  with  which  you  have  honoured  us,  and  of  the
brotherhood  with  which  you  deigned  to  associate  yourself,
but  which  you  have  now  so  grievously  wounded,  quickly  to
desist  from  so  great  a  wrong;  otherwise,  if  vou  do  not
deign  to  listen  to  us,  nor  take  any  account  of  us  whom  you
called  brethren,  who  are  your  friends,  and  who  pray  daily
for  you  and  your  children  and  realm,  we  are  forced  to  say
to  you  that,  humble  as  we  are,  there  is  nothing  which  we
are  not  prepared  to  do  within  the  limits  of  our  weakness

1  Stephen,  who  was  Bishop  of  Paris  from  1124  to  1144.  The  cause  of  these
persecutions  was  the  withdrawal  of  Stephen  from  the  Court,  and  the  liberty  of
the  Church  which  he  demanded.  Henry,  Archbishop  of  Sens,  had  a  similar
difficulty,  and  for  causes  not  unlike  (Letter  49).  The  mind  of  the  King  was
not  induced  to  yield  by  this  Letter,  and  the  death  of  his  son  Philip,  who  was
already  associated  with  him  as  King,  passed  for  a  punishment  from  Heaven  for
his  obstinacy.  It  is  astonishing  that  after  his  death  the  nobles  and  bishops
should  have  had  thoughts  of  hindering  the  succession  of  Louis  the  Younger
(Ordfricus,  Book  xiii.  p.  895  sqq.)


LETTER XLVI.  221


for  the  Church  of  God,  and  for  her  minister,  the  venerable
Bishop  of  Paris,  our  father  and  our  friend.  He  implores
the  help  of  poor  religious  against  you,  and  begs  us  by  the
right  of  brotherhood1  to  write  in  his  favour  to  the  Lord

o

Pope.  But  we  judge  that  we  ought  first  to  commence  by
this  letter  to  your  royal  Excellence,  especially  as  the  same
Bishop  pledges  himself  by  the  hand  of  all  our  Congrega
tion  to  give  every  satisfaction  provided  that  his  goods,
which  have  been  unjustly  taken  away  from  him,  be  restored,
which  it  seems  to  us  justice  itself  requires;  in  the  mean
time,  we  put  off  the  sending  of  his  petition.  And  if  God
inspires  you  to  lend  an  ear  to  our  prayers,  to  follow  our
counsels,  and  to  restore  peace  with  your  Bishop,  or  rather
with  God,  which  we  earnestly  desire,  we  are  prepared  to
come  to  you  wherever  you  shall  be  pleased  to  fix  for  the
sake  of  arranging  this  affair  ;  but  if  it  be  otherwise,  we
shall  be  obliged  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  our  friend,  and  to
render  obedience  to  the  priest  of  God.  Farewell.


LETTER XLVI. (A.D. 1127.)

To  THE  LORD  POPE  HONORIUS  II.,  ON  THE  SAME
SUBJECT.

They  complain  to  the  Pope  that  by  the  raising  surrep
titiously  of  the  interdict,  the  King  of  France,  before  dis
posed  to  peace,  was  rendered  more  obstinate.

To  the  supreme  Pontiff  HONORIUS,  the  abbots  of  the  poor
of  Christ,  HUGO  of  Pontigny,  and  BERNARD  of  Clairvaux,
health  and  all  that  the  prayer  of  sinners  can  effect.

We  are  not  able  to  conceal  the  tears  and  complaints  of
the  Bishops,  and,  indeed,  of  the  whole  Church,  of  which  we
have  the  honour,  however  unworthy,  to  be  sons.  We  speak
of  what  we  have  seen.  A  great  necessity  has  drawn  us
from  our  cloisters  into  public,  and  what  we  have  seen  there

i  All  those  who  in  a  Society  had  the  right  of  suffrage  were  regarded  as
brothers.  So  the  monks  of  Chaise-Dieu  call  Louis  Le  Jeune  by  the  name  of
brother  (Uuchesne,  Vol.  iv.  Letter  308).


222  LETTER XLVII.

we  report  to  you.  We  have  seen  and  repeat  sad  things.
In  the  time  of  Honorius  the  honour  of  the  Church  has  been
deeply  wounded.  Already  the  humility,  or  rather  the
constancy,  of  the  bishops  had  bent  down  the  anger  of  the
King,  when  the  supreme  authority  of  the  supreme  pontiff
intervening,1  alas  !  threw  down  constancy  and  set  up  pride  !
We  know,  indeed,  that  that  mandate  must  have  been
obtained  from  you  by  falsehood,  as  is  quite  evident  from
your  letter,  or  you  would  not  have  ordered  an  interdict  so
just  and  so  necessary  to  be  put  an  end  to.  But  should  not
the  falsehood  be  at  length  detected — should  not  iniquity  be
made  to  feel  that  it  has  lied  against  itself,  and  not  against
dignity  such  as  yours?  For  it  is  that  which  astonishes  us,
that  judgment  should  have  been  given  without  hearing  the
two  parties,  and  that  the  absent  should  have  been  con
demned,  which,  indeed,  we  do  not  blame  with  rash  pre
sumption,  but  with  the  love  of  sons  we  suggest  to  the  heart
of  our  Father  how  greatly  from  this  act  the  wicked  triumphs
and  the  poor  is  cast  down ;  but  how  long  he  ought  to
suffer  thus,  and  in  what  degree  you  ought  to  suffer  with
him,  it  is  not  for  us,  most  holy  Father,  to  prescribe  to  you  ;
it  is  for  you  to  consult  your  own  heart.  Farewell.


LETTER XLVII. (A.D. 1127.)

TO  THE  SAME  POPE, IN  THE  NAME  OF  GEOFFREY,
BISHOP  OF  CHARTRES.

He  explains  to  the  Pontiff  the  cause  -why  the  Bishop  of
Paris  was  unjustly  oppressed  by  King  Louis.  The  inter
dict  of  the  bishops  of  France  had  put  pressure  upon  him,
and  he  had  promised  to  make  restitution,  when  the  absolu
tion  of  Honorius  rendered  him  contumacious,  and  pre
vented  his  fulfilling  his  promise.

It  is  superfluous  to  recall  to  you,  very  holy  Father,  the
cause  and  order  of  a  very  afflicting  history,  and  to  linger

1  Viz.,  by  relaxing  the  interdict  which  by  the  bishops  of  the  province  had  been
laid  upon  the  Royal  domain,  because  of  the  persecution  of  which  the  Bishop  of
Paris  was  the  object.  See  the  following  Letter.


LETTER XLVII.  223

over  what  you  have  already  heard  from  the  pious  Bishop  of
Paris,  and  which  must  have  profoundly  affected  your
paternal  heart.  Yet  my  testimony  also  ought  not  to  be
wanting  to  my  brother  and  co-bishop  ;  what  I  have  seen
and  heard  respecting  this  matter,  this  I  have  undertaken  to
make  you  acquainted  with  in  few  words.  When  the
before-mentioned  Bishop  had  brought  forward  his  complaint,
which  he  did  with  great  moderation,  in  our  provincial
assembly,  where  had  gathered  with  our  venerable  metro
politan  the  Archbishop  of  Sens,  all  the  bishops  of  the  pro
vince,  and  certain  religious  also  whom  we  had  summoned,
we  determined  to  represent  to  the  King,  with  all  becoming
humility,  his  unjust  proceeding,  and  to  beg  that  he  would
restore  to  the  Bishop  unjustly  maltreated  what  had  been
taken  from  him  ;  but  we  obtained  no  satisfaction  from  him.
Understanding,  at  length,  that  in  order  to  defend  the
Church  we  had  decided  to  have  recourse  to  the  weapons  of
the  Church,  he  was  afraid,  and  promised  the  restitution
demanded.  But  almost  in  the  same  hour  arrived  your
letter,  ordering  that  the  interdict  over  the  royal  domains
should  be  raised,  thus,  unfortunately,  strengthening  the
King  in  his  evil  doings,  so  that  he  did  not  perform  at  all
what  he  had  promised.  Nevertheless,  as  he  had  given  a
fresh  promise  that  he  would  do  what  we  required,  we
presented  ourselves  on  the  day  appointed.  We  laboured
for  peace,  and  it  did  not  come ;  but  instead  of  it  worse
confusion.  Thus  the  effect  of  your  letter  has  been  that  the
goods  unjustly  seized  are  more  unjustly  retained,  and  those
which  remain  are  seized  day  by  day,  and  that  so  much
more  securely,  as  he  is  assured  of  entire  impunity  in  retain
ing  them.  The  just  (as  we  consider)  interdict  of  the
Bishop  has  been  raised  by  your  order,  and  as  the  fear
of  displeasing  you  has  made  us  suspend  that  which  we
proposed  to  send  forth  by  our  own  authority,  and  by  which
we  hoped  to  obtain  peace,  we  are  made  in  the  meantime
the  derision  of  our  neighbours.  How  long  is  this  to  be  ?
Let  the  compassion  of  your  piety  be  exercised  on  our
behalf.


224  LETTER XLVIII.

LETTER XLVIII. (Circa  A.D. 1130.)

To HAIMERIC, THE CHANCELLOR, ON THE SAME
SUBJECT,  AND  AGAINST  DETRACTORS.

He  justifies  himself  against attacks  made upon him,
and  begs  to  be  allowed  to  enjoy  solitude  and  silence.

To  the  illustrious  HAIMERIC,  Chancellor  of  the  holy
Roman  See,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
health  eternal.

i.  Does  truth  bring  hatred  even  to  the  poor  and  indigent,
and  does  not  even  their  misery  secure  them  against  envy  ?
Ought  I  to  complain  or  to  glory  because  I  am  made  an  enemy
for  speaking  the  truth  or  for  doing  right  ?  That  is  what  I
leave  to  be  considered  by  your  brethren,  who,  against  the
law,  speak  evil  of  one  deaf  (Lev.  xix.  14),  and  not  fearing
the  malediction  of  the  Prophet,  call  evil  good  and  good  evil
(Is.  v.  20).  I  ask  of  you,  O  good  men,  what  in  me  has
displeased  your  brotherhood?1  Is  it  because  at  Chalons
was  deposed  the  Bishop  of  Verdun,2  a  man  everywhere
decried,  because  he  had  dissipated  in  management  the
goods  of  his  Lord  committed  to  him  in  the  Church  over
which  he  presided  ?  Or  was  it  because  at  Cambray,

1  Fraternitati. So  all,  or  almost all,  write constantly,  and  rightly  so  ; for
Cardinals  formerly  used  to  be  called  simply  Bruthn-s  (Life  of  S.  Bernard,  B.  ii.
n.  42),  and  in  Chrnn.  Andrent.  Spicilegii,  Vol. ix. p.  481,  the  Abbot Peter  is
brought  forward as having  visited  "  not only the lord Pope, but also  the
Brothers according to the custom." Some wrongly  read "  our brethren,"
instead  of  "  ynur  brethren, ''  at  the  beginning  of  this  Letter. See  also  IPilliam
of  Tyre,  B.  iii.  c.  15  : "The  Cardinals  are  Brothers  whether  bishops,  priests,  or
deacons."

2  Henry,  the  same  to  whom  Letters  62  and  63  are addressed. Laurence  of
Lie'ge,  speaks  of  his  deposition  in  his "  History  of  Verdun  ''  (Spicilcginm,  Vol.
xii.  p.  311), saying  that  this  affair  had  been  confided  by  Pope  Honorius  to  the
care  of  his Legate  in  France, Matthew, Bishop  of Albano,  who  assembled  a
Council at Chalons-sur-Marne  to deal with it. "  Henry at  first  consulted
Bernard,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  of  holy  memory, whose  counsels  are  at  this  day,"
says Laurence, "  the support of the realms and churches of  France. He
advised  Henry  that  it  was a  very  grave thing  to  retain  an  episcopal  charge
over unwilling people. Therefore,  before  a  very ignominious  charge  should
come  against  him in  the  public hearing  of so many  great men,  he,  being


LETTER XLVIII.  225

Fulbert,  who  conducted  his  monastery  manifestly  to  its
destruction,  was  obliged  to  yield  his  place  to  Parvin,1  a
prudent  and  faithful  servant,  according  to  the  testimony  of
all  ?  Or,  again,  was  it  because,  at  Laon,  a  sanctuary2  of
God  was  restored  to  him  after  having  been  made  a  shrine
of  Venus  ?  For  which  of  these  things  do  you,  I  do  not  say
stone  me,  so  that  I  may  not  borrow  the  language  of  my  Lord
(S.  John  x.  32),  but  tear  me  to  pieces  ?  And  this  I  should
be  right  to  reply  to  you  with  pride,  if  any  of  the  credit  of
these  things  belong  to  me.  But,  now,  why  am  I  judged  for
what  others  have  done  ?  Or  if  for  my  actions,  why  am  I
accused  as  if  I  had  done  something  wrong,  when  no  one
can  be  so  silly  as  to  doubt,  or  so  shameless  as  to  deny  that
all  these  things  were  done  justly  and  well?  Choose  now
which  alternative  you  please  ;  either  deny  or  assert  that  I
am  the  author  of  these  things.  If  I  have  done  them,  it  is  a
thing  worthy  of  praise  to  have  brought  about  praiseworthy
actions,  and  I  am  wrongly  blamed  for  that  which  renders
me  worthy  of  praise.  If  I  have  not  done  them,  as  I  have
deserved  no  praise,  I  deserve  no  blame.  It  is  a  new  kind  of
detraction  that  is  employed  against  me,  and  has  some
resemblance  to  the  work  of  Balaam,  who,  being  brought
and  paid  to  curse  the  people,  heaped  them  with  blessings
instead  (Num.  xxii.  and  xxiv.).  What  more  just  and  more
consoling  for  him  whom  the  design  was  to  blame  than  to
see  that,  though  willing  to  blame  him,  you  unwillingly
praise,  and  unknowingly  employ  the  language  of  laudation
for  that  of  insult  ?  Could  you  not  find  enough  of  real

alone,  should  yield  to  all  and  resign  the  See.  He  followed  this  counsel,  gave
up  the  pastoral  staff,  and  retired  from  the  See  in  the  thirteenth  year  after  he  had
received  it  from  the  hand  of  Caesar,"  i.e.,  in  A.D.  1 129.

1  Parvin  was  a  monk  of  S.  Vincent  at  Laon  when  he  was  made  abbot  of
S.  Sepulchre  of  Cambray,  after  Fulbert  had  been  displaced  by  Rainauld  des
Pres,  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  on  account  of  his  bad  administration.  The
monastery  of  S.  Sepulchre,  of  the  Order  of  S.  Benedict,  was  formerly  beyond
the  walls  of  Cambray,  and  was  founded  A.D.  1064  by  Bishop  Lietbert.

3  This  refers  to  the  convent  of  S.  John  Baptist  at  Laon,  from  which  the  nuns
who  had  previously  occupied  it  were  driven  out  because  of  the  irregular  lives  of
some  of  them.  They  were  replaced  in  1128  by  monks  who  had  at  their  head
as  abbot,  Drogo,  a  monk  of  S.  Nicasius  at  Rheims.

VOL. I.  15


226  LETTER XLVIII.

defaults  in  me  that  you  reproach  me  for  a  good  action  as
if  it  were  evil,  or  rather  that  you  impute  to  me  what  I  have
not  done  ?

2.  But  I  am  not  distressed  by  undeserved  reproaches,  nor
do  I  accept  unmerited  praises  ;  nothing  concerns  me  which
I  have  not  done.  Let  them  praise  if  they  will  or  blame  if
they  dare  his  lordship  of  Albano  for  the  first  matter,
for  the  second  his  lordship  of  Rheims,  and  for  the  third  the
same  archbishop,  with  the  Bishop  of  Laon,  with  the  King
in  the  same  degree,  and  with  many  other  reverend  persons,
who  will  by  no  means  disown  that  they  have  taken  a
principal  part  in  them.  If  they  have  done  well,  or  if
otherwise,  what  is  it  to  me  ?  My  sole  and  only  fault  is
that  I  have  been  present  at  these  assemblies,  being  a  man
deserving  only  of  solitude,  who  ought  to  judge  only  myself,
to  be  the  accuser  and  arbiter  of  my  own  conscience  only,  if
I  wish  that  my  life  should  display  what  my  profession
declares,  and  my  name  of  monk  describe  truly  my  solitary
habit  of  life.  For  I  was  present,  I  avow  it ;  but  it  was
because  I  had  been  summoned,  and,  as  it  were,  forced  to
come.  If  this  has  been  displeasing  to  my  friends,  I  confess
it  has  displeased  me  also.  Would  that  I  had  not  gone  to
these  assemblies,  would  that  I  may  not  go  to  any  similar  to
them  !  Would  that  I  had  never  gone  where  I  had  the
sorrow  to  see  (as  lately)  a  violent  tyrant  armed  against  the
Church  by  the  authority  of  the  Holy  See,  as  if  he  had  not
been  already  by  himself  sufficiently  powerful  !  Then  at
length  I  felt  as  the  Prophet  says,  my  tongue  cleave  to  my
mouth  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  6),  when  I  saw  that  unquestionable
authority  bear  us  down  with  its  weight,  and  when  the
Pope's  letter  was  brought  forward.  Alas  !  I  was  mute,  /
was  humbled,  I  was  silent  even  from  the  good  :  and  my
sorrow  was  renewed  (Ps.  xxxix.  3,  VULG.),  when  suddenly
I  saw  the  letter  of  the  Pope  cover  the  faces  of  the  innocent
with  confusion,  make  the  impious  and  sinners  to  rejoice
and  triumph  in  their  wickedness.  The  indulgence  which
was  shown  to  the  wicked,  as  says  the  Prophet,  did  not
teach  him  to  do  righteousness  ;  and  he  who  dealt  unjustly


LETTER XLVIII.  227

in  the  land  of  the  righteous  (Is.  xxvi.  10)  was  freed  from
the  most  just  interdict  under  which  his  domain  was  held.1

3.  For  reasons  of  this  kind,  even  if  there  were  no  others,
I  am  vexed  to  have  meddled  in  the  transaction  of  business,
especially  as  I  know  that  in  it  there  is  nothing  that  concerns
me.  I  am  vexed,  yet  I  am  forced  to  go.  But  by  whom
could  I  better  hope  to  be  relieved  from  this  necessity  than
by  you,  O  best  of  men  !  to  whom  in  such  a  matter  neither
is  power  wanting  nor,  as  I  know  well,  the  will.  I  rejoice,
therefore,  to  know  that  my  occupation  in  such  matters  is
displeasing  to  your  wisdom  ;  you  are  entirely  right,  and  I
recognize  in  it  your  friendship  for  me.  Since,  then,  such
is  your  desire,  or  rather  since  you  perceive  and  determine
that  it  is  better  for  your  friend  and  more  becoming  to  a
Religious,  take  means,  I  pray  you,  to  ensure  that  both  your
will  at  once  and  mine  may  be  accomplished  as  soon  as
possible,  that  justice  may  be  satisfied,  and  the  safety  of  my
soul  cared  for.  Forbid,  if  you  please,  those  clamorous  and
importunate  frogs  to  come  forth  from  their  hiding-places,
but  let  them  stay  contentedly  in  their  marshes.  Let  them
not  be  heard  in  Councils,  nor  enter  into  palaces ;  let  no
necessity,  no  authority  draw  them  to  mingle  in  the  settle
ment  of  disputes  or  of  any  business.  So,  perhaps,  your
friend  may  be  able  to  escape  from  the  charge  of  presump
tion.  I  do  not  know,  indeed,  how  there  can  be  any  occasion
for  it,  for  my  resolution  is  fixed  not  to  set  foot  out  of  my
monastery  unless  summoned  by  the  Legate  of  the  Apostolic
See,  or,  at  least,  by  my  own  Bishop,  since,  as  you  well  know,
it  would  be  altogether  wrong  for  a  humble  person  like  my
self  to  resist  these  unless  by  privilege  of  some  higher
authority.  If  ever  you  shall  succeed  in  effecting  this,  as  I
sincerely  hope,  then,  without  doubt,  I  shall  have  peace  my
self  and  leave  others  in  peace.  Yet,  even  although  I  shut
myself  up  and  keep  silence,  I  do  not  suppose  that  the
murmurs  of  the  Churches  will  cease,  if  the  Roman  Curia
continues  to  do  injury  to  the  absent  in  order  to  be  com
plaisant  to  those  who  are  near  at  hand.  Farewell.

1  See  Letters  46,  47.


228  LETTER XLIX.

LETTER XLIX. (A.D. 1128.)

To  THE  LORD  POPE  HONORIUS,  ON  BEHALF  OF  HENRY,
ARCHBISHOP  OF  SENS.

To  the  Supreme  Pontiff,  HONORIUS,  his  servants  and  sons
(if  we  are  worthy  to  be  so  called),  STEPHEN  of  Citeaux,
HUGO  of  Pontigny,  BERNARD  of  Clairvaux,  health  and  their
best  prayers  for  their  most  reverend  lord  and  kind  father.

Though  dwelling  in  monasteries,  to  the  shelter  of  which
our  sins  have  driven  us,  we  do  not  cease  to  pray  for  you  and
for  the  Church  of  God  committed  to  your  charge,  and  share
the  rejoicing  both  of  the  Spouse  of  the  Lord  over  so  faithful
a  guardian,  and  of  the  friend  of  the  Bridegroom  over
labouring  so  abundantly  for  her.  In  faith  and  truth  we
make  known  to  you,  holy  Father,  the  evils  to  which  we  see
with  grief  our  Mother,  the  Church,  exposed  in  this  realm.
As  far  as  we,  being  on  the  spot,  are  able  to  judge,  King
Louis  is  hostile  not  so  much  to  Bishops,  as  to  any  zeal  for
justice,  practice  of  piety,  and  even  religious  living  in  the
Bishops.  That  this  is  the  fact  the  penetration  of  your
Holiness  will  easily  infer  from  this,  that  the  very  men  who
previously  in  secular  life  were  highly  honoured  by  him,  judged
faithful,  regarded  as  familiar  friends,  are  now  treated  as
enemies,  because  they  behave  worthily  in  the  priesthood  and
honour  their  ministry  in  all  things.  This  is  the  cause  of  the
insults  and  injuries  with  which  the  Bishop  of  Paris,  though
innocent,  has  been  attacked,  yet  he  has  not  been  crushed,
because  the  Lord  arrested  the  King's  hand  when  he  opposed
yours.  Hence,  also  now  he  endeavours  to  weary  and  break
down  the  constancy  of  the  Archbishop  of  Sens,  so  that
when  the  Metropolitan  is  vanquished  (which  may  God
forbid)  he  may  easily,  as  he  supposes,  prevail  over  all  the
suffragans.  Finally,  who  doubts  that  what  he  really  wishes
to  attack  is  religion,  which  he  looks  upon  openly  as  the
destruction  of  his  realm  and  the  enemy  of  his  crown  ?
Another  Herod  holds  Christ  in  suspicion,  but  it  is  Christ  no
longer  in  the  cradle,  but  triumphant  in  the  Churches,  who  is
obnoxious  to  him.  Nor  do  we  think  that  his  hostility  to  the


LETTER L.  22g

archbishop  has  any  other  object  than  this,  that  he  strives  to
extinguish  1  in  him,  as  in  others,  the  spirit  with  which  he  is
animated.  Finally,  if  we  are  thought  to  be  deceiving  you,
or  to  be  ourselves  deceived  about  these  matters  to  which
we  bear  witness,  we  desire  that  you  will  examine  into  them
yourself  as  quickly  as  possible,  so  that  (which  we
vehemently  desire  and  suppliantly  entreat)  judgment  may
come  forth  from  your  presence,  most  holy  Father,  and  in
it  we  have  no  doubt  that  you  will  seek  equity  and  protect
innocence.  But  that  the  cause  should  be  brought  back  into
the  presence  and  under  the  power  of  the  King  is  plainly
nothing  else  than  that  the  just  should  be  delivered  into  the
hands  of  his  enemies.


LETTER L. (A.D. 1128.)
To  THE  SAME,  ON  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

He  demands  that  it  should  be  allowed  to  the  Archbishop
to  appeal  to  the  Apostolic  See.

It  would  be  desirable,  if  it  seems  good  to  your  authority,
that  the  cause  of  the  Archbishop  of  Sens  should  be  discussed
in  your  own  presence,  so  that  being,  as  he  is,  obnoxious  to
the  King,  he  may  not  seem  to  be  a  man  delivered  to  the
will  of  his  enemies  by  having  to  answer  for  himself  to  his
adversaries  in  the  presence  and  power  of  the  King;  but  as
whatever  you  direct  must  be  inviolably  adhered  to,  so  it  may
be  firmly  hoped  that  whatever  course  you  decree  may  issue
in  some  good.  This  only  we  demand  very  humbly  of  your
bounty,  with  all  our  Religious,  viz.,  that  if  it  shall  happen
that  this  Prelate  should  be  crushed  by  the  sovereign  power
(as  it  has  happened  only  too  often)  he  may  be  permitted  to
seek  refuge  in  your  fatherly  bosom,  because  hitherto  we
have  never  heard  that  you  have  refused  this  refuge  to  a
person  oppressed.  Otherwise  let  Joseph,  the  just  man,  see

1  This  expression  must  not  be  taken  too  absolutely,  since  it  is  evident  that
Louis  was  far  from  being  a  bad  prince ;  but  is  used  because  he  seemed  to
persecute  in  them  the  zeal  for  righteuuvtess  in  wishing  to  stop  the  first  motions
of  the  Bishops  of  Sens  and  Paris  towards  a  new  manner  of  life.


230  LETTER LI.

to  it,  what  he  must  do  now  to  save  the  Child  and  his  Mother,
because  even  now  in  the  province  of  Sens  Christ  is  sought
for  destruction.  For,  to  say  more  plainly  that  which  is  the
fact,  it  is  clear  that  the  King  persecutes  in  the  Archbishop
of  Sens  his  new  piety,  because  he  advanced  him  by  all
possible  means  and  dismissed  him  into  his  Diocese  with  the
assurance  of  freedom  from  every  disturbance,  as  long  as  he
lived  in  his  former  worldlv  life  and  conversation.


LETTER LI. (A.D. 1128.)
To  HAIMERIC,  THE  CHANCELLOR,  ON  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

To  the  very  illustrious  HAIMERIC,  Chancellor  of  the  Holy
Roman  See,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  health  and  all
that  the  prayer  of  a  sinner  can  avail.

How  long  will  it  be  true  to  say,  All  who  -will  live  piously
in  Christ  suffer  persecution  (2  Tim.  iii.  12)  ?  How  long
shall  the  rod  of  sinners  be  extended  over  the  heritage  of  the
just?  Who  shall  enable  the  just  to  stand1  against  those
who  have  oppressed  them  ?

Who  can  bear  to  see  so  great  a  degree  of  discord  between
heaven  and  earth,  that  while  the  Angels  rejoice  at  the
amendment  of  the  evil,  the  sons  of  Adam  rage  and  are
envious?  Has  not  Jesus  by  His  sufferings  and  His  blood
purified  the  things  which  are  in  heaven  and  those  on  earth ;
and  was  not  God  in  Him  reconciling  the  world  unto  Him
self?  Formerly  the  Archbishop  had  nothing  but  praise,
when  he  was  ruled  only  by  the  desires  of  his  heart — noth
ing  but  approval  as  long  as  his  life  and  conversation
were  worldly.  But  now  simony  is  sought  for  under  the
swaddling  clothes  of  the  infancy  of  Jesus,  and  a  malign
curiosity  searches  among  the  rising  virtues  (of  the  prelate)
for  even  the  ashes  of  dead  vices.  You  see  clearly  that  it  is
Jesus  Himself  who  is  the  mark  for  the  hostility  of  these
men.  In  His  name  I  beseech  you ;  for  His  sake  I  am  a

1  Some  read  in  great  constancy  here,  but  the  words  are  wanting  in  MSS.


LETTER LII.  231

suppliant  to  you.  He  is  well  worthy  both  of  your  reverence
and  of  your  pity.  Stand  fast  for  Him  in  the  defence  of  the
Archbishop,  and  remember  that  you  yourself  must  one  day
stand  before  Him  to  be  judged.  Farewell.


LETTER  LII. (Circa  A.D. 1128.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  declares  that  the  Bishop  of  Chartres  has  not  pro
jected  a  journey  to  Jerusalem.  He  begs  to  be  released
from  the  -weight  of  public  affairs,

Your  friend  and  mine,  the  Lord  Bishop  of  Chartres,
wished  the  assurance  to  be  conveyed  to  you  by  me  that  he
has  not  had  either  the  intention  or  the  wish  to  be  allowed
to  go  to  Jerusalem,  as  we  know  the  Pope  has  been  made  to
believe.  For  although  he  would  greatly  have  wished  to
make  the  journey,  yet  he  was  not  able  to  leave  without
great  scandal  here  to  all  good  people,  who  fear  that  his
absence  would  do  more  harm  to  his  own  flock  than  his
presence  would  do  good  to  foreigners.  This  is  what  I  have
to  say  on  behalf  of  that  Bishop.

But  that  I  may  say  something  also  on  my  own  behalf,
according  to  what  Scripture  admonishes,  saying :  Have
pity  on  your  own  soul  if  you  wish  to  please  God  (Ecclus.
xxx.  23,  VULG.).  Does  it  please  you  that  I  should  be  loaded
with  burdens  and  occupied  with  business,  so  that  I  have  no
leisure  to  attend  to  my  own  duties,  being  entirely  immersed
in  those  which  belong  to  others  ?  If  I  have  found  favour  in
your  eyes,  be  so  good  as  to  relieve  me  of  all  these  affairs,
so  that  I  may  be  able  to  pray  God  for  your  sins  and  my
own.  It  is  true  that  I  consider  nothing  could  be  safer  for
me  than  to  follow  the  will  of  my  lord  the  Pope  ;  but  if  he
would  be  so  kind  as  to  consider  the  limit  of  my  powers,  he
would  realize  that  I  am  not  able  to  do  these  things,  or  with
how  much  difficulty  I  can  do  them.  And  upon  that  matter
sufficient  is  said  to  an  intelligent  person  like  yourself.


232  LETTER LIII.

The  Bishop  of  Chartres  asked  of  me  some  of  my  little
treatises  to  send  to  you ;  but  I  have  nothing  at  hand  which
seems  to  me  worthy  of  your  attention.  There  is,  indeed,  a
little  book  concerning  Grace  and  Free  Will  which  I  have
lately  put  forth.  This  I  will  gladly  send  to  you,  if  you  wish
it.  Farewell.


LETTER  LIII. (Circa  A.D. 1128.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  presents  to  Haimeric  two religious, and in them

himself.

I  remember  that  I  have  written  to  you  on  behalf  of  many
people,  and  by  the  medium  of  many  ;  but  now  I,  who  have
often  corresponded  with  you,  am  present  before  you  in  per
son.  Represent  to  yourself  three  persons  in  the  two  whom
you  behold,  since  without  me  these  are  not  able  to  exist,  in
whose  hearts  I  rest  in  close  companionship,  and  even  more
safely  and  sweetly  than  in  my  own.  I  seem  to  exaggerate,
but  only  to  one  who  has  never  felt  the  power  of  friendship,
who  is  ignorant  of  the  force  of  affection,  who  does  not
believe  that  the  multitude  of  believers  "were  of  one  heart
and  of  one  soul  (Acts  iv.  32).  He,  then,  who  sees  them
sees  me  also,  though  not  in  my  own  body,  and  what  they
say  I  say  also  with  their  tongues.  I  am  absent  in  body,  I
confess  ;  but  the  body  is  the  least  part  of  me.  And  if  it  is
true  that  he  who  sees  my  face  may  assert  with  truth  that
he  sees  me  and  not  a  part  of  me  only,  when  notwithstanding
he  sees  only  a  part  of  me,  and  that  the  least  considerable,  how
much  more  truly  may  I  say  that  I  am  present,  even  without
bodily  presence,  where  I  feel  my  will,  my  spirit,  and  affec
tion,  which  is  the  greater  and  more  worthy  part  of  me,  to
be  ?  Know,  then,  that  we  are  one  person  in  three  bodies,
not  of  equal  holiness,  for  in  this  I  am  inferior  to  each  of
these  two,  but  having  the  same  will,  and  perfect  union  of
souls.  For  why  should  not  the  bond  of  affection  bring
about  the  unity  of  several  persons  in  one  spirit,  if  the  bond


LETTER LIV.  233

of  marriage  makes  two  to  be  one  flesh  ?  I  could  wish  that
you  would  make  yourself  the  fourth  with  us,  if  you  do  not
consider  that  unity  of  affection  unworthy  of  you.  This  you
will  easily  obtain,  if  you  do  not  disdain  it ;  only  if  you  do
not  desire  it,  I  beg  you  not  to  let  them  perceive  this.
Farewell.

LETTER LIV.  (Circa  A.D. 1136.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  recommends  the  Abbot  Vivian,  and  warns  Haimenc
to  think  seriously  of  the  salvation  of  his  soul.

I  desire  and  entreat  that  you  will  assist  in  his  business,
for  the  love  of  God  and  for  my  sake,  the  bearer  of  this
letter,  the  venerable  Vivian,  Abbot  of  Haute  Combe,1  for
whom  I  have  a  most  intimate  friendship,  on  account  of  his
piety.  This  is  what  I  have  to  say  on  his  behalf  ;  the  re
mainder  of  the  letter  is  for  yourself.  What  shall  it  profit
a  man  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul  ;
or  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul?  (S.
Matt.  xvi.  26).  Not  the  whole  world  would  be  sufficient.
A  soul,  which  has  been  redeemed  with  the  blood  of  Christ,
is  a  valuable  thing.  Great  was  the  loss  of  the  soul,  which
could  not  be  repaired  except  by  the  Cross  of  Christ.  If,
again,  it  shall  perish  by  sin  even  unto  death,  whence,  then,
shall  it  be  restored?  Is  there  either  another  Christ,  or
will  He  be  crucified  again  for  it?  Upon  this  subject  I
would  wish  that  you  would  never  forget  the  counsel  of  the
wise  man :  My  son,  remember  thy  latter  end,  and  thou
shalt  not  ever  sin  (Ecclus.  vii.  36,  40,  VULG.).

1  This  monastery  was  founded  in  1135,  in  the  Alps;  its  first  abbot  was
Vivian,  a  monk  of  the  Cistercian  Order.  He  was  succeeded  by  Amadeus  in
•139-


234  LETTER LV.

LETTER  LV. (Circa  A.D.  1128.)
To GEOFFREY, BISHOP OF CHARTRES.

He  begs  that  Geoffrey  would  receive  and  assist  a  certain
religious  recluse  who  had  deserted  his  calling,  but  was
repentant.

To  the  most  faithful  and  prudent  servant  of  God,
GEOFFREY,  Bishop  .of  Chartres,1  BERNARD,  of  Clairvaux,
servant  of  the  poor  of  Christ,  health  and  the  fulness  of  the
glory  of  the  everlasting  hills.

The  more  fame  and  honour  the  holiness  of  your  life  pro
cures  for  you,  the  more  labour  it  brings  you.  Thus  the
person  who  brings  you  this  letter,  and  on  whose  behalf  it  is
written,  has  felt  himself,  like  so  many  others,  drawn  to  you
from  far,  by  the  fragrance  of  your  pity,  and  by  the  hope  of
finding  in  you  not  only  counsel  what  he  ought  to  do,  but
also  aid  to  accomplish  it.  This  is  his  case.  He  had  for
the  love  of  God  shut  himself  in  a  certain  cell,  intending  to
live  as  a  recluse.  He  himself  will  explain  to  you  the
causes  why  he  quitted  his  cell  and  broke  his  vow.2  Now
he  desires  to  return  to  his  purpose ;  but  intends  to  ask
your  help  for  so  doing,  if  you  will  accord  it  to  him  at  my
request  by  this  letter,  with  which  he  was  desirous  to
strengthen  his  application.  Act,  therefore,  in  your  accus
tomed  way ;  give  help  to  this  unhappy  man,  and  the  more
since  I  know  you  hold  yourself  a  debtor  both  to  the  wise
and  to  the  unwise  ;  quickly  draw  this  wandering  lamb  of
Christ  from  the  jaws  of  the  wolf,  bring  him  back  to  his
former  pasture,  and  order  him  to  be  reclosed  in  some  little

1  Bernard  was  a  great  admirer and publisher  of  the  virtues  of  this  great
prelate,  of which he was an eye-witness, inasmuch as he was  frequently
associated  with  him  by  the  Pope  in  transacting  business  of  the  Church  (Lift  of
S.  Bernard,  B.  ii.  ch. i, 2, 6,  etc.). He  was  a man  truly  apostolic,  whose
character,  disposition,  and  ability  were  closely  allied  to  those of Bernard,  as  is
shown  by  the  affectionate  memory  in  which  the  latter  testifies  that  he  held  him.
In  the  life  of  William,  Duke  of  Aquitaine,  he  is  called  "  a  man  full  of  the  spirit
of  power  and  wisdom." He  died  24th  Jan.,  1 138.

2  Grimlac,  in  his  Rule  for  Solitaries,  shows  that  it  was  not  permitted  to  those
who  had  been  with  solemn  ceremony  enclosed  in  their  cell  to  quit  it  again.


LETTER LVI.  235

cell  near  one  of  your  houses  ;  unless,  perhaps,  you  see
that  some  other  course  is  the  better  for  the  man  to  take,
and  you  succeed  in  convincing  him  that  he  ought  to  take  it.


LETTER  LVI. (Circa  A.D. 1128.)
To  THE SAME.

He  is  uncertain  respecting  the  pilgrimage  of  Norbert  to
Jerusalem.  He  does  not  share  his  opinion  about  A  ntichrist.
He  also  recommends  Humbert.

I  am  quite  ignorant  respecting  the  matter  of  which  you
inquire  of  me,  namely,  whether  the  Lord  Norbert  is  about  to
go  to  Jerusalem.  For  when  I  saw  him  last,  a  few  days  ago,
he  said  nothing  of  it  to  me,  though  I  was  honoured  in  being
able  to  drink  in  many  words  from  his  mouth,  as  it  were  a
sweet-toned  flute.1  But  when  I  asked  what  he  thought
concerning  Antichrist,  he  declared  himself  quite  convinced
that  Antichrist  was  to  be  revealed  during  this  generation
that  is  now.2

1  High  praise  to  Norbert  (says  Mabillon) from such  a  man  ; but  not  less
remarkable  is  the  discernment  of Bernard in divine  things,  since  he  did  not
easily  yield  faith  to  any  kind  of  pious  imaginativeness, as  we  see from Letter
174,  n.  6. Norbert  (whom  we  have  already  praised  in Letters  35 and  38)  was
the  founder  of the  Praemonstratensian Order, which  counted  already  almost
seventy  abbeys  in  its first  twenty  years  of  existence  (Laurence  of  Liege,  Spici-
legium,  Vol.  xii.,  p.  32). See  Letter  253.

2  Not  Norbert  only,  but  many  of  the  older  Fathers  (not  to  speak  of  the  more
recent)  were  persuaded  that Antichrist  was  on  the  point  of  appearing,  and  that
the  last  day  of  the  world was  drawing near — as  may  be  seen  in  S.  Jerome,
Pope  Leo,  S.  Gregory  the  Great,  and even S.  Augustine. They were  led  to
believe  this  by  the  iniquity  of  the  times,  and  the  appearance  of very  many  of
the  signs  foretold  by  Christ  by  which  the  end  of  the  world  should  be  preceded.
But  we  may  go  even  further  back. Even  from  the  time  of  the  Apostles  there
were  many  judgments,  conjectures,  opinions, predictions upon  Antichrist  and
upon  the  end  of  the  world. Very  many  philosophers  and  astronomers,  a  great
number also of impostors, stage players, and scandal-mongers,  * certain
heretics  also  and  fanatics  wished  to  be  prophets  on  this  subject,  and  to  appear
to  know  more  about  it  than  other  mortals ; but  the event  has  already  shown
that  the  greater  number  of  these  predictions  were  vain,  and  has  convicted  their

1  Lit.,  dealers  in  female  finery,  migivenduli.


236  LETTER LVI.

y

I  begged  him  to  tell  me  on  what  he  rested  his  conviction,

authors  of  vanity  and  falsehood.  The  remainder  will  receive,  without  doubt,
from  the  present  and  from  the  future  a  similar  confutation,  and  the  truth  will
be  shown  of  that  saying  in  Acts  i.  7  :  It  is  not  fur  you  to  know  the  times  and
the  seasons  ;  and  of  that  also  in  S.  Matt.  xxiv.  36:  But  of  that  day  and  hour
knoweth  no  one.  It  will  not  be  tedious  to  the  reader  if  we  give  here  a  few
examples  of  these  out  of  a  great  many.

The  first  who  thought  that  the  end  of  the  world  was  imminent  were  the
Thessalonians,  who  wrongly  understood  those  words  of  the  Apostle  (i  Thess.
iv.  17):  Then  we  which  are  alive  and  remain  shall  Le  caught,  up  together  with
them  in  the  clouds  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the
Lord.  It  was  to  recall  these  from  this  opinion  that  S.  Paul  judged  it  necessary
to  write  a  second  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  (S.  Jerome,  Epist.  ad  Miner,  et
Alex.).

Lactantius  thought  that  the  destruction  of  the  world  would  take  place  in  the
five  hundredth  year  after  Christ  (Div.  lust.  B.  i.  c.  25).

Others,  called  Chiliasts,  assigned  to  the  world  a  duration  of  a  thousand  years
after  Christ,  founding  that  on  the  words  of  S.  John  Apoc.  xx.  7  :  After  a  thousand
years  shall  have  passed,  Satan  shall  le  unbound  and  shall  come  out  of  prison.

A  certain  Florentine  Bishop  asserted  that  Antichrist  was  born  in  A.D.  1105
(See  Plat,  in  Paschale  ii.).

Peter  John,  Chief  of  the  Beguines  and  Beghards,  used  to  say  that  the  reign
of  Antichrist  would  finish  in  1335  (Joseph  a  Costa  de  Temp,  noviss.).

A  certain  Spaniard,  named  Arnold,  indicated  (according  to  Florimund)  the
year  1345  as  that  in  which  Antichrist  would  appear,  and  fixed  on  the  day  of
Pentecost  in  that  year  as  the  time  when  his  disciples  would  spread  themselves
through  the  world.

Abbot  Joachim  thought  that  Antichrist  would  appear  within  60  years  from
his  own  time  ;  he  lived  about  A.D.  1200.

Peter  d'Ailly,  Bishop  of  Cambray  and  Cardinal,  predicted  from  astronomical
observations  and  calculations  that  Antichrist  would  be  born  in  i  789.

Nicholas  of  Cusa  did  not  hesitate  to  assert  that  the  coming  of  Antichrist
would  be  in  A.D.  1700  or  1734.

The  illustrious  John  Picus  Mirandola  conjectured  in  his  Assertions  (Concl.  9)
that  Antichrist  would  appear  in  1994.

Jerome  Cardan  (de  Variet.  B.  ii.  c.  2)  and  James  Naclant  (in  Prcelud.  Medulla;
c.  4)  thought  that  Antichrist  would  come  in  A.D.  1800.

In  a  former  age,  by  I  know  not  what  itch  of  prophesying,  many,  both
astrologers  and  heretics,  occupied  themselves  with  predicting  the  end  of  the
world,  which  continued  to  exist  all  the  same,  and  made  them  its  laughing
stock.

John  of  Konigsberg,  a  very  distinguished  mathematician,  assigned  A.D.  1588
as  that  which  would  see  the  destruction  of  the  world.  John  Stoffler,  an
astronomer  not  less  famous,  was  of  the  same  opinion  ;  also  Henry  de  Rantzau,
a  Danish  nobleman,  in  his  book  on  fatal  years  and  on  the  periods  of
empires.  /c.r.X.


LETTER LVII.  237

but  his  reply  did  not  convince  me  that  he  was  right.  But
at  length  he  asserted  this,  that  before  his  own  death  he
would  see  a  general  persecution  in  the  Church.

Concerning  another  matter,  permit  me  to  recall  to  the
remembrance  of  your  Piety  a  poor  exile  named  Humbert.
He  begged  you  lately  when  you  were  at  Troyes  to  intercede
for  him  with  Count  Theobald,  who  had  deprived  him  of  his
goods.  I  also  by  this  letter  entreat  for  him,  and  with  him,
the  same  thing  of  your  Piety.  I  have  written1  on  that
subject  to  intercede  with  the  Prince  himself,  but  have  not
succeeded  in  obtaining  the  favour  which  I  asked.

One  thing  I  ought  to  tell  you,  which  I  know  you  will
gladly  hear.  Stephen,  your  former  disciple,  so  runs  not  as
uncertainly,  so  fights  not  as  one  that  beateth  the  air.  Pray
for  him  that  he  may  so  run  that  he  may  obtain,  may  so
fight  that  he  may  overcome.


LETTER LVII. (Circa A.D. 1128.)
To  THE  SAME.

Lesser  vows  ought  not  to  be  a  motive  to  hinder  greater
spiritual  progress.  This  seems  to  be  written ,  if  I  do  not
mistake,  in  the  cause  of  the  monk  who  is  the  subject  of
Letter  55.

As  this  man  has  reported  to  me  from  you,  you  have
declined  up  to  the  present  to  accede  to  his  desire  and
petition,  because  it  seems  to  you  to  make  void  his  first  vow
of  proceeding  to  Jerusalem.  Upon  which,  if  you  ask  my
opinion,  I  consider  that  more  important  vows  ought  not  to
be  hindered  by  less  important ;  and  that  God  will  not
require  the  fulfilment  of  a  good  vow  if  it  has  been  dis
charged  by  the  performance  of  one  still  better.  For  would
you  be  right  to  complain  of  a  debtor  who  owed  you  twelve
pence  if  on  the  appointed  day  he  paid  you  a  silver  mark  ?

1  Letters  37-39.


238  LETTER LVIII.

and  if  it  is  from  his  Bishop  that  you  fear  some  objection,
you  may  be  sure  that  not  only  will  you  not  displease  him
by  rendering  help  to  this  man,  but  that  he  will  be  very
grateful  to  you.  Farewell.


LETTER LVIII. (Circa A.D. 1126.)

To EBAL, BISHOP OF CHALONS-SUR-MARNE.

He  begs  Ebal  to  take  means  for  the  choosing  of  a  fit
man  to  preside  over  the  Abbey  of  All  Saints.

To  the  venerable  EBAL,  by  the  grace  of  God,  Lord  Bishop
of  Chalons,  Brother  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  health
and  all  that  the  prayers  of  a  sinner  can  avail.

i.  It  is  not  good  that  you  should  neglect  or  disregard  the
danger  of  that  little  vessel  (I  speak  of  the  Church  of  All
Saints')1  which  is  drifting  under  your  eyes,  being  deprived  of
its  ruler.  It  is  a  matter  which  belongs  to  your  charge  ;
therefore  I  wonder  what  motive  hinders  you  in  conscience
from  requiring  the  acceptance  of  the  post  by  that  ecclesiastic,
a  pious  man,  as  it  is  said,  who  has  been  elected  by  religious
persons  to  the  same,  even  although  some  of  the  monks  of  that
abbey  show  themselves  unworthy  of  your  interest  by  their
carelessness  and  indifference.  I  have  understood  that  thev
have  nothing  to  object  to  him  who  has  been  chosen  except
that  he  is  religious,  and  that  they  have  dared  to  desire  your
Greatness  to  permit  them  to  choose  another  who  appears
to  them  more  agreeable  and  more  affable,  because  he  is
not  a  stranger  to  them,  but  is  as  agreeable  as  he  is  well
known  to  the  citizens,  and  being  well  acquainted  with  the
customs  of  the  country  is  gratified  for  transacting  the  busi
ness  of  the  Church.  In  reality  that  which  you  ask  (I  should
reply  to  those  very  cautious  advisers)  is  someone  who  will
not  object  to  your  faults,  and  who  will  either  consent  or  will

1  This  was  the  Abbey  of  regular  Canons  of  the  Order  of  S.  Augustine  at
Chalons-sur-Marne.  Hugo  Metellus,  regular  Canon  of  S.  Leo  at  Toul,  in  Lor
raine,  wrote  a  Letter  (unedited)  to  Peter,  the  abbot  of  this  Church,  perhaps  the
first  after  the  reform.


LETTER LVIII.  239

not  dare  to  oppose  himself  to  your  objectionable  way  of
life.  These  are  not  to  be  listened  to,  but  rather,  whether
they  wish  it  or  no,  action  ought  to  be  taken  by  you,  so
as  to  put  at  the  head  of  that  unfortunate  Church  this  man,
whose  reputation  is  unquestioned,  since,  if  he  is  such  as  he
is  reported  to  be,  God  will,  without  doubt,  be  with  him,
will  pour  His  grace  upon  him,  that  he  may  be  acceptable
to  all  and  successful  in  all  his  enterprises.

2.  If  those  people  are  altogether  unworthy  of  him  and
he  cannot  by  any  means  be  obtained  for  the  post,  let  another
be  sought  out  who  shall  seem  fit,  from  some  other  religious
house  ;  not  such  a  person  as  those  people  desire,  who  desire
nothing  but  what  flatters  their  carnal  tastes,  but  one  who,
as  he  knows  how  to  manage  the  temporal  administration,  so
also  is  able  to  prefer  the  care  of  souls  in  all  things.  Under
the  Lord  William,  your  predecessor  of  holy  memory,  the
two  monasteries  of  S.  Peter  and  S.  Urban  l  were  similarly
deprived  of  pastoral  care  ;  he  was  not  deterred  by  the
length  of  the  journey,  nor  by  the  severity  of  the  winter,  but
came  in  person  twice  to  Cluny,  and,  if  I  do  not  mistake,
once  to  Dijon.  Thence  he  obtained  a  good  man,  Lord  Hugo,
who  afterwards  died,  and  from  Cluny  Lord  Radulf,  whom
he  had  sought  with  many  prayers,  and  who  still  survives.
These  he  placed  one  over  each  monastery,  not  judging  it
safe  to  commit  that  charge  to  any  one  of  the  monks  on  the
spot;  which  I  have  adduced  as  an  example,  for  this  reason
that  I  may  impress  upon  your  charity  how  it  becomes  you
to  act  with  no  less  caution  and  care  in  this  matter  which  is
now  in  your  hands.

1  These  were  two  monasteries  of  Benedictines,  afterwards  under  the  Congre
gation  of  S.  Vito,  the  first  in  the  town  itself,  the  second  in  the  Diocese  of
Chalons-sur-Marne,  which  William  of  Champeaux  reformed.


240  LETTER LIX.

LETTER LIX. (A.D. 1129.)
To  GuiLENCUs,1  BISHOP  OF  LANGRES.

He  counsels  him,  in  order  to  take  away  any  occasion  for
scandal  and  calumny,  to  abandon  to  the  Church  of  S.
Stephen  at  Dijon,  certain  articles  -which  Gamier  had  left
there  on  dying.

To  his  lord  and  father  GUILENCUS,  by  the  Grace  of  God,
Bishop  of  Langres,  Brother  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
health  and  his  entire  devotion.

On  hearing  of  the  death  of  the  Archdeacon  Dom
Gamier2  I  have  thought  it  necessary  to  address  a  prayer
to  your  Paternity  and  even  to  press  upon  you  my  advice,
if  you  will  deign  to  attend  to  the  suggestions  of  one  so
humble.  As  relates  to  the  goods  which  the  late  Abbot
possessed  in  the  Church  of  S.  Stephen  at  Dijon,  have  the
generosity  to  renounce  the  rights  that  you  have  over  these
things.  I  know  well  that  they  ought  to  return  to  you
as  I  remember  was  arranged  and  settled  in  writing  in  the
Chapter  of  Langres,  when  your  son  Harbert  was  constituted
the  first  regular  abbot  of  that  house.  But  because  I  know
that  for  you  on  any  account  to  assert  your  rights  over  these
properties  which  that  Church  has  so  long  held  would  be  an
occasion  of  grave  scandal  to  the  Canons  and  of  great
reproach  to  the  Abbot,  whom  they  would  accuse  of  having
by  coming  among  them  established  a  bad  precedent,  since
it  was  because  of  him  and  at  his  coming  that  their  Church
sustained  so  great  a  loss,  I  beg  you,  therefore,  and  at  the
same  time  advise  and  entreat  you,  to  spare  so  great  a

1  Wilencus  or,  as  others  write, Guillermus. He had  been  Archdeacon of
Langres. Perard,  Burgund.  Minium.,  p.  87.

2  He  had  been  Abbot  of  S.  Stephen  at  Dijon,  before  regular  canons  were  intro
duced  there,  which  was  done  in 1113,  in  which  year  the  four  canons  retired  to
Quincy  to  lead  there  the  life  of  regulars. In  1 116,  then  numbering  twelve,  they
returned  to  their  former  house. That  house  was  governed  up  to  1125  by  the
Priors  Arnulf  and  afterwards  Galo;  and  that  year  Dom  Erbert  or  Harbert  was
instituted  as  abbot  in  the  presence  of  Hubaud,  Archbishop  of  Lyons  ;  Stephen,
Bishop  of  Autun  ;  Goceran,  or  Josceran,  Bishop  of Langres,  and  other  persons
(Perard).


LETTER LX.  241

scandal  to  so  many  feeble  servants  of  Christ,  and  at  the
same  time  to  free  this  vicar  of  Christ  from  such  a  reproach
by  conceding  to  this  Church  what  has  been  theirs  so  long.1


LETTER  LX. (Circa  A.D. 1128.)

To  THE  SAME.
He  intercedes  for  the  Abbey  of  Molesme.

I  hope  that  you  will  not  think  me  an  importunate  meddler
if  I  approach  you  to  intercede  on  behalf  of  the  Abbey  of
Molesme.  There  are  many  motives  which  encourage  me
to  believe  that  I  need  not  fear  a  refusal  from  you.  First,
because  the  house  for  which  I  make  request  is  not  a  foreign
one ;  it  depends  upon  you.  Next,  that  it  asks  only  its
right  from  your  justice,  and  is  not  usurping  that  which
belongs  to  another;  and,  thirdly,  that  our  request  is  joined
in  by  such  a  person  as  would  be  sufficient  to  obtain  even
a  greater  thing  from  your  kindness.  I  mean  Count
Theobald.  If  I  presume  to  add  a  fourth,  it  is  with  diffi
dence  that  I  do  so.  For  neither  have  I  such  distrust  in  my
humility  but  that  I  would  venture,  if  need  were,  to  commit
myself  to  your  long-tried  kindness  in  making  any  request
that  might  be  reasonable.  Farewell.

1  That  was.  in  fact,  done  by  Guilencus  in  1129,  as  we  learn  from  a  charter
published  by  Perard  (p.  97)  and  subscribed  by  many  other  persons,  among'
others  by  the  Abbots  of  Citeaux  and  Clairvaux,  assembled  at  Langres.  In  the
same  year  a  controversy,  which  was  between  the  same  Church  and  the  monks
of  S.  Seine,  was  settled  by  the  same  Josceran  at  the  advice  and  with  the  counsel
of  Gautier,  Bishop  of  Chalons-sur-Saone,  and  the  abbots  of  Citeaux,  Busay,  and
Clairvaux  (//•.,  p.  102).  The  matter  was  afterwards  submitted  to  Pope
Innocent,  who  remitted  the  decision  to  Stephen,  Abbot  of  Cistell,  and  Bernard  of
Clairvaux  (p.  103).  See  how  Bernard  alone  exercised  influence  over  all  things,
and  alone  was  in  the  habit  of  closing  all  lawsuits  and  controversies  (Mabillon's
note).


VOL.  I.  l6


242  LETTER LXI.

LETTER LXI. (Circa  A.D. 1125.)
To RICUIN,  BISHOP OF  TOUL, IN LORRAINE.

He  sends  back  to  the  Bishop  a  man  who  had  been  sent  to
him  for  the  purpose  of  undergoing  penitence,  and  charges
him  "with  his  restoration.

To  the  Reverend  Lord  and  Father  RiCUiN,1  by  the  grace
of  God,  Bishop  of  Toul,  Brother  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clair-
vaux,  health  and  prayers.

For  this  sinner  whom  your  Worthiness  has  thought  fit  to
send  to  me,  who  am  myself  a  sinner,  for  spiritual  advice,  as
he  says,  I  have  no  wiser  counsel  at  the  present  than  that
he  should  return  to  the  bosom  of  your  fatherly  goodness,
and  should  learn  his  duty  from  the  mouth  of  the  priest ;  for
I,  in  order  to  remain  within  the  narrow  limits  of  my  powers
and  my  office,  which  I  ought  not  to  transgress,  am  not  at
all  accustomed  to  impose  penance,  especially  for  great
faults,  on  anyone  but  those  alone  who  are  under  my  juris
diction.  For  what  rashness  \vould  it  be  in  me,  a  sinner,
and  inexperienced  as  I  am,  to  undertake  episcopal  func
tions  and  matters  so  important?  Ought  I  not  also,  just  as
other  men,  to  have  recourse,  as  is  proper,  to  the  opinion  of
the  bishop,  as  often  as  there  presents  itself  among  us  some
affair  more  weighty  than  usual,  which  either  I  know  not,
or  dare  not,  or  am  unable  to  settle  by  myself ;  and  am  I  not
far  from  secure  until  I  have  been  fortified  by  the  opinion
and  advice  of  my  bishop  ?  Let  this  poor  diseased  sheep  be
provided  for,  then,  by  his  own  pastor,  who  is  one  who  well
knows  the  canons,  with  a  suitable  medicine  of  penance,
that  a  soul  for  which  Christ  died  may  not  (which  God
forbid)  die  in  sin,  and  the  Chief  Pastor  require  his  blood  at
your  hand.  But  I  have  persuaded  him  to  leave  the  world
since  God  has  given  him  a  thought  of  so  doing  ;  if  by  your
intercession  he  may  obtain  the  favour  of  being  received,

1  Ricuin  died  in  1 1 26,  from  whence  it  follows  that  this  Letter  cannot  be  later
than  that  year.  On  the  other  hand,  it  appears  certain  that  it  cannot  have  been
written  before  1124,  since  the  Letter  implies  that  Bernard  already  had  a  certain
celebrity  for  his  teaching.  Letter  396  is  addressed  to  the  same  Ricuin.


LETTER LXII.


243


though  an  old  man  and  poor,  into  some  monastery  of  holy
men  within  your  diocese.  May  God  one  day  receive  you,
holy  and  venerable  father,  full  of  days  and  good  works,  into
the  sacred  habitations  in  which  one  day  is  better  than  a
thousand  passed  elsewhere.


LETTER  LXII. (Before  A.D. 1129.)
To HENRY/ BISHOP OF VERDUN.

He  recommends  to  the  bishop  a  woman  laden  with  many
sins,  but  now  penitent.

To  the  Lord  HENRY,  by  the  grace  of  God,  Bishop  of
Verdun,  Brother  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  health  and
prayers.

This  poor  woman,  whom  already  Satan  has  bound,  lo  !
these  many  years,  with  many  and  tangled  knots  of  sin,  has
sought  counsel  respecting  her  salvation  from  me,  though
unworthy,  and  has  been  advised  by  me  ;  but  after  many  and
daily  wanderings  this  poor  lost  sheep  should  return  with
confidence  to  the  fold  of  her  own  pastor.  You  will  succour
her  with  the  more  care  and  speed  in  her  distress  inasmuch
as  you  know  perfectly  well  that  you  will  render  a  strict
account  of  her  safety  to  the  Lamb  who  has  died  for  her  and
has  committed  her  to  your  care.  It  was  our  duty  to  correct
her  when  wandering,  it  is  yours  not  to  despise  her  as  a
sinner,  but  to  receive  her  as  a  penitent ;  and  if  her  un
happy  history  which  she  has  told  me  be  true,  to  reconcile
her  to  her  former  husband,  if  he  still  lives,  or  if  he  is  un-
\villing  to  receive  her,  to  oblige  both  the  one  and  the  other
to  live  in  single  life.  Farewell.

1  Concerning  him,  see  Letter  48,  where  we  have  noted  that  he  resigned  his
see  in  1129,  at  the  advice  of  Bernard.


244  LETTER LXIII.

LETTER LXIII. (Circa  A.D. 1128.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  justifies  himself  respecting  an  imprudence  of  which
he  had  been  accused;  he  seeks  his  friendship,  and  com
mends  to  him  the  Abbot  Guy.

Respecting those matters about  which it  has pleased
your Excellency to make inquiry of me, either I am
deceived  or  he  who  has  reported  them  to  you  misinforms
you. If  there  is  any  foundation  of  truth  in  those  reports
(for  I  distrust  my  memory,  which,  I  know,  is  defective,  and
I  would  not  suspect  such  great  falseness  in  the  brother  who
has  spoken  to  you  about  them), at  least  I  am  quite  sure,
and  you  may  believe  without  doubt  this,  that  I  have  never
used  a  word  of  blame against  you  at  any  time  or  to  any
person,  nor  made  any  accusation. May  such  rashness  be
far  from  a  humble  person like myself  as  to  dare  to  speak
against  bishops,  especially  in  their  absence,  about  matters
which  do  not  concern  me,  and  of  which,  besides,  I  have  no
correct  knowledge. I  gratefully  accept  the  honour  which
you  have  done  me  in  deigning  to  wish  for  my  acquaintance,
and  I  desire  both  that  I  should  be  better  known  to  you  and
that  you  should  know  me  better. It  is  with  the  same  con
fidence  in  the  goodness  of  your  Highness  that  I  address  to
you  a  request, or  rather  a  recommendation,  in favour  of
that  monastery  which my reverend  brother  and  co-abbot
Dom  Guy,  of  Trois-Fontaines,  has  undertaken  to  erect  under
your  protection,  and,  as  they  say,  at  your  request. I  shall
see  in  that  which  you  do  for  him  what  is  your  regard  for
me,  and  I  shall  hold  as  done  for  myself  all  that  you  are  so-
good  as  to  do  in  his  favour. Farewell.


LETTER LXIV.  245

LETTER  LXIV. (Circa  A.D. 1129.)

TO ALEXANDER,1  BlSHOP OF LINCOLN.

A  certain  canon  named  Philip,  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem,
happening  to  turn  aside  to  Clairvaux,  wished  to  remain
there  as  a  monk.  He  solicits  the  consent  of  ^Alexander,
his  bishop,  to  this,  and  begs  him  to  sanction  arrange
ments  with  the  creditors  of  Philip.  He  finishes  by
exhorting  Alexander  not  to  trust  too  much  in  the  glory  of
the  world.

To  the  very  honourable  lord,  ALEXANDER,  by  the  Grace
of  God,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
wishes  honour  more  in  Christ  than  in  the  world.

1.  Your  Philip,  wishing  to  go  to  Jerusalem,  has  found
his  journey  shortened, and  has quickly  reached  the end
that  he  desired. He  has  crossed  speedily  this  great  and
wide  sea,  and  after  a  prosperous  voyage  has  now  reached
the  desired  shore,  and  anchored  at  length  in  the  harbour  of
salvation. His  feet  stand  already  in  the  Courts  of  Jeru
salem,  and  Him  whom  he  had  heard  of  in  Ephrata  he  has
found  in  the broad  woods,  and  willingly  worships  in  the
place  where  his  feet  have  stayed. He  has  entered  into  the
Holy  City, and  has obtained an heritage with  those of
whom  it  is  rightly  said  :  Now  ye  are  no  longer  strangers
and  foreigners,  but  fellow-citizens  with  the  saints  and  of
the  household  of  God  (Ephesians  ii. 19). He  goes  in  and
out  with  the  saints,  and  is  become  as  one  of  them,  praising
God  and saying  as  they  : Our  conversation  is  in heaven
(Philip, iii. 20). He is  become,  therefore,  not a  curious
spectator  only, but  a  devoted  inhabitant  and  an enrolled
citizen  of  Jerusalem ;  but  not  the  Jerusalem  of  this  world
with which is joined Mount Sinai, in Arabia, which is
in  bondage  with  her  children,  but  of  her  who  is  above,  who
is  free,  and  the  mother  of  us  all  (Gal.  iv.  25-26).

2.  And this,  if  you  are  willing  to  perceive  it, is  Clair
vaux. This  is Jerusalem,  and  is associated by  a  certain

1  This  Alexander  was  Bishop  of  Lincoln  in  England  from 1123  to I(47'


246  LETTER LXIV.

intuition  of  the  spirit,  by  the  entire  devotion  of  the  heart,
and  by  conformity  of  daily  life,  with  her  which  is  in
heaven.  This  shall  be,  as  he  promises  himself,  his  rest  for
ever.  He  has  chosen  her  for  his  habitation,  because  with
her  is,  although  not  yet  the  realization,  at  least  the  expec
tation,  of  true  peace  of  which  it  is  said  :  The  peace  of  God
which  passes  all  understanding  (Philip,  iv.  17).  But  this  is
true  happiness  ;  although  he  has  received  it  from  above,  he
desires  to  embrace  it  with  your  good  permission,  or  rather
he  trusts  that  he  has  done  this  according  to  your  wish,  know
ing  that  you  are  not  ignorant  of  that  sentence  of  the  wise
man,  that  a  wise  son  is  the  glory  of  his  father.1  He  makes
request,  therefore,  of  your  Paternity,  and  we  also  make
request  with  him  and  for  him,  to  be  so  kind  as  to  allow  the
payments  which  he  has  assigned  to  his  creditors2  from  his
prebend  to  remain  unaltered,  so  that  he  may  not  be  found
(which  God  forbid)  a  defaulter  and  breaker  of  his  covenant,
and  so  that  the  offering  of  a  contrite  heart,  which  he  makes
daily,  may  not  be  rejected  by  God,  inasmuch  as  any  brother
has  a  claim  against  him.  And  lastly,  he  entreats  that  the
house  which  he  has  built  for  his  mother  upon  Church  land,
with  the  ground  which  he  has  assigned  there,  may  be  pre
served  to  his  mother  during  her  life.  Thus  much  with
regard  to  Philip.

3.  I  have  thought  well  to  add  these  few  words  for  your
self,  of  my  own  accord,  or  rather  at  the  inspiration  of  God,
and  venture  to  exhort  you  in  all  charity,  not  to  look  to  the
glory  of  the  world  which  passeth  away,  and  to  lose  that
which  abides  eternally  ;  not  to  love  your  riches  more  than
yourself,  nor  for  yourself,  lest  you  lose  yourself  and  them
also.  Do  not,  while  present  prosperity  smiles  upon  you,
forget  its  certain  end,  lest  adversity  without  end  succeed  it.
Let  not  the  joy  of  this  present  life  hide  from  you  the  sorrow

1  Prov.  x.  i. Bernard  always  quotes  this  passage  thus. In  the  VULGATE  it
is,  Filius  sapiens  l&tificat  patrem.

2  Letter  18 from the Abbot  Philip to  Alexander the  Third is on a very
similar subject,  and begs  that  the property of the Archdeacon  of Orleans,
who  had  become  a  monk,  should  be  given  up  to  his  creditors  (Biblioth,  Cisterc.
Vol.  i.  p.  246).


LETTER LXV.  247

which  it  brings  about,  and  brings  about  while  it  hides.  Do
not  think  death  far  off,  so  that  it  come  upon  you  unprepared,
and  while  in  expectation  of  long  life  it  suddenly  leaves  you
when  ill-prepared,  as  it  is  written  :  When  they  say  Peace
and  safety,  then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them,  as
travail  upon  a  woman  with  child,  and  they  shall  not  escape
(i  Thess.  v.  3).  Farewell.


LETTER LXV.  (Circa  A.D. 1129.)
To  ALVISUS,  ABBOT  OF  ANCHIN.

He  praises  the  fatherly  gentleness  of  Alvisus  towards
Godwin.  He  excuses  himself,  and  asks  pardon  for  having
admitted  him.

To  ALVISUS,  Abbot  of  Anchin.1

i .  May  God  render  to  you  the  same  mercy  which  you  have
shown  towards  your  holy  son  Godwin.  I  know  that  at  the
news  of  his  death  you  showed  yourself  unmindful  of  old
complaints,  and  remembering  only  your  friendship  for  him,
behaved  with  kindness,  not  resentment,  and  putting  aside
the  character  of  judge,  showed  yourself  a  father  in  circum
stances  that  required  it.  Therefore,  you  strove  to  render  to
him  all  the  duties  of  charity  and  piety  which  a  father
ought  to  render  to  a  son.  What  better,  what  more  praise
worthy,  what  more  worthy  of  yourself  could  you  have
done  ?  But  who  believed  this  ?  Truly  no  one  knows  what
is  in  man,  except  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  him

1  A  monastery  of  the  Benedictine  Order  on  the  river  Scarpe  two  miles  from
Douai.  It  dates  from  1029,  and  was  at  first  named  S.  Saviour.  It  was  situated
on  an  island  named  Anchin,  and  was  founded  by  two  illustrious  persons,  Siclier
and  Gautier,  under  the  episcopate  of  Gerard  II..  Bishop  of  Cam  bray,  to  whose
diocese  that  place  then  belonged.  The  monks  of  Anchin  were  associated
with  the  congregation  of  Cluny,  whose  reform  they  accepted  in  1110.  The
name  and  glory  of  Anchin  were  greatly  increased  by  the  College  in  the  Academy
of  Douai,  which  John  Lentailler,  the  very  worthy  abbot  of  that  place,  gave  with
remarkable  and  praiseworthy  generosity  to  the  Fathers  of  the  Society  of  Jesus
Alvisus,  who  is  mentioned  in  Letter  66,  became  Bishop  of  Arras,  on  which  Anchin
depended,  in  1131.  Letter  395  is  addressed  to  him.


248  LETTER LXV.

(i  Cor.  ii.  n).  Where  is  now  that  austerity,  that  severity,
that  indignation  which  tongue,  eyes,  and  countenance  were
accustomed  to  display  and  terribly  to  pour  upon  him  ?
Scarcely  is  the  death  of  your  son  named  to  you  than  your
fatherly  bosom  is  moved.  Suddenly  all  these  sentiments
which  were  adopted  for  a  purpose,  and  therefore  only  for  a
time,  disappeared,  and  those  which  were  truly  yours,  but
were  concealed  —  charity,  piety,  benignity  —  appeared.
Therefore  in  your  pious  mind  mercy  and  truth  have  met
together,  and  because  mercy  has  certainly  prevailed  over
judgment,  righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other
(Ps.  Ixxxv.  10).  For  as  far  as  I  seem  to  be  able  to  form  an
idea,  I  think  I  see  what  passed  in  your  mind  then,  when
truth,  fired  with  zeal  for  justice,  prepared  to  avenge  the
injury  which  it  seemed  to  you  had  been  done.  The  senti
ment  of  mercy  which,  after  the  example  of  Joseph,  prudently
dissimulated  at  first,  yet  not  enduring  longer  to  be  con
cealed,  and  in  this  also  like  to  Joseph  (Gen.  xlv.  i),  burst
forth  from  the  hidden  fount  of  piety,  and  making  common
cause  w-ith  truth,  repressed  agitation,  calmed  wrath,  made
peace  with  justice.

2.  Then  from  the  pure  and  peaceful  fountain  of  your
heart  poured  forth  like  limpid  streams  such  thoughts  as
these :  What  need  have  I  to  be  angry  ?  Would  it  not
be  better  to  pity  him,  and  not  to  forget  what  is  written,
/  will  have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice  (Hos.  vi.  6),  and  to
fulfil  what  is  ordered,  Study  to  keep  the  unity  of  the
Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace  (Eph.  iv.  3),  so  as  to  be  able  to
count  on  what  is  promised,  Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for
they  shall  obtain  mercy  (S.  Matt.  v.  7)  ?  After  all,  was  not
that  man  my  son  ?  And  \vho  can  rage  against  his  son  ? —
unless,  perhaps,  he  was  only  then  my  son  when  he  was
with  me,  and  not  also  when  he  deserted  me.  In  withdraw
ing  from  me  in  body  for  a  time,  has  he  withdrawn  equally
from  my  heart,  or  can  even  death  take  him  away  from  me  ?
Must  the  necessity  of  the  body  and  of  place  so  hamper  the
freedom  of  souls  which  love  each  other  ?  I  am  quite  sure
that  neither  distance  of  places,  nor  the  absence,  or  even  the


LETTER LXV.  249

death,  of  our  bodies  would  be  able  to  disjoin  those  whom
one  spirit  animates,  one  affection  binds  together.  Finally,
if  the  souls  of  the  righteous  are  in  the  hand  of  God  (Wisd.
iii.  i),  we,  both  those  who  are  already  at  rest,  having  laid
dowrn  the  burden  of  the  flesh,  and  those  who,  being  still  in  the
flesh,  do  not  war  according  to  the  flesh,  beyond  a  doubt  are
still  together.  Mine  he  was  when  living,  mine  he  will  be
dead,  and  I  shall  recognize  him  as  mine  in  the  common
fatherland.  If  there  is  any  who  is  able  to  tear  him  from  the
Hands  of  God,  then  he  may  be  able  to  separate  him  from
me  also.

3.  Thus  your  affection,  father,  has  enabled  you  to  make
excuses  for  your  son.  But  what  has  it  said  of  me,  or  what
satisfaction  from  me  will  be  worthy  of  you,  which  you
could  impose  for  the  great  injury  inflicted  upon  you,  because
when  your  son  left  you  he  was  received  by  me  ?  What
can  I  say  ?  If  I  should  plead  I  have  not  received  him
(would  I  were  able  to  say  so  without  sin)  it  would  be  a
falsehood.  If  I  should  plead  I  received  him,  indeed,  but
writh  good  reason,  I  should  seem  to  wish  to  excuse  myself.
The  safer  way  will  be  to  answer,  I  did  wrong.  But  how  far
did  I  do  wrong  ?  I  do  not  say  it  by  way  of  defence,  but  by
whom  would  he  not  be  received  ?  Who,  I  say,  would  repel
that  good  man  from  his  door  when  he  knocked,  or  expel
him  when  once  received  ?  But  who  knows  if  God  did  not
wish  to  supply  our  need  out  of  your  abundance,  so  that  He
directed  to  us  one  of  the  many  holy  men  who  were  then  in
great  number  in  your  house,  for  our  consolation,  indeed,
but  none  the  less  for  a  glory  to  you  ?  For  a  wise  son  is  the
glory  of  his  father  (Prov.  x.  i).  Moreover,  I  did  not  make
any  solicitation  to  him  beforehand.  I  did  not  gain  him
over  by  promises  to  desert  you  or  to  come  to  us.  Quite  on
the  contrary,  God  is  my  witness.  I  did  not  consent  to
receive  him  until  he  begged  me  to  do  so,  until  he  knocked
at  my  door  and  entreated  to  have  it  opened,  until  I  had
tried  to  send  him  back  to  you,  but  as  he  would  not  agree
to  that  I  at  length  yielded  to  his  importunity.  But  if  it  is
a  fault  that  I  received  him,  a  monk,  a  stranger,  alone,  and


250  LETTER LXVI.

received  him  in  the  way  I  did,  it  will  not  be  unworthy  of
you  to  pardon  such  a  fault,  which  was  committed  once  only,
for  it  is  not  lawful  for  you  to  deny  forgiveness  even  to  those
who  sin  against  you  seventy  times  seven.

4.  But  yet  I  wish  that  you  should  know  that  I  do  not
treat  this  matter  lightly  or  negligently,  and  on  the  contrary
that  I  cannot  pardon  myself  for  ever  having  offended  your
Reverence  in  any  manner.  I  call  God  to  witness  that  often
I  have  in  mind  (since  I  was  not  able  to  do  it  in  body)  thrown
myself  at  your  feet  as  a  suppliant,  and  I  often  see  myself
before  you  making  apology  on  my  knees.  Would  that  the
Holy  Spirit  who  perhaps  inspired  me  with  these  feelings
make  you  also  feel  with  what  tears  and  regrets  worthy
of  pity  I  humble  myself  at  this  moment  before  your  knees
as  if  you  were  present.  How  many  times  with  bare
shoulders,  and  bearing  the  rods  in  my  hands,  prepared,  as  it
were,  to  strike  at  your  bidding;  I  seek  your  pardon,  and
trembling  wait  for  your  forgiveness  !  I  earnestly  desire,
my  father,  to  learn  from  you,  if  it  is  not  too  painful  for  you
to  write  to  me,  that  you  receive  my  excuses,  so  that  if  they
are  sufficient  I  may  be  consoled  by  your  indulgence,  but  if
on  the  contrary  I  must  be  more  humiliated  (as  it  is  just)
that  I  may  endeavour,  whatever  else  I  can  do,  to  give  you
fuller  satisfaction.  Farewell.


LETTER  LXVI.  (Circa  A.D.  1129.)
To  GEOFFREY,  ABBOT  OF  S.  MEDARD.1

He  begs  Geoffrey's  help  in  reconciling  him  with  Abbot
Alvisus,  and  consoles  him  in  his  tribulations.

To  Dom  GEOFFREY,  Abbot  of  S.  Medard,  Brother
BERNARD,  unworthy  superior  of  Clairvaux,  health  ever
lasting.

1  All  the  printed  copies,  and  MSS.,  which  I  have  seen,  except  one,  have  S.  Thierry,
but  it  should  be  read  S.  Medard,  as  in  the  Corbey  copy,  from  which  I  restore  the
following  inscription,  which  is  wanting  in  others,  except  in  Spicilegium,  Vol.  iii.,
Domiio.  etc.  But  although  Geoffrey  was  successively  Abbot  of  St.  Medard  at
Soissons,  and  S.  'I  hierry  at  Rheims,  he  was  then  Abbot  of  S.  Medard,  when  this


LETTER LXVI.  251

In  the  first  place,  I  beg  that  you  would  be  so  good  as  to
forward  the  enclosed  letter  to  the  lord  Abbot  of  Anchin,
and  that  you  would  not  fail  to  do  what  you  can  in  favour  of
your  absent  friend,  as  opportunity  shall  serve,  that  he  obtain
that  which  it  asks.  For  I  ought  not  to  conceal  the  cause  of
offence,  whether  just  or  unjust,  which  anyone,  and  especially
so  venerable  a  father  has  against  me  ;  which  that  I  may  not
do,  I  should  perhaps  have  been  better  able  to  explain  my
meaning  better  by  speech  than  by  writing,  for  in  such
matters  word  of  mouth  is  wont  to  be  more  acceptable  than
written  words,  and  the  tongue  than  the  pen.  The  expres
sion  of  the  eye  gives  confidence  in  the  words.  Nor  is  the
hand  able  to  express  our  sentiments  as  is  the  countenance.
But  now  not  being  able  in  my  absence  to  do  as  I  would,  I
have  recourse  to  you  to  give  satisfaction  as  far  as  I  can.  I
entreat  you,  then,  again  and  again  to  take  away,  as  far  as
in  you  lies,  this  offence  from  the  kingdom  of  God,  \vhich  is
on  our  account,  lest  if  this  resentment  endure  (which  may
God  forbid)  until  the  day  when  the  Angels  shall  be  charged
themselves  to  take  away  that  offence,  we  may  both  be  left
without  excuse.  Concerning  the  tribulations  of  which  you
complained  to  me  some  time  since,  you  know  that  it  is  said,
The  Lord  is  nigh  ^lnto  them  who  are  of  a  troubled  spirit
(Ps.  xxxiv.  1 8).  Trust  in  Him  because  He  hath  overcome
the  world.  He  knows  among  what  people  you  are  dwelling,
and  those  who  trouble  you  are  in  His  sight.  He  who  now
tries  you  by  the  waters  of  persecution,  He  will  grant  you  a
refuge  from  the  tempest.  Farewell.

Letter  was  written.  For  it  was  written,  as  can  be  gathered  from  the  order  of  the
Letters,  before  the  year  1131,  in  which  Geoffrey  was  raised  to  the  Bishopric  of
Chalons-sur-Marne  from  the  Abbacy  of  S.  Medard,  which  he  had  held  since
1119.  He  had  been  previously  Abbot  of  S.  Thierry  for  eight  years.


252  LETTER LXVII.

LETTER LXVII. (Circa  A.D. 1125.)

TO THE MONKS OF FLAY.1

He  justifies  his  reception  of  B.,  a  monk,  as  being  from
a  monastery  entirely  unknown  to  him,  and  having  just
causes  for  his  departure.

To  Dom  H.,  Superior  of  the  Convent  of  Flay,  and  to  the
brethren  who  are  with  him,  the  brethren  in  Clairvaux  wish
health.

i.  We  learn  by  your  letter  that  your  Reverence  is
aggrieved  because  we  have  received  one  of  your  monks
among  us.  I  also  am  much  grieved,  fearing  that  this
grief  of  yours  be  not  that  whereof  the.  Apostle  said  :  Ye
•were  made  sorry  according  to  God  (2  Cor.  vii.  9).  For  if
it  had  been  according  to  God  it  would  not  have  so  provoked
you,  and  you  would  not  have  shown  so  much  bitterness
and  violence  in  the  reproaches  which  you  make  to  us,  the
first  time  that  you  write  to  us,  since  although  we  are  un-

1  Thus,  after  the  best  MSS.,  and  not  of  Flavigny  (Flaviniacenses),  as
Horstius  and  some  others  affirm.  The  context  furnishes  three  convincing'  proofs
of  this.  For.  first,  Bernard  asserts  in  this  Letter  to  the  monks,  to  whom  he
writes :  "  We  have  had  no  knowledge  of  nor  have  we  ever  heard  the  least
mention  of  your  house,  nor  of  the  sanctity  of  your  life,  up  to  the  present  time.''
Then  he  adds  :  "We  are  separated  from  each  other  by  a  longdistance,  by
different  provinces,  and  by  difference  of  language."  And,  lastly  :  "  Not  only
are  we  not  resident  in  the  same  diocese,  but  we  do  not  belong  to  the  same
archbishopric."  And  it  is  too  evident  to  need  proof  that  these  expressions  do
not  at  all  apply  to  the  Abbey  of  Flavigny.  For  Flavigny  is  a  town  in  the
Duchy  of  Burgundy,  not  far  from  Fontaines,  where  Bernard  was  born,  nor  a
very  great  distance  from  Clairvaux,  having  an  Abbey  of  Benedictines,  which
was  in  the  Diocese  of  Autun,  the  Archbishopric  of  Lyons,  just  as  Clairvaux
was,  and  which  possessed  the  relics  of  a  holy  queen.  We  must,  therefore,
restore  "of  Flay"  (Flaviacenses),  a  little  village  of  the  Diocese  of  Beauvais,  on  the
Epte,  where  S.  Germer  founded,  in  650,  a  famous  monastery  of  Benedictines  ;
whence  it  was  sometimes  called  Flay,  sometimes  S.  Germer  of  Flay.

As  for  the  name  of  the  abbot,  whom  Bernard  indicates  by  his  first  Letter  to
Dom  H.,  Abbot  of  Flay,  I  think  that  it  is  no  other  than  Hildegaire  I.,  who
was  Abbot  of  Flay  from  1106  to  1123,  as  is  stated  in  the  Catalogue  of
Acherius,  following  Guibert.  But  I  collect  from  the  order  of  these  Letters  that
he  was  still  abbot  in  1126.  Some  think  (but  wrongly)  that  Hugo  is  meant  in
this  place.


LETTER LXVII.  253

known  to  you,  and  we  have  never  yet  held  communication
by  speech  or  by  letter,  we  are  none  the  less  your  brethren,
and  if  you  permit  me  to  say  so,  even  your  friends.  You
wonder,  as  you  write  us,  that  we  have  received  Brother
Benedict1  among  us,  and  you  address  threats  to  us  unless
we  immediately  send  him  back.  You  remind  us  that  the
Rule  forbids  a  monk  to  be  received  from  a  known  monas
tery,  and  you  are  no  doubt  persuaded  that  yours  is  not  un
known.  But  what  if  it  is  known  to  others,  provided  that  it
is  not  known  to  us  ?  Even  although,  as  you  tell  me,  the
reputation  of  your  community  has  so  spread  that  the
history  of  your  church  is  known  even  at  Rome  ;  yet  it  has,
I  know  not  how,  so  passed  over  us,  who  are  a  long  way
this  side  of  Rome,  that  we  have  never  heard  speak  of  you
the  least  in  the  world,  neither  of  your  abbot  nor  of  your
monks,  nor  of  the  very  name  of  your  house,  nor  have  we
the  least  knowledge  of  the  sanctity  of  your  life  up  to  the
present  time.  Nor  is  that  wonderful,  considering  that  we
are  separated  from  each  other  by  a  long  distance,  by
different  provinces,  and  by  difference  of  language.  Not
only  are  we  not  residing  in  the  same  diocese,  but  we  do
not  belong  to  the  same  archbishopric.  We  think,  then,
that  we  are  prohibited  from  receiving  monks  only  from
monasteries  which  are  known  to  us,  and  not  from  those
which  others  know  ;  otherwise,  since  there  is  no  monastery
which  is  not  known  to  somebody,  not  one  would  be  left
from  which  monks  might  properly  be  received.  How,
then,  would  that  be  fulfilled  which  was  permitted  and  even
ordered  by  the  blessed  Benedict,  that  a  stranger  monk
ought  not  only  to  be  received  as  a  guest,  as  long  as  he
pleases  to  remain,  but  also  to  be  urged  to  remain  per
manently,  if  he  is  found  useful  to  the  community?

2.  We,  nevertheless,  took  another  course  with  regard  to
the  brother  before  mentioned.  For  when  he  came  humbly
praying  to  be  received  by  us  he  was  at  first  repulsed,  and

1  In  the  printed  copies  the  initial  G.  is  found,  in  not  a  few  MSS.  B.  That  of
Corhey,  which  is  most  highly  tstimated,  has  the  full  name  Benedict,  and  follow
ing  it  we  have  restored  the  name  in  several  places.


254  LETTER LXVII.

then  bidden  to  return  to  his  own  monastery.  But  he  not
being  willing  to  do  this,  betook  himself  to  a  hermitage  near
us,  and  there  dwelt  quietly  almost  seven  months,  without
any  evil  report  of  him  arising.  But  not  thinking  it  safe
for  himself  to  live  alone,  he  was  not  ashamed,  after  this
first  repulse,  to  ask  of  us  again  what  he  had  asked  before.
We  a  second  time  admonished  him  about  his  return,  and
when  we  inquired  the  cause  of  his  departure  he  said  :  "  My
abbot  treated  me  not  as  a  monk  but  as  a  physician.1  He
obliged  me  to  serve,  or  rather  he  himself  served  by  means
of  me,  not  God,  but  the  world  ;  since,  in  order  not  to  incur
the  ill-will  of  secular  princes,  he  used  to  compel  me  to  give
medical  care  to  tyrants,  robbers,  and  excommunicate.  I
declared  to  him  both  in  public  and  in  private  the  peril  which
my  soul  incurred ;  but  as  this  was  to  no  purpose,  I  at
length,  relying  on  the  advice  of  certain  wise  men,  fled  from
the  destruction  of  my  soul,  not  from  religion  or  from  my
community.  Do  not  reject  one  who  seeks  salvation,  open
the  door  to  one  who  knocks."  At  the  sight  of  his  perse
verance,  having  heard  his  reason,  and  knowing  no  ill  of
him,  we  granted  him  admission  ;  we  approved  him  after
his  time  of  probation,  we  admitted  him  to  make  profession,
and  now  we  consider  him  as  one  of  us.  We  did  not  com
pel  him  to  enter,  and  now  we  will  not  oblige  him  to  depart.
And  if  we  should  drive  him  out  he  would  not  (as  he  asserts)
return  to  you,  but  would  fly  still  farther  from  you.  Cease
then,  brethren,  to  persecute  unoffending  people  with  un
merited  reproaches,  and  to  trouble  them  with  useless  letters,
because  we  will  not  be  provoked  even  by  reiterated  insults
to  reply  to  you  otherwise  than  with  respect ;  nor  will  we  be
terrified  into  not  keeping  among  us  a  monk  whom  we
believe  that  we  have  received  according  to  the  Rule.

1  Formerly  clerks  and  monks  used  to  act  as  physicians.  As  to  clerks,
Christianus  Lupus  shows  that  in  notes  upon  various  Letters,  both  of  the  Ephesine
and  Chalcedonian  Council  (p.  too,  et  seqq.}  As  to  monks,  various  examples
are  cited,  of  which  a  remarkable  one  is  in  Lupus  Ferrariensis  Ep.  72,  respecting
Dido,  Abbot  of  Sens.  Modern  law  forbids  the  practice  of  medicine  to  monks  as
well  as  to  clergy.  (Mabillon's  note.)


LETTER LXVIII.  255

LETTER LXVIII.

To  THE  SAME,  UPON  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

To  the  Reverend  the  Abbot  of  Flay,  to  the  brethren  of
that  convent,  and  to  certain  others,  Brother  BERNARD
wishes  health.

MY  GOOD  BRETHREN,—

1.  It  would have  been a  proof  of  moderation  on  your
part  had  you  shown  yourselves satisfied with  my  former
explanation in answer to your  complaint, and refrained
from  harassing  those  who  do not deserve it. But  as  to
your  former  attacks  you  have  added  greater  ones,  and  have
thrown  among  us  new  germs of  discord  (which,  we  trust,
will  no  more  be  fruitful than  the  former  were),  and  as  by
not  replying  I  may  seem  to  acknowledge  fault  where  there
is  none,  I  reply  truthfully  a  second  time  to  what  you  angrily
object. This  is  the  whole  of  my  fault,  which  you  consider
so  great;  this  the  vast  injustice  that  I  have done  to  you  ;
that  a  monk,  alone,  a  wanderer,  poor,  miserable,  flying  from
peril  to  his  soul,  seeking  earnestly  his  own  salvation,  at  his
earnest  application  and  request  we  have  received  ; or  that
having  thus received him, we do  not eject him  without
cause,  and so make ourselves prevaricators,  destroyers  of
what  we  have  built. For this  we  are considered trans
gressors  of  the  Rule,  of  the canons,  of  the law  of  nature
itself  ! You demand  with  indignation,  why  we  have  pre
sumed  to  admit  among  us  a  monk  of  yours,  excommunicated
by  you,  which  we  would  not  suffer  ourselves. But  as  to  the
excommunication,  why need we  reply, when you give  a
sufficient  reply  yourselves  for  us,  since  you know  without
doubt  that  he  was  received  by  us,  before  he  was excom
municated  by  you  ? But  if  he  was  regularly  received,  it  is
a  monk  under  our  jurisdiction and not under  yours,  that
you  have  excommunicated  : and  you  will  see,  whether  that
was  rightly  done.

2.  It remains  therefore  to be ascertained,  whether  he
was  rightly  received  ; and  this  is  the  sole  question  between


256  LETTER LXVIII.

us.  You  indeed,  since  you  cannot  deny  that  a  monk  may
regularly  be  received  from  a  monastery  that  is  unknown,
contend  that  yours  was  known  to  us.  We  deny  it,  and  you
do  not  believe  us.  But  if  you  do  not  believe  us  in  a  simple
denial,  do  so  when  we  affirm  by  oath.  I  take  God  to  witness
that  I  did  not  know  you,  and  do  not  know  you  ;  I  have  re
ceived  the  writings  of  unknown  persons  and  I  have  replied
to  unknown  persons.  I  feel  indeed  your  violence  and  your
attacks,  but  yet  I  am  not  acquainted  with  the  assailants
themselves.  But  you  for  the  purpose  of  convincing  me  of
pretended  ignorance,  employ  the  crushing  argument  that
those  cannot  be  unknown  to  me  whose  name,  that  of  the
abbot  and  of  the  monastery  itself  I  have  placed  in  my
letters  ;  as  if  when  you  know  the  names  of  things  you  know
the  things  themselves  also.  Since  in  that  case  I  have  the
pleasure  to  know  the  names  of  Michael  and  Gabriel  and
Raphael,  by  the  mere  hearing  of  these  words,  I  am  already
blessed  by  the  knowledge  of  those  blessed  spirits  them
selves.  It  is  no  small  profit  to  me,  I  say,  if  because  I  have
learned  from  the  Apostle  to  call  by  their  names  Paradise
and  the  third  Heaven,  I  have  therefore,  though  not  rapt
thither  with  the  Apostle,  learned  the  secrets  of  Heaven  from
their  names  alone,  and  heard  unspeakable  words  which  it
is  not  lawful  for  man  to  utter.  Foolish  am  I  who,  already
knowing  the  name  of  my  God,  yet  still  groan  superfluously
every  day,  I  know  not  why;  uselessly  sighing  with  the
Prophet,  and  saying,  Thy  face  O  Lord  will  I  seek  (Ps.
xxvii.  8).  And  When  shall  I  come  to  appear  before  God
(Ps.  xlii.  2).  And:  Show  us  Thy  Face,  and  we  shall  be  saved
(Ps.  Ixxx.  3).

3.  But  what  is  it  we  do  towards  you  which  we  are  unwill
ing  to  be  done  towards  us  ?  Do  you  suppose  that  we  are  un
willing  that  any  monk  departing  from  our  monastery  should
be  received  in  any  other  ?  Would  that  you  might  be  able
to  save  without  us  all  those  committed  to  us.  If  any  monk  of
ours  should  have  passed  over  to  you  for  the  sake  of  greater
perfection,  or  from  the  desire  of  a  severer  life,  not  only  are
we  not  offended  if  you  assist  him  in  so  good  a  wish,  but  we


LETTER LXVIII.  257

earnestly  entreat  you  to  do  so  :  nor  should  we  complain  as
persons  offended,  but  confess  ourselves  to  have  received  a
great  service.  Then  you  deny  what  we  had  heard  of  you,
that  Brother  B.  as  long  as  he  was  with  you,  practised  the
medical  art  by  your  consent  or  even  by  your  order  upon
secular  persons,  and  you  accuse  of  falsehood  him  who  has
said  this.  Whether  he  has  told  the  truth  I  know  not ;  let
him  see  to  it;  but  this  I  know,  that  if  he  practised  medicine,
whether  of  his  own  accord,  as  you  declare,  or  to  obey  you,
as  he  testifies,  he  exposed  his  soul  to  great  dangers.  Who,
then,  could  be  so  inhuman  as  not  to  help  a  person  in  such
peril  if  he  were  able,  or  to  counsel  him  if  he  were  not  able  ?
And  if,  as  you  assert,  that  it  was  not  compelled  by  obedi
ence  but  by  the  desire  of  gain  for  himself,  or  a  taste  for
wandering,  that  he  used  to  travel  about  here  and  there
making  merchandise  of  his  art ;  what  cause  existed  for  his
leaving  you  ?  Was  it  because  by  the  tightening  of  pastoral
discipline,  that  was  no  longer  permitted  to  him  which  had
been  permitted  before  ?  But  in  that  case  why  did  you,
when  he  was  with  us,  wishing  to  recall  him,  promise  him
that  he  should  remain  quiet  in  the  convent,  for  the  purpose
of  persuading  him  to  return  ;  unless  that  you  knew  that  the
man  wished  for  this,  and  remembered  that  he  had  asked  for
it  ?  but  he,  having  already  obtained  among  strangers  what
he  could  not  obtain  among  his  own,  nor  desiring  to  quit  the
certain  for  the  uncertain,  has  held  fast  what  he  already  en
joyed,  despising  what  was  offered  to  him  too  late.

4.  Cease,  then,  my  brethren,  cease,  from  being  careful  for
a  brother  for  whom  it  is  not  at  all  needful  that  you  should
take  care  :  unless,  perhaps,  which  I  hope  is  not  the  case,
you  seek  your  own  interests  and  not  those  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  love  more  the  advantage  which  you  derive  from  him
than  his  salvation.  For  since  he  was  always  when  among
you  a  rolling  stone,1  and,  as  you  write,  expending  for  his
own  purposes  what  he  acquired  by  his  art,  against  the  obli
gations  of  his  condition  and  the  command  of  his  abbot ;  let
those  who  love  him  rejoice,  because  by  the  pity  of  God  he

1 Gyro  vagus.
VOL.  I.  17


258  LETTER LXIX.

has,  while  among  us,  been  entirely  cured.  For  we  give  our
testimony  to  him  that  never  now  does  he  wander  abroad
on  any  pretence,  but  remains  quietly  in  the  monastery;
he  lives  without  complaint  as  a  poor  man  among  poor  men.
Far  from  regarding,  as  you  say,  the  first  engagements  which
he  made  as  null  and  void,  he  now  considers  them  valid,  and
accomplishes  them  all  without  exception,  which,  when  with
you,  he  failed  to  do  ;  and  this  with  a  regularity  and  perfect
obedience  without  which  he  deceives  himself  who  trusts  in
his  stability  of  place.  I  entreat  you,  then,  brethren,  that
your  indignation  may  now  be  calmed  and  your  inquietude
cease.  But  if  otherwise,  do  what  you  please,  write  as  you
please,  persecute  me  as  much  as  you  please ;  charity
endures  all  things,  suffers  all  things.  For  I  am  quite  re
solved  not  to  abandon  on  account  of  this  matter  the  purest
affection,  the  deepest  respect,  and  a  brotherly  consideration
towards  you.

LETTER  LXIX.

To  Guv,1  ABBOT  OF  TROIS  FONTAINES.2

He  instructs  Guy  what  to  do.  The  latter  had  conse
crated  by  mistake  a  Chalice,  in  which,  by  oversight  of  the
servers,  there  was  no  wine.

i.  I  know,  my  dear  friend,  that  you  are  distressed,  and  I
praise  you  for  being  so,  if  your  distress  be  not  excessive  ;
for  you  are,  I  believe,  distressed,  as  the  Apostle  says,

1  He  was  the  second  abbot  of  Trois  Fontaines,  and  has  been  already  praised
in  Letter  63  ;  he  had  succeeded  Roger,  the  first  abbot,  in  1 1 29.  See,  respecting  his
death,  Letter  71.

2  The Abbey of  Trois Fontaines, first  daughter  house  of Clairvaux,  was
founded,  as  William,  Abbot  of  S.  Thierry,  states  (Life  of  S.  Bernard,  B.  i.  c.  13),
in  1 1 18,  in  the  Diocese  of  Chalons-sur-Marne,  with  the  assistance  of  William  of
Champeaux,  then  Bishop  of  that  see.

It  was  by  the  Abbey  of  Trois  Fontaines  that  was  created  that  of  Haute  Fon
taine,  in  the  same  Diocese  of  Chalons-sur-Marne.'

It  was  another  abbey  of  Trois  Fontaines,  or  of  SS.  Vincent  and  Anastasius,  at
Tres  Fontes,  near  Rome,  to  which  abbey  the  election  of  Abbot  Turold  refers,  o  f
which  mention  is  made  in  Letter  306.


LETTER LXIX.  259

according  to  God  (2  Cor.  vii.  9)  ;  nor  is  it  doubtful  that
sorrow  of  this  kind  will  be  one  day  changed  into  joy.
Therefore,  be  angry  and  sin  not,  for  you  will  sin  not  less
by  too  much  anger  than  by  no  anger  at  all.  For  not  to  be
angry  when  where  is  cause  for  anger  is  to  be  unwilling  to
correct  what  is  wrong ;  but  to  be  more  angry  than  there  is
cause  for  being  is  to  add  sin  to  sin  ;  and  if  it  is  wrong  not
to  correct  what  is  wrong,  how  much  more  would  it  not  be
to  increase  it  ?  If  judgment  depended  on  the  issue  of
actions  inculpated,  your  sorrow,  however  great,  could  not
be  blamed,  since,  unquestionably,  it  rests  on  the  fact  that
the  fault  had  been  great.  For  a  fault  would  appear  the
graver  the  more  sacred  is  the  matter  which  it  is  concerned
with.  But  as  it  is  the  motive  and  not  the  matter,  the  in
tention  and  not  the  result  of  actions  which  distinguishes
between  praise  and  blame,  according  to  the  word  of  the
Lord,  If  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of
light :  but  if  thine  eye  be  evil,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of
darkness  (S.  Matt.  vi.  22,  23);  therefore,  in  the  examination
of  your  act,  I  consider  the  dignity  of  holy  things  is  not  so
much  the  point  to  be  regarded  as  your  own  intention.
Furthermore,  our  Prior  and  I,  after  thinking  over  the  whole
matter  privately  and  consulting  together  about  it,  decided
that  in  it  there  was  ignorance  on  your  part,  and  negligence
on  the  part  of  the  servers  ;  but  evidently  no  ill  intention  in
either.  And  you  know  well  that  no  work  is  good  unless  it
be  founded  in  good  will.  How  then  can  an  act  not  done
with  consent  of  the  will  be  a  great  sin  ?  Otherwise,  if  it
were  the  case  that  without  the  assent  of  the  will,  a  g-ood

> o

action  indeed  obtains  no  approval,  but  a  bad  one  severe
punishment ;  that  would  be  as  much  as  to  say,  that  for
one  and  the  same  cause  both  evil  is  reckoned  and  good  not
credited ;  and  whosoever  thinks  thus  let  him  assert,  if  he
will,  that  good  does  not  prevail  over  evil,  but  that  evil
prevails  over  good.

2.  Nevertheless,  in  order  to  set  at  rest  your  troubled  con
science,  and  lest  perhaps  this  lamentable  occurrence  should
be  a  warning  of  some  secret  sin  lurking  still  in  the  monas-


260  LETTER LXIX.

tery,  I  enjoin  upon  you  by  way  of  penance  to  recite1  the
Seven  Penitential  Psalms  daily  until  Easter,  seven  times
prostrating  yourself,  and  to  receive  the  discipline  seven  times.
In  this  manner  also  let  him  who  ministered  to  you  at  that
Mass  make  satisfaction.  But  as  for  him  who  had  made  the
preparations2  beforehand  and  had  forgotten  to  put  wine  into
the  chalice,  his  fault  I  consider  greater  than  that  of  others,
and,  if  you  agree  with  me,  I  leave  him  to  your  judgment.  If
a  report  of  this  has  gone  forth  among  the  brethren,  I  think
that  they  also  should  severally  receive  the  discipline,  that
that  may  be  fulfilled  which  is  written,  Bear  ye  one  another's
burdens  (Gal.  vi.  2).  Afterwards,  I  greatly  approve  of  your
having  poured  some  wine  into  the  chalice,  upon  a  particle
of  the  consecrated  Host,  when  the  negligence  had  been
found  out,  though  it  was  found  out  too  late  ;  and  I  consider
that  the  liquid,  though  not  changed  by  a  proper  and  solemn
consecration  into  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ,  yet  became
hallowed  by  the  contact  with  the  Sacred  Body.3  It  is  said,
nevertheless,  that  some  other  writer,  I  know  not  whom,
was  of  another  opinion,  and  thought  that  the  Sacrifice  could
not  be  without  the  three — bread,  wine,  and  water  ;  so  that
if  either  of  the  three  should  be  in  any  case  wanting,  the
other  two  were  not  consecrated.  But  on  this  point  every
one  must  be  satisfied  in  his  own  mind.

3.  For  myself,  if  the  same  thing  had  happened  to  me,  I
should  (according  to  my  poor  opinion)  proceed  to  repair
the  omission  in  one  out  of  t\vo  ways  :  either  that  which
you  did,  or  I  would  rather  have  iterated  the  sacred  words
from  that  place  where  it  is  said,  "  Likewise  after  supper  He
took  the  cup"  (simili  modo  postquam  coenatum  est),  and

1  Decantare,  i.f.,  to  recite,  in  which  sense  the  word  is  used  everywhere  among
old  writers. "The  holy Bishop  Ambrose,"  says  the  Ven.  Bede,  speaking  con
cerning  the  Faith,  directs  the  faithful  to  recite  (decantent)  the  words  of  the  Creed
in  matins.

2  Some  MSS.  have  apparaverat.

3  This  was  also  the  opinion  of  James  de  Vitry,  besides  the  scholastics  (Hist.
Occident,  p.  427). He  proposes  the  present  case  (Ibid.  444). See  my  Comm.in
Ordinem  Rom.  and  our  Edmund  Martene,  de  Ritiius  monasticis  (B.  ii.  c.  7).


LETTER LXX.  261

so  have  supplied  what  remained  to  do  of  the  sacrifice.1
For  I  could  not  possibly  doubt  that  the  Body  was  already
consecrated,  according  to  the  Rite  of  the  Church,  since  I
have  learned  from  the  Church,  what  she  also  has  learned
from  her  Lord,  to  present  Bread  and  Wine  together  ;  yet  (I
have  not  learned)  to  be  confident  that  the  Mystery  is  con
summated  in  these  together.  Since,  then,  according  to  the
custom  of  the  Church,  the  Body  is  perfected  from  bread,
before  the  Blood  from  wine :  if  by  forgetfulness,  that
which  is  to  be  consecrated  the  later,  is  presented  too  late,
I  do  not  see  why  that  lateness  of  the  latter  should  annul
the  preceding  consecration.  For  I  think  that  if  it  had
pleased  the  Lord,  after  His  Body  made  from  bread,  to
intermit  for  a  little  while  the  consecration  of  the  wine,  or
even  altogether  to  omit  it,  none  the  less  His  Body  which
He  had  made'2  would  have  remained,  nor  would  things  not
yet  done  affect  those  done.  It  is  not  that  I  deny  that  bread
and  wine  mixed  with  water  ought  to  be  presented  together,
on  the  contrary,  I  assert  that  it  ought  to  be  thus  done  and
not  otherwise ;  but  it  is  one  thing  to  blame  negligence,
and  another  to  deny  efficacy  (as  a  result  of  it)  ;  in  the
one  case  we  assert  that  all  things  are  not  done  as  they
should  be,  in  the  other  we  deny  that  they  are  done  at  all.
In  the  meantime,  you  have  here  wrhat  I  think  and  feel
about  this  matter,  without  the  least  unwillingness  to  con
sider  either  your  opinion,  if  it  be  wiser  than  mine,  or  that
of  any  other  better  qualified  person.


LETTER LXX.

To  THE  SAME.

Bernard  reminds  him  what  feelings  of  mercy  a  pastor
ought  to  have,  and  ad-vises  him  to  withdraw  a  sentence
which  he  had  passed  upon  an  offending  monk.

1  See  General  Rubrics  of  the  Mass  :  chap.,  "  Concerning  Defects in  Matter  ;  "
art.,  "  Concerning  Defect  of  Wine."

2  Fecerat,  otherwise  fucrat.


262  LETTER LXX.

To  the  Lord  Abbot  GUY,  Brother  BERNARD,  health,  with
the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  piety.1

Considering  the  miserable  condition  of  this  unhappy
man,  I  feel  myself  touched  with  pity,  but  I  fear  lest  it  be
in  vain.  Yet  even  though  he  should  remain  in  his  unhappy
state  I  do  not  think  that  my  pity  would  be  altogether
wasted,  but  would  be  of  advantage,  at  least  to  me.  The
pity  which  I  feel  is  not,  however,  prompted  by  any  advan
tage  to  myself,  but  a  brotherly  sympathy  is  produced  in
my  inmost  heart  by  the  misery  of  a  brother.  Pity  is  a
feeling  which  is  not  governed  by  the  will,  nor  subjected  to
the  reason,  nor  is  anyone  drawn  to  it  by  deliberate  purpose  ;
but  it  necessarily  imposes  itself  of  its  own  accord  on  com
passionate  hearts  at  the  sight  of  the  suffering  of  others,  so
that  even  if  it  were  a  sin  to  be  moved  with  compassion  I
could  not  help  pitying,  even  if  I  wished.  The  reason  and
the  will  would,  indeed,  be  able  to  prevent  our  acting  upon
the  feeling;  but  could  they  eradicate  the  feeling  itself?
Far  from  me  be  those  who  would  console  me  by  saying
that  my  prayer  shall  return  unto  my  own  bosom,  although
he  for  whom  it  is  offered  is  not  yet  converted.  Nor  do  I
listen  to  those  who  flatter  me  by  quoting:  The  righteous
ness  of  the  righteous  shall  be  upon  him  (Ezek.  xviii.  20)
while  the  wicked  still  remains  in  his  impiety.  No,  I  say,  I
cannot  be  consoled  while  I  see  the  desolation  of  a  brother.
If,  then,  my  dear  son,  your  pious  mind  is  similarly  affected,
or  rather  because  it  is  similarly  affected,  although  that  un
happy  man  seems  to  have  practised  shameful  and  repeated
flight  from  the  monastery  after  having  returned,  yet
because  he  thinks  otherwise,  you  ought  to  listen,  not  only
patiently  but  also  willingly  to  what  he  humbly  urges  (how
ever  ill-founded),  if  perchance  any  reasonable  opportunity
may  be  found  for  saving  a  man  whose  safety  is  despaired
of;  which  (as  your  experience,  equally  with  my  own,
teaches)  is  difficult  to  find  even  in  cono-reo-ation,  but  is

/  o o

much  more  difficult  when  he  is  without  in  the  world. Do
not  disdain,  therefore,  having  called  an  assembly  of  all  the

1  This  inscription  has  been  restored  from  the  Corbey  MS.,  No.  553.


LETTER LXX.  263

brethren,  to  recall  all  the  censures  that  you  have  launched
against  him,  insomuch  that  his  contumacy  shall  be  healed
by  your  humility,  and  perhaps  some  means  may  be  found,
without  violating  the  Rule,  for  receiving  him  once  more.
Nor  need  you  fear  that  by  this  retractation  you  will  displease
our  just  and  merciful  God,  if  mercy  shall  be  exalted  above
justice.1  Farewell.

i  Out  of  eight  MS.  copies  of  this  Letter  which  I  have  seen,  there  are  five  in
which  the  following  addition  is  found  after  these  words,  viz.,  two  of  Citeaux,  one
of  Vauluisant,  one  of  Corbey,  and  five  of  Foucarmont;  but  in  thr;e  Colbertine
MSS.  it  is  wanting  : —

"  A  similar  case,  which  I  remember  to  have  happened  to  me,  I  adduce  as
an  example  to  you.  A  certain  brother  (otherwise  Bartholomew)  I  one  day,
carried  aivay  by  anger  because  he  had  vexed  me,  bade  ivith  threatening  voice
and  look  to  go  out  of  the  monastery  ;  he  immediately  went  out,  and  proceed
ing  to  one  of  our  farmhouses  there  remained.  Which  being  known,  I  unshed
to  recall  him ;  but  he  replied  that  he  would  only  return  if  he  might  take  his
previous  order  and  standing,  instead  of  being  last  of  all;  and  not  as  a  fugi
tive,  but  as  one  rashly  and  without  reasonable  judgment  dricen  forth ;
because,  he  said,  he  ought  not  to  submit  to  the  ordinary  judgment  of  the  Rule
in  returning,  as  that  had  not  been  waited  for  in  expelling  him.  Not  wishing
to  decide  on  his  answer  and  my  action  myself,  since  I  distrusted  my  own
judgment  on  account  of  a  feeling  of  carnal  resentment,  I  committed  the
matter  to  the  judgment  of  all  the  brethren.  Therefore  in  my  absence  it
was  decided  that  his  recall  ought  not  to  be  subject  to  the  precept  of  the  Rule,
as  it  appeared  that  his  expulsion  had  not  been  regularly  made.  If,  then,  so
great  and  pious  consideration  was  shown  in  the  case  of  one  who  had  once  only
gone  out  of  his  monastery,  ivhat  ought  not  to  be  shown  for  your  monk  in  the
situation  of  peril  in  ivhich  he  is  ?  "

This  entire  addition  appears  to  me  entirely  alien  as  well  to  the  character  of
Bernard  as  to  his  conduct.  That  transport  of  rage,  and  headlong  ejection  of  a
monk  from  the  convent  could  never  have  been  found  in  so  good  a  man.  He  had
without  doubt  ardent  zeal,  but  founded  on  gentleness  and  clemency,  as  appears
even  in  this  Letter,  where  he  urges  the  showing  of  so  much  lenity  to  a  deserter.
Besides,  if  our  Saint  had  fallen  into  this  fault  he  would  rather  have  buried  it  in
silence,  and  striven  to  efface  it  by  penitence  ;  nor  would  he  have  committed
such  an  imprudence,  as  to  adduce  to  Abbot  Guy  for  an  example,  what  would
have  been  so  contrary  to  the  object  of  Bernard  himself,  and  an  occasion  of
scandal  to  Guy.  I  think,  then,  that  this  story  was  cited  at  first  by  some  abbot,
perhaps  on  the  margin  of  a  Codex,  it  may  be  one  of  the  Cistercian  MSS.,  and
then  removed  from  the  margin  to  the  text,  and  that  from  this  Codex  others  re
ceived  it;  but  by  no  means  any  of  those  at  Clairvaux,  which  in  this  matter  are
of  the  greatest  weight.


264  LETTER LXXI.

LETTER  LXXI. (A.D. 1127.)
To  THE  MONKS  OF  THE  SAME  PLACE.

He  excuses  himself  for  having  hitherto  put  off  making  a
visit  to  them,  not  from  negligence  on  his  part,  but  from
waiting  for  a  suitable  opportunity  ;  he  consoles  them  for
the  death  of  their  Abbot ,  Roger.

Do  not  impute  it  to  negligence  that  I  have  not  come  to
you  yet.  I  care  for  you  indeed  as  for  my  own  bowels.  If
a  mother  is  able  to  neglect  the  care  of  her  own  child,  then
can  I  be  suspected  of  neglecting  you.  I  have  been  waiting,
and  I  am  waiting  now,  only  for  an  opportunity,  so  that  when
I  come  my  visit  may  not  be  without  profit.  In  the  mean
time,  let  not  your  heart  be  troubled  for  the  departure  of
your  father.  God,  we  hope,  will  provide  him  a  worthy  suc
cessor.  Nor,  indeed,  is  he  lost  to  you  ;  the  Lord  has  trans
lated  him,  not  taken  him  entirely  away.  Only  he,  who  was
your  own  peculiar  property,  now  belongs  to  us  all  as  well.
Until  I  come  to  you,  work  bravely,  let  your  hearts  be  com
forted,  and  let  all  your  actions  be  done  in  charity.  Fare
well.


LETTER  LXXII.
To  RAINALD,  ABBOT  OF  FOIGNY. *

Bernard  declares  to  him  how  little  he  loves  praise  ;  that
the  yoke  of  Christ  is  light ;  that  he  declines  the  name  of
father,  and  is  content  with  that  of  brother.

i. In  the  first  place, do  not  wonder  if  titles  of  honour2
affright  me,  when  I  feel  myself  so  unworthy  of  the  honours

1  Foigny,  in  the  Diocese  of Laon,  one  of  the  daughter  houses  of  Clairvaux.
was  founded  by  Bishop  Bartholomew  in  1121. Rainald  was  the  first  abbot  of
that  house,  and  to  him  this  Letter  was  written. Concerning  Foigny,  see  Letter
5  and  Life  of  S.  Bernard,  n.  25.

2  Bernard refers to  the titles of Dnm  (Domnus,  for  it  is  written  thus)  and
Father. Truly  a  wonderful example  of  modesty  in  Bernard  to  show  himself
afraid  of  titles  of  dignity,  in  which  others  rejoice  more  than  in  the  dignities  them-


LETTER LXXII.  265

themselves  ;  and  if  it  is  fitting  that  you  should  give  them  to
me,  it  is  not  expedient  for  me  to  accept  them.  For  if  you
think  that  you  ought  to  observe  that  saying,  In  honour  pre
ferring  one  another  (Rom.  xii.  10),  and:  Submit  yourselves
one  to  another  in  the  fear  of  God  (Eph.  v.  21),  yet  the
terms  one  another,  one  to  another,  are  not  used  at  random,
and  concern  me  as  well  as  you.  Again,  if  you  think  that
the  declaration  of  the  Rule  is  to  be  observed,  "Let  the
younger  honour  their  elders,"1  I  remember  what  the  Truth
has  ruled  :  The  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  last  (S.
Matt.  xx.  16),  and,  He  that  is  the  greater  among  you,  let
him  be  as  the  younger  (S.  Luke  xxii.  26),  and  The  greater
thou  art,  the  more  humble  thyself  (Ecclus.  iii.  18),  and  Not
because  we  have  dominion  over  your  faith,  but  are  helpers
of  your  joy  (2  Cor.  i.  24),  and,  Have  they  made  thee  the
master?  Be  then  among  them  as  one  of  them  (Ecclus.  xxxii.
i),  and  Be  ye  not  called  Rabbi ;  and  Call  no  man  your
father  upon  the  earth  (S.  Matt,  xxiii.  8,  9).  As  much,  then,

selves.  We  find  a  similar  example  (besides  those  which  I  have  collected  above,
in  notes  on  Letter  i  i)  in  the  Life  of  the  Blessed  Mechthildis,  c.  10.  '•  Sister  Mech-
thihlis,"  says  the  author,  "  desired  that  she  should  not  be  called  Dame  [Domnd],
and  refused  every  appellative  of  rank  ;  but  the  custom  of  the  house  and  the  Rule
of  the  convent  required  that  she  should  be  called  Dume  and  Abbess."  Augustus
(Suetonius,  August.  Vit.  c.  53)  always  disliked  the  title  of  Lord  (Dominus)  as  an
opprobrium  and  a  sort  of  curse.  Tiberius  himself  regarded  it  as  a  kind  of  out
rage.  Thence  it  came  about  that  writers  in  later  times,  wishing  to  employ  an
expression  less  ambitious,  cut  off  a  syllable  from  the  word,  and  gave  the  title  of
dom  to  holy  personages,  Bishops,  and  others,  up  to  the  time  of  Bernard.  So
Severus  Sulpicius  Ep.  2,  "  They  announce  that  Dom  Martin  was  dead.''  So
Gregory  the  Great,  B.  i.  Ep.  6,  and  B.  vii.  Ep.  127;  so  everywhere  in  the
Epistles  of  Diclier  of  Cahors  and  in  Gregory  of  Tours,  Hist.  B.  ix.  cap  42,  from
whom  the  custom  was  derived  to  the  Spaniards  and  Italians.  We  see  also
among  the  modern  Greeks  the  word  xvpios  changed  into  Kvpos,  as  our  Hugh
Menard  has  very  learnedly  observed  in  his  notes  ad  Concord.  Regul.  cap.  70.  Our
holy  father  Benedict  makes  mention  of  this  word  Domnus  in  the  Rule,  c.  63,  where
we  read  :  "  Let  the  Abbot,  who  seems  to  act  in  the  place  of  Christ,  be  called
Domnus  and  Abbas,  not  as  arrogating  it  to  himself,  but  for  the  honour  and  love
of  Christ."  And  although  this  name  was  by  the  Rule  granted  to  the  Abbot  only,
^et  in  process  of  time  it  was  given,  like  that  of  Father,  to  all  monks  who  were
Priests.  (See  on  this  subject  Menard  i.e.  ;  Haften  B.  iii.  Dissert.  4  and  5;  Jul.
Nigron.  in  Reg.  comm.  Sec.  Jesu  Reg.  22).
1  Rule  of  S.  Benedict  cap.  63.


266  LETTER LXXII.

as  I  am  carried  away  by  your  compliments,  so  much  am  I
restrained  by  the  weight  of  these  texts.  Wherefore  I
rightly,  I  do  not  say  sing,  but  mourn  ;  While  I  suffer  Thy
terrors  I  am  distracted  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  15),  and  Thou  hast
lifted  me  up  and  cast  me  down  (Ps.  cii.  10).  But  I  should,
perhaps,  represent  more  truly  what  I  feel  if  I  say  that  he  who-
exalts  me  really  humiliates  me  ;  and  he  who  humiliates  me,
exalts.  You,  therefore,  rather  depress  me  in  heaping  me
with  terms  of  honour,  and  exalt  me  by  humbling.  But  that
you  may  not  humble  so  as  to  crush  me,  these  and  similar
testimonies  of  the  Truth  console  me,  which  wonderfully
raise  up  those  whom  they  make  humble,  instruct  while  they
humiliate.  Thus  this  same  Hand  that  casts  me  down
raises  me  up  again  and  makes  me  sing  with  joy.  It
was  good  for  me,  O  Lord,  that  I  was  afflicted,  that  I
might  learn  Thy  statutes  ;  the  law  of  Thy  mouth  is  good
unto  me,  above  thousands  of  gold  and  silver  (Ps.  cxix.  71,
72).  This  marvel  the  word  of  God,  living  and  efficacious,
produces.  This,  that  Word  by  which  all  things  are  done,
gently  and  powerfully  brings  to  pass  ;  this,  in  short,  is  the
work  of  the  easy  yoke  and  light  burden  of  Christ  (S.  Matt..
xi.  30).

2.  We  cannot  but  wonder  how  light  is  the  burden  of
Truth.  Is  not  that  truly  light  which  does  not  burden,  but
relieves  him  who  bears  it  ?  What  lighter  than  that  weight,,
which  not  only  does  not  burden,  but  even  bears  every
one  upon  whom  it  is  laid  to  bear?  This  weight  was
able  to  render  fruitful  the  Virgin's  womb,  but  not
to  burden  it.1  This  weight  sustained  the  very  arms
of  the  aged  Simeon,  in  which  He  was  received.  This
caught  up  Paul,  though  with  weighty  and  corruptible
body,  into  the  third  heaven.  I  seek  in  all  things  to  find  if
possible  something  like  to  this  weight  which  bears  them  who
bear  it,  and  I  find  nothing  but  the  wings  of  birds  which  in
any  degree  resembles  it,  for  these  in  a  certain  singular
manner  render  the  body  of  birds  at  once  more  weighty  and
more  easily  moved.  Wonderful  work  of  nature  !  that  at

1 Gravulare  ;  gravare. —  [E.]


LETTER LXXI1.  267

the  same  time  increases  the  material  and  lightens  the
burden,  and  while  the  mass  is  greater  the  burden  is  in  the
same  degree  less.  Thus  plainly  in  the  wings  is  expressed
the  likeness  of  the  burden  of  Christ,  because  they  them
selves  bear  that  by  which  they  are  borne.  What  shall  I  say
of  a  chariot  ?  This,  too,  increases  the  load  of  the  horse  by
which  it  is  drawn,  but  at  the  same  time  renders  capable  of
being  drawn  a  load  which  without  it  could  not  be  moved.
Load  is  added  to  load,  yet  the  whole  is  lighter.  See  also
how  the  Chariot  of  the  Gospel  comes  to  the  weighty  load
of  the  Law,  and  helps  to  carry  it  on  to  perfection,
while  decreasing  the  difficulty.  His  word,  it  is  said,
runneth  very  swiftly  (Ps.  cxlvii.  15).  His  word,  before
known  only  in  Judea,  and  not  able,  because  of  its  weighti-
ness,  to  extend  beyond,  which  burdened  and  weighed  down
the  hands  of  Moses  himself,  when  lightened  by  Grace,  and
placed  upon  the  wheels  of  the  Gospel,  ran  swiftly  over  the
whole  earth,  and  reached  in  its  rapid  flight  the  confines  of
the  world.

3.  Do  you,  therefore,  my  very  dear  friend,  cease  from
overwhelming  me  rather  than  raising  with  undeserved
honours  ;  otherwise  you  range  yourself,  though  with  a
friendly  intention,  in  the  company  of  my  enemies.  These
are  they  of  whom  I  am  in  the  habit  of  thus  complaining  to
God  alone  in  my  prayers.  Those  who  praised  me  were
sworn  against  me  (Ps.  cii.  8,  VULG.).  To  this,  my  com
plaint,  I  hear  God  soon  replying,  and  bearing  witness  to  the
truth  of  my  words  :  Truly  they  which  bless  thee  lead  thec
into  error  (Is.  ix.  16,  cited  from  memory].  Then  I  reply,
Let  them  be  soon  brought  to  shame  who  say  unto  me,  There,
There!  (Ps.  Ixx.  3).  But  I  ought  to  explain  in  what
manner  I  understand  these  words,  that  it  may  not  be
thought  I  launch  maledictions  or  imprecations  against  any
of  my  adversaries.  I  pray,  then,  that  whosoever  think  of  me
above  that  which  they  see  in  me  or  hear  respecting  me
may  be  turned  back,  that  is,  return  from  the  excessive
praises  which  they  have  given  me  without  knowing  me.  In
what  way  ?  When  they  shall  know  better  him  whom  they


268  LETTER LXXII.

praise  without  measure,  and  consequently  shall  blush  for
their  error,  and  for  the  ill  service  that  they  have  rendered
to  their  friend.  And  in  this  way  it  is  that  I  say,  Turn
back  !  and  blush  !  to  both  kinds  of  my  enemies  ;  those  who
wish  me  evil  and  commend  me  in  order  to  flatter,  and  those
who  innocently,  and  even  kindly,  but  yet  to  my  injury,
praise  me  to  excess.  I  would  wish  to  appear  to  them  so
vile  and  abject  that  they  would  be  ashamed  to  have  praised
such  a  person,  and  should  cease  to  bestow  praises  so
indiscreetly.  Therefore,  against  panegyrists  of  each  kind  I
am  accustomed  to  strengthen  myself  with  those  two  verses  :
against  the  hostile  with  the  former,  Let  them  be  turned  back
and  soon  brought  to  shame  -who  wish  me  evil,  but  against  the
well-meaning,  Let  them  be  turned  back-ward  and  made  to
blush  -who  say  over  me,  There,  There  !

4.  But as  (to return  to  you)  I ought,  according  to  the
example  of  the  Apostle,  to  rejoice  with  you  only,  and  not  to
have  dominion  over  your  piety,  and  according  to  the  word
of  God  we  have  one  Father  only  wrho  is  in  heaven,  and  all
we  are  brethren,  I  find  myself  obliged  to  repel  from  me  with
a  shield  of  truth  the  lofty  name  of Lord  and  Father  with
which  you  have  intended,  I  know  well,  to  honour  me,  not  to
burden  ; and in place of  these I think it  fitter  that you
should  name  me  brother  and  fellow-servant,  both  because
we  have  the  same  heritage,  and  because  wre  are  in  the  same
condition,  lest  perchance  if  I  should  usurp  to  myself  a  title
which  belongs  to  God,  I shall  hear  from  Him  :  If  I  be  a
Father  -where  is  my  honour,  and  I  be  a  Lord  -where  is  my

fear?  (Mai.  i.  6).  It  is  very  true,  however,  that  if  I  do  not
wish  to  attribute  to  myself  over  you  the  authority  of  a
father,  I  have  all  the  feelings  of  one,  nor  is  the  love  with
which  I  embrace  you  less,  I  think,  than  that  of  a  father  or  of
a  son.  Sufficient,  then,  on  the  subject  of  the  titles  which
you  give  me.

5.  I  wish  to  reply  now  to  the rest of  your  letter. You
complain  that  I  do  not  come  to  see  you. I  could  complain
equally  of  you  for the same  reason,  unless,  indeed  (which
you  yourself  do not deny)  the  will of  God  must  be  pre-


LETTER LXXIII.  269

ferred  to  our  feelings  and  our  needs.  If  it  were  otherwise,
if  it  were  not  the  work  of  Christ  that  was  in  question,
would  I  suffer  to  be  so  far  away  from  me  a  companion  so
dear  and  necessary  to  me,  so  obedient  in  labour,  so  per
severing  in  studies,  so  useful  in  conference,  so  prompt  in
recollection  ?  Blessed  are  we  if  we  still  remain  thus  until
the  end  always  and  in  everything,  seeking  not  our  own
interests,  but  those  of  Jesus  Christ.


LETTER  LXXIII.
To  THE  SAME.

He  instructs  Rainald,  who  was  too  anxious  and  distrust
ful,  respecting  the  duty  of  superior  which  had  been  con
ferred  upon  him  ;  and  warns  him  that  he  must  bestow  help

and  solace  upon  his  brethren  rather  than  require it  from

them.

To  his  very  dear  son  RAINALD,  Abbot  of  Foigny,  BERNARD,
that  God  may  give  him  the  spirit  of  strength.

I.  You  complain,  my  very  dear  son,  of  your  many  tribu
lations,  and  by  your  pious  complaints  you  excite  me  also  to
complain,  for  I  am  not  able  to  feel  that  you  are  sorrowing
without  sharing  your  sorrow,  nor  can  I  be  otherwise  than
troubled  and  anxious  when  I  hear  of  your  troubles  and
anxieties.  But  since  I  foresaw  these  very  difficulties  which
you  say  have  happened  to  you,  and  predicted  them  to  you,
if  you  remember — it  seems  to  me  that  you  ought  to  be  better
prepared  to  endure  them,  and  to  spare  me  vexation  when
you  can.  For  am  I  not  sufficiently  tried,  and  more  than
sufficiently,  to  lose  you,  not  to  see  you,  nor  to  enjoy  your
society,  which  was  so  pleasant  to  me  ;  so  that  I  have  almost
regretted  that  I  should  have  sent  you  away  from  me.  And
although  charity  obliged  me  to  send  you,  yet  not  being  able
to  see  you  where  you  have  been  sent,  I  mourn  you  as  if  lost
to  me.  When  then,  besides  this,  you  who  ought  to  be  the
staff  of  my  support,  belabour  me  as  it  were  with  the  rod  of


270  LETTER LXXIII.

your  faint-heartedness,  you  heap  sorrow  upon  sorrow,  and
torment  upon  torment;  and  if  it  is  a  mark  of  your  filial  affec
tion  towards  me  that  you  do  not  hide  any  of  your  difficulties
from  me,  yet  it  is  hard  to  add  fresh  trouble  to  one  already
burdened.  Why  is  it  needful  to  occupy  with  fresh  anxieties
one  already  more  than  anxious  enough,  and  to  torture  with
sharper  pains  the  bosom  of  a  father,  already  wounded  by  the
absence  of  his  son  ?  I  have  shared  with  you  my  weight  of
cares,  as  a  son,  as  an  intimate  friend,  as  a  trusty  assistant ;
but  how  do  you  help  to  bear  your  father's  burden,  if,  instead
of  relieving  me,  you  burden  me  still  more  ?  You,  indeed,
are  loaded,  but  I  am  not  lightened  of  my  load.

2.  For  this  burden  is  that  of  sick  and  weak  souls.  Those
who  are  in  health  do  not  need  to  be  carried,  and  are  not,
therefore,  a  burden.  Whomsoever,  then,  of  your  brethren
you  shall  find  sad,  mean-spirited,  discontented,  remember
well  that  it  is  of  these  and  for  their  sakes,  you  are  father
and  abbot.  In  consoling,  in  exhorting,  in  reproving,  you
do  your  duty,  you  bear  your  burden  ;  and  those  whom  you
bear  in  order  to  cure,  you  will  cure  by  bearing.  But  if  any
one  is  in  such  spiritual  health  that  he  rather  helps  you  than
is  helped  by  you,  recognize  that  to  him  you  are  not  father
and  abbot,  but  equal  and  friend.  Do  not  complain  if  you
find  more  trials  than  consolations  from  those  among  whom
you  are.  You  were  sent  to  sustain  and  console  others,  be
cause  you  are  spiritually  stronger  and  better  able  to  bear
than  they,  and  because  with  the  grace  of  God  you  are  able
to  aid  and  sustain  all  without  needing  yourself  to  be  aided
and  sustained  by  any.  Finally,  if  the  burden  is  great,  so
also  is  the  reward  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  more  assist
ance  you  receive,  the  more  your  own  reward  is  diminished.
Choose,  therefore ;  if  you  prefer  those  who  are  for  you  a
burden,  your  merit  will  be  the  greater ;  but  if,  on  the  con
trary,  you  prefer  those  who  console  you,  you  have  no  merit
at  all.  The  former  are  the  source  whence  it  arises  for  you ;
the  second  as  the  abyss  in  which  it  is  swallowed  up ;  for  it  is
not  doubtful  that  those  who  are  partakers  of  the  labour,  will
be  also  sharers  of  the  reward.  Knowing,  then,  that  you


LETTER LXXIV.  271

were  sent  to  help,  not  to  be  helped,  bear  in  mind  that  you
are  the  vicar  of  Him  who  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,
but  to  minister.  I  could  have  wished  to  write  at  greater
length,  in  order  to  comfort  you,  but  that  it  was  not  neces
sary  ;  for  what  need  is  there  of  rilling  a  dead  leaf  with
superfluous  words,  while  the  living  voice  is  speaking  ?  I
think  that  when  you  have  seen  our  prior,  these  words  will
be  sufficient  for  you,  and  your  spirit  will  revive  at  his
presence,  so  that  you  will  not  require  the  consolation  of
written  words,  in  the  delight  and  help  which  his  discourse
will  give  you.  Do  not  doubt  that  1  have  communicated  to
him,  as  far  as  was  possible,  my  inmost  mind,  which  you
begged  in  your  letters  might  be  sent  to  you.  For  you
know  well  that  he  and  I  are  of  one  mind  and  one  will.


LETTER  LXXIV.

To  THE  SAME.

He  had  desired  Rainald  to  refrain  from  querulous  com
plaints  ;  now  he  directs  Rainald  to  keep  him  informed  of
all  his  affairs.

I  had  hoped,  my  dear  friend,  to  find  a  remedy  for
my  care  about  you,  if  I  were  not  informed  by  you  of  your
little  vexations.  And  I  remember  that  I  said  to  you,
amongst  other  things,  in  my  last  letter,  "  if  it  is  a  mark  of
your  filial  affection  towards  me  that  you  do  not  hide  any  of
your  difficulties  from  me,  yet  it  is  hard  to  add  trouble  to
one  already  burdened."  But  the  remedy  which  I  thought
would  lighten  my  cares  has  increased  them,  and  I  feel
more  burdened  than  before.  For  then  I,  indeed,  felt  vexa
tion  and  fear,  but  only  on  account  of  the  troubles  named
by  you,  but  now  I  fear  that  some  evil,  I  know  not  what,  is
happening  to  you,  and  like  your  favourite  Ovid —

When  have  I  not  made  the  perils  which  I  feared
Greater  than  they  really  were  ?  '

I  fear  all  things  because  I  am  uncertain  of  all  things,  and

1  Heroid.  Ep.  I.  v.  1 1.


272  LETTER LXXV.

feel  often  real  sorrow  for  imaginary  evils.  The  mind  which
affection  dominates  is  hardly  master  of  itself.  It  fears
what  it  knows  not ;  it  grieves  when  there  is  no  need  ;  it  is
troubled  more  than  it  wished,  and  even  when  it  does  not
wish  ;  unable  to  rule  its  sensibility,  it  pities  or  sympathizes
against  its  will.  And  because  you  see,  my  son,  that  neither
my  timid  industry  nor  your  pious  prudence  in  this  respect
are  of  service  to  me,  do  not,  I  pray  you,  conceal  from  me
henceforth  anything  that  concerns  you,  that  you  may  not
increase  my  uneasiness  by  seeking  to  spare  me.  The  little
books  of  mine  which  you  have,  please  return  to  me  when
you  can.


LETTER  LXXV. (A.D. 1127.)
To  ARTAUD,  ABBOT  OF PRULLY.*

To  his  very  dear  friend  and  colleague,  Abbot  ARTAUD,
Brother  BERNARD  wishes  health.2

Whatever  affection  and  heartfelt  kindliness  absent  friends
are  able  to  bestow  upon  one  another  I  feel  is  due  both  from
me  to  you  and  from  you  to  me,  not  only  because  we  share
the  same  vows  and  method  of  life,  but  also  because  we  have
neither  of  us  forgotten  our  ancient  friendship.  And  we  are
in  no  way  better  able  to  show  to  each  other  or  to  recognize
how  acceptable  this  is  to  each  of  us,  and  how  warmly  it
exists  in  the  heart  of  each  of  us,  than  not  to  conceal  from
each  other  if  either  should  hear  of  anything  unbecoming  or
unsuitable  concerning  his  friend.  Now,  I  have  heard  that
you  have  the  intention  of  founding  an  abbey  in  Spain  to  be
dependent  on  your  holy  convent.  The  plan  occasioned  great
surprise  to  me,  nor  could  I  conjecture  for  what  end,  with  what
design  or  hope  of  usefulness,  you  should  wish  to  send  some  of

1  Of Prally, not of Po/tieres. See notes to Letter 80. Prully  was  a
monastery  of  Cistercians,  situated  in  the Diocese  of  Sens,  founded  in  11  18,  by
Theobald,  Count  of  Champagne,  and  Adele.  his  mother,  as  William  de  Nangis
reports  in  his  Chronicle,  cited  by  Manrique  in  his  dnnals  under  that  year. But
Theobald  was  not  then  Count,  as  may  be  gathered  from  the  notes  to  Letter  31.

2  This  inscription  is  restored  from  the  Corbey  MS.


LETTER LXXVI.  273

your  monks  into  exile  to  a  place  so  distant,  and  which  will
cost  you  so  much  both  in  trouble  and  in  money  to  reach
and  to  build  upon,  when  you  have  quite  near  you  a  house
already  built  and  well-fitted  up,  where  you  may  settle  any
of  them.  For  you  cannot,  I  suppose,  excuse  yourself  by
saying  that  the  place  I  refer  to  is  not  yours,  when  I  know
quite  well  that  it  may  easily  be  yours  if  you  wish.  Do
you  suppose  that  the  Lord  Abbot  of  Pontigny, l  to  whom  it
belongs,  would  refuse  it  to  you  if  you  asked  him  for  it  ?
On  the  contrary,  it  would  be  most  agreeable  to  him  if  you
were  willing  to  accept  it ;  not  because  it  is  not  a  good
house,  but  because,  as  you  know,  he  has  no  need  of  it.
We  ought  both  of  us  to  take  great  care  in  our  conduct,  of
the  advice  which  the  Apostle  gives  :  Let  no  man  despise  thy
youth  (i  Tim.  iv.  12),  because  we  are  remarked  the  sooner
for  levity,  as  we  are  young  men.  But  I  trust  that  you  will
act  with  more  consideration,  and  choose  this  place,  as  it
is  nearer  to  you  and  already  built  ;  which,  while  it  will
perfectly  meet  your  wants,  is  only  a  burden  to  our  friend
the  abbot,  who  at  present  holds  it.  Farewell.


LETTER LXXVI.

To THE ABBOT OF THE REGULAR CANONS OF S.

PlERREMONT.2

He  considers  what  is  to  be  done  in  the  case  of  a  man  who,
after  a  long  time  spent  in  a  monastery  and  in  the  habit  of
a  religious,  has  returned  to the  world  and  contracted  a
second  marriage.

1  Thus  in  the  Corbey  MS. In  others,  the  Abl:ot  P. The  place  here  referred
to  is  Vauluisant,  in  which  Artaud,  at  the  advice  of Bernard,  founded  a  monastery
in  1127  (the  date  of  this  Letter), sending  twelve  monks  thither  under  Norpald
as  abbot.

2  In all editions  there has been up  to  the  present To  the  Same  ;  we  have
replaced  the  correct  subscription  and  title  of the  Letter  from the  Corbey  MS.
Pierremont  is  an  abbey  of  the  Augustine  Order,  in  the  diocese  of  Toul,  not  far
from the little river Mortagne, an affluent of the Meurthe. This Letter
explains  the  doubt  which  Bernard  proposes  to  himself  in the  fourth  division  of
Concerning  Precept  and  Dispensation,  ch.  xvii.

VOL.  I.  l8


274  LETTER LXXVI.

To  the  most  Reverend  the  Father  of  the  Canons  of  S.
Pierre-mont,  Brother  BERNARD,  health  and  the  affection
which  is  due  to  him.

Since  it  pleased  your  worship  that  this  brother  should
consult  my  unworthy  self,  I  have  let  him  know  my  opinion
without  at  all  pretending  that  he  ought  to  follow  it,  that  I
may  not  stand  in  the  way  of  better  advice.  Not  to  weary
you  by  repeating  circumstances  which  you  already  know,
this  is  the  sum  of  my  advice.  It  is  very  dangerous,
perhaps  unlawful,  that  a  man  who  has  so  long  dwelt  in  a
convent  and  worn  the  religious  habit,  should  have  returned
to  the  world ;  also  that  he  who  with  the  consent  of  his
former  wife,  while  she  was  living,  had  long  observed
absolute  continence  should  contract  a  second  marriage  is
indecent  and  dishonourable.  Yet  since  the  marriage  was
publicly  and  solemnly  performed  as  others  are,  and  with
out  protest  or  opposition,  it  does  not  seem  to  me  safe  that
the  man  should  dismiss  his  wife  against  her  will,  unless  he
shall  have  had  recourse  to  episcopal  authority  or  advice,  or
at  all  events  to  an  ecclesiastical  and  canonical  judgment.1
But  since,  in  my  opinion,  the  great  danger  in  which  the
man  now  is,  is  due,  in  no  small  degree,  to  you  (in  that  you
deferred  too  long  his  taking  the  vow,  though  he  wished
and  desired  to  do  so,  and  thus  gave  opportunity  to  the
tempter  to  precipitate  him  into  those  unhappy  courses),  I
counsel  and  advise  you  in  the  name  of  charity  to  employ
all  your  efforts  to  rescue  the  unfortunate-  man,  even  at  any
cost.  Address  yourself,  for  instance,  to  the  wife  herself,
and  obtain  from  her  a  promise  to  dismiss  her  husband  and
live  in  continence,  or  procure  that  the  bishop  should
summon  them  both  before  him  and  separate  them,  which  I
believe  may  justly  be  done.

1  It  is  not  clear  by  what  vow  (if  any)  the  man  was  bound.  Consult  the
passage  already  referred  to  De  Prcecepto  et  Dispensatione,  ch.  xvii,  and  the  notes
upon  it.


LETTER LXXVII.  275

LETTER  LXXVII.

To  MAGISTER  HUGO,  OF  S.  VICTOR.

This  Letter  also,  on  account  of  its  importance,  has  been
placed  among  the  Treatises.


LETTER LXXVIII. (A.D. 1127.)
To  SUGER,  ABBOT  OF  S.  DENis.1

He  praises  Suger,  who  had  unexpectedly  renounced  the
pride  and  luxury  of  the  world  to  give  himself  to  the
modest  habits  of  the  religious  life.  He  blames  severely
the  clerk  who  devotes  himself  rather  to  the  service  of
princes  than  that  of  God.

i.  A  piece  of  good  news  has  reached  our  district ;  it  can
not  fail  to  do  great  good  to  whomsoever  it  shall  have  come.
For  who  that  fear  God,  hearing  what  great  things  He  has
done  for  your  soul,  do  not  rejoice  and  wonder  at  the  great
and  sudden  change  wrought  by  the  Right  Hand  of  the  Most
High.  Everywhere  your  courage  is  praised  in  the  Lord  ;  the
gentle  hear  of  it  and  are  glad,  and  even  those  who  do  not

1  The  Benedictine  Abbey  of  S.  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  the  apostle  of
France,  one  of  the  most  celebrated  foundations  of  the  country,  is  about  two
leagues  from  Paris,  and  was  founded  by  Dagobert  I.,  King  of  the  Franks.
Suger  succeeded  Abbot  Adam,  whom  Abaelard  wrongly  accused  as  a  man  dis
reputable  by  his  vices  (Hut.  Calu.m.  p.  19.  See  the  notes  of  Duchesne  on  the
same  passage).  He  was  chosen  Abbot  in  1123  in  his  absence,  while  he  was
fulfilling  a  mission  from  Louis  le  Gros,  King  of  France,  to  Pope  Calixtus  II.
He  died  in  1152,  at  the  age  of  seventy  years,  and  was  buried  in  the  Abbey
Church,  which  he  had  himself  erected,  such  as  we  see  it  at  the  present  time.
It  is  a  magnificent  edifice  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  390  feet  long,  100  feet  broad,
80  feet  high  from  the  pavement  to  the  vault,  and  upheld  by  60  columns  or
pillars.  Its  windows  are  incomparably  beautiful,  its  choir  laid  with  marbles  of
various  colours  and  ornamented  with  sixty  high  stalls,  and  it  is  enriched  with
very  many  tombs  of  kings  and  princes.  The  Annals  of  this  Abbey  declare
that  "  [Suger]  by  his  zeal  restored  the  order  of  our  holy  Religion.  For  before,
by  the  negligence  of  the  Abbots  who  preceded  him,  and  of  certain  monks  of
that  house,  obedience  to  the  Rule  had  been  so  broken  through  that  there  was
scarcely  an  appearance  of  the  Religious  life  left,''  as  also  Bernard  says  here.
See  notes  to  Letter  266.


276  LETTER LXXVIII.

know  you,1  but  have  only  heard  of  you,  what  you  were  and
what  you  are  now,  wonder  and  glorify  God  in  you.  But  what
adds  still  more  to  their  admiration  and  joy  is  that  you  have
been  able  to  make  your  brethren  partake  of  the  counsel  of
salvation  poured  upon  you  from  above,  and  so  to  fulfil  what
we  read,  Let  him  that  heareth  say.  Come  (Rev.  xxii.  17),
and  that  What  I  tell  you  in  darkness  that  speak  ye  in
light,  and  what  ye  hear  in  the  ear  that  preach  ye  upon  the
house  tops  (S.  Matt.  x.  27).  So  a  soldier  intrepid  in  war,  or
rather  a  general  full  of  bravery  and  devotedness,  when  he
sees  almost  all  his  soldiers  turned  to  flight  and  falling
everywhere  under  the  hostile  blades,  although  he  may  see
that  he  would  be  able  to  escape  alone,  yet  he  prefers  to  die
with  those,  without  whom  he  would  think  it  shame  to  live.
He  holds  firm  on  the  field  of  battle  and  combats  bravely  ;
he  ranges,  sword  in  hand,  along  the  ranks,  through  the
bloody  blades  which  seek  him  ;  he  terrifies  his  adversaries
and  reanimates  his  followers  with  all  his  powers  of  voice
and  gesture.  Wherever  the  enemy  press  on  more
boldly  and  there  is  danger  of  his  friends  giving  ground,
there  he  is  present ;  the  enemy  who  strikes  he  opposes,
the  friend  who  sinks  exhausted  he  succours ;  and  he  is  the
more  prepared  to  die  for  each  one,  that  he  despairs  to  save
them  all.  But  while  he  makes  heroic  efforts  to  hinder  and
to  stop  the  pursuers  who  press  upon  his  followers,  he  raises
as  best  he  can  those  who  are  fallen  and  recalls  those  who
have  taken  flight.  Nor  is  it  rare  that  his  splendid  valour
procures  a  safety  as  welcome  as  unhoped  for,  throws  into
confusion  the  hostile  ranks,  forces  them  to  fly  from  those
whom  they  were  pursuing,  and  overcomes  those  who  bore
themselves  almost  as  victors,  so  that  they  who  a  little  before
were  struggling  for  life  are  now  rejoicing  in  victory.

2.  But  why  do  I  compare  an  event  so  profoundly  religious
to  things  secular,  as  if  examples  were  wanting  to  us  from
religion  itself  ?  Was  not  Moses  quite  certain  of  what  God
had  promised  him,  that  if,  indeed,  the  people  over  whom
he  ruled  should  have  perished,  he  himself  should  not  only

1  Otherwise  viderunt,  have  seen.


LETTER LXXVIII.  277

not  perish  with  them,  but  should  be  besides  the  chief  of  a
great  nation  ?  Nevertheless,  with  what  affection,  with
what  zeal,  with  what  bowels  of  piety  did  he  strive  to  save
his  people  from  the  wrath  of  God  ?  And,  finally,  inter
posing  himself  on  behalf  of  the  offenders,  he  cries :  If  Thou
wilt  forgive  their  sin  — ;  and  if  not,  blot  me,  I  pray
Thee,  out  of  Thy  book  which  Thou  hast  written  (Exod.
xxxii.  32).  What  a  devoted  advocate  !  who,  because  he
does  not  seek  his  own  interests,  easily  obtains  everything
which  he  seeks.  What  a  benign  chief,  who,  binding
together  his  people  with  bonds  of  charity  as  the  head  is
united  with  the  members,  will  either  save  them  with
himself  or  else  encounter  the  same  danger  as  they  !
Jeremiah,  also  bound1  inseparably  to  his  people,  but  by  the
bond  of  compassion,  not  by  sympathy  for  their  revolt,
quitted  voluntarily  his  native  soil  and  his  own  liberty2  to
embrace  in  preference  the  common  lot  of  exile  and  slavery.
He  was  free  to  remain  in  his  own  country  had  he  chosen,
while  others  must  remove,  but  he  preferred  to  be  carried
away  captive  with  his  people,  to  whom  he  knew  that  he
could  render  service  even  in  captivity.  Paul,  animated  be
yond  doubt  by  the  same  spirit,  desired  that  he  might  be
anathema  even  from  Christ  Himself  for  his  brethren
(Romans  ix.  3).  He  experienced  in  his  own  heart  how
true  is  that  saying,  Love  is  as  strong  as  death,  jealousy  is
cruel  as  the  grave  (Cant.  viii.  6).  Do  you  see  of  whose
great  examples  you  have  shown  yourself  an  imitator  ?  But
I  add  one  more  whom  I  had  almost  passed  over,  that  of  the
holy  king  David,  who,  perceiving  and  lamenting  the
slaughter  of  his  people,  wished  to  devote  himself  for  them,
and  desired  that  the  Divine  vengeance  should  be  transferred
to  himself  and  to  his  father's  house  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  17).

3.  But  who  made  you  aspire  to  this  degree  of  perfection  ?
I  confess  that  though  I  earnestly  desired  to  hear  such  things
of  you,  I  never  hoped  to  see  it  come  to  pass.  Who  would
have  believed  that  you  would  reach,  so  to  speak,  by  one
sudden  bound,  the  practice  of  the  highest  virtues,  and

1 Vinctus,  otherwise  junctus.  2  Otherwise  voluntatem.


278  LETTER LXXVIII.

approach  the  most  exalted  merit  ?  Thus  we  learn  not  to
measure  by  the  narrow  proportions  of  our  faith  and  hope
the  infinite  pity  of  God,  which  does  what  It  will  and  works
upon  whom  It  will,  lightening  the  burden  which  It  imposes
upon  us,  and  hastening  the  work  of  our  salvation.  What
then  ?  the  zeal  of  good  people  blamed  your  errors  at  least,
if  not  those  of  your  brethren  :  it  was  against  your  excesses
more  than  theirs  that  they  were  moved  with  indignation  ;
and  if  your  brothers  in  religion  groaned  in  secret,  it  was
less  against  your  entire  community  than  against  you  ;  it
was  only  against  you  that  they  brought  their  accusation.
You  corrected  your  faults,  and  their  criticisms  had  no-
longer  an  object ;  your  conversion  at  once  stilled  the
tumult  of  accusation.  The  one  and  only  thing  with  which
we  were  scandalized  was  the  luxury,  the  pride,  the  pomp,
which  followed  you  everywhere.1  At  length  you  laid  down
your  pride,  you  put  off  your  splendid  dress,  and  the
universal  indignation  ceased  at  once.  Thus  you  had  at  the
same  time  satisfied  those  who  complained  of  you,  and  even
merited  our  praises.  For  what  in  human  doings  is  deserv
ing  of  praise,  if  this  is  not  considered  most  worthy  of
admiration  and  approval  ?  It  is  true  that  a  change  so-
sudden  and  so  complete  is  not  the  work  of  man,  but  of  God.
If  in  heaven  the  conversion  of  one  sinner  arouses  great  joyr
what  gladness  will  the  conversion  of  an  entire  community
cause,  and  of  such  a  community  as  yours?

4.  That  spot  so  noble  by  its  antiquity  and  the  royal
favour,  was  made  to  serve  the  convenience  of  worldly  busi
ness,  and  to  be  a  meeting-place  for  the  royal  troops.  They
used  to  render  to  Csesar  the  things  which  were  Caesar's
promptly  and  fully ;  but  not  with  equal  fidelity  did  they
render  the  things  of  God  to  God.  I  speak  what  I  have
heard,  not  what  I  have  seen  :  the  very  cloister  itself  of  your
monastery  was  frequently,  they  say,  crowded  with  soldiers,
occupied  with  the  transaction  of  business,  resounding  with

1  It  is,  perhaps,  of  this  man  that  Bernard  speaks  in  his  dpology  c.  10 :  "I  have
seen,  I  do  not  exaggerate,  an  abbot  going  forth  escorted  by  60  horses  and
more  .  .  etc."


LETTER LXXVIII.  279

noise  and  quarrels,  and  sometimes  accessible  even  to
women.  How,  in  the  midst  of  all  that,  could  place  be
found  for  thoughts  of  heaven,  for  the  service  of  God,  for
the  interests  of  the  spiritual  life  ?  But  now  there  is  leisure
for  God's  service,  for  practising  self-restraint  and  obedience,
for  attention  to  sacred  reading.  Consider  that  silence  and
constant  quiet  from  all  stir  of  secular  things  disposes  the
soul  to  meditation  on  things  above.  And  the  laborious
exercise  of  the  religious  life  and  the  rigour  of  abstinence
are  lightened  by  the  sweetness  of  psalms  and  hymns.
Penitence  for  the  past  renders  lighter  the  austerity  of  the
new  manner  of  life.  He  who  in  the  present  gathers  the  fruits
of  a  good  conscience,  feels  in  himself  a  desire  for  future

O

good  works,  which  shall  not  be  frustrated,  and  a  well-
founded  hope.  The  fear  of  the  judgment  to  come  gives
way  to  the  pious  exercise  of  brotherly  charity,  for  love
casteth  out  fear  (i  S.  John  iv.  18).  The  variety  of  holy
services  drives  far  away  weariness  and  sourness  of  temper,
and  I  repeat  these  things  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God,
who  is  the  Author  of  all ;  yet  not  without  praise  to  yourself
as  being  His  co-worker  in  all  things.  He  was  able,  indeed^
to  do  them  without  you,  but  He  has  preferred  to  have  you
for  the  sharer  of  His  works,  that  He  might  have  you  for
the  sharer  of  His  glory  also.  The  Saviour  once  reproached
certain  persons  because  they  made  the  house  of  prayer  a
den  of  thieves  (S.  Matt.  xxi.  13).  He  will  doubtless  then
have  in  commendation  the  man  who  has  accomplished  the
task  of  freeing  His  holy  place  from  the  dogs,  of  rescuing
His  pearl  from  the  swine  ;  by  whose  ardour  and  zeal  the
workshop  of  Vulcan  is  restored  to  holy  studies,  or  rather
the  house  of  God  is  restored  to  Him  from  being  a  synagogue
of  Satan  to  be  that  which  it  was  before.

5.  If  I  recall  the  remembrance  of  past  evils  it  is  not  in
order  to  cast  confusion  or  reproach  on  anyone,  but  from
the  comparison  with  the  old  state  of  things  to  make  the
beauty  of  the  new  appear  more  sharply  and  strikingly ;  be
cause  there  is  nothing  which  makes  the  present  good  shine
forth  more  clearly  than  a  comparison  with  the  evils  which


280  LETTER LXXVIII.

preceded  it.  As  we  recognize  similar  things  from  similar,
so  things  which  are  unlike  either  please  or  displease  more
when  compared  with  their  opposites.  Place  that  which
is  black  beside  that  which  is  white,  and  the  juxtaposition
of  the  two  colours  makes  each  appear  more  marked.  So,
if  beautiful  things  are  put  beside  ugly,  the  former  are
rendered  more  beautiful,  the  ugliness  of  the  latter  is  more
apparent.  That  there  may  be  no  occasion  of  offence  or
confusion,  I  am  content  to  repeat  with  the  Apostle  :  Such,
indeed,  ye  were,  but  ye  are  -washed,  ye  are  sanctified
(i  Cor.  vi.  11).  Now,  the  house  of  God  ceases  to  open  to
people  of  the  world,  there  is  no  access  to  sacred  precincts
for  the  curious ;  no  gossip  about  trifling  things  with  the
idle;  the  chatter  of  boys  and  girls  is  no  longer  heard.  The
holy  place  is  open  and  accessible  only  to  the  children  of
Christ,  of  whom  it  is  said :  Behold  I  and  the  children
whom  the  Lord  hath  given  me  (Isaiah  viii.  18).  It  is  re
served  for  the  praises  of  God  and  the  performance  of  sacred
vows  with  due  care  and  reverence.  How  gladly  do  the
martyrs,  of  whom  so  great  a  number  ennoble  that  place,
listen  to  the  loud  songs  of  these  children,  to  whom  they  in
turn  reply  no  less  with  a  voice  of  charity:  Praise,  O ye
servants  of  the  Lord,  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord  (Ps.
cxiii.  i),  and  again,  Sing  praises  to  our  God,  sing  praises,
sing  praises  to  our  King,  sing  praises  (Ps.  xlvii.  6).

6.  When  your  breasts  are  beaten  with  penitent  hands,
and  your  pavements  worn  with  your  knees,  your  altars
heaped  with  vows  and  devout  prayers,  your  cheeks  fur
rowed  with  tears  ;  when  groans  and  sighs  resound  on  all
sides  and  the  sacred  roofs  echo  with  spiritual  songs  instead
of  worldly  pleadings,  there  is  nothing  which  the  citizens  of
heaven  more  love  to  look  upon,  nothing  is  more  agreeable
to  the  eyes  of  the  Heavenly  King.  For  is  not  this  what  is
said  :  The  sacrifice  of  praise  shall  honour  me  (Ps.  1.  23)  ?
O,  if  anyone  had  his  eyes  opened,  as  were  those  of  the
prophet's  servant  at  his  prayer !  He  would  doubtless  see
(2  Kings  vi.  17)  The  princes  go  before,  joined  with  the
minstrels  in  the  midst  of  the  players  on  timbrels  (Ps.


LETTER LXXVIII.  281

Ixvii.  26,  VULG.).  We  should  see,  I  say,  with  what  care
and  ardour  they  assist  at  the  chants,  and  at  the  prayers
how  they  unite  themselves  with  those  who  meditate,  they
watch  over  those  who  repose,  they  preside  over  those  who
order  and  care  tor  all.  The  powers  of  heaven  fully  recog
nize  their  fellow-citizens;  they  earnestly  rejoice,  comfort,
instruct,  protect,  and  provide  for  all  those  who  take  the
heritage  of  salvation,  at  all  times.  How  happy  I  esteem
myself  while  I  am  still  in  this  world  to  hear  of  these  things,
although  I  am  absent  and  do  not  see  them  !  But  your
felicity,  my  brethren,  to  whom  it  is  given  to  bear  part
in  them,  far  surpasses  mine,  and  blessed  above  all  is  he
whom  the  Author  of  all  good  has  deigned  to  make  the
chief  worker  of  so  good  a  work  ;  it  is  you,  my  dear  friend,
whom  with  justice  I  congratulate  for  this,  that  you  have
brought  about  all  which  I  so  greatly  admire.

7.  You  are  wearied,  perhaps,  with  my  praises,  but  you
ought  not  to  be  so  ;  they  are  far  different  from  the  flatteries
of  those  who  call  evil  good  and  good  evil  (Isaiah  v.  20),  and
so  please  a  person  to  lead  him  into  error.  Sweet  but
perilous  is  the  praise  when  the  wicked  is  praised  in  the
desire  of  his  heart,  and  the  unjust  is  blessed  (Ps.  ix.  3,
VULG.).  The  warmth  of  my  praises  comes  from  charity,
and  does  not  once  pass,  as  I  believe,  the  limits  of  truth.
He  is  safely  praised,  who  is  praised  in  the  Lord,  that  is,  in
the  truth.  1  have  not  called  evil  good,  but  have  pointed  out
as  evil  what  was  evil.  But  if  I  boldly  raise  my  voice
against  that  which  is  evil,  ought  I  to  be  silent  in  presence  of
good,  and  not  give  my  testimony  to  it  ?  That  would  be  to
show  myself  an  envious  critic,  not  a  corrector;  and  to
prefer  to  mangle  rather  than  to  mend,  if  I  am  silent  as  to
good  and  raise  my  voice  only  about  evil.  The  just  reproves
in  mercy,  the  wicked  flatters  in  impiety;  the  one  that  he
may  cure,  the  other  in  order  to  hide  that  which  needs  to  be
cured.  Do  not  be  afraid  that  those  among  us  who  in  the
fear  of  the  Lord  praise  you  will  pour  upon  your  head  that
ointment  of  the  sinner  with  which  they  were  wont  to
anoint  you.  I  praise  you  because  you  are  doing  right.


282  LETTER LXXVIII.

But  I  do  not  flatter  you  ;  I  only  accomplish  in  your  case,
by  the  gift  of  God,  those  words  of  the  Psalmist :  Those  -who
fear  Thee  shall  see  me  and  shall  rejoice,  because  I  have
hoped  in  Thy  word  (Ps.  cxix.  74)  ;  and  again  :  Many  shall
show  forth  his  wisdom  (Ecclus.  xxxix.  10).  It  is,  then,  your
wisdom  which  more  praised  than  blamed  the  former  folly.

8.  I  would  that  you should  take  pleasure  in  the  praises
of  such  as  fear  just  as  much  to  flatter  vice  as  to  depreciate
virtue. That  is  the  true praise,  which, as it is  wont  to
extol nothing  but  what is  good, so  it  knows  not  how  to
caress what is  evil. All  other is pretended  praise, but
really  blame,  which  Scripture  refers  to  : The  sons  of  men
are  vain  ;  they  are  deceitful  upon  the  weights,  so  that  they
deceive even more  than vanity (Ps. Ixii. 10). Such  are
altogether  to  be  avoided  according  to  the  counsel  of  the
wise  man  : My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee  consent  thou  not
(Prov.  i.  10),  since  their  milk  and  their  oil,  though  they  be
sweet,  are  poisonous  and deadly. Their  words,  he  says
(that  is,  those  of  flatterers),  are  softer  than  oil,  and  yet  are
they  very  swords  (Ps.  Iv.  21).  The  righteous  has  oil,  too,  but
of  mercy,  of  sanctification,  of  spiritual  joy. He  has  wine,
which  he  pours  into  the  wounds  of  the  haughty  soul. But
for  the  soul  of  him  that  mourns, and  for him of  contrite
heart,  he has the  oil  of  mercy,  with  which  he  is  wont  to
soften  its  sorrow. Where  he corrects,  he  pours  in  wine ;
when  he  soothes,  oil ; but  wine  without  bitterness,  and  oil
without  guile. Thus,  not  every  praise  is  flattery,  nor  every
blame  mixed  with  rancour. Blessed is  he  who  can  say  :
Let  the  righteous  smite  me in mercy, and  reprove  me  :
but  let  not  the  oil  of  the  sinner  break  my  head  (Ps.  cxli.  5),
which  when  you  have put  far  from  you,  you  have  shown
yourself  worthy  of  the  oil  and  wine  of  the  saints.

9.  Let the children of Babylon seek for themselves
pleasant  mothers, but pitiless, who  will  feed  them with
poisoned milk, and soothe them with caresses which
will make  them fit for  everlasting flames;  but  those of
the Church,  fed  at the breasts of her  wisdom, having
tasted the sweetness of a better milk, already begin


LETTER LXXVIII.  283

to  grow  up  in  it  unto  salvation,  and  being  fully  satiated
with  it  they  cry:  Thy  fulness  is  better  than  wine,  Thy
fragrance  than  the  sweetest  ointments  (Cant.  i.  1,2).  This
to  their  mother.  But,  then,  having  tasted  and  known  how
sweet  the  Lord  is,  how  truly  the  best  of  fathers,  they  say
to  Him  :  How  great  is  Thy  goodness,  O  Lord,  which  Thou
hast  laid  up  for  them  that  fear  Thee  (Ps.  xxxi.  19).  Now
my  whole  desire  is  accomplished.  Formerly  when  I  saw
with  regret  with  what  avidity  you  sucked  in1  from  the  lips
of  flatterers  their  mortal  poison,  the  seed  of  sin,  I  used,  with
grief,  to  desire  better  things  for  you,  saying:  Who  shall
give  thee  to  me,  my  brother,  who  sucked  the  breasts  of  my
mother  (Cant.  viii.  i)?  Far  from  thee  henceforth  be
those  men  with  caresses  and  dishonest  praises,  who  bless
you  before  your  face  and  expose  you  at  the  same  time
to  the  reproach  and  derision  of  all  men,  whose  applause  in
your  presence  is  the  world's  by-word,  or  rather  makes  you
a  by-word  to  the  world.  If  they  murmur  even  now,  say  to
them  :  If  I  yet  pleased  you,  I  should  not  be  the  servant  of
Christ  (Gal.  i.  10).  Those  whom  we  please  in  evil  things
we  cannot  please  in  good  things,  unless  they  are  them
selves  changed,  and  begin  to  hate  what  we  were,  and  so  at
length  to  love  what  we  are.

10.  In  our  time  two  new  and  detestable  abuses  have
arisen  in  the  Church,  of  which  one  (permit  me  to  say  it)
was  no  stranger  to  you  when  you  lived  in  forgetfulness  of
the  duties  of  your  profession  ;  but  this,  thanks  to  God,  has
been  amended  to  His  glory,  to  your  everlasting  gain,  to  our
joy  and  an  example  to  all.  God  is  able  to  bring  about  that
we  may  soon  be  consoled  for  the  second  of  these  evils,  the
odious  novelty  of  which  I  do  not  dare  to  speak  of  in  public,
and  yet  am  afraid  to  pass  over  in  silence.  My  grief  urges
my  tongue  to  speak,  but  fear  restrains  the  words ;  fear
only  lest  I  may  offend  someone  if  I  speak  openly  of  what
troubles  me,  since  truth  sometimes  makes  enemies.  But
for  enmity  of  this  kind  thus  incurred  I  hear  the  truth  con
soling  me.  It  is  needful,  he  says,  that  offences  should  come.

1  Sugere. Bernard  is  playing  upon  the  name  of  his  correspondent  Suger.


284  LETTER LXXVIII.

And  I  do  not  think  that  those  words  which  follow,  Woe  to
that  man  by  whom  the  offence  cometh  (S.  Matt,  xviii.  7)
concern  me.  For  when  vices  are  attacked  and  a  scandal
results  thence,  it  is  not  he  who  makes  the  accusation  who  is
to  answer  for  the  scandal,  but  he  who  renders  it  necessary.
In  short,  I  am  neither  more  cautious  in  word  nor  circumspect
in  action  than  he  who  says,  "  It  is  better  that  a  scandal  should
arise  than  the  truth  be  compromised  "  (S.  Greg.  Magn.  Horn.
7  in  Ezech.  near  the  beginning,  and  S.  Aug.  de  Lib.  Arbitr.
et  de  Praedest.  sanctor.).  Although  I  know  not  what  advan
tage  it  would  be  were  I  to  hold  my  tongue  about  that  which
all  the  world  proclaims  with  a  loud  voice,  nor  can  I  alone
pretend  to  overlook  the  pest  whose  ill  odour  is  in  all
nostrils,  and  not  dare  to  guard  my  own  nose  from  its  ill
effect.

ii.  For  whose  heart  is  not  indignant,  and  whose  tongue
does  not  murmur  either  openly  or  secretly  to  see  a  deacon
equally  serving  God  and  Mammon,1  against  the  precept  of

1  This  deacon  was  Stephen  de  Garlande,  seneschal  or  officer  of  the  table  to  the
King  of  France.  Many  have  wrongly  confounded  him  with  the  Chancellor
Stephen,  who  became  later  on  Bishop  of  Paris,  as  Duchesne  rightly  remarks  in
his  notes  on  Abaelard.  Teulf  says  of  him,  in  his  Annals  of  Maurigny,  B.  ii. :
"  At  the  death  of  William,  brother  german  of  Anselle,  officer  of  the  King's  table,
Stephen,  the  brother  of  both,  became  Mayor  of  the  King's  palace.  It  was  a
thing  unheard  of  up  to  that  time,  that  one  who  occupied  the  po.-ition  of  a  deacon
should  perform  the  military  functions  of  a  Court.  He  was  an  enterprising  man,
and  endowed  with  rare  worldly  ability.  His  ecclesiastical  revenues  were  con
siderable.  The  King  had  such  a  friendship  for  him  that  he  seemed  rather  to
obey  him  than  command.  He  enjoyed  greater  temporal  prosperity  than  any
other  man  in  our  times.  He  married  his  niece  to  Almaric  de  Montfort,  who
received  the  title  of  Rochefort  on  his  marriage.  Swollen  by  prosperity,  and
forgetful  of  what  he  was,  he  rendered  himself  odious  to  the  Queen  Adela  by
many  slights  towards  her,  and  having  become  disliked  by  all,  he  lost  his  favour
with  the  King,  was  removed  from  his  place  and  obliged  to  quit  the  Court.
Then,  as  if  he  were  seized  with  a  kind  of  insanity,  he  did  all  in  his  power  to
throw  the  realm  into  confusion,  and,  with  the  aid  of  Almaric,  who  was  a  man
of  remarkable  bravery,  he  took  up  arms  against  his  country.  It  was  of  the  same
Stephen,  if  I  do  not  mistake,  for  he  was  surnamed  de  Garlande,  that  Ivo,  Bishop
of  Chartres,  speaks  in  terms  not  at  all  flattering  in  his  eighty-seventh  Letter,
where,  addressing  the  cardinals,  he  accuses  the  people  of  Beauvais  of  taking  him
for  a  Bishop.  '  Violating  all  the  canons,'  he  says,  '  they  have  taken  for  Bishop
a  clerk  ignorant,  a  gambler,  addicted  to  a  crowd  of  vices,  completely  wanting  in


LETTER LXXVIII.  285

the  Gospel  heaping  up  ecclesiastical  dignities,  so  that  he
seems  not  to  be  inferior  to  Bishops,  yet  so  mixed  up  in
military  offices  that  he  is  preferred  even  to  Dukes.  What
monster  is  this,  that  being  a  clerk,  and  wishing  at  the  same
time  to  appear  a  soldier,  is  neither  ?  It  is  equally  an  abuse
that  a  deacon  should  serve  at  the  table  of  the  King,  and  that
the  server  of  the  King  should  minister  at  the  altar  during  the
holy  mysteries.  Is  it  not  a  wonder,  or  rather  a  scandal,  to
see  the  same  person  clothed  in  armour  march  at  the  head
of  armed  soldiery,  and  vested  in  alb  and  stole  read  the
Gospel  in  the  midst  of  the  Church  ;  at  one  time  give  the
signal  for  battle  with  the  trumpet,  and  at  another  convey
the  orders  of  the  Bishop  to  the  people  ?  Unless,  perhaps,
that  man  (which  would  be  scandalous)  is  ashamed  of  the
Gospel  of  which  S.  Paul,  that  Vessel  of  election,  was  so
proud  ?  Perhaps  he  is  ashamed  to  appear  a  cleric,  and
thinks  it  more  honourable  to  be  supposed  a  soldier,
preferring  the  Court  to  the  Church,  the  table  of  the
King  to  the  Altar  of  Christ,  and  the  cup  of  demons  to  the
chalice  of  Christ.  This  seems  the  more  probable,  because
he  is  prouder  (they  say)  to  be  called  by  the  name  of  that
one  post  which  he  has  obtained  at  the  palace  than  by  any  of
those  titles  of  ecclesiastical  dignities  which,  in  defiance  of
the  canons,  he  has  heaped  upon  himself,  and  instead  of
delighting  to  be  called  Archdeacon,  Dean,  or  Provost  to  his
various  Churches,  he  prefers  to  be  styled  Dapifer  to  H.M.
the  King.  O,  unheard  of  and  hateful  perversity !  thus  to
prefer  the  title  of  servant  of  a  man  to  that  of  the  servant  of
God,  and  to  consider  the  position  of  an  official  of  an  earthly
king  one  of  higher  dignity  than  that  of  an  heavenly  !  He
who  prefers  military  warfare  to  the  work  of  the  ministry

all  that  Holy  Orders  require,  a  man,  in  short,  who  was  formerly  driven  from  the
Church  by  the  Archbishop  of  Lyons,  Legate  of  the  Holy  See,  because  of  a  public
adultery,  and  that  by  the  order  of  the  King  and  Queen.  This  man,  who  was
intruded,  is  Stephen  de  Garlande.  If  ever  the  Apostolic  authority  shall  permit
him  to  ascend  into  the  Episcopal  chair,  a  fatal  silence  will  be  manifestly  imposed
on  the  canons.  For  how  shall  we  drink  at  the  spring  of  knowledge  if  by  those
who  hold  the  keys  we  are  not  permitted  to  enter  ? ' "  So  Ivo.  Even  this  Stephen
Bernard  won  over  to  God.


286  LETTER LXXVIII.

places  the  world  before  the  Church,  is  convicted  of  pre
ferring  human  things  to  Divine,  earthly  to  heavenly.  Is  it
then  more  honourable  to  be  called  the  King's  Dapifer  than
Dean  or  Archdeacon  ?  It  may  be  to  a  layman,  not  to  a
cleric  ;  to  a  soldier,  not  to  a  deacon.

12.  It  is  a  strange  but  blind  ambition  to  delight  more  in
the  lowest  things  than  in  the  highest,  and  that  the  man
whose  lines  had  fallen  to  him  in  pleasant  places  should  re
create  himself  upon  a  dunghill  with  eager  desire,  and  count
his  precious  lands  as  nothing  worth.  This  man  mingles  the
two  orders  and  cunningly  abuses  each.  Military  pomps
delight  him,  but  not  the  risks  and  labours  of  warfare  ;  the
revenues  of  religion,  but  not  its  duties.  Who  does  not  see
how  great  is  the  disgrace,  as  much  to  the  State  as  to  the
Church  ?  for  just  as  it  is  no  part  of  clerical  duty  to  bear  arms
at  the  pay  of  the  King,  so  it  is  no  part  of  the  royal  duties  to
administer  lay  affairs  by  means  of  clerics.1  What  king  has
«ver  put  at  the  head  of  his  army  an  unwarlike  clerk  instead
•of  some  brave  soldier  ?  What  clerk,  again,  has  ever  thought
it  otherwise  than  unworthy  of  him  to  be  bound  to  obey  any
lay  person  whatsoever  ?  The  very  sign  which  he  bears  upon
his  head2  is  rather  the  mark  of  royalty  than  of  servitude  ;  on

1  Bernard  here  blames  equally  clerics  who  bear  arms  for  the  King's  pay  and
kings  who  impose  military  service  upon  clerks. Each  is  wrong  :  the  one  be
cause  he  loses  sight  of  the  dignity  of  his  status,  the  others  because  they  confide
without  choice  or  discrimination  functions  of  the  Court or  of  the  Army  upon
clerks  instead  of  giving  them  to  laymen,  as  they  ought. A  similar  practice  was
renewed  under  Louis  XL.  King  of  France. For  when  Cardinal  Balue,  Bishop  of
Kvreux,  was  sent  by  the  King  to  Paris  to  review  the  troops,  he  performed  that
duty  unworthy  of  a  prelate,  riding  a  mule  and  wearing  a  linen  rochet. Cha-
banne,  who  commanded  the  cavalry,  was  indignant,  and,  seeking  the  King,  he
begged  of  him  a  commission  to  visit  the  Chapter  of  Evreux,  or  to  examine  the
candidates  for  orders. "  Your demand astonishes  me,1'  said  the  King. "  Do
you  not  know  that  those  functions  belong  to  others,  and  require  a  character
which  you  have  not  ? '' "  Why," retorted Chabanne, "  should  I  be  less  fit  to
bring  clerks  to orders  than a  Bishop  to  review soldiers  ?  " which  reply  con
founded  the  King  and  aroused  the  mirth  of  the  bystanders. Guaguin,  Hist.  <if
the  Clergy,  B.  x. ;  Claud  Espence,  a  man famed in France  for learning  and
sanctity,  B.  ii.  c.  6  ; Digress,  in  i.  Ep.  ad  Timot/i. ;  Bosquier,  in  Pluiarch.  Christ.  ;
•Corozetus,  Apophthfg.  Gall.

2  The  tonsure,  or  clerical  crown.


LETTER LXXVIII.  287

the  other  hand,  the  throne  finds  a  better  support  in  the
force  of  arms  than  in  chanting  of  Psalms.  Still,  if  the
abasement  of  the  one  contributes  to  the  greatness  of  the
other,  as  is  sometimes  the  case  ;  if,  for  example,  the  humi
liation  of  the  King  raised  higher  the  dignity  of  the  priest,  or
the  abasement  of  the  clerk  added  something  to  the  royal
honour  ;  as  it  happens/  for  instance,  if  a  woman  of  noble
rank  marries  a  man  of  the  people,  she  indeed  loses  in  grade
by  him,  but  he  gains  by  her;  if,  then,  I  say,  either  the  King
had  advantage  from  the  clerk,  or  the  clerk  from  the  King,  it
would  be  an  evil  only  in  part,  and  perhaps  ought  to  be
borne  with  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  since  there  is  no  gain  to
either  from  the  humiliation  of  the  other,  but  there  is  loss  to
each ;  since  neither  does  it  become  a  cleric,  as  has  been
said,  to  be  or  to  be  called  the  server  of  the  King;  nor  is  it
for  the  King's  advantage  to  put  the  reins  of  government  into
any  but  strong  and  brave  hands.  Truly  then  it  is  strange
that  either  power  endures  such  a  man  as  this ;  that  the
Church  does  not  repulse  the  deacon-soldier,  or  the  State
the  prince-ecclesiastic.

13.  I  had  wished  to  inculcate  these  principles  by  still
stronger  and  more  detailed  arguments,  and  perhaps  ought
to  do  so,  did  not  the  necessary  limits  of  a  letter  oblige  me
to  defer  this  for  the  present ;  and  because,  most  of  all,  I
fear  to  offend  you,  I  have  spared  a  man  for  whom,  it  is
said,  you  had  formerly  a  great  regard.  I  would  not  that
you  should  have  a  friend  at  the  expense  of  the  truth.  But
you  have  still  a  friendship  for  him  ;  show  yourself  a  true
friend,  and  exert  yourself  to  make  him,  too,  a  friend  of  the
Truth.  Then  at  length  there  will  be  a  true  friendship  be
tween  you,  if  it  is  bound  together  by  a  common  love  of
truth.  And  if  he  will  not  yield  to  you  in  this,  hold  fast  what
you  have ;  join  the  tail  to  the  head  of  the  sacrifice.1  You

1  That  is,  join  the  end  to  the  beginning  of  your  work.  He  exhorts  to  per
severance,  alluding  to  that  precept  of  the  Law  which  prescribed  the  offering  at
the  same  time  of  the  head  and  the  tail  of  the  victim  (Exod.  xxix. ;  Lev.  iii.).
Radulfus  gives  the  mystical  sense  of  the  precept  thus:  "The  tail,  which  is  the
end  of  the  body,  is  the  symbol  of  perseverance  in,  and  the  perfecting  of,  good
works."  The  same  writer  says,  in  Humit.  25  in  Evang. :  "In  the  precept  of  the


288  LETTER LXXIX.

have  received  by  the  grace  of  God  a  robe  of  many  colours  ;
take  pains  to  make  it  reach  even  to  the  feet,  for  what  will  it
profit  you  to  have  put  your  hand  to  the  work  if  (which,  God
forbid)  you  do  not  attain  finally  to  persevere  ?  I  end  my
letter  by  warning  you  to  make  a  good  ending  of  your  good
work.


LETTER LXXIX. (Circa A.D. 1130.)
To  ABBOT  LuKE.1

Bernard  imams  him  that  familiarity  with  women  is  to
be  shunned,  and  indicates  what  is  to  be  done  in  regard  to

o

a  brother  -who  has  fallen  into  sin.

i.  My  very  dear  friend,  you  have  singularly  edified  me,
and  have  shown  an  example  only  too  rare  of  goodness,  be
cause  not  only  have  you  not  despised  the  warnings  of  one  of
less  importance  than  yourself,  but  have  besides  this  returned
thanks  to  your  adviser,  wisely  looking  not  to  who  or  what
he  might  be,  but  to  what  was  his  advice.  I  thank  God  for
it,  and  that  my  presumption  in  advising  has  met  with
gratitude  rather  than  indignation.  Encouraged,  therefore,
by  this  striking  proof  of  your  humility  I  feel  myself  bolder
in  repeating  my  former  advice.  I  pray  you,  therefore,  by
that  Blood  which  was  poured  out  for  souls  not  to  regard
as  a  matter  of  small  importance  the  peril  that  is  incurred  by
souls  of  so  great  value  by  the  meeting  of  persons  of  different
sexes  in  familiar  intercourse.  This  cannot  be  doubted  by
those  who  have  long  struggled  against  the  temptations  of  the

Law  the  tail  cf  the  victim  is  ordered  to  be  offered  in  sacrifice  ;  and  that  since  the
tail  is  the  actual  ending  of  the  body,  and  he  offers  a  complete  sacrifice  who
carries  out  his  offering  of  a  good  work  to  its  due  end  and  perfection."

1  Abbot  of  Cuissy,  of  the  Premonstratensian  Order  in  the  Diocese  of  Laon,  as
is  evident  from  the  Biblioth.  Premonstrat.,  and,  as  Bernard  himself  sufficiently
indicates  when  he  expresses  his  surprise  that  William,  Abbot  of  S.  Thierry,  as
being  very  near,  or  some  brother  at  Premontre',  since  that  was  in  his  immediate
neighbourhood,  had  not  been  consulted  instead  of  himself.  Of  Luke  and  of  the
monastery  of  Cuissy  you  have  the  following  from  the  monk  Hermann  :  Bartho
lomew  Bishop  of  Laon,  "  built  also  in  a  place  named  Cuissy  another  monastery
of  clerks,  and  there  ordained  as  abbot  Dom  Luke,  a  religious  man  "  (Miraculis
B.  Mariae  Laudunens,  B.  iii.  c.  16).


LETTER LXXIX.  289

devil,  and  have  learned  by  their  own  experience  to  say  with
the  Apostle,  We  are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices  (2  Cor.
ii.  11).  And  if  there  is  anything  that  should  induce  you  to
take  into  serious  consideration,  not  my  advice  indeed,  but
that  of  the  Apostle  himself,  or  rather  his  precept  about  this
matter,  when  he  cries  aloud  Flee  from  fornication  (i  Cor.
vi.  1 8),  it  is  the  proof  of  peril  given  by  the  shameful  fall  of
the  brother,  about  whom  you  have  deigned  to  consult  me.
But,  indeed,  I  wonder  that  it  should  have  seemed  to  you
expedient  to  seek  me  for  an  adviser,  although  at  such  a
distance,  when  you  have  beside  you  a  wise  man  of  our
Order  and  a  special  lover  of  your  house,  namely,  William,
Abbot  of  S.  Thierry.  And  I  do  not  doubt  that  there  are  in
the  Abbey  of  Premontre  also  men  of  sense,  who  have
prudence  and  faithfulness  to  show  you  the  way  out  of  your
difficulties.

2.  But  since  it  has  pleased  you  rather  to  have  recourse  to
me,  for  which,  no  doubt,  you  have  some  good  reason,  the
best  advice  I  can  give  is  at  your  disposal.  If  that  brother
has  come  of  himself  to  confess  his  fault,  however  grave  and
shameful  it  may  have  been,  endeavour  should  be  made  to
bring  about  his  amendment,  and  he  should  not  be  expelled.
But  as  the  ill  odour  of  such  a  crime  betrays  it  to  others,  it  is
needful  to  proceed  with  care,  if  itis  possible,  and  in  a  different
way  from  heretofore.  For  it  is,  perhaps,  not  expedient
that  he  should  be  allowed  to  remain  longer  among  you,  lest,
perhaps,  as  you  have  with  great  reason  written,  this  sick
sheep  should  infect  your  young  and  tender  flock  with  his
disease.  On  the  other  hand,  a  father  ought  not  to  close  his
heart  entirely  against  his  son,  though  a  sinner;  I  should
consider  it,  therefore,  a  course  kindly  in  the  father  and
salutary  for  the  son  that  you  should  endeavour  to  remove
him  into  another  of  the  houses  of  Dom  Norbert,  but  a  distant
one,  where  he  may  do  penance  under  a  stricter  discipline,
changing  his  abode  but  not  his  purpose,  until  the  time  when
it  shall  seem  good  to  you  to  recall  him  to  his  own  monastery.
As  for  his  passing  into  our  Order,  that,  perhaps,  w^ould  not
be  of  advantage  to  you.  You  wrote  to  me,  it  is  true,  that  he

VOL. I.  19


2QO  LETTER LXXX.

had  often  said  that  he  had  my  promise  to  receive  him  if  he
should  come  with  your  licence ;  but  in  my  presence  he
denied  having  said  any  such  thing.  Perhaps  you  may  not
be  disposed  to  send  him  to  any  of  those  places  to  abide
which  I  have  mentioned,  or  he  may  not  be  willing  to  go,  or
if  both  are  willing,  perhaps  a  place  ready  to  receive  him
may  not  be  found  :  then  one  of  two  things  will  be  advisable
in  the  necessity  of  the  case ;  one,  to  dismiss  him  with
letters  of  licence  to  travel  whither  he  will  for  the  good  of
his  soul ;  the  other  to  keep  him  among  you,  by  special
grace  of  forgiveness,  if,  that  is  to  say,  you  are  able  to  take
away  every  occasion  of  his  repenting  or  disseminating  his
former  wickedness.  But  sufficient  on  this  subject.

3.  There  is  still  one  point  on  which  with  my  usual  pre
sumption  I  will  make  bold  to  tell  you  what  I  think.  I  speak
of  that  mill  at  which  the  lay  brothers  x  who  are  in  charge
are  obliged  to  permit  the  resort  of  women.  If  you  will  follow
my  advice  do  one  of  three  things  ;  either  forbid  entirely  any
entrance  of  women  to  the  mill ;  or  let  the  mill  be  put  into
the  charge  of  some  outside  person,  and  not  left  to  the  lay
brothers ;  or  let  it  be  altogether  given  up.


LETTER LXXX. (Circa A.D. 1130.)
To  GUY,  ABBOT  OF  MoLESMES.2

Bernard  consoles  him  under  a  great  injustice  which  he
had  suffered,  and  recommends  him  to  temper  his  vengeance
with  mercy.

God  who  knows  the  hearts  of  all  men,  and  is  the  inspirer
of  all  good  dispositions,  knows  with  what  sympathy  I  con
dole  with  you  in  this  your  adversity,  of  which  I  have  heard.
But,  again,  when  I  consider  rather  the  person  who  has
caused  you  this  trial  than  Him  who  permits  it,  just  as  much

1  Conversi. Respecting  these  see  Letter  143  and  note. Letter  404  similarly
recommends  the  avoidance  of  relations  with  women.

2  Guy  was  the  second  Abbot  of  Molesmes,  after  S.  Robert. See  on  this  sub
ject  Letters  43,  44,  and  60.


LETTER LXXX.  2QI

as  I  feel  with  you  in  the  present  misfortune,  so  much  I  hope
soon  to  rejoice  with  you  in  the  prosperity  which  must
speedily  come.  But  only  do  not  let  yourself  be  at  all  crushed
by  discouragement ;  think  with  me  how,  by  the  example  of
holy  Job,1  you  ought  to  receive  with  the  same  cheerfulness
troubles  from  the  hand  of  the  Lord  as  you  do  blessings.
Indeed,  you  ought,  after  the  example  of  holy  David,2  not  so
much  to  be  angry  with  those  people  who  have  caused  you
such  great  sufferings,  although  they  are  your  own  servants,
as  to  know  that  you  ought  to  humble  yourself  under  the
mighty  hand  of  God,  who  doubtless  has  sent  them  to  bring
about  this  misfortune  to  you.  But  since  it  appears  that
their  correction  devolves  upon  you,  as  they  are  serfs  of  the
Church  committed  to  your  government,  it  is  proper  that
these  unfaithful  serfs  should  be  punished  for  their  very
wicked  presumption,  and  that  the  loss  of  the  monastery
.should  be  recompensed  in  some  degree  out  of  their  goods.
But  that  you  may  not  seem  rather  to  be  avenging  your  own
injury  in  this  than  punishing  their  fault,  I  beg  you  and  also
advise  you  not  to  think  so  much  of  what  they  deserve  as
what  is  fitting  for  you  to  do,  so  that  mercy  may  be  exalted
above  strict  justice,  and  that  in  your  moderation  God  may
be  glorified.  For  the  rest,  I  beg  you  to  press  upon  that
your  son,  who  is  dear  to  me  as  well  for  your  sake  as  in  a
great  degree  for  his  own,  with  your  own  lips,  as  with  my
spirit,  not  to  show  in  his  accusations  a  bitterness  and  a
violence  such  as  prove  that  he  forgets  that  precept  of  our
Lord — Whosoever  shall  smite  thee  on  thy  right  cheek  turn
to  him  the  other  also  (S.  Matt.  v.  39).

1  Job.  ii.  10.  2 2  Sam.  xvi.  10.


292  LETTER LXXXI.

LETTER  LXXXI. (Circa  A.D. 1130.)
To  GERARD,1  ABBOT  OF  POTTIERES.

He  defends  himself  against  a  false  accusation  "which  had
been  made  against  him.

I  do  not  remember  that  I  ever  wrote  anything  to  the
Count  of  Nevers,  to  accuse  you  personally,  nor  is  it
true  to  say  that  I  have.  But  if  I  have  written  a  letter
to  that  prince  it  is  on  behalf  of  your  Church,  and  I
consider  that  in  this  I  have  acted  not  against  you,  but  on
your  behalf.  I  had  heard  that  on  your  advice,  and  with
your  consent,  he  proposed  to  come  to  you  on  a  visit
of  inspection,  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  there  was  any
truth  in  the  many  evil  reports  which  were  going  abroad
concerning  your  house,  and,  if  so,  to  whom  the  blame  was
to  be  laid,  so  that  he  might  correct  with  zeal  and  care  any
thing  that  he  might  find  to  be  wrong.'2  I  do  not  see  that
you  have  any  right  to  feel  yourself  injured  or  to  complain
because  I  took  pains  to  strengthen  the  prince  by  my
encouragement  in  a  resolution  so  just  and  so  pious.  On  the
contrary,  I  think  I  did  rightly  and  in  the  interests  of  the
House  of  God  in  rousing  the  zeal  of  the  man  who  was  able

o

to  apply  a  remedy  to  the  evil  from  which  it  suffered.  You
quote  the  Holy  Scripture  to  convince  me  that  I  have  done
wrong  because  I  did  not  begin  by  warning  you  ;  but  know
that  I  have  absolutely  no  complaint  against  you  personally,
and  in  all  that  I  have  done  for  the  sake  of  charity  I  have  had
in  view  only  the  restoration  of  peace  in  your  Church.
Finally,  you  shall  be  fully  convinced  of  the  truth  of  what  I
say  if,  as  you  announce  to  me,  you  come  to  show  me  the
whole  business.  You  will  be  sure  to  find  me  here  on  what
ever  day  of  the  coming  week  you  please.

1  Pottieres  was  an  Abbey  of  Benedictines  in  the  Diocese  of  Langres,  founded
by  Gerard,  Count  of  Nevers,  and  not  far  from  his  Chateau. He  was  buried
there  with his  wife  Bertha. Acheiiui Opera Guilerti de Novigentum,  p.  653,
notes.

2  Because  he  had  succeeded  to  the  rights  of  Count  Gerard,  founder  of  the
monastery  of  Pottieres.


LETTER LXXX1I.  293

LETTER LXXXII. (Circa A.D. 1128.)
To  THE  ABBOT  OF  S.  JOHN  AT  CHARTRES.1

Bernard  dissuades  him  from resigning  his  charge, and
undertaking  a  Pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem.

i.  As  regards  the  matters  about  which  you  were  so  good  as
to  consult  so  humble  a  person  as  myself,  I  had  at  first  deter
mined  not  to  reply.  Not  because  I  had  any  doubt  what  to
say,  but  because  it  seemed  to  me  unnecessary  or  even  pre-
.sumptuous  to  give  counsel  to  a  man  of  sense  and  wisdom.
But  considering  that  it  usually  happens  that  the  greater
number  of  persons  of  sense — or  I  might  say  that  all  such —
trust  the  judgment  of  another  person  rather  than  their  own
in  doubtful  cases,  and  that  those  who  have  a  clear  judgment
in  the  affairs  of  others,  however  obscure,  frequently  hesitate
and  are  undecided  about  their  own,  I  depart  from  my  first
resolution,  not,  I  hope,  without  reason,  and  without  pre
judice  to  any  wiser  opinion  explain  to  you  simply  how  the
matter  appears  to  me.  You  have  signified  to  me,  if  I  do
not  mistake,  by  the  pious  Abbot  Ursus  of  S.  Denis,2  that
you  have  it  in  contemplation  to  desert  your  country  and
the  monastery  over  which,  by  the  Providence  of  God,  you
are  head,  to  undertake  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  to  occupy
yourself  henceforth  only  with  God  and  the  salvation  of
your  own  soul.  Perhaps,  if  you  aspire  unto  perfection,  it
may  be  expedient  for  you  to  leave  your  country,  when  God
says,  Go  forth  from  thy  country  and  from  thy  kindred

1  Doubtless  Stephen,  who  from  being  Abbot  of  S.  John  at  Chartres,  of  the
Augustinian  Order,  was  made  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem  at  the  beginning  of  1128
after  Germundus  (Orderic.  Vit.  B.  12,  towards  the  end).  It  was  he  who  sent  a
letter,  it  is  said,  to  Fulk,  Count -of  Anjou,  by  means  of  William  de  Bury.
(Analect.  B.  iii.  p.  335,  Lett.  35  and  36,  and  the  Preface  by  Papebroch,  On  the
Patriarchs  of  Jerusalem,  Vol.  iii.  of  May.)

-  Ursus,  or  Ursio.  fifth  Abbot  of  the  Regular  Canons  of  S.  Denis  of  Rheims,
of  the  Order  of  S.  Augustine,  and  afterwards  Bishop  of  Verdun,  is  mentioned  in
Spicilegium,  Vol.  xii.  p.  312.  he  was  promoted  to  the  See  of  Verdun  in  1129,
and  had  Gilbert  for  successor  at  S.  Denis,  but  at  length  laying  down  his  dignity
he  resumed  after  a  time  his  rule  as  Abbot.  (Marlot,  Metrop.  Remens.  Vol.  ii.  p.


2Q4  LETTER LXXXII.

(Gen.  xii.  i).  But  I  do  not  see  at  all  on  what  ground  you
ought  to  risk,  by  your  departure,  the  safety  of  the  souls
entrusted  to  you.  For  is  it  pleasant  to  enjoy  liberty  after
having  laid  down  your  burden  ?  But  charity  does  not  seek
her  own  interests.  Perhaps  the  wish  for  quiet  and  rest
attracts  you  ?  But  it  is  obtained  at  the  price  of  the  peace
of  others.  Freely  will  I  do  without  the  enjoyment  of  any
desire,  even  a  spiritual  one,  which  cannot  be  obtained
except  at  the  price  of  a  scandal.  For  where  there  is
scandal,  there,  without  doubt,  is  loss  of  charity  :  and  where
there  is  loss  of  charity,  surely  no  spiritual  advantage  can
be  hoped  for.  Finally,  if  it  is  permitted  to  any  one  to^
prefer  his  own  quiet  to  the  common  good,  who  is  there  that
can  say  with  truth :  For  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  if
gain  (Phil.  i.  21)  ?  And  where  wrill  that  principle  be  which
the  Apostle  declares  :  No  one  lives  to  himself,  and  no  one
dies  to  himself  (Rom.  xiv.  7) ;  and,  Not  seeking  mine  own
profit,  but  the  profit  of  many  (i  Cor.  x.  33)  ;  and,  That  lie
who  lives  should  not  any  longer  live  unto  himself,  but
unto  Him  who  died  for  all  (2  Cor.  v.  15)  ?

2.  But  you  will  say :  Whence  comes  my  great  desire,  if
it  is  not  from  God  ?  With  your  permission  I  will  say  what
I  think.  Stolen  waters  are  sweet  (Prov.  ix.  17);  and  for
whosoever  knows  the  devices  of  the  devil,  it  is  not  doubtful
that  the  angel  of  darkness  is  able  to  change  himself  into  an
angel  of  light,  and  to  pour  upon  the  thirsting  soul  those
waters  of  which  the  sweetness  is  more  bitter  than  worm
wood.  In  truth,  what  other  can  be  the  suggester  of  scandals,
the  author  of  dissension,  the  troubler  of  unity  and  peace,
except  the  devil,  the  adversary  of  truth,  the  envier  of
charity,  the  ancient  foe  of  the  human  race,  and  the  enemy
of  the  Cross  of  Christ  ?  If  death  entered  into  the  world
through  his  envy,  even  so  now  he  is  jealous  of  whatever
good  he  sees  you  doing  ;  and  since  he  is  a  liar  from  the
beginning,  he  falsely  promises  now  better  things  which  he
does  not  see.  For  wrhen  did  the  Truth  oppose  that  most
faithful  saying,  Art  thou  bound  unto  a  wife?  seek  not  to  be
loosed  (i  Cor.  vii.  27)  ?  Or  when  did  charity  urge  to-


LETTER LXXXIII.  295

scandal,  who  at  the  scandals  of  all  shows  herself  burning
with  regret?  He,  then,  the  most  wicked  one,  opposed  to
charity  by  envy,  and  to  truth  by  falsehood,  mixing  false
hood  and  gall  with  the  true  honey,  promises  doubtful  things
as  certain,  and  gives  out  that  true  things  are  false,  not  that
he  may  give  you  what  you  vainly  hope  for,  but  that  he  may
take  away  what  you  are  profitably  holding  now.  He  prowls
around  and  seeks  how  he  may  take  away  from  the  flock
the  care  of  the  pastor,  to  make  a  prey  of  it  when  there  is
none  to  defend  it  from  his  attacks  ;  and,  besides  this,  to
bring  down  upon  the  pastor  that  terrible  rebuke,  Woe  to
him  by  whom  scandal  comet h  (S.  Matt,  xviii.  7).  But  I
have  full  confidence  in  the  wisdom  given  to  you  by  God,
that  by  no  cunning  devices  of  the  wicked  one  you  will  be
seduced  or  made  to  renounce  certain  good,  and  for  the
hope  of  uncertain  advantage  to  incur  certain  evil.


LETTER  LXXXIII. (Circa  A.D. 1129.)
To  SIMON,  ABBOT  OF  S.  NICHOLAS. L

Bernard  consoles  him  under  the  persecution  of  which  he
is  the  object.  The  most  pious  endeavours  do  not  always
have  the  desired  success.  What  line  of  conduct  ought  to
be  followed  towards  his  inferiors  by  a  prelate  who  is
desirous  of  stricter  discipline.

i.  I  have  learned  with  much  pain  by  your  letter  the  per
secution2  that  you  are  enduring  for  the  sake  of  righteous-

1  He  was  Abbot  of S.  Nicholas,  at Rheims,  and  was made  Abbot  of  S.
Nicholas  aux  Bois,  in  the  diocese  of  Laon. Hermann,  a  monk  of  Laon,  speaks
of him  in B.  iii. of  Miracles  of  Mary, c. 18. He  was  brother  of  William,
Abbot of  S.  Thierry, who is mentioned in Letters 85 and  86. See also
the  Admonition  to  the  Brothers  of  Mont  Dieu.

2  This  refers  to  the  persecution  which  Simon  endured  from  his  monks  because
he  had  resigned  into  the  hands  of  the  Bishop  of  Arras  certain  altars  (that  is  the
name  which  used  to  be  given  to  the  cures  of  parishes),  because  the  possession
of  them  was  stained  by  simony. We  find  on  this  subject  a  Letter  of  Samson,
Bishop  of  Rheims,  and  of  Joscelin,  Bishop  of  Soissons,  to  Pope  Innocent  II.,  who
had  named  them  as  judges  of  that  cause. We  read  also  a  Letter  of  Eugenius  III.


2g6  LETTER LXXXIII.

ness,  and  although  the  consolation  given  you  by  Christ  in
the  promise  of  His  kingdom  may  suffice  amply  for  you,
none  the  less  is  it  my  duty  to  render  you  both  all  the  con
solation  that  is  in  my  power,  and  sound  and  faithful  advice
as  far  as  I  am  able.  For  who  can  see  without  anxiety
Peter  stretching  his  arms  in  the  midst  of  the  billows? — or
hear  without  grief  the  dove  of  Christ  not  singing,  but
groaning  as  if  she  said,  How  shall  we  sing  the  Lord's  song
in  a  strange  land?  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  4).  Who,  I  say,  can
without  tears  look  upon  the  tears  of  Christ  Himself,  who
from  the  bottom  of  the  abyss  lifts  now  His  eyes  unto  the
hills  to  see  from  whence  cometh  His  help  ?  But  we  to
whom  in  your  humility  you  say  that  you  are  looking,  are
not  mountains  of  help,  but  are  ourselves  struggling  with
laborious  endeavours  in  this  vale  of  tears  against  the  snares
of  a  resisting  enemy,  and  the  violence  of  worldly  malice,
and  with  you  we  cry  out,  Our  help  is  from  the  Lord,  who
made  Heaven  and  earth  (Ps.  cxxi.  2).

2.  All  those,  indeed,  who  wish  to  live  piously  in  Christ
suffer  persecution  (2  Tim.  iii.  12).  The  intention  to  live
piously  is  never  wanting  to  them,  but  it  is  not  always
possible  to  carry  it  perfectly  out,  for  just  as  it  is  the  mark
of  the  wicked  constantly  to  struggle  against  the  pious
designs  of  the  good  ;  so  it  is  not  a  reproach  to  the  piety  [of
the  latter],  even  although  they  are  frequently  unable  to  per
fect  their  just  and  holy  desires,  because  they  are  few  against
many  opposers.  Thus  Aaron  yielded  against  his  will  to  the
impious  clamours  of  the  riotous  people  (Exod.  xxxii.).  So
Samuel  unwillingly  anointed  Saul,  constrained  by  the  too

to  Bartholomew,  Bishop  of  Laon,  in  which  he  informs  him  that  he  wishes  to
know  the  ground  of  the  dispute  between  Alvisus,  Bishop  of  Arras,  and  G.,
Abbot  of  S.  Nicholas.  In  the  Letter  from  Samson  to  Pope  Innocent  it  is  said
that  Abbot  Simon,  "  because  his  monks  did  not  agree  with  him  to  resign  those
altars,  laid  down  the  abbacy  for  a  while,  and  retired  into  a  distant  region  ;  "  but
at  length  he  was  recalled  by  his  monks,  "  who  preferred  to  be  without  those
altars  than  without  their  abbot."  From  this  may  be  understood  the  integrity
and  disinterestedness  of  Simon,  under  whom  the  monastery  flourished  (says
Hermann),  "both  in  religion  and  in  material  prosperity."  The  time,  then,  of
the  writing  of  this  Letter  may  be,  without  doubt,  placed  before  the  accession  of
Innocent,  i.e.,  before  1130.  As  to  Gilbert,  the  successor  of  Simon,  see  Letter  399.


LETTER LXXXIV.  297

eager  desires  of  the  same  people  for  a  king  (i  Sam.  x.).  So
David,  when  he  wished  to  build  a  Temple,  yet  because  of
the  numerous  wars  which  that  valorous  man  had  constantly
to  sustain  against  enemies  who  molested  him,  he  was  for
bidden  to  do  what  he  piously  proposed  (2  Sam.  vii.).  Simi
larly,  venerable  father,  I  counsel  you,  without  prejudice  to
the  better  advice  of  wiser  persons,  so  to  soften,  for  the  pre
sent  only,  the  rigour  of  your  purpose  of  reform,  and  that  of
those  who  share  it  with  you,  that  you  may  not  be  unmindful
of  the  salvation  of  the  weaker  brethren.  Those,  indeed,
over  whom  you  have  consented  to  preside  in  that  Order  of
Cluny  ought  to  be  invited  to  a  stricter  life,  but  they  ought
not  to  be  obliged  to  embrace  it  against  their  will.  I  believe
that  those  who  do  desire  to  live  more  strictly  ought  to  be
persuaded  either  to  bear  with  the  weaker  out  of  charity  as
far  as  they  can  without  sin,  or  Ipermitted  to  preserve  the
customs  which  they  desire  in  the  monastery  itself,  if  that
may  be  done  without  scandal  to  either  party ;  or  at  least
that  they  should  be  set  free  from  the  Order  to  associate
themselves  where  it  may  seem  good  with  other  brothers
who  live  according  to  their  proposal.


LETTER  LXXXIV.

To  THE  SAME.

He  sends  back  an  erring  monk,  but  advises  that  he
should  be  treated  more  gently  and  kindly  after  his  return.

In  the  first  place,  please  to  notice  that  your  wandering
sheep1  has  been  detained  by  us  against  our  custom,  not  for
ourselves,  but  for  his  own  sake,  and  for  you  ;  not  without  a
good  result,  as  you  see,  since  we  have  succeeded  by  such
treatment,  and  by  salutary  counsels,  in  satisfying  his  desire
for  a  stricter  life,  and  in  giving  you  at  the  same  time  full
satisfaction,  by  his  return  to  you  with  his  own  assent.

I  say  this  to  you  not  to  show  you  our  kindly  feeling
towards  you,  which  I  could  never  sufficiently  show,  but  to

1  Bernard  himself  calls  him  Nicholas  in  his  Apology  to  William,  par.  4.


298  LETTER LXXXIV.

convince  you  of  the  truth  of  what  I  have  already  said  to
you,  if  I  remember  rightly,  that  the  trial  of  a  Rule  somewhat
more  strict  often  suffices  to  calm  unquiet  spirits  who  are  not
content  with  the  kind  of  life  that  they  are  living.  You
have  written  to  say  that  you  wish  to  have  my  advice  on  the
subject  of  this  very  brother  who  is  now  reconciled  to  you  ;
but  I  have  thought  it  now  unnecessary  to  give  it,  now  that
he  has  returned  to  you  with  the  intention  not  of  extorting
his  own  will  from  you,  but  of  doing  yours,  as  it  is  right  he
should.  I  beg  you  on  his  behalf,  and  with  him,  kindly  to
soften  the  difficulty  of  his  first  return,  which  he  greatly
fears,  and  to  treat  him  with  greater  kindness  and  condes
cension  than  is  usual  with  other  fugitives,  because,  although
the  circumstances  are  similar1  to  these,  yet  the  cause  of
his  conduct  was  different,  and  should  justify  different  treat
ment.  It  is  evident  that  there  is  a  great  distinction  between
one  who  quits  his  monastery  from  fear  and  dislike  of  the
religious  state,  and  one  who  quits  it  to  go  to  another  from
love  of  his  vocation  and  desire  to  practise  it  better.


To  WILLIAM,  ABBOT  01^  S.  THIERRY.

Here  is  inserted  in  some  editions  a  Letter  of  S.  BERNARD,
which  we  have  prefixed  as  a  preface  to  the  Apology  of
Bernard,  addressed  to  the  same  WILLIAM.

1  But  the  actions  were  not  really  similar  :  because,  according  to  philosophers,
it  is  the  final  and  determining  causes  which  make  the  difference  between  actions.
Thus  they  are  similar  only  in  class  (in  genere  entis)  to  borrow  their  language,
not  in  moral  quality  (in  geuere  muris).  S.  Augustine  draws  out  this  difference
excellently  in  his  9^rd  Letter,  notes  6  and  7.


LETTER LXXXV.  299

LETTER LXXXV. (Circa A.D. 1125.)

TO THE SAME WlLLIAM.1

Bernard  gently  reproaches  him  for  complaining  that  a
sufficient  return  was  not  made  to  him  by  Bernard  in
offices  of  friendship.

To  Dom  Abbot  WILLIAM,  Brother  BERNARD  wishes  health
and  the  charity  which  comes  of  a  pure  heart  and  a  good
conscience  and  faith  unfeigned.2

I.  If  no  one  knoweth  the  things  of  a  man,  save  the  spirit
of  man  which  is  in  him  (i  Cor.  ii.  n),  if  man  sees  only  the

1  The  venerable  William,  whose  friendship  was  a  great  delight  to  Bernard,
was  of  a  noble  family  of  Liege,  and  was  sent  to  Rheims  to  study  there  with
another  young  man  of  good  family,  named  Simon,  whom  a  MS.  of  Marmoutiers,
containing many Letters  of Bernard, says  was his  own brother. William,
despising the delights of the world, entered  with his companion into the
monastery  of S.  Nicasius, of Rheims, where he was celebrated for strict
observance  of  the  rule. After  having  happily  passed  through  his  noviciate,  as
each  of them  was  exemplary  in  virtues,  the  one  became  Abbot  of  S.  Nicholas
aux  Bois  and  the  other,  William,  succeeded,  in  1 120,  as  Abbot  of  the  monastery
of  S.  Thierry,  of  Rheims,  to  Geoffrey,  who  had  been  named  Abbot  of  S.  Medard,
of  Soissons. However,  the  reputation  of  Bernard  for  sanctity  spread  everywhere,
and  inspired  many  persons  with  the  desire  to  see  and  admire  him.  This  William,
then  a  simple  monk  of  S.  Nicasius,  having  heard  of  the  sickness  with  which  the
holy  man  was  seized  soon  after  he  became  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  went  to  see  him
with  a  certain  abbot;  and  from  the  interviews  they  then  had  commenced  that
close  friendship  with  which  they  were  afterwards  bound. It is that  which
explains  the  grief  which  he  felt  on  hearing  the  calumnies  of  which  Bernard  was
the  object ;  and  not  being  able  to  bear  them  longer,  he  occupied  himself  in
justifying  him  against  all  the  accusations  made  against  him  by  the  monks  of
Cluny,  which  he  did  in  the  elegant  Apology  written  by  him,  and  which  will  be
found  in  a  later  volume. These  were  not  the  only  vexations  which  the  love  of
William for  Bernard  caused him  to endure. Weary of the weight  of  his
pastoral  charge,  and  desirous  of  the  society  of  Bernard,  when  he  had  been  often
refused  entrance  into  Clairvaux,  as  will  be  understood  after  this  Letter,  he  at
length  laid  down  his  charge  and  betook  himself  to  the  monastery  of  Signy,  of
the  Cistercian  Order,  in  the  Diocese  of  Rheims,  about  1135,  a^ter  having  been
fourteen  years and  five months Abbot  of  S.  Thierry. He  was  professed  at
Signy  in 1 135,  and  after  having  passed  many  years  there  in  great  humility
and  exemplary  modesty,  as  in  the  contemplation  of  heavenly  things  (which  a
MS. Chronicle  of  Signy  calls  "  his  daily  occupation  "),  he  quitted  the  world
about  1 150,  or  at  all  events  after  1144.

2  Inscription  from  the  Corbey  MS.


300  LETTER LXXXV.

face,  while  God  reads  the  heart,  I  wonder,  I  cannot  suffi
ciently  wonder  how  and  by  what  means  you  have  been
able  to  measure  and  distinguish  between  your  affection  for
me  and  mine  for  you,  so  that  you  can  judge,  not  only  of
the  feelings  of  your  own  heart,  but  also  of  that  of  another
person.  It  seems  to  be  the  error  of  the  human  mind,  not  only
to  think  good  evil  and  evil  good,  or  true  things  false  and
conversely,  but  also  to  regard  sure  things  as  doubtful  and
doubtful  things  as  sure.  Perhaps  it  is  true  what  you  say,
that  you  are  loved  less  by  me  than  you  love  me  ;  but  I  am
quite  sure  of  this,  that  you  can  have  no  certainty  about  it.
How,  then,  do  you  affirm  as  certain  what  you  cannot
possibly  have  any  certainty  of  ?  Wonderful  !  Paul  did
not  trust  himself  to  his  own  judgment,  saying,  /  judge  not
my  own  self  (i  Cor.  iv.  3).  Peter  mourned  for  the  pre
sumption  with  which  he  had  deceived  himself,  when  he
said  of  himself,  Though  I  should  die  with  Thee  I  will  not
deny  Thee  (S.  Matt.  xxvi.  35).  The  disciples,  not  trusting
their  own  consciences,  replied  one  after  the  other  concerning
the  denial  of  the  Lord,  Is  it  I,  Lord?  (S.  Matt.  xxvi.  22).
David  confesses  his  own  ignorance  of  himself  in  his  prayer,
Remember  not  my  sins  of  ignorance  (Ps.  xxv.  7,  VuLG.).
But  you,  with  marvellous  confidence,  declare  so  positively,
not  only  about  your  own  heart,  but  mine,  "  Though  I  love
more,  I  am  loved  less."

2.  These  were,  in  fact,  your  words.  I  could  wish  they
had  not  been,  because  I  do  not  know  whether  they  are
true.  But  if  you  know,  how  do  you  know  ?  How,  I
repeat,  have  you  made  proof  that  I  am  more  loved  by  you
than  you  by  me  ?  Is  it  from  what  you  have  added  in  your
letters,  that  those  who  go  and  come  between  our  houses
never  bring  you  a  pledge  of  regard  and  affection  from  me  ?
But  what  pledge,  what  proof  of  love  do  you  require  from
me?  Is  this  the  trouble  that  disturbs  you,  that  to  none  of
your  many  letters  to  me  have  I  ever  replied?1  But  how
could  I  think  that  the  ripeness  of  your  wisdom  could  take
any  pleasure  in  the  scribblings  of  my  inexperience  ?  For

1  This  was  the  first  Letter  of  Bernard  to  William.


LETTER LXXXV.  3OI

I  knew  who  said,  My  little  children,  let  us  not  love  in
•word  nor  by  tongue,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth  (i  S.  John
iii.  1 8).  When  have  you  ever  had  need  of  my  help  and  it
has  failed  you  ?  O,  Thou  who  searchest  the  hearts  and  the
reins  !  who  alone,  as  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  lightenest
the  hearts  of  Thy  servants  with  the  differing  rays  of  Thy
grace;  Thou  knowest  I  feel  that  I  love  him  by  Thy  gift,
and  because  he  merits  it ;  but  how  much  I  love  him  Thou
knowest  and  I  do  not.  Thou,  O  Lord,  who  hast  given  the
love  that  we  have,  I  for  him  or  he  for  me,  knowest  how
much  Thou  hast  given.  And  by  what  right  does  any  of  us,
to  whom  Thou  hast  not  revealed  it,  dare  to  say,  "  I  love
more,  I  am  loved  less,"  unless  he  already  sees  his  light  in
Thy  light ;  that  is,  he  recognizes  in  the  light  of  Thy  truth
how  bright  the  fire  of  charity  may  be  ?

3.  In  the  meantime  I  am  content,  O  Lord,  to  see  my  own
darkness  in  Thy  light,  until  Thou  shalt  visit  me  sitting  in
the  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death;  and  by  Thee  the
thoughts  of  men's  hearts  shall  be  revealed  and  the  secret

O

things  of  darkness  made  manifest,  and  the  shadows  being
dissipated,  nothing  but  light  shall  remain  in  Thy  light.  I
feel,  indeed,  that,  by  Thy  gift,  I  love  him  ;  but  I  do  not
yet  see  in  Thy  light  whether  I  love  him  sufficiently.  Nor
do  I  yet  know  if  I  have  reached  that  degree  of  affection,
than  which  there  can  be  none  greater,  that  one  should  lay
down  his  life  for  his  friends.  For  who  will  boast  that  his
heart  is  pure,  or  that  it  is  perfect?  O,  Lord,  who  hast
lighted  in  my  soul  a  lamp  by  whose  light  I  see  and  shudder
at  my  own  darkness,  my  God  !  enlighten  also  that  very
darkness,  that  I  may  see  and  rejoice  in  my  affections  per
fectly  regulated  within  me,  that  I  may  know  and  love  what
ought  to  be  loved,  and  to  the  right  degree  and  for  the  right
reason.  May  I  not  desire  to  be  loved  except  in  Thee,  and
no  more  than  I  ought  to  be  loved.  Woe  to  me  also  if
(which  I  greatly  fear)  either  I  was  more  loved  by  him  than
I  deserved,  or  he  less  loved  by  me  than  he  was  worthy  to
be.  Nevertheless,  if  those  who  are  the  better  ought  to  be
loved  the  more  (for  those  are  the  better  who  love  the


302  LETTER LXXXV.

more),  what  else  shall  I  say  than  that  I  do  not  doubt  that  I
love  him  more  than  myself,  whom  I  know  to  be  better  than
myself;  but  I  confess  at  the  same  time  that  I  love  him  less
than  I  ought  to  do,  because  I  have  less  capability  of
doing  so.

4.  But,  my  father,  the  greater  is  your  love,  the  less  ought
you  to  despise  the  imperfection  of  mine,  because  although
you  love  more,  having  greater  capability,  yet  you  do  not
love  more  than  your  capacity  enables  you.  It  is  thus  with
me,  although  I  love  you  less  than  I  ought,  yet  I  love  you
as  much  as  my  capacity  permits,  and  I  can  only  do  what  I
have  received  the  capacity  of  doing.  Draw  me,  then,  in
your  train  that  I  may  reach  unto  you,  and  with  you,  receiving
capacity  more  fully,  may  love  more  abundantly.  Why,
then,  do  you  endeavour  that  I  should  attain  and  complain
that  I  am  not  able  to  do  so,  since  you  have  succeeded  as
you  see  and  may  dispose  of  me  as  you  please,  but  such  as
I  am,  not  such  as  you  hoped  to  find  me  ?  Indeed,  you  see
in  me  something,  I  know  not  what,  which  I  have  not,  and
pursue  as  me  what  is  not  me.  Therefore  you  do  not
attain  it,  because  I  am  insufficient  for  this,  and,  as  you
rightly  complain  in  your  letter,  it  is  not  I  that  fail  you,  but
God  in  me.  Now,  if  all  this  verbiage  pleases  you  that  I  have
ventured  upon  here,  tell  me,  and  I  will  repeat  it,  since  in
obeying  you  I  shall  not  fear  the  reproach  of  presumption.
The  little  Preface  l  which  you  have  ordered  to  be  sent  to
you  I  have  not  now  at  hand,  nor  did  I  think  it  necessary  as
yet  to  draw  it  up.  I  pray  that  He  who  has  given  you  to
will  may  in  His  good  pleasure  accomplish  to  you  and  to
your  friends  whatsoever  you  will  rightly,  my  pious  and
most  reverend  father,  who  art  fully  worthy  of  all  my  regard.

1  This  is  the  Letter  which  is  placed  at  the  head  of  his  Apology,  addressed  to
William,  and  was  written  about  1125.


LETTER LXXXVI.  303

LETTER LXXXVI. (Circa A.D. 1130.)

To  THE  SAME.

Bernard  sends  back  to  him  to  be  severely  reprimanded  a
fugitive  monk.  He  persuades  William,  who  was  meditating
a  change  of  state  or  retiring  into  private  life,  to  persevere.

To  his  friend,  Brother  BERNARD,  of  Clairvaux,  all  that  a
friend  can  wish  for  a  friend.

1.  You  have  given  me  this  formula  of  salutation  when
you wrote, ''  to  his friend all that  a  friend  can  wish." x
Receive  what  is  thine  own,  and  perceive  that  the  assump
tion  of  it  is  a  proof  that  we  are  of  one  mind,  for  my  heart  is
not distant from him with whom I have language in
common. I  must  now  reply  briefly  to  your  letter,  because
of  the  time  : for  when  it  arrived  the  festival  of  the  Nativity
of  our Lady 2 had dawned  ; and being  obliged  to devote
myself  entirely  to  its  solemnities,  I  had  no  leisure  to  think
of  anything  else. Your  messenger  also  was  anxious  to  be
gone ; scarcely would he stay even until to-morrow
morning  that  I  might  write  to  you  these  few  words  after  all
the  Offices  of  the  festival. I  send  back  to  you  a  fugitive
brother after having subjected  him  to severe reprimand
suited  to  his  hard  heart. It  seemed  to  me  that  there  was
nothing  better  to  do  than  to  send him  back  to  the  place
whence  he  had  fled,  since  I ought not,  according  to  our
rules,  to  detain  any  monk  in  the  house  without  the  consent
of  his  abbot. You  ought  to  reprove  him  very  severely  also,
and  press  him  to  make  humble  satisfaction  and  then  comfort
him  a  little  by  a  letter  from  yourself  addressed  to  his  abbot
on  his  behalf.

2.  Concerning  my  state  of  health,  I  am  not  able  to  reply
very  precisely  to  your  inquiry  except  that  I  continue,  as  in

1  Suits  ille  quod  sum.

2  It was by the example of  the Cistercians, as, I think, all of whose
monasteries  were  dedicated  to  the  Blessed  Virgin,  that  she  began  to  be  called  Our
Lady. Hence,  Peter  Cellensis  says  of  Bernard  :  "  He  was  a  most  devoted  child
of  Our  Lady,  to  whom  he  dedicated  not  one  church  only,  but  the  churches  of  the
whole  Cistercian  Order"  (B.  vi.  Ep.  23).


304  LETTER LXXXVII.

the  past,  to  be  weak  and  ailing,  neither  much  better  nor
much  worse.  If  I  have  not  sent  the  person  whom  I  had
thought  of  sending,  it  is  only  because  I  feel  much  more  the
scandal  to  many  souls  than  the  danger  of  one  body.  Not
to  pass  over  any  of  the  matters  of  which  you  speak  to  me,
I  come  to  yourself.  You  wrote  that  you  wished  to  know
what  I  desired  you  to  do  (as  if  I  were  aware  of  all  that  con
cerned  you).  But  this  plan,  if  I  should  say  what  I  think,
is  one  that  neither  I  could  counsel  nor  you  carry  out.  I
wish,  indeed,  for  you  what,  as  I  have  long  known,  you  wish  for
yourself.1  But  putting  on  one  side,  as  is  right,  both  your
will  and  mine,  I  think  more  of  what  God  wills  for  you,  and,
to  my  mind,  it  is  both  safer  for  me  to  advise  you  to  that,
and  much  more  advantageous  for  you  to  do  it.  My  advice
is,  then,  that  you  continue  to  hold  your  present  charge,  to
remain  where  you  are,  and  study  to  profit  those  over  whom
you  are  set,  nor  flee  from  the  cares  of  office  while  you  are
able  to  be  of  use,  because  woe  to  you  if  you  are  over  the
flock  and  do  not  profit  them ;  but  deeper  woe  still  if,
because  you  fear  the  cares  of  office,  you  abandon  the
opportunity  of  usefulness.


LETTER LXXXVII. (Circa  A.D. 1126.)
To OGER, REGULAR CANON. 2

Bernard  blames  him  for  his  resignation  of  his  pastoral
charge,  although  made  from  the  love  of  a  calm  and  pious
life.  None  the  less,  he  instructs  him  how,  after  becoming
a  private  person,  he  ought  to  live  in  community.

To  Brother  OGER,  the  Canon,  Brother  BERNARD,  monk
but  sinner,  wishes  that  he  may  walk  worthily  of  God  even
to  the  end,  and  embraces  him  with  the  fullest  affection.

1  See  note  to  Letter  85.

2  Some  blame  and  some  ridicule  such a  title  as  this,  as  being  a  vicious
pleonasm,  since  these  two  words  differ  only  in  the  language from  which  each
is  borrowed,  and  mean  exactly  the  same  thing;  as if  canons  were  something
different  from  regulars,  or  as  if  there  were  some  canons  who  were  regulars  and
others  who  were  not. But  it  may  be seen  in  John Bapt. Signy  Lib.  de  Ord.


LETTER LXXXVII.  305

i.  If  I  seem  to  have  been  too  slow  in  replying  to  your
letter,  ascribe  it  to  my  not  having  had  an  opportunity  to
send  to  you.  For  what  you  now  read  was  written  long
since,  but,  as  I  have  said,  though  written  without  delay,  was
delayed  for  want  of  a  bearer.  I  have  read  in  your  letter
that  you  have  laid  dowrn  with  regret  the  burden  of  your
pastoral  charge,  permission  having  been  obtained  with
great  difficulty,  or  rather,  extorted  by  your  importunity,
from  your  Bishop ;  and  only  on  the  condition  that  you
should  remain  under  his  authority,  though  fixing  yourself
elsewhere.  But  this  not  being  satisfactory  to  you,  you
appealed  to  the  Archbishop,  and,  obtaining  the  relaxation
of  this  condition,  you  have  returned  to  your  former  house
and  put  yourself  under  your  original  abbot.  Now  you  ask
to  be  advised  by  me  as  to  how  you  ought  to  live  hence
forth.  An  able  teacher,  indeed,  and  incomparable  master
am  I  !  And  when  I  shall  have  begun  to  teach  what  I  do
not  know  myself,  it  will  soon  be  discovered  that  I  know
nothing.  You  act,  in  consulting  me,  as  a  sheep  who  seeks
wool  from  a  goat,  a  mill  expecting  water  from  an  oven,  a
wise  man  expecting  sound  counsel  from  a  fool.  Besides
this,  you  heap  upon  me,  from  one  end  of  your  letter  to  the
other,  complimentary  speeches,  and  attribute  to  me  excel
lences  of  which  I  am  not  conscious  ;  and  as  I  ascribe  them
to  your  kind  feelings,  so  I  forgive  them  to  your  ignorance.
For  you  look  upon  the  countenance,  but  God  upon  the
heart ;  and  if  I  examine  myself  with  attention  under  His
awful  gaze,  I  find  that  I  know  myself  much  better  than  you
know  me,  since  I  am  much  less  far  from  myself  than  you
are.  Therefore  I  give  greater  credence  to  that  which  I  see
in  myself  than  to  what  you  suppose,  without  seeing,  to  be

Canon,  B.  ii.,  and  Navarre,  Com.  I.  de  Kegul.  at!  c.  12,  Ctii  portio  Dens,  q.  i,
where  he  shows  that  every  pleonasm  is  not  necessarily  a  battology.  For  in
legal  documents  certain  expressions  or  clauses  are  often  repeated  to  give  them
mere  force.  It  is  the  same  in  Hebrew  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  5,  Ps.  Ixviii.  12  VULG.  and
Ixx.).

Oger  was  the  first  Dean  of  the  Regular  Canons  of  S.  Nicholas  des  Pres,  near
Tournay.  Picard  states  this  upon  the  authority  of  Denis  Viller,  Canon  and
Chancellor  of  Tournay.

VOL.  I.  20


306  LETTER LXXXVII.

in  me.  Nevertheless,  if  you  may  have  heard  from  me  any
thing  that  is  profitable  to  you,  give  thanks  to  God,  in  whose
hand  I  am  and  all  my  words.

2.  You  explain  to  me  also  for  what  reason  you  have  not
followed  my  advice,  not  only  not  to  allow  yourself  to  be
discouraged  or  overcome  by  despondency,  but  to  bear
patiently  the  burden  laid  upon  you,  which  once  undertaken
you  were  not  at  liberty  to  lay  down  ;  and  I  accept  your
explanations.  I  am  well  aware,  indeed,  of  the  infertility  of
my  wisdom,  and  I  always  hold  myself  in  suspicion  for  rash
ness  and  inexperience,  so  that  I  ought  not  to  take  it  ill,  nor
do  I,  when  the  course  which  I  approve  is  not  taken  ;  and  I
wish,  on  the  contrary,  that  action  should  be  taken  on  better
advice  than  mine.  As  often  as  my  opinion  is  chosen  and
followed  I  feel  myself  weighed  down,  I  confess  it,  with
responsibility,  and  await  with  inquietude,  never  with  con
fidence,  the  issue  of  the  matter.  Yet  it  is  for  you  to  see
if  you  have  acted  wisely  in  not  following  my  advice  about
this  thing  j1  it  must  be  decided  also  by  those  wiser  persons
than  I,  on  whose  authority  you  have  relied,  whether  you

i  Bernard  had  counselled  him  not  to  resign  his  abbacy,  and  this  advice  he
had  not  followed.  Hence  is  suggested  the  serious  question  :  Is  it  lawful  to  lay
down  the  pastoral  charge,  to  withdraw  one's  self  from  cares  and  business,  for  the
purpose  of  serving  God  in  peace  and  quiet,  and  caring  for  one's  own  soul  ?
The  examples  of  so  many  holy  men  whom  we  know  to  have  done  this  add  to
the  difficulty  of  the  question.  Many  might  be  cited  among  prelates  of  lower
rank,  not  a  few  Bishops,  Cardinals,  and  even  some  Popes.  Bruno  III.,  Count  of
Altena,  and  afterwards  Bishop  of  Cologne,  quitted  his  see,  in  1119,  and  retired  to
the  Cistercian  monastery  of  Aldenberg.  Eskilus,  Archbishop  of  Lunden,  in
Denmark,  came  to  live  at  Clairvaux  as  a  simple  monk;  Peter  Dam  ian,  who,
from  a  Benedictine  monk,  became  Cardinal  and  Bishop  of  Ostia,  after  he  had
rendered  signal  service  to  the  Church  for  a  number  of  years,  with  wonderful  con
stancy,  in  the  high  office  to  which  he  had  been  raised,  returned  into  his  cell
from  love  of  solitude  and  quiet,  and  passed  the  rest  of  his  days  in  profound
peace,  in  the  midst  of  his  brethren  ;  but  was  blamed  by  the  Pope  because  he,
a  useful  and  able  man,  postponed  public  usefulness  to  his  private  safety.  One
remarkable  fact  is  recorded  of  him,  that  the  Pope  imposed  upon  him  a  penance
of  a  hundred  years  for  quitting  his;  Bishopric:  he  was  to  recite  Ps.  1.  [li.]  and
give  himself  the  discipline  every  day  for  a  hundred  years  ;  and  this  he  completed
entirely  in  the  space  of  one  year.  This  I  remember  to  have  read  somewhere
(If'orks,  Vol.  i.  ep.  10,  new  ed.,  Vol.  iii.  opusc.  20).  To  Pope  Alexander  and
Cardinal  Hildebrand,  who  became  Pope  later  under  the  name  of  Gregory  VII.,


LETTER LXXXVII.  307

have  done  according  to  reason.  They  will  tell  you,  I  say,
whether  it  is  lawful  for  a  Christian  man  to  lay  down  the
burden  of  obedience  before  his  death,  when  Christ  was
made  obedient  to  the  Father  even  unto  death.  You  will
reply,  "  I  have  acted  by  license,  asked  and  received  from
the  Bishop."  True,  you  have,  indeed,  asked  for  license,
but  in  a  manner  you  ought  not  to  have  done,  and,  there
fore,  have  rather  extorted  than  asked  it.  But  an  extorted
or  compelled  license  should  rather  be  called  violence.
What,  therefore,  the  Bishop  did  unwillingly,  when  over
come  by  your  importunity,  was  not  to  release  you  from
your  obligations,  but  violently  to  break  them.

3.  You  may  indeed  be  congratulated,  since  you  are  thus
exonerated  ;  but  I  fear  lest  you  have,  as  much  as  lieth  in
you,  taken  from  the  glory1  of  God,  whose  will  you,  beyond
doubt,  resist  in  casting  yourself  down  from  the  post  to
which  He  had  advanced  you.  Perhaps  you  excuse  yourself
by  pleading  the  necessity  of  religious  poverty ;  but  it  is
necessity  that  brings  the  crown,  in  rendering  achievements
difficult  and  almost  impossible  ;  for  all  things  are  possible
to  him  who  has  faith.  But  answer  to  me  what  is  most  true,
that  you  have  consulted  your  own  quiet,  rather  than  the  ad-
he  tries  to  justify  his  quitting  his  see,  and  opposes  numerous  examples  of  con
duct  similar  to  his,  to  the  blame  of  the  Pope  and  the  cardinals.

But  it  is  necessary  to  hold  to  what  the  law  prescribes  rather  than  to  the
examples  of  other  persons.  The  Angelical  Doctor  says:  ''Every  pastor  is
obliged  by  his  function  to  labour  for  the  salvation  of  others,  and  it  is  not  per
mitted  to  him  to  cease  to  do  so,  not  even  to  have  leisure  for  peaceful  meditation
upon  spiritual  things.  For  the  Apostle  regards  the  obligation  to  occupy  himself
with  the  salvation  of  others  who  depend  upon  him  as  being  of  such  importance
that  it  must  not  be  postponed  even  to  heavenly  meditation  :  1  know  not  what
to  choose,  he  says,  far  lam  in  a  strait  betwixt  two,  having  a  desire  to  depart  and
to  ie  with  Christ,  which  is  far  letter  ;  nevti  theless,  to  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more
needful  for  you  (Phil.  i.  22-23).  ^  rnay  be  added  that  the  Episcopate  being  a
state  more  perfect  than  that  of  the  monk,  it  follows  that  just  as  it  is  not  per
mitted  to  quit  the  second  to  re-enter  the  world,  so  it  is  not  allowable  to  renounce
the  first  in  order  to  embrace  the  second,  considering  that  the  latter  is  less  perfect
than  the  former.  That  would  precisely  be  to  look  back  after  having  put  one's
hand  to  the  plough,  and  to  show  one's  self  unfit  for  the  kingdom  of  God  (S.  Luke
ix.  62).

1 Exoneratus  ;  ex'ionoratus.


308  LETTER LXXXVII.

vantage  of  others.  Nor  is  this  strange.  I  confess  that  I,
too,  am  pleased  that  quiet  should  delight  you,  if  only  it  does
not  delight  you  too  much.  For  that,  even  although  a  great
thing,  which  pleases  us  to  such  a  degree  that  we  wish  to
bring  it  about,  even  although  by  wrong  means,  pleases  us
too  much  ;  and  because  it  cannot  be  brought  about  by  right
means,  it  ceases  to  be  good.  For  if  you  offer  rightly,  but
do  not  divide  rightly,  you  have  sinned  (Gen.  iv.  7,  Ixx).
Either,  therefore,  you  ought  not  to  have  accepted  the  cure  of
the  Lord's  flock,  or,  having  accepted  it,  ought  not  to  have
relinquished  it,  according  to  those  words  :  Art  thou  bound
unto  a  -wife?  seek  not  to  be  loosed  (i  Cor.  vii.  27).

4.  But  to  what  end  do  I  strive  in  these  arguments? To
persuade  you  to  take  your  charge  again  ?  You  cannot,  since
it  is  no  longer  vacant. Or  to  drive  you  to  despair  by  fixing
upon you  the blame  of a  fault  which  you  are  no  longer
able  to  repair  ? By  no  means  ; I  wish  only  that  you  should
not  neglect  the fault  you  have  committed,  as if it  were
nothing  or  nothing  much,  but  that  you  should  rather  repent
of  it  with  fear  and  trembling,  as  it  is  written  :  Happy  is  the
man  that  feareth  alway  (Prov.  xxviii. 14). But  the  fear
which  I  wish  to  inspire  is  not  that  which  falls  into  the  nets
of  desperation,  but  which  brings  to  us  the  hope  of  blessed
ness. There  is,  indeed,  a  fear,  useless,  gloomy,  and  cruel,
which  does  not  seek  pardon,  and,  therefore,  does  not  obtain
it. There  is  also  a  fear,  pious, humble,  and  fruitful,  which
easily  obtains mercy  for  a sinner,  however  great  be  his
offence. Such  a  fear  produces,  nourishes,  and  preserves
not only  humility,  but also  sweetness,  patience,  and  for
bearance. Whom  does  not  so  blameless  an  offspring  de
light  ? But of  the other fear the miserable progeny is
obstinacy,  excessive  sorrow,  rancour,  horror,  contempt,  and
desperation. I have  wished  to  recall  you  to  the  remem
brance  of  your  fault,  but  only  in  order  to  awaken in  you,
not  the  fear  which  produces  desperation,  but  that  which  pro
duces  hope ;  being  afraid  lest  you  should  not  have  any  fear
at  all,  or  should  have  too  little.

5.  There  is  something, however,  which  I  fear  still  more


LETTER LXXXVII.  309

for  you,  namely,  that  which  is  written  of  certain  sinners,
that  they  rejoice  in  having  done  evil  and  delight  in  wicked
actions  (Prov.  ii.  14) ;  that  you  should  be  deceived,  and  not
only  think  that  what  you  have  done  is  not  wrong,  but  also
(which,  God  forbid)  glory  in  your  heart,  thinking  that  you
have  done  something  great,  and  which  is  usually  done  by
few,  in  renouncing  voluntarily  the  power  to  command  others,
and,  despising  rule,  have  preferred  to  be  subjected  again  to
a  ruler.  That  would  be  a  false  humility,  causing  real  pride
in  the  heart  of  him  that  should  think  such  thoughts.  For
what  can  be  more  proud  than  to  ascribe  to  spontaneous  and,
as  it  were,  free  choice  that  which  the  force  of  necessity  or
faint-hearted  weakness  obliges  us  to  do  ?  But  if  you  have
not  been  forced  by  necessity  or  exhausted  by  labour,  but
have  done  it  willingly,  there  is  nothing  more  proud  than
this  ;  for  you  have  put  your  own  will  before  that  of  God,
you  have  chosen  to  taste  the  sweetness  of  repose  rather
than  serve  diligently  in  the  work  to  which  He  has  set  you.
If,  then,  you  have  not  only  despised  God,  but  glory  in  utterly
contemning  Him,  your  glorying  is  not  good.  Beware  of
boastfulness  and  self-satisfaction  ;  more  useful  for  you  were
it  to  be  always  in  care,  always  humbly  trembling,  not,  as  I
have  said,  with  the  fear  that  provokes  wrath,  but  with  that
which  softens  it.

6.  If  that  horrible  fear  ever  knocks  at  the  door  of  your
soul  to  terrify  it,  and  to  suggest  that  your  service  to  God
cannot  be  accepted,  and  that  your  penitence  is  unfruitful
because  that  in  which  God  has  been  offended  by  you  cannot
be  amended  ;  do  not  receive  it  even  for  a  moment,  but  reply
with  confidence  :  I  have  done  wrong  indeed,  but  it  is  done
and  cannot  be  undone.  Who  knowrs  if  God  has  foreseen
that  good  should  come  to  me  out  of  it,  and  that  He  who  is
good  has  willed  to  do  me  good  even  from  my  evil  ?  Let
Him  then  punish  the  evil  which  I  have  done,  but  let  the
good  which  He  had  provided  for  remain.  The  goodness  of
God  knew  how  to  use  our  ill-governed  wills  and  actions  to
the  beauty  of  the  order  which  He  established,  and  often,
in  His  goodness,  even  to  our  benefit.  O  indulgent  bounty


310  LETTER LXXXVII.

of  Divine  love  towards  the  sons  of  Adam  !  which  does  not
cease  to  load  us  with  benefits,  not  only  where  no  merit  was
found,  but  often  even  where  entire  demerit  was  seen.  But
let  us  return  to  you.  According  to  the  two  kinds  of  fear
which  are  distinguished  above,  I  wish  you  to  fear,  and  yet
not  to  fear ;  to  presume,  and  yet  not  to  presume.  To  feel
that  you  may  repent,  not  to  feel  that  you  may  have  con
fidence  ;  and  again,  to  have  confidence  that  you  may  not
distrust,  and  not  to  be  confident  that  you  may  not  grow  in
active.

7.  You  perceive,  brother,  how  much  confidence  I  have  in
you,  since  I  permit  myself  to  blame  you  so  sharply,  to  judge
and  disapprove  so  freely  what  you  have  done,  when  per
haps  you  have  had  better  reasons  for  doing  it  than  have
hitherto  been  made  known  to  me.  For  you  have  not  per
haps  wished  to  state  those  reasons  in  your  letters,  by  which
your  action  might  well  be  excused,  either  through  your
humility  or  through  want  of  space.  Leaving,  then,  un
decided  for  the  present  my  opinion  about  any  part  of  the
matter  with  which  I  may  not  be  fully  acquainted,  one  thing
that  you  have  done  I  unreservedly  praise,  namely,  that  when
you  had  laid  down  the  yoke  of  ruling,  yet  without  a  yoke
you  were  not  willing  to  continue,  but  took  up  again  a
discipline  to  which  you  were  attached,  without  being
ashamed  to  become  a  simple  disciple  when  you  had  borne
the  title  of  master.  For  you  were  able,  when  freed  from
your  pastoral  charge,  to  remain  under  your  own  authority,
since  in  becoming  abbot  you  were  released  from  the
obedience  owed  to  your  former  abbot.1  But  you  did  not
wish  to  be  under  no  authority  but  your  own,  and  as  you  had
declined  to  rule  over  others,  so  you  shrunk  from  rule  over
yourself  ;  and  inasmuch  as  you  thought  yourself  not  fit  to  be
the  master  of  others,  so  also  you  did  not  trust  yourself  to
be  your  own  master,  and  in  your  distrust  of  yourself,  even
for  your  own  guidance,  would  not  be  your  own  disciple.
And  rightly.  For  he  who  makes  himself  his  own  master,

1  Because  a  monk,  when  he  became  an  abbot,  was  freed  from  the  control  of
his  own  abbot.


LETTER LXXXVII.  311

subjects  himself  to  a  fool  as  master.  I  know  not  what
others  may  think  of  this  ;  as  for  me,  I  have  had  experience
of  what  I  say,  that  it  is  far  more  easy  and  safe  to  govern
many  others  than  my  own  single  self.  It  was,  therefore,  a
proof  of  prudent  humility  and  of  humble  prudence  that,  by
no  means  believing  that  you  were  sufficient  for  your  own
salvation,  you  proposed  to  live  henceforth  by  the  judgment
of  another  person.

8.  I  praise  you  also  that  you  did  not  seek  out  another
master  nor  another  place,  but  returned  to  the  cloister
whence  you  had  gone  forth,  and  to  the  master  under  whom
you  had  made  progress  in  good.  It  was  very  right  that  the
house  which  had  nurtured  you,  but  had  sent  you  forth
through  brotherly  charity,  should  receive  you  when  freed
from  your  charge,  rather  than  that  another  house  should
have  in  its  place  the  joy  of  possessing  you.  As,  however,
you  have  not  obtained  the  sanction  of  the  Bishop  for  what
you  have  done,  do  not  be  negligent  in  seeking  it,  but  either
yourself,  or  through  some  third  person,  be  prompt  to  give
him  satisfaction  as  far  as  is  in  your  power.  After  this,
study  to  lead  a  simple  life  among  your  brethren,  devoted  to
God,  submissive  to  your  superior,  respectful  towards  the
older  monks,  and  obliging  towards  the  younger.  Be  profit
able  in  word,  humble  in  heart,  pleasing  to  the  Angels,
courteous  to  all.  But  beware  of  thinking  that  you  have  a
right  to  be  honoured  more  than  others  because  you  were
once  placed  in  a  position  of  dignity,  but  show  yourself  as
one  among  the  rest,  only  more  humble  than  all.  For  it  is
not  becoming  that  you  should  be  honoured  on  account  of  a
post,  the  labour  of  which  you  have  shunned.

g.  Another  danger  also  may  arise  from  this  of  which  I
wish  to  forewarn  you  and  strengthen  you  against  it.  For  as
we  are  very  changeable,  and  it  frequently  happens  that
what  we  wished  for  yesterday  to-day  we  refuse,  and  what
we  shrink  from  to-day  to-morrow  we  desire,  so  it  may
happen  sometime  by  the  temptation  of  the  devil  that,  from
the  remembrance  of  the  honour  you  have  resigned,  a  selfish
desire  may  knock  at  the  door  of  your  heart,  and  you  may


312  LETTER LXXXVII.

begin  weakly  to  covet  what  you  bravely  resigned.  The
recollection  of  things  which  before  were  bitter  to  you  will
then  be  sweet ;  the  dignity  of  the  position,  the  care  of  the
house,  and  the  administration  of  its  property,  the  respectful
obedience  of  domestics,  the  freedom  of  your  own  actions,
the  power  over  others;  it  may  be  as  much  a  source  of
regret  to  you  that  you  have  given  up  these  things,  as  it  was
before  of  weariness  to  bear  them.  If  you  yield  even  for  an
hour  (which  may  God  forbid)  to  this  most  injurious  tempta
tion  you  will  surfer  great  loss  to  your  spiritual  life.

10.  This  is  the  whole  of  the  wisdom  of  that  most  accom
plished  and  eloquent  Doctor,  by  whom  you  have  wished  to
be  taught  from  such  a  distance. This  is  the  eulogy,  desired
and  waited for, which  you have  been so eager  to hear.
This  is  the  sum  of  all  my  wisdom. Do  not  look  for  any
other  great  thing  from me ; you have heard all. What
can  you  require  more  ? The  fountain  is  drained,  and  would
you seek water from the dry  sand  ? I have sent you,
according  to  the  example  of  that  widow  in  the  Gospel,1  out
of  my  poverty  all  that  I  had. Why  art  thou  ashamed,  and
why  does  thy  countenance  fall  ? You have obliged me.
You  have  asked  for  a  discourse ;  a  discourse  you  have. A
discourse,  I  say,  long  enough, indeed,  but  saying  nothing;
full of  words, empty  of  meaning. Such is  the  discourse
which ought to  be received  by  you with charity, as  you
have  requested  it,  but  which  only  seems  to  reveal my  lack
of  knowledge. Perhaps  it  would  not  be  impossible  for  me  to
find  excuses  for  it. Thus  I  might  say  that  I  have  dictated
it  while  labouring  under  a  tertian  fever,  as  also  while  occu
pied  with  the  cares of  my office,  while  yet  it  is  written,
Write  at leisure  of  wisdom (founded  on  Ecclus. xxxviii.
25). I should rightly  put  these reasons  forward  if  I  had
adventured  upon  some  great  and  laborious  work. But  now,
in  such  a  brief  treatise  that  my  engagements  afford  me  no
excuse,  I  can  allege  nothing,  as  I  have  often  said  already,
but  the  insufficiency  of  my  knowledge.

11.  But  I  console  myself  in  my  mortification  by  consider-

1  S.  Luke  xxi.  2-4.


LETTER LXXXVII.  313

ino-  that  if  I  had  not  done  as  you  requested,  if  I  had  not  sent
what  you  hoped  for,  you  would  not  have  been  quite  sure  of
my  goodwill  to-day.  I  hope  that  my  good  intention  will
content  you  when  you  see  that  the  power  to  do  more  was
wanting  to  me.  And  although  my  Letter  be  without  utility
to  you,  it  will  profit  me  in  promoting  humility.  Even  a
fool  when  he  holdcth  his  peace  is  counted  wise  (Prov.  xvii.
28),  for  that  he  holds  his  peace  is  counted  to  him  as  the
reserve  of  humility,  not  as  want  of  sense.  If,  then,  I  had
still  kept  silence,  I  should  have  had  the  benefit  of  a  similar
judgment,  and  have  been  called  wise  without  being  so.  But
now  some  will  ridicule  me  as  a  man  of  little  wisdom,  some
laugh  at  me  as  ignorant,  and  others  indignantly  accuse
me  of  presumption.  Do  not  think  that  all  this  serves
little  to  the  profit  of  religion,  since  humility,  which
humiliation  teaches  us  to  practise,  is  the  foundation
of  the  entire  spiritual  fabric.  Thus  humiliation  is  the
way  to  humility,  as  patience  to  peace,  as  reading  is  to
knowledge.  If  you  long  for  the  virtue  of  humility,
you  must  not  flee  from  the  way  of  humiliation.  For  if
you  do  not  allow  yourself  to  be  humiliated,  you  can
not  attain  to  humility.  It  is  a  benefit  to  me,  therefore,
that  my  ignorance  should  be  made  known,  and  that  I  should
be  rightly  put  to  confusion  by  those  who  are  instructed,
since  I  have  often  been  undeservedly  praised  by  those  who
could  not  form  a  correct  opinion.  The  fear  of  the  Apostle
makes  me  fear  when  he  says,  I  forbear,  lest  any  man  should
think  of  me  above  that  which  lie  seeth  me  to  be,  or  that  he
heareth  of  me  (2  Cor.  xii.  6).  How  finely  he  has  said  /
spare  [restrain]  you.  The  arrogant,  the  proud,  the  desirous
of  vain  glory,  the  boaster  of  his  own  deeds,  who  either
takes  merit  to  himself  for  what  he  has  done,  or  even  claims
what  he  has  not  done,  he  does  not  restrain  himself.  He
alone  who  is  truly  humble,  he  restrains  his  own  soul,  who
is  even  afraid  to  let  the  excellency  that  is  in  him  be  known,
that  he  may  not  be  thought  to  be  what  he  is  not.

12. Great in  truth is  the danger,  that  anyone should
.speak of  us  above  what  we  feel  our  desert  to  be. Who


LETTER LXXXVII.

shall  give  me  to  be  as  deservedly  humiliated  among  men  for
well-founded  reasons  as  I  have  been  undeservedly  praised
for  ill-founded  ones  ?  I  should,  then,  be  able  to  take  to
myself  the  word  of  the  Prophet  :  After  having  been  exalted
I  have  been  cast  down  and  filled  -with  confusion  (Ps.
Ixxxviii.  I5,VULG.),  and  this,  /  10 ill  play  and  will  be  yet
more  vile  (2  Sam.  vi.  21,  22).  Yes,  I  will  play  this  foolish
game  that  I  may  be  ridiculed.  It  is  a  good  folly,  at  which
Michal  is  angry  and  God  is  pleased.  A  good  folly  which
affords  a  ridiculous  spectacle,  indeed,  to  men,  but  to
angels  an  admirable  one.  Yes,  I  repeat ;  an  excellent  folly,
by  which  we  are  exposed  to  disgrace  from  the  rich  and
disdain  from  the  proud.  For,  in  truth,  what  do  we  appear
to  people  of  the  world  to  do  except  indulge  in  folly,  since
what  they  seek  with  eagerness  in  this  world  we,  on  the
contrary,  shun,  and  what  they  avoid  we  eagerly  seek  ?'
Upon  the  eyes  of  all  we  produce  the  effect  of  jugglers  and
tumblers,  who  stand  or  walk  on  their  hands,  contrary  to
human  nature,  with  their  heads  downward  and  feet  in  the
air.  But  our  foolish  game  has  nothing  boyish  in  it,  nothing
of  the  spectacle  at  the  theatre,  which  represents  low  actions,
and  with  effeminate  and  corrupt  gestures  and  bendings
provoke  the  passions,  but  it  is  cheerful,  honourable,  grave,
decent,  and  capable  of  delighting  even  the  celestial  beings
who  gaze  upon  it.  This  it  was  he  was  engaged  in,  who
said,  We  are  made  a  spectacle  to  Angels  and  to  men  (i  Cor.
iv.  9).  May  it  be  ours  also  in  this  meantime,  that  we  may
be  ridiculed,  confounded,  humiliated,  until  He  shall  come
who  puts  down  the  powerful  and  exalts  the  humble,  to  fill  us
with  joy  and  glory,  and  to  raise  us  up  for  ever  and  ever.


LETTER LXXXVIII. (Circa  A.D. 1127.)
To  THE  SAME.

Bernard ,  being  hindered  by  many  occupations,  has not
yet been able  to  find time  to satisfy  his  wishes, and  is


LETTER LXXXVIII.  315

obliged  even  to  write  to  him  very  briefly.  He  forbids  a
certain  one  of  his  treatises  to  be  made  public  unless  it
were  read  over  and  corrected.

1.  I  pass  over  now  my  want  of  experience,  my  humble
profession, or  rather my  profession  of  humility,  nor  do  I
shelter  myself  behind (I do not  say  my  lowness, but, at
least) my  mediocrity  of  position or  name,  since  whatever
I  should  allege  of  that  kind  you  would  declare  to  be  rather
a  pretext  for  delay  than  a  reasonable  excuse. It  seems  to
me  that  you  interpret  my  shyness  and  modesty  at  your  will,
now  as  indiscretion,  now  as  false  humility,  and  now  as  real
pride. Of  these  reasons,  therefore,  since  they  would  appear
doubtful to you, I  say  nothing. Only I wish that your
friendship  should  be  fully  convinced  of  one  thing,  that  since
the  departure  of  your  messenger  (not  the  one  who  carries
this  letter,  but  the  other) left  me  I  have  not  had  a  single
instant  of leisure  to  do  what  you asked,  so  busy  are  my
days  and  so  short  my  nights. Even  now  your  latest  letter
has  found  me so  engrossed  that  it  would  take  me  too  long
to  write  to  you  the  mere  occupations,  which  would  be  my
excuse  with  you. I  have  scarcely  been  able  even  to  read
your  letter  through, except  during  my  dinner,  for  at  that
hour  it  was  delivered  to  me,  and  scarcely  have  I  been  able
to  write  back to you  these few  words hastily and,  as  it
were,  furtively. You  will  see  that  you  must  not  complain
of  the  brevity  of  my  letter.

2.  To  speak  the  truth, my  dear  Oger,  I  am  forced  to  be
angry with all these cares, and that on your account,
although  in  them,  as  my  conscience  bears  witness,  I  desire
to  serve  only  charity,  by  the  requirements  of  which,  as  I  am
debtor  both  to  the  wise and  to  the  unwise,  I have  been
made unable  as  yet  to  satisfy  your  wishes. What,  then?
Does  Charity  deny  to  you  what  you  ask in  the name  of
Charity  ? You have requested and begged, you have
knocked  at  the  door,  and  Charity  has  rendered  your  requests
unavailing. Why  are  you  angry  with  me  ? It  is  Charity
whom  you  must  be  angry  with,  if  you  will  and  dare  to  be


316  LETTER LXXXVIII.

so,  since  it  is  she  who  is  the  cause  that  you  have  not
obtained  what  you  expected  to  have  by  her  means.  Already
she  is  displeased  at  my  long  discourse,  and  is  angry  with
you  who  have  imposed  it.  Not  that  the  ardour  with  which
you  do  this  is  displeasing  to  her,  since  it  is  she  which  has
inspired  you  with  it,  but  she  wishes  that  your  zeal  should
be  ruled  according  to  knowledge,  and  that  you  should  be
careful  not  to  hinder  greater  things  for  the  sake  of  lesser.
You  see  how  unwillingly  I  am  torn  away  from  writing  to  you
at  greater  length,  since  the  pleasure  of  conversing  with  you,
and  the  wish  to  satisfy  you,  make  me  troublesome  to  my
mistress,  Charity,  who  has  long  since  been  bidding  me  to
make  an  end,  and  I  am  not  yet  silent.  How  wide  is  the
matter  for  reply  in  your  letter,  if  it  were  permissible  to  do
as  you  would  wish,  and  as  I,  too,  should,  perhaps,  be  well
enough  pleased  to  do  !  But  she  who  requires  otherwise  of
me  is  mistress,  or  rather  is  the  Master.  For  God  is  charity
(i  S.  John  iv.  1 6),  and  it  is  very  evident  that  such  is  her
authority,  that  I  ought  to  obey  her  rather  than  either
myself  or  you.  And  since  it  is  incumbent  on  Charity  to  obey
God  rather  than  men,  I  unwillingly,  and  with  grief,  put  off
for  a  time  the  doing  what  you  ask,  not  refuse  altogether
to  do  it,  and  I  fear  in  endeavouring  humbly  to  respond  to
your  desires  to  appear  to  wish,  under  the  pretext  of  a
pretended  humility,  which  is  only  pure  pride,  to  revolt  here
below,  I,  who  am  only  a  miserable  worm  of  the  earth,  against
the  strength  of  that  power  which,  as  you  truly  declare,  rules
even  the  Angels  in  heaven.

3.  As  for  the  little  treatise  which  you  ask  for,  I  had
asked  for  it  back  again  from  the  person  to  whom  I  had  lent
it,  even  before  your  messenger  came  to  me,  but  I  have  not
yet  received  it ;  but  I  will  take  care  that  at  all  events  when
you  come  here,  if  you  are  ever  coming,  you  shall  find  it
here,  see  and  read  it,  but  not  transcribe  it.  For  that  other
treatise  which  you  mention  that  you  have  transcribed  I  had
sent  to  you  to  be  read,  indeed,  but  not  to  be  copied ;  and  I
do  not  know  to  what  good  purpose  or  for  whose  good  you
can  have  done  it.  In  sending  it  to  you  I  did  not  intend


LETTER LXXXVIII.  317

that  the  Abbot  of  S.  Thierry  should  have  it,1  and  I  had  not
bidden  you  to  send  it ;  but  I  am  not  displeased  that  you
have  done  so.  For  why  should  I  be  afraid  that  my  little  book
should  pass  under  his  eyes,  under  whose  gaze  I  would
willingly  spread  my  whole  soul  if  I  were  able  ?  But,  alas  !
why  does  the  mention  of  so  good  a  man  present  itself  at
such  a  time  of  hurried  discourse,  when  it  is  not  permitted
to  me  to  linger,  as  would  be  fitting,  and  converse  with  you
about  that  excellent  man,  when  I  ought  already  to  have
come  to  the  end  of  my  letter  ?  I  entreat  you  to  make  an
opportunity  of  going  to  see  him,  and  do  not  give  out  my
book  to  be  read  or  copied  until  you  shall  have  gone  over
the  whole  of  it  with  him  ;  read  it  then  together  and  correct
what  in  it  needs  correction,  that  every  word  in  it  may  have
the  support  of  two  witnesses.  After  that,  I  commit  to  the
judgment  of  each  of  you  whether  it  be  expedient  that  it
should  be  shown  publicly,  or  only  to  a  few  persons,  or  to
some  particular  person  only,  or  not  at  all  to  anyone.  And
I  make  you  judge  equally  if  that  little  preface2  which  you
have  fitted  to  the  same  out  of  fragments  from  other  letters
of  mine  should  stand  as  it  is,  or  whether  another  fitter  one
should  be  composed.

4.  But  I  had  almost  forgotten  that  you  complained  at  the
beginning  of  your  letter  that  1  had  accused  you  of  false
hood.  1  do  not  clearly  recollect  whether  I  ever  said  that ;
but  if  I  said  anything  like  it  (for  I  should  prefer  to  think
that  I  had  forgotten  rather  than  that  your  messenger  had
falsely  reported)  do  not  doubt  that  it  was  spoken  in  joke,
and  not  seriously.  Can  I  have  even  thought  that  you  had
used  levity  and  were  capable  of  trifling  with  your  word  ?

i  He  is  here,  without  doubt,  speaking  of  the  Apology  to  the  Abbot  William.
Oger  was  at  Clairvaux  while  Bernard  was  writing  it,  as  appears  from  the  last
words  of  that  work.  But  as  he  left  before  the  final  touches  were  put  to  it,
Bernard  afterwards  sent  it  to  him  for  perusal  ;  and  he,  without  direction,  com
municated  it  to  Abbot  William,  to  whom  it  was  inscribed,  and  to  whom
Bernard  intended  to  send  it.

-  This  little  preface  is  the  Letter  addressed  to  the  same  William,  and  counted
the  85111  among  the  Letters  of  S.  Bernard;  it  is  placed  at  tie  head  of  the
Apology.


318  LETTER LXXXIX.

Far  from  me  be  such  a  suspicion  of  you,  who  have  from
your  youth  been  happy  in  bearing  the  yoke  of  truth,  and
when  I  find  in  you  a  gravity  of  character  beyond  your  years.
Nor  am  I  so  simple  as  to  see  a  falsehood  in  a  word  artlessly
spoken  without  duplicity  of  heart ;  nor  so  indifferent  as  to
have  forgotten  either  the  project  which  you  have  long  since
formed  or  the  obstacle  which  hinders  its  realization.


LETTER  LXXXIX. (Circa  A.D. 1127.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  excuses  the  brevity  of  his  letter  on  the  ground  that
Lent  is  a  time  of  silence  ;  and  also  that  on  account  of  his
profession  and  his  ignorance  he  docs  not  dare  to  assume
the  function  of  teaching.

i.  You  will,  perhaps  be  angry,  or,  to  speak  more  gently,
will  wonder  that  in  place  of  a  longer  letter  which  you  had
hoped  for  from  me  you  receive  this  brief  note.  But  re
member  what  says  the  wise  man,  that  there  is  a  time  for  all
things  under  the  heaven  ;  both  a  time  to  speak  and  a  time
to  keep  silence  (Eccles.  iii.  1-7).  But  when  shall  silence
have  its  time,  if  our  chatter  shall  occupy  even  these  sacred
days  of  Lent  ?  Correspondence  is  more  absorbing  than
conversation,  inasmuch  as  it  is  more  laborious  ;  since  when
in  each  other's  presence  we  may  say  with  little  labour  what
we  will,  but  when  absent  we  require  diligently  to  dictate  in
turn  the  words  which  we  mutually  seek,  or  which  are  sought
from  us.  But  while  being  absent  from  you  I  meditate,
dictate  or  write  down  what  you  are  in  time  to  read,  where,
I  pray  you,  is  the  silence  and  quiet  of  my  retreat?1  But

1  In  this  Letter  the  Saint  expresses  in  forcible  words  how  little  he  felt  himself
inclined  to  write  to  his  friends  Letters  without  necessity  or  usefulness,  and  to
take  time  and  leisure  for  doing  so  which  belonged  to  more  important  and
sacred  employments.  Also,  he  felt  that  the  labour  of  literary  composition
interfered  with  the  silence  to  which  monks  were  bound,  as  also  with  inward
quiet  and  peace.  Bernard  speaks  of  the  function  and  calling  of  a  monk  like
himself.  For  the  monk,  as  such,  is  not  called  to  preach  and  to  teach,  but  to
devote  himself  in  solitu  le  to  God  and  to  his  own  salvation,  through  meditation


LETTER LXXXIX.  3IQ

all  these  things,  you  say,  you  can  do  in  silence  ;  yet,  if  you
think,  you  will  not  answer  thus.  For  what  a  tumult  there
is  in  the  mind  of  those  who  dictate,  what  a  crowd  of  senti
ments,  variety  of  expressions,  diversity  of  senses  jostle;
how  frequently  one  rejects  that  word  which  presents  itself
and  seeks  another  which  still  escapes  ;  what  close  attention
one  gives  to  the  consecutiveness  of  the  line  of  thought  and
the  elegance  of  the  expression  !  How  it  can  be  made  most
plain  to  the  intellect,  how  it  can  be  made  most  useful  to
the  conscience,  what,  in  short,  shall  be  put  before  and  what
after  for  a  particular  reader,  and  many  other  things  do  those
who  are  careful  in  their  style,  attend  to  most  closely.  And
will  you  say  that  in  this  I  shall  have  quiet;  will  you  call
this  silence,  even  though  the  tongue  be  still?

2.  Besides,  it  is  not  only  the  time,  but  also  my  profession
and  my  insufficiency  which  prevent  my  undertaking  what
3'ou  desire,  or  being  able  to  fulfil  it.  For  it  is  not  the  pro
fession  of  a  monk,  which  I  seem  to  be,  or  of  a  sinner,  which  I
am,  to  teach,  but  to  mourn  for  sin.  An  unlearned  person
(as  I  truly  confess  myself  to  be)  never  acts  more  unlearnedly
than  when  he  presumes  to  teach  what  he  knows  not.
Therefore,  to  teach  is  the  business  neither  of  the  unlearned
in  his  rashness,  nor  of  the  monk  in  his  boldness,  nor  of  the
penitent  in  his  distress.  It  is  for  this  reason  I  have  fled
from  the  world  and  abide  in  solitude,  and  propose  to  myself
with  the  prophet,  to  take  heed  to  my  ways  that  I  offend  not
with  niv  tongue  (Ps.  xxxix.  2)  since,  according  to  the  same
prophet,  A  man  full  of  words  shall  not  prosper  upon  the
earth  (Ps.  cxl.  n),  and  to  another  Scripture,  Death  and

and  the  practice  of  virtues.  Wherefore  he  says,  in  ep.  42  :  "  Labour  and
retirement  and  voluntary  poverty,  these  are  the  signs  of  the  monk  ;  these  render
excellent  the  monastic  life."  But  if  there  should  be  anywhere  lurking  slothful
monks  who  are  so  imprudent  and  rash  as  to  abuse  the  authority  of  the  Saint  to
the  excuse  of  their  own  indolence,  let  such  hear  him  accusing  them  in  plain
•words  :  "  I  may  siem,  perhaps,  to  say  too  much  in  disparagement  of  learning,
as  if  I  wished  to  blame  the  learned  and  prohibit  the  study  of  literature.  By
no  means.  I  do  not  overlook  how  greatly  her  learned  sons  have  profited  and
do  profit  the  Church,  whether  in  combating  her  enemies  or  in  instructing  the
simple,"  etc.  (Sermon  36  on  the  Canticles).


320  LETTER XC.

life  are  in  the  poiver  of  the  tongue  (Prov.  xviii.  21).  But
silence,  says  Isaiah,  is  the  work  of  righteousness  (Is.  xxxii.
17),  and  Jeremiah  teaches  us  to  wait  in  silence  for  the
salvation  of  the  Lord  (Lam.  iii.  26).  Thus  to  this  pursuit
and  desire  of  righteousness,  since  righteousness  is  the
mother,  the  nurse,  and  the  guardian  of  all  virtues,  I  would
not  seem  entirely  to  deny  what  you  have  asked,  and  I
invite  and  entreat  you  and  all  those  who,  like  you,  desire  to
make  progress  in  virtue,  if  not  by  the  teaching  of  my  words,
at  least  by  the  example  of  my  silence,  to  learn  from  me  to
be  silent,  you  who  press  me  in  your  words  to  teach  what  I
do  not  know.

3.  But  what  am  I  doing?  It  wrill  be  wonderful  if  you  do
not  smile,  seeing  with  what  a  flood  of  words  I  condemn
those  who  are  too  full  of  words,  and  \vhile  I  desire  to  com
mend  silence  to  you,  I  plead  against  silence  by  my  loquacity.
Our  dear  Guerric,1  concerning  whose  penitence  and  whose
manner  of  life  you  wished  to  be  assured,  as  far  as  I  can
judge  from  his  actions,  is  walking  worthy  of  the  grace  of
God,  and  bringing  forth  works  worthy  of  penitence.  The
little  book  which  you  ask  of  me  I  have  not  beside  me  just
now.  A  certain  friend  of  ours,  with  the  same  desire  to  read
it  as  you,  has  kept  it  a  long  time,  but  not  to  frustrate
altogether  the  desire  of  your  piety,2  I  send  you  another
which  I  have  just  completed  on  the  Glories  of  the  Virgin
Mother,  which,  as  I  have  no  other  copy  of  it,  I  beg  that
you  will  return  to  me  as  soon  as  possible,  or  bring  it  with
you  if  you  will  be  coming  here  soon.


LETTER  XC.  (Circa  A.D. 1127.)
To  THE  SAME.

A  sincere  love  has  no  need  of  lengthy  letters,  or  of
many  words.  Bernard  has  been  in  a  state  of  health
almost  despaired  of,  but  is  now  recovering.

1  This  Guerric  was  made  Abbot of  Igny  in  1138. He  is mentioned  again
in  the  following  Letter.

2  Or  1-enignity.  •


LETTER XC.  321

1.  I  have  sent  you  a  short  letter  in  reply  to  a  short  one
from  you. You  have  given  me  an  example  of  brevity,  and
I  willingly  follow  it. And  truly  what  need  have  true  and
lasting  friendships,  as  you  truly  say,  of  exchanging  empty
and fugitive  words  ? However great be the variety of
quotations  and  verses,  and  the  multiplicity  of  the  phrases  by
which  you  have  endeavoured  to  display  or  to  prove  your
friendship  for  me,  I  feel  more  certain  of  your  affection  than
I  do  that  you  have  succeeded  in  expressing  it,  and  you  will
not be wrong if  you think  the same  in respect to  me.
When  your  letter  came  into  my  hands  you  were  present  in
my  heart,  and  I  am  quite  convinced  that  it  will  be  the  same
for  me  when  you  receive  my  letter,  and  that  when  you  read
it  I  shall  not  be  absent. It  is  a  labour  for  each  of  us  to
scribble  to  the  other,  and  for  our  messengers  a  fatigue  to
carry  our  letters  from  the  one  to  the  other,  but  the  heart
feels  neither  labour  nor  fatigue  in  loving. Let  those  things
cease,  then,  which  without  labour  cannot  be  carried  on,  and
let  us  practise  only  that  which,  the  more  earnestly  it  is  done,
seems  to  cost  the  less  labour. Let  our  minds,  I  say,  rest  from
dictating,  our  lips  from  conversing,  our  fingers  from  writing,
our  messengers  from  running  to  and  fro.1 But  let  not  our
hearts  rest  from  meditating  day  and  night  on  the  law  of  the
Lord,  which  is  the  law  of  love. The  more  we  cease  to  be
occupied  in  doing  this  the  less  quiet  shall  we  enjoy,  and  the
more  engrossed  we  are  in it,  so  much  the  more  calm  and
repose  we shall feel  from  it. Let  us  love  and  be  loved,
striving  to  benefit  ourselves  in  the  other,  and  the  other  in
ourselves. For  those  whom  we  love,  on  those  do  we  rely,
as  those  who  love  us  rely  in  turn  on  us. Thus  to  love  in
God is  to  love charity,  and  therefore  it is to labour for
charity,  to  strive  to  be  loved  for  the  sake  of  God.

2.  But  what  am  I  doing  ? I  promised  brevity,  and  I  am
sliding  into  prolixity. If  you  desire  news  of  Brother  Guer-
ric,  or  rather since  you do  so,  he  so  runs  not  as  uncer-

i  This  kind  of  correspondence  is  a  hindrance  to  devotion  and  the  spirit  of
prayer,  as  he  says  in  the  Letter  placed  at  the  head  of  his  Apology  addressed  to-
Abbot  William,  and  also  in  Letter  89.

VOL.  I.  21


322  LETTER XCI.

tainly,  so  fights  not  as  one  that  beateth  the  air.  But  since
he  knows  that  salvation  depends  not  on  him  who  fights,  nor
on  him  who  runs,  but  on  God,  who  shows  mercy,  he  begs
that  he  may  have  the  help  of  your  prayers  for  him,  so  that
He  who  has  already  granted  to  him  both  to  fight  and  to  run,
may  grant  also  to  overcome  and  to  attain.  Salute  for  me
with  my  heart  and  by  your  mouth  your  abbot,  who  is  most
dear  to  me,  not  only  on  your  account,  but  also  because  of  his
high  character.  It  will  be  most  agreeable  to  me  to  see  him
at  the  time  and  place  which  you  have  promised.  I  do  not
wish  to  leave  you  ignorant  that  the  hand  of  God  has  for  a
little  while  been  laid  heavily  upon  me.  It  seemed  that  I
had  been  stricken  to  the  fall,  that  the  axe  had  been  laid  to
the  root  of  the  barren  tree  of  my  body,  and  I  feared  that  I
might  be  instantly  cut  down  ;  but  lo  !  by  your  prayers  and
those  of  my  other  friends,  the  good  Lord  has  spared  me
this  time  also,  yet  in  the  hope  that  I  shall  bear  good  fruits
in  the  future.


LETTER XCI. (Circa A.D. 1130.)
To  THE  ABBOTS  ASSEMBLED  AT  SoissoNS.1

Bernard  urges  the  abbots  zealously  to  perform  the  duty
for  which  they  had  met. He  recommends  to  them  a  great
desire  of  spiritual  progress,  and  begs  them  not  to  be  de
layed  in  their  work  if  lukewarm  and  lax  persons  should
perhaps  murmur.

1  This  was  one  of  the  first  general  Chapters  held  by  the  Black  Monks  (as  they
are  called)  in  the  province  of  Rheims.  It  seems  that  its  cause  and  occasion  was
the  Apology  addressed  by  Bernard  to  Abbot  William,  who  was  the  prime  mover
in  calling  together  this  assembly,  after  the  example  of  the  Cluniacs  and  Cister
cians,  that  they  might  re-establish  the  observance  of  the  Rule  which  was  being
let  slip.  It  was  held  without  doubt  at  S.  Medard  under  the  Abbot  Geoffrey,  to
•whom  Letter  66  was  addressed.  He  was  Bishop  of  Chalons-sur-Marne  when
Peter  the  Venerable  spoke  of  him  thus  (B.  ii.  Ep.  43) :  "  It  is  he  who  first  spread
the  divine  Order  of  Cluny  through  the  whole  of  France,  who  was  its  author  and
propagator;  and,  far  more,  it  was  he  who  expelled  '  the  old  dragon  '  from  his
resting-places  in  so  many  monasteries,  and  who  rouse.l  monks  from  their
torpor."  Innocent  II.  determined  that  these  general  Chapters  should  be  held
every  year  in  future.


LETTER XCI.  323

To  the  Reverend  Abbots  met  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  in
Chapter  at  Soissons,  brother  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
the  servant  of  their  Holiness,  health  and  prayer  that  they
may  see,  establish,  and  observe  the  things  which  are  right.

1.  I  greatly  regret  that  my  occupations  prevent  me  from
being  present at  your meeting — at least, in body. For
neither  distance  nor  a  crowd  of  cares  are  able  to  banish  my
spirit,  which  prays  for  you,  feels  with  you,  and  rests  among
you. No,  I  repeat,  I  cannot  be  wanting  in  the  assembly  of
the saints, nor  can  distance  of  place  nor  absence  of  body
altogether separate me from the congregation and the
counsels of  the righteous, in  which,  not  the  traditions  of
men  are  obstinately  upheld  or  superstitiously  observed  ;  but
diligent  and  humble  inquiry  is  made  what  is  the  good  and
acceptable  and  perfect  will  of  God  (Rom.  xii.  2). All  my
desires  carry  me  where  you  are;  I  am  with  you  by  devotion,
by  friendship,  by  similarity  of  sentiment,  and  partaking  of
your  zeal.

2.  That  those  wTho  now  applaud  you  may  not  hereafter
ridicule you as  having assembled to  no  purpose (which
God  forbid!),  strive,  I  beseech  you,  to  make  your  conduct
holy  and  your  resolutions  good,  for  too  good  they  cannot
be. Grant  that  you  may  be  too  just  or  even  too  wise,  yet
it  is  plain  that  you  cannot  be  good  beyond  measure. And
indeed  I  read  :  Do  not  carry  justice  to  excess  (Eccles.  vii.
17,  VULG.). I  read  : Be  not  wiser  than  is  befitting  (Rom.
xii.  3,  VULG.). But  is  it  ever  said  : Do  not  carry  goodness
to  excess  ?  or,  Take  care  not  to  be  too  good  ?  No  one  can
be  more  good  than  it  behoves  him  to  be. Paul  was  a  good
man,  and  yet  he  was  not  at  all  content  with  his  state  ;  he
reached  forward  gladly  to  the  things  that  were  before,  for
getting  those  that  were  behind  (Phil.  iii.  13),  and  striving  to
become continually  better  than himself. It  is  o'nly  God
who  does  not  desire  to  become  better  than  He  is,  because
that  is  not  possible.

3.  Let  those  depart  both  from  me  and  from  you  who  say  :
We  do  not  desire  to  be  better  than  our  fathers  ;  declaring
themselves  to  be  the  sons of  lukewarm  and  lax  persons,


324  LETTER XCI.

whose  memory  Is  in  execration,  since  they  have  eaten  sour
grapes,  and  their  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge.  Or  if
they  pretend  that  their  fathers  were  holy  men,  whose
memory  is  blessed,  let  them  imitate  their  sanctity,  and  not
defend,  as  laws  instituted  by  them,  the  indulgences  and
dispensations  which  they  have  merely  endured.  Although
holy  Elias  says,  I  am  not  better  than  my  fathers  (i  Kings
xix.  4),  yet  he  has  not  said  that  he  did  not  wish  to  be.
Jacob  saw  upon  the  ladder  Angels  ascending  and  de
scending  (Gen.  xxviii.  12) ;  but  was  any  one  of  them  either
sitting,  or  standing  still  ?  It  was  not  for  angels  to  stand
still  on  the  uncertain  rounds  of  a  frail  ladder  ;  nor  can  any
thing  remain  fixed  in  the  same  condition  during  the  un
certain  period  of  this  mortal  life.  Here  have  we  no  con
tinuing  city ;  nor  do  we  yet  possess,  but  always  seek  for,
that  which  is  to  come.  Of  necessity  you  either  ascend  or
descend,  and  if  you  try  to  stand  still  you  cannot  but  fall.
It  may  be  held  as  certain  that  the  man  is  not  good  at  all
who  does  not  wish  to  be  better ;  and  where  you  begin  not
to  care  to  make  advance  in  goodness  there  also  you  leave
off  being  good.

4.  Let  those  depart  both  from  me  and  from  you  who  call
good  evil  and  evil  good.  If  they  call  the  pursuit  of
righteousness  evil,  what  good  thing  will  be  good  in  their
eyes?  The  Lord  once  spoke  a  single  word,  and  the  Phari
sees  were  scandalized  (S.  Matt.  xv.  12).  But  now  these
new  Pharisees  are  scandalized  not  even  at  a  Avord,  but  at
silence.  You  plainly  see  then  that  they  seek  only  the  occa
sion  to  attack  you.  But  leave  them  alone  ;  they  be  blind
leaders  of  the  blind.  Take  thought  for  the  salvation  of  the
little  ones,  not  of  the  murmurs  of  the  evil-disposed.  Why
do  you  so  much  fear  to  give  scandal  to  those  who  are  not  to
be  cured  unless  you  become  sick  with  them  ?  It  is  not  even
desirable  to  wait  to  see  whether  your  resolutions  are
pleasing  to  all  of  you  in  all  respects,  otherwise  you  will
determine  upon  little  or  no  good.  You  ought  to  consult
not  the  views,  but  the  needs  of  all  ;  and  faithfully  to  draw
them  towards  God,  even  although  they  be  unwilling,  rather


LETTER XCII.  325

than  abandon  them  to  the  desires  of  their  heart. I  com
mend  myself  to  your  holy  prayers.


LETTER  XCII. (A.D. 1132.)
To HENRY, KING  OF  ENGLAND.

He  asks  the  King's  favour  to  the  monks  sent  by  him  to
construct  a  monastery.

To  the  illustrious  HENRY,  King  of  England,  BERNARD,
Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  that  he  may  faithfully  serve  and
humbly  obey  the  King  of  Heaven  in  his  earthly  kingdom.

There  is  in  your  land  a  property1  belonging  to  your  Lord
and  mine,  for  which  He  preferred  to  die  rather  than  it
should  be  lost.  This  I  have  formed  a  plan  for  recovering,
and  am  sending  a  party  of  my  brave  followers  to  seek,
recover,  and  hold  it  with  strong  hand,  if  this  does  not
displease  you.  And  these  scouts  whom  you  see  before
you  I  have  sent  beforehand  on  this  business  to  investigate
wisely  the  state2  of  things,  and  bring  me  faithful  word
again.  Be  so  kind  as  to  assist  them  as  messengers  of  your

1  The  history  of  the  Abbey  of Wells,  in  England,  explains  to  us  what  is
meant  by  these  words  of  Bernard. "  The  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  Bernard,  had
sent  detachments  of  his  army  of  invasion  to  take  possession  of  the  most  dis-
tauc  regions  ; they  won  brilliant  triumphs  over  the  ancient  enemy  of  salvation,
bearing  from  him  his  prey  and  restoring it  to  its  true  Sovereign. God  had
inspired  him  with  the  thought  of  sending  some  hopeful  slips  from  his  noble  vine
of  Clairvaux  into the English  land that  he might  have  fruit among  that
nation,  as  in  the  rest  of  the  world. The  very  letter  is  yet  extant  which he
wrote  for  these  Religious  to  the  King,  in  which  he  said  that  there  was  a  pro
perty  of  the  Lord  in  that  land  of  the King,  and  that  he  had  sent  brave  men  out
of  his  army  to  seek  it,  seize  it,  and  bring  it  back  to  its  owner. He  persuades
the  King  to  render  assistance  to  his  messengers,  and  not  to  fail  to  fulfil  in  this
his  duty  to  his  suzerain  ;  which  was  done. The  Religious  from  Clairvaux  were
received  with  honour  by  the  King  and  by  the  realm,  an^  they  laid  new  founda
tions  in  the  province  of  York,  founding  the  Abbey  of  Rievaulx. And  this  was
the  first  planting  of  the  Cistercian  Order  in  the  province  of  York." (Monast.
Anglican.  Vol.  i.  p.  733.) Further  mention  of  Henry  I.  is  made  in  the  notes  to
Letter  138.

2  Esse. This  word  is  a  common  one  with  Bernard  to  signify  the  state  of  a
man  or  a  business. See  Letters  1 18,  304.


326  LETTER XCIII.

Lord,  and  in  their  persons  fulfil  your  feudal1  duty  to  Him.
I  pray  Him  to  render  you,  in  return,  happy  and  illustrious,
to  His  honour,  and  to  the  salvation  of  your  soul,  to  the
safety  and  peace  of  your  country,  and  to  continue  to  you
happiness  and  contentment  to  the  end  of  your  days.


LETTER XCIII. (Circa A.D. 1132.)

TO HENRY,2 BISHOP OF WINCHESTER.

Bernard salutes him very respectfully.

To  the  very  illustrious  Lord  HENRY,  by  the  Grace  of
God  Bishop  of  Winchester,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
health  in  our  Lord.

1  Since  kings  and  princes  are,  as  it  were,  vassals  to  God.

2  He  was  nephew,  by  his  mother,  of Henry  I.,  King  of  England,  brother  of
King  Stephen,  and  son  of  Stephen,  Count  of  Blois. "  His  mother,  Adela,"  says
William  of  Newburgh,  "  not  wishing  to  appear  to  have  borne  children  only  for
the  world,  had  him  tonsured." In  1 1  26,  The  History  of  the  Abbey  nf  Glastonbury
counts  him  among  the  number  of  the  abbots  of  that  monastery,  and  says,  "  he
was a man extremely versed in letters, and  of remarkable regularity  of
character. By  his  excellent  administration  the  Abbey  of Glastonbury  profited
so  much  that  his  name  will  be  held  in  everlasting  memory  there "  (Monast.
Anglican.  Vol.  ii.,  p.  18). Henry  was  elevated  later  on  to  the  see  of  Winchester,
and  Bernard  complains  of  him  in  writing  to  Pope  Eugenius. "  What  shall  1  say
of  his  Lordship  of  Winchester  ? The works  which he  does  show  sufficiently
what  he  is."  Harpsfield  reports  that  he  extorted  castles  from  nobles  whom  he  had
invited  to  a  feast,  and  Roger  that  he  had  consecrated  the  intruder  William  to  the
See  of  York  (Annnl.  under  year  1 140).  The  latter  calls  him  legate  of  the  Roman
See. Brito  and  Henriquez  must,  therefore,  be  wrong  in  counting  him  among  the
Cistercians,  and  the  latter  in  particular,  in  speaking  of  him  as  a  man  of  eminent
sanctity,  taking  occasion  from  the  testimony  of  Wion  (Ligno  ritce),  who  calls
him  a  man  gifted  with  prophecy,  because  when  on  his  death-bed,  in  recehing
the  visit  of  his  nephew, Henry,  he  predicted  to  him  that  he  would  be  punished
by God on  account  of  the  death  of S.  Thomas  of  Canterbury,  whom  he  had
himself  consecrated  ;  as  if  that  saying  may  not  have  been  inspired  by  fear  rather
than  prophecy,  as  Manrique  rightly  says  in  his  Annals. Peter  the  Venerable
wrote  many  letters  to  him,  which  are  still  extant,  among  others  Letters  24  and
25  in  Book  iv.,  in  which  he  requests that  he  may  return  to  Cluny  to  die  and  be
buried  there. Being  invited  to  do  so  at  the  request  of  Louis,  the  King  of  France,
and  of  the  chief  nobles  of  Burgundy,  and  also  at  the  letters  of  Pope  Hadrian  IV.,
he  sent  on  his  treasures  to  Peter  the  Venerable,  and,  leaving  England  without
the  permission  of  the  King,  arrived  at  Cluny  in  1155. He  discharged  from  his


LETTER XCIV.  327

It  is  with  great  joy  that  I  have  learned  from  the  report
of  many  persons  that  so  humble  a  person  as  myself  has
found  favour  with  your  Highness.  I  am  not  worthy  of  it,
but  I  am  not  ungrateful  for  it.  I  return  you,  therefore,
thanks  for  your  goodness  ;  a  very  unworthy  return,  but  all
that  I  am  able  to  make.  I  do  not  fear  but  that  you  will
receive  the  humble  return  that  I  make,  since  you  have  been
so  kind  as  to  forestall  me  by  your  affection  and  the  honour
that  you  have  done  to  me;  butj  defer  writing  more  until  I
bhall  know  by  some  token  from  your  hand,  if  you  think  fit
to  send  one,  how  you  receive  these  few  words.  You  may
easily  confide  your  reply,  in  \vriting,  or  by  word  of  mouth
if  it  shall  so  please  you,  to  Abbot  Oger,  who  is  charged  to
convey  to  you  this  note.  I  beg  your  Excellency  also  to  be
so  good  as  to  honour  that  Religious  with  your  esteem  and
confidence,  inasmuch  as  he  is  a  man  commendable  for  his
honour,  knowledge,  and  piety.


LETTER  XCIV.  (A.D. 1132.)
To THE  ABBOT OF  A CERTAIN  MONASTERY AT  YORK,

FROM WHICH THE PRIOR HAD DEPARTED, TAKING

SEVERAL  RELIGIOUS  WITH  HIM.1

I.  You  write  to  me  from  beyond  the  sea  to  ask  of  me
advice  which  I  should  have  preferred  that  you  had  sought

own  means  the  debts  of  the  abbey,  which  were  then  enormous  ;  he  expended
for  the  support  of  the  monks  who  lived  at  Cluny,  more  than  four  hundred  in
number,  7, coo  marks  of  silver,  which  are  equal  to  40,000  livres.  He  gave  forty
chalices  for  celebrating  mass,  and  a  silk  pannus  (which  may  have  been  an
altar  vestment,  or  more  probably  a  Hanging — [E.])of  great  price;  he  buried  with
his  own  hands  Peter  the  Venerable,  who  died  January  ist,  1157.  Having
returned  at  length  to  his  see,  he  died,  to  the  great  grief  of  the  Religious  of  Cluny,
on  August  the  gth,  1171.

1  Letter  318  ckarly  shows  what  monastery  these  had  left,  namely,  the
Benedictine  Abbey  of  S.  Mary,  at  York,  and  this  the  Monaslicnn  Anglicanum
confirms.

The  Abbey  of  S.  Mary,  at  York,  was  founded  in  1088  by  Count  Alan,  son  of
Guy,  Count  of  Brittany,  in  the  Church  of  S.  Olave,  near  York,  to  which  King
William  Rufus  afterwards  gave  the  name  of  S.  Mary.  Hither  were  brought
from  the  monastery  of  Whitby  the  Abbot  Stephen  and  Benedictine  monks,


328  LETTER XCIV.

from  some  other.  I  am  held  between  two  difficulties,  for  if
I  do  not  reply  to  you,  you  may  take  my  silence  for  a  sign
of  contempt ;  but  if  I  do  reply  I  cannot  avoid  danger,  since
whatever  I  reply  I  must  of  necessity  either  give  scandal
to  some  one  or  give  to  some  other  a  security  which  they
ought  not  to  have,  or  at  all  events  more  than  they  ought  to
have.  That  your  brethren  have  departed  from  you  was
not  with  the  knowledge  nor  by  the  advice  or  persuasion
of  me  or  of  my  brethren.  But  I  incline  to  believe  that  it
was  of  God,  since  their  purpose  could  not  be  shaken  by  all
your  efforts  ;  and  that  the  brethren  themselves  thought  this
also  who  so  earnestly  sought  my  advice  about  themselves  ;
their  conscience  troubling  them,  as  I  suppose,  because  they

under  whom  monastic  discipline  was  observed;  but  about  the  year  1132,  under
Geoffrey,  the  third  abbot,  it  began  to  be  relaxed.  It  was  at  that  time  that  the
Cistercian  order  was  everywhere  renowned,  and  was  introduced  into  England  in
the  year  1128  (its  first  establishment  being  at  Waverley,  in  Surrey).  Induced
by  a  pious  emulation,  twelve  monks  of  S.  Mary,  who  were  not  able  to  obtain
from  their  abbot  permission  to  transfer  themselves  to  this  Cistercian  Order,
begged  the  support  of  Thurstan,  Archbishop  of  York,  to  put  their  project  into
execution.  With  his  support  they  left  their  monastery  on  October  4th,  1132,
notwithstanding  the  opposition  of  their  abbot,  to  the  number  of  twelve  priests
an  1  one  levite  (deacon).  Of  these  one  was  the  Prior  Richard,  another  Richard
the  sacristan,  and  others  named  in  the  History  before  mentioned,  taking
nothing  from  the  monastery  but  their  habit.  Troubled  by  their  desertion,
Abbot  Geoffrey  complained  to  the  king,  to  the  bishops  and  abbots  of  the  neigh
bourhood,  as  well  as  to  S.  Bernard  himself,  of  the  injury  done  by  this  to  the
rights  of  all  religious  houses,  without  distinction.  Archbishop  Thurstan  wrote
a  Idler  of  apology  to  William,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  at  the  same  time
Bernard  himself  wrote  to  Thurstan  and  to  the  thirteen  Religious  to  congratulate
them,  and  another  to  Abbot  Geoffrey  to  justify  their  action  (Letters  94  to  96
and  313).  In  the  meantime  these  monks  were  shut  up  in  the  Episcopal  house
of  Thurstan ;  and  as  they  refuse;),  notwithstanding  the  censures  of  their  abbot,
to  return  to  their  former  monastery,  Thurstan  gave  them  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Ripon  a  spot  of  ground  previously  uncultivated,  covered  with  thorn  bushes,
and  situated  among  rocks  and  mountains  which  surrounded  it  on  all  sides,
that  they  might  build  themselves  a  house  there.  Their  Prior  Richard  was
given  to  them  for  abbot  by  Thurstan,  who  gave  him  the  Benediction  on
Christmas  Day.  Having  passed  a  whole  winter  in  incredible  austerity  of  life,
they  gave  themselves  and  their  dwelling-place,  which  they  had  called  Fountains,
to  S.  Bernard.  He  sent  to  them  a  Religious,  named  Geoffrey,  of  A  mayo,  from
whose  hands  they  received  the  Cistercian  Rule  with  incredible  willingness  and
piety  (Life  of  S.  Bernard,  B.  iv.  c.  2).


LETTER XCIV.  329

•  quitted  you.  Otherwise,  if  their  conscience,  like  that  of
the  Apostle,  did  not  reproach  them,  their  peace  would  not
have  been  disturbed  (Rom.  xiv.  22).  But  what  can  I  do
that  I  may  be  hurtful  to  no  one  neither  by  my  silence  nor
by  my  reply  to  the  questions  asked  me  ?  Thus,  perhaps,  I
may  relieve  myself  of  the  difficulty  if  I  shall  send  those  who
question  me  to  a  person  more  learned,  and  whose  authority  is
more  reverend  and  sacred  than  mine.  Pope  S.  Gregory  says
in  his  book  on  the  Pastoral  Rule,  "  Whosoever  has  pro
posed  to  himself  a  greater  good  does  an  unlawful  thing
in  subordinating  it  to  a  lesser  good."  And  he  proves  this
by  a  citation  from  the  Gospel,  saying,  No  one  putting  his
ha ud  to  the  plough  and  looking  back  is  fit  for  the  kingdom
of  God  (S.  Luke  ix.  62)  ;  and  he  proceeds  :  "  He  who
renounces  a  more  perfect  state  which  he  has  embraced,  to
follow  another  which  is  less  so,  is  precisely  the  man  who
looks  back"  (Part  iii.  c.  28).  The  same  Pope,  in  his  third
Homily  on  Ezekiel,  adds:  "There  are  people  who  taste
virtue,  set  themselves  to  practise  it,  and  while  doing  so
contemplate  undertaking  actions  still  better;  but  afterwards
drawing  back,  abandon  those  better  things  which  they  had
proposed  to  themselves.  They  do  not,  it  is  true,  leave  off
the  good  practices  they  had  begun,  but  they  fail  to  realize
those  better  ones  which  they  had  meditated.  To  human
judgment  these  seem  to  stand  fast  in  the  good  work,  but  to
the  eyes  of  Almighty  God  they  have  fallen,  and  failed  in
what  they  contemplated."

2.  Here  is  a  mirror.  In  it  let  your  Religious  consider,
not  the  features  of  their  faces,  but  the  fact  of  their  turning
back.  Here  let  them  determine  and  distinguish  their
motives,  their  thoughts,  accusing  or  excusing  them  with
that  sentence  which  the  spiritual  man  passes  who  judges  all
things,  and  is  himself  judged  by  no  one.  I,  indeed,  cannot
rashly  determine  whether  the  state  which  they  have  left  or
that  which  they  have  embraced  was  the  greater  or  less,  the
higher  or  lower,  the  severer  or  the  more  lax.  Let  them
judge  according  to  this  rule  of  S.  Gregory.  But  to  you,
Reverend  Father,  I  declare,  with  as  much  positive  assurance


33°  LETTER XCV.

as  plain  truth,  that  it  is  not  at  all  desirable  that  you  should
set  yourself  to  quench  the  Spirit.  Hinder  not  him,  it  is
said,  who  is  able  to  do  good,  but  if  thou  canst,  do  good
also  thyself  (Prov.  iii.  27,  Vt'LG.).  It  more  befits  you  to  be
proud  of  the  good  works  of  your  sons,  since  a  wise  son  is
the  glory  of  his  father  (Prov.  x.  i).  For  the  rest,  let  no
one  make  it  a  cause  of  complaint  against  me  that  I  have  not
hidden  in  my  heart  the  righteousness  of  God,  unless,  per
haps,  I  have  spoken  less  of  it  than  I  ought,  for  the  sake  of
avoiding  scandal.

LETTER XCV. (A.D. 1132.)
To  THURSTAN,  ARCHBISHOP  OF  YORK.

Bernard  praises  his  charity  and  beneficence  towards  the
Religions.

To  the  very  dear  father  and  Reverend  Lord  THURSTAN,.
by  the  Grace  of  God  Archbishop  of  York,  BERNARD,  Abbot
of  Clairvaux,  wishes  the  fullest  health.

The  general  good  report  of  men,  as  I  have  experienced,,
has  said  nothing  in  your  favour  which  the  splendour  of
your  good  works  does  not  justify.  Your  actions,  in  fact,
show  that  your  high  reputation,  which  fame  had  previously
spread  everywhere,  \vas  neither  false  nor  ill-founded,  but
manifest  and  certain.  Especially  of  late  how  brilliantly  has-
your  zeal  for  righteousness  and  your  sacerdotal  energy
shone  forth  in  the  defence  of  the  poor  Religious  who  had
no  other  helper.1  Once,  indeed,  the  whole  assembly  of  the
saints  used  to  venerate  your  works  of  mercy  and  alms
deeds  ;  but  in  doing  so  it  narrated  always  what  is  common
to  you  with  very  many,  since  whosoever  possesses  the
goods  of  this  world  is  bound  to  share  them  with  the  poor.
But  this  is  your  episcopal  task,  this  the  noble  proof  of  your
paternal  affection,  this  your  truly  divine  fervour,  the  zeal

1  What  Thurstan  did  for  the  protection  of  these  monks,  who  'had  taken
refuge  with  him  in  the  desire  to  embrace-  a  mere  austere  life,  may  be  seen  in  a
Letter  from  him  which  we  have  taken  from  the  Monasticon  A?iglicanum  nnd.
placed  after  those  of  S.  Bernard.


LETTER XCV.  331

which  no  doubt  has  inspired  and  aroused  in  you  who
makes  His  angels  spirits  and  His  ministers  a  flaming  fire.
This,  I  say,  belongs  entirely  to  you.  It  is  the  ornament  of
your  dignity,  the  badge  of  your  office,  the  adornment  of  your
crown.  It  is  one  thing  to  fill  the  belly  of  the  hungry,  and
quite  another  thing  to  have  a  zeal  for  holy  poverty.  The
one  serves  nature,  the  other  grace.  Thou  shalt  -visit  thy
kind,  He  says,  and  thou  shalt  not  sin  (Job.  v.  24,  VULG.).
Therefore  he  who  nourishes  the  flesh  of  another  sins  not  in
so  doing,  but  he  who  honours  the  sanctity  of  another  does
good  to  his  own  soul ;  therefore  he  says  again,  Keep  your
alms  in  your  own  hand  until  you  shall  find  a  righteous  man
to  whom  to  give  it.  For  what  advantage  ?  Because  He
•who  receives  a  righteous  man  in  the  name  of  a  righteous
man  shall  receive  a  righteous  man's  reward  (S.  Matt.
x.  41).  Let  us,  then,  discharge  the  debt  that  nature
requires  of  us,  that  we  may  avoid  sin ;  but  let  us  be
co-workers  with  grace,  that  we  may  merit  to  become
sharers  of  it.  It  is  this  that  I  so  admire  in  you,  as
I  acknowledge  that  it  was  given  to  you  from  above.  O,
Father,  truly  reverend  and  to  be  regarded  with  the  sincerest
affection ;  the  praise  for  what  you  have  laid  out  of  your
temporal  means  to  the  relief  of  our  necessities,  will  be
blended  with  the  praises  of  God  for  ever.


LETTER XCVI. (A.D. 1132.)

To RICHARD/ ABBOT  OF  FOUNTAINS/*  AND  HIS  COM
PANIONS,  WHO HAD  PASSED  OVER  TO  THE  ClSTERCIAN

ORDER  FROM  ANOTHER.

He  praises  them  for  the  renewal  of  holy  discipline.
How  marvellous  are  those  things  which  I  have  heard  and

1  He  had  been  Prior  of  the  monastery  of  S.  Mary,  at  York,  which  he  quitted,
followed  by twelve  other  Religious,  as  we  have  seen  above. He  died  at  Rome,
as  may  be  seen  in  Man.  Anglic,  p.  744. He  had  for  successor  another  Richard,
formerly sacristan  of  the  same  monastery  of  S.  Mary,  who  died  at  Clairvaux
(ll'id.,  p.  745). He  is  mentioned  in  the  32Oth  Letter  of  S.  Bernard.

2  The  monastery  of  Fountains,  in  the  Diocese  of  York,  passed over  to  the


332  LETTER XCVI.

learned,  and  which  the  two  Geoffries  have  announced  to
me,  that  you  have  become  newly  fervent  with  the  fire  from
on  high,  that  from  weakness  you  have  become  strong,  that
you  have  flourished  again  with  new  sanctity.

This  is  the  finger  of  God  secretly  working,  softly
renewing,  healthfully  changing  not,  indeed,  bad  men  into
good,  but  making  good  men  better.  Who  will  grant  unto
me  to  cross  over  to  you  and  see  this  great  sight  ?  For
that  progress  in  holiness  is  not  less  wonderful  or  less
delightful  than  that  conversion.  It  is  much  more  easy,  in
fact,  to  find  many  men  of  the  world  converted  to  good  than
one  Religious  who  is  good  becoming  better  than  he  is.
The  rarest  bird  in  the  world  is  the  monk  who  ascends  ever
so  little  from  the  point  which  he  has  once  reached  in  the
religious  life.  Thus  the  spectacle  which  you  present,
dearest  brethren,  is  the  more  rare  and  salutary,  not  only  to
men  who  desire  greatly  to  be  the  helper  of  your  sanctity,
but  it  rightly  rejoices  the  whole  Church  of  God  as  well;  since
the  rarer  it  is  the  more  glorious  it  is  also.  For  prudence
made  it  a  duty  to  you  to  pass  beyond  that  mediocrity  so
dangerously  near  to  defect,  and  to  escape  from  that  luke-
warmness  which  provokes  God  to  reject  you;  it  wras  even  a
duty  of  conscience  for  you  to  do  so,  since  you  know  that  it
is  not  safe  for  men  who  have  embraced  the  holy  Rule  to
halt  before  having  attained  the  goal  to  which  it  leads.  I  am
exceedingly  grieved  that  I  am  obliged  by  the  pressing
obligations  of  the  day  and  the  haste  of  the  messenger  to
express  the  fulness  of  my  affection  \vith  a  pen  so  brief,  and
to  comprise  the  breadth  of  my  kindness  for  you  within  the
narrow  limits  of  this  billet.  But  if  anything  is  wanting,
brother  Geoffrey  :  will  supply  it  by  word  of  mouth.

Cistercian  Rule  in  i  132.  It  is  astonishing  to  read  of  the  fervour  of  these  monks
in  Monast.  Anglican.  Vol.  i.  p.  733  and  onwards.  Compare  also  Letters  313  and
320  for  what  relates  to  the  death  of  Abbot  Richard,  the  second  of  that  name  and
Order.

1  This  Geoffrey,  "  a  holy  and  religious  man,"  who  founded  or  reformed
numerous  monasteries,  had  been  sent  by  Bernard  to  Fountains  to  train  them
according  to  the  Rule  of  the  Cistercian  Order  (Monast.  Anglican.  Vol.  i.  p.  741).
Concerning  the  same  Geoffrey  see  The  Life  of  S.  Bernard,  B.  iv.  c.  2.


LETTER XCVII.  333

LETTER  XCVII. (A.D. 1132.)
To  DUKE  CONRAD.*

Bernard  urges  upon  him  not  to  make  war  upon  tlie
Count  of  Geneva,  lest  he  should  draiv  itpon  himself  the
-vengeance  of  God.

1.  All  power  comes  from  Him,  to  whom  the  prophet  says,
Tliine  is  the  power, Thine  tlie  kingdom,  O,  Lord; Thou
art  over  all  nations  (i  Chron.  xxix.  n). Therefore  I  have
thought  it  fit,  O  illustrious  Prince,  to  warn  your  Excellency
how  great  reverence  it  behoves  you  to  show  to  that  terrible
One,  who  takes  away  the  life  of  princes  themselves. The
Count  of  Geneva,  as  I  know  from  his  own  mouth,  offers  to
do  you  justice  with  respect  to  all  the  causes  of  complaint
which  you  declare  you  have  against  him. If,  after  this,  you
continue to invade the country of another, to destroy
churches, to set  houses  on  fire,  to plunder the  poor,  to
perpetrate  homicides,  and  to  pour  out  human  blood,  it  is
certain  that  you  will  arouse  against  you  the  stern  anger  of
Him  who  is  the  Father  of  orphans  and  the  judge  of  widows.
And  if  He  is  angry  with  you, neither  the  number  nor  the
bravery of your soldiers will profit you at all. The
Almighty Lord  of  Sabaoth  will  give  the  victory  to  whom
He  pleases, whether  it  be by  many  or  by  few. He  has
made,  when  He  saw  fit,  one  soldier  put  to  flight  a  thousand,
and  two  ten  thousand  (Deut.  xxxii.  30).

2.  The cry of  the poor which has come to me has
inspired  me, a poor man,  to use this language to  your
Greatness,  knowing  that  it  is  more  honourable  and  worthy
of  you  to  yield  to  the  entreaties  of  the  humble  than  to  the
threats  of  your  enemies;  not  that  I  think  your  enemies  more

1  Samuel  Guichenon,  in  his  History  of  the  Dukes  of  Savoy,  written  in  French,
reports  that  Conrad,  Duke  of  Zeringen,  was  at  this  time  contemplating
hostilities  against  Amadeus  I.,  Count  of  Geneva.  Zeringen,  says  Munster
(Cosmography,  B.  iii.),  was  a  certain  castle,  now  destroyed,  situated  on  the
Brisgau,  half  a  mile  below  Fribourg,  from  which  the  Dukes  of  Zeringen  derived
their  title.  These  Dukes  were  descended  from  the  Counts  of  Hapsburg  by  a
ceitain  Gebizo  about  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Henry  III. ;  and  continued  until
i  ?.  The  sixth  and  last  inheritor  of  the  title  was  named  Egon.


334  LETTER XCVIII.

powerful  than  you,  but  that  I  know  Almighty  God  is  far
more  powerful  than  either,  and  that  He  resists  the  proud
while  he  gives  grace  unto  the  humble.  If  I  had  been  able
I  would  have  come  unto  your  presence,  noble  Prince,  to
treat  of  this  matter,  but  now  I  have  sent  to  you,  in  my  place,
these  of  my  brethren  to  obtain  from  your  Highness,  by
their  prayers  united  with  mine,  either  a  solid  peace,  if  that
be  possible,  or,  at  least,  a  truce  while  we  endeavour  to
settle  the  conditions  of  a  definitive  peace,  according  to  the
will  of  God,  and  both  to  your  honour  and  the  safety  of  your
country.  Otherwise,  if  you  neither  accept  the  satisfaction
offered  you,  nor  deign  to  regard  our  entreaties,  or  rather
do  not  give  ear  to  the  salutary  advice  which  God  gives  you
by  me,  let  Him  look  upon  it  and  judge.  For  I  know,  nor
can  I  reflect  upon  it  without  trembling,  that  such  great
armies  can  hardly  meet  in  battle  without  horrible  carnage
and  slaughter  of  each  side.


LETTER XCVIII.

CONCERNING  THE  MACCABEES,  BUT  TO  WHOM  WRITTEN
IS  UNKNOWN.1

He  replies  to  the  question  why  the  Church  has  decreed  a
festival  to  the  Maccabees  alone  of  all  the  righteous  under
the  ancient  law.

i. Fulk,  Abbot  of  Epernay,2  had  already  written  to  ask

i  Such  is  the  title  in  almost  all  the  MSS.  But  in  one  atCiteaux  the  Letter  is
inscribed  To  Bruno  of  Cologne,  as  is  believed,  on  the  martyrdom  of  the  Maccabees.
In  an  old  edition  It  is  thought  to  have  been  written  to  Hugo  of  S.  Victor.  What
seems  to  have  occasioned  the  conjecture  that  it  was  addressed  to  that  prelate
was  that  the  relics  of  the  Maccabees  were  preserved  in  Cologne,  but  it  must  be
noted  that  it  was  not  until  after  the  death  of  Bernard  they  were  brought  thither
from  Milan  by  Bishop  Reinold,  who  obtained  them  from  the  Emperor,  Frederick
I.  In  many  MSS.  Letter  77,  addressed  to  Hugo  of  S.  Victor,  immediately
precedes  this.

-  Fulk,  Abbot  of  S.  Martin,  at  Epernay,  on  the  Marne,  in  the  Diocese  of
Rheims.  It  is  he  to  whom  is  addressed  Letter  13  of  Hugo  Metellus  :  "To  the
Reverend  Fulk,  Abbot  of  Epernay,  blessed  in  Our  Lord,"  on  the  subject  of  a
certain  canon  of  Epernay  whom  he  reclaimed  from  Abbot  William.  Fulk  was


LETTER XCV1II.  335

me  the  same  question  as  your  charity  has  addressed  to  your
humble  servant  by  Brother  Hescelin.  I  have  put  off  reply
ing  to  him,  being  desirous  to  find,  if  possible,  some  statement
in  the  Fathers  about  this  which  was  asked,  which  I  might
send  to  him,  rather  than  to  reply  by  some  new  opinion  of
my  owrn.  But  as  I  do  not  come  upon  one,  in  the  meantime
I  reply  to  each  of  you  with  my  thoughts  upon  the  matter,
on  condition  that  if  you  discover  anything  better  and  more
probable  in  your  reading,  conversation,  or  by  your  medita
tions,  you  will  not  omit  to  share  it  with  me  in  turn.  You
ask,  then,  why  it  seemed  good  to  the  Fathers  to  decree
that  an  annual  commemoration,  with  veneration  equal  to
our  martyrs,  should  be  solemnly  made  in  the  Church,  by  a
certain  peculiar  privilege,  to  the  Maccabees  alone  out  of
all  the  ancient  saints  ?  If  I  should  say  that  having  made
proof  of  the  same  courage  as  those,  they  were  worthy  now
of  the  same  honours,  that  would,  perhaps,  answer  the
question  why  they  were  included,  but  not  why  they  alone
were;  while  it  is  quite  evident  that  there  were  others
amongst  the  ancients  who  suffered  with  equal  zeal  for
righteousness,  but  yet  have  not  attained  to  be  reverenced
with  equal  solemnities.  If  I  reply  that  the  latter  have  not
received  the  same  honours  as  our  martyrs  because,  although
their  valour  deserved  it,  the  time  when  they  lived  deprived
them  of  it,  why  was  not  the  same  consideration  applied
also  to  the  Maccabees,  if,  indeed,  they,  too,  on  account  of
the  era  when  they  lived,  did  not  at  once  enter  into  the
light  of  Heaven,  but  descended  into  the  darkness  of  Hades?
For  the  Firstbegotten  from  the  dead.  He  who  opened  to
believers  the  kingdom  of  Heaven,  the  Lamb  of  the  tribe  of
Juclah,  who  opens  and  no  more  shuts,  at  Whose  entrance
with  complete  authority  it  was  sung  by  the  heavenly
powers  :  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  yc  gates,  and  be  ye  lift  up
ye  everlasting  doors,  and  the  King  of  Glory  shall  come  in
(Ps.  xxiv.  7), — He  had  not  yet  appeared.  If  on  that

the  first  abbot  of  that  monastery ;  after  that,  on  the  advice  of  Bernard  and  of
Guy,  the  order  of  Regular  Canons  was  established  there  in  1128.  He  was
brought  from  the  Abbey  of  S.  Leo,  at  Toul.


336  LETTER XCVIII.

account  it  appears  unsuitable  to  commemorate  with  joy  the
passing  away  of  those  which  was  not  a  passage  of  glory
and  of  joy,  why  was  there  an  exception  made  for  the
Maccabees  ?  Or  if  they  obtained  favour  on  account  of  the
courage  which  they  displayed,  why  was  not  the  same
favour  extended  to  those  others  ?  Or  ought  it  to  be  said,
in  order  to  explain  this  difference,  that  if  the  martyrs  of  the
ancient  law,  as  well  as  those  of  the  new  law,  have  suffered
for  the  same  cause  of  religion,  yet  they  did  not  suffer  in
the  same  condition  with  those  who  have  attained  to  the
glory  of  martyrdom  ?  It  is  agreed  that  all  the  martyrs,
whether  of  the  Old  or  the  New  Testament,  equally  suffered
for  the  sake  of  religion  ;  but  there  is  a  distinction,  because
the  one  class  suffered  because  they  held  it,  the  other
because  they  censured  those  who  held  it  not ;  the  one
because  they  would  not  desert  it,  the  other  because  they
declared  that  those  would  perish  who  deserted  it,  and  to
sum  up  in  a  word,  that  in  which  the  two  differ,  perseverance
in  the  faith  has  done  in  our  martyrs  that  which  zeal  for  the
faith  has  done  in  those  of  the  ancient  law.  The  Maccabees
are  alone  among  the  ancient  martyrs,  because  they
possessed  not  only  the  same  cause  as  the  new  martyrdom,
but  also,  as  I  have  said,  the  form  of  it ;  and  rightly,  there
fore,  they  have  attained  the  same  glory  and  fame  as  the
new  martyrs  of  the  Church.  For  like  our  martyrs,  they
were  urged  to  pour  libations  to  false  gods,  to  renounce  the
law  of  their  fathers,  and  even  to  transgress  the  command
ments  of  God,  and  like  them  they  resisted  and  died.

2.  Not  so  did  Isaiah  or  Zecharias,  or  even  that  great
prophet,  John  the  Baptist,  die  ;  of  whom  the  first  is  said  to
have  been  sawn  asunder,  the  second  slain  between  the
temple  and  the  altar  (S.  Matt,  xxiii.  25),  and  the  third
beheaded  in  prison.  If  you  ask  by  whom?  It  was  by
the  wicked  and  irreligious.  For  what  cause?  For  justice
and  religion.  In  what  manner  ?  For  confessing  and  openly
upholding  these.  They  openly  upheld  the  truth  before
those  who  hated  it,  and  thus  drew  upon  themselves  the
hatred  which  caused  their  death.  That  which  the  un-


LETTER XCVIII.  337

righteous  and  wicked  persecuted  was  not  so  much  religion
in  itself  as  those  who  brought  it  before  them,  nor  was
their  object  to  attack  the  righteousness  of  others,  but  to
remain  undisturbed  in  their  own  unrighteousness.  It  is
one  thing  to  seize  upon  the  good  things  of  another,  and
another  to  defend  one's  own  goods  ;  to  persecute  the  truth,
and  not  to  be  willing  to  follow  it  one's  self;  to  grudge  at
believers,  and  to  be  angry  at  their  reproofs  ;  to  stop  the
mouth  of  those  who  confess  their  faith,  and  not  to  be  able
to  bear  patiently  the  taunts  of  those  who  contradict.  Thus
Herod  sent  and  seized  John.  Wherefore  !  Because  he
preached  Christ,  or  because  he  was  a  good  and  just  man  ?
On  the  contrary,  he  reverenced  him  the  more  on  this
account,  and  having  heard  him,  did  many  things.  But  it
was  because  John  reproached  Herod  because  of  Herodias,
his  brother  Philip's  wife  ;  on  that  account  he  was  bound
and  beheaded ;  no  doubt  he  suffered  for  the  truth,  but
because  he  urged  its  interests  with  zeal,  not  because  he
was  urged  to  deny  it.  This  is  why  the  suffering  of  so
great  a  martyr  is  observed  with  less  solemnity  than  those
even  of  far  less  famous  men.

3.  It  is  certain  that  if  the  Maccabees  had  suffered  in
such  a  matter,  and  for  such  a  reason  as  S.  John,  there  would
not  have  been  any  mention  of  them  at  all.  But  a  confes
sion  of  the  truth,  not  unlike  that  of  the  Christian  martyrs,
made  them  like  those ;  and  rightly,  therefore,  a  similar
veneration  follows.  Let  it  not  be  objected  that  they  did
not,  like  our  martyrs,  suffer  for  Christ  expressly  by  name ;
because  it  does  not  affect  his  status  as  a  martyr  whether
a  person  suffers  under  the  Law,  on  behalf  of  the  observances
of  the  Lawr,  or  under  grace  for  the  commandments  of  the
Gospel.  For  it  is  recognized  that  each  of  these  equally
suffers  for  the  truth,  and,  therefore,  for  Christ,  who  said  :  I  am
the  Truth  (S.  John  xiv.  6).  Therefore  the  Maccabees  are
more  deserving  of  the  honours  that  have  been  conferred
upon  them  for  the  kind  of  their  martyrdom  than  for  the
valour  displayed  in  it,  since  we  clo  not  see  that  the  Church
has  decreed  such  honour  to  the  righteous  of  a  former  time,

VOL.  I.  22


338  LETTER XCVIII.

although  they  have  displayed  equal  courage  on  behalf  of
righteousness,  for  the  time  in  which  they  lived.  I  suppose
that  it  was  thought  unfit  to  appoint  a  day  of  festival  for
a  death,  however  laudable,  before  the  Death  of  Christ,
especially  since  before  that  saving  Passion  those  who  died,
instead  of  entering  into  joy  and  glory  endured  the  dark
ness  of  the  prison-house.  The  Church  then,  as  I  said
above,  considered  that  an  exception  should  be  made  in
favour  of  the  Maccabees,  since  the  nature  of  their  martyr
dom  conferred  upon  them  what  the  time  of  their  suffering
denied  to  others.

4.  Nor  them  only,  but  those  also  who  preceded  in  their
death,  the  Death  of  Him  who  was  the  Life  manifest  in  the
flesh,  either  dying  during  His  life,  as  Simeon  and  John  the
Baptist,  or  for  Him,  as  the  Innocents,  we  venerate  with
solemn  rites,  although  they,  too,  descended  into  Hades ;  but
for  another  reason.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  the  Innocents,  it
would  be  unjust  to  deprive  innocence  dying  on  behalf  of
righteousness  of  fame  even  in  the  present.  John  also,
knowing  that  from  his  day  the  kingdom  of  heaven  suffered
violence,  therefore  proclaimed,  Do  penitence,  for  the  king
dom  of  heaven  is  at  hand  (S.  Matt.  iii.  2,  VULG.)  ;  and,  seeing
that  the  Life  would  immediately  follow  him,  endured  death
with  joy.  He,  before  his  death,  was  careful  to  inquire  from
the  Lord  Himself  respecting  this,  and  had  the  happiness  to
be  informed  of  it.  For  when  he  sent  his  disciples  to  ask  of
Jesus  Art  Thou  He  that  should  come,  or  are  we  to  look  for
another?  he  received  for  answer,  after  the  enumeration  of
very  many  miracles,  And  blessed  is  he  who  shall  not  be
offended  in  me  (S.  Matt.  xi.  3-6).  In  which  answer  the
Lord  intimated  that  He  \vas  about  to  die,  and  by  such  a
death  as  might  be  to  the  Jews  a  stumbling  block  and  to  the
Greeks  foolishness.  At  this  word  the  friend  of  the  Bride
groom  went  onward  rejoicing  and  with  a  willing  mind,
because  he  could  not  doubt  that  the  Bridegroom  also  would
speedily  come.  Therefore  he  who  so  joyfully  could  die
merited  also  to  be  held  in  joyful  remembrance.  And  that
old  man,  too,  as  full  of  virtues  as  of  days,  who  when  death


LETTER XCVI1I.


339


was  already  so  near  said,  holding  in  his  arms  Him  who  was
the  Life,  Now  lettcst  Thou  TJiy  servant  depart  in  peace,
for  mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation  (S.  Luke  ii.  29,  30),
as  if  he  had  said,  /  go  down  without  fear  into  Hades,
because  I  feel  that  my  redemption  is  so  nigh ;  he,  too,
\vho  died  with  such  fearless  joy  and  such  joyful  security
rightly  deserves  to  be  commemorated  with  joy  in  the
Church.

5.  But  on  what  principle  shall  a  death  be  accounted
joyful  which  is  not  accompanied  by  the  joys  of  heaven?
or  from  whence  should  a  dying  person  derive  joy  who  was
sure  that  he  was  going  down  into  the  darkness  of  the  prison-
house,  and  yet  did  not  bear  with  him  any  certitude,  how  soon
the  consolation  of  a  deliverer  thence  should  come  to  him  ?
Thus  it  was  that  when  one  of  the  saints  heard  Set  thy  house
in  order,  for  thoushalt  die,  and  not  live,  he  turned  himself
to  the  wall  and  wept  bitterly,  and  so  asked  and  obtained
some  deferring  of  hateful  death.  Thus  also  he  lamented
miserably,  saying,  I  shall  go  to  the  gates  of  the  grave  ;  I
am  deprived  of  the  half  of  my  days  (Is.  xxxviii.  10)  ;  and  a
little  after  added,  /  shall  not  see  the  Lord  in  the  land  of
the  living :  I  shall  behold  man  no  more  with  the  inhabi
tants  of  the  world  (Is.  xxxviii.  n).  Hence  also  another
says  :  Who  shall  grant  me  that  Thou  wouldest  protect  me
in  the  grave,  that  Thou  wouldest  keep  me  secret  until  Thy
wrath  be  passed ;  that  Thou  wouldest  appoint  me  a  set
time  and  remember  me?  (Job  xiv.  13).  Israel  also  said  to
his  sons,  Ye  will  bring  down  my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to
the  grave  (Gen.  xlii.  38).  What  appearance  is  there  in
these  deaths,  of  solemn  joy,  of  rejoicing  and  festival  ?

6.  But  our  martyrs  desire  to  be  unclothed  and  be  with
Christ,  knowing  well  that  where  the  Body  is  there  without
delay  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together.  There  will  the
righteous  rejoice  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  be  in  joy  and
felicity.  There,  there,  O  most  blessed  Jesus,  shall  every
saint  who  is  delivered  from  this  wicked  world  be  filled
speedily  with  the  joy  of  Thy  countenance.  There  in  the
habitations  of  the  just  resounds  for  ever  one  song  of  joy


340  LETTER XCVIII.

and  salvation:  Our  soul  is  delivered  as  a  bird  out  of  the
net  of  the  fowler  :  the  net  is  broken  and  we  are  delivered
(Ps.  cxxiv.  7).  How  could  those  sing  this  song  of  gladness
who  in  Hades  sat  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death,
while  as  yet  there  was  no  Redeemer  for  them,  no  Saviour ;
while  the  Sun  rising  from  on  high,  Christ  the  first  fruits  of
them  that  slept,  had  not  yet  visited  us  ?  Rightly,  then,
does  the  Church,  who  has  learnt  to  rejoice  with  them  that
rejoice  and  to  weep  with  them  that  weep,  distinguish,
because  of  the  time  at  which  they  lived,  between  those
whom  she  judges  equal  in  valour:  and  does  not  think  the
descent  into  Hades  proper  to  be  followed  with  equal  honour
as  is  the  passage  into  life.

7.  Therefore,  though  the  motive  makes  martyrdom,  yet
the  time  and  the  nature  of  it  determine  the  difference
between  martyrdoms.  Thus  the  time  in  which  they  lived
separates  the  Maccabees  from  the  martyrs  of  the  new  law
and  joins  them  with  those  of  the  old  ;  but  the  nature  of
their  martyrdom  associates  them  with  the  new  and  divides
them  from  the  old.  From  these  causes  come  the  differences
of  observance  with  which  they  are  kept  in  memory  in  the
Church.  But  that  which  is  common  to  the  whole  company
of  the  Saints  before  God  is  what  the  holy  prophet  declares  :
Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  Pits  saints
(Ps.  cxvi.  15).  And  why  he  calls  it  precious  he  explains
to  us :  When  He  has  given  sleep  to  His  beloved,  behold,
children,  the  heritage  of  the  Lord ;  His  reward,  the  fruit
of  the  womb  (Ps.  cxxvii.  3).  Nor  must  we  think  that
martyrs  alone  are  beloved,  since  wTe  remember  that  it  was
said  of  Lazarus,  Our  friend  Lazarus  sleeps  (S.  John  xi.
u),  and  elsewhere,  Blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in  the
Lord  (Apoc.  xiv.  13).  Not  those  alone  who  die  for  the
Lord,  like  the  martyrs,  but  without  doubt  those  also  who
die  in  the  Lord  as  confessors  are  blessed.  There  are  two
things,  as  it  seems  to  me,  which  make  death  precious,  the
life  which  precedes  it  and  the  cause  for  which  it  is  en
dured  ;  but  more  the  cause  than  the  life.  But  when  both
the  cause  and  the  life  concur  that  is  the  most  precious  of  alL


LETTER XCIX.  341

LETTER XCIX.

TO A CERTAIN MONK.1

Bernard  writes  that  he  had  been  anxious  because  of  the
rumoured  departure  of  this  monk  from  his  convent,  and
that  he  had  been  freed  from  such  fear  by  his  letter.

The  messenger  by  whom  you  say  that  you  have  been  dis
turbed  was  sent  by  Brother  William  in  your  interest,  and
not  in  his  own.  He,  indeed,  by  the  grace  of  God,  acts
bravely,  as  he  is  wont,  and  does  not  merit  so  far  that  that
declaration  should  be  applied  to  him :  A  double-minded
man  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways  (S.  James  i.  8).  He  walks
simply  and  faithfully  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  and  does  not
fear  that  woe  that  is  spoken  :  Woe  be  to  the  sinner  that
goeth  two  ways  (Ecclus.  ii.  12).  For  we  had  heard  that  you,
being  mixed  up  in  a  dispute,  had  left  your  convent,  to  the
grave  scandal  of  your  abbot  and  your  brethren,  and  were
living  alone  in,  I  know  not  what  unsuitable  place.  Being
greatly  distressed  by  this  rumour,  I  ask  myself,  with  anxiety,
in  what  way  I  could  be  of  service  to  you,  and  nothing  oc
curred  to  me  to  do  better  than  to  beg  you  to  come  to  see
me  so  as  to  make  me  aware  of  what  had  passed  about  your
self,  so  that  I  might,  without  delay,  counsel  you  by  word  of
mouth.  But  since  my  letter  and  your  reply  have  put  to
flight  the  fears  and  suspicions  which  were  in  the  mind  of
each  of  us,  let  us  say  nothing  more  of  the  matter.  It  has
been  shown,  at  all  events,  by  this  false  report,  how  true  is
the  mutual  affection  between  us ;  and  I  think  that  this
affection  has  been  not  unfruitfully  renewed  by  our  mutual
anxiety;  I  should  hope  that  we  might  taste  this  fruit  far
more  fully  if  leave  and  opportunity  were  given  you  to  pay
me  a  visit.  Otherwise  it  were  better  that  I  should  still  be
content  without  seeing  you  rather  than  enjoy  your  presence
at  a  time  when  it  is  unsuitable  or  inconvenient  to  you.

1  In  many  MSS.  the  four  Letters  which  follow  have  no  other  title  than  this,
Concerning  the  same  sul-ject,  viz.,  the  Maccabees,  which  is  false.  William,  of
whom  mention  is  made  at  the  beginning  of  the  Letter,  was  that  monk  of  Clair-
vaux  who  is  referred  to  in  Letter  103.


342  LETTER C.

LETTER C.

TO A CERTAIN BlSHOP.

Bernard  praises  his  liberality  and  kindness  towards  poor

Religious.

o

If  I  were  less  acquainted  with  your  zeal  for  undertaking
a  work  of  such  importance  I  should  urge  and  entreat  you  to
it.  But  now,  since  your  piety  has  anticipated  my  inten
tion,  it  only  remains  to  me  to  give  thanks  to  Him,  from
whom  all  good  things  proceed,  for  having  put  into  your
heart  to  wish  this  good,  and  to  pray  Him  to  add  to  it,  that
you  may  bring  to  perfection  that  which  you  have  piously
desired.  Yet  I  cannot  hide  from  you  my  joy,  nor  dissimu
late  the  pleasure  which  your  good  intentions  inspire  in  me.
My  soul  will  be  delighted  to  the  full  if  I  could  know  that
you  are  untiring  in  edifying  and  honourable  pursuits.  For
I  rejoice,  not  because  I  seek  a  gift,  but  because  I  require
fruit.  I  willingly  accept  a  benefit  which  profits  the  giver,
otherwise  I  should  not  walk  in  that  charity  which  seeketh
not  her  own  (i  Cor.  xiii.  5).  And,  indeed,  your  gifts  are
profitable  to  me,  but  more  to  you,  according  to  that  declara
tion  :  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive  (Acts  xx.
35).  This  liberality  is  befitting  a  Bishop  ;  it  is  the  glory  of
your  priesthood,  it  adorns  your  crown,  and  ennobles  your
dignity.  If  the  charge  he  holds  forbids  a  person  to  be  poor
let  his  conduct  show  that  he  is  a  lover  of  the  poor.  For  it
is  not  poverty,  but  the  love  of  poverty,  which  is  counted  a
virtue ;  and  it  is  said,  Blessed  are  the  poor,  not  in  worldly
wealth,  but  in  spirit  (S.  Matt.  v.  3).


LETTER CI.

To  CERTAIN  MONKS.

Bernard  asks  that  a  monk  who  had  departed  without  per
mission  should  be  received  with  kindness.
I  send  back  to  you  Brother  Lambert,  whom  I  received,  in
some  respects  wavering  in  mind,  but  to  whom  your  prayers


LETTER CI.  343

have  restored  calm,  so  that  he  is  not,  as  I  think,  labouring
any  more  under  his  former  scrupulosity.  I  have  carefully
questioned  him  about  the  cause  of  his  coming,  and  also
about  the  reason  and  manner  of  his  departure.  He  does
not  seem  to  me  to  have  had  any  bad  intention  in  acting  as
he  has  done  ;  but  his  reason  for  leaving  in  such  a  manner,
that  is,  without  permission,  was  plainly  insufficient.  I  took
occasion  from  this  to  blame  him  as  he  deserved,  to  chide
him  sharply,  to  remove  his  hesitations  and  doubts,  and  to
persuade  him  to  return  to  you.  Now  that  he  is  returning,
I  entreat  you,  my  very  dear  brethren,  to  receive  him  kindly,
and  to  be  indulgent  to  the  presumption  of  a  brother  in
which  there  is  more  simplicity  than  malice,  since  he  turned
neither  to  the  right  nor  left,  but  came  straight  to  me,  whom
he  knew  for  certain  to  be  the  devoted  servant  of  your  Holi
ness,  a  very  sincere  lover  and  faithful  imitator  of  your  piety.
Receive  him,  therefore,  you  who  are  spiritual  men,  in  a
spirit  of  gentleness  ;  let  your  charity  be  confirmed  towards
him,  and  let  his  good  intention  excuse  his  bad  action.
Therefore,  receive  him  back  with  joy,  whom,  when  lost,  you
grieved  for;  and  let  gladness  at  the  return  of  your  brother
speedily  chase  away  the  grief  caused  by  his  transgression
and  departure.  I  trust  that,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  all  the
bitterness  which  his  irregular  departure  occasioned  will  be
soon  softened  by  this  improvement  in  his  life.


LETTER CII.

TO A CERTAIN ABBOT.

Bernard  advises  that  all  possible  means  should  be  tried
to  correct  a  refractory  monk,  but  that,  if  incorrigible,  he
should  be  expelled ,  lest  lie  should  infect  others  by  his  com
pany.

i.  Respecting  the  brother  who  is  disorderly  and  dis
orders  others,  nor  respects  the  authority  of  his  superior,  I
give  you  brief  but  faithful  advice.  It  is  the  occupation  of
the  devil  to  go  about  in  the  House  of  God  and  seek  whom  he


344  LETTER CII.

may  devour  ;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  task  committed  to
your  watchfulness,  never  as  far  as  you  are  able,  to  give
place  to  the  devil.  The  more  efforts  he  makes  then  to
separate  from  the  flock  a  poor  little  sheep  that  he  may  draw
it  away  the  more  easily  whither  there  will  be  none  to  de
liver  it  from  him,  the  more  strenuously,  as  far  as  in  you
lies,  ought  you  to  resist,  that  the  enemy  may  not  be  able  to
snatch  it  from  your  arms,  and  say  I  have  prevailed  against
him.  Have  recourse,  then,  in  order  to  save  that  brother,  to
every  office  of  charity  ;  spare  neither  kindnesses,  good  ad
vice,  private  reprimands,  nor  public  remonstrances,  even
the  sharp  correction  of  words  and,  if  necessary,  blows,  but,
above  all,  what  is  usually  more  efficacious,  the  pious  inter
cessions  of  yourself  and  your  brethren  to  God  for  him.

2.  But  if,  when  you  have  done  all  these  things  you  have
no  success,  you  are  bound  to  follow  the  counsel  of  the
Apostle  when  he  says,  Put  away  from  among  yourselves
that  wicked  person  (i  Cor.  v.  13).  Let  the  wicked  man  be
taken  away,  that  he  may  not  make  others  wicked,  for  an
evil  tree  can  bear  only  evil  fruit.  I  say  that  he  should  be
taken  away,  but  not  in  the  manner  that  he  himself  wishes  ;
nor  should  he  suppose  that  he  can  be  permitted  to  live  with
your  license  away  from  the  community,  against  his  profes
sion  avoiding  obedience,  under  his  own  authority,  and  that
according  to  the  law1  and  with  conscience  wrongly  at  ease  ;
but  he  should  be  cut  off,  as  a  diseased  sheep  is  parted  from
the  flock,  as  a  gangrened  limb  from  the  body  ;  and  in  going
forth  he  should  be  made  to  know  for  certain  that  he  will  be
held  by  you  as  a  heathen  man  and  a  publican.  And  do  not
fear  that  you  will  act  against  charity  if  you  provide  for  the
peace  of  many  by  the  expulsion  of  one — of  one  whose

1  The  discipline  for  refractory  monks  differed  in  various  times  and  places.  The
Rule  of  S.  Benedict  (capp.  28  and  29)  ordered  that  they  should  be  expelled.  The
Council  of  Cloveshoo,  A.D.  747,  in  Can.  24,  decided  that  this  should  not  he  done
except  by  the  decree  of  a  synod.  Another  method  was  pursued  towards  nuns.
One  was  expelled  from  the  convent  of  S.  Peter,  at  Metz,  her  veil  having  been
taken  from  her.  By  Can.  9  of  a  Synod  at  Metz  such  a  person  was  to  be  brought
back  and  "  placed  in  a  dungeon  within  the  monastery.''  In  the  twelfth  century
regular  canons  were  expelled.  (See  Stephen  of  Tournay,  Let.  38).


LETTER  cm.  345

malice  may  easi'y  destroy  the  peace  of  many  brethren  who
dwell  together.  Let  that  declaration  of  Solomon  console
you,  ATo  one  can  correct  that  person  whom  God  leaves  alone
(Eccles.  vii.  13),  and  that  of  the  Saviour,  Every  plantation
which  My  Father  hath  not  planted  shall  be  rooted  up  (S.
Matt.  xv.  13),  and  that  of  S.  John  the  Evangelist  concerning
schismatics,  They  went  out  from  its,  because  they  -were  not
of  us  (i  S.  John  ii.  19),  and  that  from  the  Apostle,  If  the
unbelieving  depart,  let  him  depart  (i  Cor.  vii.  15).  Other
wise  the  rod  of  the  wicked  ought  not  to  be  left  over  the  lot
of  the  righteous,  lest  the  righteous  put  forth  their  hand  unto
wickedness.  For  it  is  better  that  one  member  should  perish
than  the  whole  community.1


LETTER CIII.
To  THE  BROTHER  OF  WILLIAM,  A  MONK  OK  CLAiRVAUx.'2

Bernard,  after  having  made  a  striking  commendation  of

religious  poverty,  reproaches  in  him  an  affection too  great

for  worldly  tilings,  to  the  detriment  of  t he  poor  and  of  his

own  soul, so  that he  preferred  to  yield  them  up  only  to

death,  rather  than  for  t/ie  love  of  Christ.

i .  Although  you  are  unknown  to  me  by  face,  and  although
distant  from  me  in  body,  yet  you  are  my  friend,  and  this
friendship  between  us  makes  you  to  be  present  and  familiar
to  me.  It  is  not  flesh  and  blood,  but  the  Spirit  of  God
which  has  prepared  for  you,  though  without  your  knowledge,
this  friendship,  which  has  united  your  brother  William  and
me  with  a  lasting  bond  of  spiritual  affection,  which  includes
you,  too,  through  him,  if  you  think  it  worth  acceptance.
And  if  you  are  wise  you  will  not  despise  the  friendship  of

1  On  the  question  whether  a monastery  has  the  right  of  expelling an  in
corrigible monk,  consult Haeften  in  Distjuisitionit-us JMonasticis, Menard,  and
Edmund  Martene  in  his  Commentaries  upon  the  Rule.

2  Such  of  the  title  of  the  Letter  in  two  Vatican  MSS.  and  in  certain  others.
In  those  of  Citeaux  it  is  inscribed  Letter  of  exhortation  to  a  friend. But  at  the
end  of  Letter 106  I  conjecture  the  reference  to  be  to  Ivo,  who  signs  it  with
"William.


346  LETTER  cm.

those  whom  the  Truth  declares  blessed,  and  calls  kings  of
heaven  ;  which  blessedness  we  would  not  envy  to  you,  nor
if  communicated  to  you  would  it  be  diminished  to  us,  nor
would  our  boundaries  be  at  all  narrowed  if  you  should  reign
over  them  too.  For  what  cause  can  there  be  for  envy  where
the  multitude  of  those  who  share  a  blessing  takes  nothing
from  the  greatness  of  the  share  which  each  enjoys  ?  I  wish
you  to  be  the  friend  of  the  poor,  but  especially  their  imi
tator.  The  one  is  the  grade  of  beginner,  the  other  of  the
perfect,  for  the  friendship  of  the  poor  makes  us  the  friend
of  kings,  but  the  love  of  poverty  makes  us  kings  ourselves .
The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  the  kingdom  of  the  poor,  and
one  of  the  marks  of  royal  power  is  to  do  good  to  friends
according  to  our  will.  Make  to  yourselves  friends,  it  is
said,  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness,  that  "when  yc
fail  they  may  receive  you  into  everlasting  habitations  (S.
Luke  xvi.  9).  You  see  what  a  high  dignity  sacred  poverty
is,  so  that  not  only  does  it  not  seek  protection  for  itself,  but
extends  it  to  those  who  need.  What  a  power  is  this,  to
approach  by  one's  self  to  the  Throne  of  God  without  the
intervention  of  any,  whether  angels  or  men,  with  simple
confidence  in  the  Divine  favour,  thus  reaching  the  summit
of  existence,  the  height  of  all  glory  !

2.  But  would  that  you,  without  pretence,  would  consider
how  you  hinder  your  own  attainment  of  these  advantages.
Alas  !  that  a  vapour  which  appears  but  for  a  moment  should
block  up  the  entrance  to  eternal  glory,  hide  from  you  the
clearness  of  the  unbounded  and  everlasting  light,  prevent
you  from  recognizing  the  true  nature  of  things,  and  deprive
you  of  the  highest  degree  of  glory  !  How  long  will  you
prefer  to  such  glory  the  grass  of  the  field,  which  to  day  is,
and  to-morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven  ?  I  mean  carnal  and
worldly  glory.  For  all  flesh  is  grass,  and  its  glory  as  the
flower  of  the  field  (Is.  xl.  6).  If  you  are  wise,  if  you  have
a  heart  to  feel  and  eyes  to  see,  cease  to  pursue  those
things  which  it  is  misery  to  attain.  Happy  is  he  who
does  not  toil  at  all  after  those  things,  which  when
possessed  are  a  burden,  when  loved  a  defilement,  and


LETTER CIV.  347

when  lost  a  torment.  Will  it  not  be  better  to  have
the  honour  to  renounce  them  than  the  vexation  to  lose
them  ?  Or  will  it  be  more  prudent  to  yield  them  up  for  the
love  of  Christ  than  to  have  them  taken  away  by  death  ? —
death,  which  is  a  robber  lying  in  wait  for  you,  into  whose
hands  you  cannot  help  falling,  with  all  that  belongs  to  you.
When  he  shall  do  so  you  cannot  foresee,  because  he  will
come  as  a  thief  in  the  night.  You  brought  nothing  into
this  world,  and  it  is  certain  you  can  carry  nothing  out  (i
Tim.  vi.  7).  You  shall  sleep  your  sleep,  and  find  nothing
in  your  hands.  But  these  things  you  know  well,  and  it
would  be  superfluous  laboriously  to  teach  them  to  you.
Rather  I  will  pray  God  that  you  may  have  the  grace  to
fulfil  in  practice  what  it  has  been  given  you  already  to
know.


LETTER CIV.

To  MAGISTER  x  WALTER  DE  CHAUMONT.

He  exhorts  him  to  flee  from  the  world,  advising  him  to
prefer  the  cause  and  the  interests  of  his  soul  to  those  of
parents.

MY  DEAR  WALTER,

I  often  grieve  my  heart  about  you  whenever  the
most  pleasant  remembrance  of  you  comes  back  to  me,
seeing  how  you  consume  in  vain  occupations  the  flower  of
your  youth,  the  sharpness  of  your  intellect,  the  store  of  your
learning  and  skill,  and  also,  what  is  more  excellent  in  a
Christian  than  all  of  these  gifts,  the  pure  and  innocent
character  which  distinguishes  you  ;  since  you  use  so  great
endowments  to  serve  not  Christ  their  giver,  but  things
transitory.  What  if  (which  God  forbid  !)  a  sudden  death
should  seize  and  shatter  at  a  stroke  all  those  gifts  of  yours,

1  S.  Bernard  usually  designates  thus  Doctors  and  Professors  of  Belles
I.ettres.  See  Letters  77,  (06,  and  others.  It  is  thus  that  in  the  Spicilegium  iii.  pp.
137,  140,  Thomas  d'Etampes  is  called  sometimes  Magister,  sometimes  Doctor,
In  a  MS.  at  the  Vatican  we  read,  "To  Magister  Gaucher."


34-8  LETTER CIV.

as  it  were  with  the  rush  of  a  burning  and  raging  wind,  just
like  the  winds  whirl  about  and  dry  grass  or  as  the  leaves  of
herbs  quickly  fall.  What,  then,  will  you  carry  with  you  of  all
your  labour  which  you  have  wrought  upon  the  earth  ?  What
return  will  you  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  the  benefits
that  He  hath  done  unto  you  ?  What  gain  will  you  bring
unto  your  creditor  for  those  many  talents  committed  to  you  ?
If  He  shall  find  your  hand  empty,  who,  though  a  liberal
bestower  of  His  gifts,  exacts  a  strict  account  of  their  use  !
"  For  he  that  shall  come  will  come  and  will  not  tarry,  and
will  require  that  which  is  His  own  with  usury."  For  He
claims  all  as  His  own,  which  seems  to  ennoble  you  in  your
land,  with  favours  full  at  once  of  dignity  and  of  danger

O  J  O

Noble  parentage,  sound  health,  elegance  of  person,  quick
apprehension,  useful  knowledge,  uprightness  of  life,  are
glorious  things,  indeed,  but  they  are  His  from  whom  they
are.  If  you  use  them  for  yourself  "there  is  One  who
seekethand  judgeth."

2.  But  be  it  so  ;  suppose  that  you  may  for  a  while  call  these
things  yours,  and  boast  in  the  praise  they  bring  you,  and  be
called  of  men  Rabbi  and  make  for  yourself  a  great  name,
though  only  upon  the  earth  ;  what  shall  be  left  to  you  after
death  of  all  these  things  ?  Scarcely  a  remembrance  alone—
and  that,  too,  only  upon  earth.  For  it  is  written,  They  have
slept  their  sleep,  and  all  the  men  whose  hands  were  mighty
have  found  nothing.  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  5).  If  this  be  the  end  of  all
your  labours — allow  me  to  say  so — what  have  you  more
than  a  beast  of  burden  ?  Indeed,  it  will  be  said  even  of
your  palfrey  when  he  is  dead  that  he  was  good.  Look  to
it,  then,  how  you  must  answer  it  before  that  terrible  judg
ment  throne  if  you  have  received  your  soul  in  vain,  and
such  a  soul !  if  you  are  found  to  have  done  nothing  more  with

*  O

your  immortal  and  reasonable  soul  than  some  beast  with
his.  For  the  soul  of  a  brute  lives  no  longer  than  the  body
which  it  animates,  and  at  one  and  the  same  moment  it  both
ceases  to  give  life  and  to  live.  Of  what  will  you  deem
yourself  worthy,  who,  being  made  in  the  image  of  your
Creator,  do  not  guard  the  dignity  of  so  great  a  majesty?


LETTER CIV.  349

And  being  a  man,1  but  not  understanding  your  honour,  art
compared  unto  the  foolish  beasts  and  made  like  unto  them,
seeing  that  forsooth,  you  labour  at  nothing  of  a  spiritual  or
eternal  nature,  but,  like  the  spirit  of  a  beast  which  as  soon
as  it  is  loosed  from  the  body  is  dissolved  with  the  body,
have  been  content  to  think  of  nothing  but  material  and
temporal  goods,  turning  a  deaf  ear  to  the  Gospel  precept :
Labour  not  for  the  meat  that  per isheth,  but  for  that  meat
which  endureth  unto  everlasting  life  (S.  John  vi.  27).  But
you  know  well  that  it  is  written  that  only  he  ascends  into
the  hill  of  the  Lord  who  hath  not  Lift  up  his  mind  unto
vanity  (Ps.  xxiv.  ^).~  And  not  even  he  except  he  hath  clean
hands  and  a  pure  heart.  I  leave  you  to  decide  if  you
dare  to  claim  this  of  your  deeds  and  thoughts  at  the  present.
But  if  you  are  not  able  to  do  so,  judge  what  is  the  reward
of  iniquity,  if  mere  unfruitfulness  is  enough  for  damnation.
And,  indeed,  the  thorn  or  thistle  will  not  be  safe  when  the
axe  shall  be  seen  laid  to  the  root  of  the  fruit  tree,  nor
will  He  spare  the  thorn  which  stings,  who  threatens  even
the  barren  plant.  Woe,  then ;  aye  !  double  woe  to  him  of
whom  it  shall  be  said,  /  looked  that  he  should  bring  forth
grapes,  and  he  hath  brought  forth  wild  grapes  (Is.  v.  4).

3.  But  I  know  how  freely  and  fully  you  can  nourish
these  thoughts,  though  I  be  silent,  but  yet  I  know  that,  con
strained  by  love  of  your  mother,  you  are  not  as  yet  able  to
abandon  what  you  have  long  known  how  to  despise.  What
answer  shall  I  make  to  you  in  this  matter  ?  That  you
should  leave  your  mother?  That  seems  inhuman.  That
you  should  remain  with  her?  But  what  a  misery  for  her  to
be  a  cause  of  ruin  to  her  son  !  That  you  should  fight  at
once  for  the  world  and  for  Christ?  But  no  man  can  serve
two  masters.  Your  mother's  wish  being  contrary  to  your
salvation  is  equally  so  to  her  own.  Choose,  therefore,  of
these  two  alternatives  which  you  will ;  either,  that  is,  to
secure  the  wish  of  one  or  the  salvation  of  both.  But  if  you

1  Some  add "in honour"  from  Ps.  xlviii.,  but  it  is  wanting  in the  3VISS.,
and  certainly  is  redundant  here.

2  Hath  not  received  it  in  vain,  VULG.


350  LETTER CV.

love  her  much,  have  the  courage  to  leave  her  for  her  sake,
lest  if  you  leave  Christ  to  remain  with  her  she  also
perish  on  your  account.  Else  you  have  ill-served  her  who
bare  you  if  she  perish  on  your  account.  For  how  doth  she
escape  destruction  who  hath  ruined  him  whom  she  bare?
And  I  have  spoken  this  in  order  in  some  way  to  stoop  to
assist  your  somewhat  worldly  affection.  Moreover,  it  is  a
faithful  saying  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  although  it  is
impious  to  despise  a  mother,  yet  to  despise  her  for  Christ's
sake  is  most  pious.  For  He  who  said,  Honour  thy  father  and
mother  (S.  Matt.  xv.  4),  Himself  also  said,  He  who  loveth
father  or  motlicr  more  than  Me  is  not  worthy  of  Me  (S.
Matt.  x.  37).

LETTER CV.

To  ROMANUS,  SUB-DEACON  OF  THE  ROMAN  CURIA.

He urges upon him the  proposal  of  the religious  life,
recalling  the  thought  of  death.

BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  to  his  dear  ROMANUS,  as
to  his  friend.

MY  DEAREST  FRIEND,

How  good  you  are  to  me  in  renewing  by  a  letter  the
sweet  recollection  of  yourself  and  in  excusing  my  tiresome
delay.  It  is  not  possible  that  any  forgetfulness  of  your
affection  could  ever  invade  the  hearts  of  those  who  love
you  ;  but,  I  confess,  I  thought  you  had  almost  forgotten
yourself  until  I  saw  your  letter.  So  now  no  more  delays ;
fulfil  quickly  the  promise  that  you  have  written ;  and  if
your  pen  truly  expresses  your  purpose,  let  your  acts
correspond  to  it.  Why  do  you  delay  to  give  birth  to  that
spirit  of  salvation  which  you  have  so  long  conceived  ?
Nothing  is  more  certain  to  mortals  than  death,  nothing
more  uncertain  than  the  hour  of  death,  since  it  is  to  come
upon  us  as  a  thief  in  the  night.  Woe  unto  them  who  are
still  with  child  [of  that  good  intention]  in  that  day !  If  it
shall  anticipate  and  prevent  this  birth  of  salvation,  alas  !  it


LETTER CV.  351

will  pierce  through  the  house  and  destroy  the  holy  seed :
For  when  they  shall  say  Peace  and  safety,  then  sudden
destruction  shall  come  upon  them  as  travail  upon  a  woman
with  child,  and  they  shall  not  escape  (i  Thess.  v.  3).  I
wish  you  not  to  flee  from  death,  but  only  to  fear  it.  For
the  just,  though  he  avoids  it  not,  because  he  knows  that  it
is  inevitable,  yet  does  not  fear  it.  Moreover,  he  awaits  it  as
a  rest  (Wisdom  iv.  7)  and  receives  it  in  perfect  security ;
for  as  it  is  the  exit  from  the  present  life,  so  it  is  the  entrance
into  a  better.  Death  is  good  if  by  it  thou  die  to  sin,  that
thou  mayest  live  unto  righteousness.  It  is  necessary  that
this  death  should  go  before,  in  order  that  the  other  which
follows  after  may  be  safe.  In  this  life,  so  long  as  it  lasts,
prepare  for  yourself  that  life  which  lasts  for  ever.  While
you  live  in  the  flesh,  die  unto  the  world,  that  after  the
death  of  the  flesh  you  may  begin  to  live  unto  God.  For
what  if  death  rend  asunder  the  coarse  envelope1  of  your
body  so  long  as  from  that  moment  it  clothes  you  with  a
garment  of  joy  ?  O,  how  blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in
the  Lord  (Apoc.  xiv.  13),  for  they  hear  from  the  Spirit,
that  "  they  may  rest  from  their  labours."  And  not  only  so,
but  also  from  new  life  comes  pleasure,  and  from  eternity
safety.  Happy,  therefore,  is  the  death  of  the  just  because
of  its  rest ;  better  because  of  its  new  life,  best  because  of
its  safety  (Ps.  xxxiv.  21).  On  the  other  hand,  worst  of  all
is  the  death  of  sinners.  And  hear  why  worse.  It  is  bad,
indeed,  through  loss  of  the  world ;  it  is  worse  through
separation  from  the  flesh  ;  worst  of  all  through  double  pain
of  worm  and  fire.  Up,  then,  hasten  ;  go  forth  out  of  the
world,  and  renounce  it  entirely ;  let  your  soul  die  the  death
of  the  righteous,  that  your  last  end  also  may  be  like  His  :
Oh,  how  dear  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  His
saints  (Ps.  cxvi.  13).  Flee,  I  pray  you,  lest  you  stand  in
the  way  of  sinners.  How  canst  thou  live  where  thou  durst
not  die?2

1  Saccns.

2  A  familiar  figure  of  speech  with  Bernard. See  Letter  107,  §  13;  124,  §  2,
etc.


352  LETTER CVI.

LETTER CVI.

To  MAGISTER  HENRY  MuRDACH.1

He urges him to embrace the religious life, briefly
describing  its  delights.

O  <b

To  his  beloved  HENRY  MURDACH,  BERNARD,  called
Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  eternal  life.

i.  What  wonder  if  you  are  tossed  to  and  fro  by  the
waves  of  prosperity  and  adversity,  since  you  have  not  yet
set  your  feet  upon  the  rock  ?  But  if  you  are  quite  resolved
to  keep  the  righteous  judgments  of  the  Lord,  can  anything
sever  you  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  O,  if  you  only  knew,
and  if  I  were  able  to  convey  to  you  !  but  Eye  hath  not
seen,  without  Thee,  O  God,  the  things  that  Thou  hast
prepared  for  them  that  love  Thee  (Is.  Ixiv.  4).  But  you,
my  brother,  who,  as  I  hear,  read  the  prophets,  and  no  doubt
suppose  that  you  understand  the  sense  of  their  writings,  is
it  not  clear  to  you  if  you  understand  that  the  meaning  of
the  prophetic  declaration  refers  to  Christ?  And  if  you
desire  to  lay  hold  on  Him,  I  assure  you  that  you  can  attain
to  Him  sooner  by  following  Him  than  by  reading,  merely
reading  of  Him.  Why  do  you  seek  in  the  Word  written,
the  Word  who  is  already  here  before  your  eyes,  the  Word
made  flesh  ?  He  has  long  quitted  his  hiding-place  among
the  prophets  to  come  forth  before  the  eyes  of  Fishermen  ;
already  He  has  left  the  deep,  shady  hills  of  the  ancient  Law,
as  a  bridegroom  leaves  his  chamber,  and  has  leapt  forth  to
the  plain  of  the  Gospel.  Now  let  him  who  hath  ears  to
hear,  hear  Him  crying  in  the  Temple,  If  any  man  thirst,
let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink  (S.  John  vii.  37),  and

i  This  Henry  was  by  birth  an  Englishman,  and  master  of  a  school  in  England.
Among  His  disciples  were  William  and  Ivo,  as  appears  from  the  end  of  the
epistle.  He  yielded  at  length  to  the  exhortations  of  Bernard,  and  became  a
monk  of  Clairvaux  ;  afterwards  he  was  Abbot  of  Vauclaire,  and  then  third
Abbot  of  Fountains,  in  England  (see  Letters  320  and  331);  and,  lastly,  after
the  deposition  of  the  Treasurer,  William,  by  Eugenius  III.,  Archbishop  of  York,
on  which  subject  several  letters  occur  below.  See  also  William  of  Newburgh,
B.  i.  c.  17  ;  Roger  Hoveden,  under  the  year  1140;  Robert  du  Mont,  Appendix  to
Sigebert.


LETTER CVI.  353

Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden  and
I  will  refresh  you  (S.  Matt.  xi.  28).  Do  you,  then,  fear  to
fail  where  Truth  promises  to  sustain  you?  Surely  if  the
storm-rain  from  the  clouds  of  heaven  so  delights  you,  how
much  sweeter  will  be  the  draught  that  you  may  draw  from
the  pure  fountains  of  the  Saviour?

2.  If  you could once  for  a  moment  taste  of  that  bread
with  which  Jerusalem is satisfied, how  gladly  you  would
leave  your  dry  crusts  for  Jewish  scholars  to  gnaw  ! How
happy  should I  be  to  have  you  for  my  companion in  the
school of  piety under  the Master,  Jesus  ! Would  that  it
were mine  first  to  purge  the  vessel of  your  heart  that  it
might  be  filled  with  the  unction  that  makes  wise  about  all
things ! How willingly would I break with you those
loaves, still warm and steaming, and,  as it  were,  freshly
drawn  from  the  oven,  which  Christ  of  His  heavenly  bounty
often  breaks  unto  His  poor! Would  that,  if  God  deigned
of  His  sweetness  to  shed  at  any  time  on  my  poor  soul  some
drop  of  the  free  rain  which  He  keeps  for  His  inheritance,
ah  !  would  that then I could pour it out  upon  you, and
again receive from  you in  turn  that  which  you  had  felt !
Believe one  who  has  tried  : you shall find  a  fuller  satis
faction in  the  woods  than in  books. The  trees  and  the
rocks will teach you that which  you  cannot  hear from
masters. Do  you  think  that  you  cannot  draw  honey  from
the rock and oil from the hardest flint? Do not our

^  mountains  drop  sweetness  ?  the  hills  flow  with  milk  and
honey  ?  and  the  valleys  stand  thick  with  corn  ?  When  so
much  occurs  to  me  to  say  to  you  I  scarce  restrain  myself.
But  inasmuch  as  you  ask  not  for  a  lecture,  but  for  prayers,
may  God  open  your  heart  in  His  law  and  in  His  statutes.
Farewell.

3.  Let William and Ivo, too, have share in  this my
prayer. What  more  shall I  say  to  you  ? You  know  that
I  long  to  see  you,  and  why ;  but  how  much  I  long  neither
1  can  tell  nor  you  can  know. So  I  pray  God  that  He  may
grant you even to follow whither you ought to have
preceded  me,  since  in  this  matter  I  hold  you  to  be  master

VOL.  I.  23


354  LETTER CVII.

of  so  great  humility  as  not  to  disdain,  though  a  master,  to
follow  your  disciples.


LETTER CVII.

To  THOMAS,  PRIOR  OF  BEVERLEY.1

This  Thomas  had  taken  the  vows  of  the  Cistercian
Order  at  Clairvaux.  As  he  showed  hesitation,  Bernard
urges  his  tardy  spirit  to  fulfil  them.  But  the  following
letter  will  prove  that  it  was  a  warning  to  deaf  ears,  where
it  relates  t/ie  unhappy  end  of  Tliomas.  In  this  letter
Bernard  sketches  with  a  master ' s  hand  the  whole  scheme
of  salvation.

BERNARD  to  his  beloved  son  THOMAS,  as  being  his  son.

i.  What  is  the  good  of  words?  An  ardent  spirit  and  a
strong  desire  cannot  express  themselves  simply  by  the
tongue.  We  want  your  sympathy  and  your  bodily  presence
to  speak  to  us  ;  for  if  you  come  you  will  know  us  better,
and  we  shall  better  appreciate  each  other.  We  have  long
been  held  in  a  mutual  bond  as  debtors  one  to  another;  for
I  owe  you  faithful  care  and  you  owe  me  submissive
obedience.  Let  our  actions  and  not  our  pens,  if  you
please,  prove  each  of  us.  I  wish  you  would  apply  to
yourself  henceforth  and  carry  out  towards  me  those  words
of  the  Only  Begotten  :  The  works  which  the  Father  hat/i
given  Me  to  finish,  the  same  works  bear  witness  of  Me
(S.  John  v.  36).  For,  indeed,  only  thus  does  the  spirit  of
the  Only  Son  bear  witness  with  our  spirit  that  we  also  are
the  sons  of  God,  when,  quickening  us  from  dead  works,  He
causes  us  to  bring  forth  the  works  of  life.  A  good  or  bad
tree  is  distinguished,  not  by  its  leaves  or  flowers,  but  by  its
fruit.  So  By  their  fruits,  He  saith,  ye  shall  know  them
(S.  Matt.  vii.  16).  Works,  then,  and  not  words,  make  the
difference  between  sons  of  God  and  sons  of  unbelief.  By
works,  accordingly,  do  you  display  your  sincere  desire  and
make  proof  of  mine.

1  See  Letter  411.


LETTER CVII.  355

2.  I  long  for  your  presence  ;  my  heart  has  long  wished
for  you,  and  expected  the  fulfilment  of  your  promises.
Why  am  I  so  pressing  ?  Certainly  not  from  any  personal
or  earthly  feeling.  I  desire  either  to  be  profited  by  you  or
to  be  of  service  to  you.  Noble  birth,  bodily  strength  and
beauty,  the  glow  of  youth,  estates,  palaces,  and  sumptuous
furniture,  external  badges  of  dignity,  and,  I  may  also  add,
the  world's  wisdom — all  these  are  of  the  world,  and  the
world  loves  its  own.  But  for  how  long  will  they  endure  ?
For  ever  ?  Assuredly  not  ;  for  the  world  itself  will  not  last
for  ever ;  but  these  will  not  last  even  for  long.  In  fact,  the
world  will  not  be  able  long  to  keep  these  gifts  for  you,  nor
will  you  dwell  long  in  the  world  to  enjoy  them,  for  the  days
of  man  are  short.  The  world  passes  away  with  its  lusts,
but  it  dismisses  you  before  it  quite  passes  away  itself.
How  can  you  take  unlimited  pleasure  in  a  love  that  soon
must  end  ?  But  I  ever  love  you,  not  your  possessions  ;  let
them  go  whence  they  were  derived.  I  only  require  of  you
one  thing :  that  you  would  be  mindful  of  your  promise,  and
not  deny  us  any  longer  the  satisfaction  of  your  presence
among  us,  who  love  you  sincerely,  and  will  love  you  for  ever.
In  fact,  if  we  love  purely  in  our  life,  we  shall  also  not  be
divided  in  death.  For  those  gifts  which  I  wish  for  in  your
case,  or  rather  for  you,  belong  not  to  the  body  or  to  time
only ;  and  so  they  fail  not  with  the  body,  nor  pass  away
with  time  ;  nay,  when  the  body  is  laid  aside  they  delight
still  more,  and  last  when  time  is  gone.  They  have  nothing
in  common  with  the  gifts  above-mentioned,  or  such  as  they
with  which,  I  imagine,  not  the  Father,  but  the  world  has
endowed  you.  For  which  of  these  does  not  vanish  before
death,  or  at  last  fall  a  victim  to  it  ?

3.  But,  indeed,  that  is  the  best  part,  which  shall  not  be
taken  away  for  ever.  What  is  that  ?  Eye  hath  not  seen  it,
nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of
man  (i  Cor.  ii.  9).  He  who  is  a  man  and  walks  simply
according  to  man's  nature  only,  he  who,  to  speak  more
plainly,  is  still  content  with  flesh  and  blood,  is  wholly
ignorant  what  that  is,  because  flesh  and  blood  will  not


356  LETTER CVII.

reveal  the  things  which  God  alone  reveals  through  His
Spirit.  So  the  natural  man  is  in  no  way  admitted  to  the
secret;  in  fact,  he  receivcth  not  the  tilings  of  the  Spirit
of  God  (i  Cor.  ii.  14).  Blessed  are  they  who  hear  His
words.  /  have  called  you  friends,  for  all  things  that:  I
have  heard  of  My  Father  I  have  made  known  to  yon  (S.
John  xv.  15).  O,  wicked  world,  which  wilt  not  bless  thy
friends  except  thou  make  them  enemies  of  God,  and  con
sequently  unworthy  of  the  council  of  the  blessed.  For
clearly  he  who  is  willing  to  be  thy  friend  makes  himself  the
enemy  of  God.  And  if  the  servant  knoweth  not  what  his
Lord  doeth,  how  much  less  the  enemy?  Moreover,  the
friend  of  the  Bridegroom  standeth,  and  rejoiceth  with  joy
because  of  the  Bridegroom's  voice ;  whence  also  it  says,
My  soul  failed  when  [my  beloved\  spake  (Cant.  v.  6).
And  so  the  friend  of  the  world  is  shut  out  from  the  council
of  the  friends  of  God,  who  have  received  not  the  spirit  of
this  world  but  the  spirit  which  is  of  God,  that  they  may
know  the  things  which  are  given  to  them  of  God.  /  thank
Thee,  O  Father,  because  Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from
the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes  ;
even  so,  Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  Thy  sight  (S,
Matt.  xi.  25,  26),  not  because  they  of  themselves  deserved  it.
For  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  Thy  glory,  that  Thou
mayest  freely  send  the  Spirit  of  Thy  Son,  crying  in  the
hearts  of  the  sons  of  adoption  :  Abba,  Father.  For  those
who  are  led  by  this  Spirit,  they  are  sons,  and  cannot  be
kept  from  their  Fathers  council.  Indeed,  they  have  the
Spirit  dwelling  within  them,  who  searches  even  the  deep
things  of  God.  In  short,  of  what  can  they  be  ignorant
whom  grace  teaches  everything?

4.  Woe  unto  you,  ye  sons  of  this  world,  because  of  your
wisdom,  which  is  foolishness  !  Ye  know  not  the  spirit  of
salvation,  nor  have  share  in  the  counsel,  which  the  Father
alone  discloses  alone  to  the  Son,  and  to  him  to  whom  the
Son  will  reveal  Him.  For  who  hath  known  the  mind  of
the  Lord?  Or  who  hath  been  His  counsellor?  (Rom.  xi.
34).  Not,  indeed,  no  one  ;  but  only  a  few,  only  those  who


LETTER CVII.  357

can  truly  say :  The  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the
bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him.  Woe  to  the
world  for  its  clamour !  That  same  Only  Begotten,  like  as
the  Angel  of  a  great  revelation,  proclaims  among  the
people  :  He  who  hath  ears  to  hear  let  him  hear.  And
since  he  finds  not  ears  worthy  to  receive  His  words,  and  to
whom  He  may  commit  the  secret  of  the  Father,  he  weaves
parables  for  the  crowd,  that  hearing  they  might  not  hear,
and  seeing  they  might  not  understand.  But  for  His  friends
how  different !  With  them  He  speaks  apart :  To  you  it  is
given  to  knoiv  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God  (S.
Luke  viii.  8-10)  ;  to  whom  also  He  says:  Fear  not,  little
flock,  for  it  is  yoiir  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you
the  kingdom  (S.  Luke  xii.  32).  WTho  are  these?  These
are  they  whom  He  foreknew  and  foreordained  to  be  con
formed  to  the  image  of  His  Son,  that  He  might  be  the
first  born  among  many  brethren.  The  Lord  knows  who
are  His.  Here  is  His  great  secret  and  the  counsel  which
He  has  made  known  unto  men.  But  He  judges  no  others
worthy  of  a  share  in  so  great  mystery,  except  those  whom
He  has  foreknown  and  foreordained  as  His  own.  For
those  whom  He  foreordained,  them  also  He  called.  Who,
except  he  be  called,  may  approach  God's  counsel  ?  Those
whom  he  called,  them  also  He  justified.  Over  them  a  Sun
arises,  though  not  that  sun  which  may  daily  be  seen  arising
over  good  and  bad  alike,  but  He  of  whom  the  Prophet
speaks  when  addressing  himself  to  those  alone  who  have
been  called  to  the  counsel,  he  says:  Unto  you  that  fear  My
name  shall  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arise  (Malachi  iv.  2).1
So  while  the  sons  of  unbelief  remain  in  darkness,  the  child  of
light  leaves  the  power  of  darkness  and  comes  into  this  new
light,  if  once  he  can  with  faith  say  to  God  :  /  am  a  com
panion  of  all  them  that  fear  Thee  (Ps.  cxix.  63).  Do  you

1  So  all  texts,  except  a  few,  in  which  the  reading  is  :  '•'  Indeed,  that  Sun  is
promised  to  those  who  have  been  called,"  etc.  In  the  first  edition,  and  many
subsequent  ones  :  "  For  the  Sun  which  arises  is  not  that  which  is  daily  to  be
seen  rising  over  good  and  bad,  but  one  promised  by  the  prophetic  warning  to
such  as  fear  God,  to  those  only  who  have  been  called,"  etc.


358  LETTER CVII.

see  how  faith  precedes,  in  order  that  justification  may
follow  ?  Perchance,  then,  we  are  called  through  fear,  and
justified  by  love.  Finally,  the  just  shall  live  by  faith
(Rom.  i.  17),  that  faith,  doubtless,  which  works  by  love
(Gal.  v.  6).

5.  So  at  his  call  let  the  sinner  hear  what  he  has  to  fear;
and  thus  coming  to  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  let  him,  now
enlightened,  see  what  he  must  love.  For  what  is  that
saying  :  The  merciful  goodness  of  the  Lord  endureth  from
everlasting  to  everlasting  upon  them  that  fear  Him  (Ps.
ciii.  17).  From  everlasting,  because  of  predestination,  to
everlasting,  because  of  glorification.  The  one  process  is
without  beginning,  the  other  knowrs  no  ending.  Indeed,
those  whom  He  predestines  from  everlasting,  He  glorifies
to  everlasting,  with  an  interval,  at  least,  in  the  case  of
adults,  of  calling  and  justification  between.  So  at  the
rising  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  the  mystery,  hidden
from  eternity,  concerning  souls  that  have  been  predesti
nated  and  are  to  be  glorified,  begins  in  some  degree  to
emerge  from  the  depths  of  eternity,  as  each  soul,  called  by
fear  and  justified  by  love,  becomes  assured  that  it,  too,  is
of  the  number  of  the  blessed,  knowing  well  that  whom  He
justified,  them  also  He  glorified  (Rom.  viii.  30).  What
then  ?  The  soul  hears  that  it  is  called  when  it  is  stricken
with  fear.  It  feels  also  that  it  is  justified  when  it  is  sur
rounded  with  love.  Can  it  do  otherwise  than  be  confident
that  it  will  be  glorified  ?  There  is  a  beginning ;  there  is
continuation.  Can  it  despair  only  of  the  consummation  ?
Indeed,  if  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  in  which  our  calling  is
said  to  consist,  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom,  surely  the  love
of  God — that  love,  I  mean,  which  springs  from  faith,  and  is
the  source  of  our  justification — is  progress  in  wisdom.
And  so  what  but  the  consummation  of  \visdom  is  that
glorification  which  we  hope  for  at  the  last  from  the  vision
of  God  that  will  make  us  like  Him  ?  And  so  one  deep
calleth  another  because  of  the  noise  of 'the  wafer-pipes  (Ps.
xlii.  9),  when,  with  terrible  judgments,  that  unmeasured
Eternity  and  Eternal  Immensity,  whose  wisdom  cannot  be


LETTER CVII.  359

told,  leads  the  corrupt  and  inscrutable  heart  of  man  by  Its
own power  and  goodness forth into Its own  marvellous

light.

6.  For  instance,  let  us  suppose  a  man  in  the  world,  held
fast  as  yet  in  the  love  of  this  world  and  of  his  flesh  ;  and,
inasmuch as he bears the image of the earthly man,
occupied  with  earthly  things,  without  a  thought  of  things
heavenly,  can  anyone  fail  to  see  that  this  man  is  surrounded
with  horrible  darkness,  unless  he  also  is  sitting  in  the  same
fatal  gloom  ? For  no  sign  of  his  salvation  has  yet  shone
upon  him  ; no inner inspiration  bears its  witness in his
heart  as  to  whether  an  eternal  predestination  destines  him
to good. But, then, suppose the heavenly compassion
vouchsafes  sometime  to  have  regard  to  him,  and  to  shed  upon
him  a  spirit  of  compunction  to  make  him  bemoan  himself
and  learn  wisdom,  change  his  life,  subdue  his  flesh,  love  his
neighbour,  cry  to  God,  and  resolve  hereafter  to  live  to  God
and  not  to  the  world  ; and  suppose  that  thenceforward,  by
the gracious visitation of  heavenly  light  and  the  sudden
change  accomplished  by  the  Right  Hand  of  the  Most  High,
he  sees  clearly  that  he  is  no  longer  a  child  of  wrath,  but  of
grace,  for  he is now  experiencing  the fatherly love and
divine  goodness  towards  him — a  love  which  hitherto  had
been  concealed  from  him  so  completely  as  not  only  to  leave
him  in  ignorance  whether  he  deserved  love  or  hate,  but  also
as  to  make  his  own  life  indicate  hatred  rather  than  love,  for
darkness  was  still  on  the  face  of  the  deep— would  it  not
seem  to  you  that  such  an  one  is  lifted  directly  out  of  the
profoundest  and  darkest  deep of  horrible  ignorance into
the  pleasant  and  serene  deep  of  eternal  brightness  ?

7.  And  then  at  length  God,  as  it  were,  divides  the  light
from  the  darkness,  when  a  sinner,  enlightened  by  the  first
rays  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  casts  off  the  works  of
darkness  and  puts  on  the  armour  of  light.  His  own
conscience  and  the  sins  of  his  former  life  alike  doom  him
as  a  true  child  of  Hell  to  eternal  fires  ;  but  under  the  looks
with  which  the  Dayspring  from  on  high  deigns  to  visit  him,
he  breathes  again,  and  even  begins  to  hope  beyond  hope


36°  LETTER CVII.

that  he shall enjoy  the  glory  of the  sons of  God. For
rejoicing  at  the  near  prospect  with  unveiled  face,  he  sees  it
in  the  new  light,  and  says  : Lord,  lift  Thou  up  the  light  of
Thy  countenance  upon  us ; Thou  hast  put  gladness  in  my
heart  (Ps.  iv.  7)  ; Lord,  what  is  man  that  Thou  hast  such
respect  unto  him,  or  the  son  of  man  that  Thou,  so  regardest
him  ?  (Ps.  cxliv.  3). Now,  O  good  Father,  vile  worm  and
worthy  of  eternal  hatred  as  he  is,  he  yet  trusts  that  he  is
loved,  because  he  feels  that  he  loves  ; nay,  because  he  has
a  foretaste  of  Thy  love  he  does  not  blush  to  make  return  of
love. Now  in  Thy  brightness  it  becomes  clear,  Oh  ! Light
that  no man  can approach  unto,  what  good  things  Thou
hast  in  store  for  so  poor  a  thing  as  man,  even  though  he  be
evil ! He loves not undeservedly, because  he  was  loved
without his  deserving  it ; and his  love  is  for  everlasting,
because  he  knows  that  he  has  been  loved  from  everlasting.
He  brings  to  light for  the comfort of  the sorrowful  the
great  design  which  from  eternity  had  lain  in  the  bosom  of
eternity,  namely,  that  God  wills  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,
but rather  that he should  be converted  and  live. As  a
witness of  this  secret, Oh! man,  thou  hast  the  justifying
Spirit  bearing witness herein with thy  spirit that thou
thyself  also  art  the  son  of  God. Acknowledge  the  counsel
of  God  in  thy  justification; confess  it  and  say, Thy  testi
monies  are  my  delight  and  my  counsellors  (Ps.  cxix.  24).
For  thy  present  justification  is  the  revelation  of  the  Divine
counsel, and a  preparation for future glory. Or  rather,
perhaps,  predestination  itself  is  the  preparation  for  it,  and
justification is more the gradual drawing near unto it.
Indeed,  it  is  said,  Repent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is
at  hand  (S.  Matt.  iii.  2). And  hear  also  of  predestination
that  it is  the  preparation  : Come, inherit, He says, the
kingdom  prepared  for  you  from the  foundation of  the
world  (S. Matt.  xxv. 34).

8.  Let  none,  therefore,  doubt  that  he  is  loved  who  already
loves.  The  love  of  God  freely  follows  our  love  which  it
preceded.  For  how  can  He  grow  weary  of  returning  their
love  to  those  whom  He  loved  even  while  they  yet  loved


LETTER CVII.  361

Him  not?  He  loved  them,  I  say;  yes,  He  loved.  For  as  a
pledge  of  His  love  thou  hast  the  Spirit ;  thou  hast  also
Jesus,  the  faithful  witness,  and  Him  crucified.  Oh  !  double
proof,  and  that  most  sure,  of  God's  love  towards  us.  Christ
dies,  and  deserves  to  be  loved  by  us.  The  Spirit  works,
and  makes  Him  to  be  loved.  The  One  shows  the  reason
why  He  is  loved  :  the  Other  how  He  is  to  be  loved.  The

J

One  commends  His  own  great  love  to  us;  the  Other  makes
it  ours.  In  the  One  we  see  the  object  of  love  ;  from  the
Other  we  draw  the  power  to  love.  With  the  One,  there
fore,  is  the  cause  ;  with  the  Other  the  gift  of  charity.  What
shame  to  watch,  with  thankless  eyes,  the  Son  of  God  dying
— and  yet  this  may  easily  happen,  if  the  Spirit  be  not  with
us.  But  now,  since  The  love  of  God  is  s/icd  abroad  in  our
hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  us  (Rom.  v.
5),  having  been  loved  we  love  ;  and  as  we  love,  we  deserve
to  be  loved  yet  more.  For  if,  says  the  Apostle,  while  we
were  vet  enemies,  we  have  been  reconciled  to  God  through

^  o

the  death  of  His  Son  ;  much  more,  being  reconciled,  shall
we  be  saved  through  His  life  (Rom.  viii.  32).  For  He
that  spared  not  His  own  Son ,  but  delivered  Him  up  for
us  all,  how  shall  He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all
things  ?

O

9.  Since,  then,  the  token  of  our  salvation  is  twofold,
namely,  a  twofold  outpouring,  of  the  Blood  arid  of  the
Spirit,  neither  can  profit  without  the  other.  For  the  Spirit
is  not  given  except  to  such  as  believe  in  the  Crucified ;  and
faith  avails  not  unless  it  works  by  love.  But  love  is  the
gift  of  the  Spirit.  If  the  second  Adam  (I  speak  of  Christ)
not  only  became  a  living  soul,  but  also  a  quickening  spirit,
dying  as  being  the  one,  and  raising  the  dead  as  being  the
other,  how  can  that  which  dies  in  Him  profit  me,  apart
from  that  which  quickens  ?  Indeed,  He  Himself  says  :  It
is  the  spirit  that  quickeneth,  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing
(S.  John  vi.  63).  Now,  what  does  "quickeneth"  mean
except  "  justifieth  ?"  For  as  sin  is  the  death  of  the  soul
(The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die,  Ezek.  xviii.  4),  without
doubt  righteousness  is  its  life;  for  The  just  shall  live  by


362  LETTER CYII.

faith  (Rom.  i.  17).  Who,  then,  is  righteous,  except  he
who  returns  to  God,  who  loves  him,  His  meed  of  love?
And  this  never  happens  unless  the  Spirit  by  faith  reveal  to
the  man  the  eternal  purpose  of  God  concerning  his  future
salvation.  Such  a  revelation  is  simply  the  infusion  of
spiritual  grace,  by  which,  with  the  mortification  of  the
deeds  of  the  flesh,  man  is  made  ready  for  the  kingdom
which  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit.  And  he  receives  by
one  and  the  same  Spirit  both  the  reason  for  thinking  that
he  is  loved  and  the  power  of  returning  love,  lest  the  love
of  God  for  us  should  be  left  without  return.

10.  This,  then,  is  that  holy  and  secret  counsel  which  the
Son  has  received  from  the  Father  by  the  Holy  Spirit. This
by  the  same  Spirit  He  imparts  to  His  own  whom  He  knows,
in their justification, and  by  the imparting  He justifies.
Thus in his justification each  of  the  faithful  receives  the
power  to  begin  to know  himself  even as he is known  :
when,  for  instance,  there  is  given  to  him some  foretaste  of
his  own  future  happiness,  as he  sees  how  it  lay  hid  from
eternity  in  God,  who  foreordains  it,  but  will  appear  more
fully in God, who is effecting it. But concerning the
knowledge  that  he  has  now,  for  his  part,  attained,  let  a  man
glory  at  present  in  the  hope,  not  in  the  secure  possession  of
it. How  must  we  pity  those  who  possess  as  yet  no  token
of  their  own  calling  to  this  glad  assembly  of  the  righteous..
Lord, who hath believed  our report? (Is. liii. i). Oh!
that  they  would  be  wise  and  understand. But  except  they
believe  they  shall  not  understand.

11.  But you, too, ye unhappy and heedless lovers
of  the world, have your purpose far from that of the
just. Scale sticks close to scale, and there  is no air
hole between  you. You, too, oh  !  sons  of  impiety, have
your purpose communicated one to another,  but openly
against  the  Lord  and  against  His Christ  (Ps.  ii.  2). For
if,  as  the  Scripture  says, The  fear  of  God, that  is  piety
(Job  xxviii. 28), 1  of course anyone who loves  the  world

1  The  Ixx.  has  iSov  BtotrefStia  ttrri  <ro(pia.  The  VULGATE  reads  "  Ecce  timor
Domini  ipsa  est  sapientia,''  with  which  the  A.  V.  coincides,  "  Behold  the  fear  o£
the  Lord,  that  is  wisdom."  Does  Bernard  quote  from  memory  ?


LETTER CVII.  363

more  than  God  is  convicted  of  impiety  and  idolatry,  of
worshipping  and  serving  the  creature  rather  than  the
Creator.  But  if,  as  has  been  said,  the  holy  and  impious
have  each  their  purpose  kept  for  themselves,  doubtless  there
is  a  great  gulf  fixed  between  the  two.  For  as  the  just
keeps  himself  aloof  from  the  purpose  and  council  of  evil
men  (cf.  Ps.  i.  6),  so  the  impious  never  rise  in  the  judg
ment,  nor  sinners  in  the  purpose1  for  the  just.  For  there
is  a  purpose  for  the  just,  a  gracious  rain  which  God  hath  set
apart  for  His  heritage.  There  is  a  purpose  really  secret,
descending  like  rain  into  a  fleece  of  wool — a  sealed  fount
whereof  no  stranger  may  partake — a  Sun  of  Righteousness
rising  only  for  such  as  fear  God.

12.  Moreover,  the  prophet,  noting  that  the  rest  remain  in
their  own  dryness  and  darkness,  being  ignorant  of  the  rain
and of  the light  of  the just, mocks  and  brands  their  un
fruitful  gloom  and  confused  perversity. This  is  a  nation,
he  says,  that  obeyeth not  the  voice  of  the  Lord  their  God
(Jer.  vii.  28). You  are  not  ready, oh  ! miserable  men,  to
say  with  David,  /  will  hearken  what  the  Lord God  will
say  with regard  to  me  (Ps.  Ixxxv. 8),  for  being  exhausted
abroad  upon  [the  quest  of]  vanity  and  false  folly,  you  seek
not  for  the  deepest  and  best  hearing  of  the  truth. Oh  !  ye
sons  of  men,  how  long  will  ye  blaspheme  mine  honour,  and
have  such  pleasure  in  vanity  and  seek  after  leasing  (Ps.  iv.
2).  You  are  deaf  to  the  voice  of  truth,  and  you  know  not
the  purpose  of  Him  who  thinks  thoughts  of  peace,  who  also
speaks  peace  to  His  people,  and  to  His  saints,  and  to  such
as are converted in heart. Now, he says,  ye  are  clean
tlirough  the  word  which  I  have  spoken to  you  (S.  John  xv.
3). Therefore,  they  who  hear  not  this  word  are  unclean.

13.  But  do  you,  dearly  beloved,  if  you  are  making  ready
your  inward  ear  for  this  Voice  of  God  that  is  sweeter  than
honey  and the  honey-comb,  flee  from  outward  cares,  that
with  your inmost  heart  clear  and  free  you  also  may  say
with  Samuel,  Speak,  Lord,  for  thy  servant  heareth  (i  Sam.

1  This  must  be the  reading,  not  "  congregation," [concilia]  as  in  Ps.  i,  for
the sense  demands  "  purpose,"  [consilui]  and the  MSS.  so  read.


364  LETTER CVII.

iii.  9).  This  Voice  sounds  not  in  the  market-place,  and  is
not  heard  in  public.  It  is  a  secret  purpose,  and  seeks  to  be
heard  in  secret.  It  will  of  a  surety  give  you  joy  and  glad
ness  in  hearing  it,  if  you  listen  with  attentive  ear.  Once  it
ordered  Abraham  (Gen.  xii.  i)  to  get  him  out  of  his  country
and  from  his  kindred,  that  he  might  see  and  possess  the
land  of  the  living.  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxii.  10)  left  his  brother
and  his  home,  and  passed  over  Jordan  with  his  staff,  and
was  received  in  Rachel's  embrace  (Gen.  xxix.  n).  Joseph
was  lord  in  Egypt  (Gen.  xxxvii.  and  xli.),  having  been
torn  by  a  fraudful  purchase  from  his  father  and  his  home.
Thus  the  Church  is  bidden,  in  order  that  the  King  may
have  pleasure  in  her  beauty,  to  forget  her  own  people
and  her  father's  house  (Ps.  xlv.  n,  12).  The  boy  Jesus
was  sought  by  His  parents  among  their  kinsfolk  and
acquaintance,  and  was  not  found  (S.  Luke  ii.  44,  45).
Do  you  also  flee  from  your  brethren,  if  you  wish  to
find  the  way  of  salvation.  Flee,  I  say,  from  the  midst
of  Babylon,  flee  from  before  the  sword  of  the  north-
wind.  A  bare  sustenance  I  am  ready  to  offer  for  the  help
of  everyone  that  flees.  You  call  me  your  abbot ;  I  refuse
not  the  title  for  obedience'  sake — obedience,  I  say,  not  that
I  demand  it,  but  that  I  render  it  in  service  to  others,  even
as  The  Son  of  Man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but
to  minister  and  to  give  His  life  a  'ransom  for  many  (S.
Matt.  xx.  28).  But  if  you  deem  me  worthy,  receive  as  your
fellow-disciple  him  whom  you  choose  for  your  master.  For
we  both  have  one  Master,  Christ.  And  so  let  Him  be  the
end  of  this  Letter,  who  is  The  end  of  the  law  for  righteous
ness  to  every  one  that  believeth  (Rom.  x.  4).


LETTER  CVIII.

To  THOMAS  OF  ST.  OMER/  AFTER  HE  HAD  BROKEN  HIS
PROMISE  OF  ADOPTING  A  CHANGE  OF  LIFE.

He  urges  linn to  leave  his  studies  and  enter  religion,

O  £>

and sets before him the miserable end of Thomas of
Sever  ley.

1  See  Letter  382.


LETTER CVIII.  365

To  his  dearly  beloved  son,  THOMAS,  Brother  BERNARD,
called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  that  he  may  walk  in  the  fear  of
the  Lord.

i.  You  do  well  in  acknowledging  the  debt  of  your
promise,  and  in  not  denying  your  guilt  in  deferring  its
performance.  But  I  beg  you  not  to  think  simply  of  what
you  promised,  but  to  whom  you  promised  it.  For  I  do  not
claim,  for  myself  any  part  of  that  promise  which  you  made,
in  my  presence,  indeed,  but  not  to  me.  Do  not  fear  that  I
am  going  to  reprove  you  on  account  of  that  deceptive
delay  :  for  I  was  summoned  as  the  witness,  not  as  the  lord
of  your  vow.1  I  saw  it  and  rejoiced;  and  my  prayer  is
that  my  joy  may  be  full — which  it  will  not  be  until  your
promise  is  fulfilled.  You  have  fixed  a  time  which  you
ought  not  to  have  transgressed.  You  have  transgressed  it.
What  is  that  to  me  ?  To  your  own  lord  you  shall  stand  or
fall.  I  have  determined,  because  the  danger  is  so  imminent,
to  deal  with  you  neither  by  reproofs  nor  threats,  but  only
by  advice — and  that  only  so  far  as  you  take  it  kindly.  If
you  shall  hear  me,  well.  If  not,  I  judge  no  man  ;  there  is
One  who  seeketh  and  judgeth;  for  He  ii'/w  judgeth  us  is
the  Lord  (i  Cor.  iv.  4).  And  I  think  for  this  cause  you
ought  to  fear  and  grieve  the  more,  inasmuch  as  you  have
not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto  God.  And  though,  as  you
wish,  I  spare  your  shame  before  men,  is  that  shamelessness
to  go  unpunished  before  God  ?  For  what  reason,  pray,  is
there  in  feeling  shame  before  the  judgment  of  man  and  not
fearing  the  face  of  God  ?  For  the  face  of  the  Lord  is
against  them  that  do  evil  (Ps.  xxxiv.  16).  Do  you,  then,
fear  reproaches  more  than  torments  ;  and  clo  you,  who
tremble  at  the  tongue  of  flesh,  despise  the  sword  which
devours  the  flesh?  Are  these  the  fine  moral  principles
with  which,  as  you  write,  you  are  being  stored  in  the
acquisition  of  knowledge,  the  ardour  and  love  for  which

1  Bernard  regards  as  a  vow  that  kind  of  promise  by  which  a  man  had
determined  in  his  presence  to  enter  the  religious  state.  See  Letter  395,  and
Sermons  on  Canticles,  63,  n.  6,  in  which  he  mourns  the  lapse  and  fall  of  novices.


366  LETTER CVIII.

so  heats  and excites  you  that  you  do  not fear to  slight
your  sacred  vow  ?

2.  But, I pray you, what proof of virtue is it, what
instance of self-control, what  advance in knowledge, or
artistic  skill,  to  tremble  with  fear  where  no  fear  is  needful,
and  to  lay  aside  even  the  fear  of  the  Lord. How  much
more  wholesome  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  and  Him  crucified
— a  knowledge,  of  course,  not  easy  to  acquire  except  for
Him  who  is  crucified  to  the  world. You  are  mistaken,  my
son,  quite  mistaken,  if  you  think  that  you  can  learn  in  the
school  of  the  teachers  of  this  world  that  knowledge  which
only  the disciples of Christ,  that is, such  as  despise  the
world,  attain  ;  and  that  by  the  gift  of  God. This  knowledge
is  taught,  not  by  the  reading  of  books,  but  by  grace ; not
by  the letter, but  by  the  spirit ; not  by  learning,  but  by
the practice of the  commandments  of God  : Sow, says
the  Prophet,  to  yourselves  in righteousness,  reap  the  hope
of  life,  kindle  for  yourselves  the  light  of  knowledge  (cf.
Hos.  x.  12). You  see  that  the  light  of  knowledge  cannot
be  duly  attained,  except  the  seed  of  righteousness [first]
enter  the soul, so  that from it may grow the grain of
life, and not  the mere  husk  of  vain  glory. What  then  ?
You  have  not  yet  sown  to  yourself  in righteousness,  and
therefore  you  have  not  yet  reaped  the sheaves  of  hope  ;
and  do  you  pretend  that  you  are  acquiring  the  true  know
ledge  ? Perchance  for  the  true  there  is  being  substituted
that  which  puffeth up. You err  foolishly, Spending  thy
money  for that  which is  not  bread, and  thy  labour  for
that  which  satisfieth  not  (Is.  Iv.  2). I  entreat  you,  return
to  the  former  wish  of  your  heart,  and  realize  that  this  year
of  delay  \vhich  you  have  allowed  to  yourself  has  been  a
wrong  to  God ; is  not  a  year  pleasing  to  the  Lord,  but  a
seedplot of discord, an incentive to wrath, a food of
apostasy,  such  as  must  quench  the  Spirit,  shut  off  grace,
and  produce  that  lukewarmness  which  is  wont  to  provoke
God  to  spue  men  out  of  His  mouth  (cf.  Rev.  iii.  16).

3.  Alas  !  I  think that,  as  you are called by  the  same
name,  so  you  walk  in  the  same  spirit  as  that  other  Thomas,


LETTER CVIII.  367

once,  I  mean,  Provost  of  Beverley.  For  after  devoting
himself,  like  you,  to  our  Order  and  House  with  all  his
heart,  he  began  to  beg  for  delay,  and  then  by  degrees  to
grow  cold,  until  he  openly  ended  by  being  a  Secular,  an
apostate,  and,  twofold  more,  a  child  of  hell,  and  was  cut  off
prematurely  by  a  sudden  and  terrible  death  (S.  Matt,  xxiii.
15) — a  fate  which,  if  it  may  be,  let  the  pitiful  and  clement
Lord  avert.  The  letter1  which  I  wrote  to  him  in  vain  still
survives.  I  simply  freed  my  own  mind,  by  warning  him,
so  far  as  I  could,  how  it  must  soon  end.  How  happy
would  he  have  been  if  he  had  taken  my  advice  !  He  cloked
his  sin.  I  am  clean  from  his  blood.  But  that  is  not  enough
for  me.  For  though  in  so  acting  I  am  quite  at  ease  on  my
own  account,  yet  that  charity  which  seeketh  not  her  own
(i  Cor.  xiii.  5)  urges  me  to  mourn  for  him  who  died  not  in
safety,  because  he  lived  so  carelessly.  Oh  !  the  great  depth
of  the  judgments  of  God  !  Oh  !  my  God,  terrible  in  Thy
counsels  over  the  sons  of  men  !  He  bestowed  the  Spirit,
whom  he  was  soon  again  to  withdraw,  so  that  a  man  sinned
a  sin  beyond  measure,  and  grace  found  entrance  that  sin
might  abound  ;  though  this  was  the  fault,  not  of  the  Giver,
but  of  him  who  added  the  transgression.  For  it  was  the  act
of  the  man's  own  freewill  (whereby,  using  badly  his  freedom)
he  had  the  power  to  grieve  the  free  Spirit)  to  despise  the
grace  instead  of  bringing  to  good  effect  the  inspiration  of
God,  so  as  to  be  able  to  say :  His  grace  which  was  bestowed
on  me  was  not  in  vain  (i  Cor.  xv.  10).

4.  If  you  are  wise,  you  will  let  his  folly  profit  you  as  a
warning  ;  you  will  wash  your  hands  in  the  blood  of  the
sinner,  and  take  care  to  release  yourself  at  once  from  the
snare  of  perdition,  and  me  from  horrible  fear  on  your
account.  For,  I  confess,  I  feel  your  erring  steps  as  the
rending  of  my  heart,  because  you  have  become  very  dear
to  me,  and  I  feel  a  father's  affection  for  you.  Therefore,
at  every  remembrance  of  you  that  sword  of  fear  pierces
through  my  heart  the  more  sharply,  as  I  consider  that  you
have  too  little  fear  and  uneasiness.  I  know  where  I  have

1  No.  107.


368  LETTER CIX.

read  of  such:  For  when  they  shall  say  peace  and  safety,
then  sudden  destruction  comcth  upon  them,  as  travail
upon  a  woman  with  child,  and  they  shall  not  escape  (i
Thess.  v.  3).  Yea,  I  foresee  that  many  fearful  consequences
threaten  you  if  you  still  delay  to  be  wise.  For  I  have  had
much  experience  ;  and  Oh  !  that  you  would  share  and
profit  by  it.  So  believe  one  who  has  had  experience ;
believe  one  who  loves  you.  For  if  you  know7  for  the  one
reason  that  I  am  not  deceived,  for  the  other  you  know  also
that  I  am  not  capable  of  deceiving  you.

LETTER CIX.

To  THE  ILLUSTRIOUS  YOUTH,  GEOFFREY DE PERRONE,1
AND  HIS  COMRADES.

He  pronounces  the  youths  noble  because  they  purpose  to
lead  the  religious  life,  and  exhorts  them  to  perseverance.

To  his  beloved  sons,  GEOFFREY  and  his  companions,
BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  the  spirit  of
counsel  and  strength.

1  A  very  ancient  edition  reads  Geoffrey  de  Parrone,  which  is  a  well-fortified
town  on  the  Somme.  So  it  is  from  that  place  that  Godfrey  derives  his  name  and
lineage.  He  was  one  of  those  whom  S.  Bernard  is  said  to  have  converted  t>
religion  in  Belgium  (See  Life,  Bk.  iv.  Chap.  3).  A  companion  in  his  conversion
was  the  other  Geoffrey,  afterwards  Prior  of  Clairvaux.  The  authority  for  this  is
Herman,  a  monk  of  Tournay  (Spicilf^ium,  Vol.  xii.  p.  479),  where  he  speaks  of
S.  Bernard,  and  says  that  "  from  the  Church  of  S.  Mary,  of  Tournay,  as  well  as
from  the  diocese  itself,  many  famous  clerks  followed  Dom  Bernard,  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  by  whom  they  had  attained  to  the  grace  of  conversion."  Herman
relates  this  fact,  p.  476,  after  the  twenty-fourth  year  of  the  Episcopate  of  Simon,
Bishop  of  Noyon,  who  acceded  to  that  See  1122.  This  Letter,  therefore,  can
not,  as  Manrique  thinks,  be  referred  to  1 131.  Peter  de  Koya,  a  novice  of  Clair
vaux  (see  Letter  479,  2,  9)  gives  praise  to  Geoff rey  de  Perrone.  This  is  Mabillon  s
view,  but  Horst  does  not  agree,  because  he  believes  this  same  Geoffrey  to  have
been  Prior  of  Clairvaux,  of  whom  he  has  this  account :— "  This  man  S.  Ber
nard  converted  to  religion  in  Flanders,  with  twenty-nine  other  noble  and  cultured
youths.  But  now  that  he  is  hesitating  and  delaying.  Bernard  urges  him  forward
in  this  Letter.  Afterwards  he  became  Prior  of  Clairvaux,  the  fifth  in  order,  and
at  length  being  elected  Bishop  cf  Tournay  (others  say  of  Nantes),  he  declined  the
honour.  Peter  of  Blois  records  the  story  thus."  We  read  that  Geoffrey  de
Perrone,  Prior  of  Clairvaux,  being  elected  Bishop  of  Tournay,  entirely  refused


LETTER CIX.  369

i.  The  news  of  your  conversion  that  has  got  abroad  is
edifying  many, nay,  is  making  glad  the  whole  Church  of
God,  so  that  The  heavens  rejoice  and  the  earth  is  glad  (Ps.
xcvi.  n),  and  every  tongue  glorifies  God. The  earth  shook
and  the  heavens dropped  at  the  presence  of  the  God  of
Sinai  (cf.  Ps.  Ixviii.  8,  9),  raining  on  those  days  more  abun
dantly  than  usual  a  gracious  rain  which  God  keeps  for  His
inheritance (Ps.  Ixvii.  9, 10,  VuLG.). Never  more  will  the
cross  of  Christ  appear  void  of  effect  in  you,  as  in  many  sons
of  disobedience,  who,  delaying  from  day  to  day  to  turn  to
God,  are  seized  by  sudden  death,  and  go  down  straightway
to hell. We  see  flourish  again  under  our eyes  the  wood
whereon  the  Lord  of  Glory  hung,  who  died  not  for  His  own
nation  only,  But  also that  He  should  gather  together  in
one the  children of  God  that  were  scattered  abroad (S.
John  xi.  52)." He,  yes,  He  Himself  draws  you,  who  loves
you as His own flesh,  as the  most  precious fruit of  His
cross, as the most worthy  recompense of the  blood He
shed. If,  then,  the  Angels  Rejoice  over  one  sinner  that
repenteth  (S. Luke xv. 10), how  great must  be  their  joy
over  so  many,  and  those,  too,  sinners. The  more  illustrious
they  seemed  for  rank,  for  learning,  for  birth,  for  youth,  the
wider  was  their  influence  as  examples  of  perdition. I  had
read,  Not  many  noble, not  many  wise,  not  manv  mightv
hath  God  chosen  (i  Cor.  i.  26,  27). But  to-day,  through  a
miracle  of  Divine  power,  a  multitude  of  such  is  converted.
They  hold  present glory  cheap, they  spurn the  charm  of
youth, they take no  account of high  birth,  they regard
the wisdom of the world as foolishness, they rest not

the  election.  Afterwards,  when  he  was  dead,  he  appeared  to  a  certain  brother,
who  asked  how  it  was  with  him,  and  in  reply  he  said,  "  The  Holy  Trinity  has
revealed  to  me  that  if  I  had  undertaken  the  Episcopate  I  should  have  been  of
the  number  of  the  lost."  So  by  this  instance  he  struck  the  hearts  of  certain
other  prelates,  saying,  "  What,  then,  will  become  of  those  unhappy  beings  who,
of  their  own  will  and  pleasure,  drown  themselves  in  the  flood  of  worldly  cares,
who  pass  their  life  among  vanities,  dining  luxuriously,  sleeping,  drinking,  sitting
at  the  receipt  of  custom,  paying  out  cash,  seeking  the  things  that  are  their  own,
or  rather  the  things  that  are  Caesar's,  and  not  God's  ? "  So  Peter  of  Blois,
Letter  102.  To  the  same  effect  Ccesarius,  Bk.  ii.  c.  29.  See  on  the  matter
Henriquez,  Menologium,  Feb.  15.

VOL.  I.  24


37°


LETTER CIX.


in  flesh  and  blood,  they  renounce  the  love  of  parents
and  friends,  they  reckon  favours  and  honours  and  dignities
as  dung  that  they  may  gain  Christ.  I  should  praise  you  if
I  knew  that  this,  your  lot,  were  your  own  doing.  But  it  is
the  finger  of  God,  clearly  a  change  due  to  the  right  hand  of
the  Most  High  (cf.  Ps.  Ixxvii.  10  VULG.,  Ixxvi.  n).  Your
conversion  is  a  good  gift  and  a  perfect  gift,  without  doubt
descending  from  the  Father  of  lights  (S.  James  i.  17).  And
so  to  Him  we  rightly  bring  every  voice  of  praise  who  only
doeth  marvellous  things,  who  hath  caused  that  plenteous
redemption  that  is  in  Him  to  be  no  longer  without  effect  in

you.

2.  What,  then,  dearly  beloved,  remains  for  you  to  do,
•except  to  make  sure  that  your  praiseworthy  purpose  attain
the  end  it  deserves?  Strive,  therefore,  for  perseverance,
the  only  virtue  that  receives  the  crown.  Let  there  not  be
found  among  you  Yea  and  Nay  (2  Cor.  i.  18,  sg.),  that  ye
may  be  the  sons  of  your  Father  which  is  in  Heaven,  with
whom,  you  know,  there  is  no  -variableness,  neither  shadow
of  turning  (S.  James  i.  17).  You  also,  brethren,  are
changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as
bv  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  Take  heed  with
all  watchfulness  not  to  be  yourselves  found  light,  inconstant,
or  wavering.  For  it  is  written,  A  double-minded  man  is
unstable  in  all  his  ways  (S.  James  i.  8),  and  again,  Woe
be  ...  to  the  sinner  that  gocth  two  ways  (Ecclus.  ii.  12).
And  for  myself,  dearly  beloved,  I  congratulate  you,  and
myself  not  less,  for,  as  I  hear,  I  have  been  reckoned
worthy  of  being  chosen  to  have  a  part  in  this,  your  good
purpose.  I  both  give  you  my  counsel  and  promise  my
help.  If  I  am  thought  necessary,  or,  rather,  if  I  be  deemed
worthy,  I  do  not  decline  the  task,  and  so  far  as  in  me  lies
will  not  fail  you.  With  eager  devotion  I  submit  my  shoulders
to  this  burden,1  old  though  they  be,  since  it  is  laid  on  me
from  heaven.  With  a  glad  heart  and  open  arms,  as  they  say,
I  welcome  the  fellow-citizens  of  the  saints  and  servants  of

1  Hence  it  is  clear  that  Bernard  was  already  approaching old  age  when  he
wrote  this  Letter.


LETTER CX.


371


God.  How  gladly,  according  to  the  prophet's  command,  do
I  assist  with  my  bread  those  that  flee  from  the  face  of  the
sword,  and  bring  water  to  the  thirsty  (cf.  Is.  xxi.  14).  The
rest  I  have  left  to  the  lips  of  my,  or  rather  your,  Geoffrey.
Whatsoever  he  shall  say  to  you  in  my  stead,  that,  doubt
not,  is  my  counsel.

LETTER  CX.

A CONSOLATORY LETTER TO THE PARENTS OF
GEOFFREY.

There is no reason to mourn  a  son as  lost  who is  a
religions,  still  less  to  fear  for  his  delicacy  of  constitution.

1.  If  God  makes  your  son  His  son  also,  what  do  you  lose
or  what does he himself lose  ? Being  rich  he becomes
richer  ;  being  already high born, of  still nobler  lineage  ;
being illustrious,  he gains  greater  renown  ; and — what  is
more  than  all — once  a  sinner he is  now  a  saint. He  must
be  prepared  for  the Kingdom that has been  prepared  for
him  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  ; and  for  this  end,  the
short  time  that  he  has  to  live  he  must  spend  with  us ; until
he  has  scraped  off  the tilth of  the  worldly  life,  and  wiped
away  the  earthly  dust,  and at last is fit  for  the  heavenly
mansion. If  you  love  your  son,  of course  you  will  rejoice,
because  he  goes  to  His  Father  and  to  such  a  Father  as  He.
Yea,  he  goes  to  God. But  you  lose  him not : nay,  rather
through  him  you  gain  many  sons. For  all  of  us  who  are  in
or  of  Clairvaux,  acknowledge  him  as a  brother  and  you  as
parents.

2.  But  perchance  you  fear  the  effect  of  a  severe  life  upon
his  body,  which  you  know  to  be  frail  and delicate. But  of
such  fear it is said, "  There  were  they  brought  in  great

fear  where  no  fear  was"  (Ps.  xiv.  9).  Reassure  your
selves,  and  be  comforted.  I  will  be  to  him  a  father,  and  he
shall  be  to  me  a  son,  until  the  Father  of  mercies  and  the
God  of  all  consolation  (cf.  Rom.  xv.  5)  receive  him  from
my  hands.  So  do  not  mourn ;  do  not  weep.  For  your


372  LETTER CXI.

Geoffrey  is  hastening  to  joy  and  not  to  grief.  I  will  be  to
him  father,  mother,  brother,  and  sister.  I  will  make  the
crooked  straight  for  him  and  the  rough  ways  smootli  (cf.
S.  Luke  iii.  5).  I  will  so  order  and  arrange  everything  for
him  that  his  soul  shall  profit  and  his  body  not  suffer  loss.
Moreover,  he  shall  serve  the  Lord  in  joy  and  gladness,  and
shall  sing  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord  that  great  is  the  glory
of  the  Lord  (Ps.  cxxxviii.  5).


LETTER CXI.

IN THE PERSON OF ELIAS, A MONK, TO HIS PARENTS.

He  exhorts  them  not  to  try  to  hinder  him  in  or  draw  him
back  from  his  wish  to  serve  God.  Such  attempt  would  be
unworthy  and  useless.

ELIAS,  a  monk,  but  a  sinner  withal,  to  his  dear  parents
INGORRAN  and  IVETTE,  with  his  daily  prayers.1

i.  There  is  only  one  circumstance  in  which  it  would  be
wrong  to  obey  parents,  and  that  is  when  God  forbids  it.
For  He  Himself  says:  "He  that  lovcth  father  or  mother
more  than  me  is  not  worthy  of  me"  (S.  Matt.  x.  37).  If
you  love  me  in  truth  like  good  and  affectionate  parents :  if
you  have  a  true  and  faithful  affection  towards  your  son,  why
are  you  restless  at  my  hastening  to  please  God,  the  Father
of  all  ?  and  why  do  you  try  to  withdraw  me  from  His  ser
vice,  whom  to  serve  is  to  reign?  Truly  now  I  see  how
a  man's  enemies  arc  the  men  of  his  oian  house  (Micah

1  This  heading  is  now  for  the  first  time  restored  from  the  Corbey  MS.,  which
is  much  valued.  Is  this  Letter  one  of  those  which  the  Saint  sometimes  entrusted
to  the  composition  of  scribes?  (see  Ep. 38g).  Of  it  Horst  speaks  as  follows  : —
"  Bernard  wrote  this  Letter  in  the  name  of  Elias,  his  novice,  to  his  parents,  that
he  might  restrain  them  in  their  attempt  to  dissuade  their  son  from  his  purpose/'
"  Its  contents,"  says  Lessius,  "  might  have  seemed  rather  severe,  had  they  not
proceeded  from  so  great  wisdom  and  piety.  For  who  would  dare  reprove  that
chosen  instrument  of  the  Holy  Spirit?  He  knew  how  important  the  question
was.  Yet  it  is  not  his  way  to  write  in  such  sharp  tones,  unless  it  is  clear  that
their  importunity  must  throw  a  man  into  great  danger,  or  that  his  friends  do
not  cease  pressing  him.''  See  that  most  useful  treatise  on  "  The  choice  of  a
position  in  life,"  quest.  4,  36  ;  compare  Letter  104.


LETTER CXI.  373

vii.  6).  Herein  I  must  not  obey  you  ;  herein  I  own  you
not  as  parents,  but  as  foes.  If  you  loved  me,  surely  you
would  rejoice  because  I  go  to  my  Father  and  your  Father,
nay,  to  the  Father  of  all.  Besides,  what  is  there  common
between  me  and  you  ?  What  have  I  from  you  but  sin  and
misery  ?  It  is  only  this  corruptible  body  which  I  wear  that
I  confess  and  own  to  have  from  you.  Is  it  not  enough  for
you  unhappy  ones,  to  have  brought  me  unhappy  into  the
unhappiness  of  this  world ;  for  you  sinners,  to  have  given
birth  in  your  sin  to  me  a  sinner  ;  to  have  reared  in  sin  a  son
born  in  sin  ;  but  you  must,  by  grudging  me  the  compassion
which  I  have  gained  from  Him  who  willeth  not  the  death
of  a  sinner,  make  me  besides  all  this,  a  child  of  Hell  ?

2.  O,  stern  father  !  O,  harsh  mother !  O,  parents  cruel
and  void  of  affection — -nay,  not  parents  at  all,  but  mur
derers,  whose  only  grief  is  the  salvation  of  their  offspring,
whose  only  comfort  the  death  of  their  son,  who  would
rather  I  should  perish  with  them  than  reign  without  them  !
They  are  trying  to  call  me  back  again  to  the  wreck  from
wrhich  I  at  last  escaped,  naked ;  back  to  the  fire  from  which
with  much  difficulty  I  have  emerged,  half-burnt ;  back  to
the  robbers  by  whom  I  was  left  half-dead,  but  from  whom,
through  the  compassion  of  the  Good  Samaritan,  I  have  now
a  little  recovered.  Aye,  and  in  the  moment  of  triumph,
when  the  soldier  of  Christ  has  almost  carried  the  citadel  of
heaven — -I  boast  not  in  myself  but  in  Him  who  has  con
quered  the  world — they  strive  to  bring  him  back  to  the
world  from  the  very  threshold  of  glory,  as  it  were  a  dog  to
his  vomit,  a  sow  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire.  What
monstrous  treatment  !  The  house  is  in  flames,  the  fire
presses  on  from  behind.  He  who  would  flee  is  prevented
from  going  out ;  he  who  would  escape  is  persuaded  to  re
turn  !  And  that  by  those  who  are  set  in  the  midst  of
the  conflagration,  and  who,  out  of  sheer  obstinate  in
fatuation  and  infatuated  obstinacy,  will  not  flee  from
the  danger !  What  madness !  If  you  think  nothing  of
your  own  death,  why  do  you  also  wish  for  mine  ?  If,
I  say,  you  neglect  your  own  salvation,  what  pleasure


374  LETTER CXI.

is  it  to  put  hindrance  in  the  way  of  mine  ?  Why  not
rather  follow  me  in  my  flight,  that  you  may  escape
the  flames?  But,  perhaps,  it  lightens  your  torment
if  you  drag  me  also  into  your  ruin  ;  and  your  only  fear  is
to  perish  by  yourselves  ?  What  solace  will  the  burning  of
one  man  be  able  to  afford  to  others  in  like  case?  What
comfort,  I  ask,  is  it  to  the  damned  to  have  partners  in  their
damnation  ?  What  remedy  is  it  to  the  dying  to  see  others
dying  ?  That  is  not  the  belief  that  I  learn  from  the  rich
man  of  Scripture,  who,  being  in  torments  (cf.  S.  Luke  xvi.
28)  and  despairing  of  freedom  for  himself,  asked  that  a
message  might  be  sent  to  his  brethren,  lest  they  also  should
come  to  the  same  place  of  torment.  Doubtless  he  feared
that  his  own  suffering  would  be  increased  by  that  of  his
kindred.

3.  What  then  ?  Shall  I  go  and  console  my  sorrowing
mother  by  a  short  visit  in  time,  simply  that  in  eternity  I
may  sorrow  both  for  myself  and  her  without  consolation?
Shall  I  go,  I  say,  and  make  amends  to  my  angry  father  for
my  absence  in  time,  and  myself  find  comfort  for  a  time  in
his  presence,  that  afterwards  each  for  himself  and  either
for  other  we  may  be  abandoned  to  an  inconsolable  grief?
Were  it  not  better  to  follow  the  example  of  the  Apostle,
and,  Conferring  not  with  flesh  and  blood  (Gal.  i.  16),  to
listen  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  who  commands,  Let  the
dead  bury  their  dead  ?  (S.  Matt.  viii.  22).  Shall  I  not
sing  with  David,  My  soul  refused  comfort  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  2),
and  with  Jeremiah,  Neither  have  I  desired  the  woeful  day,
thou  knowest  ?  (Jer.  xvii.  16).  For  why?  The  lot  is
fallen  unto  me  in  a  fair  ground ;  yea,  I  have  a  goodly
heritage  (Ps.  xvi.  7).  Am  I,  then,  tricked  by  an  earthly
promise,  or  charmed  by  some  fleshly  comfort?  When  men
have  tasted  of  spiritual  dainties,  needs  must  that  those  of
the  flesh  seem  tasteless.  Set  your  affections  on  things
above,  and  things  below  are  insipid  ;  yearn  after  things
eternal,  and  you  scorn  things  transient.  Cease,  then,  my
dear  parents,  cease  to  trouble  yourselves  with  vain  laments
and  to  disturb  me  to  no  purpose  by  calling  me  back;  lest,


LETTER CXII.  375

if  you  keep  on  sending  messengers  about  me,  you  compel
me  to  withdraw  still  more.  But  if  you  abandon  [me],  I  shall
never  abandon  Clairvaux  :  This  shall  be  rny  rest  for  ever  ;
here  -will  I  dwell,  for  I  have  a  delight  therein  (Ps.  cxxxii.
15).  Here  will  I  pray  instantly  for  your  sins  and  mine;
here  with  constant  prayers  will  I  obtain,  if  I  can,  what  you
also  desire,  that  we,  who  for  love  of  Him  are  separated
from  each  other  for  this  short  life,  may  in  the  happy  and
indissoluble  fellowship  of  another  world  live  in  His  love
for  ever  and  ever.  Amen.


LETTER  CXII.

To  GEOFFREY,  OF  LisiEux.1

He  grieves  at  his  having  abandoned  his  purpose  to  enter
the  religious  life  and  returned  to  the  world.  He  c.xJwrts
him  to  be  wise  again.

i.  I  am  grieved  for  you,  my  son  Geoffrey,  I  am  grieved
for  you.  And  not  without  reason.  For  who  would  not
grieve  that  the  flower  of  your  youth,  which,  amid  the  joy
of  angels,  you  offered  unimpaired  to  God  for  the  odour  of
a  sweet  smell  (Phil.  iv.  18),  should  now  be  trampled  under
the  feet  of  devils,  stained  by  the  filthiness  of  vice  and  the
uncleanness  of  the  world  ?  How  can  you,  who  once  wast
called  by  God,  follow  the  devil  who  calls  you  back  ?  How
is  it  that  you,  whom  Christ  began  to  draw  after  Himself,
have  suddenly  withdrawn  your  foot  from  the  very  threshold
of  glory  ?  In  you  I  now  have  proof  of  the  truth  of  the
Lord's  word,  when  He  said:  A  man's  foes  shall  be  they  of
his  own  household  (S.  Matt.  x.  36).  Your  friends  and
kinsfolk  have  approached  and  stood  against  you.  They
have  called  you  back  into  the  jaws  of  the  lion,  and  have
placed  you  once  more  in  the  gates  of  death.  They  have

1  Some  have  "  Luxeuil."  This  word  Ordericus  also  generally  uses  to  designate
Lisieux,  in  Xeustria,  so  that  there  is  no  uniform  distinction  of  names  between
Lisieux  and  Luxeuil,  in  the  County  of  Burgundy,  found  among  writers  of  this
period.


376  LETTER CXIII.

placed  you  in  dark  places,  like  the  dead  of  this  world  ;  and
now  it  is  a  matter  for  little  surprise  that  you  are  descending
into  the  belly  of  hell,  which  is  hasting  to  swallow  you  up,
and  to  give  you  over  as  a  prey  to  be  devoured  by  those
who  roar  in  their  hunger.

2.  Return,  I  pray  you  ;  return  before  the  deep  swallow
thee  up  and  the  pit  shut  her  mouth  upon  thee  (Ps.  Ixix.
1 6);  before  you  sink  whence  you  shall  never  more  rise;
before  you  be  bound  hand  and  foot  and  cast  into  outer
darkness,  where  there  is  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth
(S.  Matt.  xxii.  13)  ;  before  you  be  thrust  down  to  the  place
of  darkness  and  covered  with  the  gloom  of  death.  Perhaps
you  blush  to  return,  because  you  gave  way  for  an  hour.
Blush,  indeed,  for  your  flight,  but  do  not  blush  to  return  to
the  battle  after  your  flight,  and  to  fight  again.  The  fight  is
not  over  yet.  Not  yet  have  the  opposing  lines  drawn  off
from  each  other.  Victory  is  still  in  your  power.  If  you
will,  we  are  unwilling  to  conquer  without  you,  and  we  do
not  grudge  to  you  your  share  of  glory.  I  will  even  gladly
come  to  meet  you  and  gladly  welcome  you  with  open  arms,
saying  :  It  is  meet  that  we  should  make  merry  and  be
glad ;  for  this  thy  brother  was  dead  and  is  alive  again  ;
he  was  lost  and  is  found  (S.  Luke  xv.  32).


LETTER CXIII.

To THE VIRGIN SOPHIA.

He  praises  her  for  having  despised  the  glory  of  the
world :  and,  setting  forth  the  praises,  privileges,  and
rewards  of  Religious  Virgins,  exhorts  her  to  persevere.

BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  to  the  Virgin  SOPHIA,
that  she  may  keep  the  title  of  virginity  and  attain  its
reward.

i.  Favour  is  deceitful  and  beauty  is  vain;  but  a
woman  that  fearet/i  the  Lord,  she  shall  be  praised
(Prov.  xxxi.  31).  I  rejoice  with  you,  my  daughter,  in  the


LETTER CXI1I.  377

glory  of  your  virtue,  whereby,  as  I  hear,  you  have  been
enabled  to  reject  the  deceitful  glory  of  the  world.  That,
indeed,  deserves  rejection  and  disdain.  But  whereas
many  who  in  other  respects  are  wise,  are  in  their  estima
tion  of  worldly  glory  become  foolish,  you  deserve  to  be
praised  for  not  being  deceived.  It  is  as  the  flower  of  the  grass
—  (James  i.  10) — a  vapour  that  appcareth  for  a  little  time
iS.  James  iv.  14).  And  every  degree  of  that  glory  is  without
doubt  more  full  of  care  than  joy.  At  one  time  you  have
claims  to  advance,  at  another,  yourself  to  defend;  you  envy
others,  or  are  suspicious  of  them;  you  are  continually  aim
ing  to  acquire  what  you  do  not  possess,  and  the  passion  for
acquiring  is  not  satisfied  even  by  success  ;  and  as  long  as
this  is  the  case,  what  rest  is  there  in  your  glory?  But  if
any  there  be,  its  enjoyment  quickly  passes,  never  to  return;
while  care  remains,  never  to  leave.  Besides,  see  how
many  fail  to  attain  that  enjoyment,  and  yet  how  few
despise  it.  Why  so  ?  Just  because  though  many  of  neces
sity  endure  it  [i.e.,  the  deprivation  of  pleasure],  yet  but
few  make  of  doing  so  a  virtue.  Few,  I  say,  very  few,  and
particularly  of  the  nobly-born.  Indeed,  not  many  noble
are  called  ;  but  God  hath  chosen  the  base  things  of  the
•world  (i  Cor.  i.  26-28).  You  are,  then,  blessed  and  privileged
among  women  of  your  rank  in  that,  while  others  strive  in
rivalry  for  worldly  glory,  you  by  your  contempt  of  this
glory  are  raised  to  a  greater  height  of  glory,  and  are
elevated  by  glory  of  a  higher  kind.  Certainly  you  are  the
more  renowned  and  illustrious  for  having  made  yourself
voluntarily  humble  than  for  your  birth  in  a  high  rank.
For  the  one  is  your  own  achievement  by  the  grace  of  God,
the  other  is  the  doing  of  your  ancestors.  And  that  which
is  your  own  is  the  more  precious,  as  it  is  the  most  rare.
For  if  among  men  virtue  is  rare — a  "  rare  bird  on  the
earth  " — how  much  rarer  is  it  in  the  case  of  a  weak  woman
of  high  birth  ?  Who  can  find  a  virtuous  woman  ?  (Prov.
xxxi.  10).  Much  more  "  a  virtuous  woman  "  of  high  birth
as  well.  Although  God  is  not  by  any  means  an  accepter
of  persons,  yet,  I  know  not  how,  virtue  is  more  pleasing  in


37$  LETTER CXIII.

those  of  noble  birth.  Perhaps  that  may  be  because  it  is  more-
conspicuous.  For  if  a  man  is  of  mean  birth  and  is  devoid
of  glory,  it  is  not  easily  clear  whether  he  lacks  virtue
because  he  does  not  wish  for  it  or  because  he  cannot  attain
it.  I  honour  virtue  won  under  stress  of  necessity.  But  I
honour  more  the  virtue  which  a  free  choice  adopts  than  that
which  necessity  imposes.

2.  Let  other  women,  then,  who  have  not  any  other  hope,
contend  for  the  cheap,  fleeting,  and  paltry  glory  of  things
that  vanish  and  deceive.  Do  you  cling  to  the  hope  that
confounds  not.  Do  you  keep  yourself,  I  say,  for  that  far
more  exceeding  -weight  of  glory,  which  our  light  affliction,
which  is  but  for  a  moment,  workcth  (2  Cor.  iv.  17)  for  you
on  high.  And  if  the  daughters  of  Belial  reproach  you,
those  who  walk  with  stretched  forth  necks  mincing  as  thcv
go  (Isaiah  iii.  16),  decked  out  and  adorned  like  the  Temple,
answer  them  :  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  (S.  John
xviii.  36)  ;  answer  them  :  My  time  is  not  yet  come,  but
your  time  is  always  ready  (S.  John  vii.  6)  ;  answer  them  :
My  glory  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God  (Col.  iii.  3)  ;  When
Christ,  who  is  my  life,  shall  appear,  then  shall  I  also
appear  with  Him  in  glory  (Col.  iii.  4).  And  yet  if  one
needs  must  glory,  you  also  may  glory  freely  and  fearlessly,
only  in  the  Lord.  I  omit  the  crown  which  the  Lord  hath
prepared  for  you  for  ever.  I  say  nothing  of  the  promises
which  await  you  hereafter,  that  as  a  happy  bride  you  are  to
be  admitted  to  behold  with  open  face  the  glory  of  your
Bridegroom ;  that  He  will  present  you  to  Himself  a
glorious  bride,  not  having  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such
thing  (Eph.  v.  27)  ;  that  He  will  receive  you  in  an  ever
lasting  embrace,  will  place  His  lift  hand  under  your  head
and  His  right  hand  shall  embrace  you  (Cant.  ii.  6).  I  pass
over  the  appointed  place,  which  being  set  apart  by  the
prerogative  of  virginity,  you  shall  without  doubt  gain
among  sons  and  daughters  in  the  kingdom.  I  say  nothing
of  that  new  song  which  you,  a  virgin  among  virgins,  shall
likewise  sing  in  tones  of  unrivalled  sweetness,  rejoicing
therein  and  making  glad  the  city  of  God,  singing  and


LETTER CXI1I.  379

running  and  following  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth.
In  fact,  eye  hath  not  seen  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have
entered  into  the  heart  of  man  the  things  which  He  hath
prepared  (i  Cor.  ii.  9)  for  you,  and  for  which  it  behoves  you
to  be  prepared.

3.  All  this  I  omit,  that  is  laid  up  for  you  hereafter.  I
speak  only  of  the  present,  of  those  things  which  you  already
have,  of  the  first  fruits  of  the  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  23),  the
gifts  of  the  Bridegroom,  the  earnest  money  of  the  espousals,
the  blessings  of  goodness  (Ps.  xxi.  3),  wherewith  he  hath
prevented  you,  whom  you  may  expect  to  follow  after  you,
and  complete  what  still  is  lacking.  Let  Him,  yea  let  Him,
come  forth  to  be  beheld  in  His  great  beauty,  so  adorned  as
to  be  admired  of  the  very  angels,  and  if  the  daughters  of
Babylon,  whose  glory  is  in  their  shame  (Phil.  iii.  19),  have
aught  like  Him,  let  them  bring  it  forth,  Though  they  be  clothed
in  purple  and  fine  linen  (S.  Luke  xvi.  19).  Yet  their  souls
are  in  rags;  they  have  sparkling  necklaces,  but  tarnished
minds.  You,  on  the  other  hand,  though  ragged  without,
are  all  glorious  within  (Ps.  xlv.  14),  though  to  Divine  and  not
human  gaze.  Within  you  have  that  which  delights  you,  for
He  is  within  whom  it  delights  ;  for  certainly  you  do  not  doubt
that  you  have  Christ  dwelling  in  your  heart  by  faith  (Eph.
iii.  17).  In  truth,  The  King's  daughter  is  all  glorious
within  (Ps.  xlv.  14).  Rejoice  greatly,  O  daughter  of  Z ion  :
slwut,  O  daughter  of  Jerusalem,  because  the  King  hath
desired  thy  beauty ;  if  thou  art  clothed  witli  confession
and  honour  (Ps.  civ.  i,  VuLG.),  and  deckest  thyself  with
livht  as  it  were  with  a  garment — For  confession  and

<S  G>  *"

worship  arc  before  Him  (Ps.  xcvi.  6,  VULG.).  Before
whom?  Him  who  \%  fairer  than  the  sons  of  men  (Ps.  xlv.
3),  even  Him  whom  the  angels  desire  to  look  upon.

4.  You  hear,  then,  to  whom  you  are  pleasing.  Love  that
which  enables  you  to  please,  love  "  confession,"  if  you
desire  "honour."  "Confession"  is  the  handmaid  of
"  honour,"  the  handmaid  of  "  worship."  Both  are  for  you.
"Thou  art  clothed  with  confession  and  honour,"  and
"  Confession  and  worship  are  before  Him."  In  truth,


380  LETTER CXIII.

where  confession  is,  there  is  worship,  and  there  is  honour.
If  there  are  sins,  they  are  washed  away  in  confession ;  if
there  are  good  works,  they  are  commended  by  confession.
When  you  confess  your  faults,  it  is  a  sacrifice  to  God  of  a
troubled  spirit ;  when  you  confess  the  benefits  of  God,  you
offer  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  praise.  Confession  is  a
fair  ornament  of  the  soul,  which  both  cleanses  a  sinner  and
makes  the  righteous  more  thoroughly  cleansed.  Without
confession  the  righteous  is  deemed  ungrateful,  and  the
sinner  accounted  dead.  Confession  perisheth  from  tiie
dead  as  from  one  that  is  not  (Ecclus.  xvii.  28).  Confes
sion,  therefore,  is  the  life  of  the  sinner,  the  glory  of  the
righteous.  It  is  necessary  to  the  sinner,  it  is  equally  proper
to  the  righteous.  For  it  becometh  well  the  just  to  be
thankful  (Ps.  xxxiii.  i).  Silk  and  purple  and  rouge  and
paint  have  beauty,  but  impart  it  not.  Every  such
thing  that  you  apply  to  the  body  exhibits  its  own  loveli
ness,  but  leaves  it  not  behind.  It  takes  the  beauty  with  it,
when  the  thing  itself  is  taken  away.  For  the  beauty  that
is  put  on  with  a  garment  and  is  put  off  with  the  garment,
belongs  without  doubt  to  the  garment,  and  not  to  the
wearer  of  it.

5.  Do  not  you,  therefore,  emulate  those  evil  disposed
persons  who,  as  mendicants,  seek  an  extraneous  beauty
when  they  have  lost  their  own.  They  only  betray  how
destitute  they  are  of  any  proper  and  native  beauty,  when
at  such  great  labour  and  cost  they  study  to  furnish  them
selves  outside  with  the  many  and  various  graces  of  the
fashion  of  the  world  which  passeth  away,  just  that  they
may  appear  graceful  in  the  eyes  of  fools.  Deem  it  a  thing
unworthy  of  you  to  borrow  your  attractiveness  from  the
furs  of  animals  and  the  toils  of  worms  ;  let  your  own
suffice  you.  For  that  is  the  true  and  proper  beauty  of  any
thing,  which  it  has  in  itself  without  the  aid  of  any  substance
besides.  Oh  !  how  lovely  the  flush  with  which  the  jewel  of
inborn  modesty  colours  a  virgin's  cheeks  !  Can  the  ear
rings  of  queens  be  compared  to  this  ?  And  self-discipline
confers  a  mark  of  equal  beauty.  How  self-discipline  calms


LETTER CXIII.  381

the  whole  aspect  of  a  maiden's  bearing,  her  whole  temper
of  mind.  It  bows  the  neck,  smooths  the  proud  brows,
composes  the  countenance,  restrains  the  eyes,  represses
laughter,  checks  the  tongue,  tempers  the  appetite,  assuages
wrath,  and  guides  the  deportment.  With  such  pearls  of
modesty  should  your  robe  be  decked.  When  virginity  is
girt  with  divers  colours  such  as  these,  is  there  any  glory  to
which  it  is  not  rightly  preferred  ?  The  Angelic  ?  An  angel
has  virginity,  indeed,  but  not  flesh  ;  and  in  that  respect
his  happiness  exceeds  his  virtue.  Surely  that  adornment
is  best  and  most  desirable  which  even  an  angel  might  envy.
6.  There  remains  still  one  more  remark  to  be  made
about  the  adornment  of  the  Christian  virgin.  The  more
peculiarly  your  own  it  is,  the  more  secure  it  remains  to
you.  You  see  women  of  the  world  burdened,  rather  than
adorned,  with  gold,  silver,  precious  stones  ;  in  short,  with
all  the  raiment  of  a  palace.  You  see  how  they  draw  long-
trains  behind  them,  and  those  of  the  most  costly  materials,
and  raise  thick  clouds  of  dust  into  the  air.  Let  not  such
things  disturb  you.  They  must  lay  them  aside  when  they
come  to  die  ;  but  the  holiness  which  is  your  possession  will
not  forsake  you.  The  things  which  they  wear  are  really
not  their  own.  When  they  die  they  can  take  nothing  with
them,  nor  will  this  their  glory  go  down  with  them.  The
world,  whose  such  things  are,  will  keep  them  and  dismiss
the  wearers  naked ;  and  will  beguile  with  them  others
equally  vain.  But  that  adornment  of  yours  is  not  of  such
sort.  As  I  said,  you  may  be  quite  sure  that  it  will  not
leave  you,  because  it  is  your  own.  You  cannot  be  deprived
of  it  by  the  violence,  nor  defrauded  of  it  by  the  deceit  of
any  man.  Against  such  possessions  the  cunning  of  the
thief  and  the  cruelty  of  the  tyrant  avail  nothing.  It  is  not
eaten  of  moths,  nor  corrupted  by  age,  nor  spent  by  use.
It  lives  on  even  in  death.  Indeed,  it  belongs  to  the  soul
and  not  to  the  body  ;  and  for  this  reason  it  leaves  the  body
together  with  the  soul,  and  does  not  perish  with  the  body.
And  even  those  who  kill  the  body  have  absolutely  nothing
that  they  can  do  to  the  soul.


382  LETTER CXIV.

LETTER CXIV.

TO ANOTHER HOLY VIRGIN.

Under  a  religious  habit  she  had  continued  to  have  a
spirit  given  up  to  the  world,  and  Bernard  praises  her  for
coming  to  a  sense  of  her  duty ;  he  exhorts  her  not  to
neglect  the  grace  given  to  her.

i.  It  is  the  source  of  great  joy  to  me  to  hear  that  you  are
willing  to  strive  after  that  true  and  perfect  joy,  which  be
longs  not  to  earth  but  to  heaven  ;  that  is,  not  to  this  vale  of
tears,  but  to  that  city  of  God  which  the  rivers  of  the  flood
thereof  make  glad  (Ps.  xlvi.  4).  And  in  very  truth  that  is
the  true  and  only  joy  which  is  won,  not  from  the  creature,
but  from  the  Creator ;  which,  if  once  you  possess  it,  no
man  shall  take  from  you.  For,  compared  with  it,  all  joy
from  other  sources  is  sorrow,  all  pleasure  is  pain,  all  sweet
ness  is  bitter,  all  beauty  is  mean,  everything  else,  in  fine;,
whatever  may  have  power  to  please,  is  irksome.  Indeed,  you
are  my  witness  in  this  matter.  Ask  yourself,  for  you  will
believe  yourself  more  readily.  Does  not  the  Holy  Spirit
proclaim  this  very  truth  in  your  heart  ?  Have  you  not  been
persuaded  of  the  truth  hereof  by  Him  long  before  I  spoke  ?
For  how  would  you,  being  a  woman,  or  rather  a  young  girl
so  fair  and  ingenuous,  have  thus  overcome  the  weakness  of
your  sex  and  years  ;  how  could  you  thus  hold  cheap  your
extreme  beauty  and  noble  birth,  unless  all  such  things  as
are  subject  to  the  bodily  senses  were  already  vile  in  your
eyes,  in  comparison  with  those  which  inwardly  strengthen
you  to  overcome  the  earthly,  and  charm  you  to  prefer
things  heavenly  ?

2.  And  this  is  right.  Poor  and  transient  and  earthly  are
the  things  which  you  despise,  but  the  things  you  wrish  for
are  grand,  heavenly,  and  everlasting.  I  will  say  still  more,
and  still  speak  the  truth.  You  leave  the  darkness  to  ap
proach  the  light;  you  come  forth  from  the  depth  of  the  sea
and  gain  the  harbour ;  you  breathe  again  in  happy  freedom
after  a  wretched  slavery  ;  in  a  word,  you  pass  from  death


LETTER CXIV.  383

to  life  ;  though  up  till  now,  living  according  to  your  own
will  and  not  God's,  to  your  own  law  and  not  that  of  God,
while  living  you  were  dead — living  to  the  world,  but  dead
to  God  ;  or  rather,  to  speak  more  truly,  living  neither  to
the  world  nor  to  God.  For  when  you  wished  while  wearing
the  habit  and  name  of  religion  to  live  like  one  in  the  world,
you  alone  had  rejected  God  from  you  by  your  own  wish.
But  when  you  could  not  effect  your  foolish  wish,  then  it
was  not  you  that  rejected  the  world,  but  the  world  you.
And  so,  rejecting  God  and  rejected  by  the  world,  you  had
fallen  between  two  stools,1  as  they  say.  You  were  not
livino-  unto  God,  because  you  would  not,  nor  to  the  world,

O  *

because  you  could  not:  you  were  anxious  for  one,  unwelcome
to  the  other,  and  yet  dead  to  both.  So  it  must  happen  to
those  who  promise  and  do  not  perform,  who  make  one  show-
to  the  world,  and  in  their  hearts  desire  something  else.
But  now,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  you  are  beginning  to  live
again,  not  to  sin,  but  to  righteousness,  not  to  the  world,  but
to  Christ,  knowing  that  to  live  to  the  world  is  death,  and
even  to  die  in  Christ  is  life.  Blessed  are  the  dead  which
die  in  the  Lord  (Rev.  xiv.  13).

3.  So  from  this  time  I  shall  not  mention  again  your  un
fulfilled  vow,  nor  your  disregard  of  your  profession.  From
henceforth  your  purity  of  body  will  not  be  impaired  by  a
corrupt  mind,  nor  your  name  of  virgin  disgraced  by  dis
orderly  conduct  ;  from  henceforth  the  name  you  bear  will
not  be  a  deception,  nor  the  veil  you  wear  meaningless.  For
why  hitherto  have  you  been  addressed  as  "  nun  '"-'  and  "  holy
virgin"  when,  professing  holiness,  you  did  not  live  holily?
Why  did  you  let  the  veil  on  your  head  give  a  false  impres
sion  of  the  reverence  due  to  you,  while  your  eye  launched
burning  and  passionate  glances  ?  Your  head  was  clothed,

1  Compare  in  this  place  Imitation  of  Christ,  Bk.  i.  c.  25.  "A  religious  per
son  who  has  become  slothful  and  lukewarm  lias  trouble  upon  trouble,  and  suffers
anguish  on  every  side,  because  he  lacks  consolation  from  within,  and  is  debarred
from  seeking  it  without."  Read  also  Sermons  3  and  5  upon  the  Ascension.

-  This  expression  is  borrowed  from  the  Rule  of  S.  Benedict,  in  which  it  is  said
that  the  younger  shall  call  their  elders  iwnna  (in  monasteries  for  men  nonnus)
Chap.  Ixiii.


384  LETTER CXIV.

indeed,  with  a  veil,  but  it  was  lifted  up  with  pride,  and
though  you  were  under  the  symbol  of  modesty,  your  speech
sounded  far  from  modest.  Your  immoderate  laughter,  un
reserved  demeanour,  and  showy  dress  would  have  accorded
better  with  the  wimple1  than  the  veil.  But  behold  now,  at
the  bidding  of  Christ,  the  old  things  have  passed  away,  and
all  things  begin  to  be  made  new,  since  you  are  changing
the  care  of  the  body  for  that  of  the  soul,  and  are  desirous  of
a  beautiful  life  more  than  beautiful  raiment.  You  are  doing
wThat  you  ought  to  do,  or  rather  what  you  ought  to  have
done  long  ago,  for  long  ago  you  had  vowed  to  do  it.  But
the  Spirit,  who  breathes  not  only  where  He  will  but  when
He  will,  had  not  then  breathed  on  you,  and  so,  perhaps,  you
are  to  be  excused  for  what  you  have  done  hitherto.  But  if
you  suffer  the  ardent  zeal  wherewith,  beyond  a  doubt,  your
heart  is  now  hot  again,  and  the  divine  flame  that  burns  in
your  thoughts,  to  be  quenched,  what  remains  for  you  but
the  certain  knowledge  that  you  must  be  destined  for  that
flame  which  cannot  be  quenched.  Nay,  let  the  same  Spirit
rather  quench  in  you  all  carnal  affections,  lest  haply  (which
God  forbid  !)  the  holy  desires  of  your  soul,  so  late  conceived,
should  be  stifled  by  them,  and  you  yourself  be  cast  into  hell
fire.

1  Wimple.  So  all  the  MS.  codices  that  I  have  seen,  viz.,  at  the  Royal
Library,  Colbert  Library,  Sorbonne,  Royal  College  of  Navarre,  S.  Victor  of  Paris
MS.,  MS.  of  Compiegne,  and  others  at  other  libraries,  which  have  "with  the
wimple"  (wimplatge),  though  all  editions  except  two  (viz.,  that  of  Paris,  1494,
and  of  Lyons,  1530)  have  "one  puffed  up"  (uni  inflates).  They  ask  what
"  with  the  wimple  "  (wimplatse)  means.  Of  course  it  is  a  word  formed  from
wimple  or  guimple,  owing  to  the  easy  change  of  g  to  w.  In  French  "  guimpe  "
or  "  guimple ''  is  a  woman's  head-dress,  once  common  with  women  of  noble
birth  (as  we  learn  from  the  old  pictures  of  noble  ladies),  but  the  more  simple
and  modest  refrained  from  wearing  it.  So  we  read  in  the  French  poet,  contained
in  Borellus'  Glossarium  Gallicum  : —

Moult  fut  humiliant  et  simple

Elle  cut  une  voile  en  lieu  de  guimple.
Which  may  be  rendered —

She  was  a  lowly  girl  and  simple,

And  wore  a  veil  in  place  of  wimple.

Now,  however,  the  word  "  wimple  "  is  scarcely  heard  outside  the  cloisters  of
nuns.


LETTER CXV.  385

LETTER CXV.

TO ANOTHER HOLY VIRGIN OF THE CONVENT OF S.

MARY  OF  TROYES.1

He  dissuades  her  from  the  rash  and  imprudent  design
which  she  had  in  her  mind  of  retiring  into  some  solitude.

i.  I  am  told  that  you  are  wishing  to  leave  your  convent,
impelled  by  a  longing  for  a  more  ascetic  life,  and  that  after
spending  all  their  efforts  to  dissuade  and  prevent  you,
seeing  that  you  paid  no  heed  to  them,  your  spiritual
mother  or  your  sisters,  determined  at  length  to  seek  mv
advice  on  the  matter,  so  that  whatever  course  I  approved,
that  you  might  feel  it  your  duty  to  adopt.  You  ought,  of
course,  to  have  chosen  some  more  learned  man  as  an
adviser;  yet  since  it  is  my  advice  you  desire  to  have,  I  do
not  conceal  from  you  what  I  think  the  better  course.  Ever
since  I  learnt  your  wish,  though  I  have  been  turning  the
matter  over  in  my  mind,  I  cannot  easily  venture  to  decide
what  temper  of  mind  suggested  it.  For  you  may  in  this
thing  have  a  zeal  towards  God,  so  that  your  purpose  maybe
excusable.  But  how  such  a  wish  as  yours  can  be  fulfilled
consistently  with  prudence  I  entirely  fail  to  see.  "  Why
so?"  you  ask.  "Is  it  not  wise  for  me  to  flee  from  wealth  and
the  throng  of  cities,  and  from  the  good  cheer  and  pleasure  of
life  ?  Shall  I  not  keep  my  purity  more  safely  in  the  desert,
where  I  can  live  in  peace  with  just  a  few,  or  even  alone,  and
please  Him  alone  to  whom  I  have  pledged  myself?"  By  no
means.  If  one  would  live  in  an  evil  manner,  the  desert
brings  abundant  opportunity :  the  wood  a  protecting  shade,
and  solitude  silence.  The  evil  that  no  one  sees,  no  one
reproves.  Where  no  critic  is  feared,  there  the  tempter
gains  easier  access,  there  wickedness  is  more  readily  com
mitted.  It  is  otherwise  in  a  convent.  If  you  do  anythino-
good  no  one  prevents  you,  but  if  you  would  do  evil  you  are
hindered  by  many  obstacles.  If  you  yield  to  temptation,  it

1  This  convent  still  exists  under  the  rule  of S.  Benedict. It  had  lately  been,
as  Bernard  testifies,  the  object  of  a  reform  when  he  wrote. —  [Mabillon's  note.]
VOL. I.  25


386  LETTER CXV.

is  at  once  known  to  many,  and  is  reproved  and  corrected.
So,  on  the  other  hand,  when  you  are  seen  to  do  anything
good,  all  admire,  revere,  and  copy  it.  You  see,  then,  my
daughter,  that  in  a  convent  a  larger  renown  awaits  your
good  deeds,  and  a  more  speedy  rebuke  your  faults,  because
there  are  others  there  to  whom  you  may  set  an  example:
by  good  deeds  and  whom  you  will  offend  by  evil.

2.  But  I  will  take  away  from  you  every  excuse  for  your
error,  by  that  alternative  in  the  parable  we  read  in  the
Gospel.  Either  you  are  one  of  the  foolish  virgins,  if,  indeed,
you  are  a  virgin,  or  one  of  the  wise  (S.  Matt.  xxv.  1-12).
If  you  are  one  of  the  foolish,  the  convent  is  necessary  to
you  ;  if  of  the  wise,  you  are  necessary  to  the  convent.  For
if  you  are  wise  and  well-approved,  without  doubt  the  reform
wrhich,  though  newly  introduced  into  that  place,  has  already
won  universal  praise,  will  be  greatly  discredited,  and,  I  fear,
be  weakened  by  your  departure.  It  will  not  fail  to  be  said
that,  being  good  yourself,  you  would  not  desert  a  house
where  the  Rule  was  well  carried  out.1  If  you  have  been
known  to  be  foolish,  and  you  go  away,  we  shall  say  that
since  you  are  not  suffered  to  live  an  evil  life  among  good
companions,  you  could  not  endure  longer  the  society  of  holy
women,  and  are  seeking  a  dwelling  where  you  may  live  in
your  own  way.  And  we  shall  be  quite  right.  For  before
the  reform  of  the  Rule  you  never,  I  am  told,  were  wont  to
talk  of  this  plan  ;  but  no  sooner  did  observances  become
stricter,  than  you,  too,  became  suddenly  holier,  and  in  hot
haste  to  think  of  the  desert.  I  see,  my  daughter,  I  see
in  this,  and  I  would  you  also  saw  as  I  do,  the  serpent's
venom,  the  guile  of  the  crafty  one,  and  the  trickery  of  his
changing  skin.  The  wolf  dwells  in  the  wood.  If  a  poor
little  sheep  like  you  should  enter  the  shades  of  the  wood
alone  you  would  be  simply  seeking  to  be  his  prey.  But  listen
tome,  my  daughter;  listen  to  my  faithful  warning.  Whether
sinner  or  saint,  do  not  separate  yourself  from  the  flock,  lest
the  enemy  seize  upon  you,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver

1 Cf.  the  French  equivalent  ''  Le  bon  ordre,"  i.e.,  the  strict  Rule  of  Monastic
Life.


LETTER CXVI.  387

you.  Are  you  a  saint  ?  Strive  by  your  example  to  gain
associates  in  sanctity.  A  sinner?  Do  not  add  sin  to  sin,
but  do  penance  where  you  are,  lest  by  departing,  not  with
out  danger,  as  I  have  shown,  to  yourself,  you  bring  scandal
upon  your  sisters,  and  provoke  the  tongues  of  many  scoffers
against  you.


LETTER CXVI.

To  ERMENGARDE,  FORMERLY  COUNTESS  OF  BRITTANY. l

He  gently  and  tenderly  assures  her  that  he  has  for  her
all  the  sentiments  of  pure  and  religious  affection.

To  his  beloved  daughter  in  Christ,  ERMENGARDE,  once
the  most  noble  Countess,  now  the  humble  handmaid  of
Christ,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  offers  the  pious
affection  of  holy  love.

Would  that,  as  I  now  open  this  page  before  me,  so  I
could  open  my  mind  to  you  !  Oh  !  that  you  could  read  in
my  heart  what  God  has  deigned  to  write  there  with  His

1  She  was  the  wife  of  Count  Alan,  and  a  great  benefactress  to  Clairvaux.
She  built  the  monks  a  monastery  near  the  town  of  Nantes  (see  Ernald,  Life
of  S.  Benu/id,  ii.  34,  and  according  to  Mabillon's  Chronology,  1135  A.D.).  The
name  of  the  monastery  is  Buzay ;  it  is  presided  over  by  the  most  illustrious
Abbot  Caumartin,  who  has  communicated  to  me  the  first  charter  founding  the
convent.  In  this  charter  Duke  Conan,  son  of  Alan  and  Ermengarde,  asserts
that  he  and  his  mother  had  determined  to  build  the  Abbey  of  Buzay,  but  that,
misled  by  evil  counsel  of  certain  persons,  they  had  desisted  from  their  under
taking.  At  length  Bernard,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  came  into  those  parts.  The
House  of  Buzay  was  dependent  upon  his  abbey.  Bernard,  seeing  the  place
almost  desolate,  was  deeply  grieved,  "  and,"  says  Conan,  "  rebuked  me  with
the  most  severe  reproofs  as  false  and  perfidious ;  and  then  ordered  the  abbot
and  monks  who  tarried  there  to  abandon  the  place  and  return  to  Clairvaux.''
Conan  interposed,  and  after  restoring  the  property  of  the  monastery  which  lie
had  taken  away,  took  steps  for  the  completion  of  the  building.  The  charter  is
signed  by  Bishops  Roland,  of  Vannes  ;  Alan,  of  Rennes  ;  John,  of  St.  Malo ;
Iterius,  of  Nantes  ;  and  also  by  Peter,  Abbot  of  the  monastery,  and  Andrew,  a
monk.  But  to  return  to  Ermengarde.  Godfrey,  Abbot  of  Vendome  (Bk.  v.
Letter  23),  urges  her  to  resume  her  purpose  of  entering  the  religious  life,  which
she  appears  to  have  abandoned.  The  same  Godfrey,  in  the  next  Letter,  speaks
of  her  as  of  royal  blood.


388  LETTER CXVII.

own  linger  concerning  my  affection  for  you  !  Then,  indeed,,
you  might  understand,  how  no  tongue  or  pen  can  suffice  to
express,  what  the  spirit  of  God  hath  been  able  to  impress
on  my  inmost  heart  !  And  even  now  I  am  present  with
you  in  the  spirit,  though  absent  in  the  body.  It  is  neither
in  your  power  nor  mine  to  be  in  the  presence  of  the  other.
Yet  you  have  with  you  the  means  whereby  you  may  not
yet  know,  but  at  any  rate  guess  what  I  mean.  Within  your
own  heart  behold  mine  ;  and  ascribe  to  me  as  great  affection
toward  you  as  you  know  to  be  in  yourself  towards  me.  Yet
do  not  think  that  you  have  more  for  me  than  I  for  you  ;  nor
have  a  better  opinion  of  your  own  heart  than  of  mine,  in
respect  of  affection.  Besides,  you  are  too  humble  and
modest  not  to  believe  that  He  who  has  brought  you  so  to
love  me  and  to  follow  my  counsel  for  your  salvation  has
inspired  me  also  with  feelings  of  affectionate  concern  for
you.  So  you  are  thinking  how  you  may  keep  me  with  you ;
and  I,  to  confess  the  truth,  am  nowhere  without  you  or
away  from  you.  I  was  anxious  to  write  this  short  note  to
you  about  my  journey  while  on  the  way,  hoping  to  send
you  a  longer  one  when  I  have  more  leisure,  if  God  will.

LETTER CXVII.

To  THE  SAME.

He commends her readiness in God's service, and
expresses  his  desire  to  see  her.

I  have  received  the  joy  of  my  heart,  good  news  from  you.
I  am  happy  to  hear  of  your  happiness  ;  and  your  ready
service,  now  so  well  known,  makes  me  quite  easy  in  mind.
This  great  happiness  comes  in  no  way  from  flesh  and  blood,
for  you  are  living  in  lowliness  instead  of  state,  in  mean,  not
high  place,  in  poverty  instead  of  wealth.  You  are  deprived
of  the  consolation  of  living  in  your  own  country,  and  of  the
society  of  your  brother  and  your  son.  Without  doubt,  then,
the  willing  devotion  that  hath  been  born  in  you  is  the  work
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  You  have  long  since  conceived  by  the


LETTER CXVIII.  389

fear  of  God  the  design  of  labouring  for  your  salvation,  and
have  at  last  brought  your  design  to  execution,  the  spirit  of
love  casting  out  fear  in  your  soul.  How  much  more  gladly
would  I  be  present  to  say  this  to  you,  than  be  absent  and
write  !  Believe  me,  I  am  annoyed  at  my  business,  which
constantly  seems  to  hinder  me  from  the  sight  of  you ;  and
I  hail  with  joy  the  chances,  which  I  seldom  seem  to  get,  of
seeing  you.  Such  opportunities  are  rare ;  but,  I  confess,
their  very  rarity  makes  them  sweet.  For,  indeed,  it  is
better  to  see  you  just  sometimes  than  never  at  all.  I  hope
to  come  unto  you  shortly  ;  and  I  already  offer  you  a  fore
taste  of  the  joy  that  shall  shortly  come  in  full.


LETTER CXVIII.
To  BEATRICE,  A  NOBLE  AND  RELIGIOUS  LADY.

He  commends  her  love  and  anxious  care.

I  wonder  at  your  zealous  devotion  and  loving  affection
towards  me.  I  ask,  excellent  lady,  what  can  possibly
inspire  in  you  such  great  interest  and  solicitude  for  us  ?
If  we  had  been  sons  or  grandsons,  if  we  had  been  united  to
you  by  the  most  distant  tie  of  relationship,  your  constant
kindnesses,  frequent  visits,  in  a  word,  the  numberless  proofs
of  your  affection  that  we  experience  daily,  would  seem  to
•deserve,  not  so  much  our  wonder,  as  our  acceptance  as  a
matter  of  obligation.  But  as,  in  common  with  the  rest  of
mankind,  we  recognize  in  you  only  a  great  lady,  and  not  a
mother,  the  wonder  is  not  that  we  should  wonder  at  your
goodness,  but  that  we  can  wonder  sufficiently.  For  who  of
our  kinsfolk  and  acquaintance  takes  care  of  us  ?  Who  ever
asks  of  our  health  ?  Who,  I  ask,  is,  I  will  not  say  anxious,
but  even  mindful  of  us  in  the  world  ?  We  are  become,  as
it  were,  a  broken  vessel  to  friends,  relatives,  and  neighbours.
You  alone  cannot  forget  us.  You  ask  of  the  state  and
condition  of  my  health,  of  the  journey  I  have  just  ac
complished,  of  the  monks  whom  I  have  transferred  to


3QO  LETTER CXIX.

another  place.  Of  them  I  may  briefly  reply,  that  out  of  a
desert  land,  from  a  place  of  grim  and  vast  solitude,  they  have
been  brought  into  a  place  where  nothing  is  wanting  to
them,  neither  possessions,  nor  buildings,  nor  friends;  into  a
rich  land  and  a  lovely  dwelling-place.  I  left  them  happy  and
peaceful ;  in  happiness  and  peace,  too,  I  returned  ;  except
that  for  a  few  days  I  was  troubled  with  so  severe  a  return
of  fever  that  I  was  in  fear  of  death.  But  by  God's  mercy
I  soon  got  well  again,  so  that  now  I  think  I  am  stronger
and  better  after  my  journey  is  over  than  before  it  began.


LETTER CXIX.
To  THE  DUKE  AND  DUCHESS  OF  LORRAINE.1

He  thanks  them  for  having  hitherto  remitted  customs  [or
tolls],  but  asks  that  they  will  see  that  their  princely
liberality  is  not  interfered  with  by  the  efforts  of  their
servants.

To  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  LORRAINE,  BERNARD,
Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  sends  greeting,  and  prays  that  they
may  so  lovingly  and  purely  rejoice  in  each  other's  affection
that  the  love  of  Christ  alone  may  be  supreme  in  them  both.

Ever  since  the  needs  of  our  Order  obliged  me  to  send  for
necessaries  into  your  land  I  have  found  great  favour  and
kindness  in  the  eyes  of  your  Grace.  You  freely  displayed
the  blessings  of  your  bounty  on  our  people  when  they
needed  it.  You  freely  remitted  to  them  when  travelling
their  toll,2  the  dues  on  their  purchases,  and  any  other  legal

1  That  is,  Simon  and  Adelaide,  not  Gertrude,  as  most  write. For  the  account
of  the  conversion  of  this  Duchess  by  S.  Bernard  see  Life,  Bk.  i.  c. 14. She  took
the  veil  of  a  Religious in  the  Nunnery  of  Tart,  in  the  environs  of  Dijon,  as  is
clear  from the  autograph  Letters of her son, Duke  Matthew, who calls  his
mother  Athele'ide. These  Letters P.  F. Chifflet  refers  to  at  the  end  of  his  four
Opuscula,  ed.  Paris,  1679. I  do  not  refer  to  the  pretended  Letters  of  Gertrude  to
Bernard,  and  Bernard  to  Gertrude,  translated by Bernard  Brito,  from  French
into  Portuguese  and  thence  into  Latin.

2  Passagium,  a  fixed  payment  from  travellers  entering  or  passing  through  a
country;  droit  de passage  or  "toll.''


LETTER CXX.  3QI

due  of  yours.  For  all  these  things  your  reward  is  surely
great  in  heaven,  if,  indeed,  we  believe  that  to  be  true
which  the  Lord  promises  in  His  Gospel :  Inasmuch  as  ye
have  done  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren  ye
have  done  it  unto  me  (S.  Matt.  xxv.  40).  But  why  is  it  that
you  allow  your  servants  to  take  away  again  what  you  be
stow  ?  It  seems  to  me  that  it  is  worthy  of  you  and  for  your
honour,  that  when  you  have  been  pleased  to  bestow  any
thing  for  the  safety  of  your  souls  no  one  should  venture
to  demand  it  back  again.  If,  then  (which  God  forbid),  you
do  not  repent  of  your  good  deed,  and  your  general  intention
in  respect  to  us  is  still  the  same,  be  pleased  to  order  it  to  be
a  firm  and  unshaken  rule  ;  that  henceforward  our  brethren
may  never  fear  to  be  disturbed  in  this  matter  by  any  of
vour  servants.  But  otherwise  we  do  not  refuse  to  follow
our  Lord's  example,  who  did  not  disdain  to  pay  the  dues.
We  also  are  ready  willingly  to  render  to  Cxsar  the  things
that  are  Cxsar's  (S.  Matt.  xvii.  26),  custom  to  'whom
custom,  and  tribute  to  whom  tribute  is  due  (Rom.  xiii.  7),
especially  because,  according  to  the  Apostle,  we  ought
not  to  seek  our  gift  so  much  as  your  gain  (Phil.  iv.  17).


LETTER CXX.

To  THE  DUCHESS  OF  LORRAINE.

He  thanks  her  for  kindnesses  shown,  and  deters  her  from
an  unjust  war.

I  thank  God  for  your  pious  goodwill  which  I  know  that
you  have  towards  Him  and  His  servants.  For  whenever
the  tiniest  little  spark  of  heavenly  love  is  kindled  in  a
worldly  heart  ennobled  with  earthly  honours,  that,  without
doubt,  is  God's  gift,  not  man's  virtue.  For  our  part  we  are
very  glad  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  kind  offers  made  to  us  of
your  bounty  in  your  letter.  But  having  heard  of  the  sudden
and  serious  stress  of  business,  which,  of  course,  must  be  de
laying  you  at  this  time,  we  think  it  meet  to  await  your
opportunity  as  it  shall  please  you.  For,  as  far  as  in  me  lies,


392  LETTER CXXI.

I  would  not  be  a  burden  to  anyone,  particularly  in  things
pertaining  to  God,  where  we  ought  to  seek  not  so  much  the
profit  of  the  gift  as  advantage  abounding  to  the  giver.  And
so,  if  you  please,  name  a  day  and  place  in  your  answer  by
this  messenger,  when,  by  God's  help,  having  brought  to  an
end  the  business  which  now  occupies,  you  will  be  able  to
approach  these  regions,  where  our  brother  Wido  T  will
meet  you,  so  that  if  he  finds  anything  in  your  country
profitable  for  our  Order  you  may  fulfil  your  promise  with
greater  ease  and  speed.  For  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver
(2  Cor.  ix.  7).  Otherwise,  if  perchance  the  delay  please
you  not,  let  me  know  this  also :  for  in  this  matter  I  am
ready,  as  reason  allows,  to  obey  your  wishes.  I  salute  the
Duke,  your  husband,  through  your  mouth,  and  I  venture  to
urge  him  and  you  both,  if  you  know  that  the  castle  for  which
you  are  going  to  war  does  not  belong  to  your  rightful
domain,  for  the  love  of  God  to  let  it  alone.  For  what  shall
it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  -whole  world  and  lose  his  own
(S.  Matt.  xvi.  26).


LETTER CXXI.

To  THE  DUCHESS  OF  BURGUNDY.2

He  tries to appease  her anger  against  Hugo,  and  asks
her  assent  to  a  certain  marriage.

The  special  friendship  with  which  your  Grace  is  pleased,
as  it  is  supposed,  to  honour  me,  a  poor  monk,  is  so  widely
known  that  whenever  anyone  thinks  your  Grace  has  him  in
displeasure,  he  applies  to  me  as  the  best  medium  for  being
restored  to  your  favour.  Hence  it  is  that  some  time  ago,
when  I  was  at  Dijon,  Hugo  de  Bese  urged  me  with  many

1  I  think  this  is  Wido  [or  Guy?],  Abbot  of  Trois  Fontaines,  who  frequently
went  to  Lorraine.  Cf.  63,  69.

-  Matilda,  wife  of  Hugo  I.,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  who  was  cherishing  her  anger
against  Hugo  de  Bese.  This  place  was  situate  four  leagues  from  Dijon,  and
famous  for  the  Monastery  of  that  name  (Bese)  of  the  Benedictine  Order.  About
this  Hugo  see  Perard,  pp.  221,  222.


LETTER CXXII.  393

entreaties  to  appease  your  displeasure,  which  he  had
deserved,  and  to  obtain,  for  the  love  of  God,  and  by  your
kindness  towards  me,  your  assent  to  the  marriage  of  his
son,  which,  though  it  did  not  meet  with  your  approval,  he
had  irrevocably  determined  to  make,  since  it  was,  as  he
thinks,  an  advantage  to  himself.  And  for  this  reason  he
has  been  besieging  my  ears,  not  as  before,  by  his  own
prayers,  but  by  the  lips  of  his  friends.  Now,  I  do  not  much
care  about  worldly  advantages,  but  since  the  matter,  as  he
himself  says,  seems  to  have  reached  such  a  narrow  pass
that  he  cannot  prevent  the  marriage  except  by  perjuring
himself,  I  have  thought  it  meet  to  tell  you  this,  since  that
must  be  a  serious  object  which  should  be  preferred  to  the
good  faith  of  a  Christian  man  and  your  servant.  For  he
cannot  be  perjured  and  yet  at  the  same  time  keep  faith
with  his  Prince.1  Aye,  and  I  see  not  only  no  gain  to  you,
but  also  much  danger  arising,  if  those  whom  perhaps  God
has  determined  to  join  together  should  be  put  asunder  by
you.  May  the  Lord  grant  His  grace  to  you,  most  noble
lady,  so  dear  to  me  in  Christ,  and  to  your  children.
Behold,  now  is  the  acceptable  time ;  behold ',  now  is  the
.day  of  salvation.  Spend  your  corn  on  Christ's  poor,  that
in  eternity  you  may  receive  it  with  usury.


LETTER CXXII. (Circa  A.I). 1130.)

HlLDEBERT,  ARCHBISHOP  OF  TOURS,  TO  THE  ABBOT
BERNARD.'-

The  reputation  of  Bernard  for  sanctity  induces  Hilde-
bcrt  to  write  to  him  and  ask  for  his  friendship.

i. Few,  I  believe,  are  ignorant  that  balsam  is  known  by
its scent, and  the  tree by  its  fruit. So, dearly  beloved

1  Legalitati,  i.e.,  good  faith,  which  consists  in  performing  promises  once  made.

2  In  not  a  few  MSS.  this  Letter,  with  the  answer  following,  is  placed  after
Letter  127,  and  in  some  even  after  Letter  252. Hildebert,  the  author  of  this
Letter,  ruled  the  Church  of  Mans  (1098-1125),  whence,  on  the  death  of  Gilbert,
he  was  translated  to  the  Metropolitan  See  of  Tours. This  is  clear,  first  from
Ordericus  Vitalis,  Bk.  x.,  sub  aim.,  1098,  and  next  from  the  Acts  of the  Bishops


394  LETTER CXXII.

brother,  there  has  reached  even  to  me  the  report  of  you —
how  you  are  steadfast  in  holiness,  and  sound  in  doctrine.
For  though  I  am  far  separated  from  you  by  distance  of
place,  yet  the  report  has  come  even  to  me.  What  pleasant
nights  you  spend  with  your  Rachel  ;  how  abundant  an  off
spring  is  born  to  you  of  Leah  ;  how  you  show  yourself
wholly  a  follower  of  virtue,  and  an  enemy  of  the  flesh.
Whoever  speaks  to  me  of  you  has  this  one  tale  to  tell.
Such  is  the  perfume  of  your  name,  like  that  of  balm,  poured
out ;  such  are  already  the  rewards  of  your  merit.  These
are  the  ears  that  you  are  gathering  from  your  field  before
the  last  great  harvest.  For  in  this  life  some  reward  of
virtue  is  to  be  found  in  the  notable  and  undying  tribute
paid  to  it.  This  it  wins  unaided,  and  keeps  unaided.  Its
renown  is  not  diminished  by  envy,  nor  increased  by  the
favour  of  men.  As  the  esteem  of  good  men  cannot  be
taken  away  by  false  accusations,  so  it  cannot  be  won  by  the
attentions  of  flattery.  It  rests  with  the  individual  himself
either  to  advance  that  esteem  by  fruitfulness  in  virtue,  or
to  detract  from  it  by  deficiency.  The  whole  Church,  I  am
quite  sure,  hopes  that  your  renown  will  be  for  ever  sus
tained,  since  it  is  believed  to  be  founded  upon  a  strong
rock.

2. As  for  me,  having  heard  this  report  of  you  everywhere,
with  desire  I  have  desired  to  be  received  into  the  inmost

of  Mans,  published  in  the  third  volume  of  Analecta,  where  Guido,  his  successor
in  the  See  of  Mans,  is  said  to  have  been  consecrated,  after  long  strife,  in  1126.
Hildebert  only  ruled  in  Tours  six  years  and  as  many  months.  So  say  the  Acts
just  mentioned.  With  them  agrees  a  dissertation  by  Duchesne,  and  John
Maan's  History  of  the  Metropolitan  See  of  Tours,  and  so  also  Ordericus  Vitalis
on  the  year  1125  (p.  882),  where  he  assigns  to  Hildebert  an  Archiepiscopate  of
about  seven  years.  Hildebert,  then,  did  not  reach  the  year  1136,  as  GalLia
Christiana  says,  but  died  in  i  [32,  in  which  year  John  Maan  places  his  death.
Horst,  in  the  note  to  this  Letter,  refers  to  another  Letter  of  Hildebert  (the  24th),
which  he  thinks  was  also  written  to  Bernard.  But  this  Letter,  which  in  all  the
editions  appears  without  the  name  of  the  person  to  whom  it  was  addressed,  is
entitled  in  two  MSS.  "To.  H.,  Abbot  of  Cluny,''  which  we  have  followed.
From  this  Letter  we  understand  that  Hildebert  had  it  in  mind  to  retire  to  Cluny,
if  the  Supreme  Pontiff  would  allow  him.  Peter  of  Blois  praises  his  Letters.
(Ep.  ioj.)


LETTER CXXIII.  395

shrine  of  your  friendship,  and  to  be  held  in  remembrance
in  your  prayers  when  stealing  yourself  from  converse
with  mortals  you  speak  on  behalf  of  mortals  to  the  King  of
Angels.  Now,  this  my  desire  was  much  increased  by
Gebuin,  Archdeacon  of  Troyes,  a  man  eminent  as  well  for
his  piety  as  for  his  learning.  I  should  have  thought  it  my
duty  to  commend  him  to  you,  if  I  were  not  sure  that  those
whom  you  deem  worthy  of  your  favour  need  no  further
commendation.  I  wish,  however,  that  you  should  know
that  it  was  through  his  information  I  learnt  that  you  are  in
the  Church,  one  who  art  fit  to  be  a  teacher  of  virtue,  both
by  precept  and  example.  But  not  to  burden  you  with  too
long  a  letter,  I  bring  my  writing  to  an  end,  though  end  the
above  petition  I  will  not  until  I  have  the  happiness  to
obtain  what  I  have  asked.  I  beg  you  to  tell  me  by  a  letter
in  reply  how  you  are  disposed  with  regard  to  it.


LETTER CXXIII. (Circa A.D. 1130.)

REPLY  OF  THE  ABBOT  BERNARD  TO  HILDEBERT,  ARCH
BISHOP  OF  TOURS.

He  repays  his  praises  with  praises.

A  good  man  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart
bringeth  forth  good  things.  Your  letter  so  redounded  to
your  honour,  as  well  as  to  mine,  that  I  gladly  welcomed  it,
Most  Reverend  Sir,  as  giving  me  an  occasion  of  addressing
to  you  the  praises  of  which  you  are  so  well  worthy,  and  as
affording  me  just  satisfaction  that  you  have  done  me  so
much  honour  as  that  your  Highness  should  deign  to  stoop
to  me,  and  to  show  so  much  esteem  for  my  humble  person.
Indeed,  for  one  in  high  place  not  to  be  studious  of
high  things,  but  to  condescend  to  those  of  low  estate,  is  a
thing  than  which  there  is  nothing  more  pleasing  to  God  or
more  rare  among  men.  Who  is  the  wise  man,  except  he
who  listens  to  the  counsel  of  Wisdom,  which  says  :  The
greater  thou  art,  the  more  humble  thyself  (Ecclus.  iii.  18)


LETTER CXXIV.

before  all.  This  humility  you  have  shown  towards  me,  the
greater  towards  the  less,  an  elder  to  a  younger.  I,  too,
could  extol  your  proved  wisdom  in  due  praises,  perhaps
more  just  than  those  of  which  your  wisdom  deemed  me
worthy.  It  is  of  great  importance  in  order  to  gain  assured
knowledge  of  things,  to  rely  on  exact  acquaintance  with
facts,  rather  than  on  the  uncertain  testimony  of  public
rumour ;  and  then  what  we  have  proved  for  certain  we  may
proclaim  without  hesitation.  What  you  were  pleased  to
write  to  me  about  myself,  it  is  for  you  to  ascertain.  I  find
an  undoubted  proof  of  your  own  merit  in  your  letter,
though  it  be  so  full  of  my  praises.  For  though  another,
perhaps,  might  be  pleased  with  the  marks  of  learning
therein,  with  its  sweet  and  graceful  language,  its  clear
style,  its  easy  and  commendable  art,  I  place  before  all  this
the  wonderful  humility,  whereby  your  Greatness  has  cared
to  approach  one  so  humble  as  I,  to  overwhelm  me  with
praises,  and  to  seek  for  my  friendship.  As  for  what  refers
to  me  in  your  letter  I  read  it  not  as  describing  what  I  am,
but  what  I  would  wish  to  be,  and  what  I  am  ashamed  of  not
being.  Yet  whatever  I  am,  I  am  yours ;  and  if,  by  the
grace  of  God,  I  ever  become  anything  better,  be  sure,
Most  Reverend  and  dear  Father,  that  I  shall  still  remain
yours.

LETTER  CXXIV.  (Circa  A.D. 1131.)

To  THE  SAME  HILDEBERT,  WHO  HAD  NOT  YET  ACKNOW
LEDGED  THE  LORD  INNOCENT  AS  POPE.

He  exhorts  him  to  recognize  Innocent,  now  an  exile  in
France,  owing  to  the  schism  of  Peter  Leonis,  as  the  right
ful  Pontiff.

To  the  great  prelate,  most  exalted  in  renown,  HlLDE-
BERT,  by  the  grace  of  God  Archbishop  of  Tours,  BER
NARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  sends  greeting,  and  prays
that  he  may  walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  spiritually  discern  all
things.


LETTER CXXIV.  397

1.  To  address  you  in  the  words  of  the  prophet,  Consola
tion  is  hid  from  their  eyes,  because  death  divideth  between
brethren  (Hosea  xiii.  14,  VULG.). For  it seems as if  ac
cording to the language of Isaiah they have made a
covenant  with death,  and  are  at agreement with  hell  (Is.
xxviii.  15).  For  behold,  Innocent,  that  anointed1  of  the  Lord,
is  set  for  the  fall  and  rising  again  of  many  (cf.  S.  Luke  ii.
34). Those who  are  of  God,  gladly join themselves to
him  ; but  he  who is of the opposite part, is either  of
Antichrist,  or  Antichrist  himself. The  abomination  is  seen
standing  in  the  holy  place  ;  and  that  he  may  seize  it,  like  a
flame  he  is  burning  the  sanctuary  of  God. He  persecutes
Innocent,  and in him all innocence. Innocent,  in sooth,
flees  from  the  face  of  Leo,  as  saith  the  prophet : The  lion
hath roared ;  who will  not  fear  (Amos  iii.  8). He  flees
according  to  the bidding  of the Lord,  which  says, When
they  persecute  you  in  one  city  flee  ye  into  another  (S. Matt,
x.  23). He  flees,  and  thereby  proves  himself  an  apostolic
man,  by  ennobling  himself  with  the  apostle's  example. For
Paul  blushed not  to  be  let  down in  a  basket  over  a  wall
(Acts ix. 25),  and so  to  escape  the hands  of  those  who
were  seeking  his  life. He  escaped  not  to  spare  his  life,
but  to give  place  unto  wrath  ; not  to  avoid  death,  but  to
attain life. Rightly  does  the  Church yield  his  place  to
Innocent,  whom  she  sees  walking  in  the  same  steps.

2.  However,  Innocent's  flight  is  not  without  fruit. He
suffers,  no  doubt,  but  is  honoured  in  the  midst  of  his  suffer
ings. Driven  from  the  city,  he  is  welcomed  by  the  world.
From  the  ends of  the earth,  men meet the fugitive  with
sustenance  ;  although  the  rage  of  that  Shimei, Gerard  of
Angouleme,  has not yet entirely  ceased  to  curse  David.
Whether  it  pleases  or  does not please that sinner  who
sees  it  with  discontent,  he  cannot  prevent  Innocent  being
honoured  in  the  presence  of  kings,  and  bearing  a  crown
of  glory. Have  not  all  princes  acknowledged  that  he  is  in
truth  the  elect  of  God? The  Kings  of  France,  England,
and Spain,  and  finally  the  King  of  the  Romans,  receive

1 Christum.


LETTER CXXIV.

Innocent  as  Pope,  and  recognize  him  alone  as  bishop  of
their  souls  (2  Sam.  xvii.).  Only  Ahitophel  is  now  unaware
that  his  counsels  have  been  exposed  and  brought  to  nought.
In  vain  the  wretch  labours  to  devise  evil  counsel  against
the  people  of  God,  and  to  plot  against  the  saints  who
stoutly  adhere  to  their  saintly  Pontiff,  scorning  to  bow  the
knee  to  Baal.  By  no  guile  shall  he  avail  to  procure  for  his
parricide  the  kingdom  over  Israel  and  the  holy  city,  which
is  the  church  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar  and  ground  of
the  truth.  A  threefold  cord  is  not  quickly  broken  (Eccle-
siastes  iv.  12).  The  threefold  cord  of  the  choice  of  the
better  sort,  the  assent  of  the  majority,  and,  what  is  more
effective  yet  in  these  matters,  the  witness  of  a  pure  life,
commend  Innocent  to  all,  and  establish  him  as  chief
Pontiff.

3.  And  so,  very  Reverend  Father,  we  await  your  vote,
late  though  it  be,  as  rain  upon  a  fleece  of  wool.  We  do
not  disapprove  of  a  certain  slowness,  for  it  savours  of
gravity,  and  banishes  all  sign  of  levity.  For  Mary  did  not
at  once  answer  the  angel's  salutation,  but  first  considered
in  her  mind  what  mariner  of  salutation  this  shoiild  be  (S.
Luke  i.  29)  ;  and  Timothy  was  commanded  to  lay  hands
suddenly  on  no  man  (i  Tim.  v.  22).  Yet  I,  who  am  known
to  the  Prelate  I  am  addressing,  venture  to  say  ''  nought  in
excess  ;  "  I,  his  acquaintance  and  friend,  say,  Let  not  a  man
think  more  highly  of  himself  than  he  ought  to  tliink  (Rom.
xii.  3).  It  is  a  shame,  I  must  confess,  that  the  old  serpent,
letting  silly  women  alone,  has,  with  a  new  boldness,  even
assayed  the  valour  of  your  heart,  and  dared  to  shake  to  its
base  so  mighty  a  pillar  of  the  Church.  I  trust,  however,
that  though  shaken  it  is  not  tottering  to  its  fall.  For  the
friend  of  the  bridegroom  standeth  and  rejoiceth  at  the
bridegroom ' s  voice  (S.  John  iii.  29) ;  the  voice  of  joy  and
health,  the  voice  of  unity  and  peace.


LETTER CXXV.  399

LETTER CXXV. (Circa  A.D. 1131.)
To  MAGISTER  GEOFFREY,  OF  LORETTO.X

He  asks his  assistance in  maintaining  the  Pontificate  of
Innocent  against  the  schism  of  Peter  Leonis.

i.  We  look  for  scent  in  flowers  and  for  savour  in  fruits;
and  so,  most  dearly  beloved  brother,  attracted  by  the  scent
of  your  name  which  is  as  perfume  poured  forth,  I  long  to
know  you  also  in  the  fruit  of  your  work.  For  it  is  not  I  alone,
but  even  God  Himself,  who  has  need  of  no  man,  yet  who,
at  this  crisis,  needs  your  co-operation,  if  you  do  not  act
falsely  towards  us.  It  is  a  glorious  thing  to  be  able  to  be  a
fellow-worker  with  God  ;  but  perilous  to  be  able  and  not
to  be  so.  Moreover,  you  have  favour  with  God  and  man  ;
you  have  knowledge,  a  spirit  of  freedom,  a  speech  both
lively  and  effectual,  seasoned  with  salt ;  and  it  is  not  right
that  with  all  these  great  gifts  you  should  fail  the  bride  of
Christ  in  such  danger,  for  you  are  the  friend  of  the  Bride
groom.  A  friend  is  best  tried  in  times  of  need.  What
then  ?  Can  you  continue  at  rest  while  your  Mother  the
Church  is  grievously  distressed  ?  Rest  has  had  its  proper
time,  and  holy  peace  has  till  now  freely  and  duly  done  its
own  work.  It  is  now  the  time  for  action,  because  they
have  destroyed  the  law.  That  beast  of  the  Apocalypse
(Apoc.  xiii.  5-7),  to  whom  is  given  a  mouth  speaking
blasphemies,  and  to  make  war  with  the  saints,  is  sitting  on
the  throne  of  Peter,  like  a  lion  ready  for  his  prey.
Another 2  beast  also  stands  hissing  at  your  side,  like  a
whelp  lurking  in  secret  places.  The  fiercer  here  and  the
craftier  there  are  met  together  in  one  against  the  Lord  and
his  anointed.  Let  us,  then,  make  haste  to  burst  their  bonds
and  cast  away  their  cords  from  us.

1  Gtcffrey  of  Loretto, a most renowned doctor,  afterwards  Archbishop of
Bordeaux. He  took  his  name  from  Loretto,  a  place  in the  Diocese  of  Tours,
close  to  Poitou. It was once famous for  a  Priory,  subject  to  Marmoutiers.
This  is  why  Gerard  of  Angouleme  is  spoken  of  to  Geoffrey  in  this  Letter  as  "  the
wild  beast  near  you.'' Another  derivation is ''  L'oratoire,''  a monastery  of  the
Cistercians  in  the  Diocese  of  Angers.

2  Gerard  of  Angouleme.


400  LETTER CXXV.

2.  I,  for  my  part,  together  with  other  servants  of  God
who  are  set  on  fire  with  the  Divine  flame,  have  laboured,
with  the  help  of  God,  to  unite  the  nations  and  kings  in  one,
in  order  to  break  down  the  conspiracy  of  evil  men,  and  to
destroy  every  high  thing  that  exalts  itself  against  the  know
ledge  of  God.  Nor  have  I  laboured  in  vain.  The  Kings  of
Germany,  France,  England,  Scotland,  Spain,  and  Jerusalem,
with  all  the  clergy  and  people,  side  with  and  adhere  to  the
Lord  Innocent,  like  sons  to  a  father,  like  the  members  to
their  head,  being  anxious  to  preserve  the  unity  of  the
spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace.  And  the  Church  is  right  in
acknowledging  him,  whose  reputation  is  discovered  to  be
the  more  honourable  and  whose  election  is  found  to  be  the
more  sound  and  regular,  having  the  advantage  as  well  by
the  merit  as  by  the  number  of  the  electors.  And  now,
brother,  why  do  you  hold  back  ?  How  long  will  the  serpent
by  your  side  lull  your  careless  energies  to  repose  ?  I  know
that  you  are  a  son  of  peace,  and  can  by  no  reason  be  led
to  desert  unity.  But,  of  course,  that  alone  is  not  enough,
unless  you  study  both  to  maintain  it  and  to  make  war  with
all  your  might  upon  the  disturbers  thereof.  And  do  not  fear
the  loss  of  peace,  for  you  shall  be  rewarded  by  no  small
increase  of  glory  if  your  efforts  succeed  in  quieting,  or  even
silencing,  that  wild  beast  near  you ;  and  if  the  goodness  of
God,  through  your  means,  rescue  from  the  mouth  of  the
lion  so  great  a  prize  for  the  Church  as  William,  Count  of
Poitiers.


LETTER CXXVI. (A.D. 1131.)
To  THE BISHOPS  OF  AQUITAINE,  AGAINST GERARD OF

ANGOULEME.1

He  nobly  defends  the  cause  of  Innocent  as  the  rightful
Pope,  against  Gerard  of  Angouleme,  -who  was  taking  part

1  Gerard  was  the  second  Bishop  of  Angouleme  of  this  name,  by  birth  a
Norman,  of  the  Diocese  of  Bayeux.  Ordericus  calls  him  "  a  most  learned  man,
of  great  fame  and  influence  in  the  Roman  Senate"  (Bk.  xiii.,  A.D.  1136).  This
is  shown  by  the  fact  that  he  was  Legate  of  the  Holy  See  in  Aquitaine  during
almost  the  whole  of  the  Pontificate  of  Paschal  II.  and  other  legitimate  Popes


LETTER CXXVI.  401

with  the  Schismatic. He  gives  a  picture  of  his  character,
and  exposes  his  subterfuges.

To  his Lords  and  Reverend  Fathers,  the  holy  Bishops,

until  Innocent.  Nor  was  he  wanting  in  zeal,  for,  if  we  can  believe  William
of  Malmesbury  (History  of  the  Kings  of  England,  Book  v.),  he  had  ths
courage  to  accuse  William,  Prince  of  Aquitaine,  who  was  disregarding  the  laws
of  marriage,  as  being  another  Herod.  But  John  Besle  contends  that  this  was
a  calumny  against  Count  William  (History  o/'  the  Counts  of  Poitiers,  chap.  32).
Pope  Innocent  having  refused  to  Gerard  the  commission  of  Legate,  he  shame
fully  abandoned  the  party  of  that  Pope  and  adhered  to  that  of  Anacktus,  who
granted  to  him  the  title  as  a  bribe,  and  proceeded  to  act,  not  as  a  Legate,  but
as  a  disperser,  drawing  all  those  whom  he  could  influence  to  the  party  of  the
schismatic.  That  is  the  reason  why  Bernard  warns  the  neighbouring  Bishops
of  Aquitaine  to  disregard  the  voice  of  the  seducer,  and  to  follow  Innocent,  their
legitimate  Pastor.  He  lays  before  them  these  grounds  of  his  right,  viz.  :
"The  high  character  of  the  person  elected,  the  priority  of  his  election,  and  the
solemnity  of  his  consecration."  Yet  there  were  not  wanting  some  persons  who
upheld  the  right  of  Anacletus,  and  who  brought  forward  arguments  upon  the
other  side,  as  appears  from  the  Letter  of  Peter,  Bishop  of  Portus,  the  author  and
defender  of  the  consecration  of  this  man,  to  William,  Bishop  of  Praencste ;  to
Matthew,  Bbhop  of  Albano  ;  to  Conrad,  Bishop  of  Sabina;  and  to  John,  Bishop
of  Ostia.  who  all  followed  the  party  of  Innocent.  This  Letter  is  reported  by
William  of  Malmesbury  (His/oria  Novella,  Book  i.)  The  party  of  Innocent,
however,  prevailed  ;  all  the  chief  leaders,  whether  ecclesiastical,  except  Gerard
of  Angouleme,  and  a  few  others,  or  secular  (if  William,  Count  of  Poitiers,  and
Roger,  King  of  Sicily,  be  excepted),  taking  his  side.  But  as  for  Gerard,  he
was  obstinate  in  his  defence  of  the  schism,  and  he  died  unhappily  in  1 136,
according  to  Ordericns.  Ernald  has  related  his  death  in  the  Life  of  S.  Bernard,
Book  ii.,  chap.  7.  But  it  has  been  thought  by  some  that  this  author,  by  too
great  zeal  for  religion,  has  invented  many  things  against  Gerard,  as  that  he
died  suddenly  and  impenitent  without  confession  and  viaticum,  and  he  adds
that  his  body  was  found  lifeless  on  his  bed  and  enormously  swollen,  and  other
details  of  the  same  kind  unworthy  of  a  serious  writer.  Those  who  judge
thus  rely  upon  the  Gesta  Episcoporum  Engolismensium,  in  which  it  is  said  :
''  On  the  day  before  his  death  he  said,  in  his  confession  to  the  priests,  that  he
had  sustained  the  party  of  Peter  Leonis  in  ignorance  that  it  was  against  the
will  of  God  ;  that  he  repented  of  and  confessed  it.  Almost  all  that  he
possessed  he  gave  to  the  Church,  or  distributed  to  the  poor,  when  dying.
Tnat  he  celebrated  Mass  with  abundant  tears  on  the  Saturday  which  preceded
the  Sunday  on  which  he  died,  which  event  took  place  in  the  year  1136  A.D.
He  had  been  Bishop  for  more  than  33  years.  As  he  had  wronged  one  of  his
chaplains  by  his  liberalities,  he  gave  to  each  of  them  at  the  end  of  his  episco
pate  one  mina  '  as  a  benefaction.  That  man  who,  as  a  magnificent  star,  had

1  The  mina  =  100  drachmae,  or  one-sixtieth  of  a  talent;  and  the  drachma
was  nearly  equal  to  the  Roman  denarius,  =  j|d. —  [E.]

VOL.  I.  26


402  LETTER CXXVI.

by  Divine  permission,  of  Limoges,  of  Poitiers,  of  Perigueux,
and  of  Saintes,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clair-
vaux,  sends  greeting,  and  prays  that  they  may  be  steadfast
in  adversity.

i.  It  is  during  peace  that  bravery  is  acquired,  in  the
struggle  that  it  is  displayed,  in  the  victory  that  it  triumphs.
The  time  has  come,  most  Reverend  and  honoured  Fathers,
to  show  your  courage,  not  to  hide  it,  nor  to  let  it  rest
inactive.  The  hostile  sword,  which  seems  to  threaten  the
whole  Church  with  death,  hangs  most  of  all  over  your
necks  ;  and  it  is  you  whom  it  threatens  most  eagerly  and
most  closely,  so  that  you  are  obliged  by  the  daily  attacks
of  which  you  are  the  objects,  either  to  resist  bravely  or
(which  may  God  forbid  !)  disgracefully  to  retreat.  The  new
Diotrephes,  who  loves  to  bear  the  first  place1  among  you,
rejects  you  from  his  communion;  he  refuses  to  recognize
with  you  him  whom  the  whole  Church  receives  as  coming
in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Not  him,  I  say,  does  he  receive,
but  the  man  who  comes  in  his  own  name.  I  am  not  sur
prised  at  this,  for  he  himself,  even  in  his  old  age,  strives
and  pants  unweariedly  to  attain  a  great  name.  I  am  not
led  astray  by  an  uncertain  or  false  rumour  in  forming  this
opinion  of  the  man;  I  judge  of  him  from  his  own  words.
In  a  letter  which  he  lately  sent  to  the  Chancellor  of  Rome,

enlightened  the  West  with  his  brightness,  now  rests,  alas  !  under  an  obscure
stone  outside  the  church  which  he  built.''

But  as  this  story  has  no  certain  support,  there  is  no  reason  for  our  rejecting
that  of  Ernald,  and  especially  as  Alain,  of  Autun,  who  subjected  to  a  severe
criticism  his  books  on  the  Life  of  S.  Bernard,  does  not  differ  in  this  respect  a
nail's  breadth  from  Ernald.

As  for  Anacletus,  he  died  miserably  in  1138,  on  January  7,  as  Foulques,  of
Beneventum,  declares,  "  having  occupied  his  see  for  the  space  of  seven  years,
eleven  months,  and  twenty-two  days."  This  agrees  with  the  account  of
William  of  Malmesbury,  who  says  (Hist.  Nt>v.,  B.  i.)  :  "Anacletus  died  in  the
eighth  year  of  his  assumed  pontifical  (as  it  is  said),  and  then  Pope  Innocent
began  to  enjoy  the  title  of  Sovereign  Pontiff  in  a  peace  which  nothing  has
troubled  up  to  the  present  time."  Upon  this  subject  consult  also  S.  Bernard's
Letters  144,  146,  147  ;  Sermon  24  in  Cantica,  at  the  beginning;  and  the  notes
on  Letter  147.

1  Primal  urn.  He  refers  to  Gerard,  who  affected  to  hold  a  primacy,  that  is,
the  dignity  of  Legate.  The  allusion  is  to  3  Ep.  S.  John  v.  9.


LETTER CXXVI.  403

does  he  not  supplicate,  in  terms  as  humble  as  they  are
unworthy  of  him,  to  be  entrusted  with  the  charge1  and
honourable  title  of  Legate  of  the  Holy  See?  Would  that
he  had  obtained  it.  Perhaps  if  his  ambition  had  been
gratified  according  to  his  prayers  it  would  have  been  less
hurtful  than  it  is,  being  frustrated.  Then,  indeed,  it  would  be
hurtful  to  himself  alone,  or,  at  all  events,  to  few ;  but  now  it
breathes  discord  over  the  whole  world.  See  what  the  love
of  vain  glory  does  !  The  title  of  Legate  is  a  heavy  burden,
especially  for  the  shoulders  of  the  old  ;  who  is  ignorant  of
that  ?  And  yet  it  is  a  severe  punishment  to  this  extremely
aged  man  to  live  without  this  title  for  the  few  days  that
remain  to  him.

2.  But  perhaps  he  will  accuse  me  of  rash  judgment  with
respect  to  him  ;  perhaps  he  will  say  that  I  venture  to  judge
the  secret  feelings  of  his  soul  on  a  mere  suspicion  which
nothing  authorizes  me  to  do.  It  is  true  I  am  very  suspicious
on  this  matter;  but  I  would  ask,  what  man  would  be  so
simple  as  to  think  otherwise  than  I  have  done  in  a  case  so
clear?  To  refer  briefly  to  an  action  that  was  unmistakable.
He  is  one  of  the  first,  if  not  the  first  of  all,  to  write  to
Pope  Innocent ;  he  applies  for  the  title  of  Legate.  He
does  not  obtain  it.  He  is  indignant,  he  falls  away  from
him  ;  he  passes  over  to  the  party  of  the  other,  of  whom  he
boasts  that  he  is  the  Legate.  If  he  had  not  in  the  first
place  made  suit  for  this  title,  or  had  not  afterwards  accepted
it  from  the  other,  one  might  have  been  able  to  attribute  his
double  dealing  to  some  other  motive  than  ambition  ;  but,
as  things  stand,  he  has  no  plausible  excuse  to  make.  Let
him  lay  dowTn  this  mere  empty  name  of  Legate,  for  it  has
no  functions ;  and  I,  for  my  part,  will  lay  aside,  if  I  can,
this  opinion  of  him  ;  if  not,  I  will  at  least  acknowledge  my
reluctant  suspicion  as  being  rash.  But  he  will,  I  know,  be
with  difficulty  persuaded  to  do  it.  He  is  not  a  man  to  strip
himself  voluntarily  of  a  title  which  has  long  rendered  him
great  among  his  neighbours,  and  without  which  he  would
appear  degraded.  We  see  in  him  what  Scripture  calls  the

1  Many  editions  read  : "  To  be  weighted  with  the  charge  and  honoured  with
the  title ;''  but  to  be  "  weighted"  is  wanting  in  the  MSS.


404  LETTER CXXVI.

false  shame  which  leads  to  sin  (Ecc.  iv.  25).  Can  there  be,
in  fact,  any  worse  thing,  any  greater  offence  than  extreme
pride  in  mere  dust  and  ashes,  so  that  it  is  reluctant,  I  do
not  say  to  be  subjected  to  others,  but  not  to  rule  over
others  ?

3.  Because of this he quitted the party  of Innocent,
whom he called his holy  Father,  and  the Holy  Catholic
Church  his  mother,  and  attached  himself  to  his  schismati-
arch, with whose vain glory  he has much in common.
They  have made  mutual  alliance,  and  have  conceived  an
evil  design  against  the  people  of  God  : Scale  is  joined  to
scale, so  that  no  air  can  come  between  them  (Job  xli.  16).
The  one  gives  to  the  other  the  name  of  Pope,  and  the  other
in  return  styles  him  his  Legate  ;  and  so  they  flatter  each
other's  vain  glory. They  console,  support,  and  commend
each  other  in  turn  ;  but  each  of  them  does  this  for  his  own
sake,  and  not  for  that  of  the  other,  for  they  are  men  who
love only themselves. With equal zeal they combine
against  the  Lord  and  against  His  Christ;  but  their  motives
are  not  the  same. Each  one  seeks  to  derive  from  the  other
some  personal  advantage,  and  (which  is  abominable)  at  the
expense  of Christ's heritage. Are  they not attempting
under  your  eyes  to  ruin  His  realm,  if  you  will  permit  it?
That Legate fabricates new  Bishops1  among  you for  the
party  of  his  Pope,  that  he  may  not  be  alone  ; nor  does  he
wait  until  the  Sees  are  vacant  by  death,  but  by  the  aid  of
the  secular  power  tyrannically  intrudes  men  into  the  places
of  Bishops  yet  living,  taking  occasion  from  the  ill-will  and
relentless  hatred  of  secular  princes  towards  the  Bishops  of
their  cities. He  sets  in  secret  snares  with  the  rich,  that  he
may  slay  the  innocent. By  such  a  door  he  enters  into  the
sheepfold.

4.  Do  you  suppose  that  this  Legate  busies  himself  with
such  activity  for  the  sake  of  his  Pope  only,  and  without  any
personal  interest? He  has added, in  order  that  he may
boast  himself  the  more,  France  and  Burgundy  to  the  ancient

1  Thus  he  intruded  Ramnulf,  Abbot  of  Dorat,  into  the  See  of  Lisieux. Life
of  S.  Bernard,  B.  ii.  33.


LETTER CXXVI.  405

limits  of  his  legation  ;  and  he  may  add  still  further,  if  he
pleases,  the  Medes,  the  Persians,  and  the  people  of  the  Deca-
polis.  Wherefore  should  he  not  arrogate  to  himself  besides
the  empty  name  of  jurisdiction  over  the  Sarmatians,  and,
in  fact,  over  every  place  that  his  foot  has  pressed  ?  O)
man  no  less  without  modesty  than  without  sense  ;  mindful
neither  of  the  fear  of  God  nor  of  his  own  honour  !  He
thinks  that  he  is  not  found  out,  while  he  is  the  laughing
stock  and  amusement  of  all  his  neighbours.  And  rightly
so.  For  he  uses  the  sanctuary  as  if  it  were  a  market ;  and
like  a  merchant  seeking  his  gain  goes  here  and  there  to  the
sellers,  seeking  to  obtain  at  the  lowest  price  what  he  wants
to  buy  :  so  he  seeks  on  all  sides  an  ecclesiastical  dignity,
and  decides  at  length  in  favour  of  that  Pope  who  has  con
sented  to  make  him  his  Legate.  And  so  Rome  could  not
have  had  a  Pope,  unless  he  had  found  one  to  make  him
Legate  ?  Whence  came  this  privilege  to  you  in  the  Church
of  Christ  ?  Who  has  given  you  this  prerogative  over
Christ's  heritage  ?  Is  the  sanctuary  of  God  become  your
patrimonial  estate  ?  As  long  as  there  was  any  hope  of
obtaining  from  the  lord  Innocent  what  you  had  the  shame
less  impudence  to  demand  of  him,  he  was  to  you  holy
Father  and  Pope  in  your  letters.  Why,  then,  do  you  now
accuse  him  as  a  schismatic  ?  Was  it  the  case  that  his
holiness,  and  his  legitimate  tenure  of  the  Papacy,  vanished
with  your  hopes  ?  It  was  wonderful  in  how  short  a  time
bitter  water  and  sweet  proceeded  from  the  same  fount.
Yesterday  Innocent  was  catholic,  holy,  Supreme  Pontiff  ;
to-day  he  is  schismatic,  wicked,  and  a  troubler  of  the
peace  ;  yesterday  Innocent  and  Pope ;  to-day  Gregory,
simple  Deacon  of  S.  Angelo.  It  is  from  the  same  mouth,
indeed,  but  from  a  double  heart,  that  these  contrary  senti
ments  proceed.  Deceitful  thoughts  are  in  the  heart,  and
from  the  heart  they  have  been  spoken.  But  what  can  you
think  of  the  reserve  or  self-respect  of  the  man  whose  double
heart  renders  uncertain  the  voice  of  his  conscience,  and
with  first  Yes  and  then  No  makes  his  tongue  forked  ?  He
ill-understands  how  to  provide,  according  to  the  saying  of


406  LETTER CXXVI.

the  Apostle,  things  honest  both  before  God  and  before
men  (2  Cor.  viii.  21),  who  being  an  unjust  judge  neither
respects  nor  fears  God  or  men.

5.  It  is  quite  certain  that  ambition,  when  it  extends  into
impudence,  defeats  its  own  success  ;  and  the  unscrupulous
man,  when  he  makes  his  object  apparent,  renders  it  unlikely
to  be  attained.  Ambition  is  the  mother  of  hypocrisy  ;  it
needs  obscurity  and  shadow,  and  is  unable  to  bear  the
light.  Ambition,  the  lowest  placed  of  the  vices,  has  always
an  eye  towards  advancement ;  but  all  its  fear  is  to  be
perceived.  Nor  is  that  wonderful  ;  for  it  may  fail  in
obtaining  its  end,  unless  it  escape  observation  ;  and  the
more  it  pursues  glory  the  less  it  can  be  obtained,  if  it  is
suspected  of  the  pursuit.  What  is  more  inglorious,  especi
ally  for  a  Bishop,  than  to  be  known  for  a  man  greedy  of
titles  and  honours,  when  a  Christian  ought  not  to  glory,
except  in  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  The
ambitious  will  be  esteemed  by  others  only  as  long  as  he
shall  walk  in  darkness ;  and  the  hypocrite  will  be  able  to
seem  righteous  and  holy  to  the  eyes  which  see  only  the
outward  appearance  just  as  long  as  his  meddling  with  filthy
lucre  be  kept  concealed.  But  when  by  impudence,  or  some
imprudence,  he  happens  to  show  what  is  lurking  in  his
mind,  does  not  the  unmeasured  love  of  greatness  which  is
shown  to  all  eyes  turn  to  his  shame  and  confusion  rather
than  to  his  glory,  and  so,  in  truth,  verify  those  words  of  the
Scripture  :  Whose  glory  is  in  their  shame,  who  mind
earthly  things  (Phil.  iii.  19)  ;  and  this  :  If  I  seek  my  own
glory,  my  glory  is  nothing  (S.  John  viii.  54)  ;  and  that
imprecation  of  the  Prophet  directed,  as  I  believe,  against
hypocrites  :  Let  them  be  as  the  grass  upon  the  housetops,
which  withereth  before  it  is  plucked  up  (Ps.  cxxviii.  6,
VULG.).  The  sentiment  of  shame  has  not  yet  perished  in
men,  so  that  naked  and  shameless  ambition  should  be
honoured  even  by  them,  especially  when  they  meet  with  it
in  an  old  man  and  a  priest,  in  whom  that  puerile  vanity  is
the  more  unbecoming,  as  increased  gravity  and  holiness  are
befitting  to  him  ;  and  if  he  is  flattered  to  his  face,  he  is


LETTER CXXVI.  407

turned  into  ridicule  behind  his  back  by  all.  There  is  an
ambition  more  delicate  and  more  enlightened,1  which  pro
ceeds  at  least  with  caution,  if  not  with  pure  intention  ;2  if
it  succeeds  in  advancing  its  object,  it  takes  good  care  to
keep  its  measures  secret ;  but  if  not,  it  still  lies  close,  and
does  not  break  the  reserve  which  it  imposes  upon  itself.
And  such  an  ambition,  if  it  does  not  fear  God  unto  salva
tion,  yet  for  innate  modesty  retains  honourable  feeling,
because  it  stands  in  fear  of  men,  and  blushes  at  public
disgrace.

6.  But  must  not  the  ambition  be  headlong  and  the  desire
to  dominate  imperious  which  causes  a  man  not  to  spare  the
repose  of  his  old  age  nor  the  honour  of  his  priesthood  to
obtain  the  precarious  title  of  Legate,  which  he  would  not  be
certain  of  for  more  than  a  year,  which  makes  him  tear  open
again  the  side  of  the  Saviour,  whence  issued  forth  once
blood  and  water  for  the  salvation  of  men,  for  joining  them
together  in  the  unity  of  faith  ?  But  whosoever  tries  to
divide  those  whom  Christ  has  joined  together  for  their
salvation  proves  himself  to  be,  not  a  Christian,  but  an  Anti
christ,  and  guilty  of  the  Cross  and  death  of  Christ.  What
impatient,  what  unbridled  desire  !  what  unrestrained  eager
ness  !  what  blind  and  shameful  ambition  !  He  is  obliged
to  confess  that  (as  I  have  said)  he  began  by  making  a
petition  unworthy  of  him  to  the  legitimate  Pope  ;  and,
smarting  at  the  refusal  he  received,  he  took  refuge  imme
diately  with  the  schismatic,  and  accepted  from  his  sacri
legious  hand  the  longed-for  dignity,  thus  cruelly  and
shamelessly  piercing  the  side  of  the  Lord  of  Glory.  For
he  divides  the  Church,  for  which  that  Side  was  divided
upon  the  Cross.  But  one  day  he  shall  see  Him  whom  he  has
pierced,  and  the  Lord  shall  pronounce  judgments,  who  now
endures  injuries  patiently.  When  the  day  shall  come  that
He  shall  do  justice  to  those  who  are  oppressed,  and  in
terfere  in  equity  on  behalf  of  the  meek  of  the  earth,  will
He,  think  you,  turn  away  His  ear  from  His  beloved  spouse
when  she  invokes  His  aid  against  those  who  have  oppressed

1 Oculata. Otherwise,  "secret"  occulta.  2  Saltern  caute,  etsi  noil  caste.


408  LETTER CXXVI.

her  ?  No  !  He  cannot  be  deaf  to  her  complaint  :  My
neighbours  and  my  friends  approached  and  stood  against
me  ;  and  those  who  were  beside  me  stood  afar  off.  Those
•who  sought  my  life  used  violence  against  me  (Ps.  xxxvii.
12,  13,  VULG.).  Why  should  He  not  recognize  the  bone
of  His  bone,  the  flesh  of  His  flesh,  yea,  rather,  the  spirit  of
His  spirit?  Is  she  not  for  Him  that  well-loved  Spouse,
whose  beauty  has  drawn  Him  here  below,  whose  form  He
has  put  on,  whom  with  marvellous  condescension  He  has
embraced  with  tender  love,  so  that  they  two  should  be  one
flesh,  as  hereafter  they  shall  be  one  spirit  ?  For  although
s/ie  had  known  Christ  according  to  the  flesh,  yet  then  shall
sJie  know  Him  no  more  :  because  before  her  face  shall  be
a  spirit,  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord  ;  and  being  closely  united
to  Him,  she  shall  be  one  spirit  with  Him  ;  when  death  shall
be  swallowed  up  in  victory;  and  that  which  is  weak  in  the
flesh  shall  overcome  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  ;  when  the
glorious  Spouse  of  the  Church  shall  have  her  in  his  sight
in  her  glory,  as  His  dove  perfect  and  beautiful,  not  having
a  spot  of  sin,  a  wrinkle  of  corruption,  or  any  such  thing.

7.  While  I  linger  willingly  upon  these  consoling  thoughts
I  have  become  almost  unmindful  of  my  subject,  so  strong
is  my  desire  to  redeem  the  time  because  the  days  arc  evil.
The  thought  of  more  happy  days  transports  me,  but  my
purpose  calls  me  back,  reminds  me  of  the  facts,  and  plunges
me  into  sorrow.  The  enemy  of  the  cross  of  Christ  (I
relate  it  even  weeping)  carries  his  audacity  so  far  as  to
drive  from  their  (Episcopal)  seats  the  holy  men  who
entirely  refuse  to  bend  the  knee  before  the  beast  of  the
Apocalypse,  whose  mouth  opens  wide  with  impious  blas
phemies  against  God  and  against  His  sanctuary  (Apoc.
xiii.  6).  He  endeavours  to  raise  altar  against  altar,  and  is
not  ashamed  to  confound  good  and  evil.  He  endeavours
to  intrude  abbots  into  the  places  of  abbots,  Bishops  into
the  places  of  Bishops,  to  thrust  out  the  Catholics,  to  advance
the  schismatics.1  Poor  creatures,  and  to  be  pitied,  who

1  Ordericus declares (Book xiii., page 825): "In most  monasteries  two
abbots  arose,  and  in bishoprics  two  prelates  strove  for  the  chief  authority : of


LETTER CXXVI.  409

consent  to  accept  such  promotion  from  the  hands  of  such
a  man.  He  traverses  sea  and  land  to  make  one  Bishop  ;
and  when  he  has  made  him,  he  makes  of  him  doubly  the
child  of  hell  that  he  is  himself.  What  do  you  suppose  is
the  cause  of  such  furious  activity  ?  It  is  because  that  pre
cept  announced  by  the  angels  to  mortals,  in  which  glory  is
given  to  God  and  peace  to  men,  is  to  him  displeasing;  and
while  he  and  his  party  usurp  the  glory  they  trouble  the
peace.  He  alone  merits  glory  who  alone  doeth  wonders,
as  the  Apostle  says,  to  God  alone  be  honour  and  glory
(i  Tim.  i.  13).  As  for  man,  he  ought  to  think  himself
happy,  he  ought  to  regard  himself  as  being  mercifully
favoured  if  it  is  permitted  him  to  enjoy  the  peace  of  God
and  peace  with  God  ;  but  how  can  it  be  thus  if  men  them
selves  wish  to  usurp  the  glory  of  God  ?  Oh,  foolish  sons
of  Adam,  who,  while  you  despise  peace  and  desire  glory,
lose  them  both  !  It  is  because  of  this  that  the  God  of
vengeance  has  now7  moved  the  land  and  divided  it :  He
has  shewed  His  people  heavy  things.  He  lias  given  them  a
drink  of  deadly  wine.

8.  Whether  we  will  or  no,  the  truth  of  the  Holy  Ghost
will  necessarily  one  day  be  fulfilled,  and  that  falling  away
foretold  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  as  we  read  in  the
Scriptures  (2  Thess.  ii.  3),  will  take  place;  but  \voe  to  the
man  by  whom  it  comes.  It  would  be  better  for  that  man
he  had  not  been  born.  But  \vho  is  that  man  except  the
man  of  sin,  who,  notwithstanding  that  a  Catholic  had  been
elected  by  Catholics  to  the  holy  place,  and  according  to
canonical  rules,  invaded  it  for  himself,  although  he  desired
it  not  because  it  was  holy,  but  because  it  was  the  highest
place  ?  He  invaded  it,  I  say,  by  the  sword,  by  fire,  by
money,  not  by  the  merit  of  his  life  or  by  his  virtues;  he  has
attained  to  that  in  which  he  remains,  but  he  remains  only
by  the  same  means  that  he  attained  it.  That  election  of

whom  the  one  adhered  to  Peter  (Anacletus)  the  other  favoured  Gregory
(Innocent)."  So  also  in  the  Acts  of  the  Bishops  of  Mans,  Vol.  iii.,  of  the
Anulecta,  p.  338,  on  the  subject  of  Philip,  the  intruded  Bishop  of  Tours,  of
whom  Letters  150  and  151  (of  S.  Bernard)  speak.


410  LETTER CXXVI.

which  he  boasts  so  much  was  nothing  but  the  note  of  a
faction,  a  mere  pretence,  the  occasion  and  the  screen  of  his
evil  plan  ;  it  is  impudent  and  false  to  call  it  an  election.
If  there  is  in  the  Church  a  principle  authentic  and  incon
testable,  it  is  that  after  the  first  election  there  is  no  second.
Suppose  that  there  has  been  one,  after  which  a  second  is
made;  yet  it  is  not  a  second,  it  is  simply  null  and  void.  But
even  although  that  which  preceded  was  conducted  with  too
little  solemnity,  and  not  sufficiently  according  to  ordinary
formalities,  as  the  enemies  of  unity  contend,  yet  ought  a
second  election  to  have  been  resolved  upon  before  the
manner  of  the  former  had  been  discussed,  and  it  had  been
quashed  by  a  deliberate  judgment  ?  It  is  that  which  obliges
me  to  say  that  the  factious  persons  are  those  who  have
hastened  to  lay  their  hands  rashly  upon  a  rash  usurper,
notwithstanding  the  prohibition  of  the  Apostle:  Lay  hands
suddenly  upon  no  man  (i  Tim.  v.  22).  They  have,  with
out  doubt,  the  greater  fault ;  they  are  the  true  authors  of
the  schism,  and  the  chiefs  of  this  great  mischief  which
has  been  done  to  the  Church.

9.  But  now  they  demand  judgment,  which  they  ought  to
have  waited  for1  before  acting.  When  that  proposition  was
made  to  them  in  fit  time  they  rejected  it ;  they  only  do
this  now  in  order  to  appear2  to  have  the  right  on  their
side  if  you  refuse  it  in  your  turn  ;  and  if  you  accept  it  they
hope  that  during  the  process  time  may  be  gained  by  delays,
and  in  the  meantime  something  may  happen  in  their  favour.
Or  do  they  despair  of  their  cause,  and  are  they  convinced
that  it  can  be  made  no  worse  than  it  is,  whatever  be  the
issue  of  the  process  ?  Whatever  (they  say)  has  been  done
hitherto,  now  we  seek  a  hearing;  we  are  prepared  to  submit
to  what  may  be  decided.  This  is  a  trap.  What  else  is  left  to
you  in  your  wicked  undertaking,  what  other  resource  have
you  for  seducing  the  simple,  for  arming  the  ill-disposed,

1  Erspectasse  ,•  otherwise  expetiisse.

2  Justi,  thus  the  old  copies  in  most  editions  for  injusti  used  in  irony. But  in
one  MS.  (Colbertine,  No.  1410),  reads,  injusti  justi  vox  videamini — that  is, "so
that  you  who  are  right  may  appear  wrong." One  MS.  of  Beauvaisreads  simply
injusti.


LETTER CXXVI.  411

and  for  hiding  your  own  guilt  ?  If  you  did  not  say  this
what  could  you  say?  But  now  God  has  already  judged
what  man  seeks  too  late  to  reopen  ;  but  He  has  judged  by
the  evidence  of  the  facts,  and  not  by  the  wording  of  a
decree.  Is  it  possible  that  human  rashness  would  dare  to
interpose  an  appeal  from  the  judgment  of  God  ?  What  if
God  should  accuse  and  cry  by  the  prophet,  men  have  taken
away  from  me  the  right  of  judgment?1  No  purpose  can
stand  against  the  purpose  of  the  Lord  ;  His  word  runneth
very  quickly,  and  draws  together  the  peoples  and  the  kings
into  one  mind,  so  that  they  serve  and  obey  the  lord  Inno
cent  as  Pope.  Who  will  appeal  from  this?  It  has  been  recog
nized  and  proclaimed  by  Walter  of  Ravenna,  Hildegar  of
Tarragona,2  Norbert  of  Magdeburg,  Conrad  of  Salzbourg,
Archbishops  ;  it  has  been  accepted  by  Equipert  of  Munster,
Hildebrand  of  Pistoja,  Bernard  of  Pavia,  Landulf  of  Asti,
Hugo  of  Grenoble,  and  Bernard  of  Parma,3  Bishops.  The
singular  merit  of  these  prelates,  their  manifest  sanctity,
and  their  authority  respected  even  by  their  enemies,  have
easily  determined  me,  who  hold  a  lower  rank  in  merit  as  in
office,  to  follow  their  leading  whether  it  be  right  or  wrong.
I  do  not  speak  of  the  multitude  of  others,  both  Archbishops
and  Bishops  of  Tuscany,  Campania,  Lombardy,  Germany,
and  Aquitaine,  of  France,  also,  and  all  the  Spains,  as  well
as  of  the  whole  Church  of  the  East,  whose  names  are  in  the
Book  of  Life,  but  which  the  brevity  of  a  letter  cannot  find
space  for.4

10.  All  these  with  one  accord,  not  induced  by  money,
not  led  away  by  fallacious  reasoning,  not  allured  by  con
siderations  of  worldly  relationship,  nor  compelled  by  fear

1  This is not  found  in any prophet ; but in Doctriiia SS.  Patrum,  Book
against  rash  judgment,  n.  7.

2  He  had  succeeded  to  Ordelric,  whom.  Ordericus  (B.  xiii.  pp.  891,  892)  calls
!;  a  very  learned  old  man.''

3  Bernard  of  Parma,  in  certain  MSS.  is  placed  after  Bernard  of  Pavia,  and  in
others,  particularly  in  the  two  Colbertine  MSS.,  his  name  is  wanting  altogether.
Ughellus  says  that  he  died  towards  the  end  of  the  Pontificate  of  Paschal  II.

4  These  words, "  but  which  the  brevity  of  a  letter  cannot  find  space  for,"  are
wanting  in  two  of  the  Colbertine  A1SS.,  but  are  found  in  the  third.


412  LETTER CXXVI.

of  the  secular  power,  but  submitting  themselves  to  the  will
of  God  which  they  cannot  doubt  has  been  made  plain,  have
frankly  rejected  Peter  Leonis,  and  recognized  Gregory  for
Pope,  under  the  name  of  Innocent.  Of  the  prelates  of  our
province,  not  one,  indeed,  is  mentioned  by  name  in  this
letter ;  because  I  could  not  name  them  all,  and  the  special
mention  of  some  of  them  would  appear  to  be  a  kind  of
adulation.  But  I  ought  not  to  pass  over  those  holy  men,
who,  though  dead  to  the  world,  live  a  better  life  in  God  ;
their  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  glory,  is  consecrated  en
tirely  to  the  knowledge  of  the  wrill  of  God,  and  to  the
endeavour  to  please  Him.  Of  these,  then,  the  Camaldulian1
Religious,  those  of  Vallombrosa,  those  of  the  Chartreuse,
the  Cluniacs,2  those  of  Marmoutiers,3  my  own  brethren  in
religion  the  Cistercians,  those  of  S.  Stephen  of  Caen,4  of

1  Most  of  the  old  MSS.  have  the  name  thus,  but  some  have  it  CamaudUlienses.
The  Camaldulian  rnonks  and those  of  Vallombrosa  are  two  Congregations  of
the  Order  of  S.  Benedict  in  Italy,  and  are  too  well  known  for  it  to  be  needful  to
say  anything  about  them  here  (Mabillon's  note). The  Order  was  founded  by  S.
Romuald,  a  noble  of  Ravenna,  who  retired in  the later part  of  the eleventh
century to  Camaldoli, near Arezzo, in the Appennines, and  commenced a
hermit's  life. It  has  two  divisions,  the  hermits,  who  are  solitaries,  and  monks
who  live  in community. The habit  is  a  white  cassock,  scapular,  and  hooded
robe. The  Vallombrosan  Order  is  a  branch  of  the  Benedictines of  Cluny,  and
was  founded,  also  in  the  eleventh  century,  by  S.  John  Gualbert,  a  Florentine. It
was  confirmed  in 1055  by  Pope  Victor  II. The habit  is  of  a  very  dark  grey,
almost  black. —  [E.]

2  A  contemporary  author,  Ordericus,  has  described  the  manner  in  which  the
monks  of Cluny  received Pope  Innocent  (B.  xiii.  p.  895)  : "On learning  the
arrival  of  Innocent,  the  monks  of  Cluny  sent  to  him  sixty  horses  or  mules  with
all  trappings  fit  for  the  Pope  and  the  Cardinals,  and  brought  him  to  their  house
with  great  respect. There  they  entertained  the  Pope  and  his  followers  for  eleven
days,  and  caused  him  to  consecrate  a  new  Church  in  honour  of  S. Peter,  chief
of  the  Apostles,  with  great  solemnity  and  attendance  of  the  people. Thence  he
obtained  great  influence  through  all  the  West  because  he  had  been  placed  before
Peter [Leonis]  by  the  monks  of  Cluny. Yet  Peter  Leonis  had  been  brought  up
by  them,  and  was  a  monk  of  theirs  by  habit  and  profession.'1

3  Marmoutiers  was  an  important  monastery  near  the  city  of  Tours,  over  which
then presided Abbot Odo, to whom Letter 307 is addressed. Upon this
monastery  depended many  priories,  which  formed,  as  it  were,  a  congregation.
But  Bernard  here  mentions  only  the  more  important  monasteries.

4  Caen  is  a  town  on  the  river  Orne,  in  Neustria  or  Normandy,  not  far  from
the  ocean. This  abbey  was  founded and magnificently  endowed  by  William


LETTER CXXVI.  413

Tiron,1  of  Savigny,2  in  one  word,  the  unanimous  consent  of
the  brethren,  as  well  secular  clergy  as  monks,  of  strict
life  and  approved  conduct,  following  their  Bishops  as
flocks  follow  their  pastors,  firmly  adhere  to  Innocent,
zealously  defend  him,  humbly  obey  him,  and  recognize  him
faithfully  as  a  true  successor  of  the  Apostles.

ii.  What  of  the  kings  and  princes  of  the  earth?  Do
they  not  receive  Innocent  in  the  same  disposition,  with  the
peoples  who  are  subject  to  them,  and  confess  him  to  be
Pope,  and  the  Bishop  of  their  souls  ?  What  man  is  there
of  good  family  or  of  distinguished  rank  who  does  not  think
the  same  thing?  And  yet  those  people  still  protest  with
quarrelsome  importunity  and  importunate  argument.  They
make  their  accusation  against  the  whole  world,  and,  not
withstanding  their  small  number,  endeavour  to  dictate  to
the  whole  of  Christendom,  and  to  oblige  it  to  confirm  by  a
second  judgment  an  election3  which  has  been  already  judged
and  condemned ;  they  began  by  improper  precipitation,
and  now  wish  to  reopen  the  whole  question.  But,  after
all,  what  means  have  they  of  assembling  the  chiefs  of  each
order  [secular  and  ecclesiastical],  I  do  not  say  of  the
faithful  simply,  so  as  to  submit  the  controversy  to  their
judgment?  Who  would  be  mighty  enough  to  persuade  so
many  thousands  of  holy  men  to  pull  down  again  what  they
had  before  built  up,  and  to  lend  themselves  to  a  deception  ?
Then  where  could  a  place  be  found  safe  and  spacious
enough  for  all  ?  For  this  is  a  business  which  belongs  to  the
whole  Church,  not  the  private  cause  of  one  person.  You
see,  then,  that  you  \_i.e.,  the  opponents]  are  demanding  a

the  Conqueror.  Its  first  Abbot  was  Lanfranc,  Prior  of  Bee,  and  afterwards
Archbishop  ot  Canterbury.

1  The  monks  of  Tiron-le-Gardais  in  Le  Perche,  the  Diocese  of  Chartres,  were
instituted  by  the  venerable  Abbot  Bernard,  whose Life  is extant  with  notes  by
Souchet. James de  Vitry  praises  the  devotion of  the  monks of  Tiron in  his
History  of the West,  c. 20. This monastery, with  that  of Marmoutiers,
flourished  under  the  Benedictine  Congregation  of  S.  Maur.

2  Savigny. There are  two monasteries  of  this  name  in  France,  the  one  in
the  Diocese  of  Lyons,  the  other  in  that  of  Avranches,  of  which latter  Bernard
must  be  understood  to  speak  here. It  was  founded in 1112  by  the  most  pious
Abbot  Vitalis.  3 I.e.,  that  of  Peter  Leonis.


414  LETTER  CXXVI.

thing  which  is  impracticable,  only  to  bring  a  false  accusa
tion  against  your  Mother  Church ;  or  rather  you  are  digging
a  pit  for  yourselves  into  which  you  shall  be  thrown  ;  you
are  weaving  a  snare  in  which  you  shall  be  taken  and  held,
nor  shall  you  return  into  the  bosom  of  your  Mother.  A
pretext  will  never  be  wanting  to  him  who  wishes  to  break
faith  with  his  friend.

12.  But  let  it  be  so.  Suppose  that  God  should  change
His  mind  (I  speak  after  the  manner  of  men),  should  recall
His  decree,  should  assemble  a  Council  from  the  ends  of  the
earth,  should  allow  the  matter  which  He  has  judged  to  be
submitted  for  a  second  judgment,  which  is  not  the  way  in
which  God  acts,  whom,  I  ask,  will  they  give  to  Him  for
judges  ?  All  have  taken  their  side  in  this  matter,  and  it
will  be  very  difficult  to  agree  upon  a  judgment;  so  that  so
great  an  assemblage  of  men  will  have  the  weariness  to
assemble  for  disagreement  rather  than  for  peace.  And,
finally,  I  would  be  glad  to  know  into  whose  hands  that
schismatic  would  consent  to  trust  the  city  of  Rome,  which
he  desired  so  eagerly  and  for  so  long  a  time,  which  he
gained  with  so  much  trouble  and  at  so  great  a  cost,  which
he  possesses  with  such  pride,  and  which  he  fears  to  lose
writh  so  great  shame,  lest  the  whole  world  should  be  seen
to  have  come  together  to  no  purpose,  if  when  he  loses  his
cause  he  does  not  at  the  same  time  lose  Rome;  otherwise
why  should  he  who  has  been  despoiled  enter  upon  the
cause  ?  Neither  the  civil  law  nor  the  Canons  oblige  him
to  do  so.  And  this  I  say,  not  that  I  have  any  doubt  of  the
justice  of  our  cause,  but  because  I  distrust  the  cunning  of
our  adversaries.  God  has  already  manifested  His  justice
as  clearly  as  the  light  and  His  judgment  as  the  noon-day,
although  to  him  who  is  blind  neither  does  the  light  appear,
nor  does  the  blaze  of  noon-day  enlighten  ;  to  him  light  and
darkness  are  the  same.

13.  The  question  is,  then,  of  ascertaining  whether  of
these  two  claimants  is  the  rightful  Pope.  As  for  that
which  relates  to  them  personally,  that  I  may  not  seem  either
to  flatter  or  to  detract  from  either  one  or  the  other,  I  will


LETTER CXXVI.  415

say  nothing  except  that  which  is  spoken  everywhere,  and
which,  I  suppose,  everyone  believes,  namely,  that  the  life
and  character  of  our  Pope  Innocent  are  above  any  attack
even  of  his  rival ;  while  that  of  the  other  is  not  safe  even
from  his  friends.  In  the  second  place,  if  you  compare  the
two  elections,  that  of  our  candidate  at  once  has  the  advan
tage  over  the  other  as  being  both  purer  in  motive,  more
regular  in  form,  and  earlier  in  time.  The  last  point  is
out  of  all  doubt ;  the  other  two  are  proved  by  the  merit
and  the  dignity  of  the  electors.  You  will  find,  if  I  do  not
mistake,  that  this  election  was  made  by  the  more  discreet
part  of  those  to  whom  the  election  of  the  supreme  Pontiff
belongs.  There  were  Cardinals,  Bishops,  Deacons,  or
Presbyters,  and  these  in  sufficient  number,  according  to
the  decrees  of  the  Fathers,  to  make  a  valid  election.  Then,
as  to  the  Consecration  of  the  person  elected,  was  it  not
performed  by  the  Bishop  of  Ostia,  to  whom  that  function
specially  belongs  ?  Since,  then,  both  the  person  elected  is
maintained  to  be  the  more  worthy  and  the  election  more
discreetly  conducted,  and  the  formalities  more  regularly
complied  with  in  performing  it;  upon  what  pretext,  or
rather  by  what  spirit  of  contention,  do  they  try  against
right  and  justice  and  the  voices  of  all  good  men  to  depose
him,  and  to  set  another  Pope  over  the  reluctant  and  pro
testing  Church  ?

14.  You  see,  most  reverend  and  illustrious  Fathers,  under
what  obligation  you  are  to  oppose  with  all  your  powers
this  attempt  so  malicious,  so  unworthy,  and  so  rash.  It  is
becoming  to  the  whole  Church,  but  most  of  all  to  you  and
yours,  that  zeal  for  the  House  of  God  should  consume  your
souls.  It  is  your  duty,  I  say,  and  that  of  your  flocks  to
watch  and  pray,  that  you  enter  not  into  temptation.  The
more  boldly  the  adversary  presses  on,  and  the  greater  is
the  stress  of  battle,  in  that  place  is  there  surely  the  greater
need  for  bravery  and  caution.  How  cruel  and  how  cunning
is  the  foe  who  has  risen  against  you,  you  know,  I  am  sure,
by  your  own  experience.  Alas  !  what  ravages  has  he  not
already  committed  in  your  neighbourhood,  having  recourse


416  LETTER CXXVII.

in  turn  to  force  and  to  cunning,  the  constant  arms  of  his
malignity  !  But  shall  his  malice  prevail  over  your  wisdom  ?
No  doubt  this  is  his  hour,  and  the  power  of  darkness ;  but
the  hour  is  his  last,  and  his  power  soon  passes  away.  Be
not  afraid,  nor  permit  yourselves  to  be  drawrn  away.  Christ,
the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God,  is  with  you  ;  it
is  His  own  cause.  Trust  in  Him  ;  He  has  overcome  the
world  ;  He  is  faithful,  and  will  not  permit  you  to  be
tempted  above  that  ye  are  able.  Though  the  deluded  man
appears  solidly  established,  without  doubt  you  will  soon
see  his  fair  show  of  prosperity  overcast  by  general  rejec
tion  ;  nor  will  the  Lord  leave  the  rod  of  sinners  long  over
the  lot  of  the  righteous.  But,  in  the  meantime,  it  is  com
mitted  to  your  vigilance  to  provide  with  the  care  and
solicitude  that  becomes  your  office,  that  the  good  people
of  your  dioceses  should  not  stretch  out  their  hands  towards
this  wickedness.

Prayer  for  Catholics  :

Do  good,  O  Lord,  iinto  those  that  are  good  and  true  of
heart  (Ps.  cxxv.  4)  ;  and  for  the  schismatics  :  Make  their
faces  ashamed,  O  Lord,  that  they  may  seek  Thy  na?ne  (Ps.
Ixxxiii.  17).

LETTER CXXVII. (Circa A.D. 1132.)
To  WILLIAM,  COUNT  OF  PoiTou1  AND DUKE  OF  AQUI-

TAINE, IN THE NAME OF HUGH, DUKE OF BURGUNDY.

William  was  of  the  party  of  the  Antipope  Anacletus  ;
Bernard  urges  him  to  abandon  it,  and  to  range  himself  on
t/ie  side  of  Innocent.

To  WILLIAM,  by  the  grace  of  God,  the  illustrious  Count  of
Poitou  and  Duke  of  Aquitaine,  HUGH,  by  the  same  grace,

1  He  was  the  ninth  of  this  name,  or,  as  some  think,  the  tenth,  and,  by  the  in
fluence  of  Gerard,  Bishop  of  Angouleme,  he  took  the  side  of  Anacletus,  and  per
secuted  the  adherents  of  Innocent  (Of.  Life  of  S.  Bernard,  lib.  ii.  c.  6).  What
William  of  Malmesbury  (de  reg.  Aug.  lib.  v.)  says  about  the  incest  and  other
crimes  of  \\illiam,  Count  of  Poitou,  must  be  understood  of  this  man's  father,
William  VIII.,  as  John  Besle  has  pointed  out.  For  Peter,  Bishop  of  Poictiers,


LETTER CXXVII.


417


Duke  of  Burgundy,  sends  greeting,  bidding  him  fear  Him
who  is  terrible,  and  who  takes  away  the  spirit  of  princes.

i.  I  can  no  longer  hold  my  peace  about  your  mistaken
line  of  action,  though  you  are  my  near  kinsman  and  dear
friend.  If  any  of  the  people  perishes  he  perishes  alone ;
but  the  error  of  a  prince  involves  many,  and  ruins  as  many
souls  as  he  rules  over.  Nor  are  we  raised  on  high,  as  vou
know,  to  destroy  our  subjects,  but  to  govern  them.  He  by
whom  kings  reign,  has  put  us  over  our  subjects  to  protect
them,  not  to  overthrow  them  ;  we  are  the  Church's  keepers,
not  her  masters.  But  since  you  are  known  to  have  dis
charged  that  function  laudably,  and  in  a  way  befitting  the
greatness  of  your  power,  on  other  occasions,  I  can  but
wonder  by  what  craft  you  have  been  induced  to  desert  your
mother  and  mistress  in  the  time  of  her  dire  need,  unless,
indeed,  those  counsellors  of  yours  have  succeeded  in  per
suading  you  that  the  whole  Church  has  been  led  to  recog
nize  Peter  Leonis.  They  are  lying  men  whom,  with  Anti
christ  their  head,  the  Truth  shall  destroy  with  the  breath  of
His  mouth.  By  the  mouth  of  David  He  tells  us  that  His
Church  is  spread  abroad  to  all  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  to
all  the  nations  of  the  Gentiles.

2.  They  have,  it  is  true,  the  Duke  of  Apulia1  on  their  side;

who  was  banished  by  the  Count,  he  says,  ended  his  days  in  exile  A.D.  1117.  But
William  IX.  succeeded  his  father  A.D.  1126,  as  the  same  author  says  in  his
French  History  of  the  Counts  of  Poitou.  Cf.  also  Baronius  (A.D.  113;)  if  more
information  about  his  life  and  all  that  he  did  is  wanted.  He  is  dealt  with  at
length  in  Vita  Bernurdi  (lib.  ii.  c.  6).  Much,  however,  that  is  said  of  him  is
fabulous.  He  was  converted  by  S.  Bernard.  It  is  certain,  on  the  authority  of
Ordericus,  his  contemporary,  who  is  supported  by  other  influential  writers,  that
William,  moved  to  penitence,  set  out  on  a  pilgrimage  to  the  shrine  of  S.  James
(Compostella),  when  he  was  taken  ill,  "  and  died  on  the  sixth  day  of  the  Passion,
April  gth,  before  the  altar  of  the  Blessed  Apostle,  after  being  fortified  by  Holy
Communion,"  about  the  year  i  137.

1  The  Antipope  Anacletus,  to  gain  the  support  of  Roger,  Duke  of  Apulia  and
Calabria,  honoured  him  with  the  title  of  King  of  Sicily  (Baronius  A.D.  1 130,  No.
0).  Innocent,  however,  afterwards,  having  been  overcome  by  him  in  battle,  and
having  been  taken  prisoner,  confirmed  the  title  as  the  price  of  his  freedom.  How
much  better  would  it  have  been  had  the  Pontiff  maintained  his  rights  by  the
agency  of  others,  if  there  really  was  need  to  take  up  arms,  instead  of  going  him
self  to  war  and  being  forced  to  accept  disadvantageous  conditions.  Cf.  Baronius
(A.D.  1 139,  vol.  xii.).

VOL. I.  27


418  LETTER CXXVIII.

but  they  have  no  other  supporter  of  any  power,  and  him
they  secured  by  the  ridiculous  bribe  of  a  usurper's  crown.
I  ask  you,  what  goodness,  or  virtue,  or  honour  do  they
bring  forward  on  the  part  of  their  Pope  that  we  should
favour  him  ?  If  what  is  commonly  said  of  him  be  true,  he
is  not  fit  to  have  the  government  of  a  single  hamlet ;  if  it  is
not  true,  it  none  the  less  is  fitting  that  the  head  of  the
Church  should  be  of  good  repute  as  well  as  of  blameless  life.
Therefore,  it  is  safer  for  you,  my  dear  kinsman,  when  you
acknowledge  any  one  as  universal  Pope,  not  to  depart  from
the  common  mind  and  agreement  of  the  universal  Church,
and  to  receive  him  that  the  whole  monastic  order  and  all  the
kings  have  acknowledged  ;  it  is  also  more  to  your  honour
and  more  expedient  to  your  salvation  to  receive  Innocent
as  Pope.  He  appeals  to  his  blameless  life,  his  unblemished
character,  and  his  canonical  election.  His  enemies  have
not  a  word  to  say  against  the  two  first  of  these ;  the  third
was  indeed  found  fault  with,  but  the  unprincipled  men  who
did  so  have  been  lately  caught  in  their  falsehood  by  the
most  Christian  Emperor  Lothaire.


LETTER  CXXVIII.  (A.D. 1132.)
To  THE  SAME.

Bernard  exhorts  him  gravely  to  restore  to  their  Churches
the  Clerks  whom  he  had  deprived.

I  recollect,  most  excellent  Prince,  that  I  not  long  ago  left
you,  wishing  well  with  all  my  heart  to  you  and  yours,  and
ready  to  lend,  whenever  I  might  have  an  opportunity,  all
the  help  that  I  could  to  promote  your  honour  and  your
salvation.  These  friendly  feelings  were  inspired  by  my
not  having  returned  deprived  of  the  object  of  my  visit  to
you  ;  by  my  return,  contrary  to  the  expectation  of  many,
bearing  a  message  of  peace  to  the  Church,  with  the  rejoic-
ino-  of  the  whole  earth.  But  now  I  cannot  imagine  with

O  ...

what  intent,  or  by  whose advice,  that happy  disposition


LETTER CXXIX.  419

in  you  which  the  right  hand  of  the  Most  High  had  so  sud
denly  worked  for  the  better,  has  now  so  suddenly  altered
for  the  worse.  Why  should  you  expel  again  from  your
territories,  to  the  great  injury  of  the  Church,  the  clergy  of
S.  Hilary  ?  Why  should  you  call  down  upon  yourself  the
wrath  of  God  more  heavily  than  before  ?  Who  has  be
witched  you  to  depart  so  soon  from  the  way  of  truth  and
safety  ?  Surely  he  will  bear  his  judgment  whoever  he  may
be.  /  would  that  they  were  even  cut  off  that  trouble  you
(Gal.  v.  12).  Return,  I  implore  you,  return  to  a  better
disposition,  lest  you,  too,  be  cut  off,  which  God  forbid.
Retrace  your  steps  ;  recall  the  love  of  your  friends,  suffer
the  clergy  to  return,  before  you  irrecoverably  bring  upon
yourself  a  terrible  foe,  Him  who  takes  away  the  spirit  of
princes,  and  is  terrible  among  the  kings  of  the  earth.


LETTER CXXIX. (A.D. 1133.)
To  THE  CITIZENS  OF  GENOA.

He  exhorts them to  preserve with  all  possible  care the
peace  that  he  had  re-established  among  them.

To  the  consuls,  magistrates,  and  people  of  Genoa,  health,
peace,  and  eternal  life.

i.  That  my  visit  to  you  last  year  was  not  fruitless,  the
Church  who  sent  me  soon  afterwards  experienced  in  her
time  of  need.  You  received  me  honourably,  and  even
thought  my  stay  with  you  was  all  too  short ;  this  was,  in
deed,  conduct  worthy  on  your  part,  but  quite  beyond  my
humble  deserving.  At  all  events,  I  am  neither  forgetful  of
it,  nor  ungrateful  to  you.  May  God,  who  has  the  power,
and  whose  cause  it  was,  repay  to  you  your  goodness  !
But  how  can  I  recompense  you  for  the  honour  you  showed
me,  except  by  an  affectionate  service  full  of  love  and  grati
tude  ?  Not  that  I  take  pleasure  in  favour  shown  to  me,
but  I  rejoice  to  see  your  devotion.  What  joyous  days
were  those ;  but  alas  !  only  too  few.  Never  will  I  forget


420  LETTER CXXIX.

thee,1  devoted  people,  honourable  nation,  illustrious  state.
At  evening,  and  at  morning,  and  at  noon-day  did  I  relate
my  news  and  announce  my  tidings,  and  I  found  that  the
hearers  had  as  much  charity  as  eagerness  to  hear.  We
took  back  the  word  of  peace,  and  when  we  had  found  the
sons  of  peace  our  peace  rested  upon  them.  I  had  gone  out
to  sow  seed,  not  mine,  but  God's ;  and  it  fell  on  good
ground  and  brought  forth  fruit  a  hundredfold  and  imme
diately.  Wonderful  was  the  rapidity,  for  great  was  the
necessity.  I  met  writh  no  delay  or  difficulty  ;  in  one  day  I
sowed  and  reaped  and  brought  back  rejoicing  sheaves  of
peace.  This  was  the  harvest  that  I  gathered  in.  To  those
in  exile,  in  captivity,  in  chains,  and  in  prison,  I  took  a  joy
ous  hope  of  freedom  and  return  to  their  native  land,  to  the
enemy  I  brought  fear,  to  schismatics  confusion,  to  the
Church  glory,  to  the  world  gladness.

2.  And  now  what  remains  for  me,  dearly  beloved,  but  to
exhort  you  to  perseverance,  which  alone  wins  for  man
glory,  and  for  his  virtues  the  crown  of  victory  ?  Without
perseverance  the  soldier  does  not  obtain  victory,  nor  the
victor  his  crown.  It  lends  vigour  to  the  will  and  perfects
all  virtues,  it  is  the  nurse  to  merit  and  the  mediator  between
the  battle  and  the  prize.  Perseverance  is  sister  to  patience,
the  daughter  of  constancy,  the  bosom-friend  of  peace,  the
cementer  of  friendships,  the  bond  of  harmony,  the  bulwark
of  holiness.  Take  away  perseverance,  and  obedience  loses

1  The  men  of  Genoa  made  trial  of  this  in  the  year  1625.  When  Charles
Emmanuel,  Duke  of  Savoy,  came  up  to  lay  siege  to  their  city,  they  called  on
Bernard  to  redeem  his  pledge,  and  vowed  as  follows  : — ''  We  promise  to  enrol  S.
Bernard  among  the  tutelary  Saints  of  our  State  for  he  engaged  in  a  Letter  to  us
that  he  would  never  forget  us.  We  engage  to  have  his  day  observed  as  a  feast
day  ;  to  erect  a  chapel  dedicated  to  him  in  our  Cathedral  or  some  other  Church  ;
yearly  to  go  in  procession,  both  clergy  and  laity,  and  solemnize  the  sacred  rites
at  his  altar,  with  the  consent  of  the  most  illustrious  Archbishop,  and  most
reverend  Bishops,  and  at  which  we  will  piously  assist  ;  lastly,  we  promise  to  pay
this  year  and  every  year  for  the  future  by  the  hand  of  the  Duke,  a  hundred  pounds
with  each  of  twelve  maidens,  as  their  dowry.  In  testimony  whereof,  etc.  Given
at  the  Cathedral  Church,  on  Sunday,  2-;th  April,  1625."  This  was  when  ruin  was
staring  the  citizens  of  Genoa  in  the  face.  The  issue  proved  the  worth  of  their
vow.  For  on  the  eve  of  this  Festival,  Bernard  quickly  put  their  enemy  to  flight,
by  causing  the  appearance  of  the  Spanish  fleet.  Thus  writes  Manrique. —
[Mabillon's  note.]


LETTER CXXIX.  421

its  reward,  well-doing  its  grace,  and  fortitude  its  praise.  It
is  not  he  who  has  begun,  but  he  that  has  persevered  unto
the  end  that  shall  be  saved  (S.  Matt.  xxiv.  13).  Saul  when
he  was  little  in  his  own  sight  was  made  King  over  Israel,
but  not  persevering  in  humility  he  lost  both  his  kingdom
and  his  life.  If  the  caution  of  Samson  and  the  devotion  of
Solomon  had  been  persevered  in,  the  one  would  not  have
been  deprived  of  his  strength,  nor  the  other  of  his  wisdom.
I  exhort  and  beseech  you  to  hold  fast  firmly  to  this  gift  of
perseverance,  the  highest  mark  of  honour,  the  one  trusty
guardian  of  integrity.  Keep  carefully  what  you  have  heard
joyfully.  Remember  the  words  that  are  written  of  Herod  :
that  he  feared  John  and  heard  him  gladly  (S.  Mark  vi.  20).
Well  would  it  have  been  for  him  if  he  had  been  as  ready
to  act  as  to  listen.  It  is  not  they  that  hear  merely  who  are
called  blessed,  but  they  that  hear  the  Word  of  God  and
keep  it  (S.  Luke  xi.  28).

3.  Keep,  therefore,  peace  between  yourselves  and  your
brethren  at  Pisa ;  keep  your  fidelity  to  the  Pope,  your
loyalty  to  the  King;  guard  your  own  honour.  This  is
expedient,  this  is  befitting,  and  this  is  demanded  by  justice.
I  have  heard  that  some  messengers  of  King  Roger  have
come  to  you  ;  I  know  not  their  object,  nor  their  success.
But  I  must  confess  with  the  poet  that  /  fear  the  Greeks,
even  when  they  bring  gifts  (VERG.,  ^En.  ii.  49).  If  anyone
among  you  is  caught  (which  God  forbid)  in  the  disgraceful
act  of  stretching  out  his  hand  for  filthy  lucre,  note  him
straightway,  judge  him  to  be  an  enemy  to  your  name,  a
betrayer  of  his  fellow-citizens,  and  a  traitor  to  the  common
good  and  honour.  If,  again,  you  find  any  whisperer  among
the  people  assuming  the  devil's  occupation  of  sowing  dis
cords,  and  trying  to  disturb  the  existing  peace,  as  he  is  ever
the  author  and  lover  of  division,  then  visit  such  a  dangerous
fellow  the  more  quickly  with  severe  judgment;  such  a
disease  is  the  most  deadly,  because  the  most  inward.  A
hostile  army  lays  waste  the  fields  and  burns  your  houses,
but  evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners,  and  a  little
leaven  permeates  the  whole  lump.  Sow,  plant,  and  exert
yourselves  not  only  not  to  commit  your  former  misdoings


422  LETTER CXXIX.

again,  but  even  by  works  of  righteousness  to  atone  for  them
and  blot  them  out.  It  is  written,  as  you  know  :  The  re
demption  of  a  man's  soul  is  his  riches  (Prov.  xv.  6),  and
again,  Give  alms  and  all  things  are  clean  to  you  (S.  Luke
xi.  41).  But  if  you  determine  to  go  to  war,  and,  again,
bravely  and  strenuously  to  try  your  strength,  to  make  test
of  your  arms,  I,  for  my  part,  think  that  you  ought  not  to
proceed  against  your  neighbours  and  friends  ;  it  would  be
more  fitting  for  you  to  subdue  the  enemies  of  the  Church
and  defend  your  crown  that  has  been  assailed  by  the
Sicilians.  From  them,  at  all  events,  it  will  be  more
honourable  for  you  to  take  possessions,  and  more  just
to  keep  them  when  taken.  May  the  God  of  love  and  peace
remain  with  you  all  always.  Amen.


LETTER CXXX. (A.D. 1133.)
To  THE  CITIZENS  OF  PISA.

He  praises  their  zeal  for,  and  devotedness  to,  Pope
Innocent,  whom  the  Antipope  Anacletus  had  forced
to  leave  Rome,  and  who  had  taken  refuge  at  Pisa.

To  his  friends,  the  consuls,  councillors,  and  citizens  of
Pisa,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  salvation,
peace,  and  everlasting  life.

May  God  bless  you,  and  remember  the  faithful  service
and  pious  compassion  and  consolation  and  reverence  which
you  have  shown,  and  still  do  show,  towards  the  Bride  of  His
Son  in  her  evil  time  and  in  the  days  of  her  affliction.  And,
indeed,  all  this  is  partly  fulfilled,  and  already  there  is  some
answer  to  this  prayer.  Conduct  that  deserves  a  reward  has
already  met  with  rapid  recompense.  Nowr,  God  is  dealing
with  you  according  to  your  merits,  O  people,  \vhom  He  has
chosen  to  Him  to  be  His  inheritance,  a  people  wholly
acceptable,  given  to  good  works.  Pisa  is  put  in  the  place
of  Rome,  and  out  of  all  the  cities  in  the  world  is  chosen  to
be  the  home  of  the  Apostolic  See.  Nor  has  this  happened
by  chance  or  by  man's  counsel,  but  by  Divine  providence
and  the  good  favour  of  God,  who  loves  them  that  love


LETTER CXXXI.  423

Him,  and  who  has  said  to  Innocent  His  anointed  :  "  Live  at
Pisa,  and  in  blessing  I  will  bless  thee.  Here  will  I  dwell,
for  I  have  chosen  this  city."  It  is  because  of  My  support
that  the  constancy  of  Pisa  does  not  yield  to  the  malice  of
the  Sicilian  tyrant;  that  she  is  not  moved  by  bribes,  nor
terrified  by  threats,  nor  deceived  by  stratagems.  O,  men
of  Pisa,  men  of  Pisa,  God  has  clone  to  you  great  things,  and
made  us  to  rejoice.  What  state  is  there  that  does  not  envy
vou  ?  Guard  well,  O,  faithful  city,  the  treasure  entrusted
to  you,  acknowledge  the  grace  of  God,  study  to  be  found
not  ungrateful  for  the  honour  bestowed  on  you.  Show  all
the  honour  you  can  to  your  Father,  and  the  Father  of  all,
and  to  the  princes  of  this  world,  and  the  judges  of  the
earth  who  are  with  you  ;  their  presence  makes  you
illustrious,  glorious,  famous.  But  if  you  know  not  the  day
of  your  visitation,  city  renowned  above  all  others,  then
shall  you  be  the  last  of  all  cities.  I  have  said  enough  to
wise  men.  I  commend  to  you  the  Marquis  Engelbert,1  who
has  been  sent  to  help  the  Pope  and  his  friends.  He  is  a
brave  and  energetic  young  man,  and,  if  I  mistake  not,
faithful.  Let  my  request  win  him  your  favour,  especially  as
I  have  specially  commended  you  to  him,  and  advised  him  to
pay  great  deference  to  your  wishes.


LETTER  CXXXI. (A.D. 1135.)
To  THE  INHABITANTS  OF  MILAN.

The  inhabitants  of  Milan,  who  had  been  reconciled  to
Pope  Innocent,  seemed  to  be  wavering  in  fidelity  to  him.
Bernard  exhorts  them  to  remain  faithful,  and  reminds

i  Who  is  tliis  Marquis  ?  1  think  that  it  is  he  that,  in  the  life  of  S.  Norbert
(c.  32),  is  called  the  brother  of  the  Bishop  of  Ratisbon.  Of  this  Engelbert  one
daughter  was  betrothed  to  Count  Theobald.  This  is  the  passage:— "  And  so
the  ambassadors  of  Count  Theobald  having  been  chosen,  Norbert  took  them  to
Ratisbon.  The  Bishop  of  Ratisbon  was  of  noble  birth,  and  had  a  most
powerful  friend  in  his  brother,  Count  Engelbert,  who  had  daughters  of  marriage
able  age,  one  of  whom  was  taken  and  betrothed  to  Count  Theobald.  Then  the
ambassadors  returned  to  announce,"  etc.  Her  name  was  Matilda  (Order.  Vit.,
lit),  xiii.).  Engelbert  or  Inglebert  was  also  Duke  of  Carinthia  and  Marquis  of
Friuli.—  Cf.  note  to  Ep.  299.


424  LETTER CXXXI.

them of  the  recent  benefits  conferred  upon them by  the
Roman  See.

To  his  friends,  all  the  clergy  and  laity  of  Milan,  BER
NARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  sends  greeting  in  the
Lord.

1.  God  is  dealing  well  with  you;  the  Roman  Church is
treating  you  well. One  acts  as  a  Father,  the  other  as  a
mother. And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  what  has  not  been  done
that should  have  been  done  ? You  asked  that  honourable
persons should be sent you from the Curia, to God's
glory  and  your  own  honour, and  it  has  been  done.1 You
asked  that  your  unanimous  decision  about  the  election of
your  venerable  father2  should  be confirmed, and  that  has
been done. You wished for what is forbidden by the
sacred  canons  to  be  done,  except  under  great  necessity,  to
be  made  lawful in  your  case, viz., for  a  bishopric  to  be
raised  to  an  archbishopric,  and  that,  too,  has  been  granted
you. You  asked  that  your  fellow-citizens  should  be  rescued
from  the  hands  of  the  men of Placentia, a  thing  which I
neither  can  nor  will  pass  by,  and  this  has  been  done. I  ask
you,  lastly,  what  reasonable  request  that  the  daughter  has
made  has  the  loving  mother  refused  or  even  postponed  for
a  time  ? To  sum  up  all,  you  will  shortly  have  the  pallium,
the  fulness  of  honour. But  now  listen  to me, illustrious
people,  noble  race,  famous  state. Listen,  I  say  (and  I  speak
the  truth  ; I  lie  not),  to  one  who  loves  you,  who  is  zealous
for  your  good. The  Roman  Church  is  very  mild,  but  she
is none the less powerful. Faithful is the saying and
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  he  who  does  not  wish  to  be
crushed  by  her  power  must  not  abuse  her  kindness.

2.  But  someone  will  say, "  Yes,  I  will  pay  her  the  rever
ence  that  is  her  due,  but  not  a  whit  more." By  all means

1  Guido  of  Pisa,  Matthew  of  Alba,  and  Geoffrey, Bishop  of  Chartres,  were
sent with  Bernard  (Life,  lib.  ii.  n.  9)  to  reconcile  the  inhabitants  of  Milan  to  the
Roman  Church. They  had  stirred  up  a  schism because  of the deposition  of
Archbishop  Anselm,  who  had  been  elected  by  them.

2  i.e.,  Ribault,  who  had  been  chosen  by  them  for  Bishop  after  the deposition
of  Anselm.


LETTER CXXXI.  425

do  so,  for  if  you  give  her  the  reverence  she  deserves,  you
give  her  all,  for  fulness  of  power  over  all  the  churches  of
the  world  has  been  given  to  the  Apostolic  See  as  her  special
prerogative.  He,  therefore,  who  resisteth  the  power  re-
sisteth  the  ordinance  of  God.  She  can,  if  she  see  fit,
appoint  bishops  where  before  there  were  none.  Where
they  exist  she  can  degrade  some,  exalt  others,  as  reason
bids  her,  so  that  she  can  make  bishops  into  archbishops  and
'vice  versa,  where  she  sees  necessity.  From  the  ends  of
the  earth  she  can  summon  the  most  exalted  ecclesiastics
and  compel  them  to  appear  before  her,  not  merely  once  or
twice,  but  as  often  as  she  sees  fit.  Moreover,  it  is  in  her
power  to  punish  all  disobedience,  if  by  chance  anyone
should  endeavour  to  resist  her.  This,  too,  you  yourselves
have  found  to  your  cost.  What  good  did  your  last  rebel
lion  do  you,1  and  the  disobedience  \vhich  your  false  prophets
wickedly  enticed  you  into  ?  What  fruit  had  you  in  those
things  whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed  ?  See  what  loss  of
power,  glory,  and  honour  you  suffered  in  the  persons  of
your  suffragans.2  Who  was  able  to  stand  up  for  you  and
withstand  the  just  severity  of  the  Apostolic  authority,

1  He  is  speaking  of  the  rebellion  in  which,  following  Ansel m  of  Pusterla,  their
Archbishop, the  Milanese  took  the  side  of  Conrad  against  the  lawful  Emperor
Lothaire. Sigonius relates  the matter  (del  Reg. Ital.  lib  xi.  A.D.  1128). He
says : "  Conrad, supported by several princes, claimed the throne against
Lothaire. Then,  elated by  temporary  good-fortune,  he  hastened  with  an  army
into  Italy,  and  having  made  Archbishop  Anselm  and  the  Milanese  his  friends,
he  received  the  crown  of  the  kingdom  at  Monza,  over-ran  Lombardy,  and  drew
to  his  side  most  of  the  States. For  this  the  Archbishops  of  Mentz,  Magdeburg,
and  Troves,  by  the  command  of  Lothaire,  excommunicated  him. Honorius,
however,  punished  not  only  Conrad  but  also  Anselm,  who  had  crowned  him,
and  the  people  who  had  received  him. Cf.  Otto  of Frisingen (Chron.,  lib.  vii.
c.i  7).

2  By  following  Archbishop  Anselm  and  supporting  Anacletus  and  Conrad.
The  dignity  was  restored  to  them  on  their  repentance. And  S.  Bernard  must  be
understood  to  have spoken  of this restoration above  when  he  said  that the
bishopric  had  been  exalted  into  an  archbishopric  out  of  grace  to  the  Milanese.
For  this see enjoyed Metropolitan dignity from the  beginning. We must
not  omit  what  Sigonius  relates  (del  Regn.  Ital.,  lib.  xi.  A.D.  1133): "Innocent
having  been  twice  received  courteously  and  honourably  by  the  Genoese  rewarded
them  by  exempting  their  Bishop  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Archbishop  of  Milan,
and  by  placing  under  him  one  half  of  the  Bishops  of  Corsica.


426  LETTER CXXXI.

when,  provoked  by  your  audacity,  it  determined  to  cut  off
your  members,  and  strip  you  of  your  old  and  illustrious
honours  ?  And  you  would  at  this  moment  be  a  hideous
and  headless  mass  if  mercy  rather  than  power  had  not  been
directed  towards  you.  Who  will  have  power  to  forbid
greater  disasters  still  if,  which  God  forbid,  you  again  pro
voke  them  ?  See,  then,  that  you  do  not  again  fall  away,  for
know  for  a  certainty  that  you  wrill  not  so  easily  find  a
remedy  a  second  time.  If  anyone  should  say  to  you  that  in
part  you  should  obey  and  in  part  refuse  to  obey,  although
you  have  felt  the  full  weight  of  the  Apostolic  power  and
the  completeness  of  its  authority,  then  I  ask  whether  such
a  man  has  not  either  been  deceived  or  wishes  to  deceive.
But  do  what  I  bid  you,  for  I  am  not  leading  you  astray.
Give  yourselves  rather  to  humility  and  to  meekness,  know
ing  that  God  giveth  grace  to  the  lowly,  and  that  the  meek
shall  inherit  the  earth.  Be  careful  to  keep  the  good  will  of
your  mistress  and  mother  now  that  you  have  regained  it.
Study  so  to  please  her  for  the  future,  that  she  may  be
pleased,  not  only  to  keep  safely  for  you  what  she  has
restored,  but  also  to  add  what  she  has  not  yet  given.


LETTER CXXXII. (A.D. 1132.)
To THE CLERGY OF MILAN.

He  congratulates  the  Milanese  clergy,  by  whose  endea
vours  the  State  had  abandoned  the  Antipope  Anacletus
and  returned  to  the  unity  of  the  Church.

Blessed  be  ye  of  the  Lord,  for  by  your  zeal  and  diligence
your  state  has  been  set  free  from  error,  has  abjured  its
schism,  and  returned  to  Catholic  unity.  The  news  of  it
has  spread  amongst  Catholics  ;  Sion  has  heard  of  it  and
rejoiced,  and  you  are  glorified  before  God  and  the  people.
How  joyfully  does  your  Mother,  the  Church,  welcome  back
such  a  number  of  worthy  sons,  whom  she  was  grieving  for
as  lost !  With  how  joyous  and  serene  countenance  does


LETTER CXXXII.  427

God,  the  Father,  receive  this  sacrifice  at  your  hands  !  Do
now,  as  sons  of  peace,  what  you  propose  to  do  for  the
peace  of  the  earth.  And  I,  brethren,  longing  to  become  a
sharer  and  companion  of  your  joy,  am  coming,  according
to  your  request,  with  our  beloved  brethren,  your  messengers.
Concerning  the  things  you  wrote  to  me  of,  I  will  more  fully
satisfy  you  according  to  reason  if  it  be  the  good  pleasure
of  God.  But  since  I  shall  soon  be  setting  out  to  the
Council,  I  hope  it  will  be  no  burden  to  you  to  postpone
them  till  my  return.


LETTER CXXXIII. (A.D. 1134.)
To ALL  THE CITIZENS  OF  MILAN.

Bernard  had  been  invited  to  negotiate  for  peace  on  their
behalf,  and  gladly  accepts  the  invitation.

I  gather  from  your  letter  that  you  have  some  slight
amount  of  regard  for  me.  And  since  I  cannot  find  that  I
deserve  it,  I  believe  it  to  be  by  the  gift  of  God.  I  am  far
from  declining  the  goodwill  of  a  powerful  and  famous
people.  I  welcome  your  kindness  towards  me,  and  with
open  arms  receive  devotedly  the  devotedness  of  your
renowned  State;  especially  now  that  you  have  abjured  the
error  of  the  schismatics,  and  returned  to  the  bosom  of  your
Mother  Church  with  the  rejoicing  of  the  whole  world.
Nevertheless,  I  think  that  not  only  to  me  is  it  a  cause  of
rejoicing  that  I  am  invited  to  strive  to  make  peace,  and  that
I,  a  poor  and  unknown  personage,  am  chosen  by  a  most
illustrious  city  to  be  its  mediator  and  minister;  but  I  think
that  it  is  also  an  honour  to  you  to  be  desirous  of  peace  and
agreement  with  your  neighbours,  when  the  hostile  attack
of  many  States,  as  is  well  known  to  the  world,  has  been
powerless  to  force  you  to  yield  for  a  moment.  And  so
being  now  hastening  to  the  Council  I  shall  hope  to  return
by  way  of  you,  and  make  trial  of  your  alleged  goodwill.
May  He  who  giveth  the  goodwill  cause  that  it  be  not  in  vain
to  me.


428  LETTER CXXXIV.

LETTER CXXXIV. (A.D. 1134.)
To SOME  NOVICES  RECENTLY  CONVERTED  AT  MILAN.  1

Bernard  congratulates  these  Milanese  novices  on  their
conversion,  and  promises  to  visit  them  on  his  return  from
the  Council.

To  his  beloved  brethren  at  Milan  lately  converted  to
God,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  sends  greeting,
and  prays  that  they  may  worthily  carry  out  in  the  spirit
of  counsel  and  strength  what  they  have  well  begun.

Blessed  be  God  who  hath  made  the  world's  glory  to  be
of  none  account  in  your  eyes  that  He  might  bestow  upon
you  His  own.  How  full  of  vanity  are  the  children  of  men,
how  deceitful  are  they  upon  the  weights,  for,  according  to
the  saying  of  the  Gospel,  they  receive  honour  one  of
another,  and  seek  not  the  honour  that  cometh  from  God
alone  (S.  John  v.  44)  ;  surely  in  this  they  all  are  alike
deceitful  from  vanity.  But  with  you  it  is  not  so.  From
this  reproach  God's  mercy  has  set  you  free,  to  make  you  a
sweet  odour  to  God  in  every  place,  to  be  to  His  glory,  to
be  a  cause  of  rejoicing  to  the  angels,  and  an  example  to  men.

1  From  this  title  Baronius  infers  that  before  the  arrival  of  Bernard  at  Milan,
i.e.,  before  A.D.  1134,  a  community  of  Cistercians  had  removed  thither,  and
had  founded  a  monastery,  to  which  these  novices  had  submitted  themselves.
But  Ughellus  (lial.  Sacr.,  Vol.  iv.)  thinks  that  Chara-vallis  was  the  first  house
of  Cistercians  at  Milan,  and  he  proves  it  to  have  been  founded  about  two  miles
outside  the  city  not  earlier  than  A.D.  1 135,  and  that,  therefore,  under  the  name  of
"  novices  "  in  this  epistle  we  must  understand  those  who  had  been  recently  con
verted  by  the  influence  of  S.  Bernard  on  his  way  to  the  Council  of  Pisa,  and
who  had  devoted  themselves  already  to  him  in  mind.  The  date  given  by
Ughellus  for  the  founding  of  the  monastery  is  proved  from  the  original
inscription  and  from  the  first  charters  of  the  place,  in  which  it  is  uniformly
called  Chara-vallis  and  not  Clara-vallis.  See  Ep.  281.  On  the  name  of  this
monastery  of  Chara-vallis  Mabillon,  in  his  work  entitled  "  Museum  Italicum,"
writes  in  the  first  part  (p.  18,  §8):  "  For  the  reading  Chara-vallis  we  have
some  original  deeds  of  the  place,  and  also  an  ancient  inscription  cut  on  the
cloister-wall  as  follows:  '  In  the  year  of  grace  1135,  on  the  22nd  of  January,
this  monastery  was  built  by  S.  Bernard,  of  Clairvaux;  in  the  year  1221  this
church  was  consecrated  by  Henry,  Archbishop  of  Milan,  on  the  2nd  May,  in
honour  of  S.  Mary  of  Chara-vallis.'  "


LETTER CXXXV.  429

If,  indeed,  there  is  joy  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that
repenteth,  how  much  more  over  so  many  and  over  such
men  as  you,  and  especially  over  those  who  belong  to  such
a  city  as  yours.  And  I,  brethren,  induced  by  my  great  joy,
and  also  invited  by  you,  sent  you  word  by  my  dear  brothers,
Otto  and  Ambrose,  whom  you  sent  to  me  with  your  invi
tation,  of  my  decision  to  come  with  them.  But  on  second
thoughts,  thinking  it  better  not  to  see  you  for  a  few  brief
moments,  nor  merely  in  passing,  I  postponed  my  visit  till
my  return.  I  am  now  going  to  the  Council,  but  by  God's
help  I  will  return  by  your  way,  and  afford  your  holy  purpose
such  counsel  and  help  as  reason  shall  enable  me.


LETTER CXXXV. (Circa A.D. 1135.)
To PETER, BISHOP OF PAVIA.  l

Bernard  attributes  to  God  the  praises  lavished  upon
himself,  but  congratulates  the  Bishop  on  his  works  of
•mercy.

If  o-Qod  seed,  sown  in  o-ood  soil,  seems  to  have  brought

O  '  O  O

forth  fruit,  His  is  the  glory  who  gave  the  seed  to  the  sower,
fertility  to  the  soil,  increase  to  the  seed.  What  have  we  to
do  with  these  ?  I  certainly  will  not  give  Christ's  glory  to
another,  much  less  will  I  claim  it  for  myself.  Surely  it  is
the  law  of  the  Lord  that  converteth  the  soul  (Ps.  xix.  7)
and  not  I  ;  it  is  the  testimony  of  the  Lord  that  is  sure  and
giveth  wisdom  unto  the  simple,  and  not  I.  It  is  the  hand
and  not  the  pen  that  is  praised  for  the  fair  shape  of  the
letters,  and  if  I  am  to  claim  for  myself  what  belongs  to  me
in  anything  I  have  done,  I  confess  that  my  tongue  is  the
pen  of  a  ready  writer  (Ps.  xlv.  i).  But,  you  say,  why
then  are  the  feet  of  them  that  preach  good  tidings  called
beautiful?  (Is.  Hi.  7).  What  are  their  advantages?  much

1  Ughellus  has  two  Bishops  of  Pavia  of  this  name  :  one  elected  A.D.  1130  or
1131,  the  other  after  Alphonse  and  Conrad,  A.D.  1148,  and  it  is  to  this  latter
that  he  assigns  this  Letter.  It,  however,  suits  the  former  better,  and,  indeed,  it
follows  immediately  after  ep.  134,  which  was  written  A.D.  1 134.


43°  LETTER CXXXVI.

every  way.  First,  because  they  are  the  children  of  their
Father  which  is  in  Heaven,  they  think  that  the  glory  which
they  offer  to  Him  as  tribute  is  none  other's,  but  His,  and
being  children  they  are  His  heirs.  Then  also  they  reckon
that  the  salvation  of  their  neighbours  is  also  their  own,
for  they  love  them  as  themselves.  Thirdly,  the  labour
of  their  lips  shall  not  utterly  perish.  For  every  man
shall  receive  his  own  reward  according  to  his  own
labour  (i  Cor.  iii.  8).  I  have  not  prevented  my  lips;
thou  hast  opened  thy  heart  also,  and  therefore  wilt
doubtless  receive  more,  inasmuch  as  thou  hast  laboured
more.  I  am  certain  that  thy  reward  awaits  thee,  for
thou  hast  given  drink  to  the  thirsty,  and  met  with  bread
those  that  were  flying.  Nor  will  thy  kindly  offices,
nor  the  exhortations  to  salvation  with  which  thou  hast
refreshed  the  bowels  of  Christ  in  His  poor  go  unre
warded.  We  are  both  fellow-labourers,  fellow-helpers  of
God  :  let  us  both  hope  for  our  reward  in  the  sight  of  the
souls  of  the  saints  saved  through  us.  May  God  grant  that
I  never  forget  you,  nor  you  cease  to  remember  me.


LETTER CXXXVI. (A.D. 1134.)
To  POPE  INNOCENT.

He  asks  that  Dalfinus,  who  was  prepared  to  give  satis
faction/or  the  injuries  that  he  had  inflicted,  may  receive
gentler  treatment.

o

If  we  were  always  meeting  with  calamities,  who  would  be
able  to  bear  them  ?  If  with  prosperity,  who  is  there  that
would  not  despise  it  ?  But  Wisdom,  who  sweetly  orders  all
things,  so  tempers  with  moderation  and  alternates  for  His
elect  the  necessary  vicissitudes  that  attend  upon  the  course
of  their  temporal  life,  that  they  are  neither  shattered  by
adversity  nor  beguiled  by  prosperity.  The  former  is  made
more  tolerable  by  the  latter,  and  the  latter  receives  a
keener  enjoyment  from  the  former.  Blessed  be  God  in  all


LETTER CXXXVII.  431

things:  our  sorrow  has  been  turned  into  joy,  our  wounds
have  been  soothed  first  by  wine,  then  with  oil.  The  robbers
and  plunderers  have  been  smitten  with  compunction  and
brought  low.  They  send  back  with  honour  the  priest  of
the  Lord,  on  whom  they  dared  to  lay  hands  ;  the  spoils
which  they  had  carried  off  they  energetically  collect  again,
and  wholly  restore.  If  any  part  of  them  cannot  be  found
Dalfinus  will  give  satisfaction  for  it  according  to  your  good
pleasure  ;  he  has  pledged  me  his  honour  to  this.  If  he
comes  to  the  feet  of  your  majesty,1  as  he  proposes  to  do,
in  order  to  fulfil  his  promise,  I  ask  that  the  young  man
may  be  dealt  with  more  gently  than  he  deserves.  Not  that
I  wish  so  great  a  crime  to  go  unpunished,  but  that  the
Church,  if  possible,  may  be  honoured  by  due  satisfaction
being  given  ;  so  that  he  who  gives  the  satisfaction  may  not
be  exasperated  beyond  the  limits  of  his  patience,  and  may
not  repent  him  of  having  listened  to  my  advice.


LETTER CXXXVII. (A.D. 1134.)
To  THE  EMPRESS  OF  THE  ROMANS.

As  Pope  Innocent  did  not  wish  to  restore  the  Milanese
to  his  favour  until  they  had  made  submission  to  the
Emperor  Lothaire,  Bernard  commends  them  to  the
clemency  of  the  Empress.

In  bringing  over  the  citizens  of  Milan2  I  did  not  forget
the  instructions  given  me  beforehand  by  your  excellency.

1  It  is  gathered  from  this  that  this  Letter  was  directed  to  the  Supreme  Pontiff,
who  is  not  seldom  styled  "  your  majesty  "  by  others,  as  by  Bernard  in  epp.  46,
150,  166,  etc.,  also  by  Odo  de  Dioglio  and  others. Still,  this  title  is  sometimes
given  to  the  prelates  under  him. Cf.  notes  to  ep.  370.

2  Sigonius (de  Regn.  Ital., lib. ii. A.D. 1134)  speaks  of this  as  follows:
"When  the Milanese  saw  themselves  excommunicated and deprived  of  their
metropolitan's  dignity for following Anselm  in  his  support  of Anacletus  and
Conrad,  moved  by  repentance for  their misdoing, they  sought, through their
Bishop  Ribault,  whom  they  had  chosen  in  the  room  of  Anselm,  to  recover  favour
with  Innocent  and  Lothaire ;  and  they  wrote  a  letter  with  this  object  to  Bernard,
the  power  of  whose  influence  they  knew  to  be  great. Bernard  being  summoned


432  LETTER CXXXVII.

Even  if  I  had  not  received  them  I  should  none  the  less  have
aimed  to  secure  your  honour  and  the  welfare  of  your
kingdom,  as  I  do  always  and  everywhere  as  far  as  I  can.
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Milanese  were  not  received  into
favour  with  thy  lord  the  Pope,  nor  into  the  unity  of  the

by  Innocent  to  the  Council  of  Pisa,  as  he  was  hastily  passing  through  Lombardy
wrote  to  congratulate  them  on  having  laid  aside  their  error,  and  promised  to
help  them  by  his  intercession  and  to  come  to  them  on  his  way  back.  Having
arrived  at  Pisa  the  Council  was  opened  and  its  business  happily  ended,  mainly
by  his  sagacity  and  wisdom.  The  acts  of  that  Council  were  many.  The  chief
one  was  an  anathema  directed  against  Anacletus  and  his  supporters.  To  the
Milanese,  who  had  been  persuaded  by  their  Bishop  to  return  to  their  allegiance
to  Innocent,  many  honours  were  given  ;  Ribault,  whom  they  had  themselves
elected,  was  allowed  to  retain  his  dignity,  and  was  gifted  with  the  pall,  so  that
the  city  regained  its  metropolitical  dignity,  and  a  most  honourable  embassy
was  sent  to  them  to  give  them  pardon.  Guido  of  Pisa,  and  Matthew,  Bishop  of
Alba,  were  sent  as  legates  a  lutere,  and  with  them  was  joined  the  man  they  most
asked  for,  Bernard,  to  extinguish  the  schism  caused  by  Archbishop  Anselm,  and
to  set  the  people  free  from  their  wickedness  by  the  ministry  of  religion.  The
Milanese,  when  they  heard  that  Bernard  was  close  by,  immediately  rushed  out
of  the  city  with  great  joy,  went  seven  miles  to  meet  him,  with  such  a  multi
tude  of  all  orders  and  ages,  both  men  and  women,  that  a  stranger  might
have  thought  that  they  were  abandoning  the  city  to  settle  elsewhere.  Then
when  the  two  companies  met,  they  vied  with  each  other  in  their  eagerness  to
see  him,  to  speak  to  him,  and  even  to  kiss  his  feet.  They  plucked  hairs  from
his  garments  to  keep  them  as  remedies  against  disease,  thinking  everything
that  he  had  touched  holy,  and  supposing  that  they  themselves  would  become  so
by  having  touched  him  ;  and  in  this  manner  they  brought  him  with  shouts  and
rejoicing  into  the  city.  Then  on  a  day  appointed  a  conference  was  held.  At  it
they  first  of  all  repudiated  Anacletus,  and  acknowledged  Innocent  as  true  and
Catholic  Pontiff.  Next  they  forswore  Conrad  and  publicly  recognized  Lothaire
as  their  king  and  lord,  and  received  him,  as  did  the  rest  of  the  world,  as  the
august  Roman  Emperor,  and  promised  on  the  Holy  Gospel  that  they  would  give
satisfaction  for  their  past  contumacy  according  to  the  counsel  and  command  of
Innocent.  Afterwards  they  agreed  to  submit  to  Bernard's  decision,  and  they  ac
cepted  the  penalty  which  he  imposed.  While  Bernard  was  at  Milan  he  cured  by
the  power  of  God,  to  the  great  wonder  of  all,  a  vast  number  of  sick,  who  were
brought  to  him,  lame,  blind,  halt,  and  especially  he  set  free  very  many  who  had
been  possessed  by  a  devil  because  of  the  schism.  Then  by  the  order  of  Innocent
he  set  out  to  Pavia  and  Cremona  to  make  peace  between  the  States  of  Lombardy.
But  being  unsuccessful  in  his  efforts  at  Cremona,  he  announced  their  obstinacy
to  Innocent  in  these  words :  "  The  people  of  Cremona  have  hardened  their
hearts,  and  their  prosperity  is  leading  them  to  their  ruin.  They  despise  the
Milanese,  and  their  confidence  is  their  snare.  They  put  their  trust  in  chariots
and  horsemen,  they  have  frustrated  my  trust  in  them,  and  rendered  my  labour
useless."


LETTER CXXXVIII.


433


Church  until  they  had  publicly  abjured  Conrad,  and  ac
knowledged  my  lord  Lothaire  as  their  king  and  lord,  and
received  him,  as  the  whole  of  the  world  does,  as  the  august
Emperor  of  the  Romans  :  nor  until  they  had  taken  an  oath
on  the  Holy  Gospel,  by  the  direction  and  command  of  my
lord  the  Pope,  that  they  would  give  you  fitting  satisfaction
for  the  injury  that  they  had  done  you.  I  give,  therefore,
hearty  thanks  to  the  divine  goodness  which  has  thus  laid
your  enemies  at  your  feet  without  the  horrors  of  war,  or
the  shedding  of  man's  blood;  and  I  ask  that,  when  the
Milanese  seek  through  the  Pope  as  their  mediator  for  your
favour,  we  may  find  you  as  kindly  disposed  and  merciful  as
we  have  often  before  experienced  you  to  be ;  and  so  they
will  not  repent  of  having  listened  to  sound  advice,  and  you
will  receive  at  their  hands  the  service  and  honour  that  are
your  due.  For  it  is  not  seemly  that  your  faithful  servants
who  labour  for  your  honour  should  be  put  to  shame  by  you,
as  they  certainly  will  be  if,  after  they  have  held  out  to
others  the  hope  of  indulgence  at  the  hands  of  your  gracious
majesty,  they  find  you  inexorable  when  they  intervene  on
their  own  behalf.

LETTER  CXXXVIII. (A.D. 1133.)

To  HENRY,  KING  OF  THE  ENGLISH.
He  asks  for  assistance  to  Pope  Innocent  from  the  King.
To  the  most  illustrious  HENRY,  King  of  England,  BER
NARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health,  prosperity,
and  peace.

To  wish  to  teach  you,  and  especially  about  what  con
cerns  your  honour,  would  be  the  part  either  of  a  fool,  or  of
one  who  knows  nothing  at  all  of  you.  It  is  enough  for  me,
therefore,  to  state  the  case  simply  and  in  as  few  words  as
possible ;  when  a  hint  is  enough  many  words  are  super
fluous.  We  are  on  the  threshold  of  the  city,  salvation  is  at
the  doors,  righteousness  is  our  companion,  but  the  Roman
military  want  other  food  than  that.  And  so  by  righteous
ness  we  appease  God,  by  our  arms  we  terrify  the  foe,  but

VOL.  I.  28


434  LETTER CXXXIX.

we  have  not  the  bare  necessaries  of  life.  You  know  better
than  I  what  should  be  done  to  finish  the  good  work  that
you  have  begun  in  your  magnificent  and  honourable  recep
tion  of  my  lord,  Pope  Innocent.1


LETTER CXXXIX. (Circa A.D. 1135.)
To  THE  EMPEROR  LOTHAIRE.

Bernard  exhorts  the  Emperor  to  repress  the  schismatics.
He  recommends  to  him  the  cause  of  a  certain  Church  at
Toul.

To  LOTHAIRE,  by  the  grace  of  God  Roman  Emperor  and
AUGUSTUS,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  sends
greeting  and  prayer,  if  the  prayer  of  a  sinner  be  of  any
avail.

i .  Blessed  be  God  who  has  chosen  you,2  and  set  you  up  as

i  What  Henry  I.  did  may  be  seen  in  the  Life  of  S.  Bernard  (lib.  ii.  c.  i.  n.  4).
William  of  Malmcsbury  also  says  (Hist.  lib.  i.) : — "  Innocent  having  been
shut  out  of  Rome,  crossed  the  Alps,  and  hastened  into  Gaul.  There  he  was
received  by  the  whole  Church  on  this  side  of  the  Alps.  Moreover,  King  Henry,
who  was  not  easily  to  be  moved  from  any  position  that  he  had  once  taken,
voluntarily  acknowledged  him  at  Chartres,  and  at  Rouen  loaded  him  with
presents,  not  only  from  his  own  stores,  but  from  the  nobles  and  also  from
the  Jews."  Roger  of  Hoveden,  too,  relates  this  same  reception  (Annals  A.D.
i  131).  Further,  in  the  year  1 132,  according  to  Fulk,  editor  of  the  Chronicle  of
Beneventum,  when  the  Emperor  Lothaire  was  besieging  Rome  for  the  purpose
of  restoring  Innocent,  and  had  not  sufficient  force  to  take  the  city,  being  sup
ported  by  only  two  thousand  soldiers,  Bernard,  who  was  with  him,  sought  by
this  Letter  reinforcements  from  the  King  of  the  English.  These,  however,  Henrv
was  unable  to  supply.  We  learn  from  a  Letter  of  Hugh,  Archbishop  of  Rouen,
to  Pope  Innocent,  what  a  Christian  and  pious  death  he  died,  A.D.  1135.  This
Letter  is  well  worthy  of  preservation,  and  may  be  seen  in  the  History  of  William
of  Malmesbury  (lib.  i.),  and  in  Baronius  (Annals  A.D.  1135).

2  Lothaire,  Duke  of  Saxony,  was  a  man  well-spoken  of  by  all :  Cf.  William  of
Tyre  (lib.  xii.  c.  16)  ;  Otto  of  Frisingen  (lib.  vii.  c.  17)  ;  Sigonius,  who  praises
him  as  well  for  his  piety  as  for  his  valour  ;  Conrad,  Abbot  of  Ursperg,  who  sings
his  praises,  as  a  brave  general,  a  sagacious  counsellor,  and  a  terrible  opponent
to  the  enemies  of  God  and  of  Holy  Church  ;  Peter  the  Deacon,  who  exalts  him
in  wondrously  magnificent  terms.  He  says  :  "  Who  would  not  admire  the
greatness  of  the  Emperor's  mind  ?  He  would  sit  in  the  Chapter  from  prime
to  vespers  endeavouring  to  appease  the  discussions  of  the  brethren,  going  with
out  food  and  drink,  while  striving  for  peace  and  unity.  Under  the  Imperial
cloak  he  served  his  heavenly  King.  For,  as  I  myself  can  testify,  when  he  was


LETTER CXXXIX.  435

the  horn  of  our  salvation,  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  His
name,  to  the  reparation  of  the  Imperial  honour,  to  the
support  of  the  Church  in  her  evil  hour,  and  lastly  to  work
salvation  in  the  midst  of  the  earth.  It  is  His  work  that  the
glory  of  your  crown  is  being  daily  added  to  and  raised  on
high,  is  wonderfully  increasing  and  advancing  in  all  honour
and  magnificence  before  God  and  men.  Of  His  doing
surely  it  was,  and  of  His  power  that  you  lately  accom
plished  so  successfully1  such  a  laborious  and  dangerous
journey,  undertaken  on  behalf  of  the  peace  of  the  kingdom
and  the  liberation  of  the  Church.  Indeed,  you  have  most
gloriously  attained  the  full  height  of  the  Imperial  dignity,
and,  what  is  still  greater,  you  did  so  not  by  a  mighty  hand,
that  so  the  greatness  of  your  mind  and  of  your  faith  might
the  more  clearly  shine  forth.  But  if  the  earth  trembled  and
was  still  before  so  tiny  an  army,  what  dread  may  we  sup
pose  will  seize  upon  the  hearts  of  the  enemy  when  the
King  shall  proceed  to  show  the  power  of  his  arm  ?  More
over,  the  goodness  of  his  cause  will  animate  him,  nay,  a
double  necessity  will  urge  him  forward.  It  becomes  not
me  to  exhort  to  battle  ;  nevertheless,  I  say  unhesitatingly
that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Church's  advocate  to  protect  the
Church  from  being  attacked  by  the  madness  of  schismatics,
it  is  the  prerogative  of  Caesar  to  uphold  his  own  crown

engaged  on  any  expedition  he  would  at  the  early  dawn  hear  mass  first  for  the
departed,  then  for  the  army,  then  either  for  himself,  or  else  the  ordinary  mass  of
the  day."  It  is  not  without  reason,  therefore,  that  Bernard  praises  God  for  giving
the  Empire  such  an  Emperor.

1  This  was  the  journey  which,  at  Bernard's  instigation,  Lothaire  undertook
from  Germany  into  Italy,  as  far  as  to  Rome,  although  with  but  scanty  forces,  for
the  purpose  of  placing  Innocent  on  the  Papal  throne,  and  of  in  turn  receiving
from  him  the  Imperial  crown.  This  last  ceremony  took  place  in  the  Lateran
while  the  Antipope  was  occupying  the  Vatican,  and  holding  the  strongest
positions  of  the  city.  Cf.  Baronius  (Annals,  A.D.  1132);  Sigonius  (lib.  xi.
A.D.  1132);  Life  of  S.  Bernard  (lib.  ii.  c.  2).  For  all  this  Ordericus  (lib.  xiii.
p.  896),  in  describing  the  journey  of  Lothaire  to  Rome,  A.D.  1133,  says  that  he
bade  Peter  either  to  give  place  to  another  or  submit  himself  to  the  judgment  of
a  Council  in  respect  of  his  election,  and  that  he  said  the  same  to  Innocent.  He
says,  too,  that  Peter  agreed,  but  Innocent  declined,  and  that,  therefore,  Lothaire
was  angry  with  the  latter,  and  handed  over  to  Peter  the  positions  he  was  hold
ing,  and  left  Rome  without  finishing  the  business.


436  LETTER CXXXIX.

against  the  Sicilian  usurper.1  For  as  a  Jew  by  descent  has
seized  upon  the  See  of  Peter  to  the  injury  of  Christ,  so
without  doubt  everyone  who  makes  himself  a  king  in
Sicily  speaketh  against  Caesar.

2.  But  if  it  is  incumbent  upon  Caesar  both  to  render  the
things  that  are  Caesar's  to  Caesar,  and  to  God  the  things
that  are  God's,  why  are  the  possessions  of  God  at  Toul
diminished  without  Caesar  getting  any  gain  from  them  ?
It  is  to  be  feared  that  neglect  of  trifles  may  become  a
barrier  to  great  matters.  What  I  refer  to  is  this.  The
church  of  S.  Gengulphus2  in  that  city  is  being  grievously
oppressed,  and  unjustly,  too,  it  is  said  ;  and  they  say  that
in  some  way  or  other  your  prudence  has  been  beguiled  into
opposing  my  lord  the  Pope,  when  he  \vas  about  to  see
justice  done,  by  a  request  from  you  not  to  interfere.  I
implore  and  advise  you  to  act  more  prudently,  to  recall  the
injurious  request,  to  permit  justice  to  be  done  before  that
Church  is  destroyed  to  the  foundation.  I  am  but  a  poor

1  About  the  rights  of the  kingdom  of  Sicily  there  was  at  other  times  great
discussion,  with  which,  however,  we  have  nothing  to  do  now. It  may  be  found
described  in  the  work  of  Baronius,  if  it  is  still  extant,  and  in  the  works  of  those
who  wrote  against  him. Bernard rightly  speaks  of  the  "  Sicilian  usurper,"  in
asmuch  as  he  seized  the  duchies of Apulia and  Calabria,  committed  to  the
charge  of William,  his  cousin,  and  kept  them  from  the  Pontificate  of  Calixtus
till  the  year  1 136,  when  Lothaire,  on  his  second  journey  into  Italy,  according  to
Conrad  of  Ursperg,  entered  Apulia,  and  conquered  Roger,  having  kindled  the  zeal
of  his  soldiers  chitfly  by  telling  them  that  they  were  fighting  against  a  foe  of  the
Church,  and  an  excommunicate. Cf.  Otto  of  Frisingen (lib.  vii.  c.  16  and  20)  ;
Fazell  (lib.  7,  poster, decad). Roger, however,  repented  afterwards  under  the
admonitions  of  Bernard,  and  Peter  of  Cluny, who  urged  him by  letter  to  seek
reconciliation.

2  For S. Gengulf, or Gangulf, or Jangulf,  see Sigbert  (A.D. 759)  :  "  S.
Gengulf  flourished  in  Burgundy,  and  there  gloriously  suffered  martyrdom.'' In
his honour  a  noble  church was erected at Toul,  in Lorraine,  about  the  year
1065,  by  S.  Gerard, bishop of  that  city,  as  I  have  been  informed  by  a  Letter
from  the  illustrious  and  Reverend Andrew  Saussay,  Bishop  and  Count  of  Toul,
a  man  distinguished not less by his  learned  writings  than  by  his  dignified
position. So  also  we  find  in  an  ancient  MS. in  his  possession : "  An  abbey  of
S.  Gengulf  was  first  founded  at  the  southern  entrance  of  the  city  by  S.  Gerard,
who  also  gave  it  an  arm  of  the  saint." Udo,  another  Bishop  of  Toul,  restored
the  church. This  invocation  of  S.  Gengulf  was  also  given  to  several  collegiate
churches,  as,  e.g.,  in  the  case  of  S. Exuperius,  at  Corbeil,  where  the  Prior,  or
head  of  the  Chapter,  is  called  abbot. Cf.  ep.  178.


LETTER CXL.  437

Religious,  yet  I  am  your  devoted  servant,  and  if  I  seem
importunate,  it  is,  perhaps,  just  because  I  am  thus  devoted.
I  salute  the  Lady  Empress  in  the  love  of  Christ.


LETTER  CXL. (Circa  A.D.  1135.)
To  THE  SAME.

He commends  to the Emperor the Pisans, who were
entirely  devoted  to  Pope  Innocent.

I  wonder  at  whose  instigation,  or  by  whose  advice,  it
is  that  your  vigilance  has  been  so  eluded,  that  men  who
were  certainly  worthy  of  double  honour  at  your  hands  have
met  with  quite  opposite  treatment.  I  mean  the  citizens  of
Pisa,  who  were  the  first,  and,  at  one  time,  the  only  people
to  lift  up  their  banner  against  your  rival.  How  much  more
just  would  it  have  been  had  the  royal  indignation  flamed
out  against  those  who  on  some  pretext  or  other  have  had
the  audacity  to  attack  a  brave  and  loyal  city,  at  a  moment,
too,  above  all  things,  when  many  thousands  of  its  people
had  gone  out  to  fight  against  the  tyrant,  to  avenge  the
wrongs  of  its  Lord,  and  to  defend  the  imperial  crown.
For,  that  I  may  most  fittingly  apply  to  this  city  what  was
of  old  said  of  holy  David  (i  Sam.  xxii.  14),  I  ask,  among  all
States  what  one  is  so  faithful  as  Pisa,  going  out  and  coming
in,  and  obeying  the  King's  command  ?  Is  not  this  the
people  which  lately  raised  the  siege  of  Naples,  and  put  to
flight  the  one  powerful  enemy  that  the  kingdom  has  ?  Is
not  this  the  people,  too,  which,  wonderful  to  say,  in  one
campaign  stormed  the  wealthy  and  strongly  fortified  cities
of  Amalfi,  Ravello,  Scala,  and  Atturnia,  cities  which  up  to
that  time  had  been  found  impregnable  by  all  who  had
attempted  their  capture  ?  How  meet  and  right,  how  con
sistent  with  all  reason  and  justice,  would  it  have  been  that
a  faithful  city  should  have  been  protected  against  every  foe,
at  all  events  while  engaged  in  such  exploits  as  I  have
mentioned  ;  to  say  nothing  of  the  presence  of  the  Supreme


438  LETTER CXLI.

Pontiff,  who  had  lately  been  driven  into  exile,  and  received
by  the  men  of  Pisa  with  the  utmost  honour,  which  they  still
continue  to  show  ;  nor  yet  of  the  good  service  that  they  have
done  the  Emperor,  for  which  at  that  very  time  they  them
selves  were  under  sentence  of  banishment.  But  things
have  gone  by  contraries  ;  those  who  were  hostile  have  met
with  favour,  and  those  who  have  done  their  duty  have
incurred  wrath.  But  perhaps  you  knew  nothing  of  all  this
before.  Now,  however,  that  you  do,  it  behoves  you,  nay,
decency  and  good  policy  call  upon  you,  to  change  your
orders  and  your  mind,  that  so  men  who  deserve  especially
to  be  honoured  by  the  King's  countenance  and  bounty
may  hear  and  receive  from  you  for  the  future  such  things
as  they  have  merited.  How  great  is  the  reward  that  the
men  of  Pisa  can  claim  ;  how  great  a  reward  may  they  still
earn  !  I  have  said  enough  for  a  wise  man.


LETTER  CXLI. (A.D. 1138.)
To  HUMBERT,  ABBOT  OF  IcNY.1

Bernard blames him  severely  for  having  suddenly and
rashly  abandoned  his  abbey  and  his  charge.

May  Almighty  God  forgive  you.  What  has  made  you
act  thus  ?  Who  would  have  believed  that  a  man  endowed
with  such  good  gifts  would  have  so  stumbled  and  fallen  into
evil  ?  How  could  a  good  tree  have  brought  forth  such  bad
fruit?  How  terrible  is  God  in  His  judgments  among  the
children  of  men  !  I  am  not  surprised  at  this  token  of  the
power  of  the  devil,  but  I  am  surprised  that  God  should
have  allowed  one  whom  I  believe  to  have  served  Him  so
faithfully  for  so  many  years  to  fall  so  grievously.  What

1  Humbert  joined  the  monks  of  Clairvaux  from  Casa  Dei ;  then  he  was  made
by  Bernard  first  Abbot  of  the  new  monastery  of  Igny,  in  the  Diocese  of  Rheims.
Desiring  a  life  of  privacy  he  resigned  his  office  A.r>.  1 138,  in  which  year  this
Letter  was  written  from  Italy.  In  spite  of  it,  however,  he  adhered  to  his  pur
pose,  and  Guerric  was  chosen  to  succeed  him.  He  die^  at  Clairvaux  A.D.  1148,
as  we  shall  see  in  the  second  volume,  in  reference  to  the  sermon  that  Bernard
delivered  after  his  death.


LETTER CXLI.  439

will  He  do  with  me,  an  idle  and  careless  servant,  if  He
hands  over  His  faithful  follower  for  a  time  unto  the  will  of
his  enemies  ?  What  reason,  I  ask  you,  have  you  for  desert
ing  your  charge?  It  is  rather  to  be  called  an  act  of  impiety,
at  which  your  children  grieve  and  your  adversaries  rejoice.
I  wonder  that  you  were  not  deterred  by  the  example  of
Abbot  Arnold,  whose  similar  presumption  was  shortly  after
wards  punished  with  a  well-deserved  but  dreadful  end,  as
you  well  recollect.  And  he,  indeed,  as  I  know  well,  had
some  excuse,  but  you  have  none.  Is  it  that  your  monks
were  disobedient  to  your  commands,  or  the  converts
neglectful  of  their  tasks,  or  your  neighbours  by  any  chance
hostile  to  you  and  your  house,  or  were  your  worldly  posses
sions  too  small  and  insufficient,  inasmuch  that  you  were
forced  to  leave  those  whom  you  were  not  able  to  govern  or
to  feed  ?

Take  care,  lest  the  words  of  God  come  to  apply  to  you,
They  have  hated  me  without  a  cause  (S.  John  xv.  25).  For
what  ought  He  to  have  done  more  for  you,  that  He  did  not
do  ?  He  planted  for  you  a  choice  and  beautiful  vineyard  ;
He  surrounded  it  with  the  hedge  of  vowed  continency ;
He  dug  in  it  a  winepress  of  the  strictest  discipline  ;  and  He
built  a  tower  of  holy  poverty,  the  top  of  which  reached
unto  heaven.  He  appointed  you  to  till  it  and  to  take  care
of  it.  He  honoured  you  in  your  labours,  and,  if  you  permit
Him,  He  will  crown  those  labours.  But  you,  alas  !  are
pulling  down  the  wall  that  He  has  built,  and  exposing  His
vine,  laden  with  fruitful  branches,  to  all  that  pass  by  that
way.  Who  is  to  prevent  the  wild  boar  out  of  the  wood
from  rooting  it  up,  and  -the  wild  beast  of  the  field  from
devouring  it?  You  write  to  me  that  you  are  not  afraid  to
die  under  such  scandal  and  the  anathema  of  our  lord  the
Pope,  but  I  can  only  wonder  how  you  can  think  this  a
good  preparation  for  your  death.  Moreover,  even  if  you
had  no  other  course  open  to  you,  might  not  some  other
time  have  been  chosen  but  that  when  I  am  kept  away  by
the  necessities  of  the  universal  Church,  and  so  am  prevented
from  lending  any  aid  to  that  unhappy  community  which


440  LETTER CXLII.

you  are  rendering  easy  of  attack?  I  beseech  you,  by  Him
who  was  crucified  for  you,  that  you  cease  from  tormenting
those  who  have  already  enough  affliction,  and  desist  from
adding  sorrow  to  sorrow.  To  tell  you  the  truth,  I  am  so
affected  by  this  grievous  rent  made  in  the  Church  at  large
that  my  soul  is  aweary  of  life,  even  if  you  and  yours  could
manage  to  live  in  peace.


LETTER CXLII. (A.D. 1138.)
To  THE  MONKS  OF  THE  ABBEY  IN  THE  ALPS.1

These  monks  of  the  Abbey  in  the  Alps  had  associated
tiiemselves  with  Clairvaux  under  the  Cistercian  Order.
Bernard  praises  and  consoles  them  for  the  loss  of  their
Abbot,  who  has  been  called  to  a  higher  rank,  and  instructs
them  respecting  the  election  of  another.

i.  Your  good  father  and  mine,  by  the  will  of  God,  has
been  promoted  to  a  higher  place.  Let  us,  therefore,  dearly
beloved,  do  what  the  prophet  speaks  of  when  he  says,  The
sun  was  raised  up,  and  the  moon  stood  still  in  her  order
(Habak.  iii.  n,  VULG.).  He  is  the  sun  by  which  your  con
gregation  in  the  Alps  is  made  everywhere  illustrious,  just
as  the  moon  receives  her  light  from  the  sun.  And  as  He
has  been  raised  up  let  us  stand  still  in  our  order,  we  who
have  chosen  to  be  doorkeepers  in  the  house  of  our  God,
rather  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  ungodliness.  Our  Order

1  This  monastery  was  in  Savoy,  in  the  Diocese  of  Geneva,  and  is  now  called
Annecy.  It  was  founded  by  Humbert  II.,  Count  of  Savoy.  Its  first  Abbot  was
Guerin,  who  was  afterwards  made  Bishop  of  Sion,  and  this  was  the  occasion  of
this  Letter  being  written,  in  which  Bernard  consoles  the  Alpine  monks  for  the
loss  of  their  Abbot.  Caspar  Jongelinus  (Notit.  Albat.  Cister.)  refers  the  founda
tion  of  this  monastery  to  the  year  1 136,  but  that  it  was  founded  before  this  and
that  the  monks  had  not  embraced  from  the  beginning  the  Cistercian  habit,  but
had  after  some  time  affiliated  themselves,  is  evident  from  this  epistle,  especially
from  the  words,  "  How  joyfully  has  the  whole  Cistercian  Order  opened  its  arms
to  you  ! "  It  is  ev  ident,  too,  from  what  S.  Bernard  goes  on  to  say,  that  they
had  attached  themselves  specially  to  Clairvaux.  Cf.  also  Ep.  253  to  the  same
Guerin,  and  Manrique  (Annals  A.D.  1136),  where  bespeaks  of  the  incorporation
as  having  taken  place.  Also  the  Life  of  S.  Bernard  (lib  i.  n.  67).


LETTER CXLII.  441

is  lowliness,  humility,  voluntary  poverty,  obedience,  peace,
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Spirit.  Our  Order  is  to  be  under  a
teacher,  under  an  Abbot,  under  rule  and  discipline.  Our
Order  is  to  seek  to  be  silent,  to  train  ourselves  by  fastings,
watchings,  and  prayers,  and  manual  labours,  and  above  all
things  to  hold  the  more  excellent  way  of  charity ;  nay,
more,  to  be  progressing  from  day  to  day,  and  persevering
in  these  things  until  our  life's  end.  And  this  I  trust  that
you  are  carefully  doing.

2.  But  you have  done  one work, and  all  men marvel.
Although  you  were  holy,  you  thought  your  holiness  to  be
nothing; you sought  to  share in  that  of  others,  that  you
might  be  the  more  holy. Fulfilled  is  that  which  is  written
in  the  Gospel,  When  ye  shall  have  done  all  those  things
which are  commanded  you  say , We  are  unprofitable  ser
vants  (S.  Luke  xvii.';io). You  count  yourselves  unprofitable,
and  you  have  been  found to  be  humble. To  do  what  is
right,  and  to  think  one's  self  unprofitable,  is  found  amongst
very  few, and  therefore  many  wonder at it  when  found.
This,  I  repeat,  is  what  makes  you  more  famous  than  those
who  are  famed,  more  saintly  than  the  saints. And  wherever
this  rumour  of  you  has  spread,  it  has  filled  all  places  with
the  sweetness  of its  odour. This  grace,  in  my  judgment,
is  to  be  preferred  to  protracted  facts  and  anticipated  vigils,
and  to  every  kind  of  bodily  discipline  ;  but  godliness  is  pro
fitable  unto  all  things. How  joyfully  has  the  whole  Cister
cian  Order  opened  its  arms  to  you  !  w7ith  what  smiling  faces
have  the  angel  hosts  looked  down  upon  you  ! They  know
well  that,  above  all  things,  Almighty  God  is  pleased  with
brotherly  fellowship  and  union,  for  He  says  by  the  Prophet,
It  is  a  good  thing  to  be  joined  together  (Is.  xli. 6,  VULG.)  ;
and  by  another,  Behold  how  good  and  joyful  a  thing  it  is,
brethren,  to  dwell  together  in unity  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  i)  ;  and
again,  If  brother  helpeth  brother  both  shall  be  comforted
(Prov.  xviii.  19,  VuLG.).

3.  Moreover, this that you have  done  tends  to foster
humility. And  how  acceptable  this  is  to  the  Divine  Majesty
is  taught  us  by  him  who  says  : God  resisteth  the  proud,  but


442  LETTER CXLIII.

giveth grace  unto  the  humble  (S.  James  iv.  6).  It  is  shown,
too,  by  the  Master  of  humility,  who  says  :  Learn  of  Me,  for
I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart  (S.  Luke  xi.  29).  What  need
I  say,  of  the  special  welcome  of  love  given  you  by  our  little
flock  of  Clairvaux,  to  which  you  have  more  specially  affi
liated  yourselves  ?  No  words  can  express  the  mutual
charity  that  exists  between  us,  and  which  works  in  a  mar
vellous  way  by  the  pouring  forth  of  the  Spirit.  It  only  re
mains,  brethren,  that,  after  invoking  the  Holy  Spirit,  you
hasten  to  elect  an  abbot.  For  if  you  were  to  wait  for  me,  I
am  afraid  that  my  arrival  may  be  long  postponed,  and  that
delay  would  be  fraught  with  danger.  But  call  to  your  side
my  dear  brother,  Godfrey,  Prior  of  Clairvaux,  to  fill  my
place  in  this  and  any  other  matters;  and  then,  according  to
his  advice,  or  the  advice  of  those  he  may  send,  in  case  he
cannot  come  to  you  himself,  as  well  as  of  your  father
Guerin,  choose  such  an  abbot  as  may  be  able  to  labour  for
the  honour  of  God  and  for  your  salvation.  Forget  me  not,
brethren.

LETTER CXLIII. (Circa A.D. 1135.)
To  HIS  MONKS  OF  CLAIRVAUX.

He  excuses  his  long  absence,  from  which  he  suffers  more
than  they  ;  and  briefly  reminds  them  of  their  duty.

To  his  dearly-loved  brethren  the  Monks  of  Clairvaux,  the
converts,1  and  the  novices,  their  brother  BERNARD  sends
greeting,  bidding  them  rejoice  in  the  Lord  always.

1  "  Converts  "  (conversi )  was  the  name  formerly  given  to  adults  who  had  been
converted  to  the  religious  life,  and  who  were  distinguished  by  this  name  from  those
who  were  offered  as  children.  The  lay  brethren  are  here  meant ;  cf.  ep.  141  n.  i .
They  were  present  at  the  election  of  an  abbot  (ep.  36  n.  2),  just  as  once  the
laity  were  joined  with  the  clergy  in  the  election  of  a  bishop.  Here  they  are
named  before  the  novices,  but  in  Sermon  22  (de  Diversis  n.  2)  they  come  after
them;  they  were  not  admitted  into  the  choir.  Bernard,  moreover,  distinguishes
them  from  the  monks.  For  at  that  time  they  were  not  among  the  Cistercians
reckoned  among  the  monks,  as  is  proved  by  the  Exordium  Cuterc.  (c.  15),
although  they  made  some  profession.  Hence  Innocent  II.,  in  some  deed  of
privilege  or  in  ep.  352,  here  says:  "Let  no  one  presume  without  your  leave  to-


LETTER CXLIII.  443

1.  Judge by yourselves what I am suffering. If my
absence is painful  to  you,  let  no  one  doubt  that  it  is  far
more  painful  to  me. The  loss  is  not  equal,  the  burden  is
not  the  same,  for  you are  deprived  of  but  one  individual,
while  I  am  bereft  of  all  of  you. It  cannot  but  be  that  I  am
weighed  down  by  as  many  anxieties  as  you  are  in  number ;
I  grieve  for  the  absence  of  each one of  you,  and  fear  the
dangers  which  fnay  attack  you. This  double  grief  will  not
leave  me  until  I  am  restored  to my  children. I  doubt  not
that  you  feel  the  same  for  me;  but  then  I  am  but  one. You
have  but  a  single ground  for  sadness ; I  have  many,  for  I
am  sad  on  account  of  you  all. Nor  is it  my  only  trouble
that  I  am  forced  to  live for  a  time  apart  from  you,  when
without you I should regard even to reign  as  miserable
slavery,  but  there  is  added  to  this  that  I  am  forced  to  live
among  things  which  altogether  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  my
soul,  and  perhaps  are  little  in  harmony  with  the  end  of  the
monastic  life.

2.  And since  you  know  these  things, you  must  not  be
angry  at  my  long  absence,  which is  not  according  to  my
will,  but  is  due  to  the  necessities  of  the  Church  ; rather  pity
me. I  hope  that  it  will  not  be  a  long  absence  now  ; do  you
pray  that  it  may  not  be  unfruitful. Let  any  losses  which
may  in  the  meantime  happen  to  befall  you  be  regarded  as
gains,  for  the  cause  is  God's. And  since  He is gracious
and  all-powerful,  He  will  easily  make  any  losses  good,  and
even  add greater  riches. Therefore, let us  be of good
courage,  since  we  have  God  with  us,  in  whom  I  am  present
with  you,  though  we  may  seem  to  be  separated  by  a  long
distance. Let  no  one  among  you  who  shows  himself  atten
tive  to his duties, humble, reverent, devoted  to reading,
watchful  unto  prayer,  anxious  for  brotherly  love,  think  that
I  am  absent  from  him. For  can I  be  anything  but  present

receive  or  to  retain  any  one  of  your  converts  who  have  made  their  profession,  but
are  not  monks,  be  he  archbishop,  bishop,  or  abbot."  In  the  Council  of  Rheims,
held  under  Eugenius  III.,  the  converts  are  called  "  the  professed  "  (Can.  7),  and
although  they  may  have  returned  to  the  world,  yet  they  are  declared  incapable  of
matrimony,  like  the  monks,  from  whom,  nevertheless,  they  are  distinguished.
For  the  early  days  of  Clairvaux  cf.  notes  to  ep.  3  i .


444  LETTER CXLIV.

with  him  in  spirit  when  we  are  of  one  heart  and  one  mind  ?
But  if,  which  God  forbid,  there  be  among  you  any  whisperer,
or  any  that  is  double-tongued,  a  murmurer,  or  rebellious,  or
impatient  of  discipline,  or  restless  or  truant,  and  who  is  not
ashamed  to  eat  the  bread  of  idleness,  from  such  I  should  be
far  absent  in  soul  even  though  present  in  body,  just  because
he  would  have  already  set  himself  far  from  God  by  a  dis
tance  of  character  and  not  of  space.

3.  In  the  meanwhile,  brethren,  until  I  come,  serve  the
Lord  in  fear,  that  in  Him  being  delivered  from  the  hand  of
your  enemies  you  may  serve  Him  without  fear.  Serve
Him  in  hope,  for  He  is  faithful  that  promised  ;  serve  Him
by  good  works,  for  He  is  bountiful  to  reward.  To  say
nothing  else,  He  rightly  claims  this  life  of  ours  as  His  own,
because  He  laid  down  His  own  to  obtain  it.  Let  none,
therefore,  live  to  himself,  but  to  Him  who  died  for  him.
For  whom  can  I  more  justly  live  than  for  Him  whose
death  was  my  life  ?  for  whom  with  more  profit  to  myself
than  for  Him  who  promises  eternal  life?  for  whom  under  a
greater  necessity  than  for  Him  who  threatens  me  with
everlasting  flames  ?  But  I  serve  Him  willingly,  because
love  gives  liberty.  To  this  I  exhort  my  children.  Serve  Him
in  that  love  which  casteth  out  fear,  which  feels  no  labours,
seeks  for  no  reward,  thinks  of  no  merit,  and  yet  is  more
urgent  than  all.  No  terror  is  so  powerful,  no  rewards  so
inviting,  no  righteousness  so  exacting.  May  it  join  me  to
you  never  to  be  divided,  may  it  also  bring  me  before  you,
especially  at  your  hours  of  prayer,  my  brethren,  dearly
beloved  and  greatly  longed  for.


LETTER  CXLIV.  (A.D. 1137.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  expresses  his  regret  at  his  very  long  absence  from
his  beloved  Clairvaux,  and  his  desire  to  return  to  his  dear
sons.  He  tells  them  of  the  consolations  that  he  feels
nevertheless  in  his  great  labours  for  the  Church.


LETTER CXLIV.  445

1.  My  soul is  sorrowful  until  I return,  and  it  refuses  to
be  comforted  till  it  see  you. For  what  is  my  consolation  in
the  hour  of  evil,  and  in  the  place  of  my  pilgrimage  ? Are
not  you  in  the  Lord  ? Wherever  I  go,  the  sweet  memory
of  you never  leaves me;  but  the  sweeter  the  memory  the
more  I  feel  the  absence. Ah, me  !  that  the  time  of my
sojourning here is not only prolonged, but its burden
increased, and truly, as the Prophet  says, they  who  for
a  time  separate  me  from  you  have  added  to  the  pain  of  my
wounds  (Ps. Ixix. 26). Life  is  an  exile,  and  one  that  is
dreary  enough,  for  while  we  are  in  the  body  we  are  absent
from  the  Lord. To  this  is  added  the  special  grief  which
almost makes me impatient, that I am forced to live
without you. It is a protracted sickness, a wearisome
waiting,  to  be  so  long  subject  to  the  vanity  which  possesses
everything  here,  to  be  imprisoned  within  the  horrid  dungeon
of  a  noisome  body,  to  be  still  bound  with  the  chains  of  death,
and  the ropes of  sin, and all  this  time  to  be  away  from
Christ. But  against  all  these  things  one  solace  was  given
me  from  above,  instead  of  His  glorious  countenance  which
has  not  yet  been  revealed,  and  that  is  the  sight  of  the  holy
temple  of  God,  which  is  you. From  this  temple  it  used  to
seem  to  me  an  easy  passage  to  that  glorious  temple,  after
which  the  Prophet  sighed  when  he  said  : One  thing  have  I
desired  of  the  Lord,  which  I  will  require,  even  that  I  may
dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  my  life,  to
behold  the  fair  beauty  of  the  Lord  and  to  visit  His  temple
(Ps.  xxvii.  4).

2.  What shall I say  ? how  often  has that  solace  been
taken from me  ? Lo, this is now the third time, if I
mistake  not,  that  my  children  have  been  taken  from  me.
The babes have been too early weaned, and I am  not
allowed to bring up those whom I begot through the
Gospel. In  short,  I  am  forced  to  abandon  my  own  children
and  look  after  those  of  others,  and  I  hardly  know  which  is
the  more  distressing,  to  be  taken  from  the  former,  or  to
have  to  do  with  the  latter. O,  good  Jesu  ! is  my  whole  life
thus  to  waste  away  in  grief,  and  my  years  in  mourning? It


446  LETTER CXLIV.

is  good  for  me,  O  Lord,  rather  to  die  than  to  live,  only  let
it  be  amongst  my  brethren,  those  of  my  own  household,
those  who  are  dearest  to  my  heart.  That,  as  all  know,  is
sweeter  and  safer,  and  more  natural.  Nay,  it  would  be  a
loving  act  to  grant  to  me  that  I  might  be  refreshed  before  I
go  away,  and  be  no  more  seen.  If  it  please  my  Lord  that
the  eyes  of  a  father,  who  is  not  worthy  to  be  called  a
father,  should  be  closed  by  the  hands  of  his  sons,  that  they
may  witness  his  last  moments,  soothe  his  end,  and  raise
his  spirit  by  their  loving  prayers  to  the  blissful  fellowship,
if  you  think  him  worthy  to  have  his  body  buried  with  the
bodies  of  those  who  are  blessed  because  poor,  if  I  have
found  favour  in  Thy  sight,  this  I  most  earnestly  ask  that  I
may  obtain  by  the  prayers  and  merits  of  these  my  brethren.
Nevertheless,  not  my  will  but  Thine  be  done.  Not  for  my
own  sake  do  I  wish  for  either  life  or  death.

3.  But  it  is  only  right,  that  as  you  have  heard  of  my  grief,
you  should  also  know  what  consolation  I  have. The  first
solace  for  all  the  trouble  and  misfortune  that  I  undergo  is
the  thought  that  the  cause I strive  for  is  that  of  Him  to
whom  all  things  live. Whether  I  will  or  no,  I  must  live  for
Him  who  bought  my  life  at  the  price  of  His  own,  and  who
is  able,  as  a  merciful  and  righteous  Judge,  to  recompense  us
in  that  day  whatever  we  may  suffer  for  Him. But  if  I  have
served  as  His  soldier  against  my  will,  it  will  be  only  that  a
dispensation  has  been  entrusted  unto  me,  and  I  shall  be  an
unprofitable  servant ;  but  if  I  serve  willingly  I  shall  have
glory. In  this  consideration, then,  I  breathe  again  for  a
little. My  second consolation is  that  often,  without  any
merit  of  mine,  grace  from  above  has  crowned  me  in  my
labours,  and  that  grace  in  me  was  not  in  vain,  as  I  have
many  times  found,  and  as  you  have  seen  to  some  extent.
But  how  necessary  just  now  the  presence  of  my  feebleness
is  to  the  Church  of God,  I  would  say  for  your  consolation
were  it  not  that  it  would  sound  like  boasting. But  as  it  is,
it  is  better  that  you  should  learn  it  from  others.

4.  Moved  by  the  pressing  request  of  the  Emperor,  by  the
Apostolic  command,  as  well  as  by  the  prayers  of  the  Church


LETTER CXLV.  447

and  the  princes,  whether  with  my  will  or  against  my  will,
weak  and  ill,  and,  to  say  truth,  carrying  about  with  me  the
pallid  image  of  the  King  of  terrors,  I  am  borne  away  into
Apulia.  Pray  for  the  things  which  make  for  the  Church's
peace  and  our  salvation,  that  I  may  again  see  you,  live  with
you,  and  die  with  you,  and  so  live  that  ye  may  obtain.  In
my  weakness  and  time  of  distress,  with  tears  and  groanings,
I  have  dictated  these  words,  as  our  dear  brother  Baldwin  l
can  testify,  who  has  taken  them  down  from  my  mouth,  and
who  has  been  called  by  the  Church  to  another  office  and
elevated  to  a  new  dignity.  Pray,  too,  for  him,  as  my  one
comfort  now,  and  in  whom  my  spirit  is  greatly  refreshed.
Pray,  too,  for  our  lord  the  Pope,  who  regards  me  and  all  of
you  equally  with  the  tenderest  affection.  Pray,  too,  for  my
lord  the  Chancellor,  who  is  to  me  as  a  mother ;  and
for  those  who  are  with  him — my  lord  Luke,  my  lord
Chrysogonus,  and  Master  Ivo2 — who  show  themselves  as
brothers.  They  who  are  with  me — Brother  Bruno  and
Brother  Gerard  3 — salute  you  and  ask  for  your  prayers.


LETTER  CXLV.  (Circa  A.D. 1137.)
To  THE  ABBOTS  ASSEMBLED  AT  CITEAUX.

Bernard  begs  them  to  have  compassion  upon  his  labours
and  sufferings,  and  to  excuse  his  absence  on  that  account.
He  earnestly  desires  to  die  among  his  brethren,  and  not  in
a  foreign  land.

1  Baldwin,  first  Cardinal  of  the  Cistercian  Order,  was  created  by  Innocent,  A.D.
1130,  at  a  Council held  at  Claremont. He  was  afterwards  made  Archbishop
of  Pisa ; cf.  Life  of  S.  Bernard  (lib.  ii.  n.  49)  :  "  In  Pisa  was  Baldwin  born,  the
glory  of  his  native  land,  and  a  burning  light  to  the  Church." So  great  a  man
did  not  think  it  beneath him  to  act  as  Bernard's  secretary,  and  his  praises  are
sung  in  ep.  245,  cf.  ep.  201.

2  All  these  were  Cardinals. Luke,  of  the  title  of  SS.  John  and  Paul,  was
created  A.D.  1132  ; Chrysogonus,  of  the  title  of  S.  Maria  de  Porticu,  A.D.  1134;
Ivo,  a  regular  Canon  of  S.  Victor  of  Paris,  A.D.  1130,  of  the  title  of  S.  Laurence
in  Damasus ;  to  him  ep.  193  was  written.

3  Bruno  is  called  (ep.  209)  the  father  of many  disciples  in Sicily. Gerard
seems  to  be  Bernard's  brother. For  Bruno  see also  ep.  165  n.  4.


448  LETTER CXLV.

In  much  weakness  of  body  and  anxiety  of  mind,  as  God
knows,  have  I  dictated  these  words  to  you— a  man  miser
able  and  born  to  suffering,  yet  your  brother.  Would  that  I
might  merit  to  have  now  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  whom  ye  have
met  together,  as  my  advocate  to  your  whole  body,  that  He
might  impress  upon  your  hearts  the  trouble  that  I  am
suffering,  and  bring  before  your  brotherly  affections  my  sad
and  suppliant  countenance  just  as  it  now  is.  I  do  not  pray
Him  to  create  new  pity  in  you,  for  I  know  how  familiar  to
you  all  is  that  virtue,  but  I  do  ask  Him  to  give  you  a  keen
sense  of  how  much  loving  pity  I  now  stand  in  need.  For  I
am  certain  that  if  that  were  given  you,  tears  would
unceasingly  flow  forth  from  the  fount  of  your  love,  that
groans  and  sobs  and  sighs  would  knock  at  heaven's  gate,  so
that  God  would  hear  and  be  gracious  unto  me,  and  say,
"  I  have  restored  thee  to  thy  brethren,  thou  shalt  not  die
amid  strangers,  but  amongst  thine  own  people."  I  am  so
worn,  indeed,  by  my  great  labours  and  griefs  that  I  am  often
awearied  of  life.  But  I  speak  as  a  man,  because  of
my  infirmity;  I  desire  my  life  to  be  prolonged  till  I  return
to  you,  that  I  may  not  die  away  from  you.  For  the  rest,
brethren,  make  good  your  ways,  determining  and  holding
to  what  is  true,  honest,  and  useful.  Before  all  things
endeavour  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of
peace,  and  the  God  of  peace  shall  be  with  you.


END OF VOL. I.


INDEX.


A

•r>"  PAGE

Abaelard,  Peter . . .  .  .  24,  48

Abbey  in the Alps, Letter to the Monks of .  . 440

Abbot  of  S.  Mary,  York,  Letter  to .  .  .  . 327

Abbot  of  S.  Pierremont,  Letter  to  .  .  . 273

Abbots assembled at  Soissons, Letter  to  .  .  .322

Abbots,  the,  at  Citeaux,  Letter  to  .  .  -447

Adam,  Abbot  of  Eberach . .  .  .  71

Adam,  de  Petit  Pont . .  .  .  -54

Adam,  Letter  to  the  Monk . .  .  .  137,  140

Adelais,  Duchess  of  Lorraine .  .  .  -33

Albano,  Matthew  of . .  .  .  42,  226

Alberic,  Bishop  of  Ostia . .  .  .  -55

Alberic  (of  Bourges) . .  .  .  .176

Albero,  Bishop  of  Verdun . .  .  .  • 31

Albero, Primicerius of  Metz, Letter  to .  .  .199

Alexander,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  Letter  to  .  . 245

Alexander  III.,  Pope . .  .  .  .21

Alvisus,  Abbot  of  Anchin,  Letter  to  .  .  . 247

Ambrose,  S. . . .  .  .  .161

Anacletus . . . .  .  .  34,  417

Angouleme,  Adhemar  of .  .  .  .20

Anselm of  Pusterla,  Archbishop  of  Milan.  .  -425

Ansellus,  Subdeacon  of  Troyes .  .  .  .19

Antichrist,  opinions  on ..... 235

Appendix  Hervagiana  ..... 7

Apulia,  Duke  of . .  .  .  .417

Aquitaine,  Letter  to  Bishops  of  .  .  . 400

Ardutius,  Bishop  of  Geneva,  Letters  to  .  .  195, 196
Arnay-le-Duc ...... 6

Arnold,  Abbot  of  Morimond,  Letter  to  .  .  133, 139

Arnold,  of  Brescia . . .  . .  .68

Arnulf,  Bishop  of  Lisieux . .  .  .  -44

Artaud,  Abbot  of  Prully,  Letter  to .  .  .  . 272

Athanasius,  S. . . .  .  .  .24

Atto . . . .  .  .  19

Augustine,  S.  .  . 24

VOL.  I.  29


450  INDEX.


Baldwin,  Archbishop  of  Pisa  .... 447

Bale  .  .  .  .  .  .  • 6,  7

Baluze,  Stephen .  .  .  .  .  .11

Bar,  Prevot  of  .  .  .  .  .  .216

Beatrice,  Letter  to  the  Lady  .  .  .  .389

Belin  ....... 216

Benedict .  .  .  .  .  .112,  253

Berengarius  of  Poitiers .  .  .  .  5 1

Bernardine  Chronology ....  76-90

Bernard  of  Parma .  .  .  .  .  .411

Bernard  of  Pavia .  .  .  .  .  .411

Bocard,  John  ...... 6

Boethius,  Exposition  of .  .  .  .  -55

Bonacursus  .  .  .  .  .  .67

Bonneval .  .  .  .  .  .  .18

Braga,  Bartholomew  of  .  .  .  .27

Brito,  Bernard  .  .  .  .  .  .11

Bruges ....... 7

Bruno  of  Cologne .  .  .  .  .  -43

Bruno  of Cologne,  Letters to .  . 138, 159, 162, 163

Burgundy,  Duke  of  .  .  .  .  .417

Burgundy, Letter to the Duchess of  .  . 392

Buzay,  John  de .  .  .  .  .  19

c.

Calixtus  II.  .  .  .  .  .  -36

Cantelou,  Claude ...... 9

Celles,  Peter  de  .  .  .  .  .16

Chalons,  Geoffrey  of  .  .  .  .  .42

Champagne  ...... 7

Chartres,  Arnold,  Abbot  of .  .  .  .  17

Chartres,  Bishop  of  .  .  .  .  .231

Chartres,  Guy  de,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux  .  .  .8

Citeaux  .  .  8,  9,  32, 145, 154. 185

Clairvaux .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5,  6

Clairvaux, Letters  to  the  Monks of  .  . 442,  444

Clement  VIII.  ...... 4

Clictoveus,  Jodocus  .  .  .  .  .  .22

Cluny  .  .  .  .  .no, 185

Cluny,  Peter  Abbot  of  .  .  .  .  17

Comestor,  Francis .  .  .  .  .  . 6,  7

Conrad ......  70, 139

Conrad,  Letter  to  Duke .  .  .  .  -333

Conrad  of  Salsbourg  .  .  .  .  .411

Cnyck,  Henry  ......


INDEX.  451


Dantzig,  Laurence  of . . .  .6

Deschamps,  Lambert . . . .  .6

Dijon . . . . . .  177

Drogo ......  202, 203

Drogo,  Letter  to . . . .  . 207

Duchesne . . . . . .  -37

E.

Ebal, Bishop of Chalons-sur-Marne  .  .  . 238

Ecbert,  Abbot  of  Schb'noue  .  .  .  .  .68

Elias,  Letter  to  the  Parents  of  .... 372

Emmanuel,  Duke  of  Savoy ..... 420

Empress  of  the  Romans,  Letter  to  .  .  .431

Engelbert,  Count ...... 423

Equipert,  Bishop  of  Munster  .  .  .  .411

Ermengarde, Countess of Brittany, Letters to . 387,  388
Ermengarde,  Duchess  of  Brittany .  .  .  -33

Eugenius  III.,  Pope  .  .  .  .  .  4,  19

Everard .  .  .  .  .  .  .139

Evervinus,  Abbot  of  Steinfeld  .  .  .  -65

F.

Flay,  Letters  to  the  Monks  of  .  .  . 252, 255

Foigny ....... 264

Frederic,  Bishop  of  Cologne  .  .  .  .67

Frederic,  Duke  of  Suabia .  .  .  .  .70

Fulk,  Abbot  of  Epernay ..... 334

Fulk,  Letter  to  .  .  .  .  .120

G.

Gabriel,  Father ...... 8

Garnerius,  Dom ...... 240

Gebuin,  Archdeacon  .  .  .  .  .180

Geneva,  Count  of  .  .  .  .  . 433

Genoa,  Letter  to  the  men  of  .... 419

Geoffrey, Abbot of S. Medard, Letter to  .  .250

Geoffrey,  Archbishop  of  Bordeaux .  .  -55

Geoffrey,  Bishop  of  Chartres  .  .  45, 222, 231

Geoffrey, Bishop of Chartres, Letters to  .  234,  235, 236

Geoffrey  de  Perrone,  Letter  to  .... 368

Geoffrey,  Letter  to  the  Parents  of  .  .  371

Geoffrey  of  Lisieux,  Letter  to  .... 375

Geoffrey  of  Loretto,  Letter  to  .  399

Geoffrey,  Prior  of  Vigeois .  .  .  .  .48

Geoffrey,  Secretary  of  S.  Bernard .  .  .  .15


452  INDEX.

PAGE

Gerard, Abbot of  Pottieres, Letter to  .  . 2Qi

Gerard,  Bishop  of  Angouleme

Ghent  ••••-..' 14

Gilbert,  Bishop  of  London,  Letter  to  .  .  .102

Gilbert  de  la  Porree  ....  48 cz

Gilo,  Bishop  of  Tusculum .  .  .  • '  4-

Godescalc,  Abbot  of  Mont  S.  Eloi .  .  .  rr

Godfrey,  Prior  of  Clairvaux  .  .  . 442

Godwin,  a  monk .  .  .  .  -247

Guarike .....  I22

Guerric .  .  .  a 120 m

/"• M  ALL  ' "' D£(J> 521

Guiberga,  Abbess .  .  .  .  _  ,,

Guigues, Prior of  Grand Chartreuse, Letters to  . 164, 175
Guilencus,  Bishop  of  Langres,  Letters  to .  240,  241

Guillot,  John  ...  .68

Guttenberg ....  '  -

Guy,  Abbot  of  Molemes,  Letter  to .  .  .  .200

Guy,  Abbot  of  Trois  Fontaines  .  .  244, 358, 261

Guy,  Bishop  of  Lausanne,  Letter  to  .  •  ' IQ5


H.

Haimeric,  Chancellor,  Letters  to 178,186,224,230  211 212 211

Harbert,  Abbot  of  Dijon . .' .  240

Heisterbach,  Caesar ...  2-

Henry,  Archbishop  of  Sens,  Letter  to .  218

Henry,  Bishop  of  Albano ...  ,-,

Henry,  Bishop  of  Verdun,  Letters  to  243, 244

Henry, Bishop of  Winchester, Letter to  .  . .' 326

Henry,  King  of  England,  Letters  to  i2\ 433

Henry  Murdach,  Letter  to .  \\2

Henry  of  Pisa ....  ?6

Hermann  of  Tournay ...  jq

Herod .....  057

Herodias . .  ,,-

Hervage,  John -..'..'  i 67

Hilary  of  Poitiers . . . .  ' '

Hildebert,  Archbishop  of  Tours,  Letter  of,  to  S.  Bernard 303

Hildebert,  Letters  to .  ,Qr ,^7

Hildebrand  of  Pistoja . . !  .' 411
Hildegar  of  Tarragona
iionorius  II. ...

Honorius  II.,  Pope,  Letters  to 176, 177,  221/222,  228,  220

Honcourt,  Letter  to  Canons  of ...  I3j
Horst,  James  Merlon . . 8,  9, i'o, n, '13, i?

Hoyland,  Gilbert  of  . ..."  5

Hugh,  Abbot  of  Pontigny .  1 3


INDEX.  453

PAGE

Hugh  de  Champfleury  .  .  .  .  -54

Hugo,  Archbishop  of  Rouen,  Letter  to .  .  193

Hugo,  Abbot  of  Pontigny,  Letter  to  ... 205

Hugo,  Count  of  Champagne,  Letter  to  ... 200

Hugo  Farsit,  Letters  to  .... 208,  209

Hugo  of  Grenoble .  .  .  .  .  .411

Hugo  of  Lausanne ...... 204

Humbald,  Archbishop  of  Lyons,  Letter  to .  .  .188

Humbert ...... 209,  211

Humbert,  Abbot  of  Igny,  Letter  to  .... 438

I.

Innocent,  Letter  to  Pope ..... 430

J-

John, Abbot of Casa Mario  ...  72,  73

Joscelin, Bishop of  Soissons  .  .  .  19,  55

K.

Klein,  John  ....  .6

L.

Lambert,  Brother .  . 342

Landulf  of  Asti .  .411

Langres,  Bishop  of .  145,  217

Lannoy,  James .  .10

Laon,  Bishop  of  . 226

Laon,  Hermann  of .  -33

Laon,  Synod  of  . . 46

Larzicourt .  .215

Lefevre,  Nicholas .  . . . .26

Lepetit,  John .  6

Lescot,  Hubert .  ... 8

Letters  of  S.  Bernard  . . 9,91-106

Liege,  Laurence  of .  31

Lothaire,  Emperor  .  . 39,  41,  431*  435

Lothaire,  Letters  to  .  . 434>  437

Lorraine, Letter  to Duke and Duchess  of  . 390,  391
Louis,  King  of  France,  Letter  to .... 219

Luke,  Abbot  of  Cuissy,  Letter  to  . 288

Luxeuil . .  . • • • .178

Lyons .  ... 6


454  INDEX.


Maccabees,  Letter  concerning  «... 334

Manberg,  John  de . . . .  . .20

Mans . . . . .  . 63,  64

Marcellin,  Antoine . . . .  . •  6, 17

Marmoutiers  ..... 1^7,  412

Matthew,  the  Legate,  Letter  to . .  . .186

Maurigny,  Chronicle  of . .  . -35

Meaux,  Bishop  of . . . .  . 64, 188

Metellus,  Hugh . . . .  . .67

Merlin,  William ......

Milan,  Letter  to  the  Clergy  of  .... 426

Milan,  Letter  to  all  the  Citizens  of .  , 423,  427
Milan,  Letter  to  Novices  at .... 428

Milo,  Bishop  of  Terouanne  . . .  . -55

Mire,  Louis  le  .

Molesme,  Abbey  of  . . . .  .218,219,241

Morimond,  Abbot  of . . .  . • 137

Moustier-Ramey,  Guy,  Abbot  of .  • 1?

Murdach,  Henry,  Letter  to . .  . -352

N.

Natalis,  Abbot  of  Rebais . . .  . -43

Nicasius,  S.,  Abbot  of,  Letter  to .  . . 202

Nicholas  V.,  Pope ....  .
Nivelles,  Sebastian  de

Norbert,  Archbishop  of  Magdebourg .  .162,235,411

o.

Oger,  Regular  Canon,  Letters  to . .  304,  314,  318,  320

Othbert . . . . .  . .126

Otto,  Bishop  of  Frisingen . . .  . 48,  72

Otto,  Bishop  of  Troyes,  Letter  to . .  . .188

P.

Pamelius,  James .....  7

Paris,  Stephen  Bishop  of . .  . .20

Parvin . . . .  . .225

Paschal  II.,  Pope . . . .  . ^5

Perigueux . . . . .  . .64

Peter  Leonis ....  2r 30

Peter,  Bishop  of  Portus

Peter  of  Pisa . . . .  -37

Peter  of  Burgundy . . . .  . -37


INDEX.


455


Peter,  Cardinal  of  S.  Aquitius  .  .  .  -37

Peter  of  S.  Adrian .  .  .  .  .  -37

Peter  de  Bruys  .  .  .  .  .  .60

Peter,  Cardinal  Presbyter,  Letter  to  .  .  .179

Peter,  Cardinal  Deacon,  Letters  to .  .  .179, 185

Peter,  Bishop  of  Pavia,  Letter  to .... 429

Philip  le  Bel  .  .  .  .  .  .8

Philip,  a  monk  ...... 245

Picard,  Jean  ...... 8

Pisa,  Letter  to  the  Men  of  .  .  .  .422

Pontius,  Abbot  of  Cluny .  .  .  .  -37

R.

Radevic .  .  .  .  .  .  .60

Rainald,  Abbot  of  Foigny, Letters to .  .  264,  269,  271

Rheims,  Council  at  .  .  .  .  .  -41

Rheims,  Samson,  Bishop  of  .  .  .  .  32,  226

Rheims .  .  .  .  .  .  .185

Richard,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  .  .  .  -47

Richard,  Abbot  of  Fountains,  Letter  to .  .  . 331

Ricuin, Bishop  of Toul,  in  Lorraine,  Letter  to .  . 242

Rie,  Louis  de  ...... 6

Romanus,  Sub-deacon,  Letter  to .  .  .  . 350

Rouald,  Magister ...... 5

Rorgon  of  Abbeville .  .  .  .  .  .16

Rosay  ....... 7

S.

Salisbury,  John  of .  .  .  .16

Samson,  Bishop  of  Rheims .  .  .  .  32

Savigny .  ... 412

SchoefFer,  Peter ...... 5

Scutepuits,  Hubert .  .  .  .  .  .12

Sens,  Henry  of  .  .  .  .  .29

Simon,  Abbot  of  S.  Nicholas,  Letters  to .  . 295,  297

Sixtus,  of  Sienna ...... 4

Soissons,  Council  of  .  .  .  .  .  .49

Sophia,  the  Virgin,  Letter  to  .... 376

Stephen,  Bishop  of  Metz,  Letter  to .... 198

Stephen  de  Garlande  .  .  .  .  .284

Stephen,  Abbot  of  S.  John  at  Chartres,  Letter  to  . 293

Suger,  Abbot  .  .  .  .  -37,  55.  275

T.

Tanchelm .  .  .  .  .  .  60,  67

Theobald,  Count  of  Blois .  .  .  .  .70


456  INDEX.


Theobald,  Count  of  Champagne,  Letters  to  .  211,213,215,217

Thierry,  Count  of  Flanders  . .  .  . -70

Thomas,  Provost  of  Beverley,  Letter  to  .  . 354
Thomas  of  S.  Omer,  Letter  to .... 364

Thurstan,  Archbishop  of  York,  Letter  to  .  . . 330

Tiraquellius,  Edmund . .  .  . .8

Trois  Fontaines,  Letter  to  the  Monks  of  .  .264

u.

Urban  II.,  Pope .  .  .  .  .  .18

Ursus,  Abbot  of  S.  Denis ..... 293

Utica  .  .  .  .  .  .  19

V.

Vallombrosa  .  .  .  .  .  .412

Venice  ....... 6

Verdun .  .  .  .  .  .  .19

Vezelay .  .  .  .  .  .  -7°

Victor,' S. .  .  .  .  .  .  '  . 17

Virgin  of  S. Mary  of  Troyes,  Letter  to  a  .  . 385

Vitalis,  Ordericus .  .  .  .  .  19

Vitry,  James  de  .  .  .  .  -33

Vivian,  Abbot  of  Haute  Combe .... 233

Voss,  Gerard  ...... 4

w.

Walter  de  Chaumont,  Letter  to  . . . 347

Walter  of  Ravenna . .  . . . .411

William,  Duke  of  Aquitaine  .  . . . .34

William,  Count  of  Poitou .  . . . .43

William,  Bishop  of  Chalons  .  .... 132

William,  Abbot  of  S.  Thierry  . . . .289

William,  Abbot  of S. Thierry,  Letters  to  .  . 299, 303

William,  Monk  of  Clairvaux  .... 345

Wissembourg,  Synod  at  . . . .40
