LIFE AND WORKS

OF SAINT BERNARD,

ABBOT OF CLAIRVAUX.
EDITED  BY

DOM. JOHN MABILLON,

Presbyter  and  Monk  of  the  Benedictine  Congregation  of  S.  Maur.

Translated  and  Edited  with  Additional  Notes,

BY
SAMUEL  J.  BALES,  M.A.,  D.C.L.,

Sometime Principal of  S. Boniface College, Warminster,


SECOND EDITION.


VOL. II.


LONDON:  BURNS  &  OATES  LIMITED.

NEW YORK, CINCINNATI & CHICAGO:  BENZIGER  BROTHERS.


BX


V-2


SOUTH  COUNTIES  PRESS  LIMITED.

NOV  20  1950


CONTENTS.

PAGE
I. NOTK ON THE SEAL OF S. BERNARD  457

II. DESCRIPTION OF THE POSITION AND  SITE OF

THE  ABBEY  OF  CLAIRVAUX...  ...  460

III.  LETTERS  No.  CXLVI.  TO  No.  CLXXXIX. .  468

IV.  NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE 549

V. LETTERS  No.  CXC.  TO  No.  CCCLXXX.  ...  565


NOTE.

The  following  list  of  editions  carries  on  the  bibliography
given  by  Dom.  J.  Mabillon  in  his  second  edition,  and  adds
some  particulars  not  therein  contained.

1.  Editions  by  J. M. Horst were published in 1642
(Paris/is,  5  Tom.)  ; in <)  vols.  (1667 — 1668); and Coloni.r
Avrippimv (Cologne) 1641, 1672. (The first and last
volumes of this  edition are differently dated from the
others.) The  Editor  was  J.  C.  Schluter; and  this  was  the
last  edition  founded  on  Horst.

2.  The  second  edition of  Dom.  J.  Mabillon, which  has
ever  since  been  the  standard,  was  issued  in 2  vols.  folio
(Parisiis,  1690).

A  third,  tcrtiis  cm-is  J.  Mabillon,  also  in  2  vols.  folio
(Parisiis,  1719):  and  again  in  3  vols.  with  additions  by
Dom.  J.  Martene  (Vcnetiis,  1726).

Lastly,  in  1839,  was  issued  in  Paris  in  6  vols.  4to,  by
Gaume  Freres,  a  fourth  edition,  emend  at  a  ct  aucta,  of
which  precise  details  are  given  in  Vol.  i.,  pp.  74,  75  ;  and
the  text  of  which  has  been  used  in  this  translation.

It  is  printed  with  remarkable  correctness,  a  verification
of  the  references  having  thus  far  shown  but  very  few
errors.

Volume  ii.  contains  the  great  bulk  of  S.  Bernard's
Letters.  The  remainder,  which  are  short  and  compara
tively  unimportant,  will  follow  at  the  beginning  of  Vol.  iii.

S.  J. E.


NOTE

ON'

THE SEAL OF S. BERNARD


WE  owe  it  to  the  kindness  of  M.  Deville,  Director  of  the
Museum  of  Antiquities  at  Rouen,  that  we  are  able  to
reproduce  the  following  note,  with  the  exact  design  of  S.
Bernard's  seal  spoken  of  in  this  note.

NOTE  ON  THE  SEAL  OF  S.  BERNARD.

Copy  of  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Permanent  Secretary  of
the  Academy  of  Inscriptions.

Rouen,  Aug.  16,  1837.
SIR,—

A  happy  circumstance  has  just  put  into  my  hands
the  original  seal  of  S.  Bernard.  The  Academy  will  doubt
less  be  interested  at  hearing  that  the  seal  of  this  celebrated
man,  who  played  so  important  a  part  in  the  religious  and
political  events  of  his  day,  still  exists ;  and  1  may,  perhaps,
be  allowed  to  send  it  some  account  of  this  little  memorial
of  the  twelfth  century — one  of  the  most  precious  that  it
has  left  us.  It  is  of  yellow  copper,  and  of  oval  form,  about
40  millimetres  long  (about  i  A-  inch),  30  millimetres  broad
in  its  widest  part  (nearly  i{  inch)  ;  its  thickness  is  about
1  inch,  and  its  weight  about  an  ounce.  The  figure  of  S.
Bernard  is  hollowed  out,  in  monastic  costume  ;  his  head  is
tonsured  and  bare,1  his  chin  shaven,  and  he  is  sitting  on  a
folding  chair,  the  arms  of  which  terminate  in  a  serpent's
head.  The  Saint  holds  in  his  right  hand,  which  becomes

1  S.  Bernard  would  never  use  the  mitre,  which  in  his  time  the  abbots  were
beginning  to  assume. He  strongly  withstood  the  innovation.

VOL. II.  30


458  NOTE ON THE SEAL OF S. BERNARD.

the  left  in  the  impression,  a  very  simple  staff,  with  a  crook
after  the  style  of  the  ancient  lituus  ;  and  in  his  left  hand,
which  is  stretched  out  like  the  right,  an  object  which  the
roughness  and  minuteness  of  the  work  make  it  difficult  to
recognize.  I  think  it  to  be  a  church-door  divided  into  two
parts  by  a  column,  surmounted  by  a  capital.  [Mabillon  has
taken  this  for  a  book  ;  the  owner  of  the  seal  took  it  for  a
sand-glass.]  The  following  inscription  is  traced  on  the
margin  of  the  seal  round  the  figure  (a  cross  patee  is  placed
just  above  the  head  of  the  Saint)  :  *  Sigillum  :  Bernardi  :
Abbatis  Claraevall.

With  the  exception  of  the  g  of  the  word  Sigillum,  of
the  d  of  Bernardi,  and  of  the  e  of  Clar avail,  which  are
of  the  Gothic  character,  the  letters  resemble  the  Roman
uncials,  and  do  not  depart  otherwise  from  the  characters  in
use  in  the  twelfth  century.

The  absence  of  the  word  Saint  before  Bernard  is  enough
to  prove,  if  necessary,  that  this  seal  is  contemporary  with
him  whose  name  it  bears,  and  that  it  really  belonged  to  him,
because  we  know  that  S.  Bernard,  who  died  in  1153,  was
canonized  not  many  years  after  his  death,  viz.,  in  1174,  by
Pope  Alexander  III.  If  this  seal— the  use  of  which  in  that
case  would  be  inexplicable — was  posterior  to  the  canoniza
tion,  they  would  not  have  failed  to  add  the  significant  word
Sanctus ;  it  could  scarcely  have  been  without  it.

The  only  objection,  perhaps,  to  a  skilled  eye  that  could
be  raised  against  the  authenticity  of  the  seal  is  that  the
style  of  the  design,  the  costumes  and  the  details,  as  well  as
the  shape  of  the  seal,  seem  to  assign  it  to  the  latter  half,
or  almost  to  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century.  But  S.
Bernard  having  taken  the  pastoral  staff  A.D.  1115,  the
question  arose  why  his  official  seal,  which  must  have  been
executed  at  that  time,  had  not  the  marks  of  that  time ;  for
the  difference,  after  the  long  study  that  I  had  devoted  to
these  monuments,  was  most  apparent  to  my  eyes.  Such  was
the  question  that  I  had  to  consider.

On  reading  again  the  Letters  of  S.  Bernard  I  found  its
solution. S.  Bernard,  writing  to  Pope  Eugenius  III.,  A.D.


NOTE ON THE SEAL OF S. BERNARD.  459

1151,  tells  him  that  he  has  been  forced  to  change  his  seal
because  of  an  abuse  of  confidence,  and  that  he  had  had  a
second  engraved,  on  which  were  traced  his  figure  and  name
(ep.  284).  It  is  this  second  seal  which  is  in  my  possession.
The  effigy  and  name  of  S.  Bernard  are  engraved  on  it :  its
shape  and  execution  correspond  exactly  with  the  style  of
the  time  when  S.  Bernard  informs  us  that  he  had  had  it
made  ;  it  has  in  every  way  all  the  marks  of  genuineness
that  can  be  wished  for.

It  only  remains  for  me  now  to  inform  the  Academy  of  the
way  in  which  I  became  possessed  of  this  inestimable  piece
of  antiquity.  I  owe  it  to  the  generosity  of  a  retired  officer,
M.  Pays,  of  Issoudun,  who  wrote  to  me  a  few  days  ago,  on
sending  it:  "  This  seal  was  bought  of  a  second-hand  sales
man,  who  became  possessed  in  1790  of  the  old  copper
articles  of  the  Collegiate  Church  of  S.  Cyr,  of  Issoudun,
which  was  affiliated  to  Clairvaux.  How  it  came  there  I  do
not  know."  Subjoined  is  an  impression  of  the  seal,  which
I  beg  you  to  bring  under  the  notice  of  the  Academy.  I
forgot  to  say  that  the  reverse  is  flat  and  of  one  piece,  and
with  no  mark  of  handle  or  hook.  It  is  evident  that  the
.seal  was  pressed  on  the  wax  by  the  finger  only.

Receive,  etc.,

DEVILLE.

COPY OF AN IMPRESSION OF S. BERNARD'S SEAL.


460  DESCRIPTION OF THE POSITION AND SITE

DESCRIPTION OF THE POSITION AND
SITE  OF  THE  ABBEY  OF  CLAIRVAUX.


If  you  wish  to  know  the  site  of  Clairvaux,  these  lines  will
describe  it  for  you  as  if  in  a  mirror.  The  abbey  is  built  at
the  foot  of  two  mountains,  which  are  separated  from  each
other  by  a  narrow  valley,  and  leave  between  them  a  distance
which  widens  as  they  descend  from  the  side  of  the  abbey.
One  of  these  mountains  has  its  side  occupied  by  one  half
of  the  abbey,  and  the  other  half  is  on  the  corresponding
side  of  the  other.  The  one  mountain  is  fertile  with  vine
yards,  the  other  with  corn  ;  and  each  of  them  offers  to  the
eye  a  beautiful  sight,  and  supplies  a  needful  support  for
the  inmates.  So  that  whilst  on  one  of  the  ridges  rises  the
corn  upon  which  the  brethren  live,  on  the  other  is  grown
the  wine  which  they  drink.  The  top  of  the  mountain  is
the  scene  of  numerous  labours  of  the  monks  ;  works  as
pleasant  as  they  are  peaceable — to  collect  dry  branches,,
and  gather  them  in  bundles  to  burn  them  ;  to  grub  up  the
brushwood  which  disfigures  the  ground,  and  to  prepare  it
for  the  fire,  for  which  alone  it  is  fit ;  to  uproot  the  brambles
and  destroy  them ;  to  dig  the  soil ;  to  scatter  (as  I  may  say
after  Solomon)  the  "  bastard  slips"2  which  choke  the  roots
or  entangle  the  boughs  of  the  rising  trees,  so  that  there
may  be  no  impediment  to  the  sturdy  oak  which  salutes  the
heavens  with  its  lofty  top,  to  the  graceful  lime-tree  which
spreads  its  arms,  to  the  ash-tree  whose  wood  is  so  elastic
and  easily  split,  or  to  the  leafy  beech,  as  the  one  shoots
upwards  and  the  other  spreads  its  lateral  shade.

Behind  the  house  extends  a  broad  plain,  of  which  a  wall
shuts  in  no  small  part,  and  encloses  the  abbey  with  an
extended  boundary.  Within  this  enclosure  the  trees  are

2  Spuria  vitulamina,  the  VULGATE  version  of  Wisd.  v.  3.  The  Greek  word
(*6a\trp.a  is  rare;  and  as  jurftrxos  has  the  double  meaning  of  "a  shoot"  and
"  a  calf,''  the  fact  no  doubt  led  to  the  rendering,  which  is  clearly  incorrect,  and
is  noticed  by  S.  Augustine  (De  Doctr.  Christ,  ii.  12).  — [E.]


OK THE ABBKY OF CLAIRVAUX.  461

numerous  and  varied,  fertile  in  fruit  of  various  kinds,  and
form  an  orchard  like  a  forest.  Beside  it  rise  the  cells  of
the  sick,  and  the  neighbourhood  of  the  trees  is  no  slight
alleviation  of  the  infirmities  of  the  brethren,  to  whom  the
orchard  offers  a  vast  space  for  walking,  and  gives  a  pleasant
shade  against  the  heat  of  the  sun.  The  sick  are  wont  to
sit  upon  the  green  turf,  and  when  the  excessive  heats  of
the  dog-days  burn  the  earth  and  dry  up  the  rivers  they  sit
sheltered  under  the  trees,  and  defended  from  the  heat  of
their  shadow.  Under  their  leafy  screen  the  sun's  rays  are
softened,  and  their  sufferings  are  soothed  as  they  breathe
the  air  fragrant  with  the  scent  of  hay.  The  pleasant  green
of  the  trees  and  of  the  turf  rests  their  eyes,  and  the  fruit
which  hangs  before  them  promises  them  delight  when
ripened.  They  might  say  with  reason  :  /  have  sat  under
the  shade  of  t/ie  tree  which  I  desired,  and  its  fruit  was
sweet  to  my  taste  (Cant.  ii.  3).  Their  ears  are  agreeably
occupied  by  the  sweet  and  harmonious  concerts  of  birds  of
varied  plumage.  See  how,  in  order  to  cure  one  sickness,
the  goodness  of  God  multiplies  remedies,  causes  the  clear
air  to  shine  in  serenity,  the  earth  to  breathe  forth  fruitful-
ness,  and  the  sick  man  himself  to  inhale  through  eyes,
and  ears,  and  nostrils  the  delights  of  colours,  of  songs,  and
of  odours.  Where  the  orchard  ceases  begins  the  garden,
through  which  run  little  channels  of  water,  or  rather  little
streams  separate  and  divide  it  into  squares.  For  although
the  water  appears  to  be  still,  yet  it  has  a  steady  current,
though  slow.  Here,  too,  is  a  pleasing  sight  afforded  to  the
eyes  of  the  sick  brethren  when  they  go  to  sit  on  the  verdant
bank  of  a  pool  filled  with  pure  and  running  water,  where
they  can  watch  the  sports  of  the  little  fish  in  water  clear  as
crystal,  which  swim  to  and  fro  in  shoals  like  marching
armies.  The  water  of  these  pools  serves  at  the  same  time
for  nourishing  the  fish  and  for  watering  the  vegetables  in
the  garden  ;  it  is  introduced  by  a  constant  current  derived
from  the  Aube,  a  river  well  known.  This  stream  passes
and  repasses  the  many  workshops  of  the  abbey,  and  every
where  leaves  a  blessing  behind  it  for  its  faithful  service.


462  DESCRIPTION OF  THE POSITION AND SITE

The  river  climbs  to  this  height  by  works  laboriously  con
structed,  and  passes  nowhere  without  rendering  some
service,  or  leaving  some  of  its  water  behind.  It  divides  the
valley  into  two  by  a  sinuous  bed,  which  the  labour  of  the
brethren,  and  not  Nature,  has  made,  and  goes  on  to  throw
half  of  its  waters  into  the  abbey,  as  if  to  salute  the  brethren,
and  seems  to  excuse  itself  for  not  coming  in  its  whole  force,,
the  canal  which  receives  it  being  too  small  for  it.  If  some
times  the  stream,  swollen  by  an  inundation,  rushes  on  with
violent  current,  it  is  stopped  by  a  wall,  under  which  it  is
obliged  to  pass,  and  so  turned  back  upon  itself,  meets  and
checks  the  descending  stream.  As  much,  however,  as  the
wall,  like  a  faithful  porter,  allows  to  enter  passes  on  at  once
to  drive  the  wheels  of  a  mill  ;  there,  lashed  into  foam  by
their  motion,  it  grinds  the  meal  under  the  weight  of  the
mill-stones,  and  separates  the  fine  from  the  coarse  by  a
sieve  of  fine  tissue.

A  little  farther  on,  in  the  next  building,  it  fills  a  boiler,
and  is  heated  for  brewing,  that  drink  may  be  prepared  for
the  brethren,  if  it  should  happen  that  the  vintage  should  not
respond  kindly  to  the  labour  of  the  vine-dresser;  so  that,  in
default  of  the  juice  of  the  vine,  the  want  maybe  supplied  by
the  extract  of  grain.  But  not  even  yet  is  its  usefulness  com
pleted,  for  the  fullers  call  it  to  their  aid  who  labour  beside
the  mill ;  sound  reason  requiring  that,  as  in  the  mill,  care  is
taken  for  the  food  of  the  brethren,  so  by  these  their  clothing
should  be  prepared.  But  the  river  does  not  hesitate  nor
refuse  any  who  require  its  aid ;  and  you  may  see  it  causing
to  rise  and  fall  alternately  the  heavy  pestles,  that  is  to  say,
hammers,  or  wooden  foot-shaped  blocks  (for  that  name
seems  to  agree  better  with  the  treading- work,  as  it  were,  of
the  fullers),  and  so  relieves  them  of  the  heaviest  part  of
their  labour.  And  if  it  is  permitted  to  them  to  mix  jokes
with  serious  work,  it  relieves  the  sadness  of  their  sins.  O
God,  how  many  consolations  Thou  givest  to  Thy  poor,  so
that  they  may  not  be  entirely  weighed  down  by  the  extreme
stress  of  their  labour !  What  alleviations  of  punishment  to
the  penitent,  that  they  may  not  be  altogether  absorbed  by


OK THE AHHEV OF CLAIRVAUX.  463

How  many  horses  would  this  labour
tire  !  of  how  many  men  would  it  weary  the  arms  !  And
the  kindly  stream  relieves  us  from  it  altogether,  although
without  it  we  should  have  neither  food  to  eat,  nor  raiment
prepared  to  put  on.  It  shares  with  us  our  fatigues,  and  for
all  the  labour  which  it  undertakes  the  whole  day  long  it  ex
pects  no  other  recompense  than  that  when  it  has  completed
diligently  all  its  tasks  it  may  be  permitted  to  go  free  upon
its  way.  Thus,  after  having  made  to  revolve  in  its  quick
movement  so  many  wheels,  rapid  as  itself,  it  emerges
foaming,  you  would  say  that  it  is,  so  to  speak,  mealy,  and
that  it  has  been  made  softer.

From  thence  it  passes  into  the  workshop  of  the  curriers,
where  it  contributes  its  laborious  assistance  to  the  prepara
tion  of  the  sandals  which  are  needful  for  the  use  of  the
Brothers.  Coming  from  there,  it  is  divided  into  numerous
threads  of  water,  and  thus  distributed  ;  it  penetrates  all  the
workshops,  and  lends  itself  to  everyone's  need,  every
where  looking  for  assistance  that  it  may  be  able  to  render.
Thus  it  helps  to  cook  the  food,  to  sift  the  grain,  to  drive
wheels  and  pestles,  to  damp,  wash,  and  soak,  and  so  to
soften,  objects  ;  everywhere  it  stands  ready  to  offer  its
help.  Lastly,  in  order  that  I  may  not  omit  any  thanks  due
to  it,  nor  leave  the  catalogue  of  its  services  in  any  way
imperfect,  it  carries  away  all  dirt  and  uncleanness,  and
leaves  all  things  clean  behind  it.  Then,  after  having
accomplished  industriously  the  purpose  for  which  it  came,
it  returns  with  rapid  current  to  the  stream,  and  renders  to
it  in  the  name  of  Clairvaux,  thanks  for  all  the  services
which  it  has  performed,  and  replies  to  its  salutation  with
worthy  response.  Immediately  it  receives  into  its  bosom
the  waters  that  it  had  lent  to  us,  and  the  two  streams
become  only  one  ;  they  are  so  perfectly  mixed  that  you  can
find  no  trace  of  their  union  ;  only  on  re-entering  into  its
bed,  it  hastens  the  course  of  the  stream,  which  had  been
delayed,  diminished,  and  rendered  less  active  in  its  course,
by  the  withdrawal  of  part  of  its  waters.

But  since  we  have  restored  it  to  its  place,  let  us  return


464  DESCRIPTION OF THE POSITION AND SITE

to  the  little  streams  which  we  have  left  behind  us.  They
are  drawn  from  the  river,  and  wander  in  careless  curves
through  the  meadows,  to  penetrate  into  the  earth  and
refresh  it,  so  that  it  may  bring  forth  seed  for  fear  that  at
the  return  of  spring,  when  the  fruitful  earth  opens  to  let
the  new  growth  appear,  the  infant  plants  should  be  dried
up  for  want  of  water ;  nor  have  they  any  need  of  the  drops
from  the  clouds  because  sufficiently  fed  by  the  bounty  of  the
neighbouring  river.  These  little  streams,  or  rather  water
courses,  after  they  have  fulfilled  their  office,  are  absorbed
in  the  stream  which  had  given  them  out,  and  the  Aube
having  regained  all  its  waters,  resumes  its  rapid  course
down  the  valley.  But  as  we  have  accompanied  it  so  far,
and  it,  following  the  word  of  Solomon,  returns  to  its  place,
(Eccles.  i.  7),  let  us  too  return  to  the  point  from  whence
we  started,  and  traverse  with  rapid  description  the  vast
plain  of  meadows.

That  spot  has  much  charm,  it  greatly  soothes  weary
minds,  relieves  anxieties  and  cares,  helps  souls  who  seek
the  Lord  greatly  to  devotion,  and  recalls  to  them  the
thought  of  the  heavenly  sweetness  towards  which  they
aspire.  The  smiling  countenance  of  the  earth  is  painted
with  varying  colours,  the  blooming  verdure  of  spring
satisfies  the  eyes,  and  its  sweet  odour  salutes  the  nostrils.
But  while  I  view  the  flowers,  while  I  breathe  their  sweet
scent,  the  meadows  recall  to  me  the  histories  of  ancient
times;  for  while  I  drink  in  the  sweetness  of  the  flowers,  the
thought  occurs  to  my  mind  of  the  fragrance  of  the  clothing
of  the  Patriarch  Jacob,  which  the  Scripture  compares  to
the  odour  which  mounts  from  a  fruitful  field.  When  I
delight  my  eyes  with  the  bright  colours  of  the  flowers,  I
am  reminded  that  this  beauty  is  far  above  that  of  the  purple
robe  of  Solomon,  who  in  all  his  glory,  could  not  equal  the
beauty  of  the  lilies  of  the  field,  although  to  him  there  was
wanting  neither  richness  of  material,  nor  wisdom  and  taste
in  arrangement.  In  this  way,  while  I  am  charmed  without
by  the  sweet  influence  of  the  beauty  of  the  country,  I  have
not  less  delight  within  in  reflecting  on  the  mysteries  which


OK THI-: ABBEY OF CLAIRVAUX.  465

are  hidden  beneath  it.  This,  meadow,  then  is  irrigated  by
the  little  stream  which  flows  through  it,  and  sends  its
moisture  to  the  roots  of  its  vegetation,  so  that  they  will  not
fear  the  heats  of  summer  when  it  shall  come.  It  is  ex
tended  so  far  that  at  the  time  when  the  covering  of  the
greensward  falls  under  the  scythe,  and  is  dried  to  make
hay,  the  gathering-in  of  it  is  a  heavy  task  for  the  whole-
force  of  the  Abbey  during  twice  ten  days.  Yet  that  labour
is  not  left  wholly  to  the  monks,  but  with  them  an  un
numbered  multitude  of  lay  brothers,  brothers  lent  from
other  Houses,  and  a  crowd  of  hired  labourers,  collect  the
hay  when  dried,  and  clear  the  shorn  soil  with  rakes.

This  meadow  is  shared  between  two  farms,  which  the
Aube  divides  equally  and  fairly,  in  order  to  avoid  dispute,
assigning  to  each  its  domain,  of  which  it  forms  the  boundary
on  either  side,  so  that  the  one  may  not  cross  to  encroach
upon  the  land  of  the  other.  You  would  not  suppose  that
these  farm-houses  only  serve  for  the  dwelling-place  of  lay-
brothers;  you  would  take  them  for  cloisters  of  monks,  if  the
yokes  of  oxen,  ploughs,  and  other  instruments  iitted  for
the  labours  of  countrymen  did  not  make  manifest  the  kind
of  inhabitants  whom  the  houses  shelter,  and  if  you  did  not
remark  that  no  books  are  lying  open  among  them.  For  as
relates  to  the  buildings,  you  would  say  that  it  was  suitable
for  a  great  convent  of  monks,  both  by  sight,  size,  and
beauty.

In  the  part  of  the  meadow  which  is  near  to  the  wall,  a
pool  of  water  has  been  made  out  of  the  solid  plain  ;  there,
where  previously  the  labourer,  pouring  with  sweat,  was
cutting  the  hay  with  his  sharp  scythe,  there  the  brother
fisherman,  borne  in  a  light  skiff,  as  it  were  upon  a  wooden
horse,  scours  the  watery  plain  ;  for  spurs  he  has  a  light  oar
with  which  he  urges  his  boat  to  speed  and  turns  its  course
where  he  will.  He  unfolds  his  net  under  the  waves,  in
which  the  iishy  tribe  are  entangled,  to  prepare  for  him  a
prey  which  he  loves  to  see  placed  upon  the  table  ;  or  he
uses  the  secret  hook,  with  which  the  imprudent  fish  is
taken.  By  the  example  of  which  we  may  be  taught  to


466  DESCRIPTION OF THE POSITION AND SITE

despise  pleasures,  because  pleasure  is  bought  with  pain,
and  is  injurious,  nor  can  anyone  be  ignorant  of  the  sad
fate  of  those  who  yield  to  it,  except  those  who  either  have
not  sinned,  or,  having  sinned,  have  not  the  benefit  of
repentance.  May  God  keep  far  from  us  the  pleasure,  at
the  entrance  to  which  Death  is  placed  ;  according  to  the
description  of  a  wise  man,  "  like  bees  in  their  flight,  who
seek  a  drop  of  honey,  and  are  pierced  through  with  a
dart  "  (Boethius).  The  banks  of  the  lake  are  strengthened
by  a  high  palisade  woven  of  flexible  osiers,  so  that  the
earth  may  not  crumble  away  by  the  percolation  of  the
water.  This  lake  is  fed  by  the  river  which  flows  by,  at  a
distance  of  scarcely  thirty-six  feet,  from  which  the  water  is
let  through  narrow  passages  into  the  lake  which  it  feeds.
Overflow  pipes  lead  back  from  it,  and  keep  the  water
always  at  the  same  level.

But  while  I  am  carried  on  in  this  description  of  the
meadows,  while  I  breathlessly  mount  the  steep  slopes,  or
traverse  the  brightly-coloured  surface  of  the  meadow,
painted  by  the  hand  of  Wisdom,  or  describe  the  ridges  of
the  mountains  clothed  with  trees,  I  am  accused  of  ingrati
tude  by  that  sweet  fountain  of  whose  waters  I  have  so  often
drunk,  which  has  merited  so  well  of  me,  and  which  I  have-
repaid  so  ill.  It  reminds  me  in  a  tone  of  reproach  that  it
has  often  quenched  my  thirst,  that  it  has  given  me  water  to
wash  my  hands  and  even  my  feet,  that  it  has  rendered  to
me  many  such  offices  of  kindness  and  benevolence.  It  says
to  me  that  all  these  good  offices  I  have  repaid  with  ingrati
tude  ;  that  it  has  been  the  last  mentioned  of  all  the  places  I
have  described,  and  indeed  that  it  scarcely  found  a  place  at
all ;  whereas  for  the  respect  I  owe  to  it,  it  should  have  been
placed  first.  And,  indeed,  I  am  unable  to  deny  that  I
remembered  it  too  late  ;  and  that  I  should  have  thought
of  it  earlier.  But  does  it  not  roll  its  waters  silently  through
subterranean  channels,  so  that  not  even  the  lightest  murmur
marks  its  passage,  like  the  waters  of  Siloah  which  roll  in
silence,  as  if  fearing  to  be  betrayed,  and  hide  themselves
from  all  eyes  ?  Why  should  I  not  have  supposed  that  it


OF THK ABBEY OF CLAIRVAUX.  46?

wished  for  secrecy,  when  I  see  that  it  does  not  wish  to  be
beheld  except  under  a  roof  ?  This  fountain,  then  (which
is  said  to  be  an  indication  of  a  good  fountain),  has  its
source  opposite  to  the  rising  sun,  so  that  at  the  time  of  the
spring  solstice  it  salutes  the  ruddy  face  of  the  scintillating
aurora.  A  hut  of  turf,  or,  to  speak  more  respectfully  of  it,
a  pavilion  small  and  pretty,  covers  and  protects  it,  that
nothing  unclean  may  fall  into  it  on  any  side.  But  the  placr
where  the  mountain  permits  it  to  issue  forth  is  also  the
place  where  the  valley  engulfs  it ;  where  it  is  born,  it  also
as  it  were  dies,  and  is  buried.  But  do  not  expect  a  sign  like
that  of  Jonas  the  prophet,  that  it  should  lie  hidden  three
days  and  three  nights  in  the  soil  ;  it  seems  to  be  raised
up  almost  immediately  from  the  heart  of  the  earth,  and
reappears  at  a  thousand  feet  distance,  within  the  enclosure
of  the  monastery.  It  might  be  said  that  it  returns  to  life
where  it  appears,  offering  itself  to  charm  the  sight  and
supply  the  wants  of  the  brethren,  as  if  it  were  not  willing
to  have  communication  with  any  others  than  saints.


468  LETTER CXLVI.

LETTER  CXLVI.

TO BURCHARD, ABBOT OF BALERNE.1

Bernard  rejoices  that  his  efforts  to  train  Burchard  to
the  Religious  life  have  not  been  in  vain;  the  happy  issue  is
to  be  attributed  to  God  alone.

1.  Your  style  has  been  filled  with  fire  and  power,  and  with
that  fire,  too,  which  the  Lord  has  sent  on  the  earth. I  read
your  letter,  and  my  heart  burned  within  me  ;  I  blessed  that
furnace from whence such sparks had flown forth. Did
not  your  heart  burn  within  you  as  you  dictated  such  words  ?
A  good  man  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart  bringeth
forth good things. If  I  laboured for  you,  as you  humbly
say,  I  rejoice  at  it. I  ploughed,  in hope,  no  doubt, of  re
ceiving  fruit,  and  my  hope  has not  deceived  me. Lo,  with
the  fruit of  my  works my heart is satisfied  in a strange
land  ;  and  I  see  by  experience  that  my  seed  has  not  fallen
by  the  wayside,  nor  on stony  ground,  nor  amongst  thorns,
but  into  a  good  and  fertile  soil. And  if  I  had  sorrow  when
I  brought them forth, yet now  I remember no more  the
travail,  for  joy  that a child  has been  born  into  the  world.
A  child,  I  mean,  in  malice,  not  in  understanding;  one  whom
the  Saviour  could set  forward  for  an  example  to  the  old,
saying,  Except  ye  be  converted  and  become  as  little  children,
ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (S.  Matt,
xviii.  3) ; such  a  child  as can say, /  am  wiser  than  the
aged,  because  I  have  sought  Thy  commandments  (Ps. cxix.
100) ; and,  /  am  small  and  despised,  yet  do  I  not  forget
Thy  precepts  (Ps.  cxix.  141).

2.  I  thank  Thee,  O  Father,  Lord of Heaven  and earth,
because Thou hast  hid  these things  from the  wise and
prudent,  and hast revealed them unto babes ; even so,
Father,  for  so it  seemed  good  in  Thy  sight. By  Thy  will,
not  by  their  merits  are  they  what  they  are. For  Thou  dost

Balerne  was  of  the  Cistercian  order,  in  the  Diocese  of  Btsan^on,  and  was
founded  A.D.  1 136.  Its  first  Abbot  was  Burchard  ;  the  judgment  passed  on  him
may  be  seen  in  the  Life  of  S.  Bernard,  at  the  end  of  lib.  i.


LETTER CXLVII.  469

not  come  to  find,  but  goest  before  to  give  merit.  We  all
have  sinned,  and  need  to  be  prevented  by  grace.  Do  thou,
then,  my  brother,  acknowledge  that  thou  hast  been  pre
vented,  and  prevented  with  the  blessings  of  goodness,  not
by  me,  who  am  nothing,  but  by  Him  who,  by  His  holy
inspiration,  prevented  me,  and  so  caused  me  to  warn  thee
to  save  thyself.  For.  to  attribute  a  great  deal  to  myself,  I
planted,  I  watered  ;  but  without  Him  who  giveth  the  in
crease,  what  am  I  ?  To  Him  in  all  humility  submit  thyself,
to  Him  with  utmost  devotion  cling.  Use  me  as  His  ser
vant,  thy  fellow  servant,  thy  companion  in  the  way,  thy
future  co-heir  in  our  country,  that  is  to  say,  if  I  shall  have
faithfully  fulfilled  the  ministry  to  which  I  was  sent  on  your
behalf,  and  if  I  shall  have  done  what  I  could  to  enable  you
to  lay  hold  of  the  inheritance  of  salvation.  This  is  my
answer  to  your  complaint.  I  will  occupy  myself  with  your
necessities  as  my  own  when  I  come.

LETTER CXLVII. (A.D. i  [38.)
To  PETER,  ABBOT  OF  CiAJNY.1

Peter  had  consoled  Bernard,  who  was  engaged  abroad  in
several  difficult  labours  for  the  Church,  by  sending  him
Gebuin,  Archdeacon  of  Troyes.  He  gratefully  acknow-

1  This  reply  of  Bernard's  is  wanting  in  not  a  few  copies,  and  in  the  first
editions  was  placed  after  ep.  307.  But  this  ep.  147  is  an  answer  to  two  of
Peter's,  one  of  which  is  ep.  29  in  lib.  ii. ;  the  other,  ep.  37,  is  here  subjoined,
that  it  may  be  seen  how  closely  these  two  holy  souls  clung  to  each  other ;  <•/.
also  notes  to  ep.  228.  The  epistle  is  as  follows  : —

"To  my  venerable  and  dearly  beloved  lord,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  his
brother  PETER,  humble  Abbot  of  the  Cluniacs,  sends  greeting,  desiring  that  he
may  be  always  strong  in  the  Lord.

"  How  great  are  the  reverence  and  the  love  that  my  inmost  soul  feels  for  you,
He  knows  whom  in  you  I  venerate  and  love.  I  still  felt  all  this  even  when  He
hid  from  me  your  bodily  presence  ;  because  rumour,  that  travels  faster  than  the
body  can,  brought  before  my  mind's  eye  the  form  of  your  blessed  soul.  But
when  I  at  length  attained  what  had  been  so  long  time  denied  me,  and  when
the  images  of  dreams  disappeared  before  the  light  of  truth,  my  soul  clung  to
yours  and  refused  to  be  again  separated  from  your  love.  So  did  your  love
claim  me  wholly  thenceforth,  so  did  your  virtues  and  the  beauty  of  your
character  seize  me,  that  nothing  of  my  own  was  left  me  which  was  net  yours,


470  LETTER CXLVII.

ledges  this  kindness,  and  predicts  a  happier  state  for  the
Church  by  the  extinction  of  the  then  existing  schism.

To  dom  PETER,  the  very  Reverend  Father,  Abbot  of
Cluny,  his  friend  BERNARD  wishes  health,  and  all  that  he
could  desire  for  his  friend.

i.  May  the  Dayspring  from  on  high  visit  you,  my
excellent  friend,  for  you  have  visited  me  in  a  strange  land,
and  consoled  me  in  the  place  of  my  pilgrimage.  You  have
done  well  to  think  upon  the  poor  and  needy.  I  was  absent,
and  absent  too  for  a  long  time,  and  you,  a  great  man,  full  of
important  matters,  yet  forgot  not  my  name.  Blessed  be
thy  holy  angel,  who  put  loving  thought  for  me  into  thy
heart  :  blessed  be  our  God  who  moved  thee.  Lo,  I  hold
in  my  hand  your  letter,  of  which  I  may  make  my  boast
among  strangers,  and  in  which  you  have  poured  out  your
full  heart  to  me.  I  rejoice  that  you  hold  me  in  favour  as
well  as  in  memory.  I  rejoice  in  the  privilege  of  your  love,
I  am  refreshed  out  of  the  abundant  sweetness  of  your  heart.

nothing  of  yours  was  suffered  to  remain  with  you  which  was  not  also  mine.
From  that  time  there  abode  in  me  (and  may  the  cause  of  Christ  to  which
you  have  set  your  hand  so  abide  in  you)  that  brotherly  love,  which  alone,  be
cause  it  can  never  perish,  has  preserved  its  nature  perfectly  so  far  as  I  am  con
cerned.  And  since  I  have  stored  this  up  in  my  bosom,  and  hold  it  dearer  than
all  the  gold  in  the  world,  more  precious  than  all  jewels,  I  wonder  that  for  so  long
a  time  I  have  not  received  from  you,  such  tokens  as  I  could  wish  for,  of  the  love
that  you  keep  for  me.  I  am  thankful,  indeed,  that  by  the  chance  salutations
you  occasionally  send,  you  show  that  you  have  not  wholly  forgotten  your
friend.  But  I  complain  that  you  have  not  given  me  yet  surer  proofs  by  letter^
I  say  '  surer,'  because  the  paper  cannot  alter  what  has  been  written  on  it,
while  the  tongue  of  the  speaker  can  too  often  change  by  addition  or  subtraction,
the  truth  that  has  been  uttered.  Hence,  because  as  a  chosen  warrior,  prepared
for  the  day  of  battle,  because  of  the  dangers  that  threaten  the  Church  of  God,
you  fight  with  the  arms  of  righteousness  on  the  right  hand  and  the  left,  1
securely  commend  to  your  friendship  the  messengers  whom  I  am  sending  to  my
lord  the  Pope ;  being  assured  that  one  who  assists  strangers  in  their  cause  will
not  be  wanting  to  his  friends  in  their  need.  That  my  complaint  may  be  set  at
rest,  send  me  word  by  letters  and  not  by  word  of  mouth  only,  how  you  are,
how  my  lord,  the  Pope,  is  situated,  and  about  his  return.  Would  that  you
were  set  free  from  an  exacting  Curia  and  I  from  a  perilous  charge,1  as  I  have
always  longed  for,  so  that  one  place  never  to  be  changed  might  hold  us  both,
one  charity  unite  us,  one  Christ  receive  us  !  "

1 Cur  a .


LETTER CXLVII.  471

And  not  only  so,  but  I  glory  in  tribulations  also,  if  I  have
been  counted  worthy  to  endure  any  for  the  sake  of  the
Church.  This,  truly,  is  my  glory  and  the  lifting  up  of  my
head — the  Church's  triumph.  For  if  we  have  been  sharers  of
her  trouble,  we  shall  be  also  of  her  consolation.  We  must
work  and  suffer  with  our  mother,  lest  she  complain  of  us,
saying,  My  kinsmen  stand  afar  off :  they  also  that  seek
after  my  life  lay  snares  for  me  (Ps.  xxxviii.  1 1,  12).

2.  But  thanks  be  to  God  who  hath  given  her  the  victory,
has  crowned  her  labours,  and  glorified  her  in  them.  Our
sadness  has  been  turned  into  rejoicing,  our  mourning  into
gladness.  The  winter  is  passed,  the  rain  is  over  and  gone  ;
the  flowers  appear  on  the  earth,  the  time  of  pruning  is  here,
the  useless  branch,  the  rotten  member  has  been  cut  off.
The  wicked  man  who  made  Israel  to  sin,  he  has  been
swallowed  up  by  death,1  and  given  over  to  the  pit  of  hell.
In  the  words  of  the  Prophet,  he  had  entered  into  a  covenant
with  death,  and  made  an  agreement  with  hell  (Is.  xxviii.  18),
and  therefore,  as  Ezekiel  says,  Destruction  has  come  to  him
and  he  shall  be  no  more  for  ever  (Ezek.  xxviii.  19).  Another
enemy,  too,  the  greatest  of  all  and  the  worst  of  all,  has  none
the  less  been  cut  off.2  And  he  was  one  of  the  friends  of
the  Church,  of  whom  she  is  wont  to  complain,  saying:  My
lovers  and  my  neighbours  did  stand  looking  upon  my  trouble,
and  my  kinsmen  stood  afar  off  (Ps.  xxxviii.  n).  If  any
remain  I  hope  for  speedy  judgment  against  them.  I  shall
soon  be  returning  to  my  brethren,  if  God  preserves  my  life,
and  I  shall  hope  to  pay  you  a  visit  in  passing.  Meanwhile
I  commend  myself  to  your  holy  prayers.  I  salute  brother
Hugh,  the  Chamberlain,  and  all  who  are  with  you,  with  the
rest  of  your  sacred  congregation.

1  The  Antipope  Anacletus died A.D. 1138. The manner of  his death  is
described  by  Ernald  (Life  of  S.  Bernard,  lib.  ii.  c.  7). Ordericus  (p.  915)  says
that  his  death  was  sudden. Victor  was  chosen  in his  place  by  the  rivals  of
Innocent.

2  This seems  to  be Gerard, Bishop of  Angouleme, who died A.U. 1136
(ep.  126  notes). Ordericus,  speaking  of  his  death  (p.  908),  calls  him  a  most
learned  man,  "  and  of  great  reputation  and  authority  in  the  Roman  Senate  in
the  times  of  Popes  Paschal,  Gelasius,  Calixtus,  and  Honorius."


472  LETTER CXLVIII.

LETTER  CXLVIII. (A.D. 1138.)
To  THE  SAME.

He replies to  Peter  only in  a  few  words,  proposing  to
write  at  greater  length  later.

To  dom  PETER,  Abbot  of  Cluny,  BERNARD  sends
humble  and  respectful  salutations.

When  I  had  read  your  letter  I  was  made  joyful  that  one
so  great  as  you  should  trouble  to  prevent  one  so  insignificant
as  I  with  the  blessings  of  goodness.  But  when  shall  we
have  an  opportunity  of  seeing  each  other,  and  of  conversing
with  each  other  ?  When  will  there  be  convenient  place,  or
fitting  occasion  ?  Meanwhile  I  send  a  few  words  in  reply  to
your  short  letter,  and  will  gladly  send  more,  when  I  know  that
they  will  not  be  burdensome  to  you.  Else  how  could  my
littleness  dare  to  write  at  all,  were  it  not  that  you  in  your
humility  stoop  to  give  me  access  to  your  exalted  dignity  ?


LETTER  CXLIX. (A.D. 1138.)
To  THE  SAME.

Bernard  advises  him  not  to  press  on  so  eagerly  the  affair
of  the  Abbey  of  Saint  Bert  in.

I  think  that  you  are  well  aware  how  unwilling  I  am  ever
to  do  anything  which  may  be  hostile  to  your  Reverence.
And  having  this  confidence  I  do  not  hesitate  to  make  sug
gestions  to  you  when  necessary.  With  respect  to  the
monastery  of  S.  Bertin1  I  could  wish  you  to  act  less  eagerly

1  The  monastery  .of  S.  Bertin  at  S.  Omer,  otherwise  Sittich,  after  having
come  to  great  want,  was  handed  over  by  Abbot  Lambert  to  Hugh,  Abbot  of
Cluny,  A.D.  1101,  and  then  it  became  so  prosperous  in  point  of  wealth,  piety,
and  the  number  of  its  monks,  that  where  twelve  monks  could  before  hardly  live
the  number  increased  to  150,  and  from  them  many  monasteries  of  Belgium  and
France  received  the  regular  discipline,  as  Hermann,  the  monk,  says  (Spicit.
Vol.  xii.  p.  443),  with  whom  Iperius  agrees.  On  the  death  of  Hugh,  Abbot  of
Cluny,  the  monks  of  Sittich  shook  off  the  yoke  and  entered  into  a  suit  with


LETTER CL.  473

than  you  have  done.  For  even  if  you  could  bring  it  to
submit  to  you  in  peace  and  without  any  contention,  I  do
not  see  how  you  would  gain  even  then.  For  I  should  not
suppose  that  you  would  find  any  pleasure  in  honour  accom
panied  by  such  responsibilities.  But  now  that  you  cannot
obtain  the  submission  of  this  monastery  without  great
labour,  nor  hold  it,  they  say,  peacefully,  you  have  a  good
excuse  afforded  you  for  retiring  gracefully  from  the
attempt,  in  the  fear  of  causing  trouble  and  strife.


LETTER  CL. (A.I). 1133.)
To  POPE  INNOCENT.

He  praises  the  Pope  for  various  acts  of  authority  ;  and
then  urges  him  to  oppose  strongly  the  ambition  of  Philip,
who  was  endeavouring  to  obtain  the  Archbishopric  of  Tours
by  illegitimate  means.

i .  May  the  members  share  in  the  health  of  the  head  !  May
the  anointing  oil  which  descended  to  the  beard  from  the
head  also  run  down  to  the  utmost  skirts  of  the  clothing !
If  when  the  shepherd  is  smitten  the  sheep  are  scattered,
may  they  return  to  their  pasture  without  fear  when  he  is
strong  and  well  !  What  I  mean  is  this  :  Many  a  report  of
your  frequent  glorious  successes  is  making  glad  the  city  of
God.  It  is,  therefore,  but  fitting  that  your  prosperity  should
be  the  strengthening  of  the  Church  ;  and  that,  when  God
exalts  him  that  He  has  chosen  out  of  His  people,  she  also
may  see  herself  exalted,  and  feel  the  stronger  by  an  increase
of  vigour.  For  if  she  have  suffered  with  him,  she  ought
also  to  reign  with  him.  That  is  at  once  worthy  of  you  and
necessary  for  us.  What  is  it  then  ?  If  in  times  of  fear  and

their  abbot  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Cluniacs.  The  quarrel  was  so  kept
up  that  at  the  instance  of  Peter  the  Venerable  Innocent  II.  deposed  two  abbots,
John  and  Simon  ;  but  at  length  Peter  was  persuaded  by  Bernard  to  yield  his
rights  and  give  the  monks  of  S.  Berlin  their  independence.  Cf.  Apulog.  (notes
Vol.ii.).

VOL.  II.  31


474  LETTER CL.

distress  the  arm  of  justice  was  not  shortened,  nor  the  zeal
for  equity  cooled,  are  we  to  give  way  now  that  we  are
nearing  the  goal  ?  Shall  the  virtue  which  shone  brightly  in
weakness  succumb  in  power  ?

2.  To  come  to  the  point,  with  how  strong  a  hand  has  the
famous  monastery  of  Vezelay1  been  set  in  order?  The
Apostolic  majesty  thought  that  it  ought  not  to  give  way,
no,  not  for  a  moment,  either  to  the  insane  outbreaks  of  an
armed  populace,  or  to  the  unbridled  madness  of  mutinous
and  wrathful  monks,  or  to  what  was  more  powerful  than  all
— the  forces  of  mammon.  What  shall  I  say  of  S.  Benedict?2
Was  the  indignation  of  a  king  able  to  repress  the  spirit  of
liberty  kindled  and  girded  to  battle  against  flesh  and  blood  ?

1  Vezelay,  in  the  Diocese  of  Autun,  was  founded  by  Gerard,  Count  of  Nevers,
and  Bertha,  his  wife,  about  the  year  821,  for  nuns,  who  were  afterwards  replaced
by  monks,  and they by  regular canons, A.D. 1537. A reformation of  this
monastery  was  first  instituted  at  the  instance  of  Henry,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  by
William,  a  follower  of S. Mayeul, Abbot of  Cluny. Then,  again, Hugh,
another  Abbot  of  Cluny,  restored  its  waning  discipline. From  this  it  came  to
pass  that  Paschal  II.  had  it  placed  entirely,  A.D.  1 103,  under  the  Abbot  of  Cluny.
Cf.  Duchesne  (notes,  ad  Biblioth.  Cluni}. But  the  monks  of  Vezelay,  attempting
to  throw  off  the  yoke  gradually,  were  again  compelled  by  Innocent  II.  to  submit.
The  historian  of  Vezelay  thus  speaks  of  this: "Although  the  monks  of  Vezelay
had  for  nearly  three  hundred  years  from  the  first  foundation  of  their  house  quietly
and  without  opposition  enjoyed  the  liberty  of  choosing  for  their  head  one  of  their
own  number,  or  a  brother  from  some  other  monastery,  yet  the  Cluniacs,  a  much
later  foundation,  endeavoured  to  surreptitiously  gain  a  supremacy  over  them  by
first  claiming an assenting  voice,  then  the  right  of  election,  falsely  asserting
that  the  charge  of  the  Order  of  the  Abbey  of  Vezelay  had  been given  them  by
Paschal  II. From  the  same  cause  a  grievous  scandal  arose  under  Innocent  II.
on  their  reclaiming  their  natural  liberty  ; but  a  certain  Alberic  was  thrust  upon
them  by  the  Cluniacs,  who  were  supported  by  force  by  Innocent  and  the  Count  of
Nevers,  and  all  the  brethren  nearly  of  the  monastery  were  thrown  into  fetters."

2  This  was  S. Benedict's  on  the Po,  which had been  dealt with  by Popes
Gregory  VII.  and  Calixtus  II.  as  Vezelay  had  been,  that  is  to  say,  it  was  for
bidden  to  choose  its  Abbot  without  the  counsel,  provision,  and  precept  of  the
Abbot of Cluny, and the  man  of  their  choice was prohibited from seeking
episcopal  benediction  without  the  Abbot's  commendatory  Letters. But,  when  the
monks  began  to  act  differently,  Innocent,  at  the  instance  of  Peter  the  Venerable,
gave  order  by  Letter  (Bull.  Cltment.  iii.,  A.D. 1 187,  Biliioth. Cluni,  col.  2452),
that  Abbot  William,  having  been  elected  and  admitted  without  the  consent  of
the Cluniacs, should  appear before them  and  pay  them due  obedience  and
reverence.


LETTER CL.  475

So  in  a  wonderful  way  were  the  churches  of  S.  Memmius1
and  S.  Satyrus2  transformed,  from  being  synagogues  of
Satan  to  become  again  sanctuaries  of  God,  whether  the
workers  of  wickedness  would  or  no.  Nor  at  Liege  was  the
threatening  and  savage  sword  of  a  passionate  and  angry
king  able  to  enforce  acquiescence  in  his  urgent  and  wicked
demands.'5  Who  can  sufficiently  praise  the  bolt  that  was
hurled,  even  though  it  was  from  a  distance,  against  the  dis-

1  S.  Memmius  was  sprung  from  the  once  famous  family  of  Memmii  at  Rome,
was  sent  by  S.  Peter  into  Gaul,  and  became  first  Bishop  of  Chalons.  A  famous
C'hurch  of  Canons  was  founded  in  his  honour  in  the  same  city, 'which  afterwards,
by  the  command  of  Innocent  II.,  took  the  rule  of  the  Regular  Canons  of  S.
Augustine.

-  Matilda,  wife  of  Godfrey  de  Bouillon  (or  Boulogne,  on  the  English  Channel,
according  to  William  of  Tyre,  lib.  ix.  c.  5),  and  first  King  of  Jerusalem,
sought  and  obtained  from  Pope  Paschal  the  body  of  S.  Satyrus,  whose  memory
is  kept  on  March  7th,  and  erected  for  it  at  Bourges  a  collegiate  house  of  secular
Canons.  But  so  easily  do  we  deteriorate,  that  within  a  few  years  they  had
degenerated  intoworldliness  and  licence,  and  were  expelled  by  the  order  of  Innocent
,md  replaced  by  Augustinian  Canons,  as  the  Memorials  Historiarum  says: —
"  In  the  year  1138  there  nourished  the  Order  of  Canons  of  S.  Victor  of  Paris,
whose  name  was  famous  throughout  the  world  for  the  high  character  and
great  learning  of  its  members,  whom  it  sent  forth  into  various  Churches
throughout  the  world,  as  a  fruitful  vine  gives  forth  its  branches  to  be  transplan
ted.  For  at  this  time  there  were  two  professed  Canons  made  prelates  of  the
Roman  Church;  the  Cardinals,  Hugh,  Bishop  of  Tusculum,  and  Master  Ivo,  as
well  as  nine  Abbots.  In  the  Church  of  S.  Satyrus,  at  Bourges,  Abbot  Ralph,''
etc.  The  Necrology  of  S.  Victor,  of  Paris,  adds  to  this,  on  the  5th  of  February,
the  name  of  "  Dom  Andrew,  Abbot  ot  S.  Satyrus,  and  Canon  of  our  Order."
Stephen,  Abbot  of  S.  Genevieve,  at  Paris,  and  afterwards  Bishop  of  Tournay,
commends  in  a  Letter  to  Pope  Lucius  III.  the  grave  and  regular  discipline  of  this
monastery.  Add  to  this  that  in  a  terrier  of  the  episcopal  estates  and  the  benefices
of  France  this  Abbey  is  said  to  be  under  the  rule  of  S.  Augustine.

3  We  must,  it  seems,  understand  this  of  the  right  o'  investiture  claimed  by
J.othaire,  and  resisted  by  Innocent.  Abbot  Conrad  of  Ursperg  says  that  "  at  this
very  time  the  Pope  went  to  Lothaire  to  seek  his  help  against  Peter  and  his  sup
porters."  Doubtless  the  Emperor  thought  this  too  good  an  opportunity  to  be  lost,
and  proceeded  to  demand  from  the  Pope  a  restoration  of  the  right  of  investiture,
which  had  been  held  for  so  long  by  his  predecessors.  The  Pope  accordingly  was
not  a  little  perplexed,  and  sorry  that  he  had  ever  come,  and  anxious,  too,  that  he
might  depart.  For  he  was  unable  to  grant  the  request  of  the  Emperor  in  a
matter  in  which  the  Church  had  before  suffered  so  many  troubles.  However.
by  the  intervention  of  S.  Bernard,  he  was  able  to  leave  the  Emperor  in  safety
Otto  of  Frisingen  gives  a  more  favourable  account  of  the  transaction  (lib.
vii.  c.  18).


476  LETTER CL.

turbers  of  the  church  of  Orleans,1  by  the  same  powerful
hand  in  the  last  few  days  ?  Truly  the  bow  of  Jonathan
turned  not  back,  nor  his  sword  returned  empty.  Neverthe
less,  by  this  word  the  king  indeed  was  disturbed,  but  not
all  Jerusalem  with  him.  He  himself  at  last  allowed  his
anger  to  cool.  He  was,  indeed,  fearful  and  scrupulous  of
taking  up  arms  against  the  Lord,  and  against  His  Anointed.
Your  majesty  has  been  exalted  above  the  heavens,  but  only
in  order  that  so  good  a  beginning  may  be  adorned  with  a
fitting  ending.  This,  indeed,  is  what  all  who  love  you  are
eagerly  looking  for,  and  they  are  demanding  its  speedy
arrival.

3.  With  equal  zeal,  and  with  as  powerful  an  arm,  it  is
necessary  for  help  to  be  immediately  lent  to  the  Church  of
Tours.  Otherwise  she  is  even  now  on  the  point  to  perish,
unless  you  speedily  help  her.  The  spirit  of  Gislebert2  lives

1  Who  these  were  we  learn  from  Letters  used  by  D'Achery  (Spicil.  Vol.
iii.,  p.  153)-  First,  from  a  Letter  of  Archembald,  Subdean  of  the  Church  of
Orleans,  to  Henry,  Archbishop  of  Sens,  we  gather  that  the  instigator  of  this
trouble  was  a  certain  John  of  Orleans,  who  afterwards  ordered  Archembald  to
be  put  to  death  (ep.  161),  and  who  had  been  intruded  into  the  office  of  Arch
deacon.  When  Archembald  and  other  clerks  opposed  him,  they  suffered  grievous
injuries,  and  the  loss  of  nearly  all  their  goods  at  the  hands  of  him  and  his  sup-
portLrs,  Bartholomew  Capicer,  Zacharias  Paganus,  the  Archdeacon,  James,  Sub-
deacon  of  S.  Anianus,  and  others.  Hence,  at  the  end  of  the  Letter  he  asks  th  it
"  full  justice  may  be  done  him  against  the  malefactors."  Archbishop  Henry,
to  whom  they  had  fled  for  help,  owing  to  the  See  of  Orleans  being  vacant,  was
asked  "  to  give  order  that  the  Church  which  had  been  defiled  with  bloodshed
and  sacrilege,  should  put  an  end  to  such  things,  or  suffer  interdict,  and  not  to
delay  to  avenge  these  men's  misdeeds,  which  affected  even  his  Lordship  the
Pope."  There  is  extant  also  another  Letter  of  the  same  tenor  sent  by  Geoffrey,
Bishop  of  Chartres,  to  the  same  Henry.  It  may  be  that  this  intruder  John
was  maintaining  his  position  by  the  support  of  the  King.  At  length,  however,
Pope  Innocent  entrusted  the  charge  of  this  matter  to  the  above-named  Geoffrey
of  Chartres.  acting  as  his  legate,  and  thus  compelled  the  guilty  to  make
satisfaction.

2  Gislebert  or  Gilbert,  the  predecessor  of  Hildebert,  who  was  translated,  A.D.
i  125,  from  the  See  of  Le  Mans  to  that  of  Tours,  which  he  held  for  six  years
and  six  months  (cf.  note  to  ep.  122).  On  his  death,  Philip,  nephew  of  Gislebert,
by  his  evil  attempts  on  the  See,  in  which  he  was  supported  by  Anacletus,  gave
occasion  for  the  writing  of  this  Letter  and  of  the  next,  which,  however,  was  the
first  written.  Philip  being  compelled  to  retire,  Hugh  was  canonically  elected
(cf.  Analect),  Vol.  iii.  p.  338).


LETTER CL.  477

again,  they  say,  in  Philip,  who  is  at  once  his  nephew
according  to  the  flesh,  and  the  heir  of  his  ambition.  With
what  a  lust  for  power  this  youth  burns  is  shown  by  the
protracted  and  cruel  tortures  inflicted  on  his  mother  church,
by  which  the  unhappy  man  has  almost  disembowelled  her,
in  order  that  he  may  be  brought  forth  to  honour.  How
ever,  by  the  will  of  God  an  end  has  at  last  been  put  to  his
misdoings,  that  is  to  say,  if  only  what  has  been  done
against  him,  as  justice  dictated,  and  his  wickedness  com
pelled,  and  peace  called  for,  be  ratified  by  Apostolic
authority.  But  God  forbid  that  the  benign  majesty  of  the
Holy  See  should  confound  its  faithful  servants,  to  whom
the  settling  of  this  matter  was  graciously  entrusted.  God
forbid  it  that  cruel  ambition  should  find  a  supporter  in  the
defender  of  innocence.  This  is  what  his  audacity  is  bidding
him  try  for,  this  is  what  he  madly  hopes  to  find.  Once  and
again  has  the  despiser  of  the  Apostolic  decree  eluded  the
stroke  of  justice  ;  and  does  he  now  again,  with  still  more
impudent  rashness,  venture  none  the  less  to  present  himself
before  the  face  of  your  equity?  Is  there  any  one  who
cannot  see  the  impiety  of  the  attempt  of  this  man,  who
places  no  confidence  whatever  in  righteousness,  to  attack
the  tower  of  strength  with  the  forces  of  mammon  ?  But
we  are  safe  ;  it  is  Innocent  who  is  to  be  tempted,  and  the
son  of  iniquity  shall  not  come  nigh  to  hurt  him.

4.  As  to  the  rest,  most  sweet  Father,  while  we  sigh  for
your  presence,  we  talk  to  each  other  of  the  memory  of  your
abundant  kindness  ;  the  one  consoles  us  for  the  want  of
the  other.  This  is  never  absent  from  our  hearts ;  it  is
often  in  our  mouths,  it  is  salt  to  every  speech,  it  soothes
the  ear,  sweetens  the  mouth,  refreshes  and  enkindles  our
hearts.  It  is  foremost  at  the  meetings  of  the  saints,  it  is
their  chief  topic  of  conversation  ;  it  lends  wings  to  their
petitions,  and  nerves  them  to  prayer.  And  now  I  pray
earnestly  for  you  and  yours  that  the  Eternal  One,  for  Whom
and  on  behalf  of  Whom  you  labour  in  time,  may  count  you
worthy  of  eternal  memory.  Amen.


47$  LETTER CLI.

LETTER  CLI.  (A.D. 1133.)
To  PHILIP,  THE  INTRUDED  ARCHBISHOP  OF  TOURS. l

He  expresses  the  great  grief  he  felt  that  Philip  should
attempt  to  gain  the  Archbishopric  of  Tours  by  illegitimate-
means.

I  am  grieved  for  you,  my  dear  Philip,  but  I  beseech  you
mock  not  at  my  grief.  For  if  by  any  chance  you  think  that
there  is  no  cause  for  grief,  then  you  are  the  more  to  be
grieved  for.  Whatever  you  may  think  about  yourself,  for
my  part  I  think  that  a  fount  of  tears  is  insufficient  to  lament
for  you.  My  grief  is  not  one  that  calls  for  ridicule,  but  for
compassion  ;  for  it  is  not  a  grief  for  flesh  and  blood,  not  for
the  loss  of  things  that  perish,  but  for  you  yourself,  Philip.
I  cannot  better  describe  the  greatness  of  my  grief  than  by
saying  that  Philip  is  the  cause  of  it.  And  when  I  say  this,
I  declare  the  great  lamentation  of  the  Church,  who  once
cherished  you  in  her  bosom,  as  a  lily  springing  up,  adorned
with  every  celestial  gift.  Who,  then,  was  there  that  did

1  "  On  the  death  of  Hildebert,  Bishop  of  Tours,  A.U.  1 137,  the  Canons  of  that
Church  were  expelled  by  violence  by  Count  Geoffrey.  Then  when  they  were  to
elect  another  Bishop  they  were  divided  into  two  parts.  For  some  of  them,
contrary  to  the  decrees  of  the  sacred  canons,  elected  a  certain  Philip,  nephew  of
the  ambitious  predecessor  of  Hildebert  in  the  same  See,  who  was  called  Gilbeit.
This  was  opposed  by  others.  Philip  immediately  hurried  away  to  the  pseudo-
pope  Anacletus  for  confirmation  and  consecration,  and  then  returned  to  Tours.
Meanwhile  Hugh,  a  wise  and  noble  man,  was  canonically  elected  by  the  wiser
part  of  the  same  clergy,  and  was  consecrated  in  Le  Mans  by  Guy  and  his
comprovincials.  When  Philip  heard  of  this  he  fled  secretly,  carrying  off  with
him  the  ornaments  of  the  Church."  The  above  is  taken  from  the  Acts  of  the
Bishops  of  Le  Mans  given  in  the  third  volume  of  the  Analccla.  While  all  this
was  going  on,  Bernard,  who  was  then  staying  at  Viterbo,  wrote  this  Letter  to
Philip.  Then  he,  having  become  more  reckless,  harassed  the  Church  of  Tours
by  his  ambition,  on  the  death  of  Anacletus,  and  the  Saint  wrote  in  the  following
year,  1138,  the  preceding  Letter  to  Pope  Innocent  against  him.  But  under
Archbishop  Hugh,  who  at  length  silenced  Philip,  that  happened  which  Innocent
III.  speaks  of  (lib.  iii.  ep.  79)  :  "  The  party  of  D61  has  added  that  Eugenius  III.,
our  predecessor  of  good  memory,  entrusted  to  Abbot  Bernard,  of  Clairvaux,  of
happy  memory,  the  task  of  allaying  the  controversy  between  the  Churches,
whose  decision  the  Church  of  Tours  refused  to  abide  by."  This  Letter  was
written  long  afterwards  by  Innocent  III.  in  the  cause  of  the  Church  of  Tours
against  the  metropolis  of  D61.


LETTER CLI.  479

not  loudly  proclaim  you  to  be  a  youth  of  good  hope,  a
young  man  of  good  disposition  ?  But,  alas  !  the  fair
promise  has  disappeared.  From  what  hope  has  France,
who  bore  and  nourished  you,  fallen  !  O,  did  you  but
know  !  But  if  you  would  apply  your  heart  unto  wisdom,
you  would  also  learn  to  grieve,  and  your  grief  would
prevent  mine  from  being  sterile.  I  should  go  on  if  I  were
to  give  way  to  my  feelings,  but  I  do  not  wish  to  say  much
while  in  uncertainty,  or  to  tight  as  one  that  beats  the  air.
But  I  have  written  this  that  you  may  know  my  affection
for  you,  and  may  learn  that  I  am  near  you,  if  perchance  God
should  inspire  you  with  a  desire  for  a  conference,  and  if
you  should  be  willing  to  grant  me  what  I  greatly  long  for,
an  interview.  I  am  at  Viterbo,1  and  I  hear  that  you  are
staying  at  Rome.  Vouchsafe  to  write  back  to  me  to  say
how  you  receive  this  letter  of  mine,  that  I  may  know  what
I  ought  to  do,  whether  I  am  to  grieve  more  or  less.  But  if
you  despise  everything,  and  will  hi  no  way  listen  to  me,  I
for  my  part  shall  not  lose  the  fruit  of  my  letter,  for  it
proceeds  from  charity  ;  but  you  will  have  to  give  an  answer
for  your  contempt  before  the  dread  tribunal.


LETTER  CLII. (Circa  A.D. 1135.)

To POPE INNOCENT, ON BEHALF OF THE BISHOP  OF

TROVES.

The  indiscipline  of  the  clergy  increases  with  the  slothful
indulgence  of  the  Bishops.  The  Bishop  of  Troyes  is  hated
by  a  part  of  his  clergy  because  he  has  corrected  them.

The  evil  living  of  the  clergy,  the  mother  of  which  is
Episcopal  negligence,  is  everywhere  disturbing  and  weaken
ing  the  Church.  The  Bishops  give  what  is  holy  to  dogs,
and  cast  pearls  before  swine,  who  turn  again  and  rend

i  Bernard  was  staying,  therefore,  at  Viterbo,  in  Etruria,  and  in  the  year  1133,
when  he  was  sent  by  Innocent  into  Germany  to  Lothaire ;  and  from  this  place
the  preceding  Letter  to  Innocent  seems  to  have  been  written.  For  more  about
his  stay  at  Viterbo  see  Sermon  2  in  Cantica,  n.  14.


48°  LETTER CLII.

them.  But  it  is  only  right  that  they  should  have  to  suffer
from  those  that  they  foster.  They  do  not  correct  those
whom  they  enrich  with  the  goods  of  the  Church,  and  there
fore  they  are  grieved  and  wearied  with  their  misconduct.
The  clergy  are  made  wealthy  from  other  men's  labours  ;
they  eat  the  fruit  of  the  earth  and  give  no  money  for  it,  and
their  iniquity  cometh  from  their  own  fat  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  7,
VULG.).  The  old  saying  of  the  Scripture  exactly  applies  to
them  of  the  present  day,  The  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  to
drink,  and  rose  up  to  play  (i  Cor.  x.  7).  A  mind  that  has
accustomed  itself  to  delights,  and  that  has  not  trained  itself
with  the  disciplinary  rod,  contracts  many  a  stain.  And
what  is  more,  if  you  attempt  to  rub  off  its  long-standing
rust,  they  will  not  suffer  you  to  touch  it  with  even  the  tips
of  your  fingers  ;  but  as  it  is  written,  Jeshurun  waxed  fat,
and  kicked  (Deut.  xxxii.  15).  False  witnesses  have  risen
up,  men  whose  delight  is  ever  to  carp  at  the  lives  of  others
and  neglect  their  own.  Your  son  supplicates  for  the
Bishop,  whose  sole  fault  in  this  quarrel,  unless  I  am  mis
taken,  has  been  that  he  has  rebuked  the  clergy  for  their
evil  lives.  Thus  much  for  the  Bishop;  now  let  me  offer
excuses  for  myself.  My  father  knows  that  I  did  not  receive
before  the  Nativity  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  his  gracious  letter,
in  which  he  preferred  to  courteously  entreat  me  to  come  to
him,  when  he  might  have  ordered  me.  And  so  I  do  not
say,  I  have  bought  five  yoke  of  oxen,  or  I  have  bought  a
piece  of  ground,  or  I  have  married  a  wife ;  but  I  confess
simply,  what,  indeed,  you  are  not  ignorant  of,  that  I  am
feeding  my  children  with  milk,  and  therefore  I  do  not  see
how  I  can  leave  them  without  running  the  risk  of  causing
scandal,  or  leaving  them  exposed  to  danger.


LETTER  CLIII. (A.D. 1135.)
To  BERNARD  DESPORTES/  OF  THE  CARTHUSIAN  ORDER.
His  correspondent  had  asked  for  an  Exposition  of  the

i  In  the  Codex Cislerciencis  we  read:  "It should  be  recollected that  there
were two Bernard Desportes, one the prior, the  other the sub-prior, who


LETTER CLIII.  481

Canticles.  He  replies  by  pleading  his  inability  to  perform
so  great  a  task,  and  to  satisfy  the  expectation  of  others.

i.  You  ask  importunately,  but  I  refuse  as  constantly,  not  as
despising  you,  but  as  sparing  myself.  I  wish  that  I  could  pro
duce  something  that  was  worthy  of  your  eager  wish,  and  of
your  intelligence.  I  would,  if  I  could,  give  for  you  the  light  of
my  eyes  ;  yea,  my  soul  itself,  my  dearest  friend,  my  brother,
to  be  embraced  in  the  bowels  of  Christ  by  me  most  of  all
with  the  fulness  of  spiritual  love.  But  where  is  the  ability,
or  when  shall  I  have  leisure  enough  to  undertake  what  you
ask  for?  Nor  do  you  seem  to  ask  for  anything  trifling  or
worthless,  such  as  lies  in  my  power.  You  would  not  be  thus
pressing  for  what  was  of  little  moment.  For  your  numerous
letters,  and  the  eagerness  that  animates  them,  sufficiently
show  your  wish.  Therefore,  the  more  ardent  I  see  your
feelings  to  be,  the  more  do  I  shrink  from  gratifying  them.
Why  is  this  ?  I  am  afraid  of  bringing  forth  a  ridiculously
insignificant  mouse,  while  you  expect  great  things.  I  am
afraid  of  this,  and  this  is  the  cause  of  my  hesitation.  And
what  wonder  is  it  that  I  am  afraid  of  giving  what  I  should
be  ashamed  to  publish?  I  am  unwilling,  I  confess,  to  give
you  anything,  because  I  think  I  should  be  rather  issuing
some  contemptible  work  than  publishing  something  that
would  be  useful.  Who  can  wish  to  give  what  would  only
cause  shame  to  the  giver,  without  benefiting  the  receiver  ?
Willingly  do  I  give  what  I  have,  but  unwillingly  do  I  throw

afterwards  was  made  a  Cardinal.''  The  prior  had  been  an  Ambrosian  monk,
and  founded  the  Carthusian  Port,?,  A.D.  1115.  We  read  of  him  in  the  Necrology  :
— "On  the  !2thof  Febiuary  died  Bernard,  first  Prior  of  Portae,  A.D.  1125."
Long  before  that  time  he  had  resigned  his  office,  and  was  succeeded  by  another
Bernard  as  Prior  of  Portae,  after  having  resigned  the  see  of  Bellay,  as  Peter
Francis  ChinHet  says  in  his  Mannale  Solitarinrum,  who  also  thinks  that  this  and
the  next  Letter  were  directed  to  this  second  Bernard.  He  adds,  moreover,  a
third  Bernard  during  the  same  period,  after  the  blessed  Nathelmus,  prior  of  the
same  place,  which  Bernard  was  afterwards  Bishop  of  Die.  It  is  evident  from
n.  2  of  this  Letter  that  the  Bernard  to  whom  this  Letter  was  writteiij  as  well  as
the  following,  was  not  prior  in  the  year  1135,  when  the  Letter  was  penned,  for
Bernard  salutes  "  my  lord  the  prior/'  i.e.,  Bernard,  the  first  inhabitant  and  Prior
of  Portae.  Portae  is  in  Beauje,  in  the  Diocese  of  Lyons,  near  the  Rhone,  three
leagues  from  Bellay,  the  Kpiscopal  city. —  Cf.  ep.  250.


482  LP:TTER  CLIII.

it  away.  I  know  that  when  great  things  are  expected
lesser  things  are  generally  displeasing.  But  what  is  not
gratefully  received  is  thrown  away,  not  given.

2.  It  is  your  aim,  since  you  have  leisure  and  freedom,  to
seek  from  all  quarters  for  fuel  for  the  fire  with  which  you
burn,  that  you  may  burn  the  more,  and  fulfil  the  will  of  the
Lord,  who  says,  And  what  do  I  wish,  except  that  it  burn
brightly?  (S.  Luke  xii.  49,  VULG.).  I  praise  your  aim,  but
not  if  you  seek  to  obtain  it  in  a  quarter  where  you  are
likely  to  complain  afterwards  of  having  been  disappointed.
You  err  if  you  seek  it  with  me.  I  ought  rather  to  beg  for
such  fuel  from  you.  I  know,  indeed,  how  much  more
blessed  it  is  to  give  than  to  receive ;  but  that  is  true  only
when  what  is  given  is  honourable  to  the  giver,  expedient
for  the  receiver,  and  such  a  gift  you  will  in  vain  seek  from
me.  But  such  as  I  have,  I  am  afraid  that  if  I  brought  it
forward,  you  would  be  ashamed  of  having  wished  for  it,
and  would  repent  of  having  asked  for  it.  But  still,  will  it
not  after  all  be  better  for  you  to  make  my  excuses  to  your
self  ?  Let  your  own  eyes  judge  for  themselves.  I  yield  to
your  importunity,  to  take  away  suspicion.  I  am  dealing
with  a  friend.  I  no  longer  spare  my  modesty,  and  hence
forth  while  your  desire  is  gratified,  I  will  not  make  mention
of  my  folly.  I  am  having  transcribed  for  you  some  ser
mons  lately  delivered  on  the  beginning  of  the  Canticles,
and  I  send  them  to  you  before  they  are  made  public.
When  I  have  time,  according  as  Christ  assigns  me  my  tasks,
I  will  endeavour  to  proceed  with  this  work.  Ask  this  for
me  in  your  prayers.  I  wrarmly  salute  through  you  my  lord
and  father  your  Prior,  with  the  rest  of  your  brethren,  and  I
humbly  entreat  them  to  remember  me  before  God.


LETTER CLIV. (Circa  A.D. 1136.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  excuses  himself  for  having  been  unable,  on  account
of  business,  to  visit  the  Chartreuse,  as  he  had  promised.
He  sends  some  of  his  Sermons  on  the  Canticles.


LETTER CLIV.  483

I  can  no  longer  conceal  the  sorrow  of  my  heart,  nor
hide  my  distress,  from  you,  my  very  dear  Bernard.  1
recollect  my  long-standing  promise ;  it  has  been  my
purpose  and  strong  desire  to  pass  by  your  way,  to  visit
again  those  whom  my  soul  loveth,  to  ask  for  rest  on  my
journey,  some  strength  to  bear  my  labours,  some  remedy
for  my  sins  ;  and  in  punishment  of  my  sinfulness  it  has
come  to  pass  that  though  I  have  the  will,  yet  I  have  not  the
power  to  visit  you.  Be  assured,  O  man  of  God,  that  this
is  by  no  means  due  to  the  disinclination,  or  idleness,  or
negligence  of  your  friend,  but  that  a  cause  has  intervened
which  might  not  be  neglected,  and  that  was  the  cause  of
God.  None  the  less  I  am  devoured  by  vexation  as  by  a
gnawing  worm,  and  my  heaviness  is  ever  in  my  sight.
And,  indeed,  I  have  more  than  enough  of  other  troubles,
but  none  so  great  as  this.  It  is  more  than  the  toils  of
travelling,  the  unpleasantness  of  the  heat,  the  anxieties  of
my  affairs.  Lo  !  I  have  opened  my  wound  to  a  friend  ;  it
is  yours  now  to  sympathize  with  me,  to  bear  with  me  what
I  suffer,  that  I  may  be  relieved.  I  earnestly  ask  for  your
prayers,  and  for  those  of  the  saints  who  are  with  you.  I
am  sending  on  to  you  the  promised  sermons  on  the  begin
ning  of  the  Canticles,  which  you  asked  for.  And  when  you
have  read  them,  I  beg  you  to  give  me  your  advice  as  soon
as  possible  whether  I  ought  to  give  them  up  or  proceed
with  them.

LETTER  CLV. (Circa A.D. 1135.)

To  POPK  INNOCENT,  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  SAME
BERNARD  WHEN  ELECTED  BiSHOP.1

Bernard  Dcsportcs,  u'/io  is  destined  for  a  Bishopric  in
Lombard)',  though  well  worthy  of  tliat  honour,  is  not

1  This  was  perhaps  to  the  See  of  Pavia,  which  at  that  time  was  vacant
through  the  death  of  Peter.  This  election  did  not  hold,  but  S.  Bernard's  advice
was  followed,  and  Bernard  Desportes  was  elected  to  the  See  of  Bellay,  which
dignity  he  resigned  A.U.  1 147,  as  has  been  said  above,  for  the  office  of  Prior  of
Portae.


484  LETTER CLV.

altogether  Jit  for  such  a  place, and  would  be  better  re
served  for  a  Jitter  ph


lace.


I  have  heard,  reverend  Father,  that  Bernard  Desportes,
a  man  beloved  of  God  and  men,  is  by  your  irresistible  call
to  undertake  the  office  and  work  of  a  Bishop.  It  is  pro
bably  true,  for  it  well  becomes  your  Apostleship  to  bring
into  the  light  a  light  that  was  hidden  ;  lest  he  who  is  capable
of  drawing  others  to  the  Life  should  live  for  himself  alone.
For  how  long  is  one  that  can  give  light  to  others  to  lie
concealed  and  only  burn  ?  Let  it  be  placed,  if  you  see
good,  on  a  candlestick,  that  it  may  be  a  burning  and  a
shining  light ;  but  at  the  same  time  let  it  not  be  in  a  place
where  the  force  of  the  storms  is  great,  lest  it  be  perchance
extinguished.  Who  is  there  that  does  not  know  of  the
evil-living  and  turbulence  of  the  Lombards  ?  Who  knows
them  better  than  yourself  ?  You  know  better  than  I  how
weakened  is  the  episcopal  power  there,  how  rebellious  a
house  it  is.  What  am  I  to  think  is  likely  to  be  done  by  a
man  whose  health  is  shattered,  and  who  has  been  ac
customed  to  a  hermit's  quiet,  in  the  midst  of  a  barbarous,
riotous,  and  passionate  populace  ?  When  are  such  holiness
and  such  iniquity  likely  to  agree?  or  when  will  such
simplicity  and  such  hypocrisy  live  in  concord  ?  Let  him  be
reserved,  if  you  see  good,  for  a  more  congenial  sphere,  and
for  another  flock,  that  he  may  profit  that  over  which  he
presides;  and  let  not  hasty  action  destroy  the  fruit  which  in
due  time  he  will  be  able  to  bring  forth.


LETTER CLVI. (Circa A.D. 1135 OR 1136.)

To  THE  SAME,  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  CLERGY  OF
ORLEANS.

For  how  long  is  the  unhappy  Church  of  Orleans  to  knock
at  the  heart  of  the  Father  of  the  fatherless  and  the  Judge  of
widows  ?  How  long  now  has  the  noble  virgin  of  Israel


LKTTKR CLVII.  485

been  lying  in  the  dust,  bereft  not  only  of  her  husband,1  but
also  of  the  dear  pledges  of  his  affection  !  Alas  !  there  is
none  to  lift  her  up.  How  long  will  it  be  before  you  send
away  the  children  crying  after  you  with  their  unhappy
mother  ?  I  mean  those  who  having  lost  their  houses  and
their  goods  have  only  saved  their  lives  by  flight.  Why
hangs  back  the  powerful  hand,  which  never  yet  has  shrunk
from  avenging  the  oppressed,  or  from  smiting  the  haughty?
Why  delays  it,  I  ask,  to  rescue  the  afflicted  from  the  hand
of  the  strong,  and  to  mete  out  punishment  to  the  proud  ?
Even  if  it  delays,  let  it  not  rest  idle  for  ever.  Help  that
has  been  withheld  should,  when  it  is  given,  come  in  greater
force,  and  render  more  thorough  service.  Let  this  be  the
reward,  if  you  see  good,  for  painful  waiting,  that  both  those
who  in  their  arrogance  have  abused  the  patience  of  the
Apostolic  See,  should  in  the  end  gain  nothing  by  it  ;  and
also  that  those  who  have  patiently  endured,  trusting  in  your
word,  should  never  have  any  cause  to  repent  them  of  their
patience.


LETTER CLVII. (A.D. 1135.)
To  HAIMERIC,  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  SAME.

To  his  special  friend  HAIMERIC,  by  the  grace  of  God
Cardinal-deacon,  and  Chancellor  of  the  Apostolic  See,  his
Brother  BERNARD,  of  Clairvaux,  sends  greeting,  and  his
wish  that  he  may  shine  ever  more  and  more  with  the  light
of  wisdom  and  virtue.

If  I  did  not  know  your  sympathy  with  the  afflicted,  and
your  indignation  against  wrong-doers,  I  would  at  every
opportunity  importunately  beseech  you  on  behalf  of  Master

1  After  the  death  of  Bishop  John,  which  took  place  A.D.  1 133,  the  See  was
for  four  years  vacant,  according  to  the  Annul*  of  Orleans  by  Charles  Soussay.
When  Hugh,  the  Dean,  who  had  been  elected,  was  returning  from  the  King's
Court,  he  was  set  upon  and  killed  by  ruffians  on  the  road,  as  Ordericus  Vitalis
says  (A.D.  1134).  This  Letter  and  the  next  were  written  by  Bernard  before  his
third  journey  to  Rome  in  A.D.  1 137.


486  LETTER CLVIII.

William,  of  Meun,1  and  his  companions  ;  I  would  stir  you
up  against  their  oppressors  and  calumniators.  But  as  it  is,
it  is  enough  to  have  mentioned  them  to  you  ;  it  is  yours
swiftly  to  act  as  necessity  requires.


LETTER CLVIII. (A.D. 1135.)

To POPE INNOCENT, ON THE MURDER OF MASTER
THOMAS,  PRIOR  OF  S.  VICTOR,  OF  PARIS.S

To  his  most  loving  Father  and  Lord,  INNOCENT,  Supreme
Pontiff,  BERNARD,  unworthy  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  sends
greeting,  with  the  assurance  of  his  prayers  and  his  feeble
services.

1  Maudunum,  or  Magdunum  (Meun),  is  a  town  near  Orleans,  on  the  Loire,
where  there  was  a  Collegiate  Church  of  S.  Lifardus,  and  a  palace  belonging
to  the  Bishop  of  Orleans.

2  S.  Bernard  in  this  Letter  earnestly  exhorts  the  Pope  to  exercise  his  power  and
punish  the  sacrilegious  persons  who  had  murdered  Thomas,  Prior  of  S.  Victor,
of  Paris. He  hints  at  the  occasion  of  the  murder,  viz.,  that  Thomas,  fired  with
xeal  for  ecclesiastical  discipline,  withstood  the  covetousness  and  unjust  exactions
with  which  the  Archdeacon  of  Paris  was  oppressing  the  clergy. Inflamed  with
hatred  at this, the  Archdeacon meditated  revenge, until  his  nephews,  either
sharing  his  vindictive  hatred,  and  so  identifying  themselves  with  the  cause  of
their  kinsman,  or  hired  and  urged  by  him  to  the  wickedness,  attacked  Thomas
on  the  road,  and,  indeed,  in  the  very  company  of  the  Bishop. Stephen,  Bishop
of  Paris,  at  once  excommunicated  the  author  of  the  murder  with  his  aiders  and
abettors  ;  and,  deeply  stirred  by  the  enormity  of  the  crime,  he  for  a  time  retired
to  Clairvaux  as  though  to  seek  to  alleviate  his  sorrow,  and  from  thence  sent  the
following  Letter  to  Geoffrey,  Legate  of  the  holy  Roman  Church,  and  Bishop  of
Chartres : —

"  To  GEOFFREY,  by  the  grace  of  God  Bishop  of  Chartres,  and  Legate  of  the
Apostolic  See,  STHPIIEN,  by  the  same  grace,  unworthy  minister  of  the  Church
of  Paris,  and  now  an  ill-starred  herald  of  misery  and  affliction,  sends  greeting
in  the  Lord.

"  i.  I  know  not  how  to  find  fitting  words  to  bring  to  your  ears  and  heart  the
weight  of  this  new  calamity.  My  news  is  of  things  hard  and  difficult  to  speak
of,  painful  to  all  to  whom  the  reproach  of  Jesus  Christ  and  our  holy  Mother
Church  is  a  hard  and  grievous  thing,  and  especially  to  us  placed  under  the
habit  and  seal  of  religion,  to  whom  these  things  are  likely  to  be  more  serious,
as  the  injury  more  specially  affects  us  ;  I  speak  of  the  fall  of  one  man,  whose
death  portends  oppression  and  ruin  to  us  all.  Master  Thomas,  Prior  of  the
monastery  of  S.  Victor,  a  man  well  tried  and  proved,  beloved  as  a  friend  by  all


LETTER CLVIII.  487

v;oo(l  men,  my  most  devoted  and  zealous  coadjutor  and  champion  in  the  defence
of  the  Holy  Church,  has  been,  you  must  know,  cut  off  by  the  hands  of  wicked
men,  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but,  as  we  have  sure  and  certain  hope,  alive  in
Christ.  For  Christ,  in  whose  cause  he  died,  will  not  be  absent  from  him  in
glory  ;  for  as  he  breathed  out  his  last  in  my  arms,  he  protested  with  a  loud
voice  that  he  died  for  the  sake  of  righteousness,  most  confident  of  his  own
righteousness  past  and  present,  in  which  he  had  fought  against  the  ungodly
within  the  Church  of  Christ,  leaving  a  proof  to  us  that  in  that  righteousness  he
would  be  perfected.  This  was  the  first  and  this  was  the  last  cause  of  his
sufferings  ;  for  he  was  then  with  me  on  behalf  of  righteousness  itself.  For  I,
mainly  by  his  urgency,  which  he  was  wont  to  show  in  these  things,  and  with
the  command  and  assent  of  the  King,  who  had  also  been  similarly  moved  by
him,  had  been  to  correct  and  set  in  order  the  house  of  nuns  at  Chelles,  having
taken  with  me  several  Religious,  viz.,  the  Abbot  of  S.  Victor,  and  of  S.  Magloire,
and  the  sub-prior  of  S.  Mai  tin's,  and  many  other  monks,  canons,  and  clerks  ;
and  when  the  business  had  been  finished  to  the  best  of  our  ability,  and  I  was  on
my  way  home,  as  we  were  near  the  Castle  of  the  lord  Stephen,  which  is  called
Gournay,  we  were  suddenly  attacked  by  the  nephews  of  Archdeacon  Theobald,
who  were  lying  in  wait  for  us.  And  as  we  were  going  on  our  way,  in  peace
and  unarmed  (it  being  the  Lord's  Day),  they  suddenly  rushed  on  us  with  drawn
swords,  and  paying  no  respect  to  God,  nor  His  holy  day.  nor  to  me,  nor  to  the
Religious  with  me,  they  slew  the  innocent  in  the  midst  of  us,  and  threatened
me  too  with  death  if  I  did  not  speedily  take  me  out  of  their  sight.  But  we,
having  more  trust  in  God,  threw  ourselves  into  the  midst  among  their  swords,
and  rescued  him,  half-dead  and  dreadfully  hacked.  Then  standing  round  him
we  bade  him  make  his  confession,  and  forgive  the  wickedness  of  his  enemies.
Then  he  joyfully  forgave  all  who  had  sinned  against  him,  and  sought  forgive
ness  for  his  own  sins,  and  received  the  communion  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of
Christ,  and  then  testified  with  a  loud  voice  before  all  that  he  died  for  righteous
ness'  sake,  and  so  gave  up  the  ghost.

"  2.  Hence,  therefore,  although  we  have  sure  and  certain  hope  of  his  salvation
and  glory,  wherein  we  rejoice  and  although  we  know  that  right  dear  in  the
sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  his  saints,  yet  the  grief  and  deep  mourning,
which  are  consuming  us  for  the  loss  of  our  friend,  and  the  great  dishonour  done
to  us  all.  are  tempered  by  no  consolation  that  we  can  feel.  For  I  behold  myself
slain  in  him,  and  even  much  more  slain  than  he,  for  by  his  death  I  see  myself
exposed  to  dangers  from  which  he  has  been  set  free.  It  remains,  therefore,
that  since  you  see  me  now  desolate  and  in  misery,  you  delay  not  to  come  at
once  to  console  and  counsel  me.  For  as  I  cannot  bear  to  see  the  place  of  so
detestable  a  crime,  1  have  fled  to  Clairvaux,  and  shall  await  you  there,  that  we
may  take  counsel  together  what  we  ought  to  do  to  wipe  out  this  intolerable
dishonour  done  to  our  holy  Church.  This  onslaught  threatens  us  all  with
death,  and  it  will  come  unless  the  Lord  prevent  it.  I,  therefore,  bid  you,  and
with  all  my  power  beseech  you,  to  hasten  without  any  delay  to  Clairvaux,  for
dangers,  which  brook  no  laggard  counsel,  are  threatening  me  on  every  side."

Having  received  this  Letter,  Geoffrey  hurried  to  Clairvaux,  and  by  Apostolic
command  bade  the  Bishops  of  Rheims,  Rouen,  Tours,  and  Sens  to  assemble  in


488  LETTER CLVIII.

force  at  a  Synod  to  be  held  at  Jouarre.  Then  when  they  assembled,  Hugh,
Bishop  of  Grenoble,  and  the  community  of  Chartreuse,  wrote,  "asking  and
beseeching  them  to  unsheathe  the  sword  of  ecclesiastical  rigour  against  the
sacrilegious  murderers."  Innocent,  too,  informed  of  the  facts  by  S.  Bernard,  re
plied  to  the  decree  of  the  Fathers,  confirming  it  and  making  it  still  more  severe.
John  Picard,  in  his  notes  to  the  Letter  of  Innocent,  and  others  who  follow  him,
assign  this  murder  to  the  year  1 130,  but  it  is  placed  by  Baronius  in  the  year  1135.
But  this  (former)  opinion  cannot  be  admitted.  For  from  ep.  159  it  is  evident
that  Thomas  was  killed  on  a  Sunday,  and  on  the  2Oth  August,  as  we  read  in  the
Necrology  of  S.  Victor  :  "  The  anniversary  of  the  death  of  Magister  Thomas,
Prior  of  this  Church,  who  was  cruelly  slain  by  the  enemies  of  righteousness  for
his  defence  of  righteousness,  and  so  both  by  his  life  and  death  he  left  behind  him
a  noble  example  of  an  honourable  and  patient  life  for  his  successors  to  strive  to
imitate."  On  Picard's  authority,  too,  the  Kalendar  of  S.  Guinail,  of  Corbeii,
agrees  with  this.  The  day,  therefore,  that  was  consecrated  by  the  blood  of
Thomas  ought  to  bear  the  same  dominical  letter  as  the  year  1130;  but  it  does
not,  for  the  dominical  letter  of  that  year  is  E,  but  the  corresponding  letter  of
20th  August  is  A.  Picard  adds  two  other  arguments  in  support  of  his  con
tention.  One  that  the  death  of  Prior  Thomas  preceded  that  of  Hugh,  of
Grenoble,  since  he  wrote  with  the  Carthusians  to  the  Fathers  assembled  in
council  at  Jouarre  to  urge  them  to  avenge  Thomas.  But  he  says  that  the  Life  of
S.  Hugh,  by  Guy,  Abbot  of  the  Grand  Chartreuse,  places  his  death  in  the  year
i  132  ;  and  therefore  the  death  of  Thomas  is  to  be  referred,  not,  indeed,  to  the
year  1131,  when  Innocent  was  in  Gaul,  accompanied  the  whole  time  by
Bernard,  and  would  not  need  to  be  petitioned  by  so  many  letters,  but  to  the  year
i  130,  in  which  Innocent  was  made  Pontiff.  The  second  argument  is  that
Innocent,  about  the  beginning  of  the  year  1131,  visited  Paris,  and  went  to  the
Church  of  S.  Victor,  and  ordered  the  body  of  the  blessed  Thomas  to  be  carried
from  the  cloister  into  the  Church  on  March  9th.  It  had  been  buried,  therefore,
in  the  August  of  the  preceding  year.  But  neither  argument  is  conclusive;
certainly  not  the  first.  For  what  is  there  to  hinder  our  saying  that  this  Letter
was  written  by  the  successor  of  S.  Hugh,  who  bore  the  same  name  ?  Nor  can
the  second  be  pressed  closely.  For,  granted  that  Innocent  ordered  the  body  to  be
moved  into  a  more  honourable  place,  yet  it  cannot  be  affirmed  that  he  did  so  in
person  ;  nay,  the  mandate  was  sent  from  Italy,  as  is  manifest  from  D'Achery
(Spicii.,  Vol.  v.  ep.  on  p.  567),  where  we  find  that  he  rebukes  the  Archbishops
of  Rheims  and  Sens  for  their  delay  in  carrying  out  the  excommunication  of  the
murderers  of  Thomas.  He  concludes  :  "  Therefore  we  command  that  the  body
of  the  above-named  good  man,  who  now  bears  testimony  to  his  righteousness
and  innocence  before  the  Supreme  Judge,  and  whose  life  was  a  life  of  obedience,
and  who  was  slain  in  the  service  of  his  Bishop,  be  honourably  buried  in  his
Church.  Given  at  Pisa  Dec.  21."  Therefore  we  must  say  that  this  murder
took  place,  not  in  the  year  1 130,  but  in  the  year  1 133,  in  which  the  dominical
letter  E  corresponds  with  the  letter  of  the  2Oth  August,  and  in  which  year,  too,
a  second  Hugh  was  occupying  the  See  of  Grenoble  in  succession  to  S.  Hugh  ;
in  which  Innocent  was  at  Pisa  for  the  Council  held  there  ;  in  which,  lastly,
Bernard  was  sent  from  Italy  into  Germany  to  arrange  terms  of  peace  between


LETTER CLVIII.  489

i.  The  wild  beast  which  has  laid  waste  Joseph,  unable  to
meet  the  eager  attack  of  our  dogs,  is  said  to  have  fled  to
you  for  shelter.  What  madness  has  seized  the  wretched
creature,  a  wanderer,  and  stranger,  and  fugitive  on  earth,
to  cause  it  to  fly  thither  of  all  places  where  it  should  have
most  to  fear !  Most  accursed  one  !  thinkest  thou  that  the
seat  of  strictest  justice  is  a  cave  of  robbers  or  a  lurking-
place  of  lions?  Do  you  dare,  with  jaws  still  foaming,  and
mouth  yet  marked  with  the  blood  of  the  son  you  have  but
just  now  slain,  to  flee  to  the  breast  of  the  mother  and
appear  before  the  eyes  of  the  father  ?  Yet  if  it  is  penance
that  he  seeks,  let  it  not  be  denied  him.  If  it  is  a  hearing,
let  him,  if  you  please,  obtain  such  an  one  as  Moses  gave
the  people  worshipping  their  molten  image,  or  such  as
Phinehas  gave  the  fornicating  Israelite,  or  such  as  Matta-
thias  gave  to  him  who  offered  sacrifice  to  devils,  or,  to
take  an  example  from  your  own  house,  such  as  Ananias
and  Sapphira  gained  from  blessed  Peter,  such  an  audience,
lastly,  as  the  Saviour  gave  those  who  bought  and  sold  in
the  temple.  Do  we  not  know  that  the  sins  of  certain  men
go  before  them  to  judgment?  Does  not  the  voice  of  your
brother's  blood  cry  out  against  you  from  the  ground?  I
believe  that  the  spirit  of  our  martyr,  whom  but  a  few  days
since  you  cruelly  delivered  to  death,  joins  with  the  souls  of
the  others  who  have  been  slain,  in  crying  with  a  loud  voice
from  under  the  altar,  and  in  demanding  vengeance,  and
that  the  more  urgently  as  his  blood  has  been  more  newly-
poured  forth  on  the  earth.

2. But  he  will  reply.  Was  it I  who  actually  slew  him  ?

Lothaire  and  Conrad,  and  having  returned  into  Gaul  stayed  there  long-  enough
to  be  present  at  a  Cistercian  Chapter,  duly  held  in  this  year  on  the  i^th
September,  as  appears  from  the  address  of  a  Letter  sent  in  this  year  by  Peter  of
Cluny  to  the  said  Chapter  (Pet.  Vep.  lib.  i.  ep.  36),  at  which  he  is  spoken  of  as
being  present.  Ordericus,  too,  favours  this  opinion  of  mine  (lib.  xiii.,  A.D.
1134),  who,  in  giving  a  summary  of  several  events  which  had  taken  place  in
the  preceding  year,  after  naming  the  death  of  John,  Bishop  of  Orleans,  and
Hugh,  the  Dean,  his  successor-designate,  which  took  place,  according  to  the
Annals  of  Orleans,  in  A.D.  1133,  goes  on  to  say:  "Then,  too,  was  killed
Thomas,  of  S.  Victor,  a  man  of  great  authority."

VOL. II.  32


4QO  LETTER CLVIII.

No,  not  directly,  but  it  was  your  friends  who  did,  and  for
your  sake. Whether  at  your  instigation,  may  God  see  and
judge. If  you  are  to  be  excused,  whose  teeth  are  spears
and  arrows,  whose  tongue is  a  sharp  sword,  then  the  Jews
ought  not  to  be  held  guilty  of  the  death  of  Christ,  inasmuch
as  they  were  wary  enough  to  withhold  their  hands  from  it.
This  man  had  been  wont  to  abuse  his  office  of  Archdeacon,
to  grind  the  presbyters  with  unlawful  exactions,  and  when
this  was  put  an end  to  by  the zeal  and  diligence  of  the
blessed  Thomas,  a  lover  and  upholder  of  righteousness,  this
man held  him in hatred, and  was often in the habit of
threatening  him  with  death. Many,  whose  testimony  is  not
to  be  rejected,  declare  that  they  have  heard  him  so  threaten.
Lastly, let him  say, if he  can,  what  other  complaint  his
nephews  had  against  Thomas,  that  they  should lay  their
impious  hands  on  the  saint  of  the  Lord. If,  then,  the  man
who,  as  nearly  all  suspect, is  the  occasion,  the  instigator,
and  the  plotter  of  this  wickedness  is  to  go,  as  he  impudently
presumes, unpunished by  the Apostolic authority, what
provocation  will  be  given  to  sin  in  the  Church  without  fear
of  punishment  ? One  of  two  things  must  inevitably  follow  :
either  that  none  of  the  noble  or  powerful  of  this  world  will
hereafter  be  admitted  to  ecclesiastical  honours, or  that  the
clergy  will  everywhere  have  free  permission  to  abuse  their
sacred  office  for  every  unworthy  end ; lest,  perchance,  any
one  kindled  with  zeal  for  God  should  attempt  to  present
them,  and  for  so  acting  be  slain  as  a  champion  of  righteous
ness  by  the  soldier's  sword. And  then  what  is  left  for  the
spiritual  sword,  for  ecclesiastical  censure,  for  the  law  and
discipline  of  Christ,  for  the  reverence  due  to  the  priesthood,
and  for  the  fear  of  God,  if  no  one  dares  to  whisper  a  pro
test  against  the  evil  lives  of  the  clergy  from  dread  of  the
secular  power? For  what  can  be  more  monstrous  or  more
disgraceful  to  the  Church  than  that  each  one  should  main
tain  his  own  ecclesiastical  dignity  by  armed  violence  instead
of  by  moral  integrity  ? Wherefore, my  lord  and  father,  I
pray  you  to  give  such  a  decision,  according  to  your  wisdom,
concerning  this  man  as  shall  be  to  the  Church's  profit,  so


LETTER CL1X.  491

that  the  salvation  given  now  may  flow  down  to  our  children,
and  that  another  generation  may  hear  not  only  how
audacious  was  the  crime,  but  also  how  terrible  was  the
vengeance.  Otherwise,  if  the  poison  be  allowed  to  have
full  play,  if  no  antidote  is  given,  it  will  destroy  many —
which  God  forbid.


LETTER CLIX. (A.D. 1133.)
To  THE  SAME,  IN THE NAME  OF  STEPHEN,  BISHOP  OE

PARIS,  AND  ON THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

To  his  most  godly  father,  INNOCENT,  Supreme  Pontiff,
STEPHEN,  unhappy  Bishop  of  the  Church  that  is  at  Paris,
sends  greeting,  praying  for  mercy  and  judgment.

i.  A  religious  man,  Master  Thomas,  Prior  of  S.  Victor,
while  engaged  in  an  office  of  charity,  on  a  journey  that
piety  had  bidden  him  to  undertake,  in  a  holy  work,  in  the
midst  of  a  company  of  saints,  on  the  Lord's  Day,  has  been
rruelly  murdered  on  my  bosom,  so  to  speak,  and  almost
in  my  arms,  for  his  righteousness,  by  the  ungodly,  and
has  been  made  obedient  even  unto  death.  There  is  no
need  for  a  lengthy  petition,  when  tears  flowing  silently  are
better  able  to  stir  sympathy,  and  when  love  finds  expres
sion  in  sobs  which  interrupt  my  prayer.  These  surely,
if  they  do  not  demand,  at  all  events  deserve  compassion,
inasmuch  as  they  indicate  and  show  a  grief  that  is  un
feigned,  and  banish  all  suspicion  of  simulation.  I  think,
therefore,  that,  to  touch  the  heart  of  my  father  with  grief
tor  the  disaster  that  has  befallen  us,  it  will  be  enough  for
me  to  simply  mention  the  circumstances.  A  sad  and
pitiful  story  speaks  for  itself,  especially  before  you,  and
needs  no  glossing  appeals  for  sympathy.  O,  my  eyes  !  run
ye  down  with  floods  of  tears,  for  my  strength  and  the  light
of  my  eyes  has  failed  me,  and  he  is  no  more  with  me.  For
I  do  not  mourn  for  him,  but  for  myself.  How  should  I
weep  for  him,  who,  by  a  quick  and  glorious  death,  has  passed
into  life  ?


492


LETTER CLIX.


2.  Who  would  not  pursue  with  praises  rather  than  with
lamentations  him  to  whom  to  live  was  Christ,  and  to  die  is
i^ain  ?  I  used  to  bear  the  name  of  Bishop  ;  he  performed
the  labours.  Casting  aside  all  thought  of  honour,  he  bore
the  burden  with  all  his  strength.  And  therefore  he  truly,
though  dead,  is  enjoying  life,  while  I,  though  living,  am  in
the  midst  of  death.  He  did  not  fall  into  the  snares  of
death,  but  escaped  them  ;  and  lo  !  the  sorrows  of  death
compass  me  about,  and  the  overflowings  of  ungodliness
make  me  afraid.  It  is  I,  therefore,  it  is  I  that  am  to  be
pitied,  now  that  you  are  dead,  my  sweetest  brother  Thomas,
I  am  like  a  weaned  child,  without  the  sweet  refreshment
that  you  gave  me,  bereft  of  your  wise  counsel,  and  left
desolate  by  the  loss  of  your  sure  protection.  Better  would
it  have  been  for  me  to  die  than  to  live  without  you.  There
fore,  my  life,  is  wasted  away  in  grief,  and  my  years  in
mourning.  The  Church  grieves  with  me,  but  she  grieves
also  for  herself.  Common  is  the  loss,  common  the  lamen
tation  ;  the  whole  of  the  religious  world  deplores  with  me
his  loss,  and  all  alike  implore  that  they  may  receive  consola
tion  from  their  father.  If  Theobald  Notier1  come  before
you  let  him  feel  to  his  cost  that  the  Lord  hath  heard  the
voice  of  my  weeping.  His  nephews  were  the  perpetrators
of  the  crime  ;  he  was  its  cause ;  whether  he  instigated  it  is
a  matter  to  be  ascertained.  Do  not  listen  to  anything  that
he  may  say,  till  our  messenger  arrive,  who  will  put  you  more
fully  in  possession  of  the  truth,  and  preserve  you  from  lying
lips  and  a  deceitful  tongue.


LETTER CLX. (A.D, 1133.)

To  HAIMERIC,  THE  CHANCELLOR,  IN  THE  NAME  OF  THE
SAME  BISHOP.

To  his  dearest  lord,  HAIMERIC,  venerable  Cardinal-
deacon  and  Chancellor  of  the  holy  Roman  Church,  his

1  Archdeacon  of  Paris,  as  Stephen  the  Bishop  of  Paris  testifies  in  the  Letter
given  in  the  last  note,  which  was  perhaps  written  by  S.  Bernard  himself  in
Stephen's  name  to  Geoffrey  of  Chartres,  the  then  legate.


LKTTKR CLX.  493

servant STEPHEN, of Paris, sends loving and friendly
greeting.

A  friend  is  proved  in  time  of  necessity.  1  say  this,  not
that  I  have  any  doubt  of  your  holy  friendship  for  me,  but  to
prevent  any  doubt  from  arising.  But  arise  it  undoubtedly
will  if  I  shall  now  find  no  sign  of  friendly  zeal  in  you.
Further,  know  that  it  will  be  to  me  an  inexcusable  proof  of
your  want  of  zeal  if  Theobald  Notier  does  not  meet  with
what  he  deserves  whenever  a  fitting  opportunity  arises  ;  for
through  his  heartless  ambition  he  has  cut  away  by  the  hands
of  his  nephews  the  half  of  my  soul,  leaving  the  remaining
half  for  nothing  but  cruel  suffering.


LETTER  CLXI.  (A.D. 1133.)
To  THE  LORI)  POPE  INNOCENT.

-•[gainst flic murderers of Archembald, Subdean of

Orleans.

The  voice  of  the  blood  of  Archembald,1  subdean  ot"
Orleans,  cries  with  a  loud  voice  for  vengeance.  For,  alas  !
that  I  should  have  to  say  it,  according  to  the  Prophet,
blood  toucheth  blood  (Hos.  iv.  2),  and  when  once  they  are
joined  they  call  to  you  still  more  loudly  from  France.  The
blood  of  both  calls  and  shouts  with  so  loud  a  shout  that  it
might  even  strike  the  palace  of  heaven  itself,  so  piteously
that  it  might  soften  hearts  of  stone.  What  are  you  doing,
O  friend  of  the  bridegroom,  O  guardian  of  the  Bride  of
Christ,  O  shepherd  of  the  sheep  of  Christ  ?  Do  you  think

1  For  his  murderers,  see  note  to  ep.  150.  Peter  the  Venerable  also  complains
•of  his  murder  (lib.  i.  ep.  17),  and  implies  that  he  was  taken  off  before  Thomas
of  S.  Victor  in  the  following  words: — "The  impunity  enjoyed  by  these  men
lends  arms  to  their  phrensy  ;  and  so  the  sword  of  the  persecutors,  after  slaying
the  Subdean  of  Orleans,  has  been  unsheathed  against  Thomas  of  Paris,  just
because  the  first  was  unavenged.''  Still,  the  contrary  may  be  without  difficulty
inferred  from  this  Letter  of  S.  Bernard's.  But  John,  the  author  of  the  death  of
Archembald,  was  possibly  John,  the  Uean  of  Orleans,  who  met  a  like  end.
His  death  is  recorded  in  the  Lamentation  ot  that  Church  given  by  Stephen  of
Tournay.


494


LETTER CLXI.


that  it  will  be  sufficient  to  ponder  upon  a  remedy  to  meet
this  infamous  and  unheard  of  evil  ?  Certainly  one  must
be  [not  only  thought  of,  but]  found  which  may  bring
relief  for  the  present  to  the  wound  lately  inflicted
on  the  Church,  and  may  act  as  a  caution  for  the  future.
Therefore  gird  thee  with  thy  sword  upon  thy  thigh,  O
thou  most  mighty.  If  Phinehas  does  not  stand  forth  even
now  and  make  atonement  the  terror  will  not  cease.  If  the
Church's  vigour  spare  those  men,  John,  and  Theobald
Notier,  by  whose  assent,  and  perhaps  at  whose  instigation,
if  not  by  whose  hand,  innocent  blood  has  been  poured  forth
on  the  earth,  then  who  is  there  that  sees  not  what  is  to
follow  ?  How  many  in  the  ranks  of  the  clergy  will  the
impunity  of  these  men  cause  to  be  promoted  from  fear  of
their  friends  rather  than  from  what  their  holy  living
deserves  !  New  diseases  must  be  met  with  new  remedies.
It  seems  to  many  that  the  Apostolic  sword  would  act  with
most  expedience  and  justice  in  cutting  off  these  men  from
every  ecclesiastical  dignity,  so  that  they  may  be  both
deprived  of  what  they  have,  and  be  prevented  from  ever
rising  to  any  others.


LETTER  CLXII. (A.D. 1133.)

TO  HAIMERIC,1  THE  CHANCELLOR,  ON  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

I  have  often  testified  to  my  Lord  the  Bishop  of  Paris  of
your  frequent  and  kindly  mention  of  him.  Lo  !  now  the
demand  is  made  upon  you  to  show  not  in  word  or  in  tongue,
but  in  deed  and  in  truth,  both  that  I  was  not  speaking,  and
that  you  have  not  written,  anything  but  the  truth.  So  this
concerns  you,  not  only  for  the  Bishop's  sake,  but  also  for
the  sake  of  your  other  friends,  who  would  certainly  be
greatly  concerned  about  you,  if  by  any  chance  this  cause
should  happen  to  go  contrary  to  their  expectation.

1  In  the  Colbertine  MS.,  No.  1038,  and  in  a  very  old  edition  this  epistle  is
given  as  to  John  of  Crema,  the  next  to  Haimeric.  But  what  is  said  in  the  latter
of  the  two  about  the  conversion  of  the  person  to  whom  it  is  addressed  is  more
applicable  to  John.


LETTER CLXIII.  495

LETTER  CLXIII. (A.I). 1133.)

To  JOHN OF CREMA,  CARDINAL-PRIEST,  ON THE  SAME

SUBJECT.

I  shall  never  forget  the  love  and  consideration  which  you
have  condescended  to  show  me,  a  man  of  no  influence  and
no  rank  ;  and  I  wish  continually  and  frequently  pray  that
worthy  fruits  may  follow  from  your  repentance  and  conver
sion,  which  have  been  a  source  of  joy  and  delight  to  me  as
well  as  to  the  Angels.  Especially  now  does  this  Gallican
Church  of  ours  join  me  in  looking  for  them,  and  I  think  not
unseasonably.  It  concerns  your  reputation  as  well  as  mine
that  I  do  not  count  on  you  to  my  own  confusion.  Let  it  be
then  so  clear  to  all  that  your  zeal  for  truth  and  righteous
ness  burns  against  the  murderers  of  clerks,  and  against
their  instigators,  that  I  may  not  be  sorry  for  having  made
my  boast  of  you.

LETTER CLXIV. (A.I). 1138.)
To  POPE  INNOCENT  IN  THE  MATTER  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF

LANGRES.1

i.  When  I  was  at  Rome  there  happened  to  come  there  the
Lord  Archbishop  of  Lyons.  With  him  came  also  Robert,
Dean  of  the  Church  of  Langres,  and  Odalric,  Canon  of  the
same  church,  seeking  for  themselves  and  the  Chapter  of
Langres  permission  to  elect  a  fresh  Bishop.  They  had

i  The  events  referred  to  here  did  not  take  place  after  the  death  of  Guilencus,  or
VVilencus,  Bishop  of  Langres,  to  whom  Letters  59  and  60  were  sent,  but  after  the
death  of  his  successor,  William  dc  Sabran.  The  death  of  Guilencus  took  place
August  ist,  A.U.  1 135,  that  of  William  in  the  year  1138.  Then  there  was  a  dis
puted  succession.  Peter,  Archbishop  of  Lyons,  and  Hugh  of  Burgundy,  afterwards
Duke,  gave  their  support  to  a  certain  monk  of  Cluny  ;  he  was  opposed  by  Robert,
Dean  of  Langres,  Pontius  the  Archdeacon,  Odalric,  and  other  Canons.  Bernard
was  called  in  as  arbiter,  and  finally  the  Cluniac  monk  was  excluded,  and  God
frey,  Prior  of  Clairvaux,  a  relation  of  Bernard's,  was  elected.  There  are  three
Letters  of  Peter  of  Cluny  about  this  controverted  election  of  the  Bishop  of  Langres  ;
one  which  is  ep.  29  of  the  first  book,  written  to  Bernard,  in  which  he  endeavours
to  clear  the  name  of  one  of  his  monks,  who  had  been  chosen  as  Bishop  of  Langres,
trom  unjust  aspersions;  the  second,  which  is  ep.  28  of  the  second  book,  to  Pope
Innocent,  in  which  he  asks  that  Innocent  will  refuse  to  confirm  the  election  of  the


496  LETTER CLXIV.

received,  indeed,  a  command  from  my  lord  the  Pope  to
abstain  by  all  means  from  acting  till  they  had  the  advice  of
religious  men.  And  when  they  wished  and  asked  to  obtain
this  permission  through  me,  I  altogether  refused  until  I
knew  for  a  certainty  that  they  intended  to  elect  a  good  and
fitting  person.  They  replied  that  they  would  subordinate
their  purpose  and  intention  to  my  opinion,  and  that  they
would  do  nothing  but  what  I  advised  them.  And  this  they
promised  me.  But  as  their  promise  did  not  give  me  suffi
cient  confidence,  the  Archbishop  joined  his  entreaties  to
theirs,  and  promised  faithfully  the  same  thing.  He  added,
moreover,  that  if  the  clergy  should  attempt  to  act  otherwise
he  would  not  confirm  or  give  his  sanction  to  anything  that
they  might  do.  My  lord  the  Chancellor  also  gave  a
similar  pledge.  Not  content  with  this,  I  went  also  before
my  lord  the  Pope  to  have  what  we  had  agreed  upon  con
firmed  by  his  sanction  and  authority.  Nevertheless,  a  con
ference  was  held  daily  between  us  on  the  election  to  be
held,  and,  out  of  the  many  names  of  which  mention  was
Abbot  of  Vezelay  to  the  same  See ;  the  last,  which  is  ep.  36  of  the  same  book,
to  Innocent  again,  in  which  he  asks  that  the  Church  of  Langres  in  future
episcopal  elections  may  be  allowed  its  full  rights  according  to  the  canons.  By
comparing  the  first  and  third  it  is  evident  that  they  refer  to  the  election  of  which
Bernard  here  speaks.  But  it  is  more  difficult  to  say  whether  the  second  also
refers  to  it.  My  own  opinion  is  that  it  must  be  understood  of  another  person.
For  in  the  first,  Peter  the  Venerable  simply  speaks  of  the  elected  man  as  "  a
monk  of  Cluny  and  my  son,"  in  the  second  "the  Abbot  of  Vezelay."  In  the
first  he  says  that  "  he  was  met  by  Canons  of  Langres  as  he  was  on  his  return
from  Poitou,  who  told  him  of  the  election  of  his  monk ;  in  the  latter  he
says  that  he  had  heard  a  rumour  that  "  ceitain  men  were  clamorously  seeking
from  Innocent  that  the  Abbot  of  Vezelay  might  be  Bishop  of  Langres.  In  the
first  he  does  all  he  can  to  help  forward  the  confirmation  of  his  monk;  in  the
second  he  strives  to  prevent  the  confirmation  of  the  Abbot  of  Vezelay.  There
fore  1  think  that  the  opinion  is  not  to  be  despised  of  those  who  say  that  Wilencus,
Bishop  of  Langres,  was  succeeded  by  William  de  Sabran,  who  perhaps  was
taken  from  presiding  over  the  Abbey  of  Vezelay  to  rule  the  See  of  Langres  ;  and
that  Geoffrey,  as  will  be  shown  presently,  succeeded  him.  At  length,  the
Cluniac  having  been  excluded,  Geoffrey  was  elected  and  confirmed  A.D.  1138,
that  is  when  Bernard  had  returned  into  Gaul  after  the  extinction  of  the  schism.
But  we  should  observe  in  this  history,  as  Baronius  does  (A.D.  1138),  that
although  Peter  of  Cluny  so  warmly  took  the  side  of  his  monk,  and  although  he-
was  worsted  by  Bernard,  yet  he  refused  to  change  his  kindly  feelings  towards
Bernard  and  his  monks  (Cf.  ep.  229,  n.  5).


LETTER CLXIV.  497

made,  two  at  last  were  chosen,  and  it  was  agreed  that  we
would  none  of  us  dissent  from  the  election  of  either  of  the
two.  And  so  my  lord  the  Pope  decreed  that  our  decision
should  be  binding  without  any  change,  and  both  Archbishop
and  clerks  promised  faithfully  to  abide  by  it.  When  they
had  left  I  made  a  stay  of  several  days  longer  in  Rome,  and
when  I  was  able  to  obtain  permission  from  my  lord  to
return  I  took  my  journey  to  my  brethren.

2.  And  as  I  was  crossing  the  Alps  I found  that  the  day
was at hand on  which the consecration to the See  of
Langres  was  to  take  place,  of  a  person  concerning  whom  I
would  that  1  had  heard  better  reports  and  more  honourable
to  him. But  1  am  unwilling  to  repeat  what  it  gave  me  pain
to  hear. I  was  persuaded  by  not  a  few religious  who  had
come to salute me to turn aside to Lyons in order, if
possible,  to  prevent  the  execution  of  the  infamous  act  that
was  contemplated. For  I,  out  of  regard  for  my  health  and
the  weariness  of  my  body,  had  determined  to  go  home  by
a  shorter  way, especially  because I had not given much
credence  to  the  rumours  that  had  reached  me. For  who
would  have  thought  that  so  great  a  man  would  have  been  so
lickle  as  to  set  aside  his  own  promise  so  lately  given,  to  say
nothing of the command of his lord, and lay his hands
without  any  fear  on  the  head  of  one  whose  ill  reputation  was
known  ? And  so  I  listened  to  the  advice  of  these  religious,
and  turned  my  steps  towards  Lyons,  and  when  I  arrived  I
found  that  things  were  just  as  I  had  heard. The  joyful  (or
rather unfortunate) festival had  been prepared  for. The
Dean,  however,  and,  unless  I  am  mistaken,  the  greater  part
of  the  Canons  of  Lyons  were  in  constant  and  open  opposi
tion. The  shameful  and  grievous  report  had  filled  the  city,
too,  and  was  hourly  spreading  and  gaining  strength.

3.  What was I to  do? I called on the Archbishop.
With  due  reverence  I  reminded  him  of  the  agreement  that  he
had  entered  into,  and  of  the  instructions  that  he  had  received.
He  admitted  all  that  I  said. But  he  said  that  the  cause  of
his  going  from his  promise  was  the  refusal  of  the  Duke's
son  to  accept  what  we  had  determined,  and  he  said  that  to
pacify  him he  had  been  guilty  of  this  change  of  purpose,


LETTER CLXIV.

and  had  done  as  he  did  for  the  sake  of  peace.  He  went  on
to  say  that  whatever  he  might  have  done  before,  he  would
do  as  I  bade  for  the  future.  Then  I  said,  in  thanking  him,
"  God  forbid  that  it  should  be  my  will ;  nay,  rather  God's
will  be  done.  And  what  this  will  is,  will  doubtless  be
known,  if  the  matter  is  brought  before  the  Council  of
Bishops  and  other  religious  persons  who  have  assembled  at
your  summons,  or  will  soon  be  here.  But  if,  after  invoking
the  Holy  Spirit,  the  consent  of  all  bids  you  proceed  in  the
work  that  you  have  begun,  then  proceed  in  it;  but  if  not,
then  listen  to  the  Apostle  who  bids  you  Lay  hands  suddenly
on  no  man  "  (i  Tim.  v.  22).  My  advice  seemed  to  please
him.  Meanwhile,  that  man  is  said  to  have  arrived ;  but  he
went  to  an  hostel,  not  to  the  palace.  He  came  on  Friday
night ;  he  left  on  Saturday  morning.  It  is  not  for  me  to
say  why  he  was  loath  to  put  in  an  appearance  at  the  Court,,
when  that  was  the  very  object  of  his  long  journey.  It
might  have  been  thought  to  be  a  monk's  modesty,  and  a
contempt  for  honour,  were  it  not  that  what  followed  showed
that  it  was  otherwise.  For  what  were  we  to  conclude  when
the  Archbishop  returned  from  him,  and  declared  before  all
that  he  could  in  noway  induce  him  to  acquiesce,  but  that  he
rejected  wholly  what  had  been  done  in  the  matter?

4.  In  short,  the  Archbishop  soon  after  bade  the  election
to  take  place.  This  is  testified  by  some  of  the  Canons  of
Langres,  who  were  then  present,  as  well  as  by  a  letter
which  can  be  produced.  When  it  was  brought  forward  and
read  before  the  Chapter  of  Langres,  immediately  another
was  read  contrary  to  the  first  in  every  point,  asserting  that
the  consecration  was  postponed,  not  set  aside,  appointing  a
day  and  place  to  decide  a  cause  which  the  first  letter
declared  to  have  been  decided  already.  You  would  think
that  in  these  letters  it  was  not  merely  diverse,  but  adverse
persons  that  were  speaking  and  contradicting  each  other,  if
it  were  not  that  one  and  the  same  image  was  impressed  on
•the  wax,  one  and  the  same  name  signed  at  the  bottom  ;  and
so  it  was  manifestly  declared,  to  the  amazement  of  all  that
were  present,  that  from  one  fountain  there  flowed  both  sweet
and  bitter.  These  contradictory  letters  are  in  our  hands  ;


LETTER CLXIV.  4gg

whichever  you  determine  to  obey,  you  must  be  held  dis
obedient.  If  you  obey  the  first  that  you  open,  you  will  be
condemned  by  the  last,  or  if  you  elect  to  follow  the  latter,
the  former  one  will  complain.  And  would  that  the  second
letter  could  as  well  protect  itself  against  a  third  as  it  over
turned  the  first.  But  lo  !  we  have  letter  upon  letter,  so
that  it  is  not  with  us  as  with  the  Prophet,  Line  upon  line
(Is.  xxviii.  10),  but  rather  line  against  line.

5.  In  the  meantime  the  man  who  had  shrunk  from
consecration,  and  rejected  the  election,  hastened  to  the
King.  He  obtained  formal  possession  of  the  Regalia,1  but
by  what  title,  he  must  say  for  himself.  Presently  letters  were
sent  out,  changing  the  place  which  had  been  appointed,  and
anticipating  the  day,  in  order  that  through  the  inconvenience
of  time  and  place  opposers  might  be  deprived  of  all  chance
of  acting,  and  a  march  might  be  stolen  on  all  who  might
wish  to  appeal.  But  no  counsel  can  stand  against  that  of
God,  by  whose  providence  it  came  to  pass  that  neither
opposers  nor  appellants  were  wanting.  An  appeal  was
lodged  by  Falco,  Dean  of  Lyons  ;  by  Ponce,  Archdeacon  of
Langres ;  by  Bonami,  priest  and  Canon  of  Langres,  and
also  by  my  brethren,  Bruno  and  Geoffrey,  who  knew  nothing
of  what  these  men  had  intended  in  their  hearts,  but  who
happened  to  arrive  by  chance,  and  no  doubt  by  the  will  of
God,  who  foresees  all  things.  So  little  time,  indeed,  was
left,  that  when  I  learnt  the  day  scarcely  four  days  were  left
for  our  messenger  to  go  with  letters  to  prevent  what  was
more  a  sacrilege  than  a  sacrament  from  being  performed.
He,  too,  nevertheless,  opposed  it,  and  summoned  the  con-
secrators  and  the  man  they  proposed  to  consecrate  to  the
Apostolic  See.  He  whom  I  had  sent  was  a  Canon  of
Langres.  I  say  the  truth  ;  I  lie  not.  The  Truth  Himself
is  my  witness  that  I  have  said  nothing  out  of  personal
hatred,  but  that  I  have  truthfully  set  down  everything  out  of
love  of  the  truth  alone.

1  The  investiture  of  the  Regalia  is  the  formal  delivering  by  the  king  to  the
new  bishop  of  the  temporal  jurisdiction  and  lands  of  the  Church  after  the  oath
of  fidelity  has  been  taken.  For  the  Regalia  see  also  ep.  170,  Suger  (epp.  19
and  20),  and  Du  Gauge's  Glossary.


500  LETTER CLXV.

LETTER CLXV. (A.D. 1138.)

To  FALCO,  DEAN,  AND GUY,  TREASURER,  OF  THE
CHURCH  OF  LYONS.

Great  as  you  see,  dearly  beloved,  is  the  plague  that  is
threatening  our  Church,  and  great  is  the  care  needed  ;  and
not  only  is  the  plague  great,  but  close  at  hand,  so  that  we
must  with  tears  press  on  the  heavenly  Physician  and  say  :
"  Lord,  come  down  ere  it  die."  There  is  one  thing  which
makes  our  grief  the  more  acute,  and  almost  causes  us  to
despair  of  a  cure,  and  that  is  that  the  source  of  our  tribula
tion  is  where  we  ought  to  have  looked  for  its  relief.  For
who  is  it,  O,  unhappy  Church,  that  has  brought  this  evil,  of
which  you  complain,  upon  you  ?  It  is  no  enemy,  not  one
who  hates  you,  but  your  bosom  friend,  your  leader  and
metropolitan  himself.  Why  comes  this  evil  from  the  south
and  not  from  the  north?1  Surely  there  is  no  grief  like  unto
my  grief,  since  it  is  from  those,  and  none  others,  on  w7hom  I
most  relied,  that  I  have  suffered  these  things.  O,  Lyons  !
my  holy  Mother  Church,  what  a  monster  have  you  now
chosen  for  a  bridegroom  /or  your  daughter!  No  mother
do  we  find  you  in  this,  but  a  step-mother.  How  far  has
this  son-in-law  of  yours  now  degenerated  from  the  honour,
weight,  and  integrity  for  which  you  were  once  so  renowned?
Am  I  to  say  that  that  is  an  honourable  marriage  and  an
underiled  bed  \vhich  has  been  brought  about  in  such  a  way
and  with  such  a  man  ?  In  defiance  of  all  law,  and  order,
and  reason  all  things  have  been  so  confounded,  nay,  as  all

'  A  reference  may  be  conjectured  to  Ps.  Ixxv.  7  :  Neither  from  the  east,  nor
from  the  west,  nor  yet  from  the  south.  But  the  resemblance  in  the  Vulgate  is
much  less  strong  :  Neither  from  the  east,  nnr  from  the  ivest,  nor  from  the  desert
hills.  Compare,  however,  Ps.  xlviii.  2,  upon  the  north  side  lieth  the  city  of  the
great  King;  Jer.  vi.  I,  Evil  oppeareth  out  of  the  north;  Ps.  cxxvi.  4,  Turn
again  our  captivity,  O  Lord,  as  the  streams  in  the  south  ;  and  the  comment  of
Gerhohus  on  the  latter  passage.

There  is  not  space  to  go  into  the  subject  here,  but  the  north  was  taken  in
Mediaeval  times  to  be  mystically  the  quarter  whence  evil  came.  In  exorcisms,
and  the  Renunciation  during  the  Baptismal  Office,  if  I  mistake  not,  the  officiant
was  directed  to  turn  towards  the  north  ;  and  the  north  side  of  churchyards  was
usually  chosen  for  the  burials  of  criminals  and  persons  under  ecclesiastical
censures. —  [E.]


LETTER CLXVI.  501

know,  all  things  have  been  so  fraudulently  and  rashly
ordered  and  ventured  on,  that  it  would  be  most  unseemly
for  a  bailiff  even,  or  receiver  of  tolls,  to  say  nothing  of  a
Bishop,  to  be  appointed  in  this  way.  How  can  I  sufficiently
sing  your  praises,  dearly  beloved,  who  have  alone  mourned
with  your  afflicted  Church,  and  have  once  and  again  stood
up  in  her  defence  when  oppressed,  rising  on  the  other  side,
and  opposing  yourselves  as  a  wall  for  the  house  of  Israel  ?
In  that  whole  congregation  not  one  has  been  found  like
you,  to  keep  the  law  of  the  Most  High,  to  obey  the  sacred
canons,  to  put  on  the  zeal  of  Phinehas  and  smite  the  forni-
cators  with  the  sword  of  the  tongue.  And  since  these
things  redound  more  and  more  on  all  sides  to  the  glory  of
God  and  your  fame,  it  only  remains  for  you  to  give  a  worthy
ending  to  so  good  and  praiseworthy  a  beginning,  and  do
all  you  can  to  join  the  tail  to  the  head  of  the  victim.

LETTER CLXVI. (Circa  A.I). 1138.)
To  POPE  INNOCENT,  ON  THE  SAME SUBJECT.

i.  Again  I  call,  again  I  knock,  if  not  with  clamorous  cry,
yet  with  tears  and  groanings.  I  am  compelled  to  reiterate
my  crying  by  the  reiterated  injury  inflicted  on  us  by  the
wicked,  and  by  those  who  prolong  their  iniquity.  They
have  made  themselves  strong  and  added  treachery  to  their
evil-doing.  They  add  sin  to  sin,  and  their  pride  is  ever
going  up  higher.  Their  phrensy  has  strengthened  itself,
while  shame  and  the  fear  of  God  are  no  more.  The  man
whom  they  did  not  hesitate  to  elect,  my  father,  contrary  to
your  wise  and  just  arrangement,  they  have  even  dared  to
consecrate,  or  rather  execrate,  after  an  appeal  had  been
made  to  you.  This  has  been  done  presumptuously  by  the
Archbishop  of  Lyons  and  the  Bishops  of  Autun  and  Macon;
all  friends  of  Cluny.  What  a  vast  multitude  of  saints  will
be  confounded  by  these  men's  fraud  and  audacity,  if  they
are  forced  to  bear  such  a  yoke  imposed  on  them  in  such  a
way.  Wicked  and  shameful  thing  !  If  they  are  to  accept
it,  it  will  be  as  if  they  were  being  forced  to  bow  the  knees
to  Baal,  or,  as  the  Prophet  says,  to  make  a  covenant  with


502  LETTER CLXVI.

death  and  to  be  at  agreement  with  hell  (Is.  xxviii.  15).  I
ask,  Where  are  equity,  law,  the  authority  of  the  sacred
canons,  and  reverence  for  your  majesty?  That  appeal
which  is  denied  to  none  that  is  oppressed  was  of  no  profit
to  me  alone.  When  gold  sways  the  throne,  and  silver  sits
at  the  seat  of  judgment,  laws  and  canons  are  silent,  and
right  and  equity  have  no  place.  With  the  same  weapons,
which  is  still  more  intolerable,  they  threaten  to  storm  the
heights  of  the  Apostolic  citadel  itself.  That,  however,  is
but  vain,  for  it  is  founded  upon  a  Rock.

2.  But  what  am  I  doing?  I  have  gone  too  far,  I  confess  ;
it  is  not  for  me  to  accuse  or  blame  any  one ;  it  is  enough
for  me  to  bewail  my  grief.  After  long  delay,  and  many
toils,  which  I  undertook  in  the  service  of  the  Roman
Church,  when  at  last  it  seemed  good  to  your  Serenity  to
let  me  return  to  my  brethren,  I  rejoiced,  though  I  was  but
an  unprofitable  servant  with  shattered  health,  because  of
the  sheaves  of  peace  which  I  was  taking  back  with  me,  and
I  arrived  safely  at  my  monastery.  I  thought  that  I  had
escaped  from  labour  to  rest,  that  it  was  allowed  me  to  re
pair  the  losses  of  my  spiritual  studies,  and  the  ruffling  of
the  spirit's  tranquillity  which  had  met  me  outside  my  walls,
and  behold  !  tribulation  and  anguish  have  come  upon  me.
As  I  lie  upon  my  bed  I  am  tortured  more  by  the  pangs  of
grief  than  by  the  body's  pains.  I  do  not  complain  of  any
temporal  inconvenience.  It  is  my  soul  that  is  in  my  hands,
and  its  salvation  that  is  at  stake.  Would  you  advise  me
to  commit  the  keeping  of  my  soul  to  a  man  who  has  lost
his  own  ?  I  know  that  you  would  not.  Wherefore  I  have
said  to  my  soul  that  it  is  better  for  her  to  take  flight  from
hence  than  to  consume  the  remainder  of  my  days  with
grief,  and  none  the  less  to  risk  my  salvation.  But  may
God  guide  you  to  the  course  which  is  best ;  may  He  bring
back  to  your  recollection,  if  you  think  me  worthy,  in  what
manner  I  have  dealt  with  you,  and  make  you  cast  an  eye  of
love  upon  your  son,  and  free  him  from  the  anguish  with
which  he  is  afflicted.  Moreover,  forget  not  what  great
things  God  hath  done  for  you,  and  as  some  little  return  for


LETTER CLXVII.  503

it  all,  annul  and undo  what  has  here  been  done  so  much
amiss.

LETTER  CLXVII.  (A.I). 1138.)
To  THE  SAME,  ON  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

Most  gracious  Father,  did  you  not  strictly  enjoin  that  in
the  Church  of  Langres  some  suitable  and  religious  person
should  be  elected,  with  the  advice  of  your  son  ?  Did  not
my  lord  of  Lyons  receive  in  person  this  same  command
from  your  Apostolic  mouth,  which  he  was  to  carry  out  as
faithfully  as  it  had  been  irrevocably  given  and  frequently
impressed  on  him  ?  Did  he  not,  moreover,  promise  to  obey?
What,  then,  has  made  him  endeavour  to  set  aside  what  had
been  most  wisely  and  prudently  determined,  and  to  pre
sumptuously  take  another  course  which  was  not  convenient,
to  make  your  majesty  contemptible,  and  my  littleness  a
laughing-stock  ?  How  is  it  that  this  good  man  was  not
ashamed  to  have  "  yea  and  nay"  found  in  his  mouth,  and
to  attempt  to  put  so  base  a  yoke  on  the  necks  of  such  a
large  number  of  religious  men  who  are  your  servants,  con
trary  to  your  command  and  his  own  promise?  Ask,  my
Father,  ask  diligently,  what  kind  of  repute  this  man,  on
whom  he  is  eager  to  lay  his  hands,  bears,  both  with  those
that  are  near  and  those  that  are  far  off.  Very  shame  pre
vents  me  from  saying  what  common  rumour  says  of  him,
nay,  what  his  well-known  evil  reputation  has  made  known
to  the  world.  What  can  I  say  ?  My  soul  is  sorrowful  even
unto  death.  Perhaps  even  now  I  should  have  fled  away
had  I  not  been  kept  back  by  the  hope  of  the  consolation
that  I  look  for  from  your  kindness.  I  had  it  in  my  mind
to  write  to  you  in  order  the  distressing  story  of  my  misery  ;
but  my  hand  fails  for  very  sadness,  my  mind  clouds  over,
my  tongue  shrinks  from  speaking  of  the  iniquitous
treachery,  the  underhand  dealing,  the  dishonesty,  the
audacity,  the  perfidy.  What  is  it,  then  ?  Your  son,  Ponce
the  Archdeacon,  who  has  shown  himself  in  this  matter  con
stant  and  faithful,  will  tell  yau  everything,  my  Father,  both


504  LETTER CLXVIII.

what  we  grieve  for  as  already  done,  and  what  we  implore
may  not  be  done.  Trust  him  as  myself.  But  this  one
thing  I  must  say  from  the  midst  of  my  pangs,  that  unless
these  men  are  made  to  desist  from  their  wicked  and
audacious  undertaking,  I  feel  that,  as  I  am  now,  my  life
will  fail  in  grief  and  my  years  in  mourning.


LETTER  CLXVIII. (A.D.  1138.)

TO  THE  BISHOPS  AND  CARDINALS  OF  THE  ROMAN  COURT
ON  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

i.  You  know,  if  you  will  deign  to  call  it  to  your  recollec
tion,  what  manner  of  life  mine  was  with  you  in  the  time  of
adversity,  going  out  and  coming  in,  and  going  forth  at  the
King's  bidding,  perseveringly  remaining  with  you  in  your
temptations,  so  much  so  that  my  bodily  strength  was  almost
exhausted,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  that  I  was  able  to  return
home  after  God  had  given  peace  to  the  Church.  I  recall
all  this  not  boastfully  or  reproachfully,  but  to  urge  and
implore  you,  to  remind  you,  and  to  demand  from  you  the
debt  of  pity  that  you  owe  me.  My  necessity  now  forces
me  to  appeal  to  all  my  debtors.  But  for  myself,  even  if  I
have  done  all  that  I  ought,  yet,  according  to  the  word  of
the  Lord,  I  reckon  myself  to  be  nothing  else  on  that
account,  than  an  unprofitable  servant.  Nevertheless,  if  I
did  what  was  necessary  or  fit  to  be  done,  did  I  deserve  to
be  beaten  for  it  ?  And  lo  !  when  I  went  from  you,  I  found
trouble  and  anguish,  and  I  called  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,
but  it  was  to  no  purpose ;  I  called,  too,  on  your  name,  but  it
availed  me  nothing ;  in  truth,  they  that  are  as  mighty  gods
on  the  earth  have  highly  exalted  themselves  ;  I  mean  the
Archbishop  of  Lyons  and  the  Abbot  of  Cluny.  They,
trusting  in  their  strength,  and  boasting  themselves  in  the
multitude  of  their  riches,  have  come  near  me,  and  stood
against  me ;  and  not  merely  against  me,  but  against  a
great  host  of  the  servants  of  God,  against  you  also,  against
themselves,  against  all  equity  and  honesty,  against  God.


LETTER CLXVIII.  505

2.  In  one  word,  they  have  placed  a  man  over  our  heads,
whom,  shameful  to  say,  both  the  good  abhor  and  the  bad
laugh  at.  By  what  order,  or,  I  should  better  say,  how  ex
traordinarily,  they  have  acted,  let  God  see  and  judge  ;
let  the  Roman  Court  see ;  let  it  see  and  grieve,  let  it  have
compassion,  and  gird  itself  to  punish  the  evil  and  show
honour  to  the  good.  Is  it  thy  pleasure,  O  mistress  of  the
world,  thou  that  hast  been  placed  over  all  to  execute
vengeance  on  the  proud  and  to  judge  the  oppressed,  is  it
thy  pleasure  that  the  poor  should  be  consumed  when  the
wicked  is  lifted  up,  and  the  poor  man  too,  who,  when  he
had  no  wealth  to  expend  in  thy  service,  spared  not  his
blood?  Do  you  think  it  right  that  you  should  enjoy  your
peace,  and  care  nothing  for  mine,  or  that  you  should  not
receive  the  partners  of  your  toil  to  some  share  in  the
reward  ?  If  I  have  found  grace  in  your  sight,  deliver  the
helpless  from  the  hand  of  them  that  are  stronger  than  he,
the  poor  and  needy  from  those  that  are  robbing  him.
Otherwise  I  for  my  part  will  labour  as  I  can  amidst  my
grief,  and  my  tears  shall  be  my  meat  day  and  night;  while
to  you  I  will  say  that  verse,  He  that  ceases  to  have  pity  on
his  friend  forsakes  the  fear  of  the  Lord  (Job  vi.  14),  and
again,  All  my  kinsmen  stood  afar  off :  and  another  also,
My  lovers  and  my  neighbours  did  stand  looking  upon  my
trouble,  and  they  also  that  sought  after  my  life  laid
snares  for  me  (Ps.  xxxviii.  u,  12).


LETTER  CLXIX. (A.D. 1138.)
To  POPE  INNOCENT,  ON  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

Bernard  explains  why  he  has  detained  the  clergy  of
Langrcs  who  had  been  summoned  to  Rome  ;  and  indicates
the  persons  to  whom  the  election  should  be  confided.

Your  condescension  has  admitted  me  to  intimacy,  and
that  intimacy  has  made  me  to  presume.  Let  your  wonted
kindness  rule  in  your  heart,  lest  haply  my  presumption
breed  indignation.  Yet  hear  patiently  not  only  what  I  have

VOL.  II.  33


506  LETTER CLXIX.

done,  but  why  I  did  it ;  perhaps  the  cause  may  in  some
way  excuse  the  deed.  I  ventured  to  keep  back  the  clergy
of  Langres  who  had  been  summoned  to  appear  before  you,
since  peace  had  been  made  between  them,  and  they  had
been  persuaded  to  act  for  the  future  in  holding  the  election
according  to  your  will  and  the  counsel  of  good  men,  even
.as  it  is  written  in  their  letters.  Moreover  there  was  great
necessity  for  their  not  leaving  just  now,  because  of  the
lands  and  possessions  of  the  Church,  which  are  given  over
to  be  plundered  and  stolen,  while  there  is  none  to  guard  or
defend  them.  And  so,  if  it  please  you,  let  an  order  be
given  to  these  men,  since  they  are  no  longer  under
suspicion,  and  since  they  seek  not  the  things  that  are
their  own,  but  those  of  Christ  Jesus,  that  they  elect  one
who  may  be  pleasing  to  God,  that  so  this  long-standing
and  unhappy  trouble  of  the  Church  may  find  at  length
its  endino-.  What  else  remains  to  be  said  I  have  com-

<D  *

mitted  to  Herbert,  Abbot  of  S.  Stephen's  of  Dijon,  and
to  the  Archdeacon  of  Langres,  and  their  companions.  I
add,  moreover,  a  prayer  that  you  would  receive  under
your  protection  the  Archdeacon  of  Langres  and  Bonami,
presbyter  of  the  same  Church,  since  they  have  shown
themselves  faithful  in  God's  cause.  For  the  workman  is
worthy  of  his  hire  (S.  Luke  x.  7).


LETTER  CLXX. (A.D. 1138.)

TO LOUIS THE YOUNGER,1 KlNG OF THE FRENCH.
He  endeavours  to  defend  the  election  of  Geoffrey,,  Prior
of  Claim aux, to  the  See  of  Langres  ; to  which  the  King
had  appeared  adverse.

i  Ordericus  calls  him  Florus  absolutely  (lib.  xi.  p.  813.),  Louis  Florus  more
than  once  (lib.  xiii.  pp.  910,  911)-  ln  the  first  passage  L°uis  the  Fat  is  said  to
have  made  peace  between  Tedbald  of  Blois,  and  Ralph  of  Peronne,  who  were
at  discord,  and  also  to  have  entrusted  the  Kingdom  of  Gaul  to  his  son  Louis
Florus,  whom  three  years  before  he  had  had  crowned  King  at  Rheims;  and
this  in  the  year  1135.  In  the  last  passage,  on  the  year  1137,  Louis  being  at
the  point  of  death  is  said  "  to  have  entrusted  Louis  Florus  his  son  to  Tedbald,
Count  Palatine,  and  Ralph,  of  Peronne,  his  kinsman."


LETTER CLXX.  507

i .  If  the  whole  world  were  to  conjure  me  to  join  it  in  some
enterprise  against  your  royal  Majesty,  I  should  still  through
fear  of  God  not  dare  lightly  to offend  a  King ordained  by
Him. Xor  am I ignorant  who it  is  that  has  said, Who
soever  rcsisteth fhc  power  rcsisteth  the  ordinance  of  God
(Rom.  xiii.  2). Nor  yet  do  I  forget  how  contrary  is  lying
to  the  Christian  calling  and still  more  so  to  my  profession.
1  say  the  truth, I lie not  ; what  was done  at Langres  in
the  matter  of  our  Prior1 was  contrary  to my  expectation
and  my  intention  and  that  of  the  Bishops. But  there  is  One
who  knows  how  to  gain the  assent  of  the unwilling, and
who  compels,  as He wills, the  adverse wills of man  to
subserve His counsel. Why should I not fear for him
whom I love as my own soul, that danger which I
have ever feared for myself  ? Why  should I not  shrink
from  the  companionship  of  those  who  bind  heavy  burdens
and  grievous  to  be  borne,  and  lay  them  on  men's  shoulders,
but  they  themselves  will not  move  them  with  one  of  their
fingers  ? Still,  what  has  been  done,  has  been  done  ; nothing
against  you,  very  much  against  me. The  staff  of  my  weak
ness has been taken from me, the light of  mine eyes
removed  from me,  my  right  arm  cut  off. All  these  waves
and  storms  have  gone  over  me. Wrath  has  swallowed  me
up,  and  on  no  side  do  I  see  any  way  to  escape. When I
fly  from  burdens,  then  I  have  them  placed  upon  me  to  my
great discomfort. 1 feel that it is  hard for me to  kick
against the pricks. It  would perhaps have  been more
tolerable  for  a  willing  horse  than  for  one  that  is  restive  and

1  This  refers  to  Geoffrey,  Bernard's  kinsman,  who  after  many  disagreements
had  been  at  length  unanimously  taken  from  being  third  Prior  of  Clairvaux  to
be  Bishop  of  Langres,  A.D.  1 138  ;  that  is  to  say,  when  the  schism  was  at  an  end.
For  while  Geoffrey  was  still  Prior,  Bernard  wrote  ep.  317,  from  Italy,  within  the
Octave  of  Pentecost  of  that  year,  in  which  after  his  return  from  Italy  the  affair
of  this  election  at  Langres  took  place,  viz.,  when  peace  had  been  restored  to  the
Church,  as  ep.  166  expressly  says.  How  highly  Bernard  valued  Geoffrey  is
evident  from  this  epistle.  Cf.  also  Life  of  S.  llcrnartl  (lib.  ii.  c.  5),  and  also
the  Preface  to  the  third  book  of  the  Life.  The  election  of  Geoffrey  was  at  length
ratified  A. n.  1 1.12,  as  we  gather  from  a  deed  given  by  Perard  (p.  134),  where
•the  Church  of  S.  Stephen  of  Dijon  is  said  to  have  been  consecrated  by  him  A.n.
1141,  "in  the  second  year  of  his  episcopate."


508  LETTER CLXX.

obstinate.  For  if  there  were  any  strength  in  me,  would  it
not  be  easier  for  me  to  bear  these  burdens  on  my  own
shoulders  than  on  those  of  others  ?

2.  But  I  yield  to  Him  that  disposeth  otherwise,  to  con
tend  with  whom  in  wisdom  or  strength  is  neither  prudent
nor  possible  for  either  me  or  the  King.  He  is,  indeed,
terrible  among  the  kings  of  the  earth.  It  is  a  terrible
thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God,  even  for  you,

0  King. How  grieved  have  I  been  to  hear  things  of  you
so  contrary  to  the  fair  promise  of  your  early  days  ! How
much more  bitter  will  be the  grief  of  the Church, after
having  tasted  first  of  such  great  joys,  if,  which  God  forbid,
she  shall  chance  to  be  deprived  of  her  pleasant  hope  of
protection  under  the  shield  of  your  good  disposition,  which
up  to  the  present  has  been  held  over  her. Alas  !  the  Virgin,
the  Church  of  Rheims,  has  fallen,1  and  there  is  none  to  lift
her  up. Langres, too, has fallen, and  there is none  to
stretch  out  the  hand  to  help. May  the  goodness  of  God
divert  your  heart  and  mind  from  adding  yet  more  to  our
grief,  and  from  heaping  sorrow  upon  sorrow. Would  that

1  may  die  before  seeing  a  king  of  whom  good  things  were
thought, and still better hoped  for, endeavouring  to go
against  the  counsel  of  God,  stirring  up  against  himself  the
anger  of  the  supreme  Judge,  bedewing  the  feet  of  the  Father
of  the  fatherless  with  the  tears  of  the  afflicted,  knocking  at
heaven's  door  with  the  cries  of  the  poor,  the  prayers  of  the
saints,  and  with  the  just  complaints of Christ's  beloved
Bride,  the  Church  of  the  living  God. May  all  this  never
happen. I  hope  for  better  things,  and  expect  things  more
joyful. God  will  not  forget  to  be  gracious,  nor  shut  up  his

1  This  was  after  the  death  of  Archbishop  Reginald,  which  happened  A.D.
1 139,  on  January  13th.  The  Church  of  Rheims  remained  for  nearly  two  years
without  its  shepherd,  not  through  any  dissension  among  the  clergy  in  the  elec
tion,  but  through  the  violent  opposition  of  the  citizens  for  the  institution  of  the
"  communia,"  as  they  called  it,  and  the  inborn  hatred  of  Louis  VII.  against
Theobald,  Count  of  Champagne,  which  showed  itself  also  against  the  counts
and  churches  of  the  district.  Cf.  Bernard's  complaint  in  ep.  318.  Finally,  on
Bernard  refusing  the  dignity,  Samson  was  elected,  A.D.  1 140,  who^e  election  was
for  a  time  opposed,  according  to  ep.  222.  Cf.  epp.  210  and  224.


LETTER CLXX.  509

loving  kindness  in  displeasure.  He  will  not  make  His
Church  sad  through  him,  and  because  of  him,  by  whom  He
has  already  made  her  so  much  to  rejoice.  By  His  long-
suffering  He  will  preserve  him  whom  He  freely  gave  us,
and  if  you  think  anything  otherwise,  this  also  He  will
reveal  to  you,  and  will  teach  your  heart  in  wisdom.  This  is
my  wish,  this  is  my  prayer  night  and  day.  Think  this
of  me,  think  it  of  my  brethren.  The  truth  shall  not  be
sinned  against  by  us,  nor  the  King's  honour  and  the  good  of
his  kingdom  diminished.

3.  We  give  thanks  to  your  clemency  for  the  kindly
answer  which  you  deigned  to  send  us.  But  still  we  are
terrified  to  delay,  as  we  see  the  land  given  over  to  plunder
and  robbery.  The  land  is  yours  ;  and  we  plainly  see  and
mourn  the  disgrace  brought  on  your  kingdom  by  your
orders  that  we  should  abstain  from  our  rights,  inasmuch  as
there  is  no  one  to  defend  them.  For  in  what  else  that  has
been  done  can  the  king's  majesty  be  truly  said  to  have
been  diminished  ?  The  election  was  duly  held  ;  the  person
elected  is  faithful,  which  he  would  not  be  if  he  wished  to
hold  your  lands  otherwise  than  through  you.  He  has  not
yet  stretched  out  his  hand  to  your  lands,  he  has  not  yet
entered  your  city,  he  has  not  yet  put  himself  forward  in
any  affair,  though  most  earnestly  pressed  to  do  so  by  the
united  voice  of  clergy  and  people,  by  the  oppression  of  the
afflicted,  and  by  the  prayers  of  all  good  men.  And  since
this  is  the  state  of  affairs  there  is,  you  see,  need  for  counsel
to  be  quickly  taken,  not  less  for  the  sake  of  your  honour
than  our  necessity.  And  unless  your  Serenity  give  answer
according  to  their  petition,  by  the  messengers  who  bring
this,  to  your  faithful  people  who  look  to  you,  the  hearts  of
many  religious  men  who  are  now  devoted  to  you  will  be
turned  against  you  (which  would  not  be  expedient),  and  I
fear  that  no  little  loss  will  accrue  to  the  regalia  belonging
to  the  Church,  which  yet  are  yours.


510  LETTER CLXXI.

LETTER CLXXI. (A.D. 1139.)
To POPE INNOCENT.

On  behalf  of  Falco, Archbishop  elect  of  Lyons.

I  think  that  I,  who  have  so  many  times  been  listened  to-
in  the  affairs  of  others,  shall  not  be  confounded  in  my  own.
I,  my  lord,  hold  the  cause  of  my  Archbishop  to  be  my
own,  being  a  member  of  him,  and  knowing  that  there  is
nothing  that  affects  the  head  but  what  touches  me,  which,,
nevertheless,  I  would  not  say  if  the  man  had  taken  this
honour  to  himself,  and  had  not  been  called  by  God,  as  was
Moses.  Nor  can  I  think  that  it  was  the  work  of  any  but
Him  that  the  votes  of  so  many  men  were  so  readily  given
him,  that  there  wras  not  even  any  hesitation,  still  less
opposition.  And  deservedly  so.  He  is  distinguished  not
only  for  his  high  birth,  but  also  for  the  nobility  of  his
mind,  for  his  knowledge,  and  his  irreproachable  life.  In
short,  the  integrity  of  his  name  fears  not  the  tooth  even  of
a  foe.  What,  therefore,  has  been  so  done  for  so  good  a
man  is  surely  wrorthy  to  obtain  the  favour  of  the  Apostolic
See,  the  fulness  of  honour,1  which  is  the  only  thing  now
lacking,  to  increase  the  joy  of  its  people  that  has  grown
accustomed  to  its  kindness,  or,  I  may  say,  to  the  liberality
which  he  has  fully  deserved.  This  is  what  the  whole
Church,  with  most  earnest  supplication,  implores ;  this  is
what  your  son,  with  his  usual  presumption,  entreats  of  you.


LETTER  CLXXII. (A.D. 1139.)

To  THE  SAME,  IN  THE  NAME OF  GODFREY,  BISHOP  OF

LANGRES.

He  expresses  the  same  thought  as  in  the  preceding  Letter,

Amidst  the  numerous  evils  which  nowadays  are  seen  in
the  churches  on  the  occasion  of  elections  the  Lord  hath
looked  down  from heaven upon our Mother Church of
1  I.e.,  the  pallium. — [E.]


LETTER CLXXII.  511

Lyons,  and  has  without  strife  given  it  a  worthy  successor
to  Peter  of  pious  memory,  its  Archbishop,  in  the  person  of
Falco,  its  Dean.  I  ask,  my  lord,  that  he  who  has  been
unanimously  elected  by  his  fellows,  promoted  for  the  good
of  all,  and  duly  consecrated,  may  receive  at  your  hands  the
fulness  of  honour  that  belongs  to  his  office.  And  what
makes  me  seek  this  is  not  so  much  consciousness  of  his
merits,  but  of  my  duty — duty  laid  upon  me  not  only  by  the
metropolitan  dignity  of  that  Church,  but  because  I  am
placed  in  this  position  in  order  that  I  may  bear  my  testimony
to  the  truth.

LETTER CLXXIII. (A.D. 1139.)

TO THE ABOVE-NAMED FALCO.

Bernard recommends to him the interests of  certain

Religions.

The  Lord  Bishop  and  I  have  written,  as  we  thought  we
ought  to  do,  to  my  lord  the  Pope  on  your  behalf,  and  you
have  a  copy  of  your  letters.  It  is  our  determination  to  stand
by  you  with  all  our  might,  because  of  the  good  which  we
hope  for  from  you  for  the  Church.  It  concerns  you  so  to>
act  that  we  may  not  be  disappointed  of  our  hope.  For  the
rest,  if  1  have  found  favour  in  your  sight  I  pray  you  think
of  those  poor  and  needy  ones  at  the  house  of  Benissons
Dieu.1  Whatsoever  you  do  to  one  of  them  you  will  do  to
me,  nay,  to  Christ.  For  they  are  both  poor,  and  they  live
amongst  the  poor.  I  especially  implore  you  to  prevent  the
monks  of  Savigny  from  molesting  them,  for  they  are
calumniating  them  unjustly,  as  I  consider.  Or  if  they
think  that  they  have  justice  on  their  side,  judge  between
them.  I  ask  also  that  my  son,  Abbot  Alberic,  though
well  deserving  of  your  favour  through  his  own  merits,  may

1  Benissons  Dieu  was  a  Cistercian  Abbey,  an  offshoot  of  Clairvaux,  in  the
Diocese  of  Lyons,  and  was  founded  A.D.  1158.  Alberic  was  its  first  Abbot.
Not  far  from  it  was  the  monastery  of  Savigny,  of  the  order  of  S.  Benedict,  in
the  same  diocese.  Its  Abbot  was  Itcrius,  of  whom  Bernard  here  complains.


512  LETTER CLXXIV.

still  be  in  even  greater  regard  through  my  recommendation.
For  I  love  him  tenderly,  as  a  mother  loves  her  only  child,
and  he  that  loveth  me  will  love  him.  In  fact,  I  shall  find
out  whether  you  care  for  me  by  the  way  you  treat  him.
For  the  farther  he  is  away  from  me  the  more  necessary  is  it
that  he  should  have  consolation  from  your  fatherly  care.


LETTER  CLXXIV. (Circa  A.n. 1140.)

To  THE  CANONS  OF  LYONS, ON  THE  CONCEPTION OF

S.  MARY.

Bernard  states  that  the  Festival  of  the  Conception  was
new  ;  that  it  rested  on  no  legitimate  foundation  ;  and  that
it  should  not  have  been  instituted  without  consulting  the
Apostolic  Sec,  to  whose  opinion  he  submits.

i.  It  is  well  known  that  among  all  the  Churches  of
France  that  of  Lyons  is  first  in  importance,  whether  we
regard  the  dignity  of  its  See,  its  praiseworthy  regulations,
or  its  honourable  zeal  for  learning.  Where  was  there  ever
the  vigour  of  discipline  more  flourishing,  a  more  grave
and  religious  life,  more  consummate  wisdom,  a  greater
weight  of  authority,  a  more  imposing  antiquity  ?  Especially
in  the  Offices  of  the  Church,  that  of  Lyons  has  always  shown
itself  opposed  to  attempts  at  sudden  innovation,  and  it  is  a
proof  of  her  fulness  of  judgment  that  she  has  never  suffered
herself  to  be  stained  with  the  mark  of  rash  and  hasty  levity.
Wherefore  I  cannot  but  wonder  that  there  should  have  been
among  you  at  this  time  some  who  wished  to  sully  this
splendid  fame  of  your  Church  by  introducing  a  new  Festival,
a  rite  which  the  Church  knows  nothing  of,  and  which
reason  does  not  prove,  nor  ancient  tradition  hand  down  to
us.  Have  we  the  pretension  to  be  more  learned  or  more
devoted  than  the  Fathers  ?  It  is  a  dangerous  presumption
to  establish  in  such  a  matter  what  their  prudence  left  un-
established.  And  the  matter  in  question  is  of  such  a  nature
that  it  could  not  possibly  have  escaped  the  diligence  of  the


LETTER CLXXIV.  513

Fathers if  they  had not thought  that  they ought not  to
occupy  themselves  with  it.

j.  The  Mother  of  the  Lord,  you  say,  ought  greatly  to  be;
honoured.  You  say  well,  but  the  honour  of  a  queen  loves
justice.  The  royal  Virgin  does  not  need  false  honour,
since  she  is  amply  supplied  with  true  titles  to  honour  and
badges  of  her  dignity.  Honour  indeed  the  purity  of  her
flesh,  the  sanctity  of  her  life,  wonder  at  her  motherhood
as  a  virgin,  adore  her  Divine  offspring.  Extol  the  prodigy
by  which  she  brought  into  the  world  without  pain  the
Son,  whom  she  had  conceived  without  concupiscence.
Proclaim  her  to  be  reverenced  by  the  angels,  to  have  been
desired  by  the  nations,  to  have  been  known  beforehand  by
Patriarchs  and  Prophets,  chosen  by  God  out  of  all  women
and  raised  above  them  all.  Magnify  her  as  the  medium  by
whom  grace  was  displayed,  the  instrument  of  salvation,  the
restorer  of  the  ages  ;  and  finally  extol  her  as  having  been
exalted  above  the  choirs  of  angels  to  the  celestial  realms.
These  things  the  Church  sings  concerning  her,  and  has
taught  me  to  repeat  the  same  things  in  her  praise,  and
what  I  have  learnt  from  the  Church  I  both  hold  securely
myself  and  teach  to  others;  \Uiat  I  have  not  received  from
the  Church  I  confess  I  should  with  great  difficulty  admit-
I  have  received  then  from  the  Church  that  day  to  be
reverenced  with  the  highest  veneration,  when  being  taken
up  from  this  sinful  earth,  she  made  entry  into  the  heavens;
a  festival  of  most  honoured  joy.  With  no  less  clearness
have  I  learned  in  the  Church  to  celebrate  the  birth  of  the
Virgin,  and  from  the  Church  undoubtedly  to  hold  it  to  have
been  holy  and  joyful  ;  holding  most  firmly  with  the  Church,
that  she  received  in  the  womb  that  she  should  come  into
the  world  holy.  And  indeed  I  read  concerning  Jeremiah,
that  before  he  came  forth  from  the  womb  [vent re  :  other
wise  dc  -vulva}  he  was  sanctified,  and  I  think  no  otherwise
ol  John  the  Baptist,  who.  himself  in  the  womb  of  his
mother,  felt  the  presence  of  his  Lord  in  the  womb  (S.  Luke
i.  41).  It  is  matter  for  consideration  whether  the  same
opinion  may  not  be  held  of  holy  David,  on  account  of  what


5H  LETTER CLXXIV.

he  said  in  addressing  God  :  In  Thee  I  have  been
strengthened  from  tlie  womb  :  Thou  art  He  who  took  me
out  of  my  mother's  bowels  (Ps.  Ixxi.  6)  ;  and  again  :  /  was
cast  upon  Thee  from  the  womb  :  Thou  art  my  God  from
my  mother's  belly  (Ps.  xxii.  10).  And  Jeremiah  is  thus
addressed  :  Before  I  formed  thec  in  the  belly  I  knew  thee  ;
and  before  thou  earnest  out  of  the  womb  I  sanctified  thee
(Jer.  i.  5).  How  beautifully  the  Divine  oracle  has  dis
tinguished  between  conception  in  the  womb  and  birth  from
the  womb  !  and  showed  that  if  the  one  was  foreseen  only,
the  other  was  blessed  beforehand  with  the  gift  of  holiness  :
that  no  one  might  think  that  the  glory  of  Jeremiah  consisted
only  in  being  the  object  of  the  foreknowledge  of  God,  but
also  of  His  predestination.

3.  Let  us,  however,  grant  this  in  the  case  of  Jeremiah.
What  shall  be  said  of  John  the  Baptist,  of  whom  an  angel
announced  beforehand  that  he  should  be  filled  with  the
Holy  Ghost,  even  from  his  mother's  womb?  I  cannot
suppose  that  this  is  to  be  referred  to  predestination  or  to
foreknowledge.  For  the  words  of  the  angel  were  without
doubt  fulfilled  in  their  time,  as  he  foretold  ;  and  the  man
(as  cannot  be  doubted)  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  at  the
time  and  place  appointed,  as  he  predicted.  But  most  cer
tainly  the  Holy  Ghost  sanctified  the  man  whom  He  filled.
But  how  far  this  sanctilication  availed  against  original  sin,
whether  for  him,  or  for  that  prophet,  or  for  any  other  who
was  thus  prevented  by  grace,  I  would  not  rashly  deter
mine.  But  of  these  holy  persons  whom  God  has  sanctified,,
and  brought  forth  from  the  womb  with  the  same  sanctifica-
tion  which  they  have  received  in  the  womb,  I  do  not  hesi
tate  to  say  that  the  taint  of  original  sin  which  they
contracted  in  conception,  could  not  in  any  manner  take
away  or  fetter  by  the  mere  act  of  birth,  the  benediction
already  bestowed.  Would  any  one  dare  to  say  that  a  child
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  would  remain  notwithstanding
a  child  of  wrath  ;  and  if  he  had  died  in  his  mother's  wombr
where  he  had  received  this  fulness  of  the  Spirit,  would
endure  the  pains  of  damnation?  That  opinion  is  very


LETTER CLXXIV.  515

severe  ;  I,  however,  do  not  dare  to  decide  anything  re
specting  the  question  by  my  own  judgment.  However
that  may  be,  the  Church,  which  regards  and  declares,  not
the  nativity,  but  only  the  death  of  other  saints  as  precious,
makes  a  singular  exception  for  him  of  whom  an  angel
singularly  said,  and  many  shall  rejoice  in  his  birth  (S.  Luke
i.  14,  15),  and  with  rejoicing  honours  his  nativity.  For
why  should  not  the  birth  be  holy,  and  even  glad  and  joyful,
of  one  who  leaped  with  joy  even  in  the  womb  of  his
mother?

4.  The  gift,  therefore,  which  has  certainly  been  conferred
upon  some,  though few,  mortals,  cannot  for  a  moment  be
supposed  to  have  been  denied to  that  so  highly  favoured
Virgin,  through  whom  the  whole  human  race  came  forth  into
life. Beyond  doubt  the mother  of  the  Lord  also  was  holy
before  birth  ;  nor  is  holy  Church  at  all  in  error  in  account
ing  the  day  of  her  nativity  holy,  and  celebrating  it  each
year  with  solemn and  thankful  joy. I  consider  that  the
blessing  of  a  fuller  sanctification  descended  upon  her,  so  as
not  only  to  sanctify  her  birth,  but  also  to  keep  her  life  pure
from  all  sin  ;  which  gift  is  believed  to  have  been  bestowed
upon  none  other  borne  of  women. This  singular  privilege
of  sanctity,  to  lead  her  life  without  any  sin,  entirely  befitted
the  queen  of  virgins,  who  should  bear  the  Destroyer  of  sin
and  death,  who  should  obtain  the  gift  of  life  and  righteous
ness for all. Therefore,  her birth was holy, since the
abundant  sanctity  bestowed  upon  it  made  it  holy  even  from
the  womb.

5.  What  addition  can  possibly  be  made  to  these  honours?
That her conception,  also,  they  say,  which  preceded  her
honourable  birth,  should  be  honoured,  since  if  the  one  had
nut  first taken place, neither would  the  other,  which is
honoured. But  what  if  some  one  else,  following  a  similar
train of  reasoning, should assert  that the honours of  a
festival  ought  to  be  given to  each  of her  parents,  then  to
her  grandparents,  and  then to  their  parents,  and  so  on  ait
infinitum  ? Thus  we  should  have  festivals  without  number.
Such  a  frequency  of  joys  befits  Heaven,  not  this  state  of  exile.


LETTER CLXXIV.

It  is  the  happy  lot  of  those  who  dwell  there,  not  of  strangers
and  pilgrims.  But  a  writing  is  brought  forward,  given,  as
they  say,  by  revelation  from  on  high,1  as  if  anyone  would
not  be  able  to  bring  forward  another  writing  in  which  the
Virgin  should  seem  to  demand  the  same  honours  to  her
parents  also,  saying,  according  to  the  commandment  of  the
Lord,  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother  (Exod.  xx.  12).
I  easily  persuade  myself  not  to  be  influenced  by  such
writings,  which  are  supported  neither  by  reason  nor  by
any  certain  authority.  For  how  does  the  consequence
follow  that  since  the  conception  has  preceded  the  birth,
and  the  birth  is  holy,  the  conception  should  be  considered
holy  also  ?  Did  it  make  the  birth  holy  because  it  preceded
it  ?  Although  the  one  came  first  that  the  other  might  be,
yet  not  that  it  might  be  holy.  From  whence  came  that
holiness  to  the  conception  which  was  to  be  transmitted  to
the  birth  which  followed  ?  Was  it  not  rather  because  the
conception  preceded  without  holiness  that  it  was  needful
for  the  being  conceived  to  be  sanctified,  that  a  holy  birth
might  then  follow  ?  Or  shall  we  say  that  the  birth  which
was  later  than  the  conception  shared  with  it  its  holiness  ?
It  might  be,  indeed,  that  the  sanctification  which  was
worked  in  her  when  conceived  passed  over  to  the  birth
which  followed ;  but  it  could  not  be  possible  that  it  should
have- a  retrospective  effect  upon  the  conception  which  had
preceded  it.

6.  Whence,  then,  was  the  holiness  of  that  conception  ?
Shall  it  be  said  that  Mary  was  so  prevented  by  grace  that,
being  holy  before  being  conceived,  she  was  therefore  con
ceived  without  sin  ;  or  that,  being  holy  before  being  born,
she  has  therefore  communicated  holiness  to  her  birth  ?  But
in  order  to  be  holy  it  is  necessary  to  exist,  and  a  person
does  not  exist  before  being  conceived.  Or  perhaps,  when
her  parents  were  united,  holiness  was  mingled  with  the
conception  itself,  so  that  she  was  at  once  conceived  and
sanctified.  But  this  is  not  tenable  in  reason.  For  how

1  A  writing  of  this  kind  is  attributed  to  an  English  abbot  named  Elsin  in  the
works  of  Anselra,  pp.  505,  507  of  the  new  edition.


LETTER CLXX1V.  517

can  there  be  sanctity  without  the  sanctifying  Spirit,  or  the
co-operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  with  sin  ?  Or  how  could
there  not  be  sin  where  concupiscence  was  not  wanting  ?
Unless,  perhaps,  some  one  will  say  that  she  was  conceived
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  not  by  man,  which  would  be  a  thing
hitherto  unheard  of.  I  say,  then,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  came
upon  her,  not  within  her,  as  the  Angel  declared  :  The  Holy
Spirit  shall  come  upon  thcc  (S.  Luke  i.  35).  And  if  it  is
permitted  to  say  what  the  Church  thinks,  and  the  Church
thinks  that  which  is  true,  I  say  that  she  conceived  by  the
Holy  Spirit,  but  not  that  she  was  conceived  by  Him  ;  that
she  was  at  once  Mother  and  Virgin,  but  not  that  she  was
born  of  a  virgin.  Otherwise,  where  will  be  the  prerogative
of  the  Mother  of  the  Lord,  to  have  united  in  her  person  the
glory  of  maternity  and  that  of  virginity,  if  you  give  the
same  glory  to  her  mother  also  ?  This  is  not  to  honour  the
Virgin,  but  to  detract  from  her  honour.  If,  therefore,  before
her  conception  she  could  not  possibly  be  sanctified,  since
she  did  not  exist,  nor  in  the  conception  itself,  because  of
the  sin  which  inhered  in  it,  it  remains  to  be  believed  that
she  received  sanctification  when  existing  in  the  womb  after
conception,  which,  by  excluding  sin,  made  her  birth  holy,
but  not  her  conception.

7.  Wherefore,  although  it  has  been  given  to  some,  though
few,  of  the  sons  of  men  to  be  born  with  the  gift  of  sanctity,
yet  to  none  has  it  been  given  to  be  ^conceived  with  it. So
that  to  One  alone  should  be  reserved  this  privilege,  to  Him
who  should  make  all  holy,  and  coming  into  the  world,  He
alone,  without  sin should  make  an  atonement  for sinners.
The Lord Jesus, then, alone  was  conceived  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  because  He  alone  was  holy  before  He  was  conceived,
lie being  excepted, all the children- of  Adam  are  in  the
same case as he who confessed  of himself with great
humility  and  truth,  /  was  shapcn in  iniquity,  and  in  sin
hath  my  mother  conceived  me  (Ps.  li.  6).

8.  And as this is so,  what  ground  can  there be  for a
Festival of the Conception of the Virgin  ? On what
principle,  I  say,  is  either  a  conception  asserted  to  be  holy


5l  LETTER CLXXIV.

which  is  not  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  not  to  say  that  it  is  by  sin,
or  a  festival  be  established  which  is  in  no  wise  holy  ?
Willingly  the  glorious  Virgin  will  be  without  this  honour,
by  which  either  a  sin  seems  to  be  honoured  or  a  sanctity
supposed  which  is  not  a  fact.  And,  besides,  she  will  by  no
means  be  pleased  by  a  presumptuous  novelty  against  the
custom  of  the  Church,  a  novelty  which  is  the  mother  of
rashness,  the  sister  of  superstition,  the  daughter  of  levity.
For  if  such  a  festival  seemed  advisable,  the  authority  of  the
Apostolic  See  ought  first  to  have  been  consulted,  and  the
simplicity  of  inexperienced  persons  ought  not  to  have  been
followed  so  thoughtlessly  and  precipitately.  And,  indeed,
I  had  before  noted  that  error  in  some  persons ;  but  I
appeared  not  to  take  notice  of  it,  dealing  gently  with  a
devotion  which  sprang  from  simplicity  of  heart  and  love  of
the  Virgin.  But  now  that  the  superstition  has  taken  hold
upon  wise  men,  and  upon  a  famous  and  noble  Church,  of
which  I  am  specially  the  son,1  I  know  not  whether  I  could
longer  pass  it  over  without  gravely  offending  you  all.  But
what  I  have  said  is  in  submission  to  the  judgment  of  who
soever  is  wiser  than  myself ;  and  especially  I  refer  the
whole  of  it,  as  of  all  matters  of  a  similar  kind,  to  the
authority  and  decision  of  the  See  of  Rome,  and  I  am
prepared  to  modify  my  opinion  if  in  anything  I  think
otherwise  than  that  See.


LETTER CLXXV. (A.D. 1135.)
To  THE  PATRIARCH  OF  JERUSALEM.2

Having  received  many  letters  from  him,  Bernard
replies  in  a  friendly  manner,  and  praises  the  soldiers
of  the  Temple.

1  The Church  of  Lyons  was  the  Mother  Church  of  Bernard  because  of  its
"metropolitan  rights,"  as  he  himself  says  in  Letter 172,  since  he  was  born  at
Fontaines,  near  Dijon,  and  lived  at  the  monastery  of  Clairvaux,  both  of  which
places  were  in  the  Diocese  of  Langres  and  Province  of  Lyons.

2  William  a  Gallo-Belgian,  and  a  monk  of  Tours,  was  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem
from  A.D.  1 130  to  A.D.  1 145.  See,  for  more  information  about  him,  the  history  of
the  Blessed  Mary  of  Fountains  (Spicilegium,  Vol.  x.  p.  3^9),  where  there  is  a


LETTER CLXXV.  519

I  shall  seem  ungrateful  if  I  do  not  reply  to  the  many
patriarchal  letters  which  you  have  vouchsafed  me.  But
what  more  can  I  do  than  salute  him  who  has  saluted  me  ?
For  you  have  prevented  me  with  the  blessings  of  goodness,
you  have  graciously  set  me  tin;  example  of  sending  letters
across  the  sea,  you  have  deprived  me  of  the  first  share  of
humility  and  charity.  What  fitting  return  can  I  now  make?
In  truth,  you  have  left  me  nothing  which  in  my  turn  I  can
give  back;  for  even  of  your  worldly  treasures  you  have
been  careful  to  make  me  a  sharer  in  giving  me  part  of  the
Cross  of  the  Lord.  What  then  ?  Ought  1  to  omit  what  I
can  do  because  I  cannot  do  what  I  ought?  I  show  you  my
affection  at  least  and  my  goodwill  by  merely  replying  and
returning  your  salutation,  which  is  all  that  I  can  do  at

O J

present,  separated  as  we  are  by  so  great  a  tract  of  sea  and
land.  I  will  show,  if  ever  I  have  the  opportunity,  that  I
love  not  in  word  or  in  tongue,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth.
Give  a  thought,  I  pray  you,  to  the  soldiers  of  the  Temple,
and  of  your  great  piety  take  care  of  these  zealous  defenders
of  the  Church.  If  you  cherish  those  who  have  devoted
their  lives  for  their  brethren's  sake  you  will  do  a  thing
acceptable  to  God  and  well-pleasing  to  man.  Concerning
the  place  to  which  you  invite  me,  my  brother  Andrew1  will
tell  you  my  mind.

desciiption  of  the  relics  sent  by  him  to  Fountains  through  Lambert,  a  monk  of
the  place.  Onlericus  says  at  the  end  of  his  thirteenth  book  :  "  In  the  year  ii2«S
died  Germumius.  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem.  After  him  succeeded  Stephen  of
Chartres,  who  reigned  in  holy  Sion  for  two  years  ;  after  him  came  William  of
Flanders."  The  same  author  mentions  a  Ralph  as  Patriarch.  But  certainly,
on  the  authority  of  William  of  Tyre,  William  buried  King-  Baldwin  A.D.  1142,
and  was  succeeded  by  Fulcher  in  114:.  Either  William  had  two  appellations
or  Ordericus  has  made  a  mistake.  Letter  ^03  was  written  also  to  the  same
Patriarch.

1  Was  this  Andrew  the  uncle  of  S.  Bernard,  one  of  the  Knights  Templars,
to  whom  Letter  288  was  written  ?  or  was  it  his  brother,  a  monk  of  Clairvaux,
mentioned  in  the  1841!!  Letter?  or  Andrew  of  Baudiment,  mentioned  in
Letter  226,  n.  2  ?  The  place  mentioned  here  may  be  the  one  conceded  to  the
Praemonstratensians  by  Bernard.  See  Letter  252.


LETTER CLXXVI.

LETTER CLXXVI. (Circa A.D. 1135.)

To  POPE  INNOCENT,  IN  THE  PERSON  OF  ALBERO,  ARCH
BISHOP  OF  TREVES.1

Bernard  declares  in  the  name  of  the  Archbishop  his
own  respect  and  obedience  and  that  of  t/ic  citramontane
Churches  towards  Innocent.

It  has  long  been  the  wish  of  my  heart,  -and  my  eager
desire,  to  pay  you  a  visit,  and  see  the  welcome  face  of  your
Blessedness,  and  to  know,  moreover,  more  certainly  how
things  are  with  you,  and  in  turn  to  acquaint  you  more
closely  with  my  own  affairs  ;  and  this  motive  has  been  long
pressing  and  ceaselessly  urging  me  to  make  a  journey  to
you.  But  having  been  hindered  by  the  wickedness  of  the
world  and  of  the  times,  and  also,  besides  my  daily  troubles,
by  some  matter  important  to  you,  I  have  not  yet  been  able,
nor  am  I  even  yet  able  to  carry  out  my  wish.  But  must  a
purpose  that  is  sound  and  righteous  be  altogether  given  up
because  it  cannot  be  wholly  carried  out  ?  I  have  determined,
therefore,  to  satisfy  in  some  degree  in  the  meantime  the
desire  I  have  so  long  felt,  and  to  make  known  to  you  my
anxiety,  by  means  of  this  venerable  man,  Hugh,  Archdeacon
of  the  Church  of  Toul.  Nor  could  anyone  be  more  faithful,
more  devoted,  or  more  cautious  than  he  in  matters  of
importance,  whether  in  bringing  to  you  what  I  charge  him
with,  or  in  bringing  back  to  me  whatever  matters  you  may
have  been  pleased  to  entrust  to  him.  I  desire,  then,  and
implore  you  to  inform  me  more  fully  in  your  goodness,  of
the  state  of  the  Court,  of  the  safety  of  your  person,  and  if
by  the  Divine  goodness  any  more  favourable  breeze  has
perchance  blown  upon  the  Church  in  her  struggles  against
the  wanton  but  ineffectual  madness  of  the  schismatics.
For  the  rest  you  know  that  the  Church  on  this  side  of  the
Alps,  both  here  and  in  the  realm  of  France,  is  strong  in  the
faith,  peaceful  in  unity,  devoted  in  its  obedience  to  you,

1  Letter  30  was  addressed  to  him  when  at  Metz,  when  he  was made  Arch
bishop  of  Treves. In  the  same  Letter  he  is  called  "archangel  of  Treves."


LKTTER CLXXVI.  521

ready  for  your  service.  The  loss  of  Beneventum,  of
Capua,  nay,  if  God  so  will  it,  of  Rome  herself  cannot
terrify  me;  knowing  that  the  position  of  the  Church  is  not
to  be  estimated  by  arms  but  by  merits.  Of  her  and  of  no
other  we  recognize  those  words  in  the  Psalm  :  Though  an
host  should  encamp  against  me  my  heart  shall  not  fear,  and
though  there  rose  up  war  against  me  yet  will  I  put  my  trust
in  Him  (Ps.  xxvii.  3).  Therefore  we,  because  we  are  of
the  Church,  will  not  fear  while  the  earth  is  troubled  and  the
mountains  removed  into  the  midst  of  the  sea.  The  Sicilian
tyrant  may  boast  himself  as  much  as  he  pleases,  he  may  boast
in  wickedness  because  he  is  powerful  in  iniquity,  but  our
strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness.  Paul  has  learned
that  the  weaker  the  Church  is  the  more  powerful  she  is
(2  Cor.  xii.  10).  He  has  learnt  directly  and  from  Solomon
that  the  prosperity  of  fools  slays  them  (Prov.  i.  32).  He
has  learned  when  he  sees  a  fool  flourishing,  to  curse  his
beauty  immediately  (Job  v.  3).  Therefore  with  holy  David
he  consoles  himself  in  both  ways,  viz.,  in  the  fall  of  his
enemies  and  in  his  own  liberation.  He  says,  indeed,  They
put  their  trust  in  chariots  and  in  horses,  but  we  will  call  on
the  Name  of  the  Lord  our  God.  They  are  brought  down
and  fallen,  but  we  are  risen  and  stand  upright  (Ps.  xx.
7,  8).  These  few  words  on  matters  about  which  I  am  quite
sure,  I  thought  ought  to  be  addressed  to  you  by  faithful
testimony  in  the  way  of  comfort  ;  to  relieve  in  some  degree
that  anxiety  which  the  care  of  all  the  churches  incessantly
brings  upon  you.  I  add  this  also,  that  the  king,1
God  strengthening  him,  is  zealous,  and  is  making  ready
for  the  liberation  of  the  Church,  and  is  collecting  an  ex
ceedingly  great  army ;  and  that  I  also  am  labouring  for
this  end  with  all  my  strength,  and  am  exhorting  and  stirring
up  every  one  that  I  can.  When  the  time  comes  I  will
spare  neither  expense  nor  my  own  person.

1  The  Emeror  Lothaire.


VOL.  ii.  34


522  LETTER CLXXVII.

LETTER CLXXVII. (Circa  A.D. 1139.)
To  THE  SAME,  IN  THE  PERSON  OF  THE  SAME.

He  complains  of  the  pastoral  charge  laid  upon  him.  He
is  hindered  in  its  discharge  by  the  envy  of  certain  persons,
not  without  fault  in  the  Pope  himself.

Did  I  ever  seek  the  episcopate  from  you,  my  lord  ?  And
if  ever  I  aspired  to  a  bishopric  it  was  certainly  not  that  of
Treves.  For  I  knew  it  to  be  an  exasperating  house,  a
stiff-necked  people.  I  hated  them  because  they  had  always
wallowed  in  discord,  and  always  resisted  the  Church.  For
her  if  I  have  ever  undergone  any  labours  I  grieve  not,  but  I
never  hoped  or  wished  for  any  such  fruit  as  this.  I  have
laboured  arduously,  but  willingly,  and  not  with  any  hope  of
reward.  I  have  been  assigned  for  my  sins  a  difficult
province.  Amongst  my  other  troubles  there  is  this,  that  my
suffragans  are  young  and  nobly  born.1  They  ought  to  be
assistants,  and  would  that  they  were  not  opponents.  But  I
pass  this  by.  I  prefer  that  their  characters  and  pursuits  be
made  known  to  you  by  another,  if  you  are  ignorant  of
them.  Still,  I  say  that  law,  right,  integrity,  and  religion
have  perished  out  of  our  episcopates.  The  evil,  which
the  duty  I  owe  to  my  office  will  not  allow  me  to  conceal,  I
have  briefly  pointed  out,  that  what  it  does  not  please  your
providence  should  be  corrected  by  me  may,  at  all  events,  be
made  known  to  you  who  can  correct  it,  lest  I  seem  altogether
to  bear  in  vain  the  name  of  archbishop.  And,  indeed,  it
would  have  been  better  for  me  not  to  have  ascended  my
throne  than  thus  shamefully  to  descend.  But  what  does  it
matter  about  myself  ?  Let  me  suffer  what  I  deserve,
inasmuch  as  I  do  amiss.  Let  me  be,  as  I  am,  a  scorn  to  my
friends,  who  have  been  frustrated  of  the  hope  which  they
had  conceived  about  me  in  wishing  me  to  preside  over
them,  whilst  they  see  that  the  dignity  of  the  Church  is  by

1  Viz.,  Stephen  of  Metz,  from  A.D  1120,  sister's  son  to  Calixtus  II.;  Albero
of  Verdun,  from  A.D.  1126,  son  of  Arnulf,  Count  of  Chisney  ;  Henry  of  Toul,
from  A.D.  1 124,  son  of  Theodoric,  Duke  of  Lorraine.  Many  praiseworthy  actions
are  recorded  of  them  all.


LETTER CLXXVIII.  523

me  rather  diminished,  instead  of  its  old  losses  being
repaired,  as  they  had  expected  they  would  be.  All  these
tilings  I  bear  patiently,  if  not  willingly,  that  I  may  not  seem
to  kick  against  the  obedience  I  owe  you,  for  which  I  confess
I  am  willing,  if  need  be,  to  lay  down  my  life.  But  I  wish
ihat  you  would  carefully  consider  this,  that  injury  done  to
the  thing  created  reflects  on  the  creator.  The  strength
which  you  withdraw  from  me  you  rob  yourself  of,  and  my
scorn  and  helplessness  casts  disgrace  on  you.  I  have  many
things  to  complain  of  to  you  about  yourself,  but  I  leave
them  to  be  explained  by  the  messenger,  whom  I  know  to  be
diligent  and  faithful  for  this  purpose.  I  tell  you  also  that
we  are  in  danger  amongst  false  brethren.  The  ambassadors
of  the  schismatics  come  and  go  to  some  of  our  supporters
more  freely  than  they  used  to,  and  the  messages  of  the
.Sicilian  tyrant  are  admitted  frequently.


LETTER CLXXVIII. (A.D. 1139.)
To  THE  SAME,  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  SAME.

He  complains  t/iat  some  evil-disposed  persons  abuse
their  powers  to  tJie  injury  of  tlie  Church,  while  zealous
prelates  are  powerless.

To  his  most  loving  Father  and  Lord,  INNOCENT,  Supreme
Pontiff,  his  BERNARD  writes  in  entire  devotedness.

i.  I  write  confidently  because  I  love  faithfully.  For  that
is  no  sincere  love  which  cherishes  doubt,  and  retains  the
<lregs  of  suspicion.  The  complaint  of  my  Lord  of  Treves
is  not  his  alone,  but  of  many,  and  of  those  especially  who
love  you  with  a  more  sincere  affection.  The  one  cry  of  all
who  faithfully  preside  over  the  flock  among  us  is  that
justice  in  the  Church  is  perishing,  that  the  keys  of  the
Church  are  mere  ornaments,  that  the  Episcopal  authority
is  altogether  become  vile,  since  no  one  of  the  Bishops  is
able  to  avenge  the  wrongs  done  to  God,  nor  is  allowed  to
punish  for  misdeeds,  however  glaring,  no,  not  even  in  his


524  LETTER CLXXVIII.

own  diocese.  They  refer  the  cause  to  you  and  to  the
Roman  Curia.  You  annul,  they  say,  what  they  have  rightly
established,  and  establish  what  they  have  justly  annulled.
All  the  evil  and  quarrelsome  men,  whether  from  the  clergy
or  the  monasteries,  hasten  to  you  when  they  are  expelled,
and  then  return  and  boast,  and  rejoice  that  they  have
obtained  as  protectors  those  whom  they  ought  to  have  felt
as  their  chastisers.  Was  not  the  sword  of  Phinees  most
promptly  and  righteously  unsheathed  to  punish  the  in
cestuous  alliance  of  Drosro  and  Milis  ?  But  it  returned  to

O

Its  sheath  dulled  and  blunted,  being  met  by  the  shield  of  an
Apostolic  defence.  Alas  !  wrhat  ridicule  has  this  caused,,
and  is  still  causing,  among  the  enemies  of  the  Church,  and
especially  among  those  very  men  who  have  made  us
wander  out  of  the  right  way  through  fear  or  favour.  Our
friends  are  confounded,  the  faithful  are  insulted,  the  Bishops
everywhere  come  into  shame  and  contempt.  And  when
their  just  judgments  are  contemned  your  authority  is  also
diminished.

2.  It  is  these  very  men  who  are  zealous  for  your
honour,  who  labour  faithfully,  if  fruitlessly,  for  your  peace
and  exaltation.  Why  do  you  lessen  their  influence  ? — why
do  you  weaken  their  power  ?  For  how  long  will  you
blunt  the  weapons  of  those  who  are  faithfully  fighting
for  you,  and  lower  the  standards  raised  in  defence  of  your
power  and  safety  ?  The  Church  of  S.  Gengulph  at  Toul
grievously  bewails  her  desolation,  and  there  is  none  to
comfort  her.  For  who  can  oppose  himself  to  the  stroke  of
a  powerful  arm,  to  the  force  of  a  torrent,  to  the  decision
of  the  Supreme  Power?  The  Church  of  S.  Paul  at  Verdun1
complains  that  it  suffers  the  same  violence,  as  the  Arch-

1  The  monastery  of  S.  Paul  of  Verdun,  of  the  Order  of  Benedictines,  having
relaxed  the  bonds  of  discipline,  had  fallen  into  great  license;  and  therefore
Albero  II.,  Bishop  of  Verdun,  who  had  succeeded  Ursio  in  the  year  1131,  had  it
transferred  to  the  Praemonstratensians,  with  the  approval  of  Pope  Innocent.
The  monks  of  the  place  for  a  long  time  withstood  the  change ;  and  even  Peter
the  Venerable,  generally  a  most  retiring  man,  warmly  expostulated  with
Matthew,  Bishop  of  Albano.  Innocent,  somewhat  shaken  by  their  complaints,
was  preparing  to  rehear  the  cause,  but  was  persuaded  by  S.  Bernard  to  let  the
matter  stand  ;  and  he,  therefore,  confirmed  by  letter  what  Albero  had  done.


l.KTTKR CLXXVI1I.  525

bishop  has  now  no  power  to  defend  it  against  the  violence  of
the  monks  ;  and  as  though  they  were  not  outrageous  enough,
they  are  further  supported  by  the  Apostolic  See.  What
fresh  reason,  I  ask,  has  been  found  why  that  should  again
come  into  court  and  be  brought  under  discussion  which  has
been  once  granted,  wisely  and  without  question,  to  canons
of  good  fame  and  life,  then  confirmed  and,  as  they  say,
again  renewed  ?  Indeed,  the  establishment  of  both  those
places  above  mentioned  is  said  to  have  been  first  sanctioned
by  you,  and  yet  is  now  revoked.  With  such  sacrifices  God
is  not  well-pleased.  Alas  !  His  anger  is  not  turned  away,
His  grace  is  not  won,  His  mercy  is  not  called  forth.  For
these  and  such  things  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  is  not  yet
averted  ;  but  His  arm  is  stretched  out  still,  and  the  rod
mentioned  by  Jeremiah  is  ever  ready  for  our  sins.

3.  In  truth,  God  is  wroth  with  the  schismatics;  but  He  is  by
no  means  well-pleased  with  the  Catholics.  The  Church  of
Metz  is,  as  you  have  found,  in  danger,  through  a  grievous
quarrel  between  the  Bishop  and  the  clergy.  You  know
what  it  may  be  your  pleasure  to  decide  about  it ;  but  there
is  there  no  peace  yet,  nor  is  it  hoped  for  in  the  near  future.
I  (not  to  conceal  what  seems  best  to  my  unworthiness)
think  that  this  and  the  troubles  of  the  Churches  of  Toul  and
Verdun  can  be  most  safely  and  conveniently  settled  by  the
Metropolitan,  who  knows  all  the  facts,  has  had  great  ex
perience,  and  by  the  testimony  of  the  Church  has  been  found
faithful.  Moreover,  think  what  evil  you  are  inflicting  on
those  two  dioceses  of  Toul  and  Metz  ;x  for,  to  speak  truth,

1  The  charges  brought  here  by  S.  Bernar.l  against  the  Bishops  of  Metz  and
Toul  are  to  be  understood  of  Stephen  of  Metz  and  Henry  of  Toul,  since  this
Letter  was  written  during  the  schism  of  Anacletus,  about  the  year  i  135.  The
first  Appendix  of  the  History  of  Ike.  Bishops  of  MtU  speaks  of  Stephen  as
follows  :  "  Stephen,  illustrious  for  his  birth,  still  more  illustrious  for  his  virtue
and  uprightness,  succeeded  Poppo  as  Bishop  of  the  Burgundians  and  Lorrainers
in  A.I).  1120,  the  second  year  of  Calixtus  II.  Henry  V.  was  at  that  time
Kmperor,  and  owing  to  the  contest  between  the  Church  and  State,  refused  to
put  him  in  possession  of  his  See;  and  accordingly  Stephen  was  consecrated  at
Rome  by  the  Supreme  Pontiff,  and  honoured  with  the  pall  and  title  of  Cardinal.
It  is  not  easy  to  conjecture  why  S.  Bernard  complains  of  him  so  bitterly.  For
besides  the  quotation  above,  we  also  find  it  said  of  him  in  the  same  History  :
"  If  I  were  to  try  to  reckon  up  and  record  the  good  deeds  done  by  him  and


526  LETTER CLXXVIII.

they  seem  to  be  without  Bishops,  and  1  would  that  they
were  without  tyrants.  When  such  men  are  protected,  sup
ported,  honoured,  cherished,  many  are  greatly  amazed  and
scandalized  ;  since  they  most  surely  know  of  that  in  their
characters  and  lives,  which  in  any  of  the  laity,  to  say  nothing
of  a  Bishop,  should  be  severely  censured  and  execrated.
What  it  is  I  should  be  ashamed  to  write,  and  it  would  not
befit  you  to  read.  Be  it  so,  that  without  an  accuser  they
cannot  be  deposed,  yet  why  should  those  whom  common
rumour  accuses  be  honoured,  and  yet  further  exalted,  with
the  special  favour  of  the  Apostolic  See  ?

4.  For  by  what  merit  of  his  own,  whether  of  his  sanctity
as  priest,  or  honour  as  bishop,  has  the  Bishop  of  Metz
obtained  leave  to  quash,  together  with  the  liberty  of
the  Church,  at  his  mere  bidding,  an  election  duly  made
by  the  Canons,  and  to  have  the  Primicerius l  elected
on  his  recommendation  against  the  privileges  of  the
Church  ?2  W^ould  it  not  be  more  just  and  honest,  if

worthy  to  be  handed  down  I  should  have  more  matter  than  paper."  Nay,  S.
Bernard  himself,  in  his  2(;th  Letter,  congratulates  him  on  the  restoration  of
peace  to  the  Church  at  Metz,  and  in  Letter  367  commends  him  to  Guido,  the
Chancellor.  It  is  possible  that  Stephen  may  have  displeased  S.  Bernard
through  having  stirred  up  several  contests,  caused  cities  to  be  besieged,  and
castles  to  be  destroyed  in  trying  to  recover  the  goods  of  the  Church  which  had
been  stolen  by  the  nobles.  It  was  things  of  this  sort,  as  described  in  the  same
History,  which  made  S.  Bernard  call  him,  in  Letter  230,  "  a  lion  rather  than  a
shepherd  of  the  sheep."  When  Albero  was  chosen  for  the  Bishopric  of  Lie'ge,
in  the  year  1135,  and  the  Canons  had  duly  chosen  a  successor  to  him,  Stephen
attempted  to  intrude  a  nominee  of  his  own.  Thence  ensued  a  bitter  strife  which
Innocent  endeavoured  to  put  an  end  to  directly,  passing  over  the  jurisdiction  of
the  Metropolitan,  the  Archbishop  of  Treves.  It  is  this  that  S.  Bernard  here
complains  of.  As  far  as  Henry  of  Toul  is  concerned,  perhaps  S.  Bernard  was
in  the  same  way  badly  informed  about  the  protracted  negotiations  with  respect
to  war  carried  on  with  Frederick,  Count  of  Toul,  and  at  length  brought  to  an
end  m  the  year  1 136.

1  With  respect  to  this  title,  see  Note  on  Letter  30. — [E.]

-  The  Archbishop  of  Treves  claimed  for  himself  the  monastery  of  S.  Maxi-
min,  near  Treves,  against  the  Abbot  and  monks.  On  the  othtr  hand,  Henry,
Count  of  Luxembourg,  endeavoured  to  claim  obedience  to  himself  in  temporal
matters  as  the  advocate  of  the  monastery.  This  claim  caused  strife,  led  to  war
and  great  slaughter  on  both  sides.  This  explains  S.  Bernard's  allusion  when  he
says  that  the  Archbishop  had  recovered  the  Church's  goods,  and  had  freed  the
captive  Church  from  a  lay-hand.


LETTKR CLXXVIII.  527

it  should  seem  good  to  your  discretion,  that  a  man  worthy
of  greater  honour  should  not  be  deprived  of  that  which  is
deservedly  his  own  ?  I  mean  the  Archbishop  of  Treves,
whom,  to  the  great  indignation  of  many  who  fear  God,  you
have  excluded  from  ending  these  and  other  matters  in  his
diocese,  as  though  he  were  under  suspicion,  or  were  inex
perienced.  Believe  your  faithful  servant  that,  as  far  as  I
have  found,  this  is  wholly  injurious  to  that  province.

5.  In  writing  these  things  I  should  fear  the  charge  of  pre
sumption  if  I  knew  not  to  whom  I  am  writing,  and  who  I  am
that  write.  But  I  know  your  natural  gentleness,  and  I  feel
assured  that  you  know  both  me  and  the  disposition  with
which  I  venture  on  these  matters  with  you,  my  most  sweet
and  loving  father.  One  word  more  with  regard  to  the  Arch
bishop;  in  order  that  you  may  know  how  his  messenger  ought
to  be  regarded,  I  may  mention  to  you  that  he  holds  a  high
position  in  that  realm,  that  he  is  a  man  faithful  and  constant
to  you  and  the  Church  of  God,  and  gives  no  countenance  to
our  ill-wishers,  and  to  those  who  would  overturn  you,  by
whom  he  is  frequently  and  sorely  tempted  ;  and  that  we  shall
be  derided  if  by  any  chance  he  should  not  be  listened  toby
you.  I  wished  lastly  to  commend  the  messenger  to  you,
but  the  merit  of  his  honesty  sufficiently  commends  him,
and  especially  his  exceeding  love  and  faithful  devotion  to
you.  Indeed,  if  I  thought  he  had  not  this,  I  would  by  no
means  send  by  his  hand  such  private  letters.


LETTER CLXXIX. (A.D. 1139.)
To  THK  SAME,  ON  BEHALF  OK  THE  SAME.

He  maintains  the  cause  of  Albero,  Archbishop  of  Treves,
against  flic  Abbot  of  S.  Maximin  and  his  rebellious
monks.

Is  it  possible  that  wickedness  can  thus  overcome  wisdom  ?
You  know,  holy  Father,  you  know  the  Archbishop  of
Treves.  I  am  sure  that  you  know  him.  But  do  you  know


528  LETTER CLXXIX.

also  that  unholy  Abbot  of  the  holy  Maximin?  I  suspect
that  you  do  not.  Who  is  worthier  of  honour  than  the  first?
Who  more  deserving  of  shame  than  the  second  ?  Yet  the
latter  has  been  honoured,  the  former  given  to  reproach.
How  has  the  Archbishop  sinned  ?  He  has  recovered  the
goods  plundered  from  his  Church,  he  has  freed  his  captive
Church  from  lay-hands.  Why  is  evil  returned  him  for  his
good,  and  hatred  for  his  goodwill  ?  Let  your  loving  eye,  I
pray  you,  rest  on  this  ;  lay  aside  for  a  moment  your  other
occupations,  and  consider  what  he  has  been  robbed  of;  that
such  a  man  as  the  one — I  am  ashamed  to  say  what  he  is —
should  hold  up  to  scorn  to  his  neighbours  and  enemies  such
a  man  as  yourself  know  the  Archbishop  to  be.  Holy
Father,  it  is  filial  affection  which  speaks.  So  far  I  have
sympathized  with  the  unhappy  and  much-to-be-pitied  Arch
bishop.  But  if  after  this,  this  injustice  is  not  rectified,  the
grief  of  my  heart,  and  my  deep  compassion  will  wholly
pass  over  to  him  by  whom  it  could  have  been  rectified.
There  are  other  wrongs  done  to  the  same  man,  and  in
alleviating  them  you  will  undoubtedly  be  labouring  for
yourself.  Whatever  stains  the  name  of  my  most  sweet
Lord  pierces  my  heart.

LETTER  CLXXX. (Circa  A.D. 1136.)
To  THE  SAME  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  SAME.

He  commends  to  the  Pontiff  the  cause  of  the  Archbishop

of  Treves.

Again  supplication  and  prayers,  though  ten  times  re
peated,  shall  not  cease.  I  desist  not  because  I  distrust  not.
I  have  a  good  cause  and  a  just  judge,  who  will  not  hesitate
to  annul  whatever  has  been  stealthily  gained,  when  the
truth  is  evident,  so  that  he  who  wished  to  scoff  will  not  be
able  to  find  cause  for  his  malicious  humour,  but  as  it  is
written,  His  iniquity  deceived  himself  (Ps.  xxvi.  12,
VULG.).  The  Apostolic  See  is  wont  to  have  this  virtue
especially,  that  it  is  not  ashamed  to  recall  a  grant  when  it


LETTER CLXXX.  52Q

has  discovered  it  to  have  been  extracted  by  fraud,  and  not
to  be  truly  deserved.  It  is  most  just  and  praiseworthy  that
no  one  should  benefit  by  a  lie,  especially  at  the  hand  of  the
supreme  and  holy  See.  Knowing  this,  your  son  supplicates
without  fear  on  behalf  of  the  Archbishop  of  Treves,  and  is
thus  urgent,  not  as  uncertainly.  I  certainly  know  his  merits,
his  cause,  his  mind.  For  which  of  these  do  his  monks  wish
to  stone  him  ?  Because  he  has  deserved  ill  of  them  ?  But
he  faithfully  helped  them,  and  served  them  greatly.  For
the  injustice  of  his  cause?  But  no  one  but  an  unjust  man
will  speak  of  him  as  unjust.  Because  he  freed  them  from
a  lay-hand  ?  Nay,  he  recovered  their  monastery  for  tin-
episcopal  See,  as  though  wringing  his  club  out  of  the  hand
of  Hercules  with  a  stronger  hand.  Is  it  because  of  the
wickedness  of  his  intention  ?  But  it  is  a  pious  deed  to  do
as  he  intended,  viz.,  to  reform  religion  in  a  monastery.
The  Lord  help  the  heart  of  my  lord,  that  it  may  not  again
be  stolen  away  by  monks,  who  are  not  so  much,  as  they
pretend,  seeking  liberty,  but  really  flying  from  discipline.


LETTER CLXXXI. (Circa A.D. 1136.)

To  THE  CHANCELLOR  HAIMERIC.
He  protests  his  gratitude  for  the  benefits  he  has  received.

If  I  wished  to  repay  you  in  words  for  the  good  deeds
with  which  you  overwhelm  me  it  would  be  as  if  one,
attacked  with  arrows,  should  defend  himself  with  straws  ;
except  that  this  last  would  seem  a  mere  game,  the  other
deceit.  Deeds  ought  to  be  repaid  by  deeds.  But  such
return  is  difficult  for  me  who  am  poor  and  in  low  station.
Poor  I  am  in  goods  and  strength,  but  not  in  good  wishes.
Your  kindnesses,  then,  which  I  cannot  repay  with  good
deeds  I  will  with  prayers.  I  am  rich  in  good  wishes,  I
abound  in  affection.  And  surely  a  true  benefactor  asks  no
more.  For  in  what  way  is  a  man  beneficent  if  he  is  not
also  benevolent?  Besides,  the  benevolent  man  thinks


530  LETTER CLXXXI.

nothing  dearer  to  himself  than  the  very  benevolence  from
which  he  is  called  benevolent  and  is  beneficent.  Again,  the
fruit  of  beneficence  is  benevolence,  unless  perchance  any
one  think  that  to  be  a  benefit  bestowed  which  he  has  sown
in  hope  or  lost  through  fear.  But  who  does  not  see  that
this  last  is  abandoned,  the  other  sold,  neither  given  ?  A
benefit,  therefore,  to  be  real  must  be  gratuitous.  And  so,
to  be  repaid  anything  by  the  receiver,  cannot  be  so  pleasing
to  the  giver  as  to  have  gratitude  felt  for  what  he  has
gratuitously  given.  And  this  benevolence  in  the  mind  of
the  receiver  springs  from  the  benevolence  in  that  of  the
giver,  a  beneficent  act  intervening.  In  this  benevolence  I
confess  myself  rich ;  this  I  offer  to  my  benefactor  from  a
full  heart  as  a  worthy  return  ;  this  I  devoutly  send  up  to
the  Creator  of  all  as  a  sacrifice  of  praise  for  the  salvation
of  my  benefactor.

LETTER  CLXXXIL (Circa  A.D. 1136.)
To  HENRY,  ARCHBISHOP  OF  SENS.1

He blames  him  for harshness in deposing his Arch
deacon  against  rule.

Often,  I  confess,  I  have  been  going  to  write  to  you  on
behalf  of  many,  and  I  had  determined  not  to  do  so  because
of  your  hateful  harshness,  but  charity  shall  prevail.  I  wish
to  retain  for  you  your  friends,  and  you  disdain  it ;  I  wish  to
reconcile  your  enemies,  and  you  suffer  it  not.  You  wish
not  for  peace,  but  for  shame  and  deposition ; 2  you  are
hastening  on  your  confusion  with  hands  and  feet.  You  are
multiplying  your  accusers,  alienating  your  supporters.  You

1  This  is  a  severe  Letter,  and  is  written  to  the  same  Bishop  to  whom  in  Letter
42  he  gave  such  wholesome  advice  about  the  office  and  character  of  Bishops.
This  Letter  was  written  close upon A.D.  1140, certainly before A.D.  1144, in
which year Henry died, and  was  succeeded  by Hugh. About  his  death  see
Letter  102.

2  That  he  was suspended A.D. 1136  is evident from  the  fact  that Hugh,
Abbot  of  Pontigny,  was  consecrated  Bishop  of  Auxerre,  at  Ferrara,  by  Geoffrey,.
Bishop  of  Chartres,  "  because  of  the  suspension  of  the  Metropolitan  Henry." —
Labl-e's  History  of  the  Bishops  of  Auxerre,  c.  55.


LETTER CLXXXII.  531

are  stirring  up  against  yourself  quarrels  long  laid  to  rest,
provoking  your  adversaries,  offending  your  protectors.
You  do  all  from  caprice  and  not  from  reason,  all  for  power,
nothing  from  the  fear  of  God.  Who  is  there  of  your
enemies  that  does  not  laugh  at  you,  who  of  your  friends
that  does  not  complain  ?  Why  do  you  degrade  a  man  who
is  not  only  not  convicted  after  trial,  but  not  even  heard  ?
What  scandal  will  this  cause  !  how  many  mouths  will  it
stir  to  derision,  how  many  hearts  to  indignation  !  And  do
you  suppose  that  justice  has  perished  out  of  the  earth  as  it
has  out  of  your  heart,  that  a  man  should  lose  his  arch
deaconry  taken  from  him  in  this  way?  But  you  perhaps
are  better  pleased  to  give  it  back  after  seizing  it,  rather
than  to  deserve  his  gratitude  by  suffering  him  to  retain  it :
but  this  you  have  lost  by  your  way  of  acting.  Do  not,  I
beseech  you,  do  not  do  this  thing;  all  who  hear  of  it  wrill
be  amazed,  no  one  will  praise  you.  These  words  that  I
have  written  are  more  biting  and  more  bold  than  you  may
like,  but  if  you  are  willing  to  correct  your  ways,  you  will
see  that  they  are  not  unwise,  nor  to  your  disadvantage.


LETTER CLXXXIII. (A.I). 1139.)

To  CONRAD,  KING  OF  THE  ROMANS.
He  urges  upon  him  reverence  for  the  Apostolic  Sec.

Your  letters  and  salutations  I  receive  as  gladly  as  I  am
unworthy  of  them  ;  unworthy  I  mean  in  dignity,  not  in
devotion.  The  complaints  of  the  King  are  also  mine,  and
especially  those  which  you  rightly  make  about  the  invasion
of  the  Empire.  I  have  never  wished  for  the  disgrace  of  the
King,  or  the  diminution  of  his  kingdom  ;  the  violent  my
soul  abhorreth.  I  have  read  indeed  :  Let  every  soul  he
subject  unto  the  higher  powers;  he  who  resistcth  fin-
power  resisteth  the  ordinance  of  God  (Rom.  xiii.  1,2).
Which  sentence  I  ask  and  warn  you  to  observe  in  every
way,  by  showing  reverence  to  the  supreme  Apostolic  See,
and  to  the  Vicar  of  Blessed  Peter,  just  as  you  wish  it


532  LETTER CLXXXIV.

shown  to  you  by  the  whole  empire.  There  are  some
matters  which  I  have  thought  it  best  not  to  write  of,  but
which  I  could  more  suitably  perhaps  speak  of  in  person.


LETTER CLXXXIV. (A.D. 1140.)
To  THE  LORD  POPE  INNOCENT.

He  excuses  himself  for  not  being well  able  to  send  the
monks  asked  of  him.

We  have  received  again  my  brother  Andrew  *  safe  and
in  good  spirits,  and  bringing  good  news  of  your  safety  and
glory,  of  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  the  Church,  of  the
flourishing  and  powerful  state  of  the  Roman  Curia,  and
lastly  of  the  favour  and  good-will  which  you  still  have  for
me.  God  in  His  mercy  has  dealt  well  with  me:  He  has
made  me  joyful.  But  your  wish  that  we  should  send
brothers  to  you  will  be  with  difficulty  complied  with,  chiefly
because  we  have  not  the  number  of  members  we  once  had.
Indeed,  besides  those  who  have  been  destined  in  twos  or
threes  to  different  cells,  three  new  monasteries  have  been
wholly  founded  out  of  them  since  I  left  you,  and  others  are
about  to  be  founded.  Still  I  will  take  care  to  summon
from  all  our  houses  some  whom  I  may  send  you,  as  I  desire
in  all  things  to  obey  your  commands.3


LETTER CLXXXV. (A.D. 1138.)

To  EUSTACE,  INTRUSIVE  OCCUPIER  OF  THE  SEE  OF
VALENCE.

Bernard  exhorts  him  to  think  of  his  age  and  his
approaching  death,  and  not  to  give  ear  to  the  perfidious
counsels  of  flatterers.

1  Either  Andrew,  Bernard's  brother, a Cistercian,  or  the  one mentioned  in
Letter  i  76,  or  Andrew  of  Baudiment,  mentioned  in  Letter  226.

2  The  Pontiff  wished  to  have  a  colony  of  Cistercians placed  at  Rome  in  the
Church  of  S.  Anastasius  at  Aquae  Salviae. Another  colony  which  was  under  the
rule  of  another  Abbot  Bernard,  who  was  afterwards  Eugenius  III.,  had  been  sent
to  Farfa,  and  this  he  placed  at  Aquae Salviae A.n.  1 140. See  the  third  book  of
his  Life,  n.  23,  and  also  S.  Bernard's  Letters  343  and  345.


LKTTKR CI.XXXV.  533

To the illustrious EUSTACK, Brother BERNARD  sends
greeting.

i.  I  often  wish  your  salvation,  my  illustrious  brother,
though  I  do  not  often  write.  Who  shall  forbid  the  wish  ?
Neither  laws  govern,  nor  princes  hold  sway  over  the  affec
tions.  They  are  free,  especially  if  led  by  the  Spirit,  for
where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty  (2  Cor.  iii.
17).  Thence  it  is  that  I  am  now  venturing  to  write  to
your  greatness  as  though  I  were  some  great  one,  though,  I
confess,  I  have  neither  been  bidden,  nor  asked,  nor  invited
by  you  to  do  so.  But  what  if  charity  bid  me  ?  Another
may,  perhaps,  take  it  differently  ;  I  have  determined  by
this  letter,  so  far  as  in  me  lies,  and  with  true  charity,  to
remind  an  illustrious  man  of  his  salvation,  to  arouse  him
from  sleep,  to  recall  him  to  himself,  to  summon  him  to
grace.  Who  knows  whether  God  will  turn,  and  pardon,
and  leave  a  blessing  behind  Him?  Nay,  who  knows  not
what  and  how  great  are  the  riches  of  His  goodness,  and
long  suffering,  which  a  merciful  and  compassionate  God
has  treasured  up  for  him?  In  short,  He  is  merciful,  He
spares,  waits,  and  hides  Himself  even  till  now,  having  made
Himself  as  a  man  who  heareth  not,  and  in  whose  mouth
are  no  reproofs,  delaying  to  strike,  ready  to  pardon.  But
thou,  my  Lord,  how  long  ?  Thou,  I  say,  O  good  man,  how
long  wilt  thou  hide  thyself  from  Him?  how  long  wilt  thou
despise  Him?  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks
(Acts  ix.  5).  Knowest  thou  not  that  the  goodness  of  God
is  leading  thcc  to  repentance  ?  How  long  wilt  thou,  after
thv  hardness  and  impenitent  heart,  heap  up  for  thyself
wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath  ?  (Rom.  ii.  4,  5).

2.  Or  is  it  not  according  to  thy  hardness  indeed,  but  ac
cording  to  thy  shame?  What  matters  it  according  to  what
you  are  perishing?  O,  shame,  void  of  reason,  enemy  of
salvation,  ignorant  of  all  honour  and  honesty  !  This  truly  is
that  of  which  the  Wise  Man  says,  that  there  is  a  shame  which
bringeth  sin  (Ecclus.  iv.  21).  Is  it,  then,  a  shame  for  a  man
to  be  overcome  by  God,  and  is  it  to  be  held  a  disgrace  to
humble  one's  self  under  the  mighty  hand  of  the  Most  High?


534  LETTER CLXXXV.

That  glorious  King  David  says  thus  :  Against  Thee  only
have  I  sinned  and  done  this  evil  in  Thy  sight,  that  Thou
viightest  be  justified  in  Thy  sayings  and  mightest  overcome
when  Thou  art  judged  (Ps.  li.  4).  The  highest  kind  of
victory  is  to  yield  to  the  Divine  Majesty;  and  not  to  strive
against  our  mother,  the  Church,  is  the  highest  honour  and
glory.  O,  perversity  !  You  are  not  ashamed  to  be  polluted,
and  yet  you  are  ashamed  to  be  cleansed.  There  is  a  shame,
according  to  the  Wise  Man,  which  brings  glory  (Ecclus.  iv.
21),  viz.,  that  which  keeps  from  sin.  But  even  if  you  are
not  ashamed  to  sin,  there  remains  a  glory,  though  it  comes
late,  viz.,  when  shame  brings  back  that  which  guilt  had
banished.  They,  whose  iniquities  are  forgiven  and  whose
sin  is  covered  (Ps.  xxxii.  i),  hold  the  second  place  of
blessedness.  An  honourable  covering  is  that  of  which  it  is
said,  Confession  and  beauty  are  in  his  sight  (Ps.  xcvi.  6,
VULG.).  Who  will  grant  me  to  see  you  in  golden  apparel,
•so  that  I  can  say  to  you  also :  Thou  hast  put  on  confession
and  honour,  thou  hast  clad  thyself  with  light,  as  with  a
garment  (Ps.  civ.  i,  2)  ;  Return,  O  Shunamite,  that  we  may
see  thee  (Cant.  vi.  13)  ;  Awake,  awake,  put  on  thy  strength,
put  on  the  garment  of  salvation  (Isa.  lii.  i)  ;  Awake
thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ
shall  give  thee  light  (Eph.  v.  14)  ;  Confession  perisheth
from  the  dead  as  from  one  who  is  not  (Ecclus.  xvii.  28).
3.  How  long  will  you  forget  yourself,  for  ever  ?  How  long
will  you  sleep  in  death,  O  ornament  of  the  noble,  but  grief
of  the  faithful  ?  How  long  will  you  be  stubbornly  opposed
to  your  spiritual  good,  an  exile  from  your  honour,  a  rebel
against  your  salvation  ?  Why  do  you  proceed  to  consum
mate  your  previous  excellent  character  and  actions  with  so
different  an  ending  ?  How  can  such  an  old  age,  which
ought  to  be  spent  quietly  in  fruitful  deeds  of  mercy,  wipe
out  the  punishment  due  to  all  your  past  days,  or  blot  out
their  guilt  ?  Why,  alas  !  should  your  hoary  head  alone,
which  should  be  reverenced,  be  robbed  of  its  accustomed
veneration  ;  why  should  it  alone  sink  unhonoured  into  the
.grave,  when  it  should  have  been  especially  respected  ?


LETTER CLXXXV.  535

Have  pity  on  thy  soul  by  pleasing  God  (Ibid.  xxx.  23)  ;
For  they  who  please  men  have  been  put  to  confusion,  for
God  hath  despised  them  (Ps.  liii.  5).  The  time  of  man  is
short ;  to  the  old  man  death  is  at  the  door.  You  have  a
short,  a  very  short  time  with  those  who  say  to  you,  Well  !
well !  Let  it  be  also  a  light  thing  to  you  to  be  judged  by
them,  or  by  man's  little  day,  since  you  are  even  now  ready
to  be  brought  before  the  scrutiny  of  angels  ;  and,  un
happy  man  that  you  are,  are  being  hastened  by  the  very
failure  of  nature  before  the  dread  tribunal  of  Christ.  You
ought  to  be  preparing  yourself  for  that  judgment,  to  be
conforming  yourself  to  that  world,  to  be  seeking  the  favour
of  that  Court,  and  dreading  rejection  from  it.  Why  are
you  disturbed  by  the  opinion  of  those  whose  praise  at
that  day  will  be  found  not  to  render  you  approved,  nor
their  abuse  to  condemn  you  ?  In  short,  the  children  of
men  arc  vanity,  the  children  of  men  are  a  lie  in  the  scales,
that  they  may  alike  deceive  in  their  vanity  (Ps.  Ixii.  9).

4.  Besides,  those  who  call  you  blessed  lead  you  into  error  ;
they  give  you  words  and  take  back  gifts.  Vain  both,  but
especially  the  words.  And  you  deceive  from  vanity  like
them  ;  but  you  are  more  deceived,  they  less.  For  you  give
what  at  all  events  is  worth  something,  and  you  give  it  to
the  ungrateful  and  undeserving.  Indeed,  they  love  your
goods,  not  you ;  nay,  rather  they  love  neither  you  nor
yours,  but  they  seek  their  own.  Your  goods,  as  far  as
they  can,  they  will  hunt  after  with  their  empty  and  lying
flatteries.  Their  words  are  smoother  than  oil,  and  yet
they  are  very  darts  (Ps.  liii.  21).  And  therefore  David
said  :  The  oil  of  the  sinner  shall  not  anoint  my  head  (Ps.
cxli.  5).  By  them  the  sinner  is  praised  in  the  desires  of
his  soul  and  the  wicked  is  blessed  (Ps.  x.  3).  It  is  not  I,
then,  but  the  Wise  Man  who  bids  you  beware  of  them.
My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee,  consent  thou  not  (Prov.  i.
10).  Attend  rather  to  Him  who  judges  in  equity  for  the
meek  of  the  earth  ;  the  meek  whom  your  pastoral  can-
does  not  feed,  but  whom  your  secular  power  oppresses,
over  whom  you  would  have  no  power  at  all  except  it  were


536  LETTER CLXXXVI.

given  you  from  above.  But  this  is  your  hour  and  the
power  of  darkness.  But  listen  to  this  :  Judgment  is
severe  for  those  who  govern,  and  mighty  men  shall  be
mightily  tormented  (Wisd.  vi.  6,  7).  If  you  fear  this  you
will  take  care  ;  if  you  disregard  it  you  will  fall  into  it,  and
it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living
God  (Heb.  x.  31).  May  the  one  true  God  avert  this,  who
wishes  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  should
be  converted  and  live  (Ezek.  xviii.  23,  32).  My  mind  bids
me  say  more,  but  you  perchance  would  not  listen.  Rough
words  please  not,  although  true  and  wholesome,  because
they  are  bitter  and  disagreeable  to  the  taste.  Therefore  I
will  put  my  ringer  on  my  lip  till  I  knowr  how  this  is
received  ;  but  you  may  believe  that  I  will  be  agreeable  to
you  if  I  can,  yet  not  with  pen  or  with  tongue,  but  in  deed
and  in  truth.

LETTER CLXXXVI. (Circa A.D. 1140.)
To SIMON, SON  OF THE CASTELLAN OF  CAMBRAY.1

Bernard  recommends to his  protection the monks  of
Vaucelles, and begs  him to ratify  the donation of  his
father.

I  have  heard,  dearly  beloved,  from  Ralph,  Abbot  of
Vaucelles,  that  you  greatly  long  to  see  and  speak  to  me,
and  I  was  greatly  pleased  with  your  so  great  devotion  to
me,  nor  am  I  ungrateful  for  your  goodwill.  You  know  it
is  my  wish  to  satisfy  your  desire  ;  but  I  am  hindered  from
carrying  out  my  wrish  not  only  by  bodily  illness,  but  also
by  very  many,  and  very  important,  matters  of  business.
But  though  absent  in  the  body  I  am  present  in  spirit,  until
such  a  time  as  I  may  be,  if  God  will,  present  with  you  in
body  and  in  spirit.  If,  however,  we  love  not  in  mouth  and
tongue  only,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth,  the  truth  of  our  love

1  Cambray  is  wanting  in  all  copies  ;  some  have  D'Oisy.  Both  are  right ;
for  in  this  Letter  mention  is  made  of  the  monks  of  Vaucelles,  of  the  Cistercian
Order,  founded  near  Cambray  A.D.  1132,.  The  author  of  the  Life  of  S.  Goswin,
Abbot  of  Anchin,  praises  Simon  of  Oisy  (lib.  ii.  c.  19).


LETTER CI. XXXVII.


537


will  best  appear  in  action.  And  so  this  is  what  I  ask,  that
you  will  love,  cherish,  and  whenever  necessary  protect  the
brothers  of  Vaucelles  and  their  Church,  so  that  in  this  you
may  afford  a  signal  mark  of  your  liberality,  and  that  there
may  be  a  clear  proof  of  that  affection  which  you  promise
me.  That  affection  I  wish  now  first  to  make  trial  of  in  this
one  point:  Will  you  ratify  to  me  the  lands  of  Ligecourt,
which  your  father  conferred  on  me  in  person  for  the  support
of  that  monastery,  so  as  not  to  make  void  the  grant  of  your
father?  I,  for  my  part,  giving  thanks  for  past  kindnesses,
and  hoping  for  the  like  in  the  future,  offer  up  my  prayers  for
you  and  yours  to  Him  who  performs  the  wish  of  those  who
fear  him,  and  hears  their  prayer  (Ps.  cxlv.  19).  We  pray
for  the  welfare  of  you  and  your  wife,  and  all  who  belong  to
you.

LETTER CLXXXVII. (A.D. 1140.)

To  CALL  TOGETHER  THE  BISHOPS  OF  THE  ARCHDIOCESE
OF SENS  AGAINST  PETER ABAELARD. x

He  urges  the  Bishops  to  energetic  action  in  the  cause  of
religion  against  Abaelard.

1  Peter  was  born  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Nantes  ;  his  father's  name  was
Berengarius,  his  mother's  Lucia.  He  first  studied  philosophy  at  Paris  under
William  of  Champeaux,  then  mathematics  under  Roscelin,  and  then  theology
under  Anselm  at  Laon,  not  without  envy  and  admiration.  He  afterwards
entered  on  the  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures  at  Paris,  and  attracted  many
disciples,  amongst  them  Heloise,  a  niece  of  Fulbert,  a  Canon  of  Paris,  whose
mind  he  trained,  but  violated  her  body.  Fulbert  being  enraged  at  this  injury
revenged  himself  on  Abaelard,  who  wished  to  repair  by  marriage  the  wrong  that
he  had  done,  by  breaking  into  his  room  at  night  and  cruelly  mutilating  him.
Both  lovers  then  sought  hiding  places  for  their  shame,  one  became  a  nun  at
Argenteuil,  near  Paris,  the  other  a  monk  of  S.  Denys.  But  everywhere  he  was
unlucky,  or  he  made  himself  obnoxious,  and  he  soon  retired  to  a  cell  near  the
monastery  at  Deuil,  and  there  he  publicly  lectured  on  theology.  But  he
gave  the  reins  too  much  to  his  own  genius  and  to  human  reason,  and,  using
expressions  inconsistent  with  the  faith,  he  was  summoned  to  a  Council  held  at
Soissons,  A.D.  1 121,  by  the  Legate  Conon,  and  there  was  compelled  to  burn  his
book  On  the  Jrmity  ,•  or,  Introduction  to  Ttieology,  which  contained  suspected
statements.  He  was  then  handed  over  to  the  monastery  of  S.  Medard  at
Soissons.  At  length,  tired  of  society,  he  was  allowed  to  depart  to  a  cell  situate

VOL.  ii.  35


LETTER CLXXXVII.

in  a  lonely  part  of  the  Diocese  of  Troyes,  where  he  built  an  oratory,  which  he
dedicated  first  to  the  Holy  Trinity,  and  afterwards  to  the  Paraclete.  But  not
even  here  was  quiet  allowed  him.  The  monks  of  S.  Gildas,  in  Brittany,  in  the
Diocese  of  Vannes,  summoned  him  to  be  their  Abbot,  and  he  found  them,  as  he
says  in  his  History  of  His  Calamities,  "  though  Christians  and  monks,  harsher
and  worse  than  heathen."  He  then  returned  to  his  oratory  of  the  Paraclete,
and  handed  it  over  to  He'loise,  with  her  sisters,  who  had  been  driven  from  the
monastery  of  Argenteuil  by  Suger.  Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  who  claimed  it  for  the
Abbey  under  an  old  charter,  A.D.  1127.  He  continued  his  perverse  writings  and
teaching,  and  more  now  began  to  discuss  his  writings,  especially  William,
Abbot  of  S.  Thierry,  who  wrote  a  refutation  of  some  heads  of  his  errors,  and  sent
his  refutation  to  Geoffrey,  Bishop  of  Chartres,  and  Bernard,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
to  stir  them  up  to  avenge  the  wrong  done  to  their  faith.  (See  Letters  326  and
327.)  But  Abaelard,  indignant  at  being  branded  as  a  heretic,  challenged  S.
Bernard,  as  the  author  of  the  charge,  to  a  public  encounter  at  a  Council  held  at
Sens,  A.D.  1 140.  S.  Bernard  went  to  the  Council,  though  against  his  will.
Impious  doctrines  of  Abaelard  were  quoted  from  his  writings,  which  he  was
bidden  to  deny  if  they  were  not  his  opinions,  to  abjure  if  they  were.  But  he
became  confused,  and  unable  to  speak,  as  Geoffrey  of  Auxerre  relates  in  his
Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse,  or  he  was  afraid  of  popular  violence,  as  Otto
of  Frisingen  says,  or  he  thought  it  was  safer  for  him  to  plead  his  cause  at
Rome,  as  S.  Bernard  says,  because  he  had  some  Cardinals  and  clergy  amongst
his  disciples,  and  so  he  appealed  to  the  Roman  Curia.  The  Fathers  of  the
Council,  none  the  less,  proceeded  to  condemn  his  errors,  and  sent  a  list  of  them
to  Innocent,  and  S.  Bernard  wrote  various  Letters,  both  in  his  own  name  and
in  that  of  the  Fathers,  to  Innocent  and  the  Cardinals.  Amongst  Abaelard's
works  there  are  extant  the  heads  of  17  errors  which  the  Synod  transmitted
to  the  Pope;  in  the  Letter  of  S.  Bernard  (No.  190)  and  in  that  of  William
of  S.  Thierry  we  have  nearly  390.  Innocent,  on  the  receipt  of  the  Synodal
Letter,  immediately  wrote  back  the  one  numbered  194  to  the  Fathers  of  the
Council,  condemning  the  errors  ;  and  he  added  another,  giving  sentence  against
Abaelard  in  these  words:  —

"  INNOCENT,  Bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his  venerable  Brothers
SAMSON,  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  HENRY,  Archbishop  of  Sens,  and  to  his  beloved
son  in  Christ,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  health  and  Apostolic  benediction  : —

"  By  these  presents  we  command  you,  brethren,  to  cause  Peter  Abaelard  and
Arnold  of  Brescia,  perverse  manufacturers  of  dogma,  and  impugners  of  the
Catholic  faith,  to  be  imprisoned  separately  in  houses  of  religion  wherever  it
may  seem  best  to  you,  and  to  cause  their  books  to  be  burnt  wherever  they  may
be  found.

''  Given  at  the  Lateran,  xviii.  Kal.  Aug."

On  this  Letter  was  written  :  "  Show  this  transcript  to  no  one  till  this  Letter
shall  have  been  presented  to  the  Archbishops  in  the  assembly  at  Paris."  So
Abaelard,  finding  that  he  had  been  condemned  at  Rome,  desisted  from  his  appeal
on  the  advice  of  Peter,  Abbot  of  Cluny,  by  whom  he  was  kindly  received  into  the
monastery.  Afterwards,  by  Peter's  intervention,  he  was  reconciled  with  S.
Bernard,  and  then,  with  Innocent  and  the  Church  ;  and  having  spent  two  years


LETTER CLXXXVII.  539

at  Cluny  with  great  submission,  he  died,  A.D.  1142,  in  the  (>3rd  year  of  his  age,
in  the  monastery  of  S.  Marcellus,  of  Chalons-sur-Saone,  whither  he  had  been  sent
by  Peter  to  be  cured  of  a  disease  that  he  was  suffering  from.  Peter  the
Venerable,  in  a  Letter  to  He'loise(No.  21,  Book  iv.),  recounts  the  eminent  virtues
that  he  displayed  in  this  last  part  of  his  life.  Abaelard  has  his  too  partial
supporters,  who  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  he  was  innocent  of  all  error.  Firstly,
they  state  that  Bernard  fought  against  shadows  ;  secondly,  they  overturn  the
authority  of  the  Council  of  Soissons  ;  and,  thirdly,  they  reverse  the  verdict  of  the
Roman  Court  given  against  Abaelard.  A  brief  answer  must  be  made  to  these
three  counts.

I.  Against  Bernard  there  is  first  of  all  set  the  authority  of  Otto  of  Frisingen,
who,  although  he  held  Bernard  in  great  veneration  as  his  own  Abbot,  that  is  to
say,  as  the  head  of  his  order,  yet  writes  that  he,  "  because  of  his  zeal  for  the
Christian  religion  was  somewhat  of  a  fanatic,  and  from  his  habitual  meekness
was  credulous;  so  that  from  the  first  he  detested  those  teachers  who  might  put
too  much  reliance  on  human  reason  and  worldly  wisdom,  and  from  the  second
he  was  ready  to  lend  a  favourable  ear  to  any  account,  however  much  against
those  teachers."  Otto,  indeed,  says  this  in  De  Gestis  Frederici  (lib.  i.  c.  47),
but  it  is  in  connection  with  Gilbert  de  la  Porree ;  it  is  an  argument,  however  in
favour  of  Abaelard.  But  Radevicus  testifies,  in  the  same  work  (lib.  ii.  c.  u),
that  Otto,  being  too  partial  to  Gilbert,  declared,  on  his  death-bed,  that  if  he  had
said  anything  with  regard  to  his  sentence  which  could  offend  anyone,  he  would
wish  it  corrected.  This  must  be  taken,  therefore,  as  a  retractation.  Further,
Otto  himself,  in  what  follows,  says  clearly  enough  what  he  thought  of  Abaelard.
He  says :  "  From  his  early  years  he  was  devoted  to  the  study  of  letters,  and  to
other  elegant  pursuits  ;  but  he  was  so  arrogant,  and  had  such  confidence  in  his
o.vn  abilities,  that  he  would  scarcely  deign  to  descend  from  his  intellectual
height  to  listen  to  teachers."  And  again  :  "  Holding  the  meaning  of  words  and
names  in  their  natural  sense,  he  applied  them  incautiously  in  theology.  Where
fore,  in  writing  and  teaching  about  the  Holy  Trinity,  he  over-refined  about  the
Three  Persons,  and  used  inapt  illustrations."  Add  to  this  that  Abaelard,  on
Otto's  own  confession,  was  adjudged  a  Sabellian  heretic  at  the  Council  of
Soissons.  So  much  for  the  authority  of  Otto  against  Bernard.  Then,  in  the
second  place,  the  testimony  of  Peter  the  Venerable  is  brought  forward  in
Abaelard's  favour,  who,  in  the  Letter  to  Heloise  already  referred  to,  says  of  him  :
*'  Germanus  was  not  more  humble,  nor  Martin  himself  more  poor."  Peter  of
Cluny  is  here  speaking  of  those  last  days  which  Abaelard  spent  at  Cluny,  and
truly  enough.  But  was  Bernard  attacking  his  future  merits?  And  can  he,
therefore,  be  said  to  have  been  fighting  against  shadows?  The  Chronicle  of
Cluny,  speaking  of  Peter  the  Venerable,  says>ell :  "  Abaelard,  whose  name  was
Peter,  was  recalled  from  his  errors  by  Peter  the  Venerable,  our  Abbot,  and  by
Bernard,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  and  abjured  what  he  had  held  from  want  of  faith
against  the  faith,  and  became  a  Cluniac  monk.  And  then  his  thoughts,
words,  and  deeds  were  always  divine;  .  .  .  and,  as  is  said  of  Gregory  the
Great,  no  moment  passed  that  he  was  not  praying,  or  reading,  or  writing,  or
dictating.  Wherefore  Peter  the  Venerable  carefully  commending  him,"  &c.
Many  other  remarks  of  this  kind  are  quoted,  extolling  either  the  disposition,  or


540  LETTER CLXXXVII.

the  doctrine,  or  the  excellent  death  of  Abaelard,  as  though  anyone  of  these  affected
Bernard.

II.  A  want  of  power  or  jurisdiction  is  then  alleged  against  the  Synod  of
Soissons,  because  neither  the  Archbishop  of  Sens  nor  of  Rheims,  who  were  pre
sent,  had  any  jurisdiction  over  Abaelard,  as  Abbot  of  S.  Gildas,  in  the  Diocese  of
Vannes,  but  only  the  Metropolitan  of  Tours,  who  was  absent.  But  having  re
turned  twelve  years  before  to  the  oratory  of  the  Paraclete,  which  was  in  the  Diocese
of  Troyes,  he  was  under  the  Archbishop  of  Sens.  In  the  next  place,  he  had  as
judges  men  whom  he  himself  had  chosen,  as  Bernard  says,  in  Letter  191,
written  in  the  name  of  the  Council  to  Innocent.  "  He  appealed,"  he  says,
"  from  the  place  and  the  judges  that  he  himself  had  chosen  to  the  Apostolic
See."  Neither  did  Bernard,  as  some  mistakenly  say,  call  this  Synod  against
Abaelard,  but  rather  Abaelard  forced  Bernard  to  it  against  his  will,  as  is  plainly
stated  in  Letters  187  and  189  ;  moreover,  Geoffrey  of  Auxerre,  a  former  disciple
of  Abaelard,  says  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse :  "  Abaelard  demanded  of
the  Metropolitan  of  Sens  that  a  great  Council  should  as  early  as  possible  be
summoned  in  his  province,  because  the  Abbot  of  Clairvaux  was  secretly  bring
ing  charges  against  his  books.  He  said  that  he  was  ready  to  defend  his
writings  in  public,  and  asked  that  the  aforesaid  Abbot  should  be  summoned  to
the  Council  that  people  might  hear  what  he  had  to  say."  He  was  then  rightly
condemned,  because,  as  jurisconsults  say,  anyone  has  jurisdiction  over  those  who
willingly  submit  themselves  to  it.  The  second  engine  brought  up  to  shake  the
authority  of  the  Synod  is  the  testimony  of  Peter  Berengarius,  of  Poictiers,  who,
in  his  Apology  for  Al-aelard,  his  teacher,  written  against  the  Fathers  of  the
Council,  and  Bernard  in  particular,  utters  such  shameless  falsehoods  and  such
disgraceful  libels  that  it  is  a  wonder  that  any  man  of  ordinary  good  feeling
should  put  up  with  them,  or  bring  forward  such  an  audacious  and  unscrupulous
man,  who  scoffs  at  venerable  Bishops  as  "drunkards,  dogs,  pigs,"  thus  exposing
himself  not  only  to  the  ridicule,  but  also  to  the  just  indignation  of  his  readers.
But  let  us  see  what  in  his  more  lucid  moments  he  wrote  to  the  Bishop  of  Mende
about  S.  Bernard  :  "  Why,  they  say,  now  that  you  have  finished  the  first  volume,
do  you  not  proceed  with  the  second  as  you  had  promised  ?  Because,  in  course
of  time,  I  had  a  clearer  apprehension,  and  I  came  to  be  of  the  same  mind  as
Bernard.  I  was  unwilling  to  be  the  patron  of  the  articles  charged  against
Abaelard,  because  though  their  meaning  was  good,  their  form  was  bad.
Well,  then,  they  say,  when  you  decided  to  leave  the  second  book  alone  why  did
you  not  destroy  the  first  ?  I  would  have  done  so,  I  reply,  if  it  were  not  that  my
work  might  be  of  use  in  furnishing  examples,''  &c.

III.  In  the  third  place  there  is  alleged  against  the  sentence  of  the  Roman
Pontiff  an  indecent  haste  in  pronouncing  it,  because  he  condemned  Abaelard
without  hearing  his  defence.  But  were  not  the  acts  of  the  Council  of  Soissons,
at  which  Abaelard  was  present,  sufficient  evidence  ?  Was  there  any  one  of  the
Cardinals  or  clergy  of  the  Roman  Curia  who  was  not  well  acquainted  with  his
opinions,  or  who  would  not,  if  it  had  been  possible,  have  tried  to  save  him  from
condemnation  whom  very  many  of  them  had  had  as  teacher  ?  Therefore,  let
the  sentence  of  Innocent  stand,  let  the  authority  of  the  Council  and  of  S.  Bernard
stand  unshaken,  and  let  Abaelard  have  no  other  excuse  for  his  error  than  his  own,


LETTER CLXXXVIII.  541

The  news  has  gone  abroad  amongst  many,  and  I  suppose
has  reached  you,  why  we  are  convoked  at  Sens,  within  the
Octave  of  Pentecost,  and  provoked  to  a  contest  in  defence
of  the  Faith,  although  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not
strive,  but  rather  be  patient  to  all.  If  it  were  my  own
cause,  the  son  of  your  Holiness  might  not  undeservedly,
perhaps,  boast  himself  in  your  protection.  But  now  since
it  is  also  yours,  nay,  more  yours  than  mine,  I  bid  you  the
more  confidently,  and  ask  you  the  more  importunately,  to
show  yourselves  friends  in  need.  I  mean,  friends  not  to
me,  but  to  Christ,  whose  Bride  calls  to  you  that  she  is
well-nigh  choked  in  the  midst  of  a  forest  of  heresies,  and
a  crop  of  errors  which  are  springing  up  under  your  care
and  protection.  The  friend  of  the  Bridegroom  will  not
desert  Her  in  Her  time  of  trouble.  Nor  wonder  that  I
invite  you  so  suddenly  and  within  so  short  a  time  ;  it  is
because  the  opposite  side  in  its  wiliness  and  craft  is  pre
paring  to  attack  the  unprepared,  and  to  force  the  unarmed
to  join  battle.


LETTER CLXXXVIII. (A.D. 1140.)

TO  THE BISHOPS  AND CARDINALS  OF  THE  CURIA ON
THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

He  warns  them,  to  vigilance  against  the  errors  of  Peter

Abaelard.

To  the  Lords  and  reverend  Fathers,  the  Bishops  and
Cardinals  who  are  of  the  Curia,  the  son  of  their  holiness
sends  greeting.

No  one  doubts  that  to  you  it  specially  belongs  to  remove
scandals  from  the  kingdom  of  God,  to  cut  down  thorns  as
they  arise,  and  to  allay  quarrels.  For  so  Moses  enjoined
vu.,  the  correction  of  his  life  and  false  opinions.  HtSloise  herself,  after  the
death  of  her  Abaelard,  acted  far  more  wisely  than  these  his  defenders,  when  she
asked  leave  from  Peter  the  Venerable  to  be  buried  in  Abaelard's  tomb  (as  is
recorded  in  the  Cluniac  Library  and  in  Abaelard's  works'),  which  some  rely  on
in  framing  thtir  Apologies,  as  an  excuse  for  the  errors  which  he  at  the  last  did
not  cease  to  wash  away  with  penitence  and  tears.  But  enough  of  this.


542  LETTER  CLXXXVIII.

when  he  ascended  the  Mount,  saying,  You  have  Aaron  and
Hur  with  you, if  any  question  arise  yo2i  shall  refer  it  to
them (Ex. xxiv. 14). I speak of  that Moses  who  went
through  water, and not  through  water  only,  but through
water  and  blood. And  He  is  therefore more than Moses,
because He  went  through  blood. And  since in place  of
Aaron  and  Hur  the  zeal  and  authority  of  the  Roman  Church
presides  over  the  people  of God,  to it  we  rightly  refer  not
only  doubtful  questions, but  attacks on the  faith,  injuries
done  to  Christ, scorn  and contempt  cast on  the  Fathers,
the  scandals of  the living,  the  dangers  to  posterity. The
faith  of  simple  folk  is  scoffed  at,  the  hidden  things  of  God
are  exposed,  questions about the most exalted  truths are
rashly ventilated,  the Fathers  are derided  because they
held  that  such  things  are  rather  to  be  tasted  than  solved.
Thence  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  Paschal  Lamb,  contrary  to
the  command  of  God (Ex. xii. 9),  is either  cooked  with
water,  or  is  eaten of raw in  a  rude and  bestial fashion.
What  is  left  is not burnt with fire but is trodden under
foot; so human reason usurps for  itself everything, and
leaves  nothing  for  faith. It  tries things above it, tests
things  too strong  for it, rushes into Divine things  ; holy
subjects  it  rather  forces  open  than unlocks,  what  is  closed
and  sealed  it  rather  plunders  than opens ;  and  whatever  it
finds  out  of  its reach it holds  to be  of no  account  and
disdains  to  believe. Read  if  you  please  the  book  of  Peter
Abaelard,  which  he calls  a  book  of  Theology, for  it  is  in
your  hands  (since,  as  he  boasts, it is read  by  many  at  the
Curia),  and  see  what  things  are  said  about  the  Holy  Trinity,
about  the  generation of  the Son, about  the  procession  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  many other  things  he  says  repugnant
to Catholic ears and minds. Read too that other  book
which  they  call a book of  his  Sentences,  J  and  that  one
1  Abaelard  denies  in  his  Apology  that  he had ever  written  any  book  of  this
name,  and  therefore  brings  forward  the  accusation  that it  had  been put  forth
against  him  through  malice  or  ignorance;  and  Duchesne  asserts the  same  in
his notes. "  S. Bernard," he says, "attributes to Abaelard this book of
Sentences  in  ignorance  in  his  i88th  Letter,"  as  though  he  had  attributed  to  him
the  books  of  Sejitences  written  by  Peter  Lombard. But Peter  was not  so  un-


LETTER CLXXXVIII.  543

which  is  entitled  Know  Thyself,  and  notice  what  a  crop
of  blasphemies  and  errors  is  there  flourishing.  See  what  he
thinks  about  the  Soul  of  Christ,  about  the  Person  of  Christ,
about  the  descent  of  Christ  into  Hades,  about  the  sacra
ment  of  the  altar,  about  the  power  of  binding  and  loosing,
about  original  sin,  about  concupiscence,  about  the  sin  of
delight,  about  the  sin  of  infirmity,  about  the  sin  of  ignorance,
about  the  work  of  sin,  about  the  will  to  commit  sin.  And
if  you  think  that  I  have  rightly  stirred,  bestir  also  your
selves  ;  and  bestir  not  yourselves  in  vain  ;  act  for  the  place
you  hold,  the  dignity  of  your  office,  the  authority  you  have
received,  in  such  a  way  that  he  who  has  exalted  himself  to
heaven  may  be  cast  down  to  hell,  so  that  the  works  of
darkness  which  have  had  the  audacity  to  come  forward
into  the  light  may  be  reproved  by  the  light ;  so  that  while
he  who  sins  publicly  is  publicly  reproved,  others  may  learn
to  restrain  themselves,  putting,  as  they  do,  darkness  for
light,  disputing  at  the  cross  roads  about  Divine  things,
speaking  evil  in  their  writings,  and  writing  it  in  their
books  ;  and  that  so  the  mouth  of  them  who  speak  wicked
ness  may  be  stopped.


LETTER  CLXXXIX. (A.D. 1140.)
To  POPE  INNOCENT,  ON  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

He  expresses  his  grief  at  the  errors  of  Abaelard,  which  he
warns  the  Pope  to  oppose.

To  his  most  loving  Father  and  Lord  INNOCENT,  by  the
grace  of  God,  Supreme  Pontiff,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  writes  as  his  humble  servant.

known  to  S.  Bernard  that  he  should  fall  into  this  mistake.  He  sings  his  praises
in  Letter  410.  Moreover,  when  this  Letter  was  written  Peter  had  not  published
his  Sentences.  We  have  certainly  a  book  which  is  undoubtedly  Abaelard's,  com
monly  called  Sic  et  non,  the  heading  of  which  runs  :  "  Here  begin  sentences
taken  from  the  Holy  Scriptures  which  seem  opposed  to  each  other :  because  of
which  opposition  this  compilation  is  called  Sic  et  unit."  S.  Bernard  may  have
alluded  to  this  when  he  wrote.  Besides  the  other  works  of  Abaelard  ivimeci  by
Duchesne  we  have  a  book  of  his  on  the  six  days  of  creation  dedicated  to
H61oise.


544  LETTER CLXXXIX.

1.  It is necessary  that  offences come. It  is  necessary
but  not  pleasant. And  therefore  the  Prophet  says, O  that
I  had  wings  like  a  dove,  for  then  would  I  flee  away  and  be
at  rest  (Ps. Iv. 6). And the  Apostle  wishes  to  be  dis
solved and to  be  with Christ. And so another of the
Saints  :  //  is  enough,  O  Lord,  take  away  my  life,  for  I  am
not  better  than  my  fathers  (i  Kings  xix.  4). I  have  now
something  in  common  with  the Saints, at  least  in  wish  if
not  in  desert. For  I could  wish myself now  taken from
the  midst  of  this  world, overcome, I confess,  by  the  fear-
fulness  of  my  spirit  and  by  the  troubles of  the  time. I
fear  lest  I  be  found  better  disposed than  prepared. I  am
weary of  life, and  whether  it is  expedient  to  die  I  know
not ;  and  so  perhaps  even  in  my  prayers  I  differ  from  the
Saints,  because  they  are  provoked  by  the  desire  of  better
things,  while  I am compelled  to  depart  by scandals  and
anxieties. He  says  in  fact, To  be  dissolved  and  to  be  with
Christ  is  far  better (Phil.  i.  23). Therefore in  the  Saint
desire prevails,  and  in  me  sense  ;  and  in  this  unhappy  life
neither  is  he  able  to  have  the  good  he  desires, nor  I  not  to
have  the  trouble  which  I  suffer. And for  this reason we
both  desire  indeed  to  depart,  with  the  same  wish,  but  not
from  the  same  cause.

2.  I  was  but  just  now  foolishly  promising  myself  some
rest, when the schism of Leo was healed and peace
restored  to  the  Church. But  lo  !  that  is  at  rest,  but  I  am
not. I  knew  not  that  I was  in a  vale  of  tears, or  I  had
forgotten  that  I  dwell  in  a  land  of  forgetfulness. I  paid  no
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  earth  in  which  I  dwell  brings
forth  for  me  thorns and  thistles, that  when  they are cut
down  others  succeed,  and  when  these  are  destroyed  others
grow  ceaselessly, and spring  up without intermission. I
had heard these  things indeed,  but, as I now  find  out,
vexation itself  gives better  understanding  to  the  hearing.
My  grief  has  been renewed, not  destroyed,  my  tears  have
overwhelmed  me,  because  evil  has  strengthened,  and  when
they  had  endured  the  frost,  the  snow  fell  upon  them. Who
hath  power  to  resist  this  frost  ? By  it  charity  freezes,  that


LETTER CLXXXIX.  545

iniquity  may  abound.  We  have  escaped  the  lion,  Leo,  to
fall  on  the  dragon  (i.e.,  Peter  Abaelard),  who  perhaps  may
do  us  not  less  injury  by  lurking  in  ambush  than  the  former
by  raging  on  high.  Although  I  would  that  his  poisonous
pages  were  still  lying  hid  in  bookcases,  and  not  read  at  the
cross-roads.  His  books  fly  abroad  ;  and  they  who  hate  the
light  because  they  are  evil  have  dashed  themselves  against
the  light,  thinking  light  darkness.  Over  cities  and  castles
is  darkness  cast  instead  of  light  ;  instead  of  honey,  or
rather  in  honey,  his  poison  is  on  all  sides  eagerly  drunk  in.
His  books  have  passed  from  nation  to  nation,  and  from  one
kingdom  to  another  people.  A  new  gospel  is  being
fashioned  for  peoples  and  nations,  a  new  faith  propounded,
another  foundation  laid  than  that  which  is  laid.  Virtues
and  vices  are  discussed  immorally,  the  Sacraments  of  the
Church  unfaithfully,  the  mystery  of  the  Holy  Trinity
craftily  and  extravagantly  ;  but  everything  is  given  in  a
perverse  spirit,  in  an  unprecedented  manner,  and  beyond
what  we  have  received.

3.  Goliath  advances,  tall  in  stature,  clad  in  his  armour  of
war,  preceded  by  his  armour-bearer,  Arnold  of  Brescia.
Scale  overlaps  scale,  and  there  is  no  point  left  unguarded.
Indeed,  the  bee  which  was  in  France1  has  sent  his  mur
muring  to  the  Italian  bee,  and  they  have  come  together
against  the  Lord  and  against  His  anointed.  They  have
bent  their  bow,  they  have  made  ready  their  arrows  within
the  quiver,  that  they  may  privily  shoot  at  them  which  are
true  of  heart.  In  their  life  and  habits  they  have  the  form
of  godliness,  but  they  deny  its  power,  and  they  thereby
deceive  many,  for  they  transform  themselves  into  angels  of
light,  when  they  are  Satan's.  Goliath  standing  with  his
armour-bearer  between  the  two  lines,  shouts  against  the
armies  of  Israel,  and  curses  the  ranks  of  the  Saints,  and
that  the  more  boldly  because  he  knows  that  no  David  is
present.  In  short,  he  puts  forward  philosophers  with  great

1  An  allusion  to  Isaiah  vii.  18.  The  French  bee  is  Abaelard,  the  Italian,
Arnold  of  Brescia,  a  city  of  Italy.  For  more  about  him  see  notes  on  Letter
•95-


546  LETTER CLXXXIX.

praise  and  so  affronts  the  teachers  of  the  Church,  and
prefers  their  imaginations  and  novelties  to  the  doctrine
and  faith  of  the  Catholic  Fathers  ;  and  when  all  fly  from
his  face  he  challenges  me,  the  weakest  of  all,  to  single
combat.

4.  The  Archbishop  of  Sens,  at  his  solicitation,  writes  to
me  fixing  a  day  for  the  encounter,  on  which  he  in  person,
and  with  his  brother  bishops,  should  determine,  if  possible,
on  his  false  opinions,  against  which  I  had  ventured  to  lift
my  voice.  I  refused,  not  only  because  I  am  but  a  youth
and  he  a  man  of  war  from  his  youth,  but  also  because  I
thought  it  unfitting  that  the  grounds  of  the  faith  should  be
handed  over  to  human  reasonings  for  discussion,  when,  as
is  agreed,  it  rests  on  such  a  sure  and  firm  foundation.  I
said  that  his  writings  wrere  enough  for  his  condemnation,,
and  that  it  was  not  my  business,  but  that  of  the  Bishops,
whose  office  it  is  to  decide  on  matters  of  faith.  He  none
the  less,  nay,  rather  the  more  on  this  account,  lifted  his
voice,  called  upon  many,  assembled  his  accomplices.  What
he  wrote  about  me  to  his  disciples  I  do  not  care  to  say.
He  spread  everywhere  the  report  that  on  a  fixed  day  he
would  answrer  me  at  Sens.  The  report  reached  everyone,
and  I  could  not  but  hear  of  it.  At  first  I  held  back,  nor
was  I  much  moved  by  the  popular  rumour.  At  length  I
yielded  to  the  advice  of  my  friends  (although  much  against
my  will,  and  with  tears),  who  saw  how  all  were  getting
ready  as  if  for  a  showr,  and  they  feared  lest  from  my
absence  cause  of  offence  should  be  given  to  the  people,
and  the  horn  of  the  adversary  be  exalted  ;  and,  since  the
error  was  likely  to  be  strengthened  if  there  were  no  one
to  answer  or  contradict  it,  I  betook  myself  to  the  place
appointed  and  at  the  time,  unprepared,  indeed,  and  un
armed,  except  that  I  revolved  in  my  mind  those  words,,
Take  no  thought  how  ye  shall  answer,  for  it  shall  be  given
you  in  that  hour  what  ye  shall  say  (S.  Matt.  x.  19)  ;  andr
again,  The  Lord  is  my  helper,  I  will  not  fear  what  man
may  do  unto  me  (Ps.  cxviii.  6).  There  had  assembled,
besides  bishops  and  abbots,  very  many  religious  menr


LETTER CLXXXIX.  547

masters  of  the  schools  from  different  states,  and  many  learned
clergy  ;  and  the  King,  too,  was  present.  And  so  in  the
presence  of  all,  my  adversary  standing  opposite,  I  produced
certain  articles  taken  from  his  books.  And  when  I  began
to  read  them  he  departed,  unwilling  to  listen,  and  appealed
from  the  judges  that  he  had  himself  chosen,  a  course  I  do
not  think  allowable.  Further,  the  articles  having  been
examined,  were  found,  in  the  judgment  of  all,  opposed  to
the  faith,  contrary  to  the  truth.  I  have  written  this  on  my
own  behalf,  lest  I  should  be  thought  to  have  shown  levity,
or  at  all  events  rashness,  in  so  important  a  matter.

5.  But  thou,  O  successor  of  Peter,  wilt  determine  whether
he,  who  assails  the  faith  of  Peter,  ought  to  have  shelter  at
the  See  of  Peter.  Thou,  I  say,  the  friend  of  the  bride
groom,  wilt  provide  measures  to  free  His  Bride  from  lying
lips  and  from  a  deceitful  tongue.  But  that  I  may  speak  a
little  more  boldly  with  my  Lord,  do  thou,  most  loving
Father,  take  heed  to  thyself,  and  to  the  grace  of  God
which  is  in  thee.  Did  He  not,  when  thou  wast  small  in
thine  own  eyes,  place  thee  over  nations  and  kingdoms?
For  what,  but  that  thou  shouldst  pull  down,  and  destroy,
and  build,  and  plant  ?  See  what  great  things  He,  who
took  thee  from  thy  father's  house,  and  anointed  thee  with
the  oil  of  His  mercy,  has  since  done  for  thy  soul :  what
great  things  for  His  Church,  by  your  means,  in  His  vine
yard,  Heaven  and  Earth  being  witnesses,  have  been,  as
powerfully  as  wholesomely,  uprooted  and  destroyed  ;  what
great  things,  again,  have  been  well  built,  planted,  and  sown.
God  raised  up  the  madness  of  schismatics  in  your  time,
that  by  your  efforts  they  might  be  crushed.  I  have  seen
the  fool  in  great  prosperity,  and  immediately  his  beauty
was  cursed  ;  I  saw,  I  say,  I  saw  the  impious  highly  exalted
and  lifted  up  above  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,  and  I  passed
by,  and  lo  he  was  gone.  It  is  necessary,  S.  Paul  says,  that
there  be  heresies  and  schisms,  that  they  that  arc  approved
may  be  made  manifest  (i  Cor.  xi.  19).  And,  indeed,  in
schism,  as  I  have  just  said,  the  Lord  has  proved  and  known
you.  But  that  nothing  be  wanting  to  your  crown,  lo  !


54-8  LETTER CLXXXIX.

heresies  have  sprung  up.  And  so,  for  the  perfection  of
your  virtues,  and  that  you  may  be  found  to  have  done
nothing  less  than  the  great  Bishops,  your  predecessors,
take  away  from  us,  most  loving  Father,  the  foxes  which
are  laying  waste  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  while  they  are
little  ones ;  lest  if  they  increase  and  multiply,  our  children
despair  of  destroying  what  was  not  exterminated  by  you.
Although  they  are  not  even  now  small  or  few,  but  imposing
and  numerous,  and  will  not  be  exterminated  save  by  you,
and  by  a  strong  hand.  lacinctus1  has  threatened  me  with
many  evils ;  but  he  has  not  done,  nor  could  he  do,  what  he
wished.  But  I  thought  that  I  ought  to  bear  patiently  con
cerning  myself  what  he  has  spared  neither  to  your  person
nor  to  the  Curia;  but  this  my  friend  Nicholas,  as  he  is  also
yours,  will  better  tell  in  person.

1  It  is  uncertain  who  this  lacinctus,  or  Hyacinctus,  is.  It  may  be  he  who
was  afterwards  created  Cardinal  by  Lucius  II.,  under  the  name  of  Bobo,  and  title
of  S.  Mary  in  Cosmedin.  Mention  seems  to  be  made  of  him  in  Letter  508.
Nicholas  was  a  monk  of  Clairvaux,  and  afterwards  S.  Bernard's  notary  ;  v.
Letter  298.


NOTE

TO

THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.


1.  The  following  Letter,  which  is  the  igoth  of  S.  Bernard,
was  ranked  by  Horst  among  the  Treatises,  on  account  of  its
length  and  importance. It  was  written  on  the  occasion  of
the  condemnation  of  the  errors  of  Abaelard  by  the  Council
of Sens, in 1140, in the  presence of a  great  number  of
French  Bishops,  and  of King Louis  the  Younger,  as  has
been  described  in  the  notes  to  Letter  187. In  the  Synodical
Epistle,  which  is  No.  19 1 of  S. Bernard,  and  in  another,
which  is  No.  337,  the  Fathers  of  the  Council  announced  to
Pope Innocent that they had condemned the errors of
Abaelard, but had pronounced no sentence  against him
personally  out  of  respect  for  the  appeal  which  he  had  made
to  the  Holy  See  ;  and  they  add  that  "  the  chief  heads  of  his
errors  are  more  fully  detailed  in  the  Letter  of  the  Bishop  of
Sens." I  think  that  the  Letter  of  which  mention  is  thus
made  can  be  no  other  than  that  given  here,  and  in  which  we
find,  in  fact,  the  chief  heads  of Abaelard's  errors,  with  a
summary  refutation  of  each. They  are  also  the  same  as
those  which  William,  who  had  become  a  simple  monk  at
Igny, after having been Abbot of Saint Thierry, had
addressed  to  Geoffrey,  Bishop  of  Chartres,  and  to  Bernard,
in  a  Letter  which  is  inserted  among  those  of  Bernard.

2.  As  regards  the  different  errors  imputed  to  Abaelard,
there  are  some  which  he  complained  were  wrongly  attri
buted  to  him. Others,  on  the  contrary,  he  recognized  as
his,  and  corrected  them  in  his  Apology,  in  which  he  repre
sents  Bernard  as  being  his  only  opponent,  his  malignant


550  NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING  TREATISE.

and  hasty  denouncer.  Two  former  partizans  of  Abaelard
himself,  but  who  had  long  recoiled  from  his  errors,  Geof
frey,  who  afterwards  was  the  Secretary  of  Bernard,  and
"  a  certain  Abbot  of  the  Black  Monks/'  whose  name  is  un
known,  attempted  to  justify  Bernard  against  these  calum
nies.  Duchesne  had  spoken  of  these  two  writers  in  his
notes  to  Abaelard,  but  the  Treatises  of  both  of  them  were
lately  printed  in  Vol.  iv.  of  the  "  Bibliotheca  Cisterciensis,"
whose  learned  Editor,  Bertrand  Tissier,  remarks  that  this
unknown  Abbot  is  some  other  person  than  William  of
Saint  Thierry.

3.  Of  the  heads  of  errors  attributed  to  Abaelard,  some
are  wanting  in  his  printed  works,  which  has  given  occasion
to  some  writers  for  accusing  Bernard,  as  if  he  had  attributed
errors  to  Abaelard  without  foundation,  and  so  had  himself
been  fighting  against shadows and  phantoms. But  it is
certain  that  most  of  these  errors  are  to  be  found  even  in  his
printed  writings,  as  we  shall  show  each  in  its  place. As
for  those which  are no longer discoverable, William of
Saint  Thierry,  Geoffrey,  and  this  unknown  Abbot,  who  had
been once a disciple of Abaelard, and was perfectly
acquainted  with  his  doctrine, quote  word  for  word  state
ments  both  from  his  Apology  and  from  his Theology,  which
do  not  appear  in  the  printed  editions  ;  and  certainly  Abae
lard  himself,  in  Book  ii.  of  his  "  Commentary  on  the  Epistle
to  the  Romans/'  p.  554,  reserves  certain  points  to  be  treated
in  his  Theology  of  which  there  is  no  mention  in  the  printed
copies,  which  close  thus  : "  The  rest  is  wanting/'  so  that  it
appears  that  the  printed  copies  of  the  Theology  have  been
mutilated.

4.  Those  writers  have,  therefore,  done  a  very  ill  service
to  Religion,  to  say  nothing  of  the  injury  to  Bernard,  who,
in  order  to  justify  Abaelard,  accuse  Bernard  of  having  been
hurried  on  by  the  impulse of  a  blind  zeal. They  ought
at  least  to  acknowledge,  as  Abaelard  himself  did,  and  also
Berengarius, his defender, that he had erred in  various
matters. And,  indeed,  Abaelard  himself,  in  his  Apology,
acknowledges,  though  perhaps  not  quite  sincerely,  that  in


NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.  551

some  respects  he  was  wrong.  "  It  is  possible,"  he  says,
"that  I  have  fallen  into  some  errors  which  I  ought  to  have
avoided,  but  I  call  God  as  a  witness  and  judge  upon  my
soul  that  in  these  points  upon  which  I  have  been  accused,
I  have  presumed  to  say  nothing  through  malice  or  through
pride."  It  may  well  be  that  he  might  be  able  to  clear
himself  of  the  reproach  of  malice,  and  even  of  that  of
heresy  ;  but,  at  least,  he  could  not  deny  that  he  had  fallen
into  various  errors — a  liking  for  new  words  and  phrases,
levity,  and  perhaps  even  pride  and  an  excessive  desire  for
disputation.  However  this  may  be,  Pope  Innocent  bade  the
Bishops  by  a  rescript  that  the  man  was  to  be  imprisoned
and  his  books  burned,  and  Godfrey  declares  that  the  Pope
himself  had  them  thrown  into  the  flames  at  Rome.  But
Peter  Abaelard  at  length  returned  to  better  views.  He
desisted  from  his  Appeal  by  the  advice  and  request  of  Peter
the  Venerable,  Abbot  of  Cluny,  who  has  described  his  last
days  in  pleasing  terms  in  a  Letter  which  he  wrote  to
Heloi'se.

5.  Bernard  did  not  attack  Abaelard  in  his  discourses
and  writings  with  impunity.  Not  only  was  Abaelard
impatient  of  his  censure,  but  also  Berengarius,  his  disciple
and  defender,  dared  to  accuse  Bernard  of  having  spread
certain  errors  in  his  books.  "  You  have  certainly  erred,"
says  Berengarius,  addressing  Bernard,  "  in  asserting  the
origin  of  souls  from  Heaven  "  (p.  310).  And  on  p.  315:
"  The  origin  of  souls  from  Heaven  is  a  fabulous  thing,  and
this  I  remember  that  you  taught  in  these  words  (Serin,  in
Cantica,  No.  17)  :  'The  Apostle  has  rightly  said,  our  con
versation  is  in  heaven.'  These  words  which  you  have
expounded  with  great  subtilty,  savour  much  to  the  palate  of
a  Christian  mind  of  heresy."  But  enough  of  this  foolish
and  impudent  slanderer.  The  unknown  Abbot  reports
another  calumny  of  Abaelard  against  Bernard  at  the  end
of  his  second  book  :  "  It  is  very  astonishing  to  me  that  for
such  a  long  time  no  reply  should  have  been  made  by  so
many  great  men  whose  teaching  enlightens  the  Church,  as
the  light  of  the  sun  is  reflected  upon  the  moon,  to  our  Abae-


552  NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING  TREATISE.

lard,  who  accused  the  Abbot  of  saying  that  God,  and  Man
assumed  by  God,  are  one  Person  in  the  Trinity.  Whereas
Man  is  a  material  body  composed  of  various  limbs  and  dis
soluble,  while  God  is  neither  a  material  body,  nor  has  any
limbs,  nor  can  be  dissolved.  Wherefore,  neither  ought
God  to  be  called  Man,  nor  Man  to  be  called  God,"  etc.
Thus  Abaelard  shows  himself  a  Nestorian,  while  petulantly
accusing  Bernard  of  error.  Rightly  does  William  of  Saint
Thierry  reply  in  his  8th  chapter  to  Abaelard  with  regard
to  this  passage  :  "  Thus  we  say  similarly  that  Christ  is  the
Son  of  Man  in  the  nature  of  His  Humanity,  but  not  from
that  according  to  which  He  has  union  with  God,  and  is  One
of  the  Three  Persons  in  the  Trinity ;  because,  as  God
Incarnate  was  made  the  Son  of  Man  on  account  of  the
human  nature  which  He  assumed,  so  the  man  united  to  the
Son  of  God  has  become  the  Son  of  God  on  account  of  the
Divine  Nature  which  has  united  him  to  itself."

6.  Besides  the  heads  of  errors  which  Bernard  refutes  in
these  books,  he  groups  together  some  others  in  No.  10,
contenting  himself  with  exposing  them  ;  these  have  been
refuted  by  other  authors,  viz.,  by  William,  and  by  the  un
known  Abbot.  As  to  the  Eucharistic  species  or  the  acci
dents,  which,  according  to  Abaelard,  remain  in  the  air  after
consecration,  this  was  the  view  of  William  :  "  It  appears
to  me,  if  you  agree  with  me,"  he  says,  writing  to  Geoffrey,
Bishop  of  Chartres,  and  to  Bernard,  "  that  those  accidents,
i.e.,  the  form  of  the  earlier  substance,  which,  I  believe,  is
nothing  else  than  a  harmonious  combination  of  accidents
into  one,  if  they  still  exist,  do  so  in  the  Body  of  the  Lord,
not  forming  it,  but  by  the  power  and  wisdom  of  God  work
ing  upon  them,  shaping  and  modifying  it,  that  it  may  become
capable,  according  to  the  purpose  of  the  mystery  and  the
manner  of  a  Sacrament,  of  being  touched  and  tasted  in  a
form  different  from  that  proper  to  it,  which  it  could  not  do
in  its  own."  He  says  again  in  his  book  to  Rupertus,  De
Cor  pore  et  Sanguine  Domini,  c.  3  :  "In  opposition  to  every
conception  and  mode  of  reasoning  in  secular  philosophy,
the  substance  of  bread  is  changed  into  another  substance,


NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.  553

and  has  carried  with  it  certain  accidents  into  the  Eucharistic
mystery,  but  without  altering  them  from  what  they  were,
and  in  such  a  manner  that  the  Body  of  the  Lord  is  not
either  white  or  round,  though  whiteness  and  roundness  are
associated  with  it.  And  it  so  retains  these  accidents  that
although  they  are  truly  present  with  His  Human  Body,  yet
they  are  not  in  It,  do  not  touch  it,  or  affect  it,"  etc.

7.  It  was  not  only  with  respect  to  the  Incarnation  of  Our
Lord  that  Abaelard  thought,  or  at  least  expressed  himself,
in  an  erroneous  manner.  He  was  equally  in  error  on  the
subject  of  the  grace  of  Christ,  which  he  reduced  simply  to
the  reason  granted  to  man  by  God,  to  the  admonitions  of
the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  to  good  examples,  and  thus  made
it  common  to  all  men.  "  We  may  say,  then,"  he  taught,
"  that  man,  by  the  reason  which  he  has  received  from  God,
is  able  to  embrace  the  grace  which  is  offered  him  ;  nor  does
God  do  any  more  for  a  person  who  is  saved  before  he  has
embraced  the  offered  grace,  than  for  one  who  is  not  saved.
But  just  as  a  man  who  exposes  precious  jewels  for  sale,  in
order  to  excite  in  those  who  see  them  the  wish  to  purchase  ;
thus  God  makes  His  grace  known  before  all,  exhorts  us  bv
the  Scriptures,  and  reminds  us  by  examples,  so  that  men,
in  the  power  of  that  liberty  of  will  which  they  have,  may
decide  to  embrace  the  offer  of  grace."  And  a  little  farther
on  he  continues  :  "  That  vivification  is  attributed  to  grace  :
because  Reason,  by  which  man  discerns  between  good  and
evil,  and  understands  that  he  ought  to  abstain  from  the  one
and  to  do  the  other,  comes  from  God.  And  therefore
it  is  said  that  he  does  this  under  the  inspiration  of  God  :
because  God  enables  him  by  the  gift  of  Reason  which  He
has  bestowed  to  recognize  what  is  sinful."  Such  were  the
errors  William  has  extracted,  among  many  others,  from  the
writings  of  Abaelard,  and  without  doubt  from  his  Theology,
which,  perhaps  because  of  these  and  other  similar  passages,
was  mutilated  by  his  scholars.  Nor  can  we  refuse  to  credit
the  good  faith  of  W'illiam,  who  was  a  learned  and  pious
man  :  especially  as  Abaelard  in  his  Book  iv.,  on  the  Epistle
to  the  Romans,  teaches  the  same  hurtful  doctrine  (p

VOL. II.  36


554  NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.

and following). We learn  from  all  these  expressions  of
Abaelard  that  he  thought,  or  at  least  certainly  wrote,  with
the  same  impiety  concerning  the  grace  of  Christ  as  he  did
on  the  Incarnation,  and  that  Bernard  was  perfectly  correct
in saying (Letter 192): "  He  speaks  of  the  Trinity  like
Arius,  of  grace  like  Pelagius,  and  of  the  Person  of  Christ
like Nestorius." Proof of the truth of these words  of
Bernard  as  concerns  the  two  last  charges  will  be  found  in
reading  the  letter  given  here ;  and  as  to  the  third,  it  will  be
sufficient  to  show  that  Bernard  has  in  nowise  exaggerated,
to  read  the  end  of  Book  iii.  of  the  Theology  of  Abaelard  ;
there  it  will  be  found  in  his  own  words,  "  that  those  wrho
abhor  our  words  respecting  the faith  may  be  easily  con
vinced  when  they  hear  that  God  the  Father  and  God  the
Son are joined with us according to  the sense  of the
words." In  what manner? "  Let  us  ask,  then," he  con
tinues,  "  if  they  believe  in  the  wisdom  of  God  of  which  it
is written  : Thou hast  made all  things  with wisdom, O
Lord,  and  they  will  reply  without  hesitation  that  they  do
so  believe. But  this  is  to  believe  in  the  Son ;  as  for  believ
ing  in  the Holy  Ghost,  it  is  nothing  else  than  believing  in
the  goodness  of  God." These  words  seem  clearly  to  be
not  only  Arian,  but  even Sabellian, although, as I must
frankly  confess,  Abaelard formally  rejects  that  error  in  its
logical  consequences  in  another  passage  on  p.  1069. But
especially in  matters  of  faith,  it  is  a  matter  of  importance,
not  only  to  think  rightly,  but  also  to  speak  and  write  with
exactness. Thus  it  is  with  reason  that  William  of  Saint
Thierry says in citing  the  very  words  of  Abaelard  with
respect  to  the  brass  and  the  seal,  and  with  respect  to  power
in  general  and  a  certain  power  :  "  As  for  the  Divine  Persons,
he  destroys  them  like  Sabellius,  and  when  he  speaks  of  their
unlikeness  and  their  inequality,  he  goes  straight  to  the  feet
of Arius in his  opinion." I only  cite  these  passages  to
make those persons ashamed  who,  although  they  detest
these  errors,  yet  take  up  the  defence  of  Abaelard  against
Bernard,  and  do  not  hesitate  to  accuse  the  latter  of  precipi
tation and of excess of zeal against him. William  de


NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.  555

Conches  expresses  himself  in  almost  the  same  manner  as
Abaelard  with  respect  to  the  mystery  of  the  Holy  Trinity,
and  Abbot  William  of  S.  Thierry  confutes  his  errors  also
in  his  letter  to  Bernard.  Nor  is  there  anything  worse  that
can  happen  to  religion  than  that  philosophers  should
attempt  to  explain  the  mysteries  of  our  faith  by  the
power  of  Reason  alone.

8.  Geoffrey,  secretary  of  S.  Bernard,  gives  an  account  of
the  whole  business  of  Abaelard  in  a  letter  to  Henry,  Cardinal
and  Bishop of Albano : "I have heard also that your
Diligence  desires  to  know  the  entire  truth  respecting  the
condemnation of Peter Abaelard, whose books Pope
Innocent  II.,  of  pious memory,  condemned  to be burned
solemnly  at  Rome  in  the  Church  of  S.  Peter,  and  declared
him  by  Apostolical  authority  to  be  a  heretic. Some  years
before  a  certain  venerable  Cardinal,  Legate  of  the  Roman
Church,  by  name  Conon,  once  a  Canon  of  the  Church  of  S.
Nicholas  of  Artois,  had  already  condemned  his  Theology  in
the  same  way  to  be  burned,  during  a  council  at  Soissons  in
which  he  presided,  the  said  Abaelard  having  been  present
and  having  been  condemned  of  heretical  pravity. If  you
desire  it  he  will  satisfy  you  by  the  book  of Tlie  Life  of  S.
Bernard,  and  by  his  letters  sent  to  Rome  on  that  subject.
I  have  found  also at  Clairvaux a  little  book  of  a  certain
Abbot of  Black Monks,  in  which  the  errors of  the  same
Peter  Abaelard  are  noted,  and  I  remember  to  have  seen it
on  a  previous  occasion  ;  but  for  many  years,  as  the  keepers
of  the  books  assert,  the  first  four  sheets  of  this  little  book,
although  diligently  sought  for,  could  not  be  found. Because
of  this  I  have  had  the  intention  to  send  some  one  into  France
to  the  Abbey  of  the  writer  of  that  little  book,  so  as,  if  I
should  be  able  to  recover  ,it,  to  have  it  copied,  and  send  it
to  you. I believe  that  your  curiosity will be completely
satisfied  in  learning  in what  respects,  how,  and  wherefore
he  was  condemned."

It  is  thus  that  Geoffrey  expresses  himself.  (Notes  of
Duchesne  to  Abaelard.)  I  pass  over  the  vision  related  by-
Henry,  Canon  of  Tours,  to  the  Fathers  of  the  Synod


556  NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.

of  Sens and  to Bernard (Spicileg., Vol. xii. p. 478 ct
seqq.}.

g.  After  I  had  written  what  precedes,  our  brother,  John
Durand,  who  was  then  occupied  at  Rome,  sent  me  the
Capitula  Hxresum  Petri  Abaelardi,  which  were  placed  at
the  head  of  the  following  letter,  taken  from  the  very  faulty
MS.  in  the  Vatican,  No.  663.  These  were,  without  doubt,
those  which  Bernard,  at  the  end  of  this  letter,  states  that
he  had  collected,  and  transmitted  to  the  Pontiff.  It  seems
well  to  place  them  here  for  the  illustration  of  the  letter.

HEADS OF HERESIES OF PETER ABAELARD.

I. — The  shocking  analogy  made  between  a  brazen  seal,  and
between  genus  and  species,  and  the  Holy  Trinity-

"  The  Wisdom  of  God  being  a  certain  power,  as  a  seal  of
brass  is  a  certain  [portion  of]  brass  ;  it  follows  clearly  that
the  Wisdom  of  God  has  its  being  from  His  Power,  similarly
as  the  brazen  is  said  to  be  what  it  is  from  its  material  :  or
the  species  derives  what  it  is  from  its  genus,  which  is,  as  it
were,  the  material  of  the  species,  as  the  animal  is  of  man.
For  just  as,  in  order  that  there  may  be  a  brazen  seal,  there
must  be  brass,  and  in  order  that  there  may  be  man,  there
must  be  the  genus  Animal,  but  not  reciprocally:  so,  in
order  that  there  may  be  the  Divine  Wisdom,  which  is  the
power  of  discernment,  there  must  be  the  Divine  Power  ;
but  the  reciprocal  does  not  follow."  And  a  little  further
on  we  read:  "The  Beneficence,  the  name  under  which
the  Holy  Spirit  is  designated,  is  not  in  God  Wisdom  or
Power."

II. — That  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  of  the  Substance  of  tJie

Father.

"The  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  are  of  the  Father,  the
One  by  the  way  of  generation,  the  Other  by  that  of  pro
cession.  Generation  differs  from  procession  in  that  He
who  is  generated  is  of  the  very  Substance  of  the  Father,
whilst  the  essence  of  Wisdom  itself  is,  as  was  said,  to  be
a  certain  Power."  And  a  little  further  on  we  read  :  "  As


NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.  557

for  the  Holy  Spirit,  although  He  be  of  the  same  Substance
with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  whence  even  the  Trinity  itself
is  called  consubstantial  (homoousion],  yet  He  is  not  at  all  of
the  Substance  of  the  Father  or  of  the  Son,  as  He  would
be  if  generated  of  the  Father  or  the  Son;  but  rather  He
has  of  them  the  Procession,  which  is  that  God,  through
love,  extends  Himself  to  another  than  Himself.  For  like
as  anyone  proceeds  through  love  from  his  own  self  to
another,  since,  as  we  have  said  above,  no  one  can  Im
properly  said  to  have  love  towards  himself,  or  to  be
beneficent  towards  himself,  but  towards  another.  But  this
is  especially  true  of  God,  who  having  need  of  nothing,  can
not  be  moved  by  the  feeling  of  beneficence  towards  His
own  self,  to  bestow  something  on  Himself  out  of  benefi
cence,  but  only  towards  creatures."

III. — That  God  is  able  to  do  what  He  docs,  or  to  refrain
from  doing  it,  only  in  the  manner  or  at  the  time  in
which  He  does  so  act  or  refrain,  and  in  no  other.

"  By  the  reasoning  by  which  it  is  shown  that  God  the
Father  has  generated  the  Son  of  as  great  goodness  as  He
was  able,  since  otherwise  He  would  have  yielded  to  envy  ;
it  is  also  clear  that  all  which  He  does  or  makes,  He  does  or
makes  as  excellent  as  He  is  able  to  do  ;  nor  does  He  will  to
withhold  a  single  good  that  He  is  capable  of  bestowing."
And  a  little  farther  on  we  read  :  "  In  everything  that  God
does,  He  so  proposes  to  Himself  that  which  is  good,  that  it
maybe  said  of  Him  that  He  is  made  willing  to  do  that  which
He  does  rather  by  the  price  (as  it  were)  of  good,  than  by
the  free  determination  of  His  own  Will."  Also:  "From
this  it  therefore  appears,  and  that  both  by  reason  and  by
the  Scriptures,  that  God  is  able  to  do  that  only  which  He
does."  And  a  little  farther:  "Who,  if  He  were  able  to
interfere  with  the  evil  things  which  are  done,  would  yet
only  do  so  at  the  proper  time,  since  He  can  do  nothing  out
of  the  proper  time  ;  consequently  I  do  not  see,  in  what
way  He  \vould  not  be  consenting  to  sinful  actions.  For
who  cm  be  said  to  consent  to  evil,  except  he  by  whom


558  NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.

it  may  be  interfered  with  at  the  proper  time?"  Also:
"  The  reason  which  I  have  given  above  and  the  answers  to
objections  seem  to  me  to  make  clear  that  God  is  able  to  do
what  He  does,  or  to  refrain  from  doing  it,  only  in  the
manner  or  at  the  time,  in  which  He  does  so  act  or  refrain,
and  in  no  other."

IV. —  That  Christ  did  not  assume  our  flesh  in  order  to  free-
us  from  the  yoke  of  the  devil.

"  It  should  be  known  that  all  our  Doctors  who  were  after
the  Apostles  agree  in  this,  that  the  devil  had  dominion  and
power  over  man,  and  held  him  in  bondage  of  right." And
a little  farther  on : "  It seems to me that  the  devil has
never had any right over man, but rightly  held  him in
bondage  as  a  jailer,  God permitting  ; nor  did  the Son of
God  assume  our  flesh  in  order  to  free  us  from  the  yoke  of
the  devil." And  again  : "  How  does  the  Apostle  say  that
we  are  justified  or  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  His
Son,  when  on the  contrary,  He  ought  to  have  been  more
angry  still  against  man,  who  had committed  in  putting  His
Son  to  death,  a  fault  much  more  great  than  in  transgressing
His  first  precept  by  eating  one  apple ;  and  would it  not
have  been  more  just? For  if  that  first  sin  of  Adam  was  so-
great,  that  it  could  not  be  expiated  except  by  the  death  of
Christ ;  what  is  there  which  can be  capable  of  expiating
the  Death  of  Christ  itself,  and  all  the  great  cruelties  com
mitted  upon Him and His Saints? (See Letter  V. 21.)
Did  the  death  of  His innocent  Son please God  so much,,
that  for  the  sake  of  it  He  has  become  reconciled  to  us,  who
have  caused  it  by  our  sins,  on  account  of  which  the  innocent
Lord  was  slain  ? And could  He  forgive  us  a  fault  much
less  great,  only  on condition  that  we  committed  a  sin  so-
enormous  ? Were  multiplied  sins  needful  in  order  to  the
doing  of  so  great  a  good,  as  to  deliver  us  from  our  sins  and
to render us, by the death of the Son of  God, more
righteous  than  we  were  before?" Again  : "  To  whom  will
it  not  seem  cruel  and  unjust  that  one  should  have  required
the innocent  blood, or  any price whatever, or that the
slaughter  of  the  innocent,  under  any  name  or  title,  should


NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.  559

be  pleasing  to  him  ?  Still  less  that  God  held  the  death  of
His  Son  so  acceptable  that  He  would,  for  its  sake,  be
reconciled  to  the  world.  These  and  similar  considerations
raise  questions  of  great  importance,  not  only  concerning
redemption,  but  also  concerning  our  justification  by  the
death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  it  seems  to  me  that
we  were  nevertheless  justified  by  the  Blood  of  Christ,  and
reconciled  with  God  by  the  special  grace  shown  to  us  when
His  Son  took  upon  Him  our  nature,  and  in  it  gave  us
an  example  both  by  word  and  deed,  until  His  Death.  He
has  united  us  so  closely  with  Him  by  His  love  for  us,  that
we  are  fired  by  so  great  benefit  of  Divine  grace,  and  will
hesitate  at  no  suffering,  provided  it  be  for  Him.  Which
benefit  indeed  we  do  not  doubt  aroused  the  ancient
Fathers,  who  looked  forward  to  this  by  faith,  to  an  ardent
love  of  God,  as  well  as  those  of  more  recent  time."  And
below:  "I  think  then  that  the  cause  and  design  of  the
Incarnation  was  to  enlighten  the  world  with  the  wisdom  of
God,  and  arouse  it  to  love  of  Him."

V. — Neither  God-and-Man,  nor  the Man  who  is  Christ,
is  one  of  the  three  Persons  in  the Trinity.

"  When  I  say  that  Christ  is  one  of  the  Three  Persons  in
the  Trinity  I  mean  this:  that  the  Word,  who  was  from
eternity  one  of  the  Three  Persons  in  the  Trinity,  is  so  ;
and  I  think  that  this  expression  is  figurative.  For  if  we
should  regard  it  as  literal,  since  the  name  of  Christ  means
He  who  is  God-and-Man,  then  the  sense  would  be,  that
God-and-Man  is  one  of  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Trinity.
Which  is  entirely  false."  And  a  little  farther  on :  "  It
should  be  stated  that  although  we  allow  that  Christ  is  one
of  the  Three  Persons  in  the  Trinity,  yet  we  do  not  allow
that  the  Person  who  is  Christ  is  one  of  the  Three  Persons
in  the  Trinity."

VI. — That  God  does  no  more  for  a  person  who  is  saved,
before  he  has  accepted  grace  offered ,  than  for  one
who  is  not  saved.

"  It  is  frequently  asked  whether  it  is  true,  as  is  said  by


560  NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.

some  persons,  that  all  men  need  to  be  saved  by  the  mercy
of  God,  and  that  their  need  is  such  that  no  one  is  able  to
have  the  will  to  do  good  unless  by  the  preventing  grace  of
God,  which  influences  his  heart  and  inspires  in  him  the
will  to  do  good,  and  multiplies  it  when  produced,  and  pre
serves  it  after  having  been  multiplied.  If  it  is  true  that
man  is  not  able  to  do  anything  good  by  himself,  and  that  he
is  incapable  of  raising  himself  up  in  any  way  whatever  by
his  free  will  for  the  reception  of  Divine  grace,  without  the
help  of  that  grace,  as  is  asserted,  it  does  not  appear  on  what
ground,  if  he  sins,  he  can  be  punished.  For  if  he  is  not
able  to  do  anything  good  of  himself,  and  if  he  is  so  con
stituted  that  he  is  more  inclined  to  evil  than  to  good,  is  he
not  free  from  blame  if  he  sins,  and  is  God  who  has  given
to  him  a  nature  so  weak  and  subvertible  deserving  of  praise
for  having  created  such  a  being?  Or,  on  the  contrary,
does  it  not  rather  seem  that  He  merits  to  be  reproached?  "
And  a  little  farther  on  :  "  If  it  were  true  that  man  is  unable
to  raise  himself  up  without  the  grace  of  another,  in  order
to  receive  the  Divine  grace,  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any
reason  wherefore  man  should  be  held  culpable ;  and  it
would  seem  that  if  he  has  not  the  grace  of  God  the  blame
should  be  rather  reflected  upon  his  Creator.  But  this  is
not  so,  but  very  far  otherwise,  according  to  the  truth  of  the
case,  for  we  must  lay  down  that  man  is  able  to  embrace  that
grace  wrhich  is  offered  to  him  by  the  reason  which  has,
indeed,  been  bestowed  upon  him  by  God  ;  nor  does  God  do
anything  more  for  a  person,  who  is  saved  before  he  has
accepted  the  grace  offered  to  him,  than  for  another  who  is
not  saved.  In  fact,  God  behaves  with  regard  to  men  in  like
manner  as  a  merchant  who  has  precious  stones  to  sell,  who
exhibits  them  in  the  market,  and  offers  them  equally  to  all,
so  that  he  may  excite  in  those  wrho  view  them  a  desire  to
purchase.  He  who  is  prudent,  and  who  knows  that  he  has
need  of  them,  labours  to  obtain  the  means,  gains  money
and  purchases  them ;  on  the  contrary,  he  who  is  slow  and
indolent,  although  he  desires  to  have  the  jewels,  and
although  he  may  be  also  more  robust  in  body  than  the


NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.  561

other,  because  he  is  indolent  does  not  labour,  and,  there
fore,  does  not  purchase  them,  so  that  the  blame  for  being
without  them  belongs  to  himself.  Similarly,  God  puts  His
grace  before  the  eyes  of  all,  and  advises  them  in  the
Scriptures  and  by  eminent  doctors  to  avail  themselves  of
their  freedom  of  will  to  embrace  this  offered  grace ;
certainly  he  who  is  prudent  and  provident  for  his  future,
acts  according  to  his  free  will,  in  which  he  can  embrace
this  grace.  But  the  slothful,  on  the  contrary,  is  entangled
with  carnal  desires,  and  although  he  desires  to  attain
blessedness,  yet  he  is  never  willing  to  endure  labour  in
restraining  himself  from  evil,  but  neglects  to  do  what  he
ought,  although  he  would  be  able  by  his  free  will  to  embrace
the  grace  offered  him,  and  so  he  finds  himself  passed  over
by  the  Almighty.1'

VII. — That  God  ought  not  to  hinder  evil  actions.

"  In  the  first  place,  we  must  determine  what  it  is  to
consent  to  evil,  and  what  not  to  do  so.  He,  then,  is  said  to
consent  to  evil  who,  when  he  can  and  ought  to  prevent  it,
does  not  do  so  ;  but  if  he  ought  to  prevent  it,  but  has  not
the  power,  or  if,  on  the  contrary,  though  he  has  the  power,
he  ought  not  to  do  so,  he  is  blameless.  Much  less  if  he
neither  has  the  power,  nor  ought,  if  he  had,  to  prevent  it,
is  he  to  be  blamed.  And,  therefore,  God  is  far  from  giving
consent  to  evil  actions,  since  He  neither  ought,  nor  has  the
power,  to  interfere  with  them.  He  ought  not,  since  if  an
action  develops  by  His  goodness  in  a  particular  manner,
than  which  none  can  be  better,  in  no  wise  ought  He  to
wish  to  interfere  with  it.  He  is,  furthermore,  not  able,
because  His  goodness,  though  it  has  chosen  a  minor  good,
cannot  put  an  obstacle  to  that  which  is  greater.''

VIII. —  That  we  have  not  contracted  from  Adam  guilt,  but

penalty.

"  It  should  be  known  that  when  it  is  said,  Original  sin  is
in  infants,  this  is  spoken  of  the  penalty,  temporal  and  eternal,
which  is  incurred  by  them  through  the  fault  of  their  first


562  NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.

parent."  And  a  little  farther  on  :  "  Similarly  it  is  said,
In  whom  all  have  sinned  (Rom.  v.  12),  in  the  sense  that
when  he  (our  first  parent)  sinned  we  were  all  in  him  in
germ.  But  it  does  not,  therefore,  follow  that  all  have
sinned,  since  they  did  not  then  exist;  for  whoever  does  not
exist  does  not  sin."

IX. — That  the  Body  of  the  Lord  did  not  fall  to  the  ground.

"  On  the  subject  of  this  species  of  Bread  and  Wine
which  is  turned  into  the  Body  of  Christ  it  is  asked  whether
they  continue  to  exist  in  the  Body  of  Christ,  in  the  sub
stance  of  bread  and  wine  as  they  were  before,  or  whether
they  are  in  the  air.  It  is  probable  that  they  exist  in  the  air,
since  the  Body  of  Christ  had  its  form  and  features,  as
other  human  bodies.  As  for  the  Eucharistic  species  of
bread  and  wine,  they  serve  only  to  cover  and  conceal  the
Body  of  Christ  in  the  mouth."  And  a  little  farther  on  :
"  It  is  asked  again  concerning  this,  that  it  seems  to  be
multiple  .  .  .  wherefore  it  is  ordered  to  be  preserved  from
one  Saturday  to  the  next,  as  we  read  was  done  with  the
shew  bread.  It  seems  also  to  be  gnawed  by  mice,  and  to
fall  to  the  ground  from  the  hands  of  a  priest  or  deacon.
And,  therefore,  it  is  asked,  wherefore  God  permits  such
things  to  happen  to  His  Body  ;  or  whether,  perhaps,  these
things  do  not  really  happen  to  the  Body,  but  are  only  so
done  in  appearance,  and  to  the  species  ?  To  which  I  reply,
that  these  things  do  not  really  affect  the  Body,  but  that
God  allows  them  to  happen  to  the  species  in  order  to
reprove  the  negligence  of  the  ministers.  As  for  His
Body,  He  replaces  and  preserves  it  as  it  pleases  Him  to
do."

X. — That  man  is  made  neither  better  nor  -worse  by  works.

"  It  is  frequently  asked  what  it  is  that  is  recompensed  by
the  Lord  :  the  work  or  the  intention,  or  both.  For  authority
seems  to  decide  that  what  God  rewards  eternally  are  works,
for  the  Apostle  says  God  will  render  to  every  man  accord
ing  to  his  works  (Romans  ii.  6).  And  Athanasius  says:


NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.  563

'  They  will  have  to  give  account  of  their  own  works.'
And  a  little  farther  on  he  says  :  And  those  who  have  done
good  shall  go  into  life  eternal,  but  those  who  have  done  evil
into  eternal  fire  (S.  Matt.  xxv.  46,  and  S.  John  v.  29).
But  I  say  that  they  were  eternally  recompensed  by  God
either  for  good  or  for  evil ;  nor  is  man  made  either  better
or  worse  because  of  works,  at  least  only  so  far  as  that
while  he  is  doing  them  his  will  towards  either  good  or
evil  gathers  force.  Nor  is  this  contrary  to  the  Apostle,
or  to  other  authors,  because  when  the  Apostle  says  God
will  render  to  each,  etc.,  he  puts  the  effect  for  the  cause,
that  is  to  say,  the  action  for  the  will  or  intention.

XI. —  That  those  who  crucified  Christ  ignorantly  committed
no  sin  ;  and  that  whatsoever  is  done  through  ignorance
ought  not  to  be  counted  as  a  fault.

"There  is  objected  to  us  the  action  of  the  Jews  who  have
crucified  Christ ;  that  of  the  men  who  in  persecuting  the
Martyrs  thought  that  they  were  doing  God  service  ;  and
finally  that  of  Eve,  who  did  not  act  against  her  conscience  since
she  was  tempted,  and  yet  it  is  certain  that  she  committed  sin.
To  which  I  say  that  in  truth  those  Jews  in  their  simplicity
were  not  acting  at  all  against  their  conscience,  but  rather
persecuted  Christ  from  zeal  for  their  law  ;  nor  did  they
think  that  they  were  acting  wickedly,  and,  therefore,  they
did  not  sin  ;  nor  were  any  of  them  eternally  condemned  on
account  of  this,  but  because  of  their  previous  sins,  because
of  which  they  rightly  fell  into  that  state  of  darkness.  And
among  them  were  even  some  of  the  elect,  for  whom  Christ
prayed,  saying:  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not
what  they  do  (S.  Luke  xxxiii.  34).  He  did  not  ask  in  this
prayer  that  this  particular  sin  might  be  forgiven  to  them,
since  it  was  not  really  a  sin,  but  rather  their  previous  sins."

XII. — Of  the  power  of  binding  and*  loosing.

"That which  is  said  in  S.  Matthew,  whatsoever  ihou  shalt
bind  on  earth,  etc.  (xvi.  19)  is  thus  to  be  understood  :  What
soever  thou  shalt  bind  on  eart/i,  i.e.,  in  the  present  life,


564  NOTE TO THE FOLLOWING TREATISE.

shall  be  bound  also  in  heaven,  i.e.,  in  the  present  Church."
And  a  little  farther  on:  "  The  Gospel  seems  to  contradict
us  when  we  say  that  God  alone  is  able  to  forgive  sins,  for
Christ  says  to  His  disciples  receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost ;
whosoever 's  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto  them
(S.  John  xx.  22,  23).  But  I  say  that  this  was  spoken  to  the
Apostles  alone,  not  to  their  successors."  And  immediately
he  adds  :  "  If,  however,  anyone  shall  say  that  this  applies
also  to  their  successors,  it  will  be  needful  in  that  case  to
explain  this  passage  also  in  the  same  manner  in  wThich  I
have  explained  the  preceding/'

XIII. — Concerning  suggestion, delectation, and  consent.

"  It  should  be  known  also  that  suggestion  is  not  a  sin  for
him  to  whom  the  suggestion  is  made,  nor  the  delectation
which  follows  the  suggestion,  which  delectation  is  produced
in  the  soul  because  of  our  weakness,  and  by  the  remem
brance  of  the  pleasure  which  is  bound  in  the  accomplish
ment  of  the  thing  which  the  tempter  suggests  to  our  mind.
It  is  only  consent,  which  is  also  called  a  contempt  of
God,  in  which  sin  consists."  And  a  little  farther  on :
"  I  do  not  say  that  the  will  of  doing  this  or  that,  nor  even
the  action  itself  is  sin,  but  rather,  as  has  been  said  above,
that  the  contempt  itself  of  God  in  some  act  of  the  will  that
constitutes  sin."

XIV. — That  Omnipotence  belongs  properly  and  specially  to
the  Father.

"  If  wre  refer  power  as  well  to  the  idea  of  Being  as  to
efficacy  of  working,  we  find  Omnipotence  to  attach  properly
and  specially  to  the  proprium  of  the  Person  of  the  Father  :
since  not  only  is  He  Almighty  with  the  Two  other  Persons,
but  also  He  alone  possesses  His  Being  from  Himself  and
not  from  another.  And  as  He  exists  from  Himself,  so  He
is  equally  Almighty  by  Himself."


LETTER CXC.  565

LETTER  CXC. (A.D. 1140.)

To  THK  SAME,  AGAINST  CERTAIN  HEADS  OK  AUAELARD'S

HERESIES.

To  his  most  loving  Father  and  Lord,  INNOCENT,  Supreme
Pontiff,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
sends  humble  greeting.

The  dangers  and  scandals  which  are  coming  to  the
surface  in  the  Kingdom  of  God,  especially  those  which
touch  the  faith,  ought  to  be  referred  to  your  Apostolic
authority.  For  I  judge  it  fitting  that  there  most  of  all,  the
losses  suffered  by  the  faith  should  be  repaired,  where  faith
cannot  suffer  defect.  This,  truly,  is  the  prerogative  of  your
see.  For  to  what  other  person  [than  Peter]  has  it  ever  been
said,  /  have  prayed  for  thee,  Peter,  that  thy  faith  fail
not?  (S.  Luke  xxii.  32).  Therefore  that  which  follows  is
required  from  the  successor  of  Peter:  And  when  thou  art
converted  strengthen  t/iy  brethren.  That,  indeed,  is
necessary  now.  The  time  is  come,  most  loving  Father,  for
you  to  recognize  your  primacy,  to  prove  your  zeal,  to  do
honour  to  your  ministry.  In  this  plainly  you  fulfil  tilt-
office  of  Peter,  whose  seat  you  occupy,  if  by  your  admoni
tion  you  strengthen  the  hearts  that  are  wavering  in  tin-
faith,  if  by  your  authority  you  crush  the  corrupters  of  the
faith.


CHAPTER  I.

He explains and  refutes t/ie dogmas  of  Abaclard
respecting  the Trinity.

i.  We  have  in  France  an  old  teacher  "turned  into  a  new
theologian,  who  in  his  early  days  amused  himself  with
dialectics,  and  now  gives  utterance  to  wild  imaginations
upon  the  Holy  Scriptures.  He  is  endeavouring  again  to
quicken  false  opinions,  long  ago  condemned  and  put  to
rest,  not  only  his  own,  but  those  of  others;  and  is  adding
fresh  ones  as  well.  I  know  not  what  there  is  in  heaven


566  LETTER CXC.

above  and  in  the  earth  beneath  which  he  deigns  to
confess  ignorance  of:  he  raises  his  eyes  to  Heaven,  and
searches  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  then  returning  to  us,
he  brings  back  unspeakable  words  which  it  is  not  lawful  for
a  man  to  utter,  while  he  is  presumptuously  prepared  to  give
a  reason  for  everything,  even  of  those  things  which  are
above  reason ;  he  presumes  against  reason  and  against
faith.  For  what  is  more  against  reason  than  by  reason
to  attempt  to  transcend  reason  ?  And  wrhat  is  more
against  faith  than  to  be  unwilling  to  believe  what
reason  cannot  attain  ?  For  instance,  wishing  to  ex
plain  that  saying  of  the  wise  man  :  He  who  is  hasty  to
believe  is  light  in  mind  (Ecclus.  xix.  4).  He  says  that  a
hasty  faith  is  one  that  believes  before  reason ;  when
Solomon  says  this  not  of  faith  towards  God,  but  of  mutual
belief  amongst  ourselves.  For  the  blessed  Pope  Gregory
denies  plainly  that  faith  towards  God  has  any  merit  what
ever  if  human  reason  furnishes  it  with  proof.  But  he
praises  the  Apostles,  because  they  followed  their  Saviour
when  called  but  once  (Horn,  in  Evang.  26).  He  knows
•doubtless  that  this  word  was  spoken  as  praise:  At  the
hearing  of  the  ear  he  obeyed  me  (Ps.  xviii.  44),  that  the
Apostles  were  directly  rebuked  because  they  had  been
slow  in  believing  (S.  Mark  xvi.  14).  Again,  Mary  is
praised  because  she  anticipated  reason  by  faith,  and
Zacharias  punished  because  he  tempted  faith  by  reason
(S.  Luke  i.  20,  45),  and  Abraham  is  commended  in  that
.against  hope  he  believed  in  hope  (Rom.  iv.  18).

2.  But  on  the  other  hand  our  theologian  says  :  "  What
is  the  use  of  speaking  of  doctrine  unless  what  we  wish  to
teach  can  be  explained  so  as  to  be  intelligible  ?  "  And  so
he  promises  understanding  to  his  hearers,  even  on  those
most  sublime  and  sacred  truths  which  are  hidden  in  the
very  bosom  of  our  holy  faith;  and  he  places  degrees  in
the  Trinity,  modes  in  the  Majesty,  numbers  in  the
Eternity.  He  has  laid  down,  for  example,  that  God  the
Father  is  full  power,  the  Son  a  certain  kind  of  power,
the  Holy  Spirit  no  power.  And  that  the  Son  is  related  to


LETTER CXC.  567

the  Father  as  force  in  particular  to  force  in  general,  as
species  to  genus,  as  a  thing  formed  of  material,  to  matter,1
as  man  to  animal,  as  a  brazen  seal  to  brass.  Did  Arius  ever
go  further?  Who  can  endure  this?  Who  would  not  shut  his
ears  to  such  sacrilegious  words  ?  Who  does  not  shudder
at  such  novel  profanities  of  words  and  ideas  ?  He  says  also
that  "  the  Holy  Spirit  proceeds  indeed  from  the  Father  and
the  Son,  but  not  from  the  substance  of  the  Father  or  of  the
Son."  Whence  then  ?  Perhaps  from  nothing,  like  every
thing  created.  But  the  Apostle  does  not  deny  that  they
are  of  God,  nor  is  he  afraid  to  say  :  Of  whom  arc  all
things  (Rom.  xi.  36).  Shall  we  say  then  that  the  Holy
Spirit  proceeds  from  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  no  other
way  than  all  things  do,  that  is,  that  He  exists  not
essentially  but  by  way  of  creation,  and  is  therefore  a
creature  like  all  other  things.  Or  will  this  man,  who  is
always  seeking  after  new  things,  who  invents  what  he
does  not  find,  affirms  those  things  which  are  not,  as  though
they  are,  will  he  find  for  himself  some  third  way,  in  which
he  may  produce  Him  from  the  Father  and  the  Son  ?  But,
he  says,  "  if  He  were  of  the  substance  of  the  Father,  He
would  surely  have  been  begotten,  and  so  the  Father  would
have  two  Sons."  As  though  everything  which  is  from  any
substance  has  always  as  its  father  that  from  which  it  is.
For  lice  and  phlegm  and  such  things,  are  they  sons  of  tin-
flesh,  and  not  rather  of  the  substance  of  the  flesh  ?  Or
worms  produced  by  rotten  wood,  whence  derive  they  their
substance  but  from  the  wood  ?  yet  are  they  not  sons  of  the
wood.  Again,  moths  have  their  substance  from  the  sub
stance  of  garments,  but  not  their  generation.  And  there
are  many  instances  of  this  kind.

3.  Since  he  admits  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  consubstantial
with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  I  wonder  how  an  acute  and
learned  man  (as  at  least  he  thinks  himself) -can  yet  deny
that  He  proceeds  in  substance  from  the  Father  and  tin-
Son,  unless  perchance  he  thinks  that  the  two  first  persons
proceed  from  the  substance  of  the  third.  But  this  is  an

1  Material  urn  ; muter iu.


568  LETTER CXC.

impious  and  unheard  of  opinion.  But  if  neither  He
proceeds  from  their  substance,  nor  They  from  His,  where,
I  pray,  is  the  consubstantiality  ?  Let  him  then  either  con
fess  with  the  Church  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  of  their
substance,  from  whom  He  does  not  deny  that  He  proceeds,
or  let  him  with  Arius  deny  His  consubstantiality,  and
openly  preach  His  creation.  Again  he  says,  if  the  Son  is
of  the  substance  of  the  Father,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not ;  they
must  differ  from  each  other,  not  only  because  the  Holy
Spirit  is  not  begotten,  as  the  Son  is,  but  also  because
the  Son  is  of  the  substance  of  the  Father,  which  the
Holy  Spirit  is  not.  Of  this  last  distinction  the  Catholic
Church  has  hitherto  known  nothing.  If  we  admit  it,  where
is  the  Trinity  ?  where  is  the  Unity  ?  If  the  Holy  Spirit
and  the  Son  are  really  separated  by  this  new  enumeration
of  differences,  and  if  the  Unity  is  split  up,  then  especially
let  it  be  made  plain  that  that  distinction  which  he  is  en
deavouring  to  make  is  a  difference  of  substance.  More
over,  if  the  Holy  Spirit  does  not  proceed  from  the  substance
of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  no  Trinity  remains,  but  a  duality.
For  no  Person  is  worthy  to  be  admitted  into  the  Trinity
whose  substance  is  not  the  same  as  that  of  the  others.
Let  him,  therefore,  cease  to  separate  the  procession  of  the
Holy  Spirit  from  the  substance  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,
lest  by  a  double  impiety  he  both  take  away  number  from
the  Trinity  and  attribute  it  to  the  Unity,  each  of  which  the
Christian  faith  abhors.  And,  lest  I  seem  in  so  great  a
matter  to  depend  on  human  reasonings  only,  let  him  read
the  letter  of  Jerome  to  Avitus,  and  he  will  plainly  see,
that  amongst  the  other  blasphemies  of  Origen  which  he
confutes,  he  also  rejects  this  one,  that,  as  he  said,  the  Holy
Spirit  is  not  of  the  substance  of  the  Father.  The  blessed
Athanasius  thus  speaks  in  his  book  on  the  Undivided
Trinity:  "When  I  spoke  of  God  alone  I  meant  not  the
Person  only  of  the  Father,  because  I  denied  not  that  the
Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  are  of  this  same  Substance  of  the
Father."


LKTTKK CXC.  569

CHAPTER II.

///  the Trinity  it  is  not  possible to  admit  any  disparity :

but  equality  is  every  way  to  be  predicated.
4.  Your  holiness  sees  how  in  this  man's  scheme,  which  is
not  reasoning  but  raving,1  the  Trinity  does  not  hold
together  and  the  Unity  is  rendered  doubtful,  and  that  this
cannot  be  without  injury  to  the  Majesty.  For  whatever
That  is  which  is  God,  it  is  without  doubt  That  than  which
nothing  greater  can  be  conceived.-  If,  then,  in  this  One  and
Supreme  Majesty  we  have  found  anything  that  is  insufficient
or  imperfect  in  our  consideration  of  the  Persons,  or  if  we  have
found  that  what  is  assigned  to  one  is  taken  from  another,
the  whole  is  surely  less  than  That,  than  which  nothing
greater  can  be  conceived.  For  indubitably  the  greatest
which  is  a  whole  is  greater  than  that  which  consists  of
parts.  That  man  thinks  worthily,  as  far  as  man  can,  of  the
Divine  Majesty  who  thinks  of  no  inequality  in  It  where  the
whole  is  supremely  great  ;  of  no  separation  where  the  whole
is  one  ;  of  no  chasm  where  the  whole  is  undivided  ;  in  short,
of  no  imperfection  or  deficiency  where  the  whole  is  a  whole.
For  the  Father  is  a  whole,  as  are  the  Father,  the  Son  and
the  Holy  Spirit  ;  the  Son  is  a  whole,  as  are  He  Himself
and  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit ;  the  Holy  Spirit  is
a  whole,  as  are  He  Himself  and  the  Father  and  the  Son.
And  the  whole  Unity  is  a  whole  neither  superabounding  in
the  Three,  nor  diminished  in  Each  Person.  For  they  do
not  individually  divide  between  Them  that  real  and  highest
Good  which  they  are,  since  they  do  not  possess  It  in  the
way  of  participation,  but  are  essentially  the  very  Good.
For  those  phrases  which  we  most  rightly  use,  as  One
from  Another,  or  One  to  Another,  are  designations  of  the
Persons,  not  division  of  the  Unity.  For  although  in  this
ineffable  and  incomprehensible  essence  of  the  Deity  we
can,  by  the  requirements  of  the  properties  of  the  Persons,
say  One  and  Another  in  a  sober  and  Catholic  sense,  yet

1  Nou  disputiDite,  sect  demrntanle.

2  Ansclm  greatly  approves  this  idea  respecting  God  in  his  Monolognim  and
his  /tpologeticus  at  the  commencement.

VOL.  ii.  37


570  LETTER CXC.

there  is  not  in  the  essence  One  and  Another,  but  simple
Unity;  nor  in  the  confession  of  the  Trinity  any  derogation
to  the  Unity,  nor  is  the  true  assertion  of  the  Unity
any  exclusion  of  the  propria  of  the  Persons.  May  that
execrable  similitude  of  genus  and  species  be  accordingly  as
far  from  our  minds  as  it  is  from  the  rule  of  truth.  It  is  not
a  similitude,  but  a  dissimilitude,  as  is  also  that  of  brass  and
the  brazen  seal ;  for  since  genus  and  species  are  to  each
other  as  higher  and  lower,  while  God  is  One,  there  can
never  be  any  resemblance  between  equality  so  perfect  and
disparity  so  great.  And  again,  with  regard  to  his  illustra
tion  of  brass,  and  the  brass  which  is  made  into  a  seal,
since  it  is  used  for  the  same  kind  of  similitude,  it  is  to  be
similarly  condemned.  For  since,  as  I  have  said,  species  is
less  than  and  inferior  to  genus,  far  be  it  from  us  to  think  of
such  diversity  between  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Far  be  it
from  us  to  agree  with  him  who  says  that  the  Son  is  related
to  the  Father  as  species  to  genus,  as  man  to  animal,  as  a
brazen  seal  to  brass,  as  force  to  force  absolutely.  For  all
these  several  things  by  the  bond  of  their  common  nature
are  to  each  other  as  superiors  and  inferiors,  and  therefore
no  comparison  is  to  be  drawn  from  these  things  with  That
in  which  there  is  no  inequality,  no  dissimilarity.  You  see
from  what  unskilfulness  or  impiety  the  use  of  these  simili
tudes  descends.

CHAPTER III.

The  absurd  doctrine  of  Abaelard,  who  attributes
properly  and  specifically  the  absolute  and  essential  names
to  one  Person,  is  opposed.

5.  Now  notice  more  clearly  what  he  thinks,  teaches,  and
writes.  He  says  that  Power  properly  and  specially  belongs
to  the  Father,  Wisdom  to  the  Son,  which,  indeed,  is  false.
For  the  Father  both  is,  and  is  most  truly  called,  Wisdom,
and  the  Son  Power,  and  what  is  common  to  Both  is  not  the
proprium  of  Each  singly.  There  are  certainly  some  other
names  which  do  not  belong  to  Both,  but  to  One  or  the
Other  alone,  and  therefore  His  own  Name  is  peculiar  to


LETTER CXC.  571

Each,  and  not  common  to  the  Other.  For  the  Father  is  not
the  Son,  nor  the  Son  the  Father,  for  He  is  designated  by  the
name  of  Father,  not  because  He  is  the  Father  with  regard  to
Himself,  but  with  regard  to  His  Son,  and  in  like  manner  by
the  name  of  Son  is  expressed  not  that  He  is  Son  with  regard
to  Himself,  but  to  the  Father.  It  is  not  so  with  power  and
many  other  attributes  which  arc  assigned  to  the  Father  and
the  Son  in  common,  and  not  singly  to  Each  taken  by  Himself.
But  he  says,  "  No;  we  find  that  omnipotence  belongs  espe
cially  to  the  proprium  of  the  Person  of  the  Father,  because
He  not  only  can  do  all  things  in  union  with  the  other  two  Per
sons,  but  also  because  He  alone  has  His  existence  from  Him
self,  and  not  from  Another,  and  as  He  has  His  existence  from
Himself,  so  has  He  His  power/'  O,  second  Aristotle  !  By
parity  of  reasoning,  if  such  were  reasoning,  would  not
Wisdom  and  Kindness  belong  properly  to  the  Father,  since
equally  the  Father  has  His  Wisdom  and  Kindness  from  Him
self,  and  not  from  another,  just  as  He  has  His  Being  and
His  Power  ?  And  if  he  does  not  deny  this,  as  he  cannot
reasonably  do,  what,  I  ask,  will  he  do  with  that  famous  par
tition  of  his  in  which,  as  he  has  assigned  Power  to  the
Father  and  Wisdom  to  the  Son,  so  he  has  assigned  Loving
Kindness  to  the  Holy  Spirit  properly  and  specially  ?  For
one  and  the  same  thing  cannot  well  be  the  proprium  of  two,
that  is,  to  be  the  exclusive  property  of  each.  Let  him
choose  which  alternative  he  will  :  either  let  him  give
Wisdom  to  the  Son  and  take  It  from  the  Father,  or
assign  It  to  the  Father  and  deny  It  to  the  Son  ;  and  again,
let  him  assign  Loving  Kindness  to  the  Spirit  without  the
Father,  or  to  the  Father  without  the  Spirit ;  or  let  him
cease  to  call  attributes  which  are  common,  propria ;  and
though  the  Father  has  his  Power  from  Himself,  yet  let  him
not  dare  to  concede  It  to  Him  as  being  a. proprium,  lest  on
his  own  reasoning  he  be  obliged  to  assign  Him  Wisdom  and
Loving  Kindness  which  He  has  in  precisely  the  same  way,
as  His  propria  also.

6.  But  let  us  now  wait  and  see  in  how  theoretic  a
manner  our  theologian  regards  the  invisible  things  of  God.
He  says,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  that  omnipotence  properly


572  LETTER CXC.

belongs  to  the  Father,  and  He  makes  it  to  consist  in  the
fulness  and  perfection  of  Rule  and  discernment.  Again,  to
the  Son  he  assigns  Wisdom,  and  that  he  defines  to  be  not
Power  simply,  but  a  certain  kind  of  Power  in  God,  namely,
the  Power  of  discernment  only.  Perhaps  he  is  afraid  of
doing  an  injury  to  the  Father  if  he  gives  as  much  to  the
Son  as  to  Him,  and  since  he  dares  not  give  Him  complete
power,  he  grants  Him  half.  And  this  that  he  lays  down  he
illustrates  by  common  examples,  asserting  that  the  Power
of  discernment  which  the  Son  is,  is  a  particular  kind  of
Power,  just  as  a  man  is  a  kind  of  animal,  and  a  brazen  seal
a  particular  form  of  brass,  which  means  that  the  power  of
discernment  is  to  the  powrer  of  Rule  and  discernment,  i.e.,
the  Son  is  to  the  Father,  as  a  man  to  an  animal,  or  as  a  brazen
seal  to  brass.  For,  as  he  says,  ua  brazen  seal  must  first  be
brass,  and  a  man  to  be  a  man  must  first  be  an  animal,  but
not  conversely.  So  Divine  Wisdom,  which  is  the  power  of
discernment,  must  be  first  Divine  Power,  but  not  conversely
(Abael.  Theol.  B.  ii.  p.  1083).  Do  you,  then,  mean  that,
like  the  preceding  similitudes,  your  similitude  demands
that  the  Son  to  be  the  Son  must  first  be  the  Father,
z>.,  that  He  who  is  the  Son  is  the  Father,  though  not  con
versely  ?  If  you  say  this  you  are  a  heretic.  If  you  do  not
your  comparison  is  meaningless.

7.  For  why  do  you  fashion  for  yourself  the  comparison,
and  with  such  beating  about  the  bush,  apply  it  to  questions
long  ago  settled  and  ill-fitted  for  debate?  Why  do  you
bring  it  forward  with  such  waste  of  energy,  impress  it  on
us  with  such  a  useless  multiplicity  oi  words,  produce  it
with  such  a  flourish,  if  it  does  not  effect  the  purpose  for
which  it  was  adduced,  viz.,  that  the  members  be  harmonized
with  each  other  in  fitting  proportions?  Is  not  this  a  labour
and  a  toil,  to  teach  us  by  means  of  it,  the  relation  which  exists
between  the  Father  and  the  Son  ?  We  hold  according  to
you,  that  a  man  being  given  an  animal  is  given,  but  not  con
versely,  at  least  by  the  rule  of  your  logic  ;  for  by  it  it  is  not
that  when  the  genus  is  given  we  know  the  species,  but  the
species  being  given  we  know  the  genus.  Since,  then, you  com-


LETTER CXC.  573

pare  the  Father  to  the  genus,  the  Son  to  the  species,  does
not  the  condition  of  your  comparison  postulate,  that  in  like
manner,  when  the  Son  is  known  you  declare  the  Father  to
be  known  and  not  conversely  ;  that,  as  he  who  is  a  man  is
necessarily  an  animal,  but  not  conversely,  so  also,  He  who
is  the  Son  is  necessarily  the  Father,  but  not  conversely  ?
But  the  Catholic  faith  contradicts  you  on  this  point,  for  it
plainly  denies  both,  viz.,  that  the  Father  is  the  Son,  and  that
the  Son  is  the  Father.  For  indubitably  the  Father  is  one
Person,  the  Son  another  ;  although  the  Father  is  not  of  a
different  substance  from  the  Son.  For  by  this  distinction
the  godliness  of  the  Faith  knows  ho\v  to  distinguish
cautiously  between  the  propria  of  the  Persons,  and  the
undivided  unity  of  the  Essence ;  and  holding  a  middle
course,  to  go  along  the  royal  road,  turning  neither  to  the
right  by  confounding  the  Persons,  nor  looking  to  the  left
by  dividing  the  Substance.  But  if  you  say  that  it  rightly
follows  as  a  necessary  truth  that  He  who  is  the  Son  is  also
the  Father,  this  helps  you  nothing ;  for  an  identical  pro
position  is  necessarily  capable  of  being  converted  in  such
a  way  that  what  was  true  of  the  original  proposition  is
true  of  the  converse  ;  and  your  comparison  of  genus  and
species,  or  of  brass  and  the  brazen  seal  does  not  admit  of
this.  For  as  it  does  not  follow  as  a  necessary  consequence
that  the  Son  is  the  Father,  and  the  Father  the  Son,  so
neither  can  we  rightly  produce  a  convertible  consequence
between  man  and  animal,  and  between  a  brazen  seal  and
brass.  For  though  it  be  true  to  say,  "  If  he  is  a  man  he  is
an  animal,"  still  the  converse  is  not  true,  "  If  he  is  an
animal  he  is  a  man."  And  again,  if  we  have  a  brazen  seal
it  necessarily  follows  that  it  is  brass  ;  but  if  we  have  brass
it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  it  is  a  brazen  seal.  But
now  let  us  proceed  to  his  other  points.

8.  Lo !  according  to  him  we  have  omnipotence  in  the
Father,  a  certain  power  in  the  Son.  Let  him  tell  us
also  what  he  thinks  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  That  loving-kind
ness,  he  says,  which  is  denoted  by  the  name  of  the  Holy
Spirit  is  not  in  God  power  or  wisdom  (Theol.  ii.  1085).  /


574  LETTER CXC.

saw  Satan  as  lightning  fall  from  heaven  (S.  Luke  x.  18),
So  ought  he  to  fall  who  exercises  himself  in  great  matters,
and  in  things  that  are  too  high  for  him.  You  see,  Holy
Father,  what  ladders,  nay  what  dizzy  heights,  he  has  set  up
for  his  own  downfall.  All  power,  half  power,  no  power.  I
shudder  at  the  very  words,  and  I  think  that  very  horror
enough  for  his  confutation.  Still,  I  will  bring  forward
a  testimony  which  occurs  to  my  troubled  mind,  so  as  to
remove  the  injury  done  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  read  in
Isaiah  :  The  Spirit  of  wisdom,  the  Spirit  of  ghostly  strength
(Is.  xi.  2).  By  this  his  audacity  is  plainly  and  sufficiently
answered,  even  if  it  is  not  crushed.  Be  it  that  blasphemy
against  the  Father  or  the  Son  may  be  forgiven,  will
blasphemy  against  the  Spirit  ?  The  Angel  of  the  Lord  is
waiting  to  cut  you  asunder  ;  for  you  have  said  "  The  Holy
Spirit  in  God  is  not  power  or  wisdom."  So  the  foot  of
pride  stumbles  when  it  intrudes  [where  it  ought  not].


CHAPTER IV.

Abaelard  had  defined  faith as  an opinion or  estimate:

Bernard  refutes  this.

9.  It  is  no  wonder  if  a  man  who  is  careless  of  what  he
says  should,  when  rushing  into  the  mysteries  of  the  Faith,
so  irreverently  assail  and  tear  asunder  the  hidden  treasures
of  godliness,  since  he  has  neither  piety  nor  faith  in  his
notions  about  the  piety  of  faith.  For  instance,  on  the  very
threshold  of  his  theology  (I  should  rather  say  his  stultology)
he  defines  faith  as  private  judgment  ;  as  though  in  these
mysteries  it  is  to  be  allowed  to  each  person  to  think  and
speak  as  he  pleases,  or  as  though  the  mysteries  of  our  faith
are  to  hang  in  uncertainty  amongst  shifting  and  varying
opinions,  when  on  the  contrary  they  rest  on  the  solid  and
unshakable  foundation  of  truth.  Is  not  our  hope  baseless
if  our  faith  is  subject  to  change?  Fools  then  were  our
martyrs  for  bearing  so  cruel  tortures  for  an  uncertainty,
and  for  entering,  without  hesitation,  on  an  everlasting  exile,
through  a  bitter  death,  when  there  was  a  doubt  as  to  the
recompense  of  their  reward.  But  far  be  it  from  us  to  think


LKTTKR CXC.  575

that  in  our  faith  or  hope  anything,  as  he  supposes,  depends
on  the  fluctuating  judgment  of  the  individual,  and  that  the
whole  of  it  does  not  rest  on  sure  and  solid  truth,  having
been  commended  by  miracles  and  revelations  from  above,
founded  and  consecrated  by  the  Son  of  the  Virgin,  by  the
Blood  of  the  Redeemer,  by  the  glory  of  the  risen  Christ.
These  infallible  proofs  have  been  given  us  in  super
abundance.  But  if  not,  the  Spirit  itself,  lastly,  bears
witness  with  our  spirit  that  we  are  the  sons  of  God.  How,
then,  can  any  one  dare  to  call  faith  opinion,  unless  it  be
that  he  has  not  yet  received  that  Spirit,  or  unless  he  either
knows  not  the  Gospel  or  thinks  it  to  be  a  fable  ?  /  know  in
-whom  I  have  believed,  and  I  am  confident  (2  Tim.  i.  12),
cries  the  Apostle,  and  you  mutter  in  my  ears  that  faith  is
only  an  opinion.  Do  you  prate  to  me  that  that  is
ambiguous  than  which  there  is  nothing  more  certain  ?
But  Augustine  says  otherwise  :  "  Faith  is  not  held  by  any
one  in  whose  heart  it  is,  by  conjectures  or  opinions,  but  it
is  sure  knowledge  and  has  the  assent  of  the  conscience."
Far  be  it  from  us,  then,  to  suppose  that  the  Christian  faith
has  as  its  boundaries  those  opinions  of  the  Academicians,
whose  boast  it  is  that  they  doubt  of  everything,  and  know
nothing.  But  I  for  my  part  walk  securely,  according  to  the
saying  of  the  teacher  of  the  Gentiles,  and  I  know  that  I
shall  not  be  confounded.  I  am  satisfied,  I  confess,  with  his
definition  of  faith,  even  though  this  man  stealthily  accuses
it.  Faith,  he  says,  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,
the  evidence  of  things  not  seen  (Heb.  xi.  i).  The  substance,
he  says,  of  things  hoped  for,  not  a  phantasy  of  empty
conjectures.  You  hear,  that  it  is  a  substance  ;  and  therefore
it  is  not  allowed  you  in  our  faith,  to  suppose  or  oppose  at
your  pleasure,  nor  to  wander  hither  and  thither  amongst
empty  opinions,  through  devious  errors.  Under  the  name
of  substance  something  certain  and  fixed  is  jnit  before  you.
You  are  enclosed  in  known  bounds,  shut  in  within  fixed
limits.  For  faith  is  not  an  opinion,  but  a  certitude.

10.  But  now  notice  other  points.  I  pass  over  his  saying
that  the  spirit  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord  was  not  in  the  Lord  ;
that  there  will  be  no  holv  fear  of  the  Lord  in  the  world  to


576  LETTER CXC.

come  ;  that  after  the  consecration  of  the  bread  and  of  the  cup,
the  former  accidents  which  remain  are  suspended  in  the  air;
that  the  suggestions  of  devils  come  to  us,  as  their  sagacious
wickedness  knows  how,  by  the  contact  of  stones  and  herbs  ;
and  that  they  are  able  to  discern  in  such  natural  objects
strength  suited  to  excite  various  passions  ;  that  the  Holy
Spirit  is  the  anima  miindi ;  that  the  world,  as  Plato  says,
is  so  much  a  more  excellent  animal,  as  it  has  a  better  soul
in  the  Holy  Spirit.  Here  while  he  exhausts  his  strength
to  make  Plato  a  Christian,  he  proves  himself  a  heathen.
All  these  things  and  his  other  numerous  silly  stories  of  the
same  kind  I  pass  by,  I  come  to  graver  matters.  To  answer
them  all  would  require  volumes.  I  speak  only  of  those  on
which  I  cannot  keep  silence.

CHAPTER V.

He  accuses  Abaelard  for  preferring  his  own  opinions  and
even  fancies  to  the  unanimous  consent  of  the  Fathers,
especially  where  he  declares  that  Christ  did  not  become
incarnate  in  order  to  save  man  from  the  power  of  tlic  devil.

ii.  I  find  in  a  book  of  his  sentences,  and  also  in  an
exposition  of  his  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  that  this
rash  inquirer  into  the  Divine  Majesty  attacks  the  mystery
of  our  Redemption.  He  admits  in  the  very  beginning  of
his  disputation  that  there  has  never  been  but  one  conclu
sion  in  our  ecclesiastical  doctors  on  this  point,  and  this  he
states  only  to  spurn  it,  and  boasts  that  he  has  a  better  ;
not  fearing,  against  the  precept  of  the  Wise  Man,  To  cross
the  ancient  boundaries  which  our  fathers  have  marked  out
(Prov.  xxii.  28).  It  is  needful  to  know,  he  says,  that  all  our
doctors  since  the  Apostles  agree  in  this,  that  the  devil  had
power  and  dominion  over  man,  and  that  he  rightly
possessed  it,  because  man,  by  an  act  of  the  free  will  which
he  had,  voluntarily  consented  to  the  devil.  For  they  say
that  if  any  one  conquers  another,  the  conquered  rightly
becomes  the  slave  of  his  conqueror.  Therefore,  he  says,
as  the  doctors  teach,  the  Son  of  God  became  incarnate
under  this  necessity,  that  since  man  could  not  otherwise


LETTKR CXC.  577

be  freed,  he  might,  by  the  death  of  an  innocent  man,  be
set  free  from  the  yoke  of  the  devil.  But  as  it  seems  to  us,
he  says,  neither  had  the  devil  ever  any  power  over  man,
except  by  the  permission  of  God,  as  a  jailer  might,  nor  was
it  to  free  man  that  the  Son  of  God  assumed  flesh.  Which
am  I  to  think  the  more  intolerable  in  these  words,  the
blasphemy  or  the  arrogance  ?  Which  is  the  more  to  be
condemned,  his  rashness  or  his  impiety?  Would  not  the
mouth  of  him  who  speaks  such  things  be  more  justly  beaten
with  rods  than  confuted  with  reasons?  Does  not  he  whose
hand  is  against  every  man,  rightly  provoke  every  man's
hand  to  be  raised  against  him  ?  All,  he  says,  say  so,  but
so  do  not  I.  What,  then,  do  you  say?  What  better
statement  have  you  ?  What  more  subtle  reason  have  you
discovered  ?  What  more  secret  revelation  do  you  boast
of  which  has  passed  by  the  Saints  and  escaped  from  the
wise?  He,  1  suppose,  will  give  us  secret  waters  and
hidden  bread.

12.  Tell us, nevertheless, that  truth which has shown
itself  to  you  and  to  none  else. Is  it  that  it  was  not  to  free
man  that the Son of God became man  ? No  one,  you
excepted,  thinks  this  ; you  stand  alone. For  not  trom  a
wise man, nor prophet, nor apostle, nor  even from the
Lord  Himself  have  you  received  this. The  teacher  of  the
Gentiles  received  from  tJic  Lord  what  he  has  handed  down
to  us  (i Cor. xi. 23). The  Teacher of  all  confesses  that
His  doctrine  is  not  His  own, for  /  do not,  He  says,  speak
of  Myself  (S.  John  vii.  16  and  xiv.  10),  while  you  give  us  of
your  own,  and  what  you  have received from no  one. He
who  speaketh  a lie speaketh of  his own (Ibid.  viii. 44).
Keep  for  yourself  what  is  your  own. I  listen  to  Prophets  and
Apostles,  I  obey  the  Gospel, but  not  the  Gospel  according
to  Peter. Do  you  found  for  us  a  new  Gospel  ? The  Church
does  not  receive  a  fifth  Evangelist.  What  othec Gospel  do  the
Law,  the  Prophets,  apostles,  and  apostolic  men  preach  to  us
than  that  which  you  alone  deny,  viz.,  that  God  became  man
to  free  man  ? And  if  an  angel  from  heaven  should  preach
to  us  any  other  Gospel,  let  him  be  anathema.

13.  But  you  do  not  accept  the  Doctors  since  the  Apostles,


578  LETTER CXC.

because  you  perceive  yourself  to  be  a  man  above  all  teachers.
For  example,  you  do  not  blush  to  say  that  all  are  against
you,  when  they  all  agree  together.  To  no  purpose,  there
fore,  should  I  place  before  you  the  faith  and  doctrine  of
those  teachers  whom  you  have  just  proscribed.  I  will
take  you  to  the  Prophets.  Under  the  type  of  Jerusalem
the  prophet  speaks,  or  rather  the  Lord  in  the  prophet
speaks  to  His  chosen  people  :  /  will  save  you  and  deliver
you,  fear  not  (Wisd.  iii.  16).  You  ask,  from  what  power?
For  you  do  not  admit  that  the  devil  has  or  ever  has  had
power  over  man.  Neither,  I  confess,  do  I.  It  is  not,  however,
that  he  has  it  not  because  you  and  I  wish  it  not.  If  you  do
not  confess  it,  you  know  it  not ;  they  whom  the  Lord  has
redeemed  out  of  the  hand  of  the  enemy ,  they  know  it  and
confess  it.  And  you  would  by  no  means  deny  it,  if  you
were  not  under  the  hand  of  the  enemy.  You  cannot  give
thanks  with  the  redeemed,  because  you  have  not  been
redeemed.  For  if  you  had  been  redeemed  you  would
recognize  your  Redeemer,  and  would  not  deny  your
redemption.  Nor  does  the  man,  who  knows  not  himself  to
be  a  captive,  seek  to  be  redeemed.  Those  who  knew  it
called  unto  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  heard  them,  and
redeemed  them  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy.  And  that
you  may  understand  who  this  enemy  is,  He  says  :  Those
whom  He  redeemed  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy  He
gathered  out  of  all  lands  (Ps.  cvii.  2,  3).  But  first,  indeed,
recognize  Him  Who  gathered  them,  of  Whom  Caiaphas  in
the  Gospel  prophesied,  saying  that  Jesus  should  die  for  the
people,  and  the  Evangelist  proceeds  thus  :  And  not  for
that  nation  only,  but  that  He  might  gather  together  into
one  all  the  children  of  God  which  were  scattered  abroad
(S.  John  xi.  51,  52).  Whither  had  they  been  scattered  ?  Into
all  lands.  Therefore  those  whom  He  redeemed  he  gathered
together  from  all  lands.  He  first  redeemed,  then  gathered
them.  For  they  were  not  only  scattered,  but  also  taken
captive.  He  redeemed  and  gathered  them  ;  but  redeemed
them  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy.  He  does  not  say  of
the  enemies,  but  of  the  enemy.  The  enemy  was  one,
the  lands  many.  Indeed,  he  gathered  them  not  from  one


LKTTER CXC.  579

land,  but  from  the  lands,  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,
from  the  north  and  from  the  south.  What  Lord  was  there
so  powerful,  who  governed  not  one  land  but  all  lands?
No  other,  I  suppose,  than  He  who  by  another  prophet  is
said  to  drink  up  a  river,  that  is,  the  human  race,  and  not
to  wonder;  and  to  trust  that  he  can  also  draw  up  into  his
mouth  Jordan,  i.e.,  the  elect  (Job  xl.  18).  Blessed  are  they
who  so  flow  in  that  they  can  flow  out,  who  so  enter  that
they  can  go  out.

14.  But  now  perhaps  you  do  not  believe  the  Prophets,  thus
speaking  with  one  accord  of  the  power  of  the  devil  over  man.
Come  with  me  then  to  the  Apostles.  You  said,  did  you  not  ?
that  you  do  not  agree  with  those  who  have  come  since  the
Apostles  ;  may  you  agree  then  with  the  Apostles  ;  and  per
haps  that  may  happen  to  you  which  one  of  them  describes,
speaking  of  certain  persons  :  If  God,  per  adventure,  will  give
them  repentance  to  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth,  and  that
they  may  recover  themselves  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,
who  are  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will  (2  Tim.  ii.  25,  26).
It  is  Paul  who  thus  asserts  that  men  are  taken  captive  by
the  devil  at  his  will.  Do  you  hear?  "  at  his  will  ;  "  and  do
you  deny  his  power  ?  But  if  you  do  not  believe  Paul,  come
now  to  the  Lord  Himself,  if  perchance  you  may  listen  to
Him  and  be  put  to  silence.  By  Him  the  devil  is  called  the
prince  of  this  world  (S.  John  xiv.  30),  and  the  strong  man
armed  (S.  Luke  xi.  21),  and  the  possessor  of  goods  (S.  Matt,
xii.  29),  and  yet  you  say  that  he  has  no  power  over  men.
Perhaps  you  think  the  house  in  this  place  is  not  to  be
understood  of  the  world,  nor  the  goods  of  men.  But  if  the
world  is  the  house  of  the  devil  and  men  his  goods,  how  can
it  be  said  he  has  no  power  over  men  ?  Moreover,  the  Lord
said  to  those  who  took  Him  :  This  is  vour  hour  and  the
power  of  darkness  (S.  Luke  xxii.  53).  That  power  did  not
escape  him  who  said :  Who  hath  delivered*,  us  from  the
power  of  darkness,  and  hath  translated  us  into  the  kingdom
of  His  dear  Son  (Col.  i.  13).  The  Lord  then  neither  denied
the  power  of  the  devil  even  over  Him,  nor  that  of  Pilate,
who  was  a  member  of  the  devil.  He  said  :  Thou  couldst
have  no  power  against  me  at  all  except  it  were  given  thee


580  LETTER CXC.

from  above  (S.  John  xix.  n).  But  if  that  power  given
from  above  so  violently  raged  against  the  green  tree,  how
is  it  that  it  did  not  dare  to  touch  the  dry  ?  Nor  I  suppose
will  he  say,  that  it  was  an  unjust  power  which  \vas  given
from  above.  Let  him,  therefore,  learn  that  not  only  had
the  devil  power  over  man,  but  also  a  just  power,  and  in
consequence  let  him  see  this,  that  the  Son  of  God  came
in  the  flesh  to  set  man  free.  But  though  we  say  that
the  power  of  the  devil  w7as  a  just  one  we  do  not  say
that  his  will  was.  Whence  it  is  not  the  devil  who  usurped
the  power,  who  is  just,  nor  man  who  deservedly  was  sub
jected  to  it  ;  but  the  Lord  is  just,  who  permitted  the
subjection.  For  anyone  is  called  just  and  unjust,  not  from
his  power  but  from  his  will.  This  power  of  the  devil  over
man  though  not  rightly  acquired,  but  wickedly  usurped,
was  yet  justly  permitted.  And  in  this  way  man  was
justly  taken  captive,  viz.,  that  the  justice  was  neither  in
the  devil,  nor  in  man,  but  in  God.


CHAPTER VI.

///  the  work  of  the  Redemption of  man, not  only  the
mercy,  but  also  the  justice,  of  God  is  displayed.

15.  Man  therefore  was  lawfully  delivered  up,  but  merci
fully  set  free.  Yet  mercy  was  shown  in  such  a  way  that
a  kind  of  justice  was  not  lacking  even  in  his  liberation,
since,  as  was  most  fitting  for  man's  recovery,  it  was
part  of  the  mercy  of  the  liberator  to  employ  justice
rather  than  power  against  man's  enemy.  For  what  could
man,  the  slave  of  sin,  fast  bound  by  the  devil,  do  of  him
self  to  recover  that  righteousness  which  he  had  formerly
lost  ?  Therefore  he  who  lacked  righteousness  had  another's
imputed  to  him,  and  in  this  way :  The  prince  of  this
world  came  and  found  nothing  in  the  Saviour,  and  because
he  notwithstanding  laid  hands  on  the  Innocent  he  lost
most  justly  those  whom  he  held  captive  ;  since  He  who
owred  nothing  to  death,  lawfully  freed  him  who  was  subject


LKTTKK CXC.  581

to  it,  both  from  the  debt  of  death,  and  the  dominion  of
the  devil,  by  accepting  the  injustice  of  death;  for  with
what  justice  could  that  be  exacted  from  man  a  second
time  ?  It  was  man  who  owed  the  debt,  it  was  man  who
paid  it.  For  if  one,  says  S.  Paul,  died  for  all,  then  were
nil  dead  (2  Cor.  v.  14),  so  that,  as  One  bore  the  sins  of
all,  the  satisfaction  of  One  is  imputed  to  all.  It  is  not
that  one  forfeited,1  another  satisfied  ;  the  Head  and  body
is  one,  viz.,  Christ.  The  Head,  therefore,  satisfied  for  the
members,  Christ  for  His  children,  since,  according  to  the
Gospel  of  Paul,  by  which  Peter's-  falsehood  is  refuted,
He  who  died  for  us,  quickened  us  together  with  Himself,
forgiving  us  all  our  trespasses,  blotting  out  the  hand
writing  of  ordinances  that  was  against  us,  and  took  il
out  of  the  way ,  nailing  it  to  His  cross,  having  spoiled
principalities  and  powers  (Col.  ii.  13,  14).

1 6.  May  I  be  found  amongst  those  spoils  of  which  the
opposing  powers  were  deprived,  and  be  handed  over  into
the  possession  of  my  Lord.  It  Laban  pursue  me  and
reproach  me  for  having  left  him  by  stealth,  he  shall  be
told  that  I  came  to  him  by  stealth,  and  therefore  so  left
him.  The  secret  power  of  sin  subjected  me,  the  hidden
plan  of  righteousness  freed  me  from  him  ;  or  I  will  reply,
that  if  I  was  sold  for  nothing  shall  I  not  be  freely  re
deemed  ?  If  Asshur  has  reproached  me  without  cause,  he
has  no  right  to  demand  the  cause  of  my  escape.  But  if  he
says,  "Your  father  sold  you  into  captivity,"  I  will  reply,  "But
my  Brother  redeemed  me."  Why  should  not  righteousness
come  to  me  from  another  when  guilt  came  upon  me  from

1  Forefrcit,  i.e.,  offended  or  transgressed.  Forisfuctura  or  forefuciiim  denoted
the  crime  or  offence :  and  the  former  word  is  also  used  to  signify  the  penalty  of
a  crime.  Forixfuctus  is  the  criminal  himself.  Semis  forisfactus  is  a  free  man
who  has  been  reduced  to  slavery  as  a  punishment  for  crime  (Legil-us  Athelstaii.
Krg.  c.  3).  From  this  word  is  the  French  forfaire,  furfuit  ;  and  the  English
forfeit,  forfeiture.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  word  is  a  legal  term  adopted  into  the  language  of
theology.  The  earliest  instance  of  its  use  is  apparently  in  the  Glossa  of  Isidore.

See  Du  Gauge's  Glossary  s.v.  Forhfacere.  Forcellini's  ed.  of  Facciolati  does
not  give  the  word. —  [E.]

3  i.e.,  Abaelard.


582  LETTER CXC.

another  ?  One  made  me  a  sinner,  the  other  justifies  me  from
sin  ;  the  one  by  generation,  the  other  by  His  blood.  Shall
there  be  sin  in  the  seed  of  the  sinner  and  not  righteous
ness  in  the  blood  of  Christ?  But  he  will  say,  "Let
righteousness  be  whose  it  may,  it  is  none  of  yours."  Be  it
.so.  But  let  guilt  also  be  whose  it  may,  it  is  none  of  mine.
Shall  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous  be  upon  him,  and
the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  not  be  upon  him  ?  It  is  not
hitting  for  the  son  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,  and  yet
to  have  no  share  in  the  righteousness  of  his  brother.  But
nowr  by  man  came  death,  by  Man  also  came  life.  For  as  in
Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive
(i  Cor.  xv.  21,  22).  I  attain  to  one  and  to  the  other  in  the
same  way:  to  the  one  by  the  flesh,  to  the  other  by  faith.
And  if  from  the  one  I  was  infected  with  concupiscence
from  my  birth,  by  Christ  spiritual  grace  was  infused  into
me.  What  more  does  this  hired  advocate  bring  against
me  ?  If  he  urges  generation,  I  oppose  regeneration  ;  and  add
that  the  former  is  but  carnal,  while  the  latter  is  spiritual.  Nor
does  equity  suffer  that  they  fight  as  equals,  but  the  higher
nature  is  the  more  efficacious  cause,  and  therefore  the  spirit
must  necessarily  overcome  the  flesh.  In  other  words,  the
second  birth  is  so  much  the  more  beneficial  as  the  first  was
baneful.  The  offence,  indeed,  came  to  me,  but  so  did
grace ;  and  not  as  the  offence  so  also  is  the  free  gift ;  for
the  judgment  was  by  one  to  condemnation,  but  the  free
gift  is  of  many  offences  unto  justification  (Rom.  v.  16).
From  the  first  man  flowed  down  the  offence,  from  the
highest  heaven  came  down  the  free  gift:  both  from  our
father,  one  from  our  first  father,  the  other  from  the  Supreme
Father.  My  earthly  birth  destroys  me,  and  does  not  my
heavenly  much  more  save  me  ?  And  I  am  not  afraid  of
being  rejected  by  the  Father  of  lights  when  I  have  been
rescued  in  this  way  from  the  power  of  darkness,  and  justi
fied  through  His  grace  by  the  blood  of  His  Son  :  It  is  God
.that  justifieth,  who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  He  who  had
mercy  on  the  sinner  will  not  condemn  the  righteous ;  I
.mean  that  I  am  righteous,  but  it  is  in  His  righteousness,  for


LKTTER CXC.  583

Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one
that  believeth  (Rom.  x.  4).  In  short,  He  was  made  our
righteousness  by  God  the  Father  (i  Cor.  i.  30).  Is  not  that
righteousness  mine  which  was  made  for  me?  If  my  guilt
was  inherited,  why  should  not  my  righteousness  be  accorded
to  me  ?  And,  truly,  what  is  given  me  is  safer  than  what  was
born  in  me.  For  this,  indeed,  has  whereof  to  glory,  but  not
before  God;  but  that,  since  it  is  effectual  to  my  salvation,
has  nothing  whereof  to  glory  save  in  the  Lord.  For  if  I
be  righteous,  says  Job, yet  will  I  not  lift  up  my  head  (Job
x.  15),  lest  1  receive  the  answer:  What  hast  thou  that  t  lion
didst  not  receive  ?  now  if  t/iou  didst  receive  it,  why  dost
thou  glory  as  if  tJwu  hadst  not  received  it  ?  (i  Cor.  iv.  7).


CHAPTER VII.

He  severely  reproves  Abaelard  for  scrutinizing  rashly
and  impiously,  and  extenuating  the  power  of,  the  secret
things  of  God.

17.  This  is  the  righteousness  of  man  in  the  blood  of  tin-
Redeemer:  which  this  son  of  perdition,  by  his  scoffs  and
insinuations,  is  attempting  to  render  vain  ;  so  much  so,
that  he  thinks  and  argues  that  the  whole  fact  that  the  Lord
of  Glory  emptied  Himself,  that  He  was  made  lower  than  the
angels,  that  He  was  born  of  a  woman,  that  He  lived  in  tin-
world,  that  He  made  trial  of  our  infirmities,  that  Ht-
suffered  indignities,  that  at  last  He  returned  to  His  own
place  by  the  way  of  the  Cross,  that  all  this  is  to  be  reduced
to  one  reason  alone,  viz.,  that  it  was  done  merely  that  He
might  give  man  by  His  life  and  teaching  a  rule  of  life,  and
by  His  suffering  and  death  might  set  before  him  a  goal  of
charity.  Did  He,  then,  teach  righteousness  and  not  bestow
it?  Did  He  show  charity  and  not  infuse  it,  and  did  He  so
return  to  His  heaven?  Is  this,  then,  the  whole  of  tin-
great  mystery  of  godliness,  which  was  manifested  in  the
flesh,  justified  in  the  Spirit,  seen  of  angels,  preached  unto
the  Gentiles,  believed  on  in  the  world,  received  up  into


584  LETTER CXC.

%lory  (i  Tim.  iii.  16).  O,  incomparable  doctor!  he  lays
bare  to  himself  the  deep  things  of  God,  he  makes  them
clear  and  easy  to  every  one,  and  by  his  false  teaching  he  so
renders  plain  and  evident  the  most  lofty  sacrament  of  grace,
the  mystery  hidden  from  the  ages,  that  any  uncircumcised
and  unclean  person  can  lightly  penetrate  to  the  heart  of  it :
as  though  the  wisdom  of  God  knew  not  how  to  guard  or
neglected  to  guard  against  what  Itself  forbade,  but  had
Itself  given  what  is  holy  to  the  dogs  and  cast  its  pearls
before  swine.  But  it  is  not  so.  For  though  it  was  mani
fested  in  the  flesh,  yet  it  was  justified  in  the  Spirit:  so
that  spiritual  things  are  bestowed  upon  spiritual  men,  and
the  natural  man  does  not  perceive  the  things  which  are  of
the  Spirit  of  God.  Nor  does  our  faith  consist  in  wisdom  of
words  but  in  the  power  of  God.  And,  therefore,  the
Saviour  says  :  /  thank  Thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven
and  earth,  because  Thozi  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise
and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes  (S.  Matt,
xi.  25).  And  the  Apostle  says:  If  our  Gospel  be  hid,  it  is
hid  to  them  that  are  lost  (2  Cor.  iv.  3).

1 8.  But  see  this  man  scoffing  at  the  things  which  are  of
the  Spirit  of  God,  because  they  seem  to  him  folly,  and
insulting  the  Apostle  who  speaks  the  hidden  wisdom  of
God  in  a  mystery,  inveighing  against  the  Gospel  and  even
blaspheming  the  Lord.  How  much  more  prudent  would  he
be  if  he  would  deign  to  believe  what -he  has  no  power  to
comprehend,  and  would  not  dare  to  despise  or  tread  under
foot  this  sacred  and  holy  mystery  !  It  is  a  long  task  to
reply  to  all  the  follies  and  calumnies  which  he  charges
against  the  Divine  counsel.  Yet  I  take  a  few,  from  which
the  rest  may  be  estimated.  "  Since,"  he  says,  "  Christ  set
free  the  elect  only,  how  were  they  more  than  now,  whether
in  this  world  or  the  next,  under  the  power  of  the  devil?"
I  answer:  It  was  just  because  they  were  under  the  power
of  the  devil,  by  whom,  says  the  Apostle,  they  were  taken
captive  at  his  will  (2  Tim.  ii.  26),  that  there  was  need  of
a  liberator  in  order  that  the  purpose  of  God  concerning
them  might  be  fulfilled.  But  it  behoved  Him  to  set  them


LETTER CXC.  585

free  in  this  world,  that  He  might  have  them  as  freeborn
sons  in  the  next.  Then  he  rejoins  :  "  Well,  did  the  devil
also  torture  the  poor  man  who  was  in  the  bosom  of
Abraham  as  he  did  the  rich  man  who  was  condemned,  or
had  he  power  over  Abraham  himself  and  the  rest  of  the
elect?"  No,  but  he  would  have  had  if  they  had  not  been
set  free  by  their  faith  in  a  future  Deliverer,  as  of  Abraham
it  is  written  :  Abraham  believed  God ,  and  it  was  counted
unto  him  for  righteousness  (Gen.  xv.  6).  Again  :  Abraliam
rejoiced  to  see  My  day,  and  he  saw  it  and  was  glad  (S.  John
viii.  56).  Therefore  even  then  the  Blood  of  Christ  was
bedewing  Lazarus,  that  he  might  not  feel  the  flames,  because
he  had  believed  on  Him  who  should  suffer.  So  are  we  to
think  of  all  the  saints  of  that  time,  that  they  were  born  just
as  ourselves  under  the  power  of  darkness,  because  of
original  sin,  but  rescued  before  they  died,  and  that  by
nothing  else  but  the  blood  of  Christ.  For  it  is  written  :
The  multitudes  that  went  before  and  that  followed,  cried
saying,  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  Dai' id,  Blessed  is  He  that
cometh  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  (S.  Matt.  xxi.  9).  There
fore  blessing  was  given  to  Christ  coming  in  the  flesh,  both
before  he  came  and  afterwards,  by  multitudes  of  those  who
had  been  blessed  by  Him,  although  those  who  went  before
did  not  obtain  a  full  blessing,  this,  of  course,  having  been
kept  as  the  prerogative  of  the  time  of  grace.


CHAPTER VIII.

Wherefore  Christ  undertook  a  method  of  setting  us  free
so  painful  and  laborious,  when  a  word  from  Him,  or
an  act  of  His  will,  would  alone  hai'c  sufficed.

19.  Then  he  labours  to  teach  and  persuade  us  that  the
devil  could  not  and  ought  not  to  have  claimed  for  himself
any  right  over  man,  except  by  the  permission  of  God,  and
that,  without  doing  any  injustice  to  the  devil,  God  could
have  called  back  his  deserter,  if  He  wished  to  show  him
mercy,  and  have  rescued  him  by  a  word  only,  as  though

VOL.  II.  38


586  LETTER CXC.

anyone  denies  this ;  then  after  much  more  he  proceeds :
''And  so  what  necessity,  or  what  reason,  or  what  need  was
there,  when  the  Divine  compassion  by  a  simple  command
could  have  freed  man  from  sin,  for  the  Son  of  God  to  take
flesh  for  our  redemption,  to  suffer  so  many  and  such  great
privations,  scorn,  scourgings,  and  spittings  on,  in  short,  the
pain  and  ignominy  of  the  cross  itself,  and  that  with  evil
doers?"  I  reply:  The  necessity  was  ours,  the  hard
necessity  of  those  sitting  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of
death.  The  need,  equally  ours,  and  God's,  and  the  Holy
Angels !  Ours,  that  He  might  remove  the  yoke  of  our
captivity;  His  own,  that  He  might  fulfil  the  purpose  of  His
will;  the  Angels',  that  their  number  might  be  filled  up.
Further,  the  reason  of  this  deed  was  the  good  pleasure  of
the  Doer.  Who  denies  that  there  were  ready  for  the
Almighty  other  and  yet  other  wrays  to  redeem  us,  to  justify
us,  to  set  us  free  ?  But  this  takes  nothing  from  the  efficacy
of  the  one  which  He  chose  out  of  many.  And,  perhaps,
the  greatest  excellence  of  the  way  chosen  is  that  in  a  land
of  forgetfulness,  of  slowness  of  spirit,  and  of  constant  offend
ing,  we  are  more  forcibly  and  more  vividly  warned  by  so
many  and  such  great  sufferings  of  our  Restorer.  Beyond
that  no  man  knows,  nor  can  know  to  the  full,  what  treasures
of  grace,  what  harmony  with  wisdom,  what  increase  of  glory,
what  advantages  for  salvation  the  inscrutable  depth  of  this
holy  mystery  contains  within  itself,  that  mystery  which  the
Prophet  when  considering  trembled  at,  but  did  not  pene
trate  (Habak.  iii.  2  in  LXX.),  and  which  the  forerunner  of  the
Lord  thought  himself  unworthy  to  unloose  (S.  John  i.  27).

20.  But  though  it  is  not  allowed  us  to  scrutinize  the
mystery  of  the  Divine  Will,  yet  we  may  feel  the  effect  of
its  work  and  perceive  the  fruit  of  its  usefulness.  And  what
we  may  know  we  may  not  keep  to  ourselves,  for  to  conceal
their  word  is  to  give  glory  to  kings,  but  God  is  glorified  by
our  investigating  His  sayings.  [Prov.  xxv.  2.  But  the
sense  of  the  text  is  the  reverse  of  this.]  Faithful  is  the
saying  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  while  we  were
yet  sinners  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  His


LETTER CXC.  587

Son  (Rom.  v.  10).  "  Where  there  is  reconciliation  there  is
also  remission  of  sins.  For  if,  as  the  Scripture  says,  our  sins
separate  between  us  and  God"  (Is.  lix.  2),  there  is  no
reconciliation  while  sin  remains.  In  what,  then,  is  remis
sion  of  sins?  This  cup,  He  says,  is  the  new  testament
in  My  Blood  which  shall  be  shed  for  you  for  the  remission
of  sins  (S.Matt.  xxvi.  28).  Therefore  where  there  is  recon
ciliation  there  is  remission  of  sins.  And  what  is  that  but
justification  ?  Whether,  therefore,  we  call  it  reconciliation,
or  remission  of  sins,  or  justification,  or,  again,  redemption,
or  liberation  from  the  chains  of  the  devil,  by  whom  we  were
taken  captive  at  his  will,  at  all  events  by  the  death  of  the
Only  Begotten,  we  obtain  that  we  have  been  justified  freely
by  His  blood,  /;/  whom,  as  S.  Paul  says  again,  we  have
redemption  through  His  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins,
according  to  the  riches  of  His  grace  (Eph.  i.  7).  You  say,
Why  by  His  blood  when  He  could  have  wrought  it  by  His
\Vord  ?  Ask  Himself.  It  is  only  allowed  me  to  know  that
it  is  so,  not  why  it  is  so.  Shall  the  thing  formed  say  to
Him  that  formed  it,  "  Why  hast  Thou  made  me  thus  ?  "
21.  But  these  things  seem  to  him  foolishness,  he  cannot
restrain  his  laughter;  listen  to  his  jeering.  " 'Why  does
the  Apostle  say,"  he  asks,  "that  we  are  justified,  or
reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  His  Son,  when  He
ought  to  have  been  the  more  angry  with  man,  as  he  sinned
more  deeply  in  crucifying  His  Son,  than  in  transgressing
His  first  command  by  tasting  of  the  apple?"  As  if  the
iniquity  of  the  malignant  were  not  able  to  displease,  and
the  godliness  of  the  sufferer  to  please  God,  and  that  in  one
and  the  same  act.  "  But,"  he  replies,  "  if  that  sin  of  Adam
was  so  heinous  that  it  could  not  be  expiated  but  bv  tin-
death  of  Christ,  what  expiation  shall  suffice  for  that
homicide  which  was  perpetrated  upon  Christ?"  I  answer
in  two  words,  That  very  Blood  which  they  Shed,  and  the
prayer  of  Him  whom  they  slew.  He  asks  again  :  "  Did  the
death  of  His  innocent  Son  so  please  God  the  Father  that  by
it  He  was  reconciled  to  us,  who  had  committed  such  a  sin
in  Adam,  that  because  of  it  our  innocent  Lord  was  slain  ?


LETTER CXC.

Would  He  not  have  been  able  to  forgive  us  much  more
easily  if  so  heinous  a  sin  had  not  been  committed  ?  "  It  was
not  His  death  alone  that  pleased  the  Father,  but  His  volun
tary  surrender  to  death  ;  and  by  that  death  destroying  death,
working  salvation,  restoring  innocence,  triumphing  over
principalities  and  powers,  spoiling  hell,  enriching  heaven,
making  peace  between  things  in  heaven  and  things  on
earth,  and  renewing  all  things.  And  since  this  so  precious
death  to  be  voluntarily  submitted  to  against  sin  could  not
take  place  except  through  sin,  He  did  not  indeed  delight
in,  but  He  made  good  use  of,  the  malice  of  the  wrong
doers,  and  found  the  means  to  condemn  death  and  sin  by
the  death  of  His  Son,  and  the  sin  [of  those  who  condemned
Him].  And  the  greater  their  iniquity,  the  more  holy  His
will,  and  the  more  powerful  to  salvation  ;  because,  by  the
interposition  of  so  great  a  power,  that  ancient  sin,  however
great,  would  necessarily  give  way  to  that  committed  against
Christ,  as  the  less  to  the  greater.  Nor  is  this  victory  to  be
ascribed  to  the  sin  or  to  the  sinners,  but  to  Him  who
extracted  good  from  their  sin,  and  who  bore  bravely  with
the  sinners,  and  turned  to  a  godly  purpose  whatever  the
cruelty  of  the  impious  ventured  on  against  Himself.

22.  Thus  the  Blood  which  was  shed  was  so  powerful  for
pardoning  that  it  blotted  out  that  greatest  sin  of  all,  by
which  it  came  to  pass  that  it  was  shed  ;  and,  therefore,  left
no  doubt  whatever  about  the  blotting  out  of  that  ancient
and  lighter  sin.  Thus  he  rejoins:  "Is  there  anyone  to
whom  it  does  not  seem  cruel  and  unjust,  that  anyone  should
require  the  blood  of  an  innocent  man  as  the  price  of  some
thing,  or  that  the  death  of  an  innocent  man  should  in  any
way  give  him  pleasure,  not  to  say  that  God  should  hold  so
acceptable  the  death  of  His  Son  as  by  it  to  be  reconciled  to
the  whole  world  ? "  God  the  Father  did  not  require  the
Blood  of  His  Son,  but,  nevertheless,  He  accepted  it  when
offered  ;  it  was  not  blood  He  thirsted  for,  but  salvation,  for
salvation  was  in  the  blood.  He  died,  in  short,  for  our  salva
tion,  and  not  for  the  mere  exhibition  of  charity,  as  this  man
thinks  and  writes.  For  he  so  concludes  the  numerous
calumnies  and  reproaches,  which  he  as  impiously  as.


LKTTKR CXC.  589

ignorantly  belches  out  against  God,  as  to  say  that  "  tin-
whole  reason  why  God  appeared  in  the  flesh  was  for  our
education  by  His  word  and  example,  or,  as  he  afterwards
says,  for  our  instruction  ;  that  the  whole  reason  why  He
suffered  and  died  was  to  exhibit  or  commend  to  us  charilv.


CHAPTER IX.

That  CJirist  came  into  the  world,  not  onlv  to  instruct  its,
but  also  to  free  its  from  sin.

23.  But  what  profits  it  that  He  should  instruct  us  if  He
did  not  first  restore  us  by  His  grace  ? Or  are  we  not  in  vain
instructed  if  the  body  of  sin  is  not  first  destroyed  in  us,  that
we  should  no  more  serve  sin?  If  all  the  benefit  that  we  derive
from  Christ  consists  in  the  exhibition  of  His  virtues,  it  follows
thai:  Adam  must  be  said  to  harm  us  only  by  the  exhibition
of  sin. But  in  truth  the  medicine  given  was  proportioned
to  the  disease. For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ
shall  all  be  made  alive  (i  Cor.  xv.  22). As  is  the  one,  so
is  the  other. If  the  life  which  Christ  gives  is  nothing  else
but  His  instruction,  the  death  which  Adam  gave  is  in like
manner  only  his  instruction  ;  so  that  the  one  by  his  example
leads  men  to  sin,  the  other  by  His  example  and His  Word
leads  them  to  a  holy  life  and  to  love  Him. But if  we  rest
in  the  Christian  faith,  and  not  in  the  heresy  of  Pelagius,  and
confess  that  by  generation  and  not  by  example  was  the  sin
of  Adam  imparted  to  us,  and  by  sin  death,  let  us  also  con
fess  that  it  is  necessary  for  righteousness  to  be  restored  to
us  by  Christ,  not  by instruction,  but  by  regeneration,  and
by  righteousness  life  (Rom.  v.  18). And  if  this  be  so,  how
can Peter  say  that the only purpose and cause of  the
Incarnation  was  that  He  might  enlighten  the  world  by  the
light  of His  wisdom and inflame it  with love of Him  ?
Where,  then,  is  redemption  ? There  come  from  Christ,  as
he  deigns  to  confess, merely  illumination  and  enkindling
to  love. Whence  come  redemption  and  liberation  ?

24.  Grant  that  the  coming  of  Christ  profits  only  those  who
are  able  to  conform  their  lives  to  His,  and  to  repay  to  Him


5QO  LETTER CXC.

the  debt  of  love,  what  about  babes  ?  What  light  of  wisdom
will  he  give  to  those  who  have  barely  seen  the  light  of  life?
Whence  will  they  gain  power  to  ascend  to  God  who  have
not  even  learned  to  love  their  mothers  ?  Will  the  coming
of  Christ  profit  them  nothing  ?  Is  it  of  no  avail  to  them
that  they  have  been  planted  together  with  Him  by  baptism
in  the  likeness  of  His  death,  since  through  the  weakness  of
their  age  they  are  not  able  to  know  of,  or  to  love,  Christ  ?
Our  redemption,  he  says,  consists  in  that  supreme  love
which  is  inspired  in  us  by  the  passion  of  Christ.  There
fore,  infants  have  no  redemption  because  they  have  not
that  supreme  love.  Perhaps  he  holds  that  as  they  have  no
power  to  love,  so  neither  have  they  necessity  to  perish,  that
they  have  no  need  to  be  regenerated  in  Christ  because  they
have  received  no  damage  from  their  generation  from  Adam.
If  he  thinks  this,  he  thinks  foolishness  with  Pelagius.
Whichever  of  these  two  opinions  he  holds,  his  ill-will  to  the
sacrament  of  our  salvation  is  evident ;  and  in  attributing
the  whole  of  our  salvation  to  devotion,  and  nothing  of  it  to
regeneration,  it  is  evident  too  that,  as  far  as  he  can,  he
would  empty  of  meaning  the  dispensation  of  this  deep
mystery ;  for  he  places  the  glory  of  our  redemption  and  the
great  wrork  of  salvation,  not  in  the  virtue  of  the  Cross,  not
in  the  blood  paid  as  its  price,  but  in  our  advances  in  a  holy
life.  But  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory  save  in  the  Cross
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (Gal.  vi.  14),  in  which  are  our  sal
vation,  life,  and  resurrection.

25.  And,  indeed,  I  see  three  chief  virtues  in  this  work  of
our  salvation  :  the  form  of  humility  in  wrhich  God  emptied
Himself;  the  measure  of  charity  which  He  stretched  out
even  to  death,  and  that  the  death  of  the  Cross  ;  the  mys
tery  of  redemption,  by  which  He  bore  that  death  which  He
underwent.  The  former  two  of  these  without  the  last  are  as
if  you  wrere  to  paint  on  the  air.  A  very  great  and  most
necessary  example  of  humility,  a  great  example  of  charity,
and  one  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  has  He  set  us ;  but  they
have  no  foundation,  and,  therefore,  no  stability,  if  redemp
tion  be  wanting.  I  wish  to  follow  with  all  my  strength  the
lowly  Jesus;  I  wish  Him,  who  loved  me  and  gave  Himself


LETTER CXC.  591

for  me,  to  embrace  me  with  the  arms  of  His  love,  which
suffered  in  my  stead  ;  but  I  must  also  feed  on  the  Paschal
Lamb,  for  unless  I  eat  His  Flesh  and  drink  His  Blood  I  have
no  life  in  me.  It  is  one  thing  to  follow  Jesus,  another  to
hold  Him,  another  to  feed  on  Him.  To  follow  Him  is  a
life-giving  purpose  ;  to  hold  and  embrace  Him  a  solemn
joy  ;  to  feed  on  Him  a  blissful  life.  For  His  flesh  is  meat
indeed,  and  His  blood  is  drink  indeed.  The  bread  of  God
is  He  who  cometh  down  from  Heaven  and  giveth  life  to  the
world  (S.  John  vi.  56,  33).  What  stability  is  there  for  joy,
what  constancy  of  purpose,  without  life  ?  Surely  no  more
than  for  a  picture  without  a  solid  basis.  Similarly  neither
the  examples  of  humility  nor  the  proofs  of  charity  are  any
thing  without  the  sacrament  of  our  redemption.

26.  These  results  of  the  labour  of  the  hands  of  your  son,
my  lord  and  father,  you  now  hold,  such  as  they  are,
against  a  few  heads  of  this  new  heresy  ;  in  which  if  you  see
nothing  besides  my  zeal,  yet  I  have  meanwhile  satisfied  my
own  conscience.  For  since  there  was  nothing  that  I  could
do  against  the  injury  to  the  faith,  which  I  deplored,  I  thought
it  worth  while  to  warn  him,  whose  arms  are  the  power  of
God,  for  the  destruction  of  contrary  imaginations,  to  des
troy  every  high  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against  the  know
ledge  of  God,  and  to  bring  every  thought  into  captivity  to
the  obedience  of  Christ.  There  are  other  points  in  his
other  writings,  not  few  nor  less  evil  ;  but  the  limits  of  my
time  and  of  a  letter  do  not  allow  me  to  reply  to  them.
Moreover,  I  do  not  think  it  necessary,  since  they  are  so
manifest,  that  they  may  be  easily  refuted  even  by  ordinary
faith.  Still,  I  have  collected  some  and  sent  them  to  you.

LETTER  CXCI. (A.D. 1140.)

To  THE  SAME,  IN  THE  PERSON  OE  THE  ARCHBISHOP
OE  RHEIMS.

That the  Pope  should use his  authority to repress  the
a r roga nee  of  Abaclard.

To  their  most  revered  Lord  and  dear  Father,  INNOCENT,


592  LETTER CXCI.

by  the  grace  of  God  Supreme  Pontiff,  SAMSON,  Archbishop
of  Rheims,  JoscELix,  Bishop  of  Soissons,  GEOFFREY,
Bishop  of  Chalons,  and  ALVISUS,  Bishop  of  Arras,  send
their  willing  testimony  of  the  obedience  they  owe.

i.  As  your  time  is  occupied  with  many  things  we  send  a
short  account  of  a  lengthy  matter,  and  the  more  especially
as  a  longer  and  fuller  account  is  contained  in  the  letters  of
the  Bishop  of  Sens.  Peter  Abaelard  is  endeavouring  to
destroy  the  virtue  of  the  Christian  faith,  inasmuch  as  he
thinks  that  he  is  able  to  comprehend  the  whole  that  God  is
by  his  unaided  human  reason,  he  is  ascending  to  the  skies,
he  is  descending  to  the  depths.  There  is  nothing  which
can  escape  him,  either  in  the  heights  above  or  in  the  depths
beneath.  He  is  a  man  great  in  his  own  eyes,  a  disputer  of
the  faith  against  the  faith,  a  man  who  busies  himself  about
great  and  wonderful  matters  which  are  out  of  his  reach,  a
prier  into  the  Majesty  of  God,  a  manufacturer  of  heresies.
He  had  not  long  since  put  forth  a  treatise  on  the  Trinity,
which  was  tried  by  the  fire  under  the  command  of  the
Legate  of  the  Roman  Church,1  because  iniquity  was  found
in  it.  Cursed  was  he  who  rebuilt  the  ruins  of  Jericho.
That  book  has  risen  from  the  dead,  and  with  it  the  heresies
of  many  which  had  slept  have  arisen,  and  appeared  unto
many.  Now,  his  heresy  is  spreading  out  its  boughs  unto
the  sea,  and  its  branches  even  to  Rome.  It  is  his  boast
that  his  book  has  where  to  lay  its  head  even  in  the  Roman
Curia.  Hence  his  phrensy  is  strengthened  and  confirmed.
Therefore,  when  the  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  armed  with  zeal
for  the  faith  and  for  righteousness,  was  arguing  about  his
heresies  in  the  presence  of  the  Bishops,  he  neither  confessed
nor  denied,  but  in  order  to  prolong  his  wickedness,  though
he  had  received  neither  injury  nor  wrong,  he  appealed  from
the  place  and  judge  which  he  had  himself  chosen  to  the
Apostolic  See.  Then  the  Bishops  who  had  assembled  for
the  purpose  of  deciding  did  nothing  against  his  person,  in
deference  to  your  authority,  but  only  censured,  as  a
medicinal  necessity,  to  prevent  the  disease  spreading,  the

1  Viz.,  Conon,  who  presided  at  Soissons  in  A.U.  1121.  See  notes  to  Letter  187.


LETTER CXCII.  593

articles  from  his  books  which  had  already  been  condemned  by
the  holy  Fathers.  Because,  then,  the  man  is  drawing  a
multitude  after  him,  and  has  a  whole  people  as  believers  in
him,  it  is  necessary  for  you  to  meet  this  contagion  with  a
swiftly-working  remedy,  for

When  ills  through  long  delays  grow  strong.
Too  late  is  medicine  prepared.1

We  have  advanced  in  this  matter  as  far  as  we  dared.  For
the  rest  it  is  your  part,  Blessed  Father,  to  take  care  that  in
your  days  no  spot  of  heretical  depravity  stains  the  fair
beauty  of  the  Church.  To  thee,  O  friend  of  the  bridegroom,
has  the  bride  of  Christ  been  entrusted  ;  it  is  thine  to
present  her,  a  chaste  virgin,  to  one  husband,  even  to  Christ.


LETTER CXCII. (A.D. 1140.)

To  MAGISTER  GUI  DO  DU  CHATEL,-  WHO  HAD  BEEN  A
DISCIPLE  OF  PETER,  ON  WHICH  PETER  PRESUMED
TOO  MUCH,  AND  WHO  WAS  AFTERWARDS  POPE
CELESTINE.

He  warns  him not  to  cherish  the  errors  of  Abaelard  in
his  love  for  the  man  himself.

To  his  venerable  Lord  and  dear  Father,  GuiDO,  by  the
grace  of  God  Cardinal-priest  of  the  holy  Roman  Church,
BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  desires  that  he
decline  neither  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left.

I  should  do  you  an  injury  if  I  were  to  suppose  that
when  you  love  anyone  you  are  in  love  also  with  his  errors.
Whoever  so  loves  another  knows  not  yet  how  to  love  as  he
ought.  For  such  love  is  earthly,  sensual,  devilish,  injuring
alike  the  lover  and  the  loved.  Others  may  think  of  others
as  they  please  ;  I  cannot  yet  think  of  you  anything  that  is
contrary  to  reason,  or  to  the  strict  rule  of  equity.  Some

1  Ovid,  De  Kemedio  Amoris,  vv.  91,  92.

2  He  was  created  A.D.  1130  Cardinal  of  S. Laurence,  in  Damasus,  when  a
Canon  of  S.  Victor,  at  Paris. See  Letter  144. Being  sent  as  legate  into  Gaul,
he  excommunicated  Ralph, Count  of  Vermandois. See  Letters  216  and  218.


594  LETTER CXCIII.

decide  first  and  try  afterwards ;  I  will  not  decide  whether
a  drink  is  sweet  or  bitter  before  I  have  tasted  it.  Master
Peter  puts  forth  in  his  books  many  blasphemous  novelties,
both  of  terms  and  senses  ;  he  disputes  about  the  faith
against  the  faith,  and  attacks  the  law  with  the  words  of
the  law.  He  sees  nothing  through  a  glass  darkly,  but
beholds  all  things  face  to  face,  and  busies  himself  in  great
and  wonderful  matters  above  him.  Better  would  it  be  if
(according  to  the  title  of  his  book1)  he  did  know  him
self,  and  did  not  go  beyond  his  measure,  but  thought
soberly.  I  do  not  accuse  him  before  the  Father;  there  is
one  who  accuses  him,  even  his  book,  in  which  he  has  such
ill-founded  pleasure.  When  he  discourses  of  the  Trinity
he  savours  of  Arius  ;  w^hen  of  grace,  of  Pelagius  ;  when  of
the  Person  of  Christ,  of  Nestorius.  I  do  not  question  your
goodness,  in  asking  you  earnestly  to  prefer  no  one  to  Christ
in  Christ's  own  cause.  But  know  this,  that  it  is  expedient
for  you,  to  whom  power  has  been  given  by  the  Lord,  it  is
expedient  for  the  Church  of  Christ,  it  is  expedient  also  for
the  man  himself,  that  he  be  silenced,  for  his  mouth  is  full
of  cursing,  and  bitterness,  and  guile.


LETTER CXCIII. (A.D. 1140.)
To  CARDINAL  Ivo,  ON  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

That  it  is  an  unworthy  thing  that  Abaelard  should  find
partizans  even  in  the  Court  of  Rome.

To  his  beloved  Ivo,  by  the  grace  of  God  Cardinal-priest
of  the  holy  Roman  Church,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
desires  that  he  love  righteousness  and  hate  iniquity.

Master  Peter  Abaelard,  a  monk  without  a  rule,  a  prelate
without  a  cure,  neither  keeps  his  order,  nor  is  kept  in  order
by  it.  He  is  a  man  inconsistent  with  himself,  within  a  Herod,
without  a  John  ;  a  thorough  hypocrite,  having  nothing  of  a
monk  but  the  name  and  habit.  But  this  is  nothing  to  me.

1 Viz.,  "  Scito  tc  ipsum."


LETTER CXCIV.  595

Each  one  will  bear  his  own  burden.  There  is  something
else,  which  I  cannot  keep  silence  about,  which  belongs  to
all  who  love  the  name  of  Christ.  He  loudly  utters  iniquity,
he  is  corrupting  the  integrity  of  the  faith,  and  the  chastity
of  the  Church.  He  crosses  over  the  boundaries  which  our
fathers  have  marked  out  in  his  discussions  and  writings
about  the  faith,  about  the  Sacraments,  about  the  Holy
Trinity;  at  his  pleasure  he  alters,  adds  to  or  diminishes
them.  In  his  books  and  works  he  shows  himself  a  manu
facturer  of  falsehood,  and  a  worshipper  of  false  dogmas  ;
proving  his  heresy,  not  so  much  by  his  error  as  by  his
obstinate  adherence  to  his  error.  He  is  a  man  who  goes
beyond  his  measure,  and  who,  by  his  skill  in  words,  lessens
or  destroys  the  power  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.  He  is
ignorant  of  nothing  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  except  himself.
He  was  condemned  at  Soissons,  with  his  work,  in  the
presence  of  the  Legate  of  the  Roman  Church.  But  as
though  that  condemnation  were  not  enough  for  him,  he  is
again  acting  so  as  to  be  again  condemned,  and  his  last
error  now  is  worse  than  the  first.  Still  he  feels  secure,
since,  as  he  boasts,  he  has  the  Cardinals  and  clergy  of  the
Curia  as  his  disciples  ;  and  he  assumes  that  those,  whose
judgment  and  condemnation  he  ought  to  fear,  are  defenders
of  his  past  and  present  error.  If  anyone  has  the  Spirit  of
God,  let  him  call  to  mind  that  verse,  Do  not  I  hate  them,
O  Lord,  that  hate  Thee,  and  am  not  I  grieved  with  those
that  rise  up  against  Thee  (Ps.  cxxxix.  21)  ?  May  God,
by  you  and  His  other  sons,  free  His  Church  from  lying  lips
and  from  a  deceitful  tongue  !


LETTER  CXCIV.  (A.D. 1140.)

RESCRIPT  OF POPK INNOCENT  AGAINST -THE HERESIES
OF  PETER  ABAELARD.

INNOCENT,  Bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his
venerable  brothers,  HENRY,  Archbishop  of  Sens,  SAMSON,
Archbishop  of  Rheims,  and  their  suffragans,  and  to  his


596  LETTER CXCIV.

beloved  brother  in  Christ,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvauxs
health  and  Apostolic  benediction.

1.  On  the  testimony  of  the  Apostle,  as  one  Lord,  so  one
faith is  to be  known  (Eph. iv. 5), on  which  the  inviolate

firmness  of  the  Catholic  Church  is  built,  as  on  an  immovable
foundation,  beside  which  no  man  can  lay  another.  Thence
it  was  that  Blessed  Peter,  the  chief  of  the  Apostles,  merited,
through  his  noble  confession  of  faith,  to  hear  from  our  Lord
and  Saviour  the  words,  Thou  art  Peter,  and  on  this  rock  I
iv  ill  build  my  Church  (S.  Matt.  xvi.  18),  manifestly  meaning
by  the  rock  the  firmness  of  his  faith  and  the  solidity  of
Catholic  unity.  This  is  the  seamless  robe  of  our  Redeemer
for  which  the  soldiers  cast  lots,  but  which  they  could  not
divide.  Against  it  in  the  beginning  the  heathen  raged,  and
the  nations  imagined  vain  things.  The  kings  of  the  eart/i
stood  up  and  their  rulers  were  gathered  together  (Ps.  ii.  i,
2).  But  the  Apostles,  as  leaders  of  the  Lord's  flock,  and
the  Apostolic  men,  their  successors,  inflamed  with  the  ardour
of  charity  and  zeal  for  righteousness,  did  not  hesitate  to  de
fend  the  faith,  and  to  implant  it  in  the  hearts  of  others  by
shedding  their  own  blood.  At  length  the  Lord  gave  com
mands  to  the  winds  ;  the  violence  of  the  persecutors  ceased,
and  there  was  a  great  calm  in  the  Church.

2.  But  since  the  enemy  of  the  human  race  is  ever  going
about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,  he  now  stealthily  uses
the  deceitful  fallacies  of  heretics  in  order  to  undermine  the
sincerity  of the  faith. Against  these heretics  the  pastors
of  the  churches  have  boldly  risen  and  condemned  their  evil
teachings,  writh  their  authors. For  in  the  great  Council  of
Nicaea  Arius  was  condemned  as  a  heretic ;  the  Synod  at
Constantinople condemned Manes  as  a  heretic  by  a  fitting
sentence ; at  the Ephesine Synod Nestorius  received  the
condemnation  of  his  error,  which  he  deserved. The  Council
of  Chalcedon  also  justly  condemned  the  Nestorian  heresy,
and the Eutychian, with Dioscorus and  his  accomplices.
Moreover, Marcian, though a layman, yet a Christian
emperor, being  inflamed with love  of the  Catholic faith,
says,  among  other  things,  when  writing  to  our  predecessor,


LKTTKR CXC1V.  597

Pope  John,  against  those  who  were  endeavouring  to  profane
the  sacred  mysteries:  "  Let  none  of  the  clerical  order,  or
of  the  military,  or  of  any  other  rank,  endeavour  for  the
future  to  discourse  publicly  about  the  Christian  faith.  For,
for  anyone  to  take  on  himself  to  explain  and  again  dispute  of
matters  once  determined  on  and  rightly  settled,  is  an  injury
to  the  decision  of  the  most  holy  Council  ;  "  and  he  adds,  as  a
penalty  to  any  who  should  break  this  law,  that  if  any  clerk
should  dare  to  treat  of  religion  in  public,  he  should  be  re
moved  from  the  fellowship  of  clerks  as  if  guilty  of  sacri
lege.'

3.  We  lament,  therefore,  that,  as  we  gather  irom  your
letters,  and  from  the  heads  of  the  errors  sent  us  by  your
Fraternity,  in  these  last  days  when  perilous  times  are
approaching,  the  heresies  of  the  aforenamed,  and  other  per
verse  doctrines  contrary  to  the  Catholic  faith,  have  begun
to  show  their  heads  in  the  pernicious  teaching  of  Peter
Abaelard.  But  by  one  thing  we  are  specially  consoled,  and
we  give  thanks  to  Almighty  God  for  it,  viz.,  that  He  has
raised  up  in  your  parts  such  worthy  successors  of  the
Fathers,  and  in  the  time  of  our  Apostolate  has  granted  to  us
such  noble  pastors,  who  study  to  meet  the  calumnies  of  the
new  heretic,  and  to  present  His  spotless  Bride  as  a  chaste
virgin  to  one  Husband,  even  Christ.  And,  therefore,  we
who  sit  in  the  seat  of  Blessed  Peter  (to  whom  it  was  said
by  the  Lord  :  And  when  tlioii  art  converted  strengthen  thy
brethren]  (S.  Luke  xxii.  32),  however  unworthily  we  seem
to  occupy  it,  have,  by  the  common  advice  of  our  brethren,
the  Bishops  and  Cardinals,  condemned,  with  their  author,  all
the  articles  sent  us  in  the  exercise  of  your  discretion,  and
all  the  perverse  doctrines  of  Peter  himself,  by  the  authority

i  A  double  mistake  seems  to  have  crept  in  here,  one  of  the  inscription,  the
other  of  the  name  of  the  existing  Pope.  This  letter  or  decree  of  Marcian's  is
extant  among  the  acts  of  the  Council  of  Chalcedon,  held  in  the  time  of  Leo  the
Great,  A.D.  451,  but  addressed  to  the  citizens  of  Constantinople,  not  to  Leo,  much
less  to  John,  who  succeeded  to  the  Roman  See  more  than  80  years  after  the
death  of  Marcian.  Perhaps  the  passage  should  be  restored  by  reading  the  name
of  the  Pope  as  an  Ablative  Absolute,  in  this  way,  "  the  most  holy  Leo,  our  pre
decessor,  being  Pope,"  etc.


59  LETTER CXCV.

of  the  sacred  canons,  and  we  have  imposed  perpetual
silence  on  him  as  a  heretic.  We  decree,  also,  that  all  the
followers  and  supporters  of  his  error  be  cut  off  from  the
fellowship  of  the  faithful,  and  be  bound  with  the  chain  of
•excommunication.

Given  at  the  Lateran  xvii.  a.d.  Kal.,  August.


LETTER CXCV. (A.D. 1140.)

TO THE BISHOP OF CONSTANCE1 ABOUT ARNOLD OF

BRESCIA.

Bernard  advises  him  to  expel  Arnold  of  Brescia  from  his

Diocese.

i.  If  the  good  man  of  the  house  had  known  in  what  watch
the  thief  would  come  he  would  have  watched,  and  would  not
have  suffered  his  house  to  be  broken  2ip  (S.  Matt.  xxiv.  43).
Do  you  know  that  a  thief  has  broken  into  your  house  by
night,  yet  not  your  house,  but  the  Lord's  entrusted  to  your
care  ?  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  you  know  what  is
taking  place  at  your  door,  when  news  of  it  has  penetrated
even  to  us  who  are  so  far  distant.  It  is  no  wonder  that
you  could  not  foresee  the  hour,  or  perceive  the  night  attack
of  the  thief,  but  it  will  be  a  wonder  if  you  do  not  recognize
that  he  has  been  caught,  if  you  do  not  hold  him  fast  and
prevent  him  from  carrying  off  your  goods,  nay,  rather  the
most  precious  spoils  won  by  Christ,  souls  which  He  has
stamped  with  His  own  image  and  redeemed  with  His  own
blood.  Perhaps  you  are  yet  in  the  dark  and  wonder  who
it  is  I  mean.  I  speak  of  Arnold  of  Brescia,2  and  I  wish  he

1  It  is  uncertain  whether  this  Constance  is  the  one  in  France  or  the  one  on  the
Rhine. I  am  inclined  to  think  the  latter,  because  Arnold  when  expelled  from
France  is  said  to  have  turned  his  steps  to  this  place. Herman  was  then  Bishop
of  this  See,  the  same  that  met  Bernard  at  Frankfort  and  took  him  to  Constance
(Miracles  of  Bernard  lib.  vi.  c.  i.).

2  Otto  of  Frisingen  (de  Gesti-;  Friderid  lib.  ii.  c.  20)  thus  describes  Arnold He

was  born  at  Brescia,  a  city  of  Italy,  and  being  ordained  reader  he  became  a  clerk
in  the  Church  there.  He  had  formerly  had  Abaelard  as  his  teacher. He  was  a  man
of  quick  intelligence,  more  distinguished  for  a  flow  of  words  than  for  the  weight
of  his  matter,  "  a  man  who  affected  singularity  and  sought  after  novelty,  one
•of  those  dispositions  ever  ready  to  manufacture  heresies  and  to  stir  up  divisions.


LETTKR CXCV.  599

were  of  as  sound  doctrine  as  he  is  of  strict  life.  And  if  you
wish  to  know  more,  he  is  a  man  who  comes  neither  eating
nor  drinking,  but  with  the  devil  alone  he  is  hungering  and
thirsting  for  the  blood  of  souls.  He  is  one  of  the  number
of  those  whom  the  watchfulness  of  the  Apostle  takes  note  of
when  he  says,  Having  the  form  of  godliness,  but  denying
the  power  thereof  (2  Tim.  iii.  5).  And  the  Lord  Himself
says:  They  shall  come  to  you  in  sheep's  clothing,  bid
inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves  (S.  Matt.  vii.  15).  Up
to  the  present  time,  in  whatever  place  he  has  lived,  he  has
left  such  foul  and  destructive  tracks  that  he  dares  not
return  to  any  place  wherever  he  has  imprinted  his  foot
mark.  For  example,  he  grievously  stirred  up  and  troubled
the  land  in  which  he  was  born,  and  he  was,  therefore,

On  returning  from  Gaul  to  Italy  he  assumed  the  religious  habit  in  order  to
impose  on  people  the  more  easily.  He  mangled  and  gnawed  at  everything  as
a  dog  might,  he  spared  no  one,  he  spoke  contemptuously  of  Bishops  and  clergy,
he  persecuted  the  monks,  and  reserved  his  flatteries  for  the  laity.  For  he  was  in
the  habit  of  saying  that  no  clergy  with  private  property,  no  Bishops  with  estates,
no  monks  with  possessions  of  their  own,  could  in  any  way  be  saved;  that  all
these  things  belonged  to  the  King,  and  that  they  ought  to  give  up  possession
of  them  and  hand  them  over  to  the  laity.  Besides  this  he  seems  to  have  held
erroneous  ideas  on  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar  and  on  Baptism  of  children."
The  same  author  adds:  "  In  the  year  1 138  he  was  condemned  to  silence  by  a
Council  held  at  Rome,  was  banished  from  Italy,  retired  to  the  town  of  Thurgau,
and  scattered  his  false  doctrines  broadcast.  When  at  last  he  heard  of  the  death
of  Innocent  he  returned  to  Rome  in  the  early  days  of  Eugenius,  and  urged  on
the  people  to  further  sedition,  putting  before  them  the  examples  of  the  Romans
of  old,  who  in  the  later  days  of  the  Senate  had  brought  the  world  under  their
sway.  And,  therefore,  he  exhorted  them  to  rebuild  the  Capitol,  to  restore  the
Senatorial  dignity,  and  to  recreate  the  equestrian  Order.  He  said  that  no  part
of  the  government  of  the  city  belonged  to  the  Pontiff,  that  he  ought  to  be  content
with  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction.  The  evils  springing  from  this  pernicious  teaching
grew  to  such  a  head  at  last  that  not  only  were  the  houses  and  splendid  palaces
of  the  Roman  nobles  or  Cardinals  pulled  down,  but  violent  hands  were  laid  by
the  furious  populace  on  the  sacred  persons  of  the  Cardinals,  and  some  were  dis
gracefully  injured."  The  same  author  says  (Chronicles  lib.  vii.  c.  20)  that
Jordan,  the  son  of  Peter  Leonis,  was  elected  into  the  Patrician  Order.  "  At
last,"  he  says,  "  falling  into  the  hands  of  certain  people  in  Tuscany,  he  was
arrested,  was  brought  before  the  Prince  for  examination,  and  at  last  was  bound
to  a  stake  by  the  Prefect  of  the  city,  and,  the  pyre  having  been  reduced  to  ashes
to  prevent  the  foolish  populace  from  paying  honour  to  his  body,  his  remains
were  scattered  upon  the  Tiber."


600  LETTER CXCV.

accused  before  the  Pope  of  grievous  schism,  and  was
banished  from  his  native  soil,  and  also  compelled  to  swear
that  he  would  not  return  except  by  the  Pope's  permission.
For  a  like  reason  this  notable  schismatic  has  been  driven
out  from  the  kingdom  of  France.  When  anathematized  by
Peter  the  Apostle  he  pined  himself  to  Peter  Abaelard,  and
with  him,  and  for  him,  he  endeavoured  to  defend  vigorously
and  stubbornly  all  his  errors,  which  had  been  already
exposed  and  condemned  by  the  Church.

2.  And  in  all  these  incidents  his  phrensy  \vas  not  abated,
but  his  hand  was  stretched  out  still.  For  though  he  is
a  fugitive  and  wanderer  on  the  earth,  he  does  not  cease
to  do  amongst  men  of  other  countries  what  he  is  not
allowed  to  do  amongst  his  own  countrymen,  and  goes
about  as  a  roaring  lion,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.
And  I  hear  that  he  is  now  working  mischief  amongst
you,  and  is  eating  up  your  people  as  it  were  bread.
His  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  and  bitterness,  his  feet  are
swift  to  shed  blood.  Destruction  and  unhappiness  are  in
his  ways,  and  the  way  of  peace  has  he  not  known.  He  is
an  enemy  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  a  sower  of  discord,  a
manufacturer  of  schisms,  a  disturber  of  peace,  a  divider  of
unity  ;  his  teeth  are  spears  and  arrows,  and  his  tongue  a
sharp  sword,  his  words  are  smoother  than  oil,  and  yet  they
are  very  darts.  Thence  it  is  that  he  is  wont  to  entice  to
himself  by  flattering  words  and  the  pretences  of  virtues
the  rich  and  the  powerful,  according  to  the  verse  :
He  sitteth  lurking  in  thievish  corners  with  the  rich
that  he  may  slay  the  innocent  (Ps.  x.  8).  Depend
upon  it,  when  he  feels  that  he  has  securely  gained
their  goodwill  and  affection,  you  will  see  the  man  openly
rise  against  the  clergy  ;  and,  relying  on  military  tyranny,
he  will  rise  against  the  Bishops  themselves,  and  run  a  tilt
against  all  ecclesiastical  order.  Knowing  this,  I  do  not
know  what  better  or  more  wholesome  thing  you  can  do  at
such  a  crisis  than,  according  to  the  admonition  of  the
Apostle,  to  remove  the  evil  man  from  among  you  (i  Cor.  v.
13),  though  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom  will  see  that  he  is


I.KTTKR CXCVI.  6oi

bound  rather  than  put  to  flight,  lest  he  be  able  to  travel
about  again,  and  so  do  more  harm.  Our  Lord  the  Pope,
when  In*  was  here,  gave  in  writing  the  same  directions,
because  of  the  evils  which  he  heard  were  being  done  ;  but
there  was  no  one  to  do  the  good  action.  To  end,  if  the
Scripture  soundly  warns  us  to  take  the  little  foxes  which
spoil  the  vine  (Cant.  ii.  15),  should  not  a  powerful  and  fierce
wolf  much  rather  be  bound  fast,  lest  he  break  into  the
sheep-folds  of  Christ,  and  slay  and  destroy  His  sheep  ?


LETTER CXCVI. (A.I). 1140.)
To  Gnno,  THK  LKGATK,  ox  THK  SAMK  SUBJKCT.

Bernard  warns  him  against  familiarity  with  Arnold  of

Brescia.

i.  Arnold  of  Brescia  is  said  to  be  with  you,  a  man  whose
discourse  is  as  sweet  as  honey,  whose  doctrine  is  poison  ;
whose  head  is  that  of  a  dove,  his  tail  a  scorpion's  ;  whom
Brescia  cast  forth,  Rome  was  horrified  at,  France  rejected,
Germany  abominates,  Italy  is  unwilling  to  take  in.  See,  I
beseech  you,  that  your  authority  lend  no  protection  to  his
further  mischief ;  for  he  has  both  the  art  and  the  wish  to  do
injurv,  and  if  he  gain  your  favour  he  will  be  likely,  like  a
threefold  cord  which  is  not  easily  broken,  to  be,  I  am  afraid,
above  measure  mischievous.  And  if  it  is  true  that  you
have  the  man  with  you,  I  suppose  one  of  two  things — either
that  you  do  not  know  him,  or,  which  is  more  likely,  that
you  are  hoping  for  his  repentance.  Would  it  were  not  a
vain  hope  !  Who  can  from  this  stone  raise  up  a  child  to
Abraham  ?  How  welcome  a  gift  would  it  be  to  our  mother
the  Church  to  receive  him  as  a  vessel  for  honour,  whom  she
had  so  long  borne  with  as  a  vessel  to  dishonour  !  It  is
lawful  to  make  the  attempt,  but  a  wise  man  will  be  careful
not  to  go  beyond  the  number  laid  down  by  the  Apostle,
when  he  says,  A  man  tJiat  is  an  heretic  after  the  first
and  second  admonition  reject,  knowing  that  lie  tJiat  is
such  is  subverted  and  sinneth,  being  condemned  of  himself

VOL. II.  39


6O2  LETTER CXCVI.

(Tit.  iii.  10,  n).  Otherwise,  to  be  on  intimate  terms  with
him,  and  to  admit  him  frequently  to  private  conversation,
not  to  say  to  your  house,  is  suspiciously  like  showing  him
favour,  and  is  a  powerful  weapon  in  the  hands  of  the
enemy.  A  member  of  the  household,  and  a  private  friend
of  the  Legate  of  the  Apostolic  See,  will  preach  with  im
punity  and  persuade  whom  he  will.  For  who  can  suspect
any  wrong  to  come  from  the  side  of  our  Lord  the  Pope  ?
But  although  he  manifestly  speak  perverse  things,  who  will
dare  lightly  to  oppose  himself  against  one  who  is  at  your
side  ?

2.  And  do  you  know  what  kind  of  footprints  he  has  left
in  every  place  he  has  dwelt  in  ?  It  is  not  without  cause
that  Apostolic  energy  has  forced  him  to  cross  the  Alps
from  Italy  which  gave  him  birth,  and  does  not  surfer  him
to  return  to  his  native  country.  What  man  is  there
amongst  the  foreigners  to  whom  he  was  driven  who  does
not  heartily  wish  that  they  had  sent  him  back  to  his  home  ?
And  certainly  the  fact  that  his  bearing  towards  all  is  such
that  he  incurs  the  hatred  of  all  is  an  approbation  of  the  con
demnation  under  which  he  labours,  so  that  no  one  can  say
that  it  was  obtained  from  our  Lord  the  Pope  by  surprise.
With  what  excuse,  then,  can  he  flout  the  sentence  of  the
Supreme  Pontiff  when,  though  his  tongue  disclaims  it,  his
life  loudly  proclaims  its  justice?  And  so  to  show  him  favour
is  to  go  against  our  Lord  the  Pope,  to  oppose  our  Lord
God.  For  by  whomsoever  a  righteous  sentence  may  have
been  given,  it  is  certain  that  it  proceeds  from  Him  who
says  by  the  mouth  of  the  Prophet,  /  who  speak  righteous
ness  (Is.  Ixiii.  i).  But  I  have  confidence  in  your  wisdom
and  honesty,  and  that  when  you  have  read  this  letter,  and
know  the  truth,  you  will  not  be  led  away  to  give  your
consent  in  this  matter  to  anything,  save  what  is  becoming
to  you  and  expedient  to  the  Church  of  God,  on  behalf  of
which  you  are  discharging  the  office  of  legate.  You  have
my  heart,  and  may  reckon  on  my  obedience.


LETTER CXCVII.  603

LETTER CXCVII. (A.D. 1141.)
To  PKTKR,  DEAN  OK  BESANQON.

Bernard blames his injurious conduct towards the
Abbot  of  Char  lieu.

I  hear  such  an  account  of  the  pilgrimage  of  the  Abbot
of  Charlieu1  that  I  look  upon  him  as  already  dead.  What
ever  danger  threatens  him,  whatever  suffering  he  has  to
.undergo,  is  (to  my  great  grief)  imputed  to  you  most  of  all.
I  neither  expected  this,  nor  deserved  it  at  your  hands.  I
.thought  you  one  thing,  I  find  you  another.  Those  who
were  present  at  the  affair  bear  their  testimony  against  you
that  you  have  not  behaved  in  it  straightforwardly  or  justly.
And  I  partly  believe  it.  For  the  Venerable  Abbot  of  Beau-
«vais-  is  by  no  means  pleased  with  you.  Do  not,  I  implore
you,  do  not  persecute  the  servants  of  God,  to  whom  you
read  that  He  said:  He  that  toucheth  you  to  u diet h  the  apple
.of  my  eye  (Zach.  ii.  8).  Do  not  pluck  up  by  the  roots
whatever  good  feeling  I  formerly  had  towards  you.  And  1
write  this,  not  because  I  love  you  not,  but  to  take  away
whatever  may  cause  me  not  to  love  you.  For  I  tell  you,  as

1  Charlieu,  in  the  Diocese  of  Besan^on,  was  a  daughter  house  of  Clairvaux,
.and  founded  A.L>.  1131.  Its  first  Abbot  was  Guy,  mentioned  in  this  and  the
following  Letter.  He  being  attacked  and  unjustly  oppressed  by  a  monk
named  Peter,  went  on  appeal  to  Innocent  with  commendatory  letters  from
Bernard.  His  enemy,  however,  was  able  to  get  the  case  sent  back  to  judges  in
Gaul,  and  it  was  entrusted  to  John,  Bishop  of  Valence,  by  the  Abbot  of  Bonne-
val,  a  Cistercian  monastery,  who,  with  the  Bishop  of  Grenoble,  was  to  com
pose  the  differences.  And  then  it  first  came  to  pass  that  questions  which  con
cerned  their  Order  were  submitted  to  the  Cistercians  for  decision,  because  of
.their  tried  uprightness.  And  this  becoming  an  established  custom,  was  the
cause  of  that  famous  and  honourable  exception  to  the  law  that  no  one  may  be  a
judge  in  his  own  cause,  or  in  any  cause  in  which  he  is  interested,  viz.,  if  the
judge  is  of  such  a  nature  that  no  suspicion  is  likely  to  attach  to  him,  e.g.,  if  he
is  a  Cistercian  monk  this  law  may  be  dispensed  with,  and  such  a  judge  is  not
to  be  refused.  (Tiraquellut  de  Pccnu,  temp.  aut.  remitt.  15,  n.  60  and  many
others.)  Sentence  having  been  given  in  favour  of  the  Abbot  of  Charlieu,  the
aforesaid  Peter  again  appealed  to  Innocent,  and  Bernard  wrote  to  him  Letter
199  to  request  him  to  confirm  the  just  sentence  of  the  Bishops.

•  Beauvais  is  situated  in  the  Diocese  of  Besan^on,  close  to  the  city.  For
•C'harlieu,  see  Life  of  S.  Bernard,  B.  iv.  n.  40;  for  Beauvais,  n.  7.


604  LETTER CXCVIII.

your  friend,  that  it  is  not  expedient  for  you  nor  for  your
Church  that  the  Pope  should  hear  how  you  have  acted.


LETTER CXCVIII. (A.D. 1141.)
To  POPE  INNOCENT.

Bernard  requests that  lie will  avenge  the violence  and
unjust  aggression  which  Abbot  Guy  has  suffered.

i.  In  the  cause  which  is  brought  before  you  by  our  dear
brother  Guy,  Abbot  of  Charlieu,  I  have  no  doubt  that
you  see  plainly  enough  the  injury  of  the  assailant,  the
innocence  of  the  sufferer,  and  the  carelessness  of  the
judge.  The  poor  man,  disregarding  the  toil  of  the  journey,,
the  expense  and  the  dangers  of  the  time,  has  been  forced
to  appeal  to  you  in  person  by  the  violence  of  the  accuser,,
and  by  the  denial  of  justice.  He,  a  lover  of  quiet,  has.
joined  hands  with  death  that  he  should  not  live  in  turmoil.
I  beseech  you  look  favourably  on  his  need  and  poverty,  and
listen  to  his  complaint  with  a  father's  sympathy,  so  that  his.
toil  and  sorrow  may  not  be  productive  of  but  small  results.
Before  this  I  have  testified  to  you  by  my  letter  once  and
again  that  the  man  who  is  now  attacking  the  Abbot  is  both
untrue  to  his  monastic  vows  and  a  squanderer  of  the  means-
of  the  monastery.1  But  now  I  tell  you,  even  weeping,  that
he  is  an  enemy  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  a  most  violent
oppressor  of  the  saints  who  are- in  his  neighbourhood,  and
a  defrauder  of  the  poor.  Since  he  has  hardly  anything  of
his  own  to  waste,  he  seizes  violently,  after  the  fashion  of  a
tyrant,  on  his  neighbours'  goods  on  every  side.  A  monk
in  habit,  though  a  false  one,  a  robber  in  fact,  he  shows,
himself  altogether  heedless  of  the  Rules  of  his  Order,  he

i  This  monastery  seems  to  be  identical  with  the  Abbey  of  S.  Mary  of
Favernay,  which  Anseric,  Archbishop  of  Besai^on,  gave,  A.D.  1133,  to  Stephen
of  Mercceur,  then  Abbot  of  Chaise-Dieu.  Bernard  rightly  calls  this  Stephen,
a  man  full  ofreligion,  since  he  is  said  to  have  been  well-known  for  his  miracles  ;.
he  died  the  2Qth  March,  A.U.  1 146.  See  Letter  391.


LETTKR CXCVI1I.  605

despises  the  laws  and  canons.  He  has  a  brazen  forehead,
knows  no  scruples,  is  void  of  godliness,  is  easily  provoked,
ready  to  dare  any  crime,  and  to  inflict  any  injustice.  And
I  wonder  how  the  Abbot  of  Chaise-Dieu,  a  man  full  of
religion,  can  either  be  ignorant  of  or  conceal  such  vices,  and
such  glaring  vices,  in  his  own  monk.

2.  But  what  is  this  to  me  ? Let  him  see  to  it. To  his
own  master  he  standeth  or  falleth. It  is  enough  for  me  to
be  set  free  from  his  hands. I  most  earnestly  implore  this
from  you,  which  has  been  in  vain  attempted  in  other  ways.
1  looked  round  and  there  was  none  to  help. We  now  have
recourse  to  the  refuge  of  all,  we  fly  to  him  by  whom  we
hope  to  be  set  free. You  have  the  power, may  you  have
the  will. And, indeed, it is  one  of  the  privileges  of  the
apostolic  see that men should in the last  resource  look
most for help to your supreme authority and plenary
power. But among the other ornaments  of  your  sole
primacy,  this  one  thing  more  specially  and  more  gloriously
ennobles and makes your Apostolate famous, viz., the
rescue  of  the  poor  man  from  the  hands  of  those  who  art-
stronger than he. In my judgment,  there is no more
precious  jewel in your  crown  than  the  zealous  care  with
which you  are  wont  to strive  for the oppressed,  and  to
prevent  the  rod  of  the  sinners  from  coming  upon  the  lot  of
the  righteous. Doubtless  because  of  that  which  follows—
that  the  righteous  stretch not  out  their  hands  to  iniquity
(Ps.  cxxv.  3)  ; or  else  because  of  that  which is  said  else
where  : When  tlie  ungodly  is  exalted  the  poor  man  is  put
to  rebuke  (Ps.  ix.  23,  VuLG.). And  what  tortures  the  body
of  the  one  destroys  the  soul of the  other  more  grievously.

3.  There is  also a monastery  of our  Order near  this
place,  which,  in  a  similar  way,  is  grievously  harassed  by
the  attacks  of  evil men,  and  there  is  no  one  to  redeem  it,
or  save  it. And for  this also  your  son does  not  shrink
from  stirring  your  fatherly  compassion  with  his  tears  and
prayers. Who the men are,  and  the occasion  of their
oppression,  the  Abbot  who  brings  this  letter  will  tell  you  by
word  of  mouth,  and  truly. May  Almighty God  preserve


606  LETTER CXCIX.

you  to  us  for  a  long  time,  to  protect  us  all,  who  are  passing
a  life  in  poverty,  and  in  the  habit  and  purpose  of  repentance,
in  order  that  we  being  delivered  out  of  the  hand  of  our
enemies  might  serve  Him  without  fear  (S.  Luke  i.  74.)


LETTER  CXCIX. (A.D. 1141.)
To  THE  SAME.

Bernard  begs  that the  decision  already  given  in  favour
of  certain  Religious  unjustly  oppressed  maybe  ratified.

How  long  is  the  ungodly  to  be  exalted  and  the  poor  put
to  rebuke?  How  long  is  so  great  innocence  to  be  vexed
by  such  shamelessness,  and  this  while  Innocent  lives  ?  It
is  our  sins  doubtless  which  cause  that  my  lord  is  so  late  in
discovering  the  characters  of  those  who  lie  to  him,  so  slow
in  listening  to  those  who  call  to  him  in  this  cause.  For  in
other  cases  I  know  it  is  customary  to  my  lord  both  to  come
to  an  understanding  quickly  and  to  show  mercy  readily.
For  the  sake  of  Him  who  chose  you  and  placed  you  as  a
refuge  of  the  oppressed,  put  now  at  length  an  end  to  the
malice  of  the  oppressor,  and  to  the  sufferings  of  the
afflicted,  because  both  have  been  by  this  time  brought  into
the  light  and  manifested.  In  short,  at  the  command  and
good  pleasure  of  my  lord  the  cause  has  been  discussed  and
ended,  and  it  only  remains  that  the  sentence  pronounced
by  his  authority  be  confirmed.  If,  then,  the  man  come  to
you  with  his  lies  shall  he  be  heard  against  the  testimony
of  such  men  as  the  Bishops  of  Valence  and  Grenoble?1
Again,  I  implore  you,  and  I  fall  at  the  feet  of  my  lord  with
the  most  anxious  mind  possible,  do  not  suffer  a  religious
house  to  be  destroyed  by  this  wicked  and  deceitful  man.
For  he  who  has  nearly  destroyed  his  own  will  not  spare
ours.  And,  therefore,  I  add,  with  my  wonted  presumption,
if  you  believe  your  son,  then  send  back  to  his  own  cell  this
man  who  abuses  your  loving  kindness,  and  give  orders  to
the  Abbot  of  Chaise-Dieu  that  he  promote  a  man  full  of
1  See  Notes  to  Ep.  197.


LETTER CC.  607

religion  to  the  place  in  the  monastery  which  this  man
occupies  uselessly,  and  that  he  order  the  convent  according
to  the  Rule.  This  is  what  is  worthy  of  your  Apostolate,  this
will  be  well-pleasing  to  God,  this  will  be  an  honour  to  the
Abbot  of  Chaise-Dieu,  and  to  his  monastery.  And  so,  too,
you  may  set  free  the  soul  of  the  aforesaid  man,  and  the
monastery  itself,  on  which  he  is  a  burden.


LETTER CC. (A.D. 1140.)

To  MAGISTER  ULCER,  BISHOP  OF  ANGERS,  CONCERNING
THE  GRIEVOUS  QUARREL  EXISTING  BETWEEN  HIM
AND  THE  ABBESS  OE  FONTEVRAUI/r.1

i.  I  am  more  inclined  to  shed  tears  than  write  a  letter.
But  since  charity  is  not  unable  to  do  either  the  one  or  the
other,  it  is  my  duty  to  give  the  latter  and  not  omit  the
former.  The  one  is  due  to  you,  the  other  to  me,  and  to
the  many  weak  ones  like  me  who  are  made  to  stumble.
You  say,  perhaps,  that  the  scandal  is  not  caused  by  you.
Will  you  deny  that  it  exists  because  of  you  ?  I  would  bear
the  rest  easily  enough  if  only  you  were  not  in  the  cause.
For  I  do  not  dare  to  say  you  are  in  the  wrong.  It  is  not
my  place  to  discuss  this  ;  there  is  One  who  seeketh  and
judgeth.  Woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offence  cometh.
Whosoever  is  the  guilty,  whether  it  be  he  or  she,  shall
surely  bear  the  punishment.  But  my  discourse  is  now
with  you.  Bear  a  little  with  my  folly.  \Vhat  I  have  once

i  Petronilla,  first  Abbess,  who  was  succeeded  by  Matilda  A.D.  1150.  The
death  of  Petronilla  is  placed  in  the  Necrology  on  April  24th,  and  she  is  said  to
have  been  chosen  for  Abbess  by  Robert,  founder  of  the  Order  of  Fontevrault,  a
famous  nunnery  in  the  Diocese  of  Poictiers,  not  far  from  the  borders  of  Tours
and  Angers.  A  bitter  quarrel  with  the  nuns  was  kept  up  by  Ulger,  Bishop
of  Angers,  whose  religion  and  learning  Ordericus  speaks  of  (lib.  xii.  p.  882),
till  the  year  1 1 24,  when  he  was  substituted  for  Reynold,  who  had  been
translated  to  the  See  of  Kheims.  Me  was  a  man  excelling  the  other  Bishops  of
his  age  in  wisdom,  character,  and  holiness  (Acts  of  the  Bishops  of  Le  Mans,
Vol.  iii.  p.  335).  Because  of  this  suit  he  did  not  at  once  betake  himself  to
Rome,  to  Innocent  and  Lucius,  who  had  undertaken  the  defence  of  the  nuns,  as
appears  from  their  bulls  given  in  the  History  of  Fontevrault.  See  Letter  340.


608  LETTER CC.

begun  I  will  say  to  my  Lord.  I  will  satisfy  in  some  degree,
though  imperfectly,  the  zeal  and  affection  wrhich  prompt  me
to  speak.  I  will  not  fear  the  age,  I  will  not  be  terrified  by
the  dignity,  I  will  not  pause  at  the  great  name  of  Magister
Ulger.  For  the  greater  the  name  the  greater  the  scandal.
Therefore  I  will  go  beyond  myself,  and  will  be  a  fool.  I
will  chide  my  senior,  I  will  reprove  a  Bishop.  I  will
endeavour  to  teach  a  teacher,  to  give  counsel  to  the  wise.
The  love  and  the  emulation  which  I  formerly  conceived  for
your  sanctity  and  the  glory  of  your  name  may  well  excuse
any  kind  of  presumption.  To  me  it  is  no  light  matter,  nor
is  it  to  the  Church  of  God,  which  used  everywhere  to  rejoice
with  great  joy  in  this  noon-day  sun,  that  the  spiritual  odour
of  this  glory  which  was  poured  out  everywhere  should  be
interrupted  even  in  a  small  degree  by  the  envy  of  the  devil.
2.  But  it  is  plain  enough  how  utterly  you  despise  your
own  glory.  I  praise  you  in  this,  but  not  if  it  is  to  the
injury  of  God.  I  praise,  too,  the  constancy  with  which
vou  yield  nothing  of  what  you  think  your  rights  even  to
the  highest  powers,  but  I  praise  you  not  if  you  should  seem
to  do  this  with  more  obstinacy  than  constancy.  How  much
more  to  your  glory,  and  certainly  to  your  holiness,  would  it
be  if  you  were  to  bear  bravely  an  injustice  done  to  you,  and
so  keep  your  good  name  for  the  glory  of  God.  And  yet  I
cannot  think  how  you  keep  even  your  conscience  in  safety
under  this  scandal.  For  it  is  no  excuse  even  if  you  can
rightly  throw  the  blame  on  another.  Be  it  that  another
has  caused  the  scandal,  surely  it  is  in  your  power  to  end  it.
Will  you  be  guiltless  if  you  are  unwilling  to  end  it?  or  will
the  wish  to  end  it  be  without  glory  ?  If  the  ill  which  you
repress  is  your  own  it  will  redound  to  your  righteousness ;
if  another's,  to  your  glory.  Whoever  may  be  the  author  of
the  scandal,  on  all  grounds  it  is  your  duty  to  end  it  ;  and
I  can  only  say  that  on  one  condition  only  are  you  free  from
blame,  viz.,  if  it  is  out  of  your  power  to  end  it.  And,  finally,
is  it  not  the  work  of  angels  to  remove  scandals  from  the
kingdom  of  God  (S.  Matt.  xiii.  41)?  If  you  say,  What  is
that  to  the  point  ?  the  verse  will  answer  you,  The  priest's


LETTER CC.  609

lips  keep  knowledge,  and  they  ask  for  the  law  at  his
mouth,  for  he  is  a  messenger1  of  the  Lord  (Matt.  ii.  7).  If,
then,  you  do  not,  when  you  can,  end  this  scandal,  you
simply  do  not  fulfil  your  ministry.  And  you  shall  judge
for  yourself  whether  that  be  no  fault.  But  I  do  not  mean
to  say  this  alone  is  enough  ;  you  must  show  it  honour  by
acting  on  it.

3.  There  is  another  thing  also  I  would  add  if  I  were  not,
I  confess,  more  timid  than  I  professed  myself.  But  I  bring
forward  with  more  safety  as  a  teacher  a  Bishop  who  is  not
afraid  to  speak  the  plain  truth  to  a  Bishop.  There  is
utterly  a  fault  among  you,  he  says,  because  ye  go  to  law
one  with  another.  Why  do  ye  not  rather  suffer  wrong
(i  Cor.  vi.  7)  ?  He  has  set  up  the  mirror,  the  Sun  of
righteousness  has  shone  forth,  truth  has  shone,  the  spot
has  been  made  apparent.  Of  what  importance  is  that
little,  trivial  possession  that  it  should  have  power  any
longer  to  cast  a  shade  over  such  manifest  truth,  or  hinder
so  longed-for  an  ending  of  strife  ?  May  God  inspire  you
so  as  to  yield  to  this  counsel,  which  is  not  so  much  mine,
as  the  counsel  of  all  who  are  jealous  for  you  with  a  godly
jealousy,  reverend  father,  who  art  worthy  to  attain  all
honour.

LETTER CCI.
To  BALDWIN,*  ABBOT OF THK MONASTERY  OK  RIETI.

Bernard  begs  him to apply  /u'mself  strenuously to  the
duties  of  his  charge.

i.  The  letter  which  you  have  sent  me  is  full  of  your
affection  ;  it  stirs  mine.  And  I  am  grieved  that  I  cannot
reply  as  I  feel.  Nor  will  I  waste  time  in  making  excuses,
knowing  that  I  speak  to  one  who  knows  me.  You  are  aware

1  Angclus.

2  Not  the  same  as  Cardinal  Baldwin,  a  disciple  of  Bernard,  for  whom  tuin
to  Letters  144  and  245. For  he  was  a  Cardinal when  the  other  Baldwin  was
ruling  the  Cistercian  Monastery  of  Rie'ti,  which  was  in  two  divisions,  one  dedi
cated  to  S.  Matthew,  the  other  to  the  Holy  Shepherd,  and  over  this  last  Baldwin
was  placed.


6lO  LETTER CCI.

under  what  a  load  I  groan,  and  my  groaning  is  not  hid
from  you.  But  do  not  judge  my  affection  by  the  short
ness  of  my  letter,  for  no  speech  would  be  able  to  express  it
by  its  length.  And  the  trouble  of  my  many  occupations,
indeed,  is  able  to  bring  it  about  that  I  write  in  few  words,
but  not  to  diminish  my  love.  It  may  exclude  action,  or
impede  it,  but  never  affection.  As  a  mother  loves  her  son,
so  did  I  love  you  when  you  were  with  me,  and  delighted

J  o

my  heart.  Let  me  love  you  when  absent,  lest  I  seem  to
have  loved  you  for  the  pleasure  I  received  from  you,  and
not  for  yourself.  You  were  very  necessary  to  me ;  and
from  this  it  may  most  clearly  be  seen  how  sincere  is  my
love.  I  mean  that  I  should  not  be  this  day  feeling  your
loss  if  in  you  I  had  sought  merely  my  own  good.  But  now
you  see  that,  disregarding  my  own  advantage,  I  envied  not
your  gain  when  I  placed  you  in  a  position  from  whence  at
some  time  you  may  be  placed  over  all  the  goods  of  your
Lord.

2.  But  do  you  see  that  you  are  found  a  faithful  and
prudent  servant.  See  that  you  give  their  heavenly  bread
to  your  fellow  servant  without  grudging,  and  that  you  pray
without  ceasing;  and  do  not  make  any  empty  excuse  about
your  being  new  to  the  office,  and  inexperienced,  for  this,
perhaps,  you  feel  or  put  on.  For  a  barren  modesty  is
unpleasing,  and  humility  beyond  the  bounds  of  truth  is  not
praiseworthy.  Attend  then  to  your  office.  Drive  away
false  shame  by  considering  the  dignity  of  your  office.  Act
as  a  teacher.  You  are  a  novice,  but  you  are  a  debtor  ;  and
recognize  that  you  became  a  debtor  from  the  time  you
bound  yourself.  Will  inexperience  be  any  excuse  to  the
creditor  for  the  loss  of  his  gains  ?  Does  the  usurer  suffer
the  first  part  of  the  time  to  go  unreckoned  ?  But  I  am  not,
you  will  say,  sufficient  for  these  things.  As  though  your
devotion  were  not  accepted  from  what  you  have,  and  not
from  what  you  have  not !  Prepare  to  give  an  answer  about
the  one  talent  entrusted  to  you,  and  be  easy  about  the  rest.
If  you  have  received  much,  give  much,  but  if  little,  then
that  little.  For  he  that  is  not  faithful  in  the  least  will


LETTER CCI.  6 1  I

not  be  faithful  in  the  greatest.  Give  all,  because  all  will  be
asked  for  again  from  you,  even  to  the  last  farthing,  but  only
what  you  have,  not  what  you  have  not.

3.  Remember  also  to  give  to  your  voice  the  utterance  of
power.  What  is  that,  do  you  say  ?  That  your  works
harmonize  with  your  words ;  nay,  rather  your  words  with
your  works  ;  that  is  to  say,  that  you  take  care  to  do  first,
and  then  to  teach.  It  is  a  most  beautiful  and  most  whole
some  order  of  things  that  you  should  first  bear  yourself
what  you  impose  as  a  burden  on  another,  and  so  learn  from
yourself  how  you  ought  to  rule  others.  Otherwise  the  Wise
Man  will  address  you  as  the  sluggard,  to  whom  it  is  a  labour
to  lift  up  his  hand  to  his  mouth  (Frov.  xxvi.  15).  The
Apostle,  too,  will  reprove  you  :  Thou  that  tcachcst  others,
dost  thou  not  teach  thyself?  (Rom.  ii.  21).  Moreover,  you
will  be  stamped  with  the  fault  of  the  Pharisees,  who  bind
heavy  burdens,  and  grievous  to  be  borne,  and  lay  them  on
men's  shoulders,  but  they  themselves  will  not  more  them
-with  one  of  their  ji  tigers  (S.  Matt,  xxiii.  4).  The  example
set  by  actual  work  is  indeed  a  speech  that  is  living  and
efficacious,  easily  making  that  which  is  said  persuasive,  by
showing  that  that  which  is  ordered  can  be  done.  On  these
two  kinds  of  commands,  viz.,  of  word  and  example,  under
stand  that  there  hang  the  whole  of  your  duty,  and  the  safety
of  your  conscience.  Yet  if  you  are  wise  you  will  add  a  third,
viz.,  devotion  to  prayer,  as  a  kind  of  complement  of  that
threefold  repetition  in  the  Gospel  concerning  feeding  the
sheep  (S.  John  xxi.  15-17).  In  this  way  you  will  find  that
the  Sacrament  of  this  Trinity  is  in  nothing  made  void  by
you  if  you  feed  by  word,  by  example,  and  by  the  fruit
of  holy  prayers.  And  now  abideth  these  three — word,
example,  prayer ;  but  the  greatest  of  these  is  prayer.  For
although,  as  I  said,  work  is  the  life  of  the  word  spoken,  yet
prayer  gives  both  to  work  and  word  grace*  and  efficacy.
Alas!  I  am  called  away;  I  must  go;  I  cannot  write  more.
Let  me,  however,  briefly  implore  you  to  take  care  to  free
me  as  soon  as  you  can  from  one  heavy  care,  and  forget  not
to  say  more  plainly  what  you  mean  when  you  complain,


6l2  LETTER CC1I.

among  other  things,  that  you  have  received  a  wound  from
one  from  whom  you  did  not  expect  it.  For  that  gives  me
much  anxiety.

LETTER CCII. (A.D. 1144.)
To  THE  CLERGY  OF  THE  ARCHDIOCESE  OF  SENS.

He  warns  them  that  the  election  of  a  new  Prelate  should
not  be  entered  upon  rashly  or  precipitately.

Now  that  you  have  been  deprived  of  your  blessed  pastor1
it  is  your  duty,  dearly  beloved,  to  take  great  care  in  the
selection  of  a  successor  to  him.  It  must  not  be  taken  in
hand  hastily,  confusedly,  or  inconsiderately,  lest  perchance
what  is  done  presumptuously  against  reason  and  due  order
be  annulled,  and  so  you  begin  to  enter  on  the  same  weary
round  as  some  of  your  neighbours  have  done.  Take  an
example,  if  you  please,  from  the  neighbouring  churches,2
and  let  their  troubles  be  a  warning  to  you  in  the  present
case.  It  is  a  great  matter  that  you  are  engaged  on,  this  of
supplying  a  pastor  to  the  renowned  Church  of  Sens.  It  is
truly  a  great  matter,  and  not  one  to  be  lightly  undertaken.
Wait  for  the  advice  of  the  suffragan  bishops,  wait  for  the
assenting  voice  of  all  the  faithful  in  the  diocese,  and  transact
in  common  this  matter  which  is  of  importance  to  all  in
common.  Otherwise,  dearly  beloved,  believe  me,  we  shall
to  our  grief  behold  your  Church  under  tribulation.  To  our
grief  we  shall  have  to  look  upon  your  confusion.  Both  of
which  will  readily  take  place  if  such  action  take  place  as
will  have  to  be  recalled.  Therefore,  let  a  fast  be  pro
claimed,  let  the  Bishops  be  assembled,  let  the  Religious  be
invited  to  be  present,  so  that  the  election  of  so  exalted  a
priest  may  be  duly  celebrated,  and  may  not  be  deprived  of
its  proper  solemnity,  which  God  forbid.  We  believe  that
so  the  Holy  Spirit  will  assist  your  prayers  ;  that  honour
will  be  added  to  you  if  you  honour  your  ministry,  provided

1  Henry,  succeeded  A.D.  1144  by  Hugh,  Abbot  of  Pontigny.

2  Viz  ,  Orleans  (Ep.  156),  Chalons  (Ep.  224),  Langres  (Ep.  164,  ft  se(/.)


LETTER CCII I.  613

you  diligently  seek,  with  prayer  and  common  counsel,  alike
what  is  most  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of  tin-
people.


LETTER CCIII. (Circa A.D. 1140.)

TO THE BISHOP AM) CLERGY OF TROVES.

Bernard  presses them to  forbid marriage and a
militarv  career  to  a  clerk  named  Anselle.

We  read  :  If  any  of  you  do  err  from  the  truth,  and  one
convert  him,  let  him  know  that  he  which  converteth  the
sinner  from  the  error  of  liis  ways  shall  save  a  soul  from
death  and  shall  hide  a  multitude  of  sins  (S.  James  v.
19,  20).  Our  friend  Anselle  is  erring,  is  erring.  Who
doubts  it  ?  If  we  dismiss  him  thus,  he  will  not  err  alone.
How  many  will  the  illustrious  youth  not  draw  after  him
by  his  example  ?  And  we  judge  to  be  involved  in  the  same
error  not  only  those  who  follow  him,  but  also  all  who  may
be  able  to  call  him  back  and  do  not.  I  am  clean  from  his
blood.  I  have  both  told  him  before  by  letter,  and  I  now  tell
you  that  he  is  presumptuously  undertaking  what  is  for
bidden.  It  is  not  the  part  of  a  clerk  to  fight  in  worldly
warfare,  nor  of  a  subdeacon  to  marry.  Tell  the  sinner  his
duty,  lest  he  die  in  his  sins,  and  He  who  redeemed  him
with  His  own  precious  blood  require  his  blood  at  your
hands.  Lo  He  cries  from  Heaven  :  The  Virgin  of  Israel  is
fallen  ;  there  is  none  to  raise  her  up  (Amos  v.  2).  How
long  is  gold  to  lie  in  the  mire?  Remove  this  pearl,
remove,  take  up  this  most  splendid  and  precious  jewel
from  the  dunghill.  Take  it  up  before  it  be  trodden  under
foot  by  swine,  that  is  by  unclean  spirits,  and  be  no  more  a
vessel  for  honour  but  for  dishonour.


LETTER CCIV.

LETTER  CCIV. (Circa  A.D. 1140).
To  THE  ABBOT  OF  S.  AuBiN.1

Bernard  declares  Jiis  affection  for  him  and  his  wish  to

see  him.

Though  you  are  unknown  to  me  by  face,  yet  you  are  not
by  renown  ;  and  it  is  very  precious  to  me  to  know  you
thus.  For  such  an  image  of  you  has  stolen  into  my  heart
through  this  report,  that  though  I  am  occupied  with  many
things,  yet,  my  dear  brother,  that  pleasing  thought  of  you
often  calls  me  from  them  all,  so  that  I  dwell  on  it  willingly
and  with  pleasure.  But  the  more  I  cherish  the  thought  of
you,  the  more  eagerly  do  I  long  to  see  you.  But  when  will
that  be  ?  or  will  it  ever  be  ?  Certainly  if  not  before,  at  all
events  we  shall  meet  in  the  city  of  our  God,  if  here  we
have  no  abiding  city,  but  seek  one  above.  There,  there
shall  I  see  you,  and  my  heart  shall  rejoice.  In  the  mean
while  I  shall  be  delighted  and  pleased  none  the  less  with
what  I  hear  from  you,  hoping  and  expecting  to  see  you
face  to  face  in  the  day  of  the  Lord,  that  my  joy  may  be  full.
Add,  I  pray  you,  to  those  good  things  which  are  always
coming  to  me  from  you  and  about  you,  my  dear  and  longed-
for  brother,  your  own  prayers  and  those  of  your  brethren
for  me.

LETTER CCV. (Circa A.D. 1140.)
To  THE  BISHOP  OF  ROCHESTER.'-'

Bernard  complains  of  the  severity  of  his  letter,  which  he
lias  done  nothing  to  deserve,

You  write  severely to one who does not  deserve it.

1  Others  read  5.  Allans,  a  famous  monastery  in  England,  founded  by  King
Offa.  But  our  reading  of  S.  Aubins  is  to  be  preferred;  this  was  a  monastery  in
Anjou,  from  which  William  went,  and  "  was  received by  the  Abbot  Bernard,
-and  displayed  such  grace  in  his  virtues  that  his  sanctity  seemed  marvellous  even
•t;>  the  perfect.''

2  Ascelin  or Anselm  was  then  presiding  over  this English  See. He suc
ceeded  John,  A.D.  j  137,  and  was  Bishop  of  it  for  10  years. — [Mabillon's  Note.]
But  according  to  the  Diocesan  Registers,  the  Diocese  was  administered  by  John
of  Seez  for  five  years  from  A.D.  1 137,  and  Ascelin  was  consecrated  in  A.D.  1142.

'This  Letter  should  therefore  be  dated  not  before  1 142.  See  note  on  next  page. —  [E.]


LKTTKR CCV.  615

What  have  I  done  wrong?  If  I  advised  Master  Robert
Pullen  }  to  spend  some  time  at  Paris,  because  of  the  sound
learning  which  is  known  to  be  gained  there,  it  was  because
1  thought  it  necessary  for  him,  and  I  still  think  so.  If  I
asked  your  Highness  to  permit  it,  I  would  again  make  the
same  request,  if  I  were  not  aware  that  you  had  rejected  my
former  petition.  If  I  said  that  the  man  is  supported  by
the  kindness  of  his  friends,  whose  influence  at  the  Curia  is
by  no  means  small,  I  said  it  because  I  had  fears  for  you,
and  I  still  have.  For  in  that  after  appeal  was  made,  you,  as
I  hear,  stretched  out  your  hand  to  the  property  of  the
appellant ;  I  neither  praised  you  in  this,  nor  do  I  now.  But
certainly  I  never  advised  him,  nor  do  I  now,  to  go  against
your  wish  in  any  way.  For  the  rest  I  am  your  servant,

1  An  Englishman  by  birth.  He  first  studied  letters  at  Paris,  and  then,
returning  to  his  native  land,  restored  the  school  at  Oxford,  which  had  well  nigh
perished.  He  was  then  summoned  to  Home,  because  of  his  intellectual  gifts  and
great  learning,  by  Innocent  II.,  who  created  him  a  Cardinal  under  the  title  of  S.
Eusebius.  He  was  the  first  Cardinal  of  his  nation,  unless  a  certain  Ulrinus  is  earlier
than  he.  But  in  what  year?  In  1 134,  if  we  believe  Onuphrius  and  Ciaconius.
One  thing  is  very  evident,  and  that  is,  that  he  had  not  obtained  this  dignity
when  this  Letter  was  written,  which  from  its  place  in  the  list  of  S.  Bernard's
Letters  seems  to  have  been  penned  about  A.D.  1 140.  In  the  next  place  Go.lwin
says  that  this  Letter  was  sent  to  Anselm,  or  Ascelin,  who,  in  the  year  1 137,  was
made  Bishop  of  Rochester.  Again,  at  the  end  of  his  Letter  Bernard  thanks  the
Bishop  of  Rochester  for  having  shown  care  for  "  his  children,  the  sons  that  he
had  sent  into  Ireland."  But  that  no  monks  of  the  Cistercian  Order  lived  in
Ireland  before  the  year  1139,  when  S.  Malachy  first  went  to  Clairvaux,  is  evident
from  what  S.  Bernard  says  in  his  life  of  him  (cxvi.),  where  he  writes  that  some
of  his  companions  had  been  sent  by  the  holy  Bishop  to  Clairvaux  to  learn  the
Cistercian  rule,  who  took  it  back  with  them  to  Ireland  in  the  year  1 141,  when
the  monastery  of  Mellifont  was  founded,  which  was  the  first  Cistercian  founda
tion  in  that  province,  except  that  of  S.  Mary  at  Dublin,  which  some  writers  say
submitted  itself  to  the  Cistercian  rule  about  the  year  i  139.  And,  theretore,  the
opinion  of  the  Anglo-Benedictine  writer  is  preferable  (it  is  referred  to  in  the
preface  to  the  works  of  Pullen),  who  holds  that  Robert  Pullen  was  invited  to
Rome  by  Innocent,  was  again  proclaimed  Cardinal  by  his  successor,  Lucius,
afterwards  obtained  the  dignity  of  Chancellor,  and  died  uirder  Eugenius  III.
They  call  him  the  oldest  of  Theologians;  his  remains,  which  were  indexed  bv
Pitsaeus,  prove  his  great  learning.  They  would  have  altogether  perished  had
they  not  been  rescued  by  Hugh  Mathoud,  head  of  the  Benedictine  house  of  S.
Columba,  at  Sens,  who  published  eight  books  of  his  Sentences,  illustrated  by
learned  notes.  If  more  about  him  is  wanted  it  will  be  found  in  the  notes  to
Letter  334.


616  LETTER CCVI.

ready  always  to  hold  and  honour  your  crown1  in  due  and
worthy  veneration.  I  venture  again  on  the  strength  of  this
consciousness  to  pray  and  advise  you  that  Master  Robert
with  your  full  goodwill  may  be  allowed  to  spend  some  time
at  Paris.  May  the  Lord  repay  you  in  eternal  life  the  good
you  have  done  to  my  offspring,  I  mean  my  sons  whom  I
have  sent  into  Ireland.


LETTER CCVI.

TO THE QUEEN OF JERUSALEM.2

Bernard  recommends  to  her  one  of  his  relatives  ; and
exhorts the Queen  so  to  live  that  she  may  reign  for  ever.

Men  tell  me  that  I  have  some  influence  with  you,  and
many  who  are  about  to  set  out  for  Jerusalem  ask  for  a
recommendation  from  me  to  your  Excellency.  Amongst
whom  is  this  young  relation  of  mine,  a  youth,  they  say,
bold  in  arms,  and  of  polished  manners.  And  I  rejoice  that
at  his  age  he  has  chosen  to  fight  for  God  rather  than  for  the
world.  And  so  do  according  to  your  custom,  and  let  it  be
well  with  him  for  my  sake,  as  it  has  always  been  with  all
my  other  relations  who  have  been  able  by  my  means  to
make  themselves  known  to  you.  As  to  the  rest,  see  that
the  pleasure  of  the  flesh  and  worldly  glory  do  not  block  up
your  road  to  the  heavenly  kingdom.  For  what  advantage
is  it  to  reign  for  a  few  days  over  the  earth  and  to  lose  the
eternal  kingdom  in  the  Heavens  ?  But  I  trust  in  the  Lord
that  you  will  do  better  ;  and  if  the  testimony  is  true  which
my  dear  uncle  Andrew  bears  concerning  you,  and  I  place
great  reliance  on  him,  you  will,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  reign
both  here  and  in  eternity.  Bestow  care  on  pilgrims,  the
needy,  and  prisoners,  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well
pleased.  Write  to  me  more  often  ;  for  it  will  not  hurt  vou,
and  will  help  me  if  I  know  more  fully  and  more  certainly
of  your  state3  and  of  your  good  dispositions.

1  S.  Bernard  not  unfrequently  addresses  Bishops,  wore  vetertnn,  as  having"  a
crown,  i.e.,  royal  honour.  See  Ep.  221.

-  This  was  Melisendis,  to  whom  Letters  289,  354,  355  were  written.
3  Esse  vestrum  :  i.e.,  statum.


LKTTER CCVII.  617

LETTER CCVII. (A.D. 1139.)
To  ROGKR,  KING  OF  SICILY.

Bernard  begs  Jiini to  be kind  and  liberal  towards  poor

Religious.

Far  and  wide  the  renown  of  your  magnificence  has
spread  over  the  earth.  For  what  lands  are  there  to  which
the  glory  of  your  name  has  not  reached  P1  But  listen  to  the
advice  of  me  who  loves  you.  Endeavour  as  much  as  in
you  lies  to  refer  this  same  glory  to  Him  from  whom  it
comes,  if  you  do  not  wish  to  destroy  it,  or  to  be  destroyed
by  it.  This  certainly  will  happen  if  you  open  the  eye  of
discretion  upon  those  whom  the  well-known  report  of  your
magnificence  calls  to  you  from  afar,  and  if  you  stretch  out
your  hand  not  so  much  to  the  greedy  as  to  the  poor.  Truly,
Blessed  is  lie  tJiat  considercth  not  the  greedy,  but  the  poor
and  needy  (Ps.  xli.  i).  The  poor,  I  repeat,  who  asks
unwillingly,  receives  modestly,  and  when  he  receives
glorifies  his  Father  which  is  in  Heaven.  Since,  then,
His  own  glory  will  be  so  faithfully  given  to  God  from
the  mouth  of  the  needy  because  of  your  gift,  that  fount
of  glory  must  flow  for  you  with  more  fruitful  stream,

i  Bernard  now  addresses  Roger  in  very  different  terms  from  what  he  had
used  before  ;  doubtless  because,  as  he  was  not  in  the  habit  of  sparing  sinners,
so  he  was  gentle  and  kind  to  the  repentant ;  and  when  the  character  had  been
changed  he  knew  how  to  change  his  style,  as  he  says  at  the  end  of  Letter  224.
It  seems,  then,  that  Roger  had  repented  himself  of  having  been  a  foe  to  the
Church,  a  disturber  of  peace,  a  fomenter  of  schism,  a  persecutor  of  Pope
Innocent,  and  a  rival  of  the  Emperor.  His  ferocity  had  been  so  great  that  he
spared  neither  sacred  things  nor  persons,  nor  his  dead  enemies  (Otto  of
Frisingen  lib.  vii.  c.  23  ;  Baronius  Vol.  xii.,  year  1136).  Thence  Bernard  had
spoken  of  him  as,  "the  Sicilian  tyrant''  in  Letters  130  and  136;  as  "an
intruder  upon  the  royal  crown,  the  Sicilian  usurper,"  in  Letter  139;  as  "the
Duke  of  Apulia  whom  Pope  Anacletus  had  drawn  to  his  side  by  the  ridiculous
bribe  of  an  usurper's  crown,"  in  Letter  127.  Peter,  Abbot  of  Cluny,  speaks  of
him  in  high  terms  (lib.  iv.  ep.  37).  At  all  events,  when  he  had  submitted  to
Pope  Innocent,  although  he  held  him  captive,  he  obtained  a  confirmation  of  his
royal  crown  (Baronius,  Annals,  year  1139),  and  invited  to  his  realms  religious,
both  Cluniacs  and  Cistercians.  He  had,  too,  a  great  desire  to  see  Bernard,  as
appears  from  the  next  Letter.

VOL.  II.  40


618  LETTER CCVIII.

for  He  loves  those  who  love  Hun,  and  glorifies  those  who
glorify  Him  ;  just  as  he  wJw  sows  blessings  shall  reap
blessings  (2  Cor.  ix.  6).  For  this  reason  I  beseech  you
cast  your  eyes  on  the  bearer  of  this  letter,  for  most  cer
tainly  it  is  not  greed  that  has  drawn  him  to  your  presence,
but  necessity  that  has  forced  him  to  come.  Necessity,  I
say,  not  his  own,  but  of  his  brethren,  viz.,  the  many
faithful  servants  of  God  by  whom  he  has  been  sent.  Hear
patiently  what  they  have  to  be  patient  under;  hear  and
suffer  with  them  ;  for  if  you  suffer  with  them  you  shall
reign  with  them.  To  reign  with  such  is  not  to  be  scorned,
even  by  a  king.  For  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  theirs  who
have  despised  the  life  of  the  world.  Make  to  yourself
friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness ,  that  when  you
fail  out  of  your  earthly  kingdom  they  may  receive  you  into
their  heavenly  kingdom  (S.  Luke  xvi.  9).


LETTER CCVIII. (A.D.  1139.)
To  THE  SAME.

The  King  had  desired  to  see  him  ;  he  sends  some  of  his
brethren  in  his  place.

If  you  ask  for  me,  here  am  I,  and  my  children  which  God
has  given  to  me.  For  my  humility  is  said  to  have  found
favour  with  the  King's  majesty,  so  that  he  seeks  to  see  me.
And  who  am  I  that  I  should  go  against  the  good  pleasure
of  the  King  ?  I  hasten  and  say  to  him  who  sought  me  :
Lo!  here  I  am,  not  in  the  weak  bodily  presence  which
Herod  mocked  in  the  Lord  (S.  Luke  xxiii.  ii),  but  in  my
children.  For  who  shall  separate  me  from  them  ?  I  will
follow  them  wherever  they  go  ;  even  if  they  dwell  in  the
uttermost  parts  of  the  sea,  they  shall  not  be  without  me.
You  have,  O  King,  the  light  of  my  eyes,  you  have  my  heart
and  my  soul.  What  if  my  meanest  part  is  absent  ?  I  mean
my  worthless  body,  that  vile  possession,  which  necessity
retains,  though  the  will  would  gladly  give  it  up.  It  is  not


LETTER CCIX.  619

able  to  follow  the  will,  since  it  is  weak,  and  almost  the  only
thing  awaiting  it  is  the  tomb.  But  why  need  this  be  a
care  ?  My  soul  shall  dwell  among  the  good,  when  my
seed  shall  inherit  the  earth.  My  seed,  my  good  seed  shall
spring  up,  that  is  if  it  falls  into  good  soil.  My  soul  shall
rejoice  and  delight  herself  in  fatness,  because,  I  trust,
there  shall  be  given  to  her  of  the  fruit  of  her  hands.  This
hope  of  mine  is  laid  up  in  my  heart,  so  that  I  can  patiently
bear  to  be  separated  from  them  in  body.  Do  not  wonder,
O  King.  I  would  rather  have  been  absent  from  the  body,
than  to  send  them  away,  if  the  cause  had  not  been  God's
alone.  Receive  them  as  strangers  and  pilgrims,  as  fellow
citizens  with  the  saints  and  of  the  household  of  God ;  nay,
not  citizens,  they  are  kings.  For  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of
heaven  by  the  right  and  merit  of  poverty.  It  is  not  fitting
that  they  should  have  been  summoned  from  afar  to  no
purpose,  and  wander  as  exiles  from  their  home  in  a  useless
pilgrimage.  Do  you  suppose  they  will  be  able  to  sing  the
Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land  ?  But  perhaps  I  am  wrong
in  calling  it  a  strange  land,  for  it  has  opened  its  heart  of
its  own  accord  to  receive  the  good  seed,  and  has  taken  in
the  precious  deposit  to  be  piously  fostered  in  its  kindly
bosom.  It  has  fallen,  I  see,  the  good  seed  has  fallen  into
a  good,  nay,  an  excellent,  soil ;  I  hope  in  the  Lord  that  it
will  take  root,  spring  up,  multiply,  and  bring  forth  fruit
with  patience  (S.  Luke  viii.  15).  Then  will  I  share  this
with  the  King,  and  eac/i  one  sJiall  receive  according  to  his
labour  (i  Cor.  iii.  8).


LETTER  CCIX.
To  THE  SAME.

Bernard  praises  the  King's  munificence  in  receiving  and
maintaining  the  Religious  sent  to  him.

You  have  what  you  asked  for,  you  have  done  what  you
promised.  Those  whom,  according  to  your  wrord,  we
selected  and  sent  abroad  to  you  have  been  received  with


620  LETTER CCX.

princely  generosity.  You  have  met  them  with  bread,  you
have  brought  them  into  a  pleasant  place,  you  have  placed
them  on  a  lofty  spot,  that  they  may  eat  the  fruits  of  the
fields,  suck  honey  out  of  the  rock,  and  oil  from  the  hard
stone  ;  may  have  butter  and  milk  from  the  herd,  and  from
.  the  sheep,  and  honey  with  the  flour  of  wheat,  and  may
drink  the  choicest  blood  of  the  grape.  These,  indeed,  are
earthly  blessings,  but  they  purchase  heavenly.  Such  is  the
way  to  heaven ;  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased.
For  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  theirs  who  in  the  land
of  the  living  will  have  power  to  render  to  the  earthly
king  for  these  earthly  benefits  life  and  everlasting  glory,
I  have  sent  you  Master  Bruno,  formerly  for  a  long  time  the
companion  of  my  solitude,  but  now  the  father  of  many
souls  who  rejoice  in  Christ  indeed,  but  are  poor  in  this
world's  goods.  Let  him,  too,  experience  the  generous
hand  of  the  King  that  the  number  of  those  maybe  increased
who  may  receive  him  into  everlasting  habitations.  What
you  do  for  him,  you  do  for  me ;  for  what  he  lacks  has  to  be
supplied  by  me.  But,  as  my  purse  is  not  very  full,  I  have
directed  Christ's  poor  monk  to  look  to  yours,  which,  as
everyone  knows,  is  somewhat  more  full  than  mine.

LETTER  CCX. (Circa  A.D.  1 139.)

To  POPE  INNOCENT.
He  recommends  to  the  Pontiff  the  Archbishop  of  Rheims.

I  recommend  the  Lord  Bishop  of  Rheims1  to  your
Holiness,  not  merely  as  one  of  many,  but  as  one  above
the  rest.  And  I  do  so  the  more  confidently  as  I  am  con
fident  of  his  faithful  devotion  to  you,  his  sincere  love,  his
submissive  and  obedient  disposition.  Let  him  be  honoured,
since  he  is  a  vessel  made  to  honour.  Let  him  be  made  to
feel,  as  much  as  in  you  lies,  that  he  does  not  honour  his
ministry  in  vain,  that  it  is  not  in  vain  that  he  excels  in  those
virtues  by  which  God  is  honoured  and  the  Church  adorned,
which,  in  short,  become  the  priest  of  the  Lord.

1  Samson.


LETTER CCXI.  621

LETTER  CCXI. (Circa  A.D.  1139.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  recommends  the  cause  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury

and  of  the  Bishop  of  London.

My  Lord  of  Canterbury,1  a  good  man,  and  one  who  has
the  testimony  of  good  men,  is  unjustly  dragged  into  a  dis
pute,  and  violently  held  back  from  acting.  He  was  pre
paring  to  start  (for  in  your  presence  the  dispute  \vas  to
be  settled),  when  he  was  stopped  by  a  hurricane  and
tempest  of  wars.  Please  excuse  him,  for  the  necessity  of
excusing  himself  is  a  trouble  to  him,  not  only  because  he
is  sure  of  getting  justice  at  your  hands,  but  also  because  he
greatly  desired  to  see  your  face.  Your  son  adds  also  this,
that  if  the  venerable  priest'2  should  make  any  other  request
of  you,  please  grant  it  the  more  quickly,  as  he  who  makes
it  is  the  more  worthy.  As  I  have  begun,  I  venture  to  say
one  thing  more  to  my  lord.  Your  old  friend,  faithful
servant,  and  devoted  son,  Robert,  Bishop  of  London,
appeals  to  you,  because  he  who  preceded  him  in  the  See3  to
which  God  has  called  him  has  appropriated  the  goods  and
lands  of  his  Church,  and  refuses  to  make  restitution.4  And
how  injurious  this  is,  and  how  it  is  to  be  corrected  it  ill
would  become  my  humility  to  dictate  to  so  great  wisdom.


LETTER  CCXII. (A.D.  1139.)

To  THE  SAME.

He  pleads  pathetically  with  the  Pontiff  the  cause  of  the
Bishop  of  Salamanca,  praising  his  remarkable  humility.

1  Theobald,  formerly  Abbot  of  Bee.

2  Bernard  everywhere,  as  a  loving  student  of  antiquity,  retains  old  names;
as  here,  Sacerdos,  by  which  name  those  even  of  the  first  Order  were  wont  to  be
called  in  olden  times  (above,  Letters  61  and  202).

3  This  was  apparently  Anselm,  Abbot  of Bury,  "  elected  A.D.  1 134,  but  after
wards  set  aside." Robert's  accession  to  the  See  was  not  until A.D.  1141  :  and
according  to  English  accounts,  it  was  in  1147  that  Archbishop  Theobald,  being
oppressed  by  Henry  of  Blois,  the  Papal  Legate,  was  driven  into  exile. So  that
the  date  of  this  Letter  must  be  somewhat  later  than  stated  in  the  text. — [E.]

4  I.e.,  as  securities.


622  LETTER CCXII.

That  illustrious  man  who  was  formerly  Bishop  of  Sala
manca,  when  returning  from  Rome,  did  not  think  it  too
much  trouble  to  turn  aside  to  your  son,  nor  thought  it
beneath  him  to  ask  help  from  one  so  feeble  as  I  am.1  And
when  I  had  heard  him  I  called  to  mind  the  words  of  the
prophet :  Every  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  made  low
before  God,  and  the  crooked  places  shall  be  made  straight,
and  the  rough  places  plain  (Is.  xl.  4).  Even  so  you  know
how  to  make  sport  of  and  repress  the  lofty,  to  abase  the
proud,  and  to  reduce  to  their  measure  those  who  go  beyond
their  rule.  But  when  the  man  had  told  me  in  detail  the
history  of  his  troubles,  I  commended  the  judge,  I  approved
the  verdict,  but,  I  confess  to  you,  I  also  felt  compassion  for
the  man,  though  condemned.  And  so,  as  it  was,  indeed,
through  the  whole  of  that  tearful  account,  he  finished
as  one  who  would  say  with  the  prophet :  Having  been
exalted,  I  was  humbled  and  put  to  confusion  (Ps.  IxxxviL
1 6,  VULG.)  ;  and,  Thou  hast  raised  me  up  only  to  cast  me
down  (Ps.  cii.  10).  And  when  I  thought  of  your  justice,
and  the  nobility  of  mind  which  I  know  you  to  have,  I
began  to  think  at  the  same  time  of  the  riches  of  your
mercy,  which  in  many  cases  I  have  made  trial  of,  and  I
said,  Who  knows  whether  the  Lord  will  turn  and  pardon,
and  leave  a  blessing  behind  Him  ?  Certainly,  I  repeat,  he
has  been  taught,  in  all  things,  and  in  all  ways,  both  to  be
jealous,  and  to  pardon,  both  to  tame  the  haughty,  and  by
no  means  to  spare  the  conquered  ;  except  that,  following
his  Master,  he  is  also  accustomed  to  let  mercy  triumph
over  justice.  And  I,  who  am  dust  and  ashes,  consented  to
write  with  that  wonted  presumption  of  mine  to  my  lord.
And  I  found  ground  for  hope,  confidence  for  my  request,

1  This  was  the  Peter  who,  when  the  Church  of  Salamanca  was  long  labour
ing  under  a  threefold  schism,  was  summoned  to  Rome  by  Innocent  while
boasting  himself  in  his  rights  of  possession,  and  was  degraded  with  the  other
litigants.  Then  Peter  betook  himself  to  Cluny,  and  then  to  Bernard,  and  would,
perhaps,  have  obtained  re-instatement  in  his  dignity  had  not  the  Bishops  of
Toledo,  Zamora,  and  Segovia,  sent  to  Rome  by  King  Alphonso.  intervened,  and
secured  the  election  of  Berengarius,  King  Alphonso's  Chancellor.  (Manriquez,
on  the  year  1139.)


LETTER CCXIII.  623

reason  for  my  doing  him  this  kindness,  in  the  fact  that  the
man  is  not,  as  is  usual,  departing  in  indignation,  filled  with
anger,  and  going  back  to  his  native  land  to  cause  scandals,
to  excite  seditions  ;  but  he  has  given  place  to  wrath,  and
has  put  on  the  spirit  of  meekness;  he  has  turned  aside  to
your  monks  of  Cluny,  and  prostrated  himself  before  the
knees  of  the  humble,  and  has  joined  them  in  their  prayers
as  arms  that  are  powerful  from  God.  He  has  resolved  to
contend  with  you  with  these  weapons,  and  he  will  endeavour
to  undermine  with  these  engines  of  devotion,  as  he  boasts,
the  wall  of  your  severity  which  now  stands  in  his  way.  He
trusts  also  that  you  will  regard  the  prayer  of  the  humble,
and  not  despise  their  petition,  and  that  piety  will  overcome
him  before  whom  the  powers  of  the  world  tremble.  I,  too,
with  confidence  stretch  out  my  hands  with  them,  bend  my
knees,  supplicate  for  the  suppliant,  boldly  declare  that  his
humility  ought  to  help  the  unhappy  man,  since  his  pride
has  so  injured  him,  and  say  that  it  is  unbecoming  for  virtue
to  be  surpassed  by  vice  in  receiving  recompense.


LETTER CCXIII. (A.D. 1139.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  expostulates  that  the  reconciliation  of  Peter  of
Pisa,  made  by  him  with  the  Pope's  own  authority,  has
been  held  invalid.

Who  will  do  me  justice  against  you  ?  If  I  had  a  judge
before  whom  I  could  take  you  I  would  quickly  show  you
what  you  deserve — I  speak  as  one  in  travail.  There  is,
indeed,  the  tribunal  of  Christ ;  but  far  be  it  from  me  to
summon  you  there,  for  if  it  were  necessary  for  you  and
possible  to  me,  I  would  far  rather  stand  there  and  answer
for  you  with  all  my  strength.  And  so  I  appeal  to  him  to
whom,  for  the  present,  power  has  been  given  to  judge  all
things,  i.e.,  to  you  yourself.  I  summon  you  before  yourself,
to  judge  between  us.  In  what,  I  ask,  has  your  son  deserved
so  ill  from  his  father,  that  it  has  seemed  good  to  you  to
brand  and  stamp  him  with  the  mark  and  the  name  of


624  LETTER CCXIV.

traitor?  Did  you  not  think  it  good  to  constitute  me  your
Vicar  in  the  matter  of  reconciling  Peter  of  Pisa,  if  per
chance  God  should  vouchsafe  to  recall  him  by  my  means
from  the  mire  of  schism  ?  If  you  deny  it  I  will  prove  it  by
the  many  witnesses  that  were  in  your  Curia  at  the  time.
Was  he  not  after  this,  according  to  the  instructions  of  my
lord,  restored  to  his  rank  and  honour  ?  Who  is  it,  then,
who  by  his  advice,  or  rather  his  craft,  has  stealthily  undone
what  your  indulgence  granted,  and  made  void  the  words
which  proceeded  out  of  your  lips  ?  And  I  say  this,  not  to
blame  your  apostolic  severity,  and  your  zeal  kindled  from
the  fire  of  God  against  schismatics,  which  with  a  mighty
wind  breaks  the  ships  of  Tarshish,  and  like  Phinehas  slays
the  fornicators,  according  to  the  verse,  Do  not  I  hate  them,
O  Lord,  which  hate  Thee,  and  am  not  I  grieved  with  them
that  rise  up  against  Thee  (Ps.  cxxxix.  21)  ?  But  where
the  guilt  is  not  equal,  the  punishment  clearly  should  not  be
equal ;  nor  ought  he  who  has  forsaken  his  sin  to  be  under
the  same  sentence  as  he  whose  sin  has  forsaken  him.  For
the  sake  of  Him  wrho  to  spare  sinners  spared  not  Himself,
take  away  my  reproach ;  and,  by  re-establishing  what  you
first  established,  consult  the  credit  of  your  first  sound  and
perfect  opinion.  I  wrote  to  you  before  on  this  matter ;  but
as  I  have  received  no  reply,  I  presume  that  the  letter  did
not  reach  you.


LETTER  CCXIV. (Circa  A.D. 1140.)

To  THE  SAME.

He  recommends  Nicholas,  Bishop  of  Cambray,  and  Abbot

Gottschalk.

If  any  regard  for  me,  any  recollection,  however  slight,  of
me,  still  remains  in  the  heart  of  my  lord,  and  if  his  child
finds  any  small  portion  of  the  grace  he  once  found  in  his
sight,  let  him  now  experience  it  on  behalf  of  that  illustrious


LETTER CCXV.  625

and  humble  man,  Nicholas,1  Bishop  of  Cambray.  I  confess
that  I  am  under  obligation  to  him,  and  that  I  am  in  debt
for  all  that  I  can  do,  not  only  because  he  honours  me  and
mine,  whenever  he  can,  but  also  for  his  uprightness,  meek
ness,  and  justice,  virtues  which  can  recommend  him  also  to
you.  And,  if  I  mistake  not,  those  who  trouble  him  are
false  men,  and  truth  is  not  in  their  mouth.  In  short,  you
are  sure  to  approve  of  him,  and  there  is  no  need  for  me  to
multiply  words  about  him.  He  has,  too,  with  him  a  religious
and  holy  man,  Abbot  Gottschalk,'2  on  behalf  of  whom,  in
like  manner,  I  earnestly  ask  a  hearing  for  his  requests,  if
my  intervention  can  lend  any  power  to  his  merits.  For  I
believe  that  he  will  make  no  petition  which  is  unworthy  of
being  granted.

LETTER CCXV. (Circa A.D. 1140.)

To  THE SAME.
He  intercedes  on  behalf  of  the  Bishop  of  Auxerre.

I  write  to  you  very  often,  I,  a  worthless  little  worm  ;  and
I  am  impelled  to  this  boldness  by  the  entreaties  of  my
friends.  I  confess  I  am  bold,  but  not  false.3  Let  not  my
lord  suspect  that  falsehood  will  be  found  in  the  words  of
his  child  in  any  letter  he  sends  him.  I  wish  to  comply  with
the  wishes  of  my  friends,  but  not  to  my  death.  For  I  do  not
forget  what  I  have  read  :  A  mouth  that  bclieth  slayeth  the
soul  (Wisd.  i.  n).  I  deny,  then,  falsehood,  I  confess  im
portunity  ;  this  will  iind  pardon,  the  rest  I  fear  not.  The
Bishop  of  Auxerre4  is  a  special  friend  of  mine.  Who  does
not  know  him  ?  He  is  able  to  communicate  anxiety  to  his

1  In  most  copies  neither  the  name,  nor  even  the  initial,  is  found. One  copy
only  has the name  in the  margin. Nicholas  presided over the Church  of
Cambray  from  A.U.  1 140  to  A.D.  1 167.

2  These  words  "  of  S.  Martin's  Mount  "  are  wanting  in  all  the  manuscripts,
and  so  is  Gottschalk in  some,  others have  the  initial  G. He  was  Abbot  of
Mount  S.  Martin  at  Arras,  of  the  Order  of Praemonstratensians,  and  is  praised
in  Letter  253,  n.  4;  he  was  afterwards  Bishop  of  Arras  (see  Letter  284).

3  Audax  nnn  mendai.
*  Hugh.


626  LETTER CCXVI.

friend,  but  not  falsehood.  We  bring  before  you  a  trust
worthy  defence  of  his  dean,  and  we  ask  for  absolution  for
him.  I  speak  with  my  wonted  presumption  when  I  say
that  we  are  sons  of  the  same  father,  viz.,  of  yourself.  I
hope  that  my  father  will  not  reject  his  sons,  but  will  do  the
will  of  them  that  fear  him,  and  will  hear  their  cry,  and
will  make  them  joyful  (Ps.  cxlv.  19).


LETTER CCXVI. (A.D.  1142.)
To THE SAME.

He  complains  that  Count  Ralph,  who  had  repudiated  his
wife  and  taken  another,  finds  supporters  in  the  Curia.

It  is  written  :  Whom  God  hath  joined  together  let  not
man  put  asunder  (S.  Matt.  xix.  6).  Audacious  men  have
arisen,  and  have  not  shrunk  from  disjoining  those  whom
God  has  joined  together.1  Nor  is  that  all  ;  they  have  gone
farther,  and  joined  together  persons  whom  it  is  forbidden
to  unite,  thus  adding  sin  to  sin.  The  sacred  rites  of  the
Church  are  violated,  and  alas  !  the  robe  of  Christ  is  rent,
and  that,  to  crown  the  sorrow,  by  the  hands  of  those  who
ought  to  have  kept  it  whole.  Thy  friends  and  thy  neigh
bours,  O  God,  have  come  near  and  stood  against  Thee
(Ps.  xxxvii.  12,  VULG.).  For  they  who  are  transgressing  Thy
command  are  not  foreigners,  not  strangers  to  Thy  sanctuary,
but  they  hold  the  place  of  those  to  whom  was  said  :  If
ye  love  me  keep  My  commandments  (S.  John  xiv.  15).
Count  Ralph  and  his  wife  had  been  joined  together  by
God  through  the  ministers  of  the  Church,  and  by  the

i  The  Bishops  named  here,  who  approved  of  the  divorce  of  Ralph,  Count  of
Vermandois,  were  Simon  of  Tournay  his  brother,  Bartholomew  of  Laon,  and
Peter  of  Senlis.  Count  Ralph  had  conceived  a  desire  to  be  married  to  the
sister  of  Eleanor,  Queen  of  the  French,  named  Petronilla,  and  he  consequently,
with  the  approbation  of  the  three  Bishops  named  above,  repudiated  his  lawful
wife,  a  niece  of  Theobald,  Count  of  Champagne,  under  the  plea  of  consan
guinity.  A  complaint  about  the  matter  came  to  the  ears  of  the  Pope  through-
Count  Theobald,  and  he  pronounced  his  anathema  against  the  Count,  and
suspended  the  three  Bishops  for  some  time  from  their  office.


LETTER CCXVII.  627

Church  through  God  who  had  given  such  power  unto  men.
Why  did  the  Court  disjoin  those  whom  God  had  joined?
And  in  so  doing  provision  wras  made  as  was  fitting  for  one
thing  only,  viz.,  that  the  works  of  darkness  should  be
done  in  darkness.  For  he  who  does  wrong  hates  the
light,  and  does  not  come  into  the  light,  that  his  works  may
be  reproved  by  the  light.  What  has  Count  Theobald
deserved,  what  wrong  has  he  done  ?  If  to  love  righteous
ness  and  hate  iniquity  be  a  sin,  he  cannot  be  excused.  If
it  be  a  sin  to  render  to  the  King  the  things  which  are  the
King's,  and  to  God  the  things  which  are  God's,  he  cannot
be  excused.  If  at  your  command  he  received  the  Arch
bishop  of  Bourges,  this  is  his  first  and  greatest  sin.1  Lo  !
this  is  the  crime  which  is  laid  at  his  door.  They  who
render  evil  for  good  calumniate  him  because  he  follows  the
thing  that  good  is.  Many  are  calling  to  you  from  the
depths  of  their  hearts  to  visit  with  fitting  punishment  the
wrong  done  to  your  son,  and  the  oppression  the  Church  is
subjected  to,  and  to  restrain  the  workers  of  this  wickedness
with  their  leader,  with  whatever  Apostolic  force  you  wish
and  are  able  to  put  forth,  that  so  their  wickedness  may
descend  upon  their  own  head.


LETTER  CCXVII. (A.D. 1142.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  complains  that Count Theobald  is  suffering  for  the
cause  of  justice,  and  for  his  fidelity  to  the  Apostolic  See.

Tribulation  and  anguish  have  found  us  out.  The  earth
trembles  and  quakes  at  the  deaths  of  men,  at  the  banish-

1  This  was  the  cause  of  the  hostility  [of  the  King  of  France]  to  Theobald,
about  which  we  find  Hermann  saying:  "The  Pope  consecrated  as  Archbishop
of  Bourges  a  certain  clerk  named  Peter,  a  relation  of  hPs  Chancellor  ;  and
because  the  King  refused  to  receive  him  he  was  excommunicated."  This  was
in  the  year  1144,  after  the  death  of  Archbishop  Alberic.  You  will  gather  more
from  the  notes  to  Letter  219,  where  you  will  find  how  badly  Theobald  was
treated  by  the  King  for  giving  an  asylum  to  Peter  Cf.  Letter  219  and  Life  of
S.  Bernard  \\\>.  iv.  n.  12.


628  LETTER CCXVII.

ment  of  the  poor,  at  the  arrest  and  imprisonment  of  the
rich.  Even  religion  itself  has  come  into  shame  and
contempt.  Only  to  make  mention  of  peace  is  counted  a
disgrace  amongst  us.  Nowhere  are  faith  and  innocence
safe.  Count  Theobald,  a  lover  of  innocence,  and  a  seeker
after  holiness,  has  been  almost  delivered  over  to  the  will  of
his  enemies.  He  was  struck  at  that  he  might  fall,  but  the
Lord  sustained  him  ;  and  it  is  a  consolation  to  him  that
justice  and  obedience  to  you  are  at  stake,  because  of  the
Apostle's  words:  If  ye  suffer  for  righteousness  sake,  happy
are  ye  (i  S.  Peter  iii.  14).  And  again  it  is  written  in  the
Gospel  :  Blessed  are  they  who  endure  persecution  for
righteousness  (S.  Matt.  v.  10).  Woe  to  us  !  we  have  been
able  to  foresee,  but  not  to  take  precautions  against  these
evils.  What  more  can  I  say?  In  order  that  the  land  might
not  be  wholly  laid  desolate,  and  the  whole  kingdom,
divided  against  itself,  fall,  that  most  devoted  son  of  yours,
and  defender  of  the  Church's  liberty,  has  been  compelled
to  promise  under  an  oath  that  he  would  do  what  he  could
to  induce  you  to  remove  the  sentence  of  excommunication
pronounced  against  the  land  and  person  of  the  adulterous
tyrant,1  who  has  been  the  head  and  originator  of  all  these
evils  and  sorrows,  by  your  legate  Ivo  of  good  memory,  as
also  against  the  adulteress  herself,  which  the  aforesaid
prince  did  at  the  entreaty  and  advice  of  some  faithful  and
wise  men.  For  they  said  that  without  any  injury  to  the
Church  it  would  be  easy  to  obtain  from  you  a  renewal
of  the  decree,  and  an  irrevocable  confirmation  of  the  same
sentence  which  had  been  justly  pronounced;  so  would
artifice  be  eluded  by  artifice  and  peace  obtained ;  and  he
who  boasts  himself  in  wickedness  and  is  powerful  in
iniquity  would  gain  no  advantage.  I  have  many  things  to
say  to  you,  but  there  is  no  need  to  write  about  everything,
when  there  is  one  present  who  knows  all,  and  can  acquaint
you  with  them  more  plainly  and  completely  by  word  of

mouth.

1  Ralph.


LETTER CCXVIII.  629

LETTER CCXVIII. (A.I). 1143.)
His  LAST  LETTER  TO  INNOCENT  II.; IN  SELF  DEFENCE.

Bernard  having  remarked  that  he  had  lost  the  favour
of  Pope  Innocent,  on  account  of  the  will  of  Cardinal  Ivo,
humbly  justifies  himself.

To  his  lord  and  most  reverend  Father  INNOCENT,  BER
NARD,  a  thing  of  nought,  wishes  health.

1.  I  used  to  think  at  one  time  that  I  was  of  some  account,
though  of  small ;  but now I feel I have  simply  been re
duced  to  nothing  while  I  knew it  not. For  I  would  never
have  said  that  I  was  nothing  at  all  while  the eyes of  my
lord  were  over  his  child,  and  his ears open  to  my  prayers,
whilst  all  that  I  wrote  he  received  with  open  hands, read
with  smiling  face,  and  while  he  answered  most  graciously
and  fully  all  my  demands. But  now  I  do  not  say  that  I  am
of  small  account,  I am of  none ;  because since  yesterday
and  the  day  before  his  face  has  been  turned  away  from  me.
Why  is  this?  what  wrong  have  I  done? Much,  I  admit,  if
the  money  of  Cardinal  Ivo,  of  good  memory,  was  distributed
according  to  my  will,  and  not  according  to  his directions,
for  I  am  told  that  this has  been brought  before  the  notice
of  my  lord. But  I  trust  that  by this  time you know  the
truth  of  this  matter, and  the  truth shall make  me  free. I
am  not  so  dull as  not  to know that  whatever  he left  no
directions  about  becomes  the  property  of  the  Church.

2.  But  now  hear  the  simple  truth. If  falsehood is  found
in  my  mouth, my  own mouth shall  condemn me. When
the  man  put  off  his  mortal frame I was absent, nay, at  a
long  distance. But  I  heard  from  those  who  were  present
that  he  made  his  will, and  had what  he wanted  written
down;  and  of  his  property  he  divided  what  he  would  to
whom  he  would,  and  whatever  was  over  he  entrusted  to
the  two  Abbots  who  were  assisting  him,  ancl  to me  who
was  absent,  with  a  view  to  its  distribution  ; because  the
poorer  places  of  the  saints  were  known  to  us. Then  the
Abbots  returned  home, and  not  finding  me  (for  I  was  kept
at  that  time  in  accordance  with  your  orders  by  the  negotia-


630  LETTER CCXVIII.

tions  for  peace),  they  nevertheless  divided  the  money  as
seemed  good  to  them,  I  not  only  not  conniving,  but  not
even  knowing  what  they  had  done.  Let  now,  if  you  please,
your  indignation  give  place  to  this  manifest  truth,  and
henceforward  look  upon  me  not  frowningly  or  in  displeasure  ;
but  let  your  wonted  serenity  return  to  your  kind  and
gracious  countenance,  and  let  your  face  once  more  assume
its  brightness  and  joy.

3.  As  to  your  complaint  that  you  have  found  much  in
my  letters  to  displease  you,  I  shall  not  have  to  fear  it  any
longer,  ior  it  is  a  fault  which  I  will  soon  cure.  I  know  it,
I  know  it,  I  have  presumed  more  than  I  ought  to  have
•done  ;  not  thinking  sufficiently  who  I  was  and  to  whom  I
was  presuming  to  scribble ;  but  you  will  not  deny  that
your  kindness  had  armed  me  with  that  boldness.  And
then  the  love  of  my  friends  urged  me  to  it ;  for  I  wrote
very  little  on  my  own  account,  if  I  recollect  aright.  But
enough  of  this.  I  will  for  the  future  put  a  rein  on  my  zeal,
be  more  wise,  and  put  my  finger  to  my  lips.  For  it  will
be  more  tolerable  to  offend  some  of  my  friends  than  to
weary  with  many  prayers  the  Lord's  anointed.  And  at
this  time  too  I  have  not  ventured  to  write  to  you  about  the
clangers  overhanging  the  Church,  and  about  the  grievous
schism  which  I  fear,  and  the  many  evils  we  are  suffering
from.  But  1  have  written  to  the  holy  Bishops  around  your
person  ;  you  can,  if  you  wish  it,  hear  from  them  what  I
have  written.

LETTER CCXIX. (A.D. 1143.)

TO  THREE1  BISHOPS  OF  THE  CURIA  ;  ALBERIC  2  OF  OSTIA,
STEPHEN  OF  PR^ENESTE,  IGMARUS  OF  TUSCULUM,  3
AND  TO  THE  CHANCELLOR  GERARD.

1  The  common  reading  "  three "  is  better  than  ''  four,"  which  is  found  in
•some  MSS. ;  for  Gerard  the  Chancellor  was  not  a  Bishop.  He  was  afterwards
made  Pontiff  under  the  name  of  Lucius  II.

-  Alberic  of  Verdun  in  France  was  dead;  Bernard  is  recorded  to  have
offered  the  Sacrifice  of  praise  at  his  tomb  (Life,  lib.  iv.  n.  21).  He  is  men
tioned  in  Letter  241  ;  Stephen  in  Letter  224.

J  Igmarus,  or  Ymarus,  was  a  Cluniac  monk  of  S.  Martin  des  Champs,  then


LETTER CCXIX.  631

Respecting  the  interdict  laid  on the  realm  of  France  on
account  of  tJie  Archbishop  of  Bourges.

i.  How  great  an  evil  is  schism  in  the  Church,  and  how
it  is  to  be  detested  and  in  every  way  avoided,  is  plainly
shown  by  the  well  known  dreadful  death  of  those  men
whom  the  earth  swallowed  up  and  sent  down  alive  into
hell  because  of  this  very  pest.  It  has  been  shown  too  by
the  persecution  of  Guibert,1  and  the  rashness  of  Bourdin,
whom  our  times  have  seen  separating  between  the  kingdom
and  the  priesthood,  and  so  inflicting  on  them  both  an
almost  incurable  wound  and  a  cruel  chastisement.  It  has
been  shown  too  by  the  mad  schism  of  Leo,  which  after
grievous  and  manifold  trouble  and  loss  to  the  Church  has
lately  by  the  mercy  of  God  received  its  death  blow.  Well
then  does  the  Saviour  say  in  the  Gospel :  Woe  to  that  man
bv  whom  the  offence  cometh  (S.  Matt,  xviii.  7).  Woe  to
us  who  live  bewailing  what  we  have  endured,  grieving
for  what  we  feel,  and  fearing  what  we  expect.  And  what
is  worse,  human  affairs  are  come  to  such  an  evil  pass
that  the  guilty  are  not  willing  to  be  humbled,  nor  the
judges  to  show  mercy.  We  say  to  the  wicked:  Deal
not  so  wickedly  ;  and  to  the  sinners  :  Lift  not  up  your  horn
(Ps.  Ixxv.  5),  and  they  will  not  listen  to  us,  for  it  is  a  rebel
lious  house  (Ezek.  ii.  5).  We  beseech  those  whose  office  it
is  to  rebuke  the  sin  to  save  the  sinner,  not  to  break  the
bruised  reed,  and  not  quench  the  smoking  flax,  and  they
all  the  more  break  the  ships  of  Tarshish  with  a  violent
wind.

Prior  of  La  Charite  sur  Loire,  then  Abbot  of  the  New  Monastery  in  Poictiers
(under  which  name  he  took  part  in  drawing  up  an  agreement  made  between
Louis  the  younger  and  Argrimus,  Archdeacon  of  Orleans  :  see  Duchesne,  Vol.  iv.
p.  764),  and  was  finally  created  a  Cardinal  by  Innocent.  He  was  a  man  of
great  integrity,  as  appears  from  the  Cluninc  Chronicle  under  the  Abbot  Pontius.
To  these  Cardinals  Letter  230  and  the  two  following  were  alsjp  written.

1  So  named  from  Guibert,  Bishop  of  Ravenna,  whom  the  Emperor  Henry
IV.  set  up  as  antipope  in  opposition  toj_  Gregory  VII.,  and  the  three  following
legitimate  Pontiffs.  Maurice  Burdin  also,  Archbishop  of  Braga,  was  intruded
into  the  Roman  See  by  Henry  V.,  and  was  at  last  'compelled  by  Calixtus  II.  to
retire  to  the  monastery  of  Cava.  His  life  was  written  in  a  pleasing  style  by
Stephen  Baluze  (Misc.  Vol.  iii).


632  LETTER CCX1X.

2.  When, with the Apostle, we bid sons obey their
parents  in  all  things,  we  may  as  well  beat  the  air. When
we  tell  parents  not  to  provoke  their  children  to  anger, we
only  call  down  their  anger  on  our  own  heads. Sinners  no
longer  wrill  consent  to  give  satisfaction,  nor  those  who  bear
the  rule  or  the  rod  in  any  wise  to  condescend. All  follow
their  own pride  and passion  ; and,  pulling  a rope  with all
their might in  different  directions,  they  break  it. Alas  !
the  scar  of  the  wound  so  recently  given  to  the  Church1  has
hardly  healed  over,  when  they  are  again  doing  all  they  can
to  tear  it  open,  to  nail  the  Body  of Christ  to  the  cross,  to
pierce  again His  unoffending  side,  to  divide  His  garments,
and,  though in  vain,  as  far  as  in  them  lies,  to  rend  asunder
His  robe  which  is  woven without  seam. If  you  have any
feelings  of  piety,  set  yourselves  against  such  evils, lest  a
schism  take  place  on that soil where, as  you  well know,
other  schisms  are  wont  to  be  healed. For  if  the  author  of  a
scandal is  stricken specially  by  a  tremendous curse from
the  mouth  of  his  Judge,  of  what  blessings  may  we  suppose
that  they  are  worthy  who conquer  and put to  flight this
wickedness  ?

3.  Of  two  wrongs  I  cannot  acquit  the  King. For  he  both
took  an  unlawful  oath  and  perseveres  in  it  contrary  to  justice.'2

1  Viz.,  the  schism  of  Anacletus.

2  William  of  Nangis  thus  relates  the  affair  in  his  Chronicle  :— "  In  the  year
i  r42  a  dispute  arose  between  Pope  Innocent  and  Louis,  King  of  the  French,  by
which  the  Gallican  Church  was  disturbed. For  on  the  death  of  Alberic,  Arch
bishop  of Bourges,  Peter  was  consecrated  and  sent  by  the  Pope  to succeed  him.
But  Louis  rejected  him,  and  refused  to  receive  him  because  he  had  been  conse
crated  without  his  consent. Now, King  Louis had  given permission to  the
Church  of  Bourges  to  choose  whom  they  would, except Peter  alone, and  had
taken  an  oath  publicly  that  while  he  lived  Peter  should  not  be  Archbishop. Yet
for  all  that  he  was  elected  and  went  to  Rome,  and  was  consecrated  by  the  Pope,
who  said, '  We must  teach and  curb  this  boy -king,  lest  he  get  used  to  such
actions,'  and  he  added,  '  That  is  no  true  freedom  of  choice  when  an  exception  of
any  person  is  made  by  the  King,  unless  he  is  proved  before  an  ecclesiastical  judge
to be  incapable  of  election. For  then  he  has  a  hearing  like  anyone  else.' But
the  King,  as  I  said  before,  refused  to  receive  the  Archbishop  on  his  return.  Then
Count  Theobald  welcomed  him  into  his  country,  and  he  ruled  the  churches  from
there. This  enraged  the  King,  and  he  called  together  his  vassals  and  made  war
on  Theobald." This  is  William's  account,  and  from  it  we  must  correct  that  of
Matthew  of  Paris,  who  places  the  affair  in  the  year  1146. This  dispute  reached


LETTER CCX1X.  633

But  he  does  so  not  so  much  from  his  own  will  as  from  a
sense  of  honour  ill-directed.  For  it  is  reckoned  disgrace
ful,  as  you  know,  among  the  French,  to  break  an  oath,  how
ever  much  the  oath  may  be  against  the  public  good,  although
no  wise  man  doubts  that  unlawful  oaths  ought  not  to  be
kept.  But  not  even  so  can  I  admit  that  he  is  to  be  excused.
For  I  have  not  undertaken  to  excuse  him,  but  to  ask  pardon.
See  whether  passion,  his  age,  or  his  high  rank  can  in  any
degree  be  his  excuse.  It  will  avail  him,  no  doubt,  if  you
decide  that  mercy  is  to  be  exalted  above  judgment,  viz.,  in
so  far  as  such  excuse  is  to  be  taken  into  consideration
in  the  case  of  a  king,  who  is  but  a  lad ;  so  that  for  this  time
perhaps  he  may  be  spared,  but  on  this  understanding,  that
he  does  not  count  on  similar  leniency  for  the  future.  I  mean
that  he  may  be  dealt  lightly  with,  if  it  can  be  done  with
out  endangering  the  liberty  of  the  Church  in  any  way  ;  and
if  at  the  same  time  the  honour  that  is  due  to  an  Archbishop
consecrated  by  Apostolic  hands  is  preserved.  The  King
himself  humbly  asks  this,  this  the  whole  Church  on  this
side  of  the  Alps  suppliantly  implores  after  her  too  long
affliction.  Otherwise  we  join  hands  with  death,  we  pine
and  wither  away  for  fear,  and  for  looking  after  those  things
which  are  coming  on  the  whole  world.  Indeed  this  has
been  my  prayer  since  last  year  ;  and  since  my  sins  called
for  it,  I  received  not  a  favourable  answer  but  anger,  and
desolation  over  nearly  the  whole  earth  followed  on  the
anger.  If  my  zeal  has  caused  anything  to  escape  me  which
ought  not  to  have  been  said,  or  ought  to  have  been  said
otherwise  than  it  was,  let  it  be,  I  beg  you,  as  if  unsaid.
But  let  not  that  be  in  vain  which  I  have  said  as  I  ought,
and  when  I  ought.

such  a  point  that  not  only  did  King  Louis  lay  waste  the  territories  of  Theobald,
but  burnt  to  the  ground  Vitry,  together  with  a  large  number  of  its  inhabitants
of  both  sexes  ;  moreover,  he  forbade  all  elections  and  ordinations  of  Bishops
within  his  realm,  and  handed  over  their  estates  to  his  brother  Robert.  S.  Bernard
bitterly  complained  of  this  in  the  case  of  Rheims,  Paris,  and  Chalons,  in  his
222nd  Letter  to  Joscelyn  of  Soissons,  and  again  in  his  224th  to  Stephen  of
Praeneste.  At  length  he  succeeded  in  quashing  this  unfortunate  divorce  on  the
accession  of  Eugenius  III.  to  the  Papal  See.

VOL.  II.  41


634  LETTER CCXX.

LETTER CCXX.
To  Louis,  KING  OF  FRANCE.

He  repulses  the  unjust  demand  of  the  King  on  behalf  of
Count  Ralph,  and  warns  him  not  to  oppress  the  innocent,
and  arouse  against  himself  the  anger  of  the  King  Supreme.

1.  I  ever  readily  strive  and  will  strive  to  the  utmost  of  my
little  power  for  the  things  which  make  for  your  honour  and
the  good  of  your  kingdom  ; and  this you deign to admit,
and your own conscience bears me witness. But with
regard  to  your  complaint  to  your  humble  servant  about  the
anathema  to  be  shortly  renewed  against  Count  Ralph,1  and
your  wish  that  I  should  in  every  possible  way  endeavour  to
prevent  it,  because  of  the  many evils  which  you  think  will
ensue,  to  be  plain  with  you  I  do  not  see  how I  can  do  this,
and go against the  Apostolic decree. Even  if  I  had  the
power  I  do  not  see  how  I  could  do  so  reasonably. I  shall
be sorry certainly if evils ensue, but still  we  ought  not
therefore  to  do  evil  that  good may come. It  is  better  and
safer to leave all this to the will and providence of
Almighty God, who  is able  to bring  to  pass  and  confirm
the  good  that He wishes, and either to prevent  the  evils
which  evil  men  contrive, or  else  bring  on themselves  the
evils  which  they  desire  and  seek  for.

2.  But  I  am  very  distressed  by one thing  which  is  con
tained in your Majesty's  letter, viz., that this anathema
must  militate against  the peace made between  you  and
Count  Theobald. Do  you  not  know  that  it  was  a  grievous
offence  that  Count Theobald was obliged  by  the  violence
of  your  inroad to take an oath against God and  against
righteousness,  not  only  because  it  sought,  but  also  because
it brought about the absolution of the aforesaid Count
Ralph and his land, an absolution as little deserved as
lawful. Do  you  wish  again to add  sin  to  sin,  and  to  heap
up  the  wrath  of  God  against  you? — which  may He forbid.
How  has  Count  Theobald  done  wrong,  that  he  deserves  to

1  For  two  reasons  the  King  was  enraged  at  the  anathema  pronounced  against
Ralph,  because  he  was  a  relation,  as  Hermann  of  Tournay  records,  and  also
because  he  had  taken  as  his  second  wife  a  sister  of  the  Queen.


LETTER CCXXI.  635

incur  your  anger  again,  when  with  so  much  toil  and  trouble
he  obtained  the  absolution  of  Count  Ralph,  though  an
unjust  one,  as  you  know,  and  has  neither  striven,  nor  is
now  striving  for  the  renewal  of  the  excommunication,  though
it  is  returning  most  justly,  inasmuch  as  from  fear  of  you  he
has  even  protested  against  it.  Do  not,  my  lord  King,  do
not,  I  pray  you,  dare  to  resist  so  plainly  your  King,  nay,
the  Creator  of  all,  in  His  kingdom  and  territory,  and  with
frequent  and  rash  audacity  to  lift  your  hand  against  that
terrible  Being  who  takes  away  the  breath  of  princes,  and
is  terrible  among  the  kings  of  the  earth.  I  speak  sharply,
because  I  fear  sharp  things  for  you  ;  and  I  should  not  fear
for  you  so  much  if  my  affection  for  you  were  not  so  great.

LETTER  CCXXI. (A.D. 1142.)

To  THE  SAME.
He  gravely  reproves  King  Louis,  because  he  listens  to  bad

advice  and  rejects  counsels  of  peace.

i.  God  knows  how  great  has  been  my  affection  for  you
from  the  time  I  first  knew  you,  and  how  ardently  I  have
wished  for  your  honour  ;  you  too  know  with  what  toil  and
anxiety  I  throughout  the  past  year  strove  together  with
your  other  faithful  servants  to  obtain  peace  for  you.  But
I  am  afraid  that  our  labour  in  your  cause  has  been  fruitless.
For  you  evidently  are  kicking  with  too  much  haste  and
fickleness  against  the  good  and  wholesome  advice  you  had
received  ;  and  I  hear  that  you  are  hurrying,  under  I  know
now  what  counsel  of  the  devil,  to  those  former  evils,  which
you  were  but  now  bewailing,  and  properly  bewailing,  that
you  had  been  guilty  of  committing,  and  this  while  those
wounds  are  still  fresh.  For  from  whom  except  from  the
devil  can  I  say  that  this  counsel  proceeds  which  makes  us
add  fires  to  fires  and  slaughter  to  slaughter  ? !  "which  causes
the  cry  of  the  poor,  the  groanings  of  the  captives,  and  the
blood  of  the  slain,  to  strike  a  second  time  the  ears  of  the
Father  of  the  fatherless,  and  the  Judge  of  widows  ?

1  This  refers  to  the  burning  of  Vitry  and  the  people  in  it ;  see  notes  on  Letter
224.


636  LETTER CCXXI.

(Ps.  Ixviii.  5.)  Doubtless.that  old  victimiser  (hostis,  enemy;
of  our  race,  is  pleased  with  these  victims  (host Us) ,  for  he  is  a
murderer  from  the  beginning  (S.  John  viii.  44).  And  do
not  take  occasion  from  Count  Theobald  to  pile  up  excuses
for  your  sins ;  it  is  useless  ;  for  he  says  he  is  prepared,  and
in  every  way  he  begs,  to  come  to  the  terms  arranged
between  you  when  peace  was  made,  and  he  is  willing  to
make  satisfaction  in  all  points,  according  to  the  decision  of
all  who  love  your  name,  i.e.,  those  who  acted  as  mediators
between  you  ;  so  that  if  he  can  be  convicted  of  any  wrong,
and  he  is  confident  he  cannot,  he  will  not  hesitate  to  make
immediate  amends  to  your  honour.

2.  But  you neither  entertain proposals  for peace, nor
keep  to  your  agreements,  nor  listen  to  good  advice  ;  but  by
some  judgment  of  God  you  so  turn  everything  round  that  you
consider  disgrace  honour  and  honour  disgrace. You  fear
for  what  is  safe,  and  neglect  what  should  be  feared,  and
you  incur  the  rebuke  which  Joab  is  recorded  to  have  given
to  the  holy  and  glorious King David, Thou  lovest  thine
enemies  and  hatest  thy  friends  (2  Sam.  xix.  6). For  it  is
not  your  honour  but  their  own  advantage  which  they  seek,
who  are  instigating  you  to  renew  your  former  evil-doing
against  an  innocent  person. Nay,  it  is  not  so  much  their
own  advantage  as  the  will  of  the  devil,  in  order  that  they
may  have  (which  God  forbid)  the  power  of  the  king  as  an
effectual  worker  of  their  hot-headed  purpose,  which  they
know  that  they  cannot  accomplish  by  their  own  strength.
They  are  enemies  to  your  crown,  and  manifest  disturbers
of  the  kingdom.

3.  But  whatever  it  may  please you  to do in a matter
which  concerns  your  crown,  your  soul,  and  your  kingdom,
we  sons  of  the  Church  cannot  wholly  keep  silence  about  the
injuries  done  to  our  mother,  and  the  way  in  which  she  is
despised and trodden under foot ; for we perceive that
these  evils,  besides  those  which  we  lament  piteously  have
already  fallen upon  her,  are  again partly inflicted  afresh
and  partly  threatened. We  will  certainly  make  a  stand,
and  fight  even  to  death,  if  need  be,  for  our  mother  with  the


LETTER CCXXI.  637

weapons  allowed  us,  not  with  shield  and  sword,  but  with
prayers  and  lamentations  to  God.  And  I  for  my  part
recollect  that,  besides  the  daily  prayers,  which  I  call  my
Lord  to  witness,  I  humbly  poured  forth  for  your  peace  and
salvation  and  for  your  kindgom,  I  also  pleaded  your  cause
by  messengers  and  letters  to  the  Apostolic  See  (I  confess
it),  even  to  the  damage  of  my  own  conscience,  and  (which
I  ought  not  to  deny)  to  the  anger  of  the  supreme  Pontiff
himself  against  me.  Now,  I  tell  you,  that  provoked  by
your  constant  outrages,  which  you  do  not  cease  to  renew
daily,  I  begin  to  repent  of  my  former  folly,  which  made  me
more  indulgent  to  your  youth  than  I  ought  to  have  been.
For  the  future,  to  the  best  of  my  little  power,  I  will  not  hold
back  the  truth.

4.  I  will  not  conceal  the  fact  that  you  are  doing  all  you
can  to  again  enter  into  alliance  and  fellowship  with  the  ex
communicated,  that  you  are  keeping  company  (so  I  am
told)  with  robbers  and  freebooters  for  the  murder  of  men,
the  burning  of  houses,  the  destruction  of  churches,  and  the
dispersion  of  the  poor,  according  to  the  saying  of  the
Psalmist,  When  thou  sawest  a  thief  then  thou  consentedst
unto  him,  and  hast  been  partaker  with  adulterers  (Ps.  1.
1 8),  as  though  you  had  not  enough  power  of  your  own  to
work  mischief.  I  will  not  hold  back  the  fact  that  that  un
lawful  and  accursed  oath  foolishly  taken  by  you  against  the
Church  of  Bourges  (through  which  so  many  and  so  great
misfortunes  have  already  deservedly  followed)  is  still,  not
withstanding  all  this,  uncorrected  by  you  ;  that  you  do  not
allow  a  pastor  to  be  set  over  the  sheep  of  Christ  at  Chalons  ;
and  moreover  that  you  have  the  audacity  to  throw  open
Episcopal  houses  for  the  use  of  your  brother1  and  his  archers
and  cross-bowmen,  against  law  and  justice,  and  so  expose
the  property  of  the  Church  to  be  squandered  in  nefarious  uses
of  this  kind.  I  tell  you  plainly  that  if  you  proceed  in  this

1  Viz.,  Robert;  for  whom  see  Letter  224,  n.  2,  and  304.  In  Letter  293
(of  Duchesne),  the  fathers  complain  to  King  Louis  that  Count  Robert,  his
brother,  "had  eaten  flesh  in  their  Granges,"  contrary  to  the  interdict  of  the
Order.  See  Letter  224,  respecting  the  Church  of  Chalons.


638  LETTER CCXXII.

way  the  wrong  will  not  be  unavenged,  and,  therefore,  my
lord  king,  I  warn  you  as  a  friend  and  advise  you  as  a  faith
ful  servant  to  desist  quickly  from  this  wickedness,  so  that
if  [God]  is  now  preparing  His  hand  to  strike,  you  may,  like
the  King  of  Nineveh,  prevent  Him  with  penitence  and
humility.  I  speak  severely,  because  I  fear  severe  things
for  you  ;  but  remember  that  the  Wise  Man  says,  Better  are
the  wounds  of  a  friend  than  the  fraudulent  kisses  of  an
enemy  (Prov.  xxvii.  6.)


LETTER  CCXXII. (A.D. 1142.)

TO JOSCELYN, BISHOP OF SOISSONS,  AND  SUGER,  ABBOT

OF  S.  DENYS.

He  complains  to  them, as  the  King's  counsellors, of  his
unjust  attacks  upon Count Theobald.

i.  I  had  written  to  the  King,  rebuking  him  for  the  wrongs
done  in  his  kingdom,  which  are  said  to  be  done  by  his  con
sent,  and  I  have  thought  it  fit  to  bring  his  reply  before  you
who  are  of  his  council.  For  I  wonder  if  he  believes  what
he  says,  and  if  he  does  not,  I  wonder  how  he  expects  to
make  me  believe  it,  when,  as  you  know,  I  am  aware  of
everything  which  took  place  with  a  view  to  making  peace.
For  he  says,  as  you  can  see  in  his  letters,  when  he  was
trying  to  prove  that  the  agreement  had  not  been  well  kept
by  the  Count,  "  Our  Bishops  still  remain  suspended,  our
land  is  still  under  an  interdict,"  as  though  it  belonged  to
Count  Theobald  to  put  an  end  to  any  ecclesiastical  in
terdict  whatever,  or  as  if  he  ever  promised  that  he  would.
He  says,  "  Count  Ralph  was  mocked  and  his  excommuni
cation  renewed/'  And  what  has  this  to  do  with  Count
Theobald  ?  Did  he  not  faithfully  carry  out  and  effectually
perform  whatever  promise  he  made  about  this  matter  ?
Rather,  was  not  the  King  caught  in  his  own  craftiness,  and
did  he  not  fall  into  the  pit  which  he  made  ?  Was  this  the
sole  reason  why  the  King  made  void  the  agreement  which


LETTER CCXXII.  639

he  had  made  and  which  your  lips  pronounced  ?  Was  it
right  for  this  that  the  anger  of  the  King  should  be  kindled
against  God  and  against  His  Church,  against  himself  and
his  kingdom  ?  Because  of  this  ought  he  to  have  so  forgotten
his  honour  as  to  send  his  brother  to  overcome  his  vassal,
whom  he  had  not  even  declared  war  against,  much  less
warned  privately  or  reasoned  with,  and  that,  too,  through
Chalons,  and  you  know  the  agreement  come  to  between
the  King  and  Count  about  this  state  especially.

2.  But  the  King  makes it  a  further  complaint  that  the
Count,  contrary  to  the  allegiance  due  to  him,  is  endeavour
ing  to  ally  himself  by  marriage  with  the  Count  of  Flanders
and  Soissons.1 Well,  a  suspicion  about  his  fidelity  is  not  a
certitude  ; moreover,  you  can  see  the  morality  of  setting
aside  fixed  agreements  because  of  empty  suspicions. Nor
ought  suspicion  of  such  a  man  as  the  Count  to  be  enter
tained  at  all. Are, then, those  to  whom  the  Count  allies
himself  necessarily  the  King's  enemies,  and  not  his  vassals
or  his  friends  ? Is  not  the  Count  of  Flanders  a  relation  of
the  King  by  blood,  and,  as  he  says  himself,  the  staff  of  his
kingdom? In  what  way,  then,  does  his  vassal  and  faithful
servant  act  against  the  allegiance  that  he  owes  the  King,  if
he  allies  himself  by  the  marriage  of  those  of  his  own  house,
to  the King's friends? If  any  one were  to consider  the
matter  with  an  unprejudiced  eye,  would  he  not  rather  see
that  it  greatly  adds  to  the  peace, strength,  and security
of  the  kingdom  ?

3.  Hut  I  do  wonder  how  the  King  can  dare  to  say  that  he
had  ascertained  that  I  knew  that  Count  Theobald  had  en
deavoured  to  draw  over  Count  Ralph  to  his  side  against  the
King. For  he  said  more  to  my  niessenger  than  he  wrote ;  that
I  had  very  often  told  Count Ralph that I  would take  on
myself  the  greatest  part  of  his  sins  if  he  would  join  himself

i  Bernard  calls  them  Barons  of  the  King  in  ep.  124  n".  3.  Hermann  oi
Tournay  explains  this  passage,  p.  394,  where  he  speaks  of  Theodoric,  Count
of  Flanders,  who  "  had  betrothed  his  daughter  to  Henry,  son  of  Theobald,
though  the  King  of  the  French  did  his  best  to  break  off  the  alliance  by  saying
that  they  were  related  within  the  third  degree  of  consanguinity.''  Theobald
meditated  also  allying  his  daughter  to  the  Count  of  Soissons.  See  ep.  224  n.  4.


640  LETTER CCXXII.

to  Count  Theobald.  If  the  man  exists  by  whom  I  sent
such  messages,  let  him  come  forward  and  accuse  me
openly.  If  I  wrote  it  in  letters,  let  them  be  produced.
Let  the  King  see  whom  he  has  believed.  I  am  certain  that
I  have  never  known  anything  of  what  he  alleges.  I  think
the  same,  too,  about  Count  Theobald,  for  he  denies  it  in  every
way.  May  God  look  upon  and  judge  the  King  for  accusing
Count  Theobald  on  suspicion,  when  he  himself,  against  his
agreements,  against  the  precepts  of  God,  and  the  sentence
of  the  Supreme  Pontiff,  is  keeping  Count  Ralph  close  by
him,  and  is  communicating  with  one  that  is  an  adulterer
and  excommunicate.

4.  The  King  also  says:  "I  have  almost  had  upon  my  hands
two  bitter  assailants." And  the  prophet  answers  in  scorn  :
They  feared  where  no  fear  was  (Ps.  xiv.  5). Lo!  he  says,  I
am  assailed,  I,  who  did  not  assail  any  one;  I,  who  persecuted
not,  suffer  persecution. Who,  I  ask,  who  is  assailing  him  ?
Or  who  is  persecuting  him  ? Is not  the  Count  entreating
him, and  that humbly  ? Is he  not ready  to honour the
King,  to  serve  and  obey  him as his  liege-lord  ? Is  he  not
earnestly  praying  for  peace, and  doing  all he  can  to  win
the  King's  good  will  ? Suppose  that  it  is  not  so,  but  that  it  is
the  Count  rather  who  is  doing  all  this wrong  to  the  King  ;
should  he  not  have  had recourse to that  which  you  know
was  determined  on  ? For  they  agreed  between  them  that,
if  any  controversy  or  difference  should  arise  about  any  of
the  articles  agreed  upon  they  would  neither  do  nor  seek  any
injury  to  each  other  until the  matter had been  ventilated
and  discussed  between  us  three  and  the  Bishop  of  Auxerre,
for  we  were  then the  mediators ; and if  any  quarrel  arose
we  ought  to  have  been  called  on  to  settle  it. And  that  the
Count  in  every  way  asks  for,  but  the  King  refuses.

5.  In  short,  even  if  the  Count  has  deserved  punishment,
why  has  the  Church  of  God  deserved  it? I  mean  not  only
the  Church  of  Bourges,  but  also  that  of  Chalons,  and  even  of
Rheims,  and  of  Paris.1 Suppose  that  the  King  has  right  on
his  side  against  the  Count, by  what  right, I  ask,  by  what

1  See  notes  to  ep.  216  and  ep.  224.


LETTER CCXXII.  641

right  does  he  presume  to  lay  waste  the  possessions  and
lands  of  the  Church,  to  prevent  pastors  being  set  over  the
sheep  of  Christ,  to  forbid  those  elected  to  be  promoted  to
their  head  ?  By  what  right  does  he  bring  about  the  post
ponement  of  an  election  (a  thing  hitherto  unheard  of)  until
he  has  swallowed  up  all  the  revenues,  carried  off  the  goods
of  the  poor,  and  until  the  land  is  wholly  made  desolate  ?  Do
you  advise  him  to  this  ?  It  is  wonderful,  indeed,  if  it  is
done  against  your  advice ;  still  more  wonderful  and  mis
chievous  if  it  is  by  your  advice.  For  to  advise  to  this  is
manifestly  to  create  a  schism,  to  resist  God,  to  make  a  tool
of  the  Church,  and  to  reduce  to  slavery  our  ecclesiastical
liberty.  If  any  one  is  a  faithful  servant  of  God  and  His
Church,  he  will  certainly  stand  up  and  oppose  himself  as  a
wall  as  far  as  he  can  in  defence  of  the  house  of  God.  For
how  can  you  yourselves,  if  you  desire  the  peace  of  the
Church,  as  behoves  children  of  peace,  I  do  not  say  give
such  evil  counsel,  but  even  have  any  part  in  it  ?  For  what
ever  evil  is  done  is  rightly  imputed,  not  to  the  King,  but
to  his  aged  advisers.


LETTER CCXXIII. (A.D. 1143.)
To  THE  BISHOP  OF  SOISSONS.

Bernard  excuses  himself  courteously  to  the  Bishop,  who
had  replied  to  his  former  letter  in  such  a  way  that  this
was  the  salutation,  "Health  in  the  Lord  and  not  the
sp irit  of  calu m ny."

i.  I  do  not  think  that  I  have  in  me  anything  of  the  spirit
of  calumny,  but  I  know  certainly  that  I  have  never  wished
nor  wish  now  to  curse  anyone,  especially  a  prince  of  my
people.  But  whatever  that  may  be  by  which  your  dignity
thinks  itself  wronged,  for  it  I  ask  pardon,  for  I  know  who
said,  Being  defamed  we  entreat  (i  Cor.  iv.  13).  I  say,
then,  with  blessed  Job,  Would  that  I  had  not  said  what
I  have,  and  I  will  say  no  more  (Job  xl.  5).  When  I


642  LETTER CCXXIII.

lately  wrote  to  my  lord  the  Abbot  of  S.  Denys  about  your
common  complaint  I  answered  both  of  you,  and  I  thought
that  I  had  done  enough,  and  since  I  see  that  your  anger  is
not  yet  appeased,  which  more  justly,  perhaps,  would  have
been  kindled  against  the  oppressors  of  the  Church,  I  also
say  to  you  that  I  never  said,  wrote,  or  believed  that  you
were  schismatics  or  promoters  of  scandal,  and  I  say  so  with
an  easy  mind,  for  I  am  not  afraid  that  my  letter  will  convict
me  of  falsehood.  Examine  it,  if  you  please,  and  if  you  find
that  I  said  so  I  will  confess  that  I  have  been  guilty  of  great
profanity,  and  that  what  you  say  is  true,  that  I  wrote  the
letter  impelled  by  a  spirit  of  calumny.

2.  But  lest  my  humble  explanation  seem  to  exclude  the
spirit  of  liberty,  let  me  say  that  I  grieved,  and  I  do  still,  to
find  that  you  do  not  yet  avenge  the  wrongs  of  Christ  or
defend  the  liberty  of  the  Church  with  the  liberty  that  is
fitting.  That  grief  compelled  me  to  write  severe  things,
but  they  were  not  of  the  spirit  that  you  complained  of.  I
thought  certainly,  and  I  would  still  think  if  I  were  not
afraid  that  this  would  offend  you,  that  it  is  by  no  means
enough  for  you  not  to  be  the  authors  of  the  schism.  You
should,  with  all  your  strength,  freely  restrain  those  who  are
the  authors,  whatever  their  rank  may  be,  and  condemn  their
counsel  and  society.  I  should  think  it  an  honour  to  you  if
you  too  could  say,  /  have  hated  the  congregation  of  the
wicked,  and  will  not  sit  among  the  ungodly  (Ps.  xxvi.  5).
Was  it  that  prophet  alone  that  zeal  befitted,  and  is  it  not  as
much  required  now  from  a  priest  of  the  Lord  to  say  with
him,  Do  not  I  hate  them,  O  Lord,  that  hate  Thee,  and  am
not  I  grieved  with  those  that  rise  up  against  Thee  ?  (Ps.
cxxxix.  21).  I  much  wish  (and  with  no  wish  to  anger  your
Serenity1  I  will  say  it)  that  you  had  exercised  this  zeal  against
the  young  King,  who,  more  like  a  cruel  tyrant  than  a  boy,2

1  A  title  which  (ep.  170)  he  had  before  given  to  the  King  of  the  French.  He
here  gives  it  to  the  Bishop,  but  only  as  the  King's  counsellor.  He  also  salutes
Innocent  by  the  same  name  (ep.  337,  n.  i).

•  He  calls  Louis  a  boy  after  the  manner  of  Holy  Scripture,  though  he  was
married  and  over  22  years  old.  The  same  word  is  similarly  used  in  ep.  170  and
elsewhere.


LETTER CCXXIV.  643

has  gone  against  your  advice  and  his  own  promises,  who,
without  cause,  is  disturbing  his  kingdom,  stirring  up  all
round  him  wars  in  heaven  and  earth,  laying  waste  the
churches,  laying  an  impious  hand  on  sacred  things,  exalting
the  wicked,  persecuting  the  good,  and  destroying  the  inno
cent.  I  repeat  that  I  wish  you  were  sorry  for  these  things,
that  you  would  withstand  and  resist  them  to  the  best  of
your  power.  But  it  is  not  my  place  to  teach  such  an  one  as
Magister  Joscelyn,  much  less  to  rebuke  a  Bishop,  who
should  rather  punish  me  and  other  sinners  and  correct
those  who  err.  You  see  how  much  I  fear  you.  Since  you
thought  ill  of  my  last  letter  being  open  I  send  you  this  one
sealed,  for  certainly  I  meant  nothing  else  by  it  than  to  follow
the  usual  practice  of  not  sealing  with  wax  a  letter1  sent  to
different  people.  I  now  ask  your  pardon  for  so  doing  also.


LETTER CCXXIV. (A.D. 1143.)
To  STEPHEN,  BISHOP  OF  PRAENESTE.2

Bernard  details  the  ill-doings  of  King Louis, and his
injuries  to  the  Church.

i.  Jeremiah  when  addressing  God  for  his  enemies  speaks
in  this  way  :  Remember  that  I  stood  before  Thee  to  speak
good  for  them,  and  to  turn  away  Thy  wrath  from  them  ;
and  he  goes  on  to  say,  therefore  deliver  up  their  children
to  the  famine,  and  give  them  into  the  power  of  the  sword
(Jer.  xviii.  20,  21}.  And  he  calls  down  on  them  other  im
precations  of  this  sort,  and  quite  as  grievous.  I  thought
that  I  might  now  remind  your  Reverence  of  this  passage,
because  I  find  that  I  am  in  a  condition  like  that  of  the
Prophet.  For  you  know  how  I  too  stood  up  for  the  King

1  Hence  he  says  (ep.  304),  "  My  seal  is  not  at  hand."  Also  in  ep.  402.  The
name  and  likeness  of  Bernard  were  engraved  on  the  seal  (ep.  284,  where  see
note).

•  Stephen  of  Praeneste,  to  whom  ep.  219  also  was  addressed,  was  a
Cistercian,  was  made  Cardinal  in  1 140,  and  died  in  1 144.  Ernald  in  his  Life  of
S.  Bernard  (lib.  ii.  n.  49)  speaks  of  him  as  a  man  of  great  modesty.  John  of
Salisbury  also  praises  him  above  others.  He  was  most  likely  of  Chalons.


644  LETTER CCXXIV.

in  the  sight  of  my  Lord,  being,  indeed,  absent  in  body,  but
present  in  spirit,  that  I  might  speak  good  for  him.  He,
indeed,  promised  well.  But  now  that  he  returns  evil  for
good  I  am  compelled  to  write  differently.  I  am  ashamed
of  my  mistake,  and  of  the  groundless  hope  which  I  enter
tained  of  him  ;  and  I  am  thankful  that  the  prayer  which  I
put  up  in  my  simplicity  was  not  answered.  I  thought  that
I  was  serving  a  peaceful  king,  and  I  find  that  I  was  helping
a  bitter  enemy  to  the  Church.1  Our  holy  things  are  trodden
under  his  feet,  and  the  Church  is  shamefully  enslaved.  For

1  The  state  of  the  Church,  as  well  as  of  the  civil  power,  under  Louis  the
Younger  is  plainly  enough  shown  in  epp.  216-222  above;  here  he  depicts  the
tearful  and  sorrow-stricken  face  of  the  Galilean  Church.  Otto  of  Frisingen  does
the  same  (Chron.  lib.  vii.  c.  21)  ;  he  says:  "  Western2  France  on  the  death  of
the  King,  under  his  son  Louis  who  succeeded  him,  suffered  so  grievously  through
fire  and  sword  in  the  war  between  him  and  Theobald,  that  unless  it  had  been
brought  to  an  end  by  the  merits,  prayers,  and  counsel  of  the  Religious  in  that
province,  the  whole  country  seemed  likely  to  be  consumed."  Otto  here  describes
the  preservation  of  Gaul  to  the  prayers  and  good  counsel  of  the  Religious.
Who,  then, can  doubt  that,  as  it  was  said,  the  world  stands  firm  through  the  merits
of  the  Saints  ?  And  who  can  doubt  that  among  them  Bernard  led  the  van,  the
common  counsellor  and  leader,  not  only  of  Gaul,  or  of  Europe,  but  of  the  whole
world  ?  But  in  passing  let  me  say  how  difficult  it  is  to  see  how  Louis  could
have  been  so  praised  by  Historians,  as,  e.g.,  Gordon,  writing  on  the  year  1180.
Certainly  if  you  take  Bernard  as  a  good  witness  in  these  Letters,  and  especially
this  one,  you  cannot  call  Louis  very  praiseworthy.  But  so  are  the  ways  of  men  :
they  praise  and  blame  according  to  their  affection.  We  need  not  go  far  for  an
instance.  For  at  the  present  time  how  many  different  opinions  are  held  and
judgments  given  on  the  plans,  expeditions,  treaties,  and  other  doings  of  kings
and  princes  ?  Some  make  things  turn  to  their  praise  and  glory  which  others
censure  and  condemn  most  severely.  Some  think  that  of  this  kind  are  the  wars
carried  on  to  the  harm  of  religion  and  the  Church,  the  fostering  of  heresies,  the
profanation  of  places  dedicated  to  God,  the  scorning  of  holy  things,  the  oppres
sion  of  the  poor,  the  loss  inflicted  on  the  State,  the  weakening  of  the  vigour  and
dignity  of  the  Church.  Yet  you  will  find  others  glossing  over  these  evils,  or
knowing  how  to  palliate  them,  and  exalting  to  the  skies  with  their  praises  those
by  whose  labour  and  under  whose  auspices  such  things  are  carried  out.  Still  we
have  no  wish  to  detract  from  the  merits  of  King  Louis,  if  he  improved  when  he
grew  older.  Perhaps  when  of  riper  years  he  atoned  for  the  crimes  of  his  youth
by  the  noble  deeds  of  his  manhood.  For  he  survived  Bernard  many  years,  dying
in  the  year  1180.  I  read  too  that  he  gave  S.  Bernard  himself  proofs  of  his
repentance.  For  Emilius  speaks  of  him  thus  :  "  The  King,  in  a  great  rage,
attacked  him  [Theobald]  and  took  and  plundered  Vitry  which  was  in  his
domains.  He  burnt  secular  and  sacred  buildings  without  making  any  distinc-
2  Sic  ,•  but  should  he  not  have  said  "  Eastern  France"  ? — [E.]


LETTER CCXX1V.  645

not  only  is  it  forbidden  to  hold  elections  of  Bishops,  but  if
the  clergy  anywhere  have  ventured  to  do  so,  the  prelate  of
their  choice  is  not  allowed  to  exercise  his  episcopal  func
tions.  In  short,  the  Church  of  Paris  is  sitting  in  sadness,
deprived  of  her  own  pastor,  and  no  one  dares  so  much  as  to
whisper  about  finding  another.

2.  It  is  not  enough  for  him  that  the  episcopal  residences
are  spoiled  of  the  goods  now  in  them  ;  his  sacrilegious  hand
is  raging  against  men  and  lands  everywhere,  for  he  claims
from  each  for  himself  the  revenues  of  the  whole  year  as
well.  The  Church  of  Chalons  has,  indeed,  held  an  election,
but  he  who  was  elected1  has  been  now  for  a  long  time
deprived  of  his  honour,  and  you  know  that  this  cannot  take
place  without  grievous  loss  to  the  Lord's  flock.  The  King
has  charged  his  brother  Robert  to  administer  the  Bishopric,
and  he,  exercising  his  power  over  all  the  lands  and  goods
of  the  Church,  and  being  not  slothful  in  the  execution
of  his  office,  is  offering  daily  sacrifices  to  heaven,  not,
indeed,  sacrifices  of  peace,  but  the  cries  of  the  poor,  the
tears  of  widows,  the  wailing  of  orphans,  the  groans  of
captives,  and  the  blood  of  the  slain.  But  that  episcopate
is  too  narrow  for  his  wickedness,  so  he  is  now  attacking

lion,  and  in  one  large  churcli  1,500,  both  young  and  old  were  burnt,  who  had
fled  to  the  altars  for  protection.  Afterwards  the  King,  coming  to  himself,  was
sei/ed  with  great  grief;  he  afflicted  himself  and  refused  consolation.  Bernard
was  sent  for  because  he  was  renowned  for  his  evident  holiness  already  under  King_
Louis  le  Gros  ;  and  though  a  disciple  only,  it  was  said,  ot  the  woods  and  glades,
who  had  become  very  learned,  under  no  other  teacher,  he  had  brought  his  holiness
and  learning  out  of  solitude  before  crowds,  out  of  darkness  into  light.  He  was
then  introduced,  and  was  kindly  received  by  the  King,  and  when  he  saw  his  tears
and  had  been  told  the  cause,  he  said,  '  These  tears,  if  they  do  not  quickly  dry  up,
can  extinguish  all  recollection  of  the  burniMg  of  Vitry.  Only  add  to  them
constancy  and  determination,  and  let  not  your  lamentation  be  like  a  woman's,
but  show  a  manly  and  truly  royal  courage.'"  What  else  is  here  said  about  the
King's  hindering  the  election  of  the  Bishops  may  be  seen  in  the  notes  to  ep.  219.
1  Geoffrey  of  Chalons,  mentioned  in  ep.  66,  died  in  the  year  1142;  in  his
place  Guy,  here  spoken  of,  was  elected.  Samson,  Archbishop  of  Rlieims,
because  he  supported  Count  Theobald,  had  been  expelled  by  the  King's  servants,
who  also  plundered  the  City  Churches  of  S.  Mary,  S.  Remigius,  and  S.  Nicasius,
and  the  suburban  monastery  of  S.  Thierry.  See  the  mention  here,  as  in
ep.  222  n.  5,  of  the  See  of  Paris,  to  which  Theobald  had  been  chosen  on  the
death  of  Stephen.


646  LETTER CCXXIV.

Rheims,  and  carrying  on  his  ill-deeds  in  the  land  of  the
saints,  sparing  neither  clerks,  nor  monks  nor  nuns.  In
short,  he  has  laid  waste  with  the  edge  of  the  sword  the
fruitful  fields  and  populous  villages  of  S.  Mary,  S.  Remigius,
S.  Nicasius,  S.  Thierry  in  such  a  way  that  he  has  re
duced  them  all  to  almost  a  wilderness.  The  cry  is  fre
quently  heard  by  all,  Let  us  take  to  ourselves  the  houses  of
God  in  possession  (Ps.  Ixxxiii.  12).  So  does  the  King
improve  upon  the  wrong  he  has  done  to  the  Church  of
Bourges  under  an  oath  like  Herod's.

3.  Moreover,  when,  after  we  had  expended  no  little
labour  on  the  matter,  he  had  made  peace  with  Count
Theobald,  and  as  we  thought,  had  entered  on  a  treaty  of
firm  friendship:  but  now  he  seeks  occasion  to  withdraw  from
his  friend.  This  is  brought  as  a  heinous  charge  against
the  Count,  that  he  is  making  matrimonial  alliances  for  his
children  with  the  King's  barons.  A  loosening  of  friendship
is  suspected  by  the  King  in  this,  and  he  does  not  think
himself  a  king  if  his  chieftains  love  each  other.  Your
wisdom  may  conjecture  what  kind  of  disposition  he  bears
towards  his  subjects  when  he  thinks  himself  the  stronger,  if
there  is  hatred  and  discord  between  them.  You  may  see
and  determine  whether  this  man  is  of  God,  who  trusts  more
in  the  mutual  rivalry  of  his  barons  than  their  mutual  love,
when  God  is  love  (i  S.  John  iv.  8).  He  would  hold  this  if
he  had  the  wisdom  of  him  who  said,  Love  is  strong  as  death,
jealousy  is  cruel  as  the  grave  (Cant.  viii.  6).  Besides,  he
openly  breaks  his  conventions  and  terms  of  peace  agreed
on,  and  does  not  hold  himself  to  the  promises  which  his
own  lips  have  uttered.  Lastly,  he  has  recalled  to  his  palace
and  to  his  Council  an  adulterous  and  excommunicate  man
[Ralph]  whom  he  had  agreed  to  banish,  and  in  order  to  work
greater  wickedness,  the  King,  and  official  guardian1  of  the
Church,  is  a  second  time  leagued  wTith  many  other  like
worthless  characters,  excommunicated  and  perjured  men,
incendiaries,  murderers,  and  this  against  one  of  whose  love
for  the  Church  and  willingness  to  defend  her  there  is  no

1  Advocatus.


LETTER CCXXIV.  647

doubt,  according  to  the  saying  of  the  Prophet,  When  thou
sawest  a  thief  thou  consentedst  unto  him,  and  hast  been
partaker  with  the  adulterers  (Ps.  1.  18).

4.  In  addition  to  all  this,  he  compels  bishops,  after  his
custom,  to  curse  those  who  should  be  blessed,  and  to  bless
those  who  should  be  cursed.  And  since  he  sets  no  bounds
to  what  it  may  please  him  to  do,  he  compasses  sea  and  land
to  find  perjurers  by  whose  means  those  whom  God  has
joined  together  may  be  by  man  put  asunder.  With  what
face,  I  ask,  can  he  endeavour  so  hard  to  lay  down  laws  to
others  about  consanguinity  when,  as  is  well  known,  he  is
living  with  his  cousins  within  the  third  degree  P1  I  do  not
know  (for  I  have  never  to  my  knowledge  praised,  nor  do  I
now,  any  forbidden  marriages)  whether  there  is  any  con
sanguinity  between  the  son  of  Count  Theobald  and  the
daughter  of  the  Count  of  Flanders,  and  also  between  the
Count  of  Soissons  and  the  daughter  of  Count  Theobald  :
but  you  know,  and  my  lord  knows,  that  their  nuptials  are
forbidden.  If  it  is  lawful  for  them  to  be  united,  then  their
being  forbidden  is  the  disarming  of  the  Church,  and  the
withdrawal  of  strength  from  her.  Nor  do  I  suppose  that
the  object  of  those  who  oppose  him  is  anything  else  but  to
prevent  those  who  venture  to  withstand  the  schism  which  is
threatened,  from  rinding  refuge  in  the  territories  of  the
aforenamed  princes.  So  far  my  zeal  carries  me.  For  I
have  no  power  to  redress  the  faults  which  I  have  been  able
to  point  out.  I  have,  however,  been  able  to  warn  him  who
can.  The  zeal  of  my  lord  will  do  this.  I  thought  it  neces
sary  that  he  should  be  informed  of  the  great  suffering  and
danger  of  the  Church,  and  no  one  can  do  it  so  well  as  you,
who  share  his  counsels  and  spirit.  And  I  pray  you  have  me
excused  with  him  for  writing  with  altered  pen  now  that  the
King  has  altered,  for  you  know  that  the  Prophet  of  God

1  John  Besley,  in  his  ,Gallican  History  of  the  Counts  of  Poictiers,  thus
explains  the  consanguinity  between  Louis  VII.  and  Eleanor  his  wife,  daughter
of  William,  Count  of  Aquitaine  : — Aldeardis,  great  grandmother  of  Eleanor,
was  sister  to  the  wife  of  Humbert  II.,  Count  of  S.  Jean  de  Maurienne,  and  so
aunt  to  Adda,  mother  of  King  Louis.


648  LETTER CCXXVI.

said  to  God,  With  the  innocent  thou  shall  be  innocent,  and
with  the  perverse  man  Thou  shalt  show  Thyself  perverse
(Ps.  xviii.  26).

LETTER  CCXXV.  (A.D.  1143.)

TO THE BISHOP OF SOISSONS.1
Bernard  urges  him  to  promote  peace.

We  have  worked  hard,  but  it  is  a  question  whether  we
have  made  much  progress.  We  have  sown  much,  but
reaped  little.  We  want,  I  must  tell  you,  your  help  and
presence.  You  will  hear  from  our  common  friend,  the
Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  why  we  did  not  seek  your  help  before
in  our  great  strait.  But  now  I  appeal  to  your  holy  watch
fulness  to  dissemble  no  more,  but  to  labour  for  the  things
which  make  for  peace  according  to  the  wisdom  given  you
by  God.  For  you  ought  not  to  need  entreaty  to  take  such
action,  since  it  is  evident  that  by  it  your  ministry  is  not
only  greatly  honoured,  but  also  that  if  you  neglect  it,  it  is
greatly  disgraced.  I  hope  to  see  you  at  the  festival  an
nounced  to  be  held  at  S.  Denys.2


LETTER CCXXVI. (A.D. 1143.)
To  Louis,  KING  OF  THE  FRENCH.

Bernard  and  Hugo  complain  of  the  King's  persistence  in

ill -doing.

To  Louis,  by  the  grace  of  God  illustrious  King  of  the
French,  and  Duke  of  Aquitaine,  HUGH,  Bishop  of  Auxerre,
his  humble  servant,  and  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
wish  health,  and  desire  that  he  should  love  righteousness,
and  judge  his  land  in  wisdom.

i.  It  is  a  long  time  since  we  left  our  homes  and  set
aside  our  private  interests  in  order  to  labour,  as  God

1  Joscelyn.

2  Was this  an  assembly  cf  the  nobles  of  the  kingdom,  or  the  Dedication
Festival  which  is  kept  by  S.  Denys  in  February  on  S.  Matthias'  Day  ?


LETTER CCXXVI.  649

is  our  witness,  for  your  peace,  and  the  peace  of  your
realm.  We  lament  that  so  far  we  have  reaped  no
fruit,  or  very  little,  in  return  for  all  our  labour.  Still  the
poor  are  crying  after  us,  still  the  land  is  daily  going  to
ruin.  Do  you  ask  what  land  ?  Yours,  none  other.  For  it
is  within  your  realm,  and  against  your  realm  that  all  these
evils  are  being  perpetrated.  For  whether  it  be  your  friends
or  your  enemies  who  are  being  impoverished,  taken  pri
soners,  and  crushed  by  that  war,  they  are  from  nowhere  else
than  your  kingdom.  In  it  the  saying  of  the  Saviour  seems
to  be  daily  coming  true,  that  every  kingdom  divided  against
itself  shall  be  brought  to  desolation  (S.  Luke  xi.  17).  To
this  there  is  added  the  fact  that  these  dividers  and  desolators
themselves  have  made  you  the  head  and  leader  of  this
wickedness,  when  they  ought  to  have  feared  you  especially
as  their  opponent,  and  felt  you  most  of  all  as  their  punisher.
Still,  we  hoped  that  you,  touched  and  illuminated  by  God,
had  perceived  their  great  wickedness,  had  recognized  your
error,  and  were  desirous  under  wiser  counsels  to  withdraw
your  foot  from  this  snare.

2.  But  the  conference  lately  held  between  us  at  Corbeil,
has  dispelled  any  such  hope.  For  you  know  how,  and  how
unreasonably  (by  your  leave  be  it  said)  you  then  left  us.
Whence  it  happened  that  your  displeasure  with  us  did  not
allow  us  to  give  you  any  clear  explanation  of  that  passage
in  our  discourse  which  displeased  you.  But  if  you  had
deigned  to  await  it  with  undisturbed  mind  you  might,
perhaps,  have  learnt  that  nothing  was  said  by  us  that  was
an  insult  to  your  majesty,  or  unendurable  in  the  present
position  of  your  affairs.  But,  as  it  is,  since  you  have  been
provoked  without  any  cause,  you  have  disturbed  and  con
fused  us,  and  you  also  keep  us,  being  men  who  desire  and
seek  your  good,  in  doubt  and  anxiety  as  to  what  we  are  to
do.  What  has  disturbed  you  is  nothing  but  the  fraud  of
the  wicked,  and  the  idle  talk  of  men  who  know  little,
who  call  evil  good  and  good  evil.  But  though  we  have  been
troubled,  yet  we  do  not  altogether  despair  of  the  help  of  the
Spirit,  who,  we  see,  has  wholesomely  smitten  your  mind  for

VOL.  II.  42


650  LETTER CCXXVII.

your  past  evil  deeds,  and  we  still  stand  and  wait  till  your
better  nature  return,  and  you  effectually  accomplish  what
you  have  wisely  begun.  For  this  reason  we  have  sent  to
you  our  dear  brother  Andrew  of  Baudiment,1  who  will  tell
you  of  these  things  more  fully,  and  will  faithfully  bring
back  word  to  us  of  whatever  reply  you  may  have  been
pleased  to  give.  But  if  (which  God  forbid)  you  persist  in
withstanding  good  advice,  we  are  clean  from  your  blood ;
God  will  not  any  longer  suffer  His  Church  to  be  trodden
down  either  by  you  or  yours.


LETTER CCXXVII. (A.D. 1143.)

To  THE  BISHOP  OF  SOISSONS.
Bernard  earnestly  implores  the  help  of  the  Bishop.

I  have  always  stood  in  need  of  my  friends'  good  offices,
for  I  am  a  man  greatly  to  be  pitied  in  mind  and  body ;  but
now  especially  is  the  need  and  time  for  pity  when  my
conscience  is  troubling  me,  when  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is
heavy  upon  me,  when  I  have  sold  myself  into  a  hard  prison,2
and  am  a  severe  judge  against  myself.  If  you  are  still  my
father  (for  I  confess  you  have  been  hitherto)  let  your  son
feel  it,  that  son  whose  filial  affection  has  not  grown  cool  to
this  day.  I  know,  I  know  how  difficult  it  is  to  wrest  his  club
from  the  hand  of  Hercules,  and  I  am  on  that  account  the  more
urgent,  because  I  seek  a  difficult  thing.  But  the  more  difficult
it  is  the  more  earnestly  do  I  entreat  the  bestowal  of  it.  If

1  This  Andrew  was  well  known  and  had  been  employed  in  many  different
businesses. His  name  is  found  subscribed  to  the  original  deeds  of  the  Abbey  of
Chercamp  (Spirit.  Vol.  ii.  p.  329)  ; and  with  S.  Bernard  he  was  a  witness  to  the
agreement  made  between King-  Louis  and  Argrimus, Archdeacon  of  Orleans
(Duchesne  Vol.  iv.  p.  764).  Inthe  transference  of  the  Church  of  Vieux-Crecy  A.D.
1 1  22,  to  the  Monastery  of  S.  Martin  des  Champs,  by  Burchard  Bishop  of  Meaux,
there  is  amongst  other  things  a  donation made  by  Stephen,  son  of  Roric,  "in
the  presence of  Count  Theobald, and  Andrew  of Baudiment,  who  gave  his
approval  as  far  as  he  was  concerned." The  same  Andrew  was  present  at  a
Council  held  at  Troyes  A.D.  1128. Cf.  Ep.  284.

2  7.e.  of  monastic  seclusion  and  retreat.


LETTER CCXXVIII.  651

I  obtain  it  I  shall  confess  myself  a  debtor  for  a  great,  a  very
great  kindness.  And  I  am  not  ignorant  that  it  is  more
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive  (Acts  xx.  35) ;  but  I  yield  to
necessity,  I  go  to  meet  dangers,  I  take  counsel  in  my
difficulties,  and  for  the  time  being  I  either  put  aside  or
torget  my  selfishness.  And  so  yielding  to  you,  as  is  fitting,
the  more  honourable  place  I  take  for  myself  the  more
modest ;  I  show  my  modesty  not  only  in  being  indecorously
ready  to  receive,  but  also  more  importunate  in  asking.  I
ask,  then,  suppliantly,  instantly,  opportunely,  importunately.
For  I  do  not  ask  anything  which  it  does  not  become  you  to
grant,  or  which  will  bring  me  shame  afterwards  for  having
accepted,  even  if  it  does  not  become  me  now  to  seek  it  in
this  way.  For  if  you  set  free  the  poor  man  from  the  hand
of  the  powerful  in  this  you  will  benefit  me  very  much,  but
most  ot  all  yourself.  I  have  made  known  my  wish,  you  know
the  affair,  the  afflicted  now  await  the  result  to  them.


LETTER  CCXXVIII. (A.D.  1143.)

To  PETER,  ABBOT  OF  CLUNY.
Bernard  complains  that  he  did  not  reply  to  him.1

To  the  Reverend  father  and  lord  PETER,  by  the  grace  of
God  Abbot  of  the  Cluniacs,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  sends  his  humble  greetings.

i.  I  should  wish  to  think  that  you  are  pleased  to  joke  in  your
letter  ;  if  such  is  the  fact,  and  if  I  ought  not  to  see  anything

1  Manrique  (Annals  A.D.  1135  c-  3)  thinks  that  this  Letter  was  written  in  the
year  1 135  ;  but  the  order  of  the  Letters  seems  opposed  to  his  view.  And  certainly
if  it  be  compared  with  the  next  Letter,  which  is  Peter's  answer  to  this,  it  will  be
seen  directly  that  it  was  written  after  the  disturbances  about  the  election  at
Langres,  which  took  place  A.D.  1138,  as  was  said  above,  ep.  164.  For  Peter
the  Venerable  answers  thus:  "When  will  my  sincere  love  f6Y  you  be  extin
guished,  or  the  warm  affection  of  my  heart  be  drowned  by  any  rivulets  of
adverse  rumour,  since  many  waters  of  tithes  have  had  no  power  to  extinguish
it,  nor  the  violence  of  the  stream  of  Langres  to  drown  it  ?  "  Moreover,  in  the
last  part  of  the  same  Letter  Peter  mentions  the  translation  of  the  Koran,  after
wards  dedicated  by  him  to  S.  Bernard,  which  was  finished  A.D.  1143,  as  the
Cluniac  Library  testifies,  and  to  this  year  the  Letter  seems  to  belong.


652  LETTER CCXXVIII.

unkind  in  what  you  say,  then  I  allow  that  you  are  treating  me
well  and  like  a  friend. Do  not  wonder  at  this. For  your
sudden  and  unexpected  condescension  makes  me  doubtful
about  this. For  it  is  not  long  ago, when  writing  to  you,  I
saluted  your  Greatness  with  due  reverence,  and  you  answered
me  not  a  word. Not  long  before  that  I  again  wrote  to  you
from  Rome,  and  not  even  then did  I get  a  single  word  in
reply. Do  you  now  wonder  that  when  you  lately  returned
from  Spain  I  did  not  presume  again  to  trouble  you  with  my
chatter  ? For  if  it  is  a  fault  not  to  have  written  for  some
cause  or  other,  to  have  had  no  mind  to  write,  nay,  more,  to
have  despised writing,  you  will surely not  be altogether
without  blame. You  see  what  I  might  urge  with  justice
(since  you  require  it  of  me)  ;  but  I  prefer  to  go  and  meet
goodwill  when  returning  than  to  delay  its  return  while  I  try
needlessly  to  excuse  myself  or  to  accuse  another. I  have
merely  said  this  so  that  I  might  not  keep  anything  in  my  mind
without  giving  it  utterance,  for  this  true  friendship  forbids^
For  the  future,  let  all  suspicion  be  now  removed,  for  charity
believeth  all  things  (i  Cor.  xiii.  7). I  rejoice  that  you  have
been  stirred  to  a  recollection  of  our  former  friendship,  and
to  recall  the  friend  that  you  had  wronged. Now  that  I  am
recalled  I  gladly  return. I  am  happy  to  be  recalled.  Hence
forward  I  remember  no  wrongs.1 Here  am  I,  now  as  then,.

1  We  need  not  spend  much  time  in  investigating  the  wrongs  mentioned  here..
For  the  context  of  both  Letters,  this  and  the  following,  shows  plainly  enough  that
the  words  are  spoken  in  a  pleasant  and  rhetorical  way.  I  am  aware  that  there
had  been  some  cause  for  dispute  between  the  two  saints,  e.g.,  the  election  at
Langres  (ep.  164)  and  the  exemption  of  the  Cistercians  from  paying  tithes  to
the  Cluniacs  ;  but  I  can  never  admit  that  they  deserve  the  name  of  injuries.  As
far  as  the  tithes  are  concerned,  the  fact  is  this:  Innocent,  when  in  Gaul  A.D.
i  132,  on  learning  the  poverty  of  the  Cistercians,  gave  them  a  precept  freeing
them  from  the  payment  of  all  tithes.  Amongst  others  the  Cluniacs  protested
against  the  exemption.  Hence  there  was  ground  for  the  complaint  which  the
Abbot  Peter  laid  before  Innocent  first,  then  before  Haimeric  in  moderate  terms,,
and  lastly  before  the  heads  of  the  Cistercian  houses  in  general  Chapter ;  and
when  he  found  that  they  were  somewhat  displeased  at  his  action,  in  the  next
year  he  sent  them  a  Letter  of  apology,  by  which  brotherly  love  was  repaired  and
kept  inviolate.  The  outrage  which  was  afterwards  committed  against  the
Cistercians  by  the  monks  of  Gigny  will  be  dealt  within  the  notes  to  ep.  283..
For  the  rest,  it  seems  desirable  to  have  the  Letter  of  Peter  which  was  theoccasioa


LETTER CCXXVIII.  653

the  devoted  servant  of  your  Holiness.  I  give  thanks  that  inc
lines  are  fallen  to  me  in  a  pleasant  place,  inasmuch  as  I  am
again  admitted  to  your  intimacy,  as  you  kindly  write  that
I  am.  If  by  any  chance  I  had  grown  lukewarm,  as  you
complain,  no  doubt  I  should  quickly  become  hot  again  when
nourished  by  the  warmth  of  your  charity.

2.  And  now  I  must  say  that  what  you  have  been  pleased  to
write  I  have  received  with  outstretched  hands.  I  have  read
it  eagerly ;  I  read  it  again  with  pleasure,  and  the  oftener  1
read  it  the  more  pleasure  it  gives  me.  I  must  say  that  I
like  your  pleasantry.  For  it  is  at  once  agreeable  from  its
gaiety,  and  serious  from  its  gravity.  I  do  not  know  how  it
is  that  you  manage  to  mingle  grave  and  gay  in  such  a  way
that  your  pleasantry  does  not  savour  of  lightness,  and,
while  you  preserve  your  dignity,  the  pleasantness  of  your
mirth  is  not  lessened.  Further,  you  so  preserve  your  dignity
that  the  saying  of  holy  Job  can  be  applied  to  you  :  If  I
laughed  on  them  they  believed  it  not  (Job  xxix.  24).  Well,
you  see  that  I  have  replied,  and  I  think  that  now  I  may
rightly  demand  more  than  you  promised.  It  is  right  that
you  should  know  how  things  are  here.  I  have  determined
not  to  leave  the  monastery  again  except  for  the  annual
meeting  of  Abbots  at  Citeaux.  Here,  supported  by  your
prayers  and  good  offices,  I  will  wait  for  the  few  remaining
days  of  my  warfare,  till  my  change  comes.  May  God  be
gracious  to  me,  and  not  withdraw  from  me  your  prayers  or
His  mercy.  I  am  broken  in  strength,  and  I  have  a  valid
excuse  for  not  travelling  about  as  I  used  to  do.  I  will  sit
still  and  be  silent,  to  see  if  perchance  I  may  experience
what  from  the  fulness  of  his  sweetness  the  holy  Prophet
says,  It  is  good  that  a  man  should  both  hope  and  quietly
wait  for  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  (Lam.  iii.  26).  And,

of  this  being  written  :  it  may  not  be  amiss,  therefore,  to  inclnde  it  in  the  list  of
S.  Bernard's,  that  before  all  lovers  of  true  Christian  friendship,  especially  before
Religious,  there  may  be  placed  this  most  perfect  example  of  the  two  friends,
Bernard  and  Peter.  Cardinal  Baronius  has  so  spoken  of  Peter  as  to  pronounce
him  in  "  that  holiness  which  worketh  by  love,  no  unworthy  rival  of  Bernard."  If
further  evidence  of  this  is  wanted  see  Peter's  own  works,  lib.  i.  ep.  28,  and  lib.
iv.  ep.  46.


654  LETTER CCXXIX.

that  you  may  not  seem  the  only  one  to  joke,  I  suppose  that
you  will  not  again  venture  to  chide  me  for  my  silence,  and,
after  your  manner,  to  call  that  sloth,  which  I  think  the
Prophet  Isaiah  more  fittingly  and  more  properly  calls  the
cultivation  of  righteousness  (Isaiah  xxxii.  17),  about  which
you  read  in  his  Prophecy,  where  he  says  from  the  Lord  :
In  quietness  and  in  confidence  shall  be  your  strengt/i
(Isaiah  xxx.  15).  Commend  me  to  the  prayers  of  your
sacred  Convent  of  Cluny ;  salute  it  first  from  me,  the
servant  of  all,  if  you  think  fit.

LETTER  CCXXIX. (A.D. H43.)1
PETER  THE  VENERABLE,  TO  ABBOT  BERNARD.

He  courteously  answers  Bernard's  letter,  and  at  the
same  time  explains  the  causes  of  the  strife  between  the
Cluniacs  and  Cistercians.

To  him  who  is  to  be  honoured  with  special  veneration,  to
be  embraced  closely  with  the  arms  of  entire  affection,  the
inseparable  guest  of  my  heart,  my  Lord  BERNARD,  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  his  brother  PETER,  humble  Abbot  of  the  Cluniacs,
wishes  the  eternal  salvation  which  he  longs  for.

i.  Since  I  am  found  to  be  long  in  replying  to  the  sweet
and  pleasant  letter  of  my  friend,  to  which  I  ought  to  have
sent  an  answer  directly  with  equal  good  will,  your  Holi
ness  will  perhaps  wonder  why  I  have  not  done  so,  and  will,
I  am  afraid,  put  it  down  to  indolence  or  contempt.  But  do
not  think  that  it  is  either,  for  both  are  absent ;  for  I  have
hardly  ever  been  so  glad  to  receive  anything  in  the  way  of
a  letter,  or  so  careful  in  reading  it.  The  cause  of  my  long
silence  was  partly  the  bearer  of  it,  who,  when  he  came  to
Cluny,  and  did  not  find  me  there,  though  I  was  not  very  far
away,  being  at  Marigny,2  neither  brought  it  nor  sent  it  on
to  me.  but  left  it  at  Cluny.  But  I  do  not  wish  to  accuse  the
good  man  ;  I  believe  that  he  was  hindered  from  going  to

1  This  is  Ep.  16,  B.v of  Abbot  Peter's  own  Letters. — [E.]

2  Marigny  sur Loire  was a nunnery on the Loire, founded by S. Hugh,
Abbot  of  Cluny.


LETTER CCXXIX.  655

me  by  some  business  which  he  had  to  do,  or  by  the  severity
of  the  winter,  which  was  then  upon  us.  I,  too,  was  kept  in
that  place  for  a  month,  partly  by  the  snow,  partly  by
business,  and  returned  home  with  difficulty  at  the  beginning
of  Lent.  Then  at  length  I  received  your  letter  from  the
Sub-Prior,  to  whom  it  had  been  given.  My  heart  was
drawn  to  you  immediately ;  and  though  my  affection  for
you  was  great  before,  it  was  kindled  into  a  flame  by  the
loving  breath  that  came  through  your  letter,  and  no  room
was  then  left  for  coldness  or  Jukewarmness.  I  was  drawn,
I  say,  and  so  drawn  to  you,  that  I  did  what  I  cannot
recollect  that  I  have  before  done,  except  to  the  Sacred
Books,  I  kissed  affectionately  your  letter  as  soon  as  I  had
read  it.  And  then  I  read  again  to  some  of  the  brethren
what  I  had  before  read  to  myself,  and  I  exhorted  them  with
all  my  heart  to  greater  love  for  you.  I  would  stir  up  those
whom  I  can  influence,  and  I  wish  I  could  influence  all  to
imitate  your  charity  ;  I  always  endeavour  to  do  this.  Then
I  laid  it  by,  and  placed  it  among  the  gold  and  silver  which,
after  the  custom  handed  down  to  me  by  my  fathers,  I  am  in
the  habit  of  carrying  with  me  to  distribute  in  alms.  Nor
was  it  unfitting.  For  your  favour  to  me,  your  charity  is
precious  to  me  above  all  gold  and  silver.

2.  I  wished  to  write  to  you  on  the  next  day  all  that  was  in
my  mind ;  but  I  was  prevented  by  business  which  made
other  claims  on  me  daily,  nay,  continuously,  and  I  kept
silence.  My  hard  taskmaster,  whom  I  had  no  power  to
resist,  imposed  silence  on  me,  and  the  care  of  an  infinite
number  of  matters  forced  me  to  hold  my  peace  not  for  one
day,  but  for  many.  And  so  a  fortnight  passed  by,  then  a
whole  month,  then  several  months  in  succession,  during
which  I  was  always  making  attempts  to  write  but  was  not
allowed  by  the  said  taskmaster.  At  length  I  broke  the
galling  chain,  and  though  with  difficulty,  I  threw  aside  the
yoke  of  my  burden,  and  the  sceptre  of  my  tyrant,  by  writ
ing  stealthily.  And  lest  I  seem  to  labour  too  much  in
making  excuse  for  my  tardiness  in  replying  I  must  say  that
you  yourself  have  forced  me  to  make  my  excuse  when  you


656  LETTER CCXXIX.

said,  "  It  is  not  long  since  I  wrote  to  you,  and  saluted  your
Crown1  with  fitting  veneration,  and  you  answered  me  not  a
word ;  and  not  long  before  I  wrote  to  you  from  Rome,  and
not  even  then  did  I  get  a  syllable.  Do  you  now  wonder
that  when  you  lately  returned  from  Spain  I  did  not  presume
to  trouble  you  again  with  my  chatter  ?  But  if  it  is  a  fault
to  have  not  written  for  some  reason  or  other,  to  have  been
unwilling  to  write,  not  to  say  to  have  disdained  to  write,
you  will  surely  not  be  altogether  without  blame."

3.  But  what  shall  I  say?  Simply  this:  I  would  never
make  any  excuse  for  the  fault  which  you  charge  me  with,
if  it  had  been  from  contempt  that  I  had  not  answered
your  letter.  For  I  admit  that,  if  you  had  written  first,  I
ought  to  have  answered  you  ;  but  as  far  as  I  can  recollect,
while  you  were  at  Rome  I  wrote  first  and  you  answered.
It  was  not  then  my  turn  to  write  in  answer,  inasmuch  I  had
been  the  first  to  write,  but  yours.  Certainly  I  might  have
written  in  reply  to  your  answer,  but  your  answer  was  so
full  and  completely  satisfactory  that  it  freed  me  from  any
necessity  to  write  further.  And  if  this  is  the  state  of  the
case,  the  fault  that  you  speak  of  seems  to  be  deserting  me
and  looking  towards  you  ;  for  you  have  been  endeavouring
to  lay  blame  on  one  that  is  blameless,  and  to  lay  on  the
shoulders  of  an  unoffending  brother  other  people's  burdens,
not  to  say  your  own.  But  to  what  you  say  about  my  having
done  the  same  thing  on  another  occasion  I  have  no  answer,
for  I  have  no  recollection  of  it.  If  by  some  chance  it  did
happen  I  have  no  doubt  that  there  was  a  reasonable  cause,
or  if  not  I  will  make  you  my  humble  apologies.  But  you
went  on  to  say,  "  You  see  what  I  might  urge  with  justice. "
I  answer:  At  present,  according  to  the  reasons  given  above,
justice  rather  makes  for  me,  because  no  fault  at  all  is  found
in  me.  Now,  if  I  were  not  inclined  to  spare  you,  and  if  I
were  to  apply  to  myself  the  name  of  an  injured  friend
which  you  say  you  can  claim,  I  should  have  good  cause  to
exact  a  penalty  for  the  wrong  or  injury  that  you  have  done
me.  But  after  my  custom  I  spare  you,  and  even  though
not  asked,  I  freely  forgive  you  everything.  "I  keep  in
1  "Your  Greatness,''  p.  652.


LETTER CCXXIX.  657

mind,"  as  you  said,  "  no  injuries."  For  this  is  but  a  fitting
introduction  to  what  I  am  going  to  say :  I  am  about  to
endeavour  to  banish  from  the  hearts  of  many  their  well-
known  feelings  of  resentment  against  each  other,  and  I  am
going  to  do  this  not  in  jest,  but  in  sober  earnestness  ;  and
I  intend  to  induce  you  to  banish  all  such  feelings.  Let  me
be  the  first  to  extend  forgiveness  to  everyone,  and  set  the
example  of  doing  what  I  endeavour  to  press  on  others.

4.  But  perhaps  you  will  say  again,  "  I  should  wish  to
believe  that  you  are  pleased  to  joke?  "  Yes,  I  do  please  ;
but  only  with  you.  I  do  not  jest  like  this  with  others.  For
with  some,  to  pass  the  limits  of  dignified  gravity  is  to  run
the  risk  of  being  thought  frivolous  ;  but  I  am  not  afraid  of
this  from  you  ;  I  seek  after  charity,  lest  haply  I  lose  her.
And,  therefore,  it  is  always  pleasant  for  me  to  talk  with
you,  and  by  friendly  wrords  to  preserve  the  sweet  honey  of
charity.  I  do  my  best  to  prevent  myself  being  in  the
number  of  those  brethren  wrho  hated  Joseph  in  their  hearts,
and  could  speak  no  peaceful  word  to  him  (Gen.  xxxvii.  4).
Would  that  all  your  brethren  and  mine  would  do  so  (I  do
not  speak  boastfully),  and  would  not  deviate  from  the  line
of  charity,  by  which  alone  after  faith  and  the  Sacrament  of
Baptism,  they  are  entitled  to  the  name  of  brethren,  and  by
which  they  are  united  to  each  other  in  a  close  relationship  ;
and  that  they  would  fear  what  the  Apostle  speaks  of  when
he  says,  Peril  amongst  false  brethren  (2  Cor.  xi.  26).
Would  that  they  would  all  do  this,  and  would  keep  their
heart  from  the  deceitful  thought,  and  their  tongue  from  the
bitter  word,  according  to  the  Psalm  which  is  so  often  in
their  mouth.  What  I  have  said  seems  to  make  large
promises,  and  as  if  it  were  a  preparation  for  great
achievements.  But  lest  the  well-known  verse,  "  \Vhat  will
this  man,  lavish  in  promises,  produce  worthy  of  so  pre
tentious  an  opening  ?  "  (Horace,  Ars  Poetica  v.  138)
be  applied  to  me,  I  must  confess  that  I  not  only  have
no  urgent  cause  for  writing,  but  not  even  an  important
or  moderately  good  one  ;  still  I  am  speaking  of  those
things  which  worldly  men  think  great  and  even  most
important,  and  from  which  the  children  of  this  world  hope


658  LETTER CCXXIX.

to  become  great  and  powerful.  Yet  my  cause  is  a  great
one,  and  so  far  surpassing  all  others,  that  by  the  Apostle  it
is  called  more  excellent  than  all.  If  you  ask  its  name  he
calls  it  charity  (i  Cor.  xii.  31  and  xiii.).

5.  This  is  my  whole  and  sole  cause  of  writing;  I  fully
trust  that  I  have  it  entirely  as  far  as  you  are  concerned,
and  I  do  not  despair  of  seeing  your  brethren  and  mine
preserve  it  towards  each  other,  better  than  they  have  been
wont  to  do,  especially  if  you  give  your  assistance  to  effect
this.  For  as  far  as  that  charity  goes  which  for  many  a  year  I
have  had  stored  up  for  you  in  the  secret  recesses  of  my
heart,  it  seems  to  me  that,  as  it  is  written,  many  waters
cannot  quench  it,  nor  the  floods  drown  it  (Cant.  viii.  7).
This  I  think  has  often  been  proved  in  different  cases.  For
when  will  my  sincere  love  for  you  be  ever  quenched,  or  the
warm  affection  of  my  heart  be  drowned  by  any  rivulets  of
evil  report,  when  neither  the  many  waters  of  the  tithe
question  could  quench  it,  nor  the  floods  of  the  troubles  at
Langres  drown  it.  You  know  what  I  mean,  and  I  only  say
this  in  order  that  your  wisdom  may  be  sure,  when  it  recol
lects  the  proofs  of  my  constant  love  for  you  in  the  past,
that  I  am  likely  to  be  equally  constant  in  the  future.  I  feel
sure  of  the  same  in  you,  and  I  trust  that  no  power  will  ever
banish  me  from  the  innermost  depths  of  your  heart.  But
since  each  of  us  is  called  a  pastor;  since  our  folds  are  filled
with  no  small  number  of  Christ's  sheep ;  since  to  both
the  precept  applies,  Be  thou  diligent  to  know  well  the
countenance  of  the  flock  (Prov.  xxvii.  23),  we  have  to  see
if  our  flock  is  known  to  us,  if  it  is  well,  if  it  languishes,  if
it  is  feeble,  if  it  is  robust,  if  it  is  living  or  dead.  For  since
the  beloved  disciple  says,  He  that  loveth  not  abideth  in
death  (i  S.  John  iii.  14),  why  am  I  anxious  about  the
weakness  of  my  flock,  when  I  see  that  it  is  already  dead  ?
For  if  he  who  loveth  not  abideth  in  death,  in  what  death  does
he  abide  who  hates?  if  he  who  loveth  not  abideth  in  death,
in  what  death  is  he  who  is  given  to  detraction  ?  For  what
purpose  do  I  say  this  ?

6. I  see  that  certain  persons,  as  well  from  my  folds  as


LETTER CCXXIX.  659

yours,  have  engaged  in  deadly  warfare  against  each  other;
and  that  those  who  ought  to  live  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  as
friends,  have  fallen  from  mutual  charity.  I  see  that  they
are  of  the  family  of  the  same  Lord,  soldiers  of  the  same
King,  that  they  bear  the  same  name  of  Christians,  and
are  alike  called  monks.  I  perceive  that  they  are  bound  to
till  their  Master's  field,  not  only  by  the  yoke  of  a  common
faith,  but  beyond  that  by  the  yoke  of  the  same  monastic
rule,  and  this  under  many  different  forms  of  toil.  Yet,
though,  as  I  said,  they  are  joined  by  a  common  name,
united  by  the  monastic  profession,  some  hidden  and
accursed  difference  separates  them,  and  splits  up  that
sincere  unity  of  hearts,  to  which  they  seem  to  have  been
called.  And,  O  lamentable  event !  not  to  be  worthily
atoned  for  by  any  founts  of  tears,  the  haughty  archangel,
who  was  once  cast  down  from  heaven,  has  again  seized
heavenly  places,  and  he,  who  could  not  establish  his  seat  in
the  north,  has  strengthened  it  in  the  south,1  that  is,  in  the
more  splendid  part  of  the  sky.  Truly  it  is  so,  he  may
boast  that  he  has  done  so,  when,  after  driving  out  Him  who
dwells  in  the  heavens,  whose  abiding  place  was  made,  not
for  mutual  hatred,  but  for  brotherly  concord,  he  lords  it,
after  the  fashion  of  a  tyrant,  over  the  minds  of  men  whose
profession  is  heavenly,  whose  example  is  conspicuous.
And  since  the  Stronger  Man  has  come  and  overcome  the
strong  man  who  had  been  long  guarding  his  palace  in
peace ;  since  the  prince  of  this  world  was  cast  out  ;  since
his  throne,  who  is  the  King  of  the  children  of  pride,
has  been  overturned  even  amongst  Christian  laymen ;
with  what  lamentations  must  we  mourn,  I  pray  you,  if
Satan,  after  having  the  throne  of  his  wickedness  over
turned  in  others,  should  again  erect  it  in  the  hearts  of
monks?  God  forbid  that  he,  who  is  said.. to  have  been
rendered  so  helpless  by  the  Saviour  as  to  suffer  himself  to
be  bound  by  His  handmaidens,  and  to  be  a  laughing  stock
to  His  servants,  should  mock  at  His  servants  and  hand
maidens,  and  bring  them  once  more  under  vile  bondage  to
him.

1  See  Letter  165,  and  note  (p 500). —  [R.]


660  LETTER CCXXIX.

7.  But  why  do they oppose each  other?  why  do  they
rail  at  each  other  ?  why  are  they  consumed  the  one  by  the
other? Let  them  bring  forward  the  ground  of  their  strife,
and  if  they  can  bring  any  just  cause  of  complaint  against
each other  let  it  be  ended by  being  entrusted  to  the  de
cision  of  just  arbitrators. What  do  you  demand,  I  ask, my
brother,  from  your  brother?  and  to  comprehend  in  two  words
all  who  are  at  variance,  What  do  you  demand, O  Cluniac
brother, from your Cistercian brother, and vice versa?
If  it  is  cities,  camps,  farmhouses, farms,  if  the  possession
of  any  land  whether  small  or  great ; if,  in  short,  it  is  gold,
silver,  or  any  quantity  or  quality  of  money  that  the  quarrel
is  about,  come,  I  say,  bring  forward  the  claim. There  are
judges  not  of  iniquity,  but  of  equity  ready  to  put  an  end  at
once  to  all  strifes  of  this  kind. Peace  will  easily  be  restored,
and  the  wounds  of  charity  healed,  as  soon  as  we  know  that
such a separation of hearts  has  been brought about  by
these  things  or  others  like  them. But  I  recollect  that  both
of  you  have  cast  off  all  such  things,  that  you  have  kept  for
yourselves no  earthly  goods,  that,  enriched  with  a  blessed
poverty, you have  determined to follow the poverty of
Christ. This,  then,  cannot  be  the  ground  of  your quarrel.
But I  will not  give  over,  I  will  not  weary,  I  will  not rest
until  I  come  to  the  bottom  of  the  truth  that  I  am  in  search
of.

8.  Perhaps  the  cause  of  your  strife  is  the  difference  in
your  customs,  in  the  observance  of  the  monastic  rule. But
if  this,  dearly  beloved,  is  the cause  of  so  great  an  evil,  it
is,  let  me  say  it  with  the  permission of  both  of  you,  very
unreasonable,  very  childish  and  foolish. For  does  not  that
which is destitute of all reason, and whose soundness
every  wise  man  denies,  seem  to  you  unreasonable,  childish,
and foolish  ? For  if  a difference  in  customs,  if  manifold
variety  in  an infinite number  of  things ought  to rob the
servants of  Christ of  mutual  charity,  what peace,  or  con
cord,  or unity,  or  how much  of  the law  of  Christ  will  be
left,  not  only  to  monks,  but  to  any  Christians,  about  which
a  great  Apostle says, Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and


LKTTER CCXXIX.  66 1

so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ? If,  I  say,  the  law  of  Christ,
that is charity, is to be abandoned by all who follow
different  uses,  it  will  simply  be  found nowhere  any  more.
For  when it  shall  have  been  rejected  by  all  who  follow  a
different  custom  it  will  be  nowhere  to  be  found. Has  not,
dearly  beloved,  the  whole  earth  long  since  been  filled  with
the  Churches  of  Christ  ? And  since  the  Churches  which
serve God in  the  same  faith and the  same charity are
almost numberless, almost as great  a  variety  of uses is
found  amongst  them  as  there  are  churches. You  will  find
this in the canticles, in the lections, in all the Church
offices,  in  the  different  vestments;  you  will  find  it,  too,  in
different fasts which are observed in addition to the
authorized  ones  which  cannot  be  changed  ;  you  will  find  it
in all similar things, which according to differences of
times,  places,  nations,  and  countries,  have  been instituted
by  the  prelates  of  the  Church,  to  whom,  according  to  the
Apostle,  it  belongs  to  give  orders  in  such things  as  they
may  see  fit  (Rom.  xiv.  5). Have  all  those  churches  aban
doned  charity  because  they  have  changed  their  custom  ?
Will they cease to be Christians because they seem to
differ  in  their  uses? Will  the  great  gift  of  peace  be  lost
by  all because each one  works  what is good in a  way
different from the rest? Not so thought Ambrose,
a Doctor of the Church, in word and in life, who,
speaking of the Saturday fast which he had seen
kept at Rome, and which he had found was not
observed at Milan when he was made Bishop, says :
"  When I am at Rome I observe the fast kept by  the
Church  at  Rome;  when  at  Milan  I  follow  the  custom  of  its
Church and do not fast" (Apud  Aug.  ep.  54). Hence,
also,  our  father  Augustine,  in  describing  the  devotion  of  his
good mother, relates that she, according  Jto the custom
which she had seen observed in the African Churches,
wished to offer her oblations at Milan contrary to the
custom of the Churches of Italy, but  was forbidden by
Ambrose  (S.  Aug.  Confess,  lib.  vi.  c.  2).

9.  But  why  labour  this  point? To  no  purpose  is  it  to.


662  LETTER CCXXIX.

surround  what  is  so  evident  with  manifold  testimonies  and
examples,  especially  since  neither  in  ancient  times  a  differ
ence  in  the  time  of  observing  Easter,  nor  in  modern  a
well-known  variation  between  Greek  and  Latin  in  the  way
of  offering  the  Christian  sacrifice,  had  any  power  to  wound
charity,  or  to  produce  any  breach  of  unity.  The  Holy
Fathers  are  witnesses  to  this,  and  their  received  writings
which  they  left  to  the  Church,  that  the  East  in  former
times  kept  Easter  at  one  time,  the  West  at  another,
the  Angles  in  Britain  at  another,  and  the  Scots
at  another.  We,  too,  witness  the  same  thing  in  our
own  time,  for  we  see  the  Roman  Church  and  the  whole
Latin  race  offer  to  God  the  life-giving  sacrifice  with  un
leavened  bread ;  while  the  Greek  Church  and  the  greatest
part  of  the  East  and  barbarian  nations  who  are  Christians
are  said  to  sacrifice  with  leavened  bread.  But  in  spite  of
this  neither  ancients  nor  moderns  have  departed  from
mutual  charity  because  of  these  well-known  varieties  of
customs,  for  they  found  nothing  in  all  this  to  wound  faith
or  charity.  But  why  do  I  say  this?  In  order  that,  if  your
minds,  brethren,  have  been  alienated  because  of  the  variety
in  your  uses,  if  they  have  grown  weak  in  their  love  of
peace  and  unity  because  of  this  or  that  custom  handed
down  by  the  founders  of  the  Churches,  that  by  so  vener
able  examples  of  such  holy  Fathers  they  may  become  one
again,  and  after  the  way  of  the  saints,  who  out  of  weakness
were  made  strong,  and  became  brave  in  the  battle,  may
become  too  strong  for  any  disease  by  shrinking  from  all
weakening  of  charity.

10.  But  you  will  say:  "Variety  of  uses  must  be  under
stood  in  a  different  sense  in  the  case  of  different  Churches
than  in  men  of  the  same  Order.  If  the  customs  of  many
Churches  vary  without  any  damage  to  faith  or  charity,  it  is
nothing  wonderful ;  but  it  is  wonderful  if  men  of  the  same
purpose  and  profession  do  not  preserve  the  same  kind  of
rules."  Is  this  all,  dearly  beloved,  that  divides  you  from
each  other?  Is  this  the  only  blow  to  charity  amongst
yourselves  ?  Is  this  the  only  thing  which  prevents  the


LETTER CCXX1X.  663

children  of  peace  from  being  at  peace  with  each  other?
If  even  a  layman  made  for  peace  with  those  who  hated  peace
(Ps.  cxx.  7),  shall  monk  strive  with  monk  in  an  accursed
war?  The  child  of  the  light  loves  the  children  of  darkness
to  prevent  the  gift  of  peace  being  disturbed,  and  shall  the
child  of  the  light  light  against  the  child  of  the  light?  I
refer  this  to  the  purpose,  not  to  the  monk.  If,  indeed,  it  is
only  this  that  is  troubling  your  minds,  if  this  is  the  sole
cause  of  the  wound  of  charity,  it  will  be  soon  healed,  if
only  there  be  no  obstinacy.  See,  then,  that  love  of  your
own  opinion  do  not  darken  the  light  of  your  understanding,
for  no  one  deserves  to  attain  to  unity  who  does  not  seek
her  for  herself,  but  rather  seeks  to  have  his  own  way.  I
therefore  ask  you  to  consider  whether  the  cause  of  your
disunion  is  a  just  one,  without  any  desire  to  defend  your
own  side  or  your  own  opinions,  and  when  you  find  it  to  be
an  unjust  one  I  ask  you  to  become  once  more  of  one  heart
and  of  one  soul.  For  each  of  you  is  fighting  under  the
same  rule,  and  under  that  particular  rule  each  hopes  to  be
able  to  attain  to  everlasting  salvation.  But  if  neither  is  to
be  disappointed  of  his  hope  I  know  not  what  place  can
now  be  left  for  discord,  division,  or  reproaches.

ii.  For  you  said  that  it  is  a  wonderful  thing  if  men  of
the  same  purpose  and  profession  do  not  observe  the  same
kind  of  rules.  My  answer  is :  What  does  it  matter  if  men
of  the  same  purpose  and  profession  do  not  observe  the  same
rules,  if  by  their  different  observances  they  alike  attain  to
the  same  salvation  and  everlasting  life  ?  What  does  it
matter,  what  is  the  objection,  if  they  come  to  the  same
Jerusalem  which  is  above,  which  is  the  mother  of  us  all,  by
a  different  path,  if  a  different  road  leads  to  the  same  land,
if  the  same  life  is  attained  by  manifold  ways?  For  if  thou,
O  Cluniac,  knewest  that  the  Cistercian,  or  thou,  O  Cister
cian,  knewest  that  the  Cluniac  was  making"  a  mistake  in
the  object  that  he  had  put  before  him,  or  if,  according  to
the  Scripture,  you  saw  that  he  was  proceeding  to  his  ruin
along  a  road  which  seemed  to  men  to  be  right,  you  would  be
justified,  I  admit,  in  correcting  or  calling  back  your  brother,


664  LETTER CCXXIX.

and  even,  if  he  refused  to  listen  to  you,  in  reproaching  him
and  invoking  God  against  him.  Then,  indeed,  if  you  were
to  reproach  him,  to  withstand  him,  to  hate  him,  I  would
admit  that  you  were  judging  justly,  that  you  were  acting
rightly,  especially  when  I  hear  a  great  prophet  saying  of
such  even  to  God,  Do  not  I  hate  them,  O  Lord,  that  hate
Thee,  and  am  not  I  grieved  with  those  that  rise  up  against
Thee  ?  Yea,  I  hate  them  right  sore,  even  as  though  they
were  mine  enemies  (Ps.  cxxxix.  21,  22.)  I  should  do  more,
I  should  rejoice  that  you  were  not  a  deaf  hearer  of  the
Scripture,  which  says  :  Go,  hasten  thyself,  rouse  thy  friend,
give  not  sleep  to  thine  eyes,  nor  slumber  to  thine  eyelids
(Prov.  vi.  3,  4.)  And  of  another :  Cursed  be  he  that  keepeth
back  his  sword  from  blood  (Jer.  xlviii.  10).  Then  I  would
readily  admit  that  you  had  just  causes  for  hatred,  and  I
myself,  girt  with  the  sword  of  zeal,  would  accompany  you
in  your  outgoings  to  subdue  the  enemies  of  God,  and  those
who,  according  to  the  Apostle,  work  a  lie  in  hypocrisy  (i
Tim.  iv.  2).  But,  as  it  is,  I  see  that  both  of  you  are  striving
to  rise  from  earth  to  heaven  under  the  same  rule,  under
different  but  yet  holy  observances,  and  so  running  by
different  courses  for  the  same  prize  in  order  that  you  may
obtain  it ;  and  so,  it  seems  to  me,  you  have  no  cause  of
anger,  hatred,  or  reproach  left  you.

12.  But  you  further  ask  me  to  prove  what  I  have  said,
and  to  show  how,  under  the  same  Rule,  or  profession  of  the
same  Rule,  a  monk can  safely  travel  by  diverse  paths. I
have an  answer  ready  enough  for  this,  and there is not
wanting  either  authority  or  reason. Thou, O  Cluniac,  in
thy  way,  thou, O Cistercian, in thine, canst alike travel
happily  along  the road  of  God's  commandments,  and  still
more  happily  attain  to  the  due  end  of  thy  course. And
because  I  have  already  appealed  to  the  authority  which  in
such  things  is  to  be  first  consulted,  in what  follows  I  will
show  that  reason is not absent, though  she follow at a
moderate  distance.

13.  But what is your  objection, my  brother? "I say
that  those  who  have  professed  the  same  rule  do  not  observe


LETTER CCXXIX.  665

alike  the  commands  of  that  rule."  What  you  say  is  true,
that  in  some  chapters  the  commands  of  the  same  Rule  are
differently  observed  by  the  professed.  But  do  not  suppose
that,  therefore,  monks  of  this  class  are  to  be  blamed  ;  do
not  for  this  dare  to  accuse  them  of  unfaithfulness.  Listen
to  a  heavenly  authority,  that  of  the  King  of  the  heavens  :
If  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  liglit
(S.  Luke  xi.  34.)  Hear,  too,  the  Apostle  :  Let  all  your
things  be  done  with  charity  (i  Cor.  xvi.  14.)  Hear,  too,
S.  Augustine  :  "  Have  charity  and  do  what  you  will."
Hear,  too,  him  who  drew  up  your  rule,  or  rather  the  Holy
Spirit  who  inspired  it  :  "  Let  the  Abbot  order  and  arrange
everything  so  that  souls  may  be  saved  ;  and  whatever  the
brethren  do,  let  them  do  it  without  murmuring"  (Reg.  S.
Bened.  c.  41.)  What  can  be  more  clear,  more  open,  more
lucid?  Does  not  the  very  flow  of  the  words  themselves
show  that  they  are  altogether  without  cloud,  and  show  to
mortals  the  clear  light  of  truth,  without  any  intervening  veil
of  clouds?  Behold,  the  Heavenly  Teacher  says  that  all  your
body,  my  brother,  depends  for  its  light  on  the  singleness
of  your  eye  ;  that  is,  that  all  your  works  must  have  purity  of
intention.  Alter  Him,  the  greatest  doctor  of  the  Church
bids  all  your  works  to  be  done  in  charity  ;  lo,  the  greatest
instructor  of  the  Church,  after  the  Apostles,  says  that  you
may  do  what  you  will  so  long  as  charity  remains  ;  lo,  your
father  Benedict  himself,  on  whom  you  rely,  orders  the
Abbot  to  direct  all  things  so  that  souls  may  be  saved,  and
that  there  maybe  no  murmuring;  and  are  you  afraid  for
the  salvation  of  those  who  follow  different  paths  under  the
same  Rule  ?  Do  you  not  see  that  those  are  safest  from
every  danger  whose  precepts  find  their  defence,  according
to  the  Rule  itself,  against  every  shade  of  variety  or  blame
because  of  difference,  in  the  intention  of  saving  souls  ?

14.  But  now,  that  you  may  see  that  reason  also  is  entirely
c,n  the  side  of  the  authorities  above  given,  and  clings  to
them  inseparably,  I  must  mention  some  points  bearing  on
the  question  before  us,  in  which  some  things  are  shown  to
have  been  changed  because  of  the  single  eye,  through  love

VOL. II.  43


666  LETTER CCXXIX.

unfeigned,  and  from  the  intention  of  saving  souls.  For
when  I  have  shown  these  I  shall  leave  nothing,  I  think,  for
you  to  ask  further,  so  far  as  this  matter  goes.  For  you  use
a  single  eye  in  not  opening  the  gate  of  the  cloister  to  a
novice  till  after  a  year's  probation  ;  because,  according  to
the  words  of  the  Apostle  (i  S.  John  iv.  i)  and  of  the  Rule
(Reg.  S.  Ben.  c.  58),  you  test  for  the  space  of  a  year  the
spirit  of  the  new-comer,  whether  it  be  of  God.  You  use,
too,  the  single  eye  when  you  admit  a  novice  within  the  year
from  the  fear  that  through  so  long  delay  he  may  return  to
his  mire  again,  and  to  the  detestable  evil  of  his  former  life.
You  use,  too,  the  single  eye  when  you  content  yourself
with  two  tunics,  or  two  cowls,  or  with  the  addition  of  one
or  two  garments  of  this  sort,  because  you  prefer  to  follow,
if  not  the  precept  (Reg.  S.  Ben.  c.  55),  at  all  events  the
mind  and  intention  of  the  founder  of  the  Rule,  than  to  add
or  assume  other  garments.  You  use,  too,  the  single  eye
when  you  allow  the  use  of  a  few  skins,  because  you  make
provision  for  the  sickly,  the  infirm,  the  delicate,  for  all  who
live  in  colder  climates,  so  as  to  prevent  their  murmuring,
or  growing  remiss,  or  having  reasonable  cause  to  retire
from  their  purpose.  You  use,  too,  the  single  eye  when  you
receive  back  all  fugitives  who  have  not  fled  three  times,
because  you  wish  both  to  obey  the  words  of  the  Rule  (Reg.
S.  Ben.  c.  29),  and  to  deter  foolish  or  unstable  monks  from
repeated  desertion,  by  fixing  a  limit  beyond  which  there  is
no  return.  You  use,  too,  the  single  eye  when  you  receive
back  a  monk  who  returns  after  deserting  more  than  three
times,  from  a  fear  lest  by  refusing  forgiveness  he  be  exposed
to  the  enemy  and  perish,  and  so  the  wolf  kill  the  wandering
sheep,  just  as  he  is  wont  to  carry  off  and  scatter  those  within
the  fold.

15.  You  use,  too,  the  single  eye  when  you  observe,
without  making  any  exception,  all  the  usual  fasts  both  in
the  summer  and  winter,  from  your  wish  to  observe  the
rules  imposed,  and  to  bring  forth  more  fruit  from  a  longer
abstinence.  But,  and  I  say  it  out  of  pure  charity,  I  do  not
altogether  recommend  that  fasts  should  be  observed  by


LETTER CCXXIX.  667

everyone  during  the  octaves  of  Christmas,  Epiphany,  and
the  Purification,  which  in  all  respects  are  Lord's  Days.
You  use,  too,  the  single  eye  when  you  except  from  tin-
ordinary  observance  of  fasting  days  the  days  which  I  have
just  named,  and  every  authorized  feast  day  of  twelve
lections,  from  a  desire  to  imitate  the  custom  of  nearly  all
Religious  who  so  observe  them,  and  thus  you  endeavour  to
honour  the  Lord  Himself,  the  Apostles,  and  other  saints.
You  use,  too,  the  single  eye  in  engaging  in  manual  labour,
according  to  the  precept  of  the  Rule  (Reg.  S.  Ben.  c.  48),
from  your  wish  both  to  obey  the  Rule  and,  by  such  holy
exercises  enjoined  by  monastic  and  apostolic  commands,  to
avoid  sloth,  the  enemy  of  the  soul,  as  the  same  Rule  says  ;
and  moreover,  as  far  as  you  have  opportunity,  it  is  your
wish  to  provide  yourself  with  the  necessaries  of  life,  after
the  manner  of  the  fathers  of  old.  You  use,  too,  the  single
eye  in  partly  giving  up  this  manual  labour,  for  you  may  be
placed,  not  in  woods  or  in  desert  places,  but  in  the  midst
of  cities  and  camps,  and  be  surrounded  by  people,  and  be
unable,  without  more  or  less  danger,  to  go  backwards  and
forwards  so  often  to  your  work  through  a  promiscuous
•crowd  of  both  sexes,  and  besides  you  often  have  not  suit
able  places  where  you  can  engage  in  such  works.  But  lest
leisure,  the  foe  of  religious,  find  opportunity  to  harm  you
when  you  have  nothing  to  do,  either  you  do  manual  work
when  and  where  you  can,  or  when  you  cannot,  you  make
up  for  it  by  giving  up  the  extra  time  to  the  Divine  Offices,
and  so  the  evil  spirit  can  claim  for  himself  no  empty  corner
in  your  heart,  seeing  that  you  fill  up  all  your  time  with  what
holy  pursuits  are  in  your  power.

1 6.  You  use,  too,  the  single  eye  in  reverencing  Christ  in
every  guest  who  comes  or  goes,  with  bowed  head  or  with
body  prostrate  on  the  ground,  and  in  washing  the  feet  of
all,  and  so  you  do,  as  is  fitting,  all  that  you  can  to  carry
out  carefully  the  good  precept  of  hospitality,  enjoined  alike
by  the  Gospel  and  the  decrees  of  the  Rule  (Reg.  S.  Ben.
c.  53),  and  you  strive  to  win  for  yourself  the  reward  due  to
such  a  proof  of  holy  brotherly  love.  You  use,  too,  the


668  LETTER CCXXIX.

single  eye  in  not  prostrating  yourself  before  all  guests,  in
not  washing  the  feet  of  all,  because  it  would  be  simply
impossible  for  you  to  be  always  prostrating  yourself  before
so  great  crowds  of  guests  as  are  constantly  coming  and
going,  or  to  be  always  washing  their  feet,  so  much  so  that,
even  if  you  wished  to  be  always  engaged  in  such  duties  and
were  to  leave  out  all  the  other  offices  of  your  Order,  you
would  not  have  enough  time.  And  because  you  see  it  is
out  of  your  power  to  do  it,  you  omit  it.  What  is  necessary
for  the  reception  of  guests  you  give  them  to  the  best  of
your  power,  and  you  show  them  all  the  honour  in  your
power,  but  you  excuse  yourself  from  the  above  duties,
which  it  is  physically  impossible  for  you  to  fulfil ;  but  yet
you  do  this  in  all  singleness  of  eye.  You  use,  too,  the
single  eye  in  your  wish  that  the  Abbot's  table  should  be
always  filled  with  guests  and  pilgrims,  because  you  at  once
obey  the  Rule  (Reg.  S.  Ben.  c.  56)  and  show  yourself
hospitable  to  guests.  You  use,  too,  the  single  eye  when
you  determine  that  the  Abbot's  table  should  not  be  always
with  the  guests,  but  that  he  should  have  his  meals  always
with  the  brethren,  and  by  recalling  him  to  the  common
table  you  thus  apply  a  remedy  to  the  profusion  (to  use
a  mild  term)  of  many  an  Abbot  who,  when  he  has  guests,
is  generous  to  himself  but  heedless  of  his  brethren.

17.  You  use  the  single  eye  when,  like  Ezra,  who  restored
the  Law,  or  like  the  Maccabees,  who  raised  up  the  temple  of
God  which  was  in  ruins,  you  labour  to  make  good  the  great
losses  of  the  Monastic  Order,  and  to  repair  the  many  rents
in  many  monasteries  and  in  their  customs,  and,  while
rejecting  what  is  more  of  luxury  than  of  necessity,  you
endeavour,  after  the  manner  of  the  old  and  original  fervour,
to  banish  the  lukewarmness  of  our  times.  And  you  use
the  single  eye  when  you  so  modify  the  commands  both  of
the  Order  and  of  the  Rule,  that,  according  to  the  words  of
the  same  Rule  (Reg.  S.  Ben.  c.  64),  what  the  strong  want
is  not  distasteful  to  the  weak,  as,  e.g.,  when  he  who  cannot
live  on  bread  is  allowed  to  have  at  least  milk,  so  as  to  pre
serve  life,  and  when  he  who  has  not  breath  enough  to


LETTER CCXXIX.  669

obtain  the  prize  set  before  him  by  running  at  great  speed,
is  taught  to  win  it  at  least  by  the  slower  walking  pace,
because  he  who  returns  to  his  country  after  a  year  is  called
as  much  an  inhabitant  of  it  as  he  who  returns  after  a  month.
And  I  say  this  without  meaning  to  prejudice  the  different
kinds  of  toil  of  the  wayfarers,  because,  according  to  the
Apostle,  Every  man  shall  receive  his  own  reward  according
to  his  own  labour  (i  Cor.  iii.  8).  You  have  S.  Benedict
himself  as  your  authority  in  this,  although,  as  he  himself
says,  you  are  not  bound  to  follow  his  written  precepts  when
charity  bids  otherwise.  Still  you  find  pleasure  in  showing
your  devotion  to  so  great  a  man  by  following  his  directions
merely  because  they  are  his.  You  have  him,  too,  as  the
authority  for  your  bye-laws,  inasmuch  as  he  directs  all  his
precepts  to  be  carried  out  according  to  the  rule  of  charity,
and  to  be  made  subservient  in  some  way  or  other  to  the
salvation  of  souls.  You  have  S.  Maur  also,  his  principal
disciple,  who  was  sent  by  him  into  Gaul,  and  is  said  to
have  altered  many  points  in  his  rule,  following  the  single
eye  of  which  I  have  said  so  much.  You  have,  besides,  very
many  fathers  of  monasteries  after  him,  whose  holy  life  and
numerous  miracles  worked  by  them  through  the  power  of
God  show  more  clearly  than  daylight  that  they  have  been
moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  modify  the  written  words  of
the  above-named  Rule  to  suit  times,  places,  and  persons.

1 8.  And  what  can  I  say  more?  If  you  go  in  a  similar
way  through  all  the  points  on  which  there  seems  to  be
difference,  you  will  find  everywhere  the  single  eye,  which
one  will  call  charity,  another  the  desire  of  saving  souls  ;
and  you  will  see  that  in  this  way  there  is  no  difference,  no
discord,  because  all  those  points  which  seem  to  be  differently
treated  become  one  through  charity.  To  this  I  add  what  is
yet  evident  to  all,  that  there  is  no  precept  about  such
matters  in  the  Rule,  which  has  not  conditions  attached,  and
which  is  not  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  Abbot.  But  even
if  it  had  been  given  imperatively,  it  could  not  in  any  way
prejudice  the  single  eye,  i.e.,  evangelical  charity.  For  such
precepts,  as  you  know,  belong  to  the  class  of  things  change-


670  LETTER CCXXIX.

able,  and  when  charity  bids,  they  are  to  be  changed  with
out  any  fear  of  transgressing.  Nor  in  this  respect  ought
those  who  profess  the  rule  to  be  suspected  of  unfaithful
ness  to  it ;  because  this  rule  of  the  holy  father  depends  on
that  sublime  and  general  rule,  from  which  and  on  which,
according  to  the  words  of  the  Truth,  hang  all  the  Law  and
the  Prophets  (S.  Matt.  xxii.  40).  But  if  the  whole  Law  so
hangs,  then  so  does  the  monastic  Rule.  Therefore,  a  monk
professing  the  rule  of  S.  Benedict  keeps  it  aright  when  he
everywhere  observes  the  law  of  charity,  whether  in  obey
ing  or  in  changing  any  of  its  articles.

19.  Well,  then,  if  this  was  the  sole  cause  of  your  strife,
brethren,  does  it  not  seem  to  you  entirely  excluded  ?  Ought
not  the hearts of monks  to  be united again in  brotherly
concord  when  a  single-eyed  charity  harmonizes  all  those
differences  which  caused  your  discord? Does  it  not  make
many  to  be  one,  since  it  brings  to  their  promised  end,  viz.,
their  chief  good,  which  is  everlasting  life,  all  who  follow
what  good  is  under  the  one  purpose  of  the  Monastic  Order,,
or  of  the  same  Rule,  even  though  it  be  by  different  paths.
Let  there be  then, O Jerusalem, peace in thy strength,
that  there  may  also  follow  abundance  in  thy  towers. But
lest, perchance,  I  be found of  the number  of  those  who
say, Peace ,  peace } when there  is  no  peace (Jer. vi. 14),
let us see if  there  is still remaining  any  cause  for  quar
relling, lest  a  snake  dart  suddenly  from its  hiding  place
while  we are  asleep  and  off  our  guard,  and  sting  some  one
of  our  brethren  or  yours  while  we  are  resting  too  carelessly.

20.  For perhaps the different colours of  your habits
furnish  an  incentive  to  discord, and a  manifold  variety  of
garments  produces a  like  difference in  your  minds. For,
as I see  too clearly, and as anyone can  easily  perceive,
a  black monk looks  askance at a  white  monk when  he
happens to meet  one  ; and a  white  monk  cannot look  a
black one straight  in the  face. I have seen very many
black  monks,  I  wrill  not  say  how  often,  who,  when  a  white
monk  meets  them,  laugh  at  him  as  if  he  were  a  chimaera  or
a  centaur, or  some monster  from  a  foreign  country, and


LETTER CCXXIX.  671

signify  their  amazement  in  words  or  by  some  gesture  of
the  body.  On  tin-  other  hand,  I  have  seen  white  monks,
who  before,  had  been  talking  loudly,  and  discussing  with
each  other  current  events,  suddenly  become  dumb  on  the
advent  of  some  black  monk,  and  lay  on  themselves  the
necessity  of  silence,  lest  they  should  disclose  their  secrets
to  their  enemies.  I  have  seen,  too,  the  tongues  of  both
orders  silent,  but  their  eyes,  hands,  and  feet  eloquent,  and
I  have  seen  them  proclaiming  very  clearly  by  their  gestures
what  they  were  unwilling  to  make  known  by  words.  I
have  seen  the  voice  silent,  the  members  talkative,  and,  by
a  perversion  of  the  order  of  nature,  men,  who  were  taciturn
before  their  fellow  men,  communicative  to  stones.  On  seeing
such  things  I  have  often  been  reminded  of  the  words  of
Solomon,  who  says  of  such  men  :  He  winketh  with  his  eyes,
he  striketh  with  his  feet,  he  teacheth  with  his  fingers  ;
frowardness  is  in  /iis  lie  art,  he  devisetli  mischief  con
tinually,  he  soweth  discord  (Prov.  vi.  13,  14).  O  wicked
and  stubborn  device  of  the  evil  angel  cast  out  by  God  !
who,  unwilling  to  lose  eternal  peace  alone,  gathers  to  him
from  wheresoever  he  can  companions  of  his  fall,  and,  that
he  may  rejoice  in  a  more  glorious  triumph,  he  endeavours
by  the  violence  of  his  wickedness  to  uproot  the  cedars  and
firs  of  the  Paradise  of  God,  where  he  once  lived  a  happy
citizen.  He  is  grieved  that  the  crown  of  heresies  has  fallen
from  his  head,  under  which  he  was  wont  in  early  times  to
divide  the  Church  of  God  ;  and  seeing  no  way  left  to  him  to
damage  the  faith,  now  that  the  Holy  Spirit  fills  the  whole
earth  with  belief  in  it,  he  turns  all  his  efforts  to  inflict  a
wound  on  mutual  charity.  For  since  he  cannot  now  per
suade  Christians  to  become  infidels,  he  tries  with  all  his
might  to  prevent  them  from  loving  each  other.  The
sect  of  Arius,  of  Sabellius,  of  Novatian,  of  Donatus,  of
Pelagius,  of  the  accursed  Manes,  older  than  them  all,
has  now  perished.  Now  the  clouds  of  innumerable  heresies
which  darkened  the  light  of  the  faith  have  disappeared
under  the  breath  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and,  every  mist
having  been  dispersed,  have  left  us  the  clear  light  of  day.


672  LETTER CCXXIX.

But  a  hurricane  from  the  south  has  succeeded  these,  and  is
suddenly  endeavouring  to  throw  everything  into  confusion  ;
and,  because  the  enemy  knows  that  the  faith  has  prevailed,
he  is  trying  to  make  good  his  earlier  losses  by  injuring
charity.

21.  But,  putting  aside  lamentation,  I  will  bring  back  my
pen  to  the  matters  that  I  began  on.  Why,  O  white  monk,
does  the  black  colour  of  your  brother's  habit,  not  of  his
soul,  seem  hateful  to  you  ?  Why,  O  black  monk,  does  the
white  colour  of  your  brother's  habit,  not  of  his  soul,  seem
marvellous  to  you  ?  Are  not  you  both  sheep  of  the  Shep
herd  who  says,  My  sheep  hear  My  voice,  and  I  know  them
and  they  follow  Me ;  and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life,
and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck
them  out  of  My  hand  (S.  John  x.  27,  28)  ?  And  what  shep
herd,  to  say  nothing  of  God,  but  what  man  ever  quarrelled
about  the  different  colours  of  his  sheep's  wool  ?  Who
ever  thought  about  it  ?  Who  ever  thought  that  the  black
were  more  his  sheep  than  the  white,  or  the  white  than  the
black  ?  Who  ever  cares  whether  they  are  black  or  white,
so  long  as  they  are  of  the  same  flock  ?  But  see  the  wicked
ness  of  men,  the  innocence  of  the  sheep.  See  the  con
stancy  of  the  brute  creation  to  the  nature  first  given  them.
See  the  perversity  of  nature  in  the  rational  creature  ?  Did
ever  any  white  ram  scorn  a  black  one  ?  Did  ever  any
black  ewe  loathe  a  white  one  ?  Do  they  not  fill  the  shep
herd's  folds  in  common,  peacefully,  without  any  disturbance,
without  any  quarrel  about  the  difference  of  their  colour,
without  giving  him  any  anxiety  ?  Sometimes,  indeed,  one
ram  butts  another  with  his  horns,  one  ewe  will  thrust  at
another,  but  it  is  not  any  difference  of  colour  that  provokes
them  to  right,  but  the  kindling  of  the  hasty  resentment
which  is  natural  to  all  animals.  But  now  I  see  that  man,
being  in  honour,  hath  no  understanding,  but  is  more  foolish
than  the  beast ;  and,  what  is  more  pitiful  still,  a  monk  cuts
himself  off  from  the  unity  of  charity  because  of  some  varia
tion  of  colour.  Do  not,  my  brother,  do  not,  if  you  wish  to  be
a  sheep  of  Christ,  quarrel  about  a  difference  of  clothing,  for


LETTER CCXX1X.  673

the  Good  Shepherd  casts  out  of  His  fold  none  except  him
whom,  not  difference  of  colour,  but  a  rupture  of  faith  or
charity  separates  from  the  flock  of  His  sheep.  He  does
not,  I  say,  cut  oft  anyone  from  His  flock  because  of  his
colour.  From  widely-separated  countries,  from  diverse
religions,  He  has  gathered  together  Jew  and  Gentile  alike
in  the  one  fold  of  the  Christian  faith.

22.  This,  perhaps,  has  been  taught  you  by  the  patience
of  the  holy  patriarch  Jacob,  who,  without  repining,  allowed
Laban  to  change  his  wages  ten  times.  He  has  shown  us
how  to  make  no  difference  between  black  and  white  or
different  kinds  of  cattle  by  showing  the  good  disposition  and
care  which  a  good  shepherd  shows  for  all  parts  of  his  many-
coloured  flock  (Gen.  xxx.).  And  the  Apostle  says,  In
Christ  Jesus  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything,  nor
zincircumcision,  but  a  new  creature  (Gal.  vi.  15).  And  in
another  place,  Where  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,
circumcision  noruncircumcision,  barbarian,  Scythian,  bond
nor  free,  but  Christ  is  all  and  in  all  (Col.  iii.  n).  Who,
then,  can  have  so  childish  a  mind  as  to  think  that  it  matters
anything  to  salvation  what  the  colour  of  different  dresses  is,
or  what  diversity  of  customs  there  may  be,  as  long  as  there
is  a  new  creature  in  Christ  ?  But  if  it  matters  nothing  to
salvation,  why  does  a  difference  of  habit  divide  monks  ?
Why  does  it  breed  schisms?  Why  separate  their  hearts  ?
Why  wound  charity  ?  There  is  no  cause  or  reason  for
taking  notice  of  it,  much  less  for  dividing,  and  still  less
for  complaining  of  such  things.  You  have,  O  white  monk,
a  powerful  defender  enough  of  your  habit  in  the  single  eye
of  your  conscience.  It  has  caused  you  to  don  a  white  cowl
and  tunic,  to  prevent  the  black  monk  supposing,  through
a  long-existing  custom,  that  no  one  can  be  a  monk  who  is
not  dressed  in  black.  Moreover,  you  have  ^noticed,  too,
that  an  innumerable  number  of  monks  of  this  Order  have
become  lukewarm,  and,  therefore,  with  praiseworthy  inten
tion  you  have  endeavoured  to  stir  them  up  to  a  fresh  and
greater  fervour  of  monastic  life  by  adopting  an  unusual
colour  for  your  habit.  You  too,  [O  black  monk],  in  the
same  way  have  good  authority  for  the  black  colour  of  your


674  LETTER CCXXIX.

habit  in  the  long-standing  custom  handed  down  by  your
fathers.  You  feel  yourselves  more  safe  in  following  the
old  than  in  introducing  what  is  new.  Both  of  you  can
appeal  to  the  words  of  the  Rule  (Reg.  S.  Ben.  c.  55)  as  an
unimpeachable  authority  for  both  colours.  It  enjoins
monks  not  to  quarrel  about  the  colour  or  the  thickness  of
their  habits,  but  to  use  garments  of  that  colour  and  quality
which  are  most  easily  obtainable  in  the  country  where  they
are  living.  Let,  then,  the  reason  I  have  given  be  sufficient
defence  for  your  white  garments,  or  perhaps  some  still
stronger  reason  than  I  have  found.  Let,  on  the  other  hand,
the  authority  of  your  fathers  be  the  defender  of  your  black
habit.  That  authority  is  of  equal  force  with  any  reason,
and  should  not  be  reckoned  as  inferior  by  anyone  who
thinks  aright.

O

23.  And  what  farther  shall  I  be  able  to  adduce  as  setting
an  example  in  this  matter  ?  Can  I  bring  anyone  greater
than  S.  Martin  ?  The  great  Martin,  monk  and  bishop,
chose  black  as  the  colour  of  his  garments,  as  we  read  in  his
life.  "  And  when  the  beasts  close  to  his  side  saw  him
enveloped  in  a  black  and  flowing  cloak,  they  retired  terror-
stricken  to  another  place."  That  he  was  a  monk  is  shown
by  his  founding  a  monastery  not  far  from  Poictiers,  another
at  Milan,  and  another  for  himself  at  Tours.  You  see  that
Martin  was  a  monk,  and  that  he  wore  black.  But  what
does  S.  Jerome  say  about  this  in  the  letter  that  he
wrote  to  Nepotian  ?  He  says,  "  Avoid  alike  black
and  white  garments."  This  was  meant  to  warn  him  to
beware  of  pride  and  ostentation,  not  only  in  white
garments,  which  men  of  the  world  then  wore,  but  also
in  black,  which  professors  of  religion  at  that  time  were
accustomed  to  use.  About  this,  too,  Paulinus,  the  famous
Bishop  of  Nola,  contemporary  and  intimate  friend  of
the  same  Martin  before  mentioned,  of  Ambrose,  Augus
tine,  Jerome,  and  often  named  with  praise  by  them  and  by
Pope  Gregory,  in  describing  the  journey  of  a  noble  lady
who  had  lately  been  converted  to  the  monastic  life,  speaks
as  follows  in  a  letter  addressed  to  Sulpicius  Severus  :—


LETTER CCXXIX.  675

"  We  saw  the  glory  of  the  Lord  in  that  journey  of  the
mother  and  her  sons;  the  same  journey,  indeed,  but  of  very
different  degree  of  luxury.  We  saw  her  sitting  upon  a  miser
able  hackney,  beside  which  an  ass  would  be  thought  valuable,
with  senators  all  around  her,  and  following  her,  with  all  the
pomp  of  this  world  that  men  of  position  and  wealth  could
display,  with  horses  in  rich  trappings,  nodding  plumes,
gilded  cars,  and  with  many  chariots  filling  and  making
resplendent  the  Appian  Way.  But  the  grace  of  Christian
humility  outshone  these  empty  splendours.  The  rich  were
rilled  with  wonder  at  our  holy  poverty,  but  our  poverty
laughed  them  to  scorn.  We  saw  the  confusion  worthy  of
the  deity  of  this  world,  its  purple,  its  silk,  and  golden
furniture  doing  obeisance  to  worn-out  and  black  garments.
\Yre  blessed  the  Lord,  Who  exalteth  the  humble,  filleth
the  hungry  with  good  things,  and  sendeth  the  rich  empty
away/'  You  see  from  this  that  not  only  in  old  times
did  men,  but  also  women,  in  taking  upon  them  the  religious
life  wear  black  garments.

24.  For  if  I  may  say  what  I  think,  it  seems  to  me  that
those  great  fathers  thought  that  black  was  more  suitable  to
humility,  repentance,  and  mourning,  and  since  the  whole
monastic  life  ought  especially  to  be  given  up  to  these  things,
they  determined  that  the  outward  and  inward  should  be
united  as  closely  as  possible,  the  colour  to  the  character,
the  dress  to  the  virtues,  for  white  garments  have  from  of  old
represented  glory  rather  than  shame,  joy  more  than  sorrow.
And  this  was  shown  more  clearly  to  the  Church,  as  is  well
known  to  all,  by  the  Angel  of  the  Resurrection,  and  by  the
Angels  who  acted  as  heralds  of  the  ascending  Lord,  and  by
the  Saviour  Himself  in  the  glory  of  His  Transfiguration,
when  He  showed  Himself  bright  in  white  garments.  Thence
it  was  that  that  good  and  learned  man  Sidonius,  Bishop  of
Clermont  Ferrand,  when  ridiculing  in  bitter  condemnation
the  faults  of  certain  men,  said,  "  They  go  in  white  to
funerals,  in  black  to  weddings,"  declaring  them  to  be  so
confused  in  their  ideas  as  to  pervert  the  usual  order  of
things,  and  to  go  in  wedding  garb  to  funerals,  and  in  funeral


676  LETTER CCXXIX.

to  weddings.  For  those  who  observed  the  common  custom
of  that  age  did  not  go  in  white  to  funerals,  in  black  to
weddings,  but  in  white  to  weddings,  in  black  to  funerals,
that  white  garments  might  agree  with  nuptial  joy,  black
with  funeral  grief.  When  I  was  lately  in  Spain  I  saw  and
wondered  at  this  old  custom  being  still  observed  by  all  the
Spaniards.  For  when  a  wife,  husband,  children,  parent,
any  relation,  or  a  friend  dies,  then  the  husband,  wife,
parents,  children,  relations,  or  friends  at  once  lay  aside
their  arms,  their  silk  garments,  their  furs,  their  many-
colcured  and  costly  dresses,  and  wear  nothing  but  sordid
and  black  clothes.  They  also  cut  off  their  own  hair  and
the  tails  of  their  horses,  and  stain  themselves  and  their
animals  with  black.  With  such  marks  of  mourning  and
grief  they  bewail  the  dead  that  they  have  lost,  and  spend  a
year,  at  least,  by  the  rule  of  society,  in  such  public  mourn
ing.

25.  By  such  authority  and  reason  as  this  I  defend  you
and  your  colour,  black  monk,  but  still  I  do  not  condemn  the
white  monk  for  his  colour.  I  praise  you  for  not  wishing  to
depart  from  the  holy  custom  of  your  fathers  ;  I  praise  him,
too,  for  stirring  up  by  this  uncommon  colour  in  dress  his
mind  to  more  and  more  fervour  of  devotion.  He  to  some
degree  separates  himself,  not  from  charity,  which  would  be
impious,  but  from  the  well-known  lukewarmness  of  many  of
this  Order.  Since,  then,  you  are  under  one  Shepherd,
Jesus  Christ,  since  you  dwell  in  one  sheepfold  of  the  Church,
since  you  live  by  the  same  faith  and  hope  in  eternity,  you,
white  monk,  as  well  as  you,  black  monk,  why,  to  speak  a
little  more  severely,  O  foolish  sheep,  do  you  quarrel  about
the  difference  in  your  wool  ?  Why  do  you  proceed  against
each  other  for  no  reason,  or  for  so  foolish  a  one  ?  Why
for  so  childish  a  thing  do  you  rend  that  first  robe  of  charity  ?
Why  do  you  separate  between  your  very  dwellings  ?  W^hy
do  you  devour  one  another  with  the  teeth  of  wolves  rather
than  of  sheep  ?  Why  do  you  rob  each  other  and  tear  each
other  ?  See,  take  care,  that  this  name  of  innocence  by
which  you  get  your  name  of  sheep  do  not  prevent  you  from


LETTKR CCXXIX.  677

being  of  those  whom  the  great  Shepherd  will  place  on  His
right  hand,  and  of  whom  He  says  Himself,  My  sheep  hear
My  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  Me,  and  I  give
unto  them  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish  (S.  John
x.  27,  28). But  beware,  lest  it  place  you  amongst  those  of
whom  it  is  said  and  sung,  Like  sheep  they  are  laid  in  the
grave ;  death  shall  feed  on  them (Ps.  xlix.  14). Do  you
now  see  how  foolish  it  is  to  dispute  about  a  colour? How
damnable  to  hate  a  brother  for  a  colour? How  wicked  to
calumniate  a  brother  for  a  colour? If  this  were  the  sole
cause  of  your  discord,  if  this  the  sole  ground for  such a
division, if, I say, this was the whole and sole cause
of the monastic schism, now that its folly has been
shown,  shall  not  this  old  severance  of  hearts  be  repaired  ?
— shall not the wounds of love be healed  ? — shall not
evangelic peace  return  to  the  children of  peace? Make
agreement with peace,  therefore, ye  sons  of peace, and
enter  into  a  perpetual  covenant  with  her;  if  not,  perchance
at  some  time  there  may  be  directed  against  you  that  saying
of  the  Prophet, There  is  no  peace, saith  my God, to  the
wicked  (Isa.  xlviii.  22). And  now,  thanks  to  God,  I  think
that  I  have  penetrated  into  the  ancient  causes  and  lurking-
places  of  the  hatreds  of  some  men  of  our  Order,  and  I  do
not suppose that I need now  seek any  farther for any
remaining  cause. And  if  I  am  right,  you,  O  white  monk,
will  no  longer  attack  the  black,  nor  you,  black  monk,  the
white,  if  you  wish  to  obey  the  precepts  of  your  Order,  nor
will  you  be  moved  from  the  state  of  a  most  exalted  charity,
in  hostility  to  your  brother,  because  of  some  difference  in
your  customs  or  some  variation in  the  colour  of  your  habit.
26. But  what  have  I said  ? How have I lost  myself  ?
Where is  my understanding? How  has  the  keenness  of
my  sight  become  clouded  over  ? I  thought  that  I  had  found
the  whole  ground  of  offence. I  supposed  "that  I  had  dis
closed  all  the  lurking-places  of  hatred. I  was under  the
impression,  as  I  said,  that  diversity  of  customs  alone,  that
only  variety  of  colours,  the  quality  or  quantity  of  clothes  or
of  food  had  wounded  charity  among  monks,  and  that  this


6j8  LETTER CCXXIX.

alone  was  the  cause  of  so  great  an  evil.  I  saw  the  mote  in
my  brother's  eye,  but  I  could  not  see  the  huge  beam,  a
very  oak,  in  my  own  eye.  But  now  my  eye  has  been
purged,  the  sky  is  clear,  and  the  sun  in  the  meridian  suffers
nothing  to  lie  hid,  and  I  see  what  it  is  given  me  to  say,  with
the  leave  of  everyone,  at  all  events  of  every  good  man.  For
whoever  shall  feel  aggrieved  will  thereby  confess  that  it  has
been  said  of  him,  as  Jerome  says.  The  sound  part  of  the
body  does  not  shrink  from  the  physician's  hand,  but  that
which  quivers  and  withdraws  itself  from  the  ringer  that
would  touch  it  shows,  without  doubt,  that  disease  is  lurking
within.  What  is  it,  then,  that  had  escaped  me  ?

27.  Come,  tell  me  (I  will  first  address  the  man  of  my  own
Order),  tell  me,  black  monk;  give  glory  to  God,  and  lay
bare  whatever  lies  hid  in  the  depths  of  your  heart  against
your  brother.  Who,  you  say,  can  endure  to  have  new  men
preferred  to  old,  to  have  their  intentions  set  before  our
actions,  to  have  them  regarded  as  more  dear,  our  brethren
as  inferior  ?  Who  can  see  unmoved  the  world  for  the  most
part  turn  away  from  our  older  Order,  and  run  after  this
new  foundation,  and  look  upon  the  wrell-trodden  paths  now
abandoned,  and  crowds  hurrying  on  the  paths  which  till
now  were  unknown  ?  Who  can  bear  to  see  the  new  pre
ferred  to  the  old,  the  younger  to  the  older,  white  monks  to
black  ?  This,  black  monk,  is  what  you  say.  But  you,
white  monk,  what  do  you  put  forward  ?  Wre,  you  say,  are
happy,  because  we  are  recommended  by  a  system  far  more
approved,  because  the  world  declares  that  we  are  more
blessed  than  other  monks,  because  our  fame  overshadows  the
reputation  of  others,  our  daylight  their  lantern,  our  sun  their
star.  We  are  they  who  have  restored  religion  which  was
lost,  the  Order  which  was  dead  ;  we  are  most  justly  they  who
•condemn  all  half-hearted,  lukewarm,  and  worldly  monks  ;
we  prove  the  fresh  fervour  of  our  members  to  excel  all
•others  by  our  characters,  our  actions,  our  customs,  our
habit,  all  of  which  are  different  to  others ;  and  we  have
exposed  to  the  world  the  tepidity  of  the  older  Orders.
.Now — now,  we  have  the  real  secret  cause,  one  far  more


LETTER CCXXIX.  679

hostile  to  charity  than  the  rest,  which  has  destroyed  tin;
unity  of  your  hearts,  separated  your  houses  from  each
other,  and  often,  as  the  Prophet  says,  sharpened  your
tongues  like  a  sword  (Ps.  cxl.  3)  to  calumnious  or  cursing
words.

28.  But  let  this  deadly  sword  be  met  by  the  sword  of  the
Divine  Word,  and  if  you  are  wise  you  will  do  ill  that  you
can  to  prevent  the  fruits  that  have  been  stored  up  with  so
much  labour  from  being  scattered  by  an  empty  breath  of
vain  glory.  O,  loss  accursed,  and  never  to  be  lamented
enough  !  If  one  hiss  of  the  wicked  serpent  is  to  undo  the
pure  continence  of  your  long  life,  your  unconquerable
obedience,  your  unbroken  fasts,  your  constant  vigils,  your
heavy  yoke  of  discipline,  so  many  palms  won  by  your
patience,  and,  to  sum  up  all,  your  great  and  numerous
toils,  both  of  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly  life,  stored  up
for  so  long  against  your  reward  in  eternity,  performed
through  the  grace  of  God  in  you  ;  if  he  is  to  empty  you  of
everything  at  one  breath,  if  the  old  dragon  is  to  cause  you
to  go  empty  before  the  sight  of  the  Great  Judge,  then
where  is  that  which  the  Saviour  said  to  his  disciples  when
labouring  under  this  disease,  /  saw  Satan  as  lightning  fall
from  heaven?  (S.  Luke  x.  18).  Where  is  that  which  he
said  in  another  place  when  a  contention  like  this  rose
among  them  which  of  them  should  be  the  greater,  But  ye
shall  not  be  so ;  but  he  that  is  greatest  among  you  let  him
be  as  the  younger,  and  he  that  is  chief  as  lie  that  doth
serve?  (S.  Luke  xxii.  26).  Where  does  that  verse  lie
hidden  from  the  eyes  of  our  memory  which  the  High  and
Lofty  One,  of  whose  greatness,  the  Psalmist  says,  there  is
no  end  (Ps.  cxlv.  3),  and  Who,  according  to  the  Apostle,  is
above  all,  God  blessed  for  ever  (Rom.  ix.  5),  and  Who,  not
preferring  Himself  to,  or  even  equalizing  Himself  with,  but
submitting  Himself  to  His  servants,  uttered,  When  He  said,
But  I  am  among  you  as  lie  that  serveth  ?  (S.  Luke  xxii.
27).  The  Apostle  is  rebuked  for  putting  himself  before
his  brother  Apostle,  and  shall  not  the  monk  for  preferring
himself  to  his  brother  monk  ?  Christ,  the  Master,  puts  the


680  LETTER CCXXIX.

greater  under  the  lesser  disciple,  the  superior  under  the
inferior,  and  shall  I,  a  Cluniac,  endeavour  to  elevate  myself
above  the  Cistercian?  Christ  submits  Himself  to  His  dis
ciples,  and  shall  a  Christian  and  a  monk  raise  his  neck,
swollen  with  pride,  above  his  brother,  who  is,  perhaps,  far
better  than  he?  Is  majesty  to  abase  itself,  and  infirmity  to
exalt  itself?  Is  loftiness  to  humble  itself,  and  the  worm  to
be  raised  aloft  ?  Is  God  to  serve,  and  earth  try  to  rule  ?
And,  my  brother,  how  have  you  fallen  from  the  height  of
your  Rule,  from  whence  you  used  to  boast  that  you  stooped  !
It  bids  "  that  the  monk  not  only  say  in  wrord  that  he  is
lower  and  viler  than  all,  but  that  he  believe  it  also  inwardly
in  his  heart "  (Reg.  S.  Ben.  c.  7).  But  why  labour  further?
There  is  no  need  to  say  more  to  pious,  wise,  and  learned
men,  and,  as  the  proverb  goes,  to  teach  Minerva,  or  to
bring  trees  to  the  wood,  water  to  the  rivers  or  the  sea.
The  wisdom  of  you  both  sees  and  knows  that  it  is  impossible
to  please  God  without  faith,  and  also  without  charity,  and
that  no  one,  if  he  throw  away  humility,  can  by  any  efforts
keep  that  charity.  For  pride  of  necessity  steps  into  any
place  vacated  by  humility  ;  where  pride  comes  there  imme
diately  comes  envy;  where  envy  arises  charity  at  once  dies.
For  the  envious  man  cannot  love  him  whom  he  envies,  nor
can  charity  in  any  way  remain  in  one  \vho  does  not  love.

29.  Therefore,  where  there  is  no  charity  there  is  no
humility,  and  where  there  is  no  humility  there  is  no  charity.
This  the  Apostle  declares  most  plainly  when  he  says,
Charity  envieth  not,  vaunteth  not  -itself,  is  not  puffed  up.
And  because  she  is  not  greedy  of  other's  goods  he  goes  on
to  say  :  Seeketh  not  her  own  (i  Cor.  xiii.  45).  Therefore,
charity  excludes  all  vain-glory,  all  ambition,  all  greediness,
all  avarice,  nay,  by  charity,  according  to  the  Apostle,  all
iniquity  is  at  once  driven  out.  Now,  if  you  wish  to  pre
serve  this  charity,  which  the  Apostle  says  is  the  same  as  the
law  of  Christ  (Gal.  vi.  2),  my  brother  of  Cluny,  my  brother
of  Citeaux,  if  you  wish  to  lay  up  for  yourself  by  it  great
treasures  in  heaven,  and  to  keep  them  when  you  have  laid
them  up,  do  your  utmost  to  drive  from  you  all  the  causes,


LKTTKR CCXXIX.  68 1

not  only  of  the  departure  of  charity,  not  only  of  her  des
truction,  but  even  of  any  injury,  no  matter  how  small.  If
they  wish  to  return  after  you  have  driven  them  out,  close
the  door  of  your  heart  against  them,  and  hold  fast  charity
and  keep  her  as  an  ever  present  guest.  Charity,  if  she  be
firmly  held,  will  lift  you  to  the  Kingdom  in  the  heavens,  for
by  her  sweetly  irresistible  force  she  brought  down  to  earth
the  King  of  Heaven.  The  Apostle  is  a  faithful  witness  of
this  when  he  says  that  because  of  His  great  love  God  sent
His  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  (Rom.  viii.  3).  You
will  rejoice  evermore  in  charity  before  God,  and  your  joy,
as  He  Himself  has  promised,  no  one  shall  take  from  you,
when  God  shall  be  all  in  all,  when  your  long  thirst  shall  be
satisfied,  when  His  glory  shall  be  made  manifest;  when  He
shall  appear  and  you  will  be  like  Him,  and  being  united  to
Him  for  ever  by  this  charity,  you  will  see  Him  as  He  is.

30.  Now  at  length let my  pen come  back to  you, my
dearest  friend,  to  whom I  send  this  letter. It  began  with
you,  and  with  you  let it  at last  end. I  call  to  witness my
conscience that, as I said before, the  sole cause of my
writing  is  charity. My  endeavour  has  been  to  fan  it  into  a
flame  by  the  breath  of  our  conference,  and  to  force  it  to
burst out into its  wonted  flames,  if not  into  greater  ones.
It  now  remains  for  you,  whom  Divine  Providence  has  given
us  to be  the milk-white  and  strong  column  on which  the
edifice  of  the  Monastic  Order  is  supported,  and  to  be,  as  it
were  a  bright  star,  not  only  to  the  monks,  but  also  to  the
whole  Latin  Church  of  our  day,  it  now  remains  for  you  to
throw  your  whole  strength  into  this  Divine  work,  and  to  pre
vent  such  great  companies  of  one  Name  and  one  Order  from
quarrelling  any  further. I have always  been zealous to
commend  to  my  brethren  the  holy  monks  of  your  congre
gation,  and  I  would,  if I  could,  unite  them  to  each  other  in
the  bond  of  a  perfect  charity. I  have  never  neglected  to  do
this  in  public,  in  private,  and  in  the  great  assemblies  of  our
Order; and  I  have  laboured to  rub  off  the rust  of  passion
and  of  quarrelsome  zeal  which  is  wont  secretly  to  gnaw  at
our  vitals.

VOL.  II.  44


682  LETTER CCXXIX.

31.  Do  you,  too,  labour  hard,  in  proportion  to  the  grace
given  you  by  God,  in  our  common  field  ;  for  no  one  since
you  in  our  time,  it  has  been  shown,  has  planted  so  usefully ;
and  so  with  praiseworthy  zeal  and  industry  everything  that
is  opposed  to  what  is  useful  will  be  rooted  up.  Banish
from  their  hearts  by  that  eloquence  which  is  from  above,
and  which  is  set  on  fire  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  childish
rivalry,  that  back-biting,  and  instead  of  them,  whether  the
brethren  like  it  or  not,  sow  the  seeds  of  brotherly  love.  Let
no  diversity  of  custom,  no  difference  of  colours,  any  longer
divide  your  flocks  from  ours;  but  let  universal  charity  unite
what  is  derived  from  the  Divine  Unity,  repair  what  is
decayed,  join  again  what  has  been  sundered,  give  life  to
what  has  been  cut  off.  So  is  it  fitting  that  there  should  be
one  heart  and  one  soul  (Acts  iv.  32)  in  those  who  have  one
Lord,  one  Faith,  one  Baptism,  who  are  contained  in  one
Church,  and  who  look  for  the  same  everlasting  life  of  bliss.
I  have  sent  a  morsel  of  crystallized  salt  to  my  friend  who
has  no  need  of  jewels,  but  to  whom,  as  I  have  heard,  its
material  use  was  once  advantageous,  and  I  thought  that  a
special  understanding  of  it  was  necessary  as  an  introduction
to  what  I  have  said  above.  For  whatever  the  number  and
the  value  of  the  array  of  virtues  on  the  table  of  the  Eternal
King,  if  they  lack  the  salt  of  brotherly  love  they  will  be
rejected  as  tasteless.  But  if  they  are  seasoned  with  this
salt  the  dainties  are  now  acceptable,  and  will  be  received
with  them  that  offer  them.  For  He  Who  in  His  law  accepts
no  sacrifice  without  salt,  shows  that  He  is  pleased  with  no
gift  of  virtue  which  lacks  this  condiment.


LETTER CCXXX.

TO THE BISHOPS OF OSTIA,  TUSCULUM,  AND PR/ENESTE.

Bernard  warns  them  to  do  their  duty  in  driving  the  wolves

from  the  flock  in  the  Diocese  of  Metz^
God  has  raised  you  to  an exalted  position,  in  order  that
the  more  eminent  the  dignity  you  possess,  the  more  you

1 See  Letter  178.


LETTER CCXXXI.  683

may  use  it  for  the  good  of  His  Church.  Otherwise  the  great
Father  will  put  down  from  their  seat  the  mighty  whose
usefulness  has  not  been  equal  to  the  power  that  they  have
received.  I  do  not  think  that  you  can  be  ignorant  of  how
great  loss  the  Spouse  of  Christ  is  suffering  in  the  Diocese
of  Metz,  though  we  here  are  the  more  horrified  because  we
are  nearer.  See  how  great  a  wolf  is  daily  endeavouring,
not  only  by  craft,  but  also  by  open  assaults,  to  break
through  into  the  fold  of  Christ,  and  to  scatter  the  sheep
which  have  been  brought  together  by  the  blood  of  Christ.
And  it  is  not  of  yesterday  or  the  day  before  yesterday,  but
•ever  since  the  time  that  he  was  a  little  wolf  he  has  not
•ceased  with  all  his  might  to  assail  and  to  harass  that  flock
of  the  Lord  with  robberies,  fires,  and  murders.  Therefore
I,  so  far  as  in  me  lies,  point  out  the  wolf,  urge  on  the  dogs.
What  your  duty  is  you  will  see.  It  is  not  my  place  to
teach  my  teachers.


LETTER  CCXXXI.

To  THE  SAME  THREE  BISHOPS  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE

ABBOT  OF  LAGNY.1
He  asserts  the  innocence  of  this  Abbot.

i.  I  dare  to  say  to  you  whatever  comes  uppermost.  For  if
it  behoved  you  to  bear  a  little  with  my  folly,  your  good-will
will,  no  doubt,  bear  with  my  manner,  for  you  are  debtor
both  to  the  wise  and  to  the  foolish.  And  I  say  this  not
.because  I  am  thinking  of  thoughtlessly  saying  a  word  not
pertinent  to  the  matter,  or  of  using  levity,  or  taking  pleasure
in  trifles,  especially  before  you,  who  are  seen  to  be  pillars
of  the  Church  ;  but  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the

*  Lagny  was  a  place  in  the  Diocese  cf  Paris,  standing  on  the  Marne,
where  was  a  monastery  founded  by  S.  Fursey,  with  the  help  of  Erchinoald,
and  restored  by  Heribert  II.,  Count  of  Champagne.  The  Charter  of  King
Robert  is  still  extant  in  lib.  vi.  tie  re  dipt.,  n.  151.  The  Church  of  Lagny  is
described  in  the  Letters  of  the  general  chapter  of  the  Benedictine  monks  as
•"  renowned  and  famous,  formerly  rich  in  holiness  and  piety."


684  LETTER CCXXXI.

mouth  speaketh,  and,  when  grief  is  urgent  within,  truth  is.
impatient  of  repression,  and  bursts  out  into  speech.  For
my  feet,  I  tell  you,  had  almost  gone,  my  treadings  had  well-
nigh  slipped,  because  by  what  appears  an  accursed  inversion
of  things  wickedness  so  often  overcomes  wisdom.  The
ungodly  are  lifting  their  horn  higher,  the  zeal  of  righteous
ness  is  being  disarmed,  and  there  is  no  one  who  will  or  can
do  good.  The  proud  do  wickedly  on  every  side,  and  no
one  dares  whisper  against  them.  And  I  would  that
innocence  were  safe,  and  that  righteousness  were  enough
for  its  own  defence.  What  sin  has  the  Abbot  of  Lagny
committed  ? x  Is  it  that  he  is  both  good  as  a  monk,  and
better  as  an  abbot — that  he  is  of  good  report  and  of  better
life  ?  Or  is  it  that  he  has  adorned  by  his  pity,  and  enriched
with  worldly  goods,  and  increased  in  numbers  of  good
brothers,  the  monastery  over  which  he  presides  ?  Behold,
this  crime  is  laid  to  his  charge.  If  it  is  a  crime  to  have
been  approved  by  God  and  men,  let  him  be  lifted  up  and
crucified.  For  heaven  and  earth  are  witnesses  that  it
cannot  be  denied  that  he  has  been.  If  it  is  a  crime  to  be
hospitable,  kind,  sober,  chaste,  humble,  let  him  deservedly
come  empty  out  of  the  hands  of  his  enemies.  For  he  is
really  all  these,  and  in  these  he  cannot  be  accused  ;  the
sanctity  of  his  life  and  the  glory  of  his  renown  prove  him
to  be  these.

2.  But  it  is  alleged  against  him  that  he  refused  to  receive
the  messenger  of  my  lord.  That  would  certainly  be  a  grave
offence  if  it  were  so.  The  Abbot  does  not  deny  that  the  man
who  was  sent  into  England,  after  being  honourably  enter
tained  by  him,  asked  to  speak  with  him,  but  Humbert,  the
i  In  the  Charter  of  S.  Martin  des  Champs  we  find  Geoffrey  given  as  Abbot  of
Lagny,  A.D.  1122,  in  succession  to  Arnulf,  who  died  A.D.  1106.  In  A.D.  1124
Ralph  became  Abbot  of  Lagny.  For  this  see  Hermann,  a  monk  of  Laon,
lib.  iii.  De  Mirac.  B.V.M.  c.  18,  where  he  says  that  Theobald,  Count  of
Champagne,  by  the  advice  of  dom  Norbert,  placed  a  monk  named  Ralph,  of  the
monastery  of  S.  Nicholas,  in  the  forest  of  Vosges,  as  Abbot  over  the  wealthy
Abbey  of  Lagny.  He  died  A.D.  1148,  and  was  succeeded  by  Godfrey.  The
Geoffrey  mentioned  in  the  Charter  of  S.  Maitin  des  Champs  died  A.D.  1 162.  We
have  two  Letters  of  the  general  chapter  of  Black  Monks  against  him,  one  to
Adrian  III.,  the  other  to  Alexander  III.


LETTER CCXXXI.  685

Provost,  interposed,  since  the  Abbot  was  getting  ready  to  go
out,  and  said  that  he,  in  the  Abbot's  place,  would  see  the  man.
I  leave  you  to  determine  if  any  want  of  respect  was  shown
to  the  man,  and  whose  fault  it  was.  He  is  also  accused  of
having  taken  a  letter  of  my  lord  the  Pope  from  Humbert
by  force  and  of  having  opened  it;  but  the  letter  exists,  still
unopened  and  sealed;  he  did  not  lay  hands  on  it,  but
Humbert,  by  the  advice  of  Count  Theobald  1  and  myself,
handed  it  to  him  of  his  own  accord.  The  charge,  there
fore,  is  false.  He  is  said  also  to  have  imprisoned  some
monks.  That,  too,  is  false.  But  if  he  did  divide  into
different  cells  some  who  were  mutinous  and  conspirators,
lest  they  should  do  more  harm  by  being  thrown  together,
who  that  can  judge  rightly  can  possibly  blame  this  ?  Then
as  to  the  charge  that  he  has  squandered  and  alienated  the
lands  and  goods  of  the  Church  and  given  them  to  his  rela
tions,  sufficient  reply  was  given  before  in  the  presence  of
the  venerable  Bishops  of  Soissons  and  Auxerre,  and  of
Count  Theobald,  who  acted  as  advocate  of  the  monastery;
and  I  give  it  again,  that  he  gave  to  his  own  as  to  others,  i.e.,
according  to  the  same  scale  and  custom.

3.  Moreover,  since  the  beginning  of  the  world,  it  was
never  heard  that  a  mutinous,  haughty,  and  ambitious  monk
merited  from  the  apostolic  See  the  privilege  of  his  liberty.
From  the  time  of  Judas  Iscariot  none  has  been  found  like
him,  to  rise  in  this  way  against  his  master,  and  betray
innocent  blood.  Happy  is  the  master  to  whom  the  words
of  the  prophet  are  common  with  the  Master  of  all,  Mine
own  familiar  friend  in  whom  I  trusted,  who  did  also  eat
of  my  bread,  hat/i  laid  great  wait  for  me  (Ps.  xli.  9).
Before,  indeed,  you  were  lording  it  over  the  clergy  against
Peter  the  Apostle  (i  S.  Pet.  v.  3),  nay,  against  his  co-
apostle  Paul,  you  were  lording  it  over  the  faith  of  the  whole
earth  (2  Cor.  i.  23).  But  now  you  have  added"  a  new  sin  in

1  Theobald  the  Great,  Count  of  Champagne,  advocate  of  Lagny,  was  buried
at  Lagny,  and  at  his  tomb  his  son,  Count  Henry,  set  up  a  [perpetual]  light.
Henry  lived  there  some  time,  as  appears  from  Suger's  epp.  No.  120.  For
Theobald  see  notes  to  ep.  3  7.


686  LETTER CCXXXII.

taking  upon  you  too  much  against  religion  itself.  What
remains  but  that  you  should  proceed  to  lord  it  over  the  holy
angels  themselves?  Except  that  in  this,  the  last  Judas
seems  to  have  surpassed  the  first  in  craftiness  and  cunning,
inasmuch  as  while  all  his  fellow-disciples  shuddered  at  the
infamous  deed  of  the  one,  the  other  has  had  the  craft  to
entrap,  not  any  undistinguished  person,  but  the  very  leaders
of  the  Apostles,  to  connive  at,  nay,  even  to  favour  his
wickedness.  I  do  not  impute  sin  to  my  lord,  from  whom,
being  but  man,  [a  decision]  could  be  snatched  by  fraud,
and  I  pray  that  God  will  not  impute  it.  But  God  forbid  that,
when  he  knows  the  truth,  the  accursed  and  sacrilegious
attempts  of  this  evil  man  should  prevail.  And  I  would
have  written  about  this  to  my  lord  himself  (Innocent)  with
my  usual  venturesomeness,  if  I  had  not  perceived  that  he
receives  with  less  than  his  wonted  favour  whatever  I  write
to  him.1  Do  you,  I  beseech  you,  who  are  monks,2  mourn
the  fortune  of  your  master  of  S.  Benedict,  who,  as  you  see,
is  in  danger  of  being  opposed  on  all  sides  ;  so  will  all  the
vigour  of  monastic  discipline  perish,  if  monks  are  to  use  the
strong  hand,  and  to  lift  up  their  horns  against  their  abbots.


LETTER  CCXXXII.

To  THE  SAME  BISHOPS.
Against  the  Abbot  of  S.  Theofred.

If  those  things  which  you  hear  about  the  Abbot  of  S.
Theofred3  are  true,  you  cannot  pass  them  over  without
danger  to  yourselves,  both  because  of  your  office  and  your
conscience.  Conscience,  I  say,  not  only  your  own,  but  also
of  others.  The  things  are  likely,  I  believe  them  also  to  be
true.  For  the  bearer  of  this  who  also  bears  his  testimony
about  these  matters  is  trustworthy.  You  ask  how  I  know
all  this?  I  hold  a  bundle  of  letters  sent  by  holy  men,

1  See  ep.  218.

-  Viz.,  Alberic  of  Ostia,  and  Vmarus  of  Tusculum  were  Cluniacs  ;  Stephen  of
Praeneste  a  Cistercian.
a  A  Benedictine,  in  the  Diocese  of  Pau.


LETTER CCXXXIIL  687

whom  I  know  to  be  both  holy  and  truthful,  and  they  all
alike  contain  as  loud-tongued  praises  of  the  bearer  as  they
do  dreadful  accusations  of  the  abbot.


LETTER CCXXXIIL

To  JOHN,  ABBOT  OF  BU/AY,  WHO  HAD  LEFT  HIS  ABBEY1

AND BETAKEN HIMSELF TO SOLITUDE.
Bernard  kindly  recalls  him  from  his  retirement.

To  his  beloved  son  JOHN,  Brother  BERNARD  entreats
that  he  walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  not  lay  aside  fear  of  the
Lord.

i.  I  cannot  say  with  what  bitterness  of  soul,  and  sorrow
of  heart  I  write  to  you,  dear  John,  now  that  I  see  that  I
gain  nothing  by  all  that  I  have  written,  and  that  my  words
have  no  effect  upon  you.  I  have  written  once  and  again,  if
I  mistake  not;  and  because  of  my  sins  my  labour  has
brought  me  no  answer.  Now  a  third  time  I  sow  my  seed,
with  prayer  to  Almighty  God,  that  it  may  not  return  to  me
empty,  but  may  prosper,  do  that  for  which  I  send  it  forth,
and  rejoice  me  at  some  time  or  other  with  the  fruit  of  your
obedience  and  salvation.  If  you  listen  to  me,  nay,  rather,
if  God  listen  to  me,  I  shall  have  gained  my  son.  If  not
1  will  turn  me  again  to  my  wonted  arms,  viz.,  prayers
and  tears,  not  against  you,  but  for  you.  I  have  mourned,
I  still  mourn,  and  draw  deep  sighs  from  the  bottom  of  my
heart  for  my  offspring.  Who  will  grant  to  me  that  you
as  my  brother  shall  again  suck  the  breasts  of  my  mother?
Who  will  recall  you  for  me  into  that  quietness  of  mind,
that  community  of  life,  that  fellowship  of  spirit,  and  tran
quillity  of  conscience  which  once  kept  you  fast  bound
to  us  ?

2.  And,  it  anything  on  my  side  is  causing  you  loss  or
keeping  you  back,  I  ask  you  not  to  doubt  that  that  report
is  false,  which  I  hear  you  have  been  made  to  believe  by

1  A  Cistercian  Abbey  in  Brittany,  in  the  Diocese  of  Nantes,  a  daughter  of
Clairvaux,  founded  A.u.  1135.  See  ep.  1 16.


688  LETTER CCXXXIII.

some  false  tongues  or  other;  viz.,  that  I,  without  any
reason  or  trial,  was  thinking  of  removing  you  from  the
care  of  the  souls  of  your  brethren  that  I  had  entrusted  to
you.  This  is  not  true ;  but  in  a  word  or  two  hear  what  is.
Even  if  I  had  wished  to  do  this,  it  would  not  have  been
lawful;  and  if  it  had  been  lawful  (I  speak  on  my  conscience)
I  should  never  have  wished  it.  This  is  the  truth.  If,  then,
this  was  the  only  reason  why  your  heart  has  been  turned,
now  that  the  truth  has  been  made  known,  what  remains  but
that  you  regain  your  wisdom,  return  to  yourself,  return  to
me,  and  moreover  condemn  yourself  for  your  hastiness  and
thoughtless  cruelty  ?  For  if  one  accursed  suspicion  had
such  power  to  alienate  you,  and  cast  you  down  headlong,
how  much  more  power  now  ought  absolute  certainty  to
have  to  set  you  up  again,  and  bring  you  back  to  us  !  It
would  be  disgraceful  to  you  if  you  could  be  seduced  by
falsehood,  and  could  not  be  brought  back  by  truth.  You
may  perhaps  be  forgiven  for  having  yielded  for  a  time  to  a
disguised  falsehood,  but  now  that  it  has  been  found  out  and
laid  bare,  it  would  be  to  your  shame  if  you  are  not  greatly
angry  at  it,  to  say  nothing  of  still  giving  it  credence.
Therefore,  be  angry  and  sin  not,  unless  you  wish  me,  or
rather  God,  to  be  angry.  For  as  to  that  which  you  have
lost,  it  deserves  our  pity  rather  than  our  indignation.  Of
course  you  are  a  man,  making  your  own  way,  like  the
whole  human  race,  across  this  great  and  wide  sea1  wherein
are  things  creeping  innumerable.  Who  can  boast  that
while  on  it  he  is  never  driven  by  winds,  nor  tossed  by  the
waves  ?  You  know  that  you  have  been  shipwrecked  by
them,  that  you  have  fallen  amongst  false  brethren.  I
repeat  it,  this  is  the  truth.  You  have  been  deceived,  and  a
lying  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  false  prophets  has  beguiled  you.
3.  But  now  falsehood  has  been  dispersed  by  the  bright
beams  of  the  risen  truth.  If,  which  God  forbid,  you  still
persist  in  your  obstinacy,  I  will  not  in  the  meanwhile  judge
you;  there  is  One  that  seeketh  and  judgeth.  But  I  spare
you,  hiding  my  indignation,  and  delaying  to  come  to  you

1 I.e.,  of  life.


LETTER CCXXXIV.  689

with  a  rod.  Further,  I  will  endeavour,  if  I  can,  to  draw  you
by  compassion  and  a  spirit  of  meekness;  for  I  feel  that  I  am
more  familiar  with  that,  and  I  do  not  doubt  that  it  will  more
easily  gain  you.  I  will  not  indeed  delay  to  unsheath  against
you  that  sword  which  lies  hidden  in  my  well-nigh  motherly
breast,  viz.,  a  continuous  sorrow  in  my  heart,  and  frequent
lamentations  to  God  for  you  until  you  come  back.  But  if,
according  to  your  hardness  and  impenitent  heart,  you  turn
aside  all  the  blows  of  this  sword  so  lovingly  striking  you,
yet  it  cannot  be  but  that  at  some  time  or  other  your  soul
will  say,  "  I  am  wounded  with  love."  For  now  it  is  not  only
truth,  but  also  charity,  which  shall  set  me  free.  But  what
am  I  saying?  How,  unhappy  that  1  am,  how  shall  I  be  free
when  my  heart  is  bleeding  from  the  loss  of  my  son  ?  My
affection  shall  not  rest  though  no  effect  follow  ;  my  grief
shall  not  be  appeased  ;  my  tears  shall  not  cease.  I  will
show  myself  to  you  while  I  live  like  another  Samuel ;  be  not
to  me  another  Saul.  I  will  pray  you,  I  will  pray  for  you,
that  you  return.  Come  to  me,  come  before  1  die,  that  I,
who  loved  you  in  life,  in  death  may  not  be  separated  from
you.

LETTER CCXXXIV.

To  HERBERT,  ABBOT  OF  S.  STEPHEN  OF  DIJON.

Bernard  begs  Jiis  forgiveness  for  a  religious  named  John ,
who  had  attacked  him  in  writing.

If  brother  John  has  said  01  written  anything  unbecoming
against  me,  or  in  an  unbecoming  way,1  it  is  not  so  much  I
whom  he  has  injured  as  himself;  for  by  writing  in  that  way
he  rather  betrays  his  own  hastiness  than  proves  me  guilty
of  wrong;  though  even  if  he  had  in  any  point  injured  me
it  was  not  my  intention  to  repay  him  with^evil.  And  so
looking  to  what  becomes  me  rather  than  what  he  deserves,
I  ask  and  supplicate  that  you  will  also  forgive  the  young

1  This  John  was  a  regular  Canon  of  the  Church  of  S.  Stephen  of  Dijon,  where
Herbert  was  abbot  (see  ep.  59).  It  does  not  appear  what  he  wrote  against
Bernard.


690  LETTER CCXXXV.

man  this  fault,  which  seems  to  savour  more  of  boastfulness
than  malice  ;  on  condition,  however,  that  for  the  future  he
keep  himself  from  writing  or  treating  of  matters  which
clearly  are  above  him.  For  as  plainly  enough  appears,  in
this  little  thing  that  he  has  been  presumptuous  enough  to
put  forth,  there  was  need  of  a  maturer  style  and  spirit.  For
you  must  see,  even  in  this  brief  pamphlet,  that  the  man
either  did  not  write  what  he  thought,  or  did  not  think  what
he  ought.

LETTER CCXXXV. (A.D. 1143.)

To POPE CELESTINE IN  THE CASE  OF  THE DISPUTED
ELECTION  AT  YORK.1

Bernard  begs the intervention of  the Pope against  the
odious  and  Simoniacal  intrusion  at  York.

i.  It  behoves  you  according  to  the  righteousness  which  is
of  the  law  to  raise  up  seed  to  your  dead  brother.  This  you
will  worthily  fulfil  if  you  maintain  the  good  actions  and

1  The  case  is  described  by  William  of  Newburgh  (de  Rebus  Angl.  lib.  i.  c.  17);
by  H  rancis  Godwin  (Lib.  de  Episc.  Angl.  on  Ebor.  n.  29) ;  and  by  Roger  Hoveden,
in  the  last  part  of  his  Annals.  The  matter  in  brief  is  this  :  In  A.D.  1 140  Thur-
stan,  Archbishop  of  York,  died.  There  was  a  disputed  election  for  his  successor.
Some  voted  for  William,  nephew  of  King  Stephen,  treasurer  of  the  Church  of
York,  others  for  Henry  Murdach,  Abbot  of  Fountains,  a  former  disciple  of  S.
Bernard's  at  Clairvaux.  William  was  consecrated  Bishop  by  Henry,  Bishop  of
Winchester,  but  was  refused  the  pall  by  the  Pope  when  he  applied  for  it.
Stephen,  indignant  at  the  refusal,  would  not  receive  Henry,  though  confirmed  by
the  Pontiff,  and  in  possession  of  the  pall.  Moreover,  the  citizens  followed  the
King,  and  refused  to  acknowledge  Henry  as  their  Bishop.  At  last,  however,  the
King  was  won  over,  Henry  was  recognized  by  his  diocese,  and  governed  it  for
ten  years,  and  finally  died  A.D.  1153  at  Sherborne.  In  the  meanwhile  William
was  living  with  Henry  of  Winchester.  But  after  the  deaths  of  Eugenius  and
Bernard,  on  the  death  of  Archbishop  Henry,  he  went  to  Rome,  and  at  length,
by  the  help  of  Cardinal  Gregory,  he  obtained  from  Anastasius,  the  suc
cessor  of  Eugenius,  his  confirmation  and  the  pall.  But  he  did  not  live
long  after  it,  as  he  died  A.D.  1154,  not  without  a  suspicion  of  having  been
poisoned.  Godwin  says  that  he  was  placed  in  the  roll  of  saints,  and  that  many
miracles  were  wrought  at  his  tomb.  But  he  also  adds :  "  Let  who  will  believe
it ;  let  him  also  remember  that,  holy  as  he  may  have  been,  he  was  certainly
driven  out  from  his  See  by  Bernard,  or,  at  all  events,  by  his  efforts."  Cf.  epp.
238-240,  252,  346  el  seq.  for  this  York  election.


LETTER CCXXXV.  691

perfect  the  incomplete  works  of  Pope Innocent,  to  whose
place  in  the  heritage  of  the  Lord  you  have  succeeded. You
have  a  case  before  you  in  which  you  may  do  this. Is  there
anyone who  knows not that  the  cause  of  the  Church  of
York  was  settled  by  him  ? I  wish  that no  one  knew  how
the order which went from his lips  has been executed.
\Vho  can  prevent  it  from  being  told  in  Gath,  from  being
published  in  the  streets  of  Askelon  ?  (2  Sam.  i.  20). But
to  make  a  short  story  for  one  who  is  much  occupied,  let  my
Lord  hear  briefly  what  was  said  and  what  has  so  far  been
done. When  the  man  who  impiously  sought  his  election
to  the  primacy  of  the  Church  of  York  was  accused  of  many
faults  the  whole  controversy  was  at  length  ordered  to  cease
according  to  the  testimony  of  the  illustrious  William,1  Dean
of  the  same  Church,  so  that his  ambition  might  fail  of  all
its  attempts unless  the  Dean  should  remove  by  his  oath
the  charge  of  intrusion  which,  amongst  other  charges,  was
made against him. But this was done, not  by way  of
sentence,  but  from  mercy,  for  he  himself  had  asked  for  it.
Surely  a  most  mild  sentence,  when he  was charged  with
very many grievous faults, which he utterly refused  to
rebut. But  it  were  well  if  matters  had  remained  there,  for
even  if  justice  was not  satisfied, at  all events  the  Church
was  set  free  from  scandal. I  do  not  speak  of  the  remission
of  the  sentence;  that  did  no  harm. But  this  indulgence,
though  too  great,  yet  availed  the  adversary  nothing,  inas
much  as  he  was  unable  to  carry  out  what  he  had  himself
come  forward  to  promise,  for  the  Dean,  on  whose support
he seemed  to  reckon, failed  him  and refused to  perjure
himself. For  when  would  a  good  man  act  as  sponsor  for  a
man  whom common rumour and his well-known actions
alike  held  up  to  detestation  ? What  then  happened  ? The
one  refused  to  swear,  and  the  other  is  Bishop.

2.  Oh  !  it  is  a  matter  to  be  kept  from  th£  knowledge  of
everyone,  and,  if  it  were  possible,  it  should  be  condemned
to  perpetual  silence.  But  that  is  too  late.  The  triumph  of

1  He  was  called  William  of  S.  Barbara,  and  was  afterwards  Bishop  of
Durham.


6g2  LETTER CCXXXV.

the  devil,  alas !  has  become  known  to  the  world.  The
shouts  of  the  uncircumcised  mingle  on  all  sides  with  the
lamentations  of  good  men,  because  wickedness  seems  to
have  overcome  wisdom.  The  shame  of  our  mother  Church
is  pointed  at  by  the  finger.  Our  father  Innocent  still  lives
in  you,  though  a  worthless  servant  thinks  him  dead,  and
exposes  and  scoffs  at  that  in  him  which  decency  would
cover.  If  this  was  to  be  the  end  of  it  all,  why  was  this
most  detestable  cause  dragged  from  so  far  to  Rome,  when
it  was  more  worthy  of  darkness  and  a  corner  ?  Why  was
so  toilsome  a  journey  over  sea  and  land  undertaken  by
many  ?  Why  were  the  religious  summoned  from  the  ends
of  the  earth  to  accuse  him,  and  why  were  the  purses  of
Christ's  poor  drained  by  the  expenses  of  the  long  journey?
Could  not  so  base  and  infamous  a  man  have  been  made
Bishop  (with  unwillingness  and  grief  I  say  it)  without  Rome
having  to  know  the  things  at  which  England  was  horrified,
and  for  which  France  abominated  him  ?  How  much  better
would  it  have  been  if  his  case  had  never  been  brought
before  the  Roman  Curia,  and  if  this  horrible  polluter  of
everything  had  never  reached  even  its  sacred  threshold.
How  much  more  tolerable  it  would  have  been  if  the  Apos
tolic  see  had  never  heard  of  this  intolerable  evil,  which
now,  that  it  has  been  manifested,  it  tolerates.  With  what
rashness  was  it  brought  about !  The  man  was  publicly
spoken  against,  accused  before  the  judge,  not  cleared — nay,
convicted  :  and  yet  consecrated.  Let  him  who  after  all  this
laid  hands  on  him  see  whether  I  should  not  say,  execrated,1
rather  than  consecrated.  For  he  will  not  deny  that  these
things  are  so  ;  he  will  not  deny  that  he  found  them  so
stated  in  the  Apostolic  letters  directed  to  him  on  the  very
subject.  Some  one,  perhaps,  may  say  that  since  sentence
was  not  given  he  was  not  convicted.  But  I  say  that  he
confessed.  For  to  escape  judgment  he  of  his  own  accord
elected  to  have  recourse  to  the  testimony  of  William  the

1  This  word  execrate  is  similarly  used  as  the  antithesis  to  consecrate  in  ep.
1 66,  n.  i,  223,  n.  2,  and  in  Duchesne,  ep.  300,  Vol.  iv.,  which  is  a  Letter  of
Drogo,  Bishop-Elect  of  Lyons,  to  Louis  the  Younger.


LKTTER CCXXXV.  693

Dean,  and  then  since  he  failed  him,  what  is  this  but  giving
judgment  against  himself,  and  being  condemned  by  his
own  mouth  ?

3.  Since  these  things  are  so,  see,  my  lord  and  father,
that  your  heart  lean  not  to  any  work  of  wickedness,  for,  as
the  Prophet  says,  As  for  such  as  turn  aside  to  their  crooked
•ways,  the  Lord  shall  lead  them  -with  the  workers  of
iniquity  (Ps.  cxxv.  5).  Otherwise  do  you  advise  those
unhappy  Abbots  whom  the  Apostolic  command  dragged  to
Rome  for  the  purpose  of  accusing  him,  as  well  as  the
very  numerous  Religious  in  that  diocese,  that  they  are  to
obey  him  and  receive  the  sacraments  from  a  man  twice
intruded  on  them— first,  by  the  King,  secondly,  by  the
legate  ?  When  he  could  not  enter  by  the  door  he  forced
his  way  in  with  a  silver  axe,  as  they  say,  and  so  was
impudently  intruded  by  the  legate  into  the  sanctuary  of
God,  against  right  and  justice,  against  the  command  of  the
Supreme  Pontiff,  to  the  injury  of  the  highest  See  and  of
the  whole  Roman  Curia.  If  I  mistake  not,  they  will  resign
their  posts  rather  than  pay  homage  to  this  idol,  unless  your
authority  forcibly  intervene.  But  with  how  much  more
holy  zeal  and  how  much  more  worthy  of  your  apostleship
would  it  be  for  you  to  draw  the  sword  of  Phinehas  against
the  two  who  are  so  disgracefully  committing  fornication
rather  than  to  allow  so  many  holy  men  to  leave  their  posts,
or  to  force  them  to  remain  against  their  consciences  ?


LETTER  CCXXXVI. (A.D. 1143-)

To THE WHOLE ROMAN CURIA,  ON THE  SAME SUBJECT.

To  my  lords  and  reverend  fathers,  the  Bishops  and
Cardinals  of  the  Curia,  Brother  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clair-
vaux,  health,  and  the  assurance  of  his  pool" prayers.

i.  What  concerns  all  must  be  written  to  all.  Nor  am  1
afraid  of  being  charged  with  presumption  because,  though
1  am  least  of  all,  I  do  not  think  that  any  injury  done  to  the
Roman  Curia  is  no  affair  of  mine.  I  am,  I  assure  you,  con-


694  LETTER CCXXXVI.

tinually  being  consumed,  so  much  so  that  I  am  even  weary
of  life.  In  the  House  of  God  I  see  dreadful  things.  And
since  I  have  no  power  to  correct  them,  I,  at  all  events,  bring
them  before  those  whose  business  it  is  to  correct  them.  If
they  amend  them,  well.  If  not,  I  have  liberated  my  soul :
you  have  no  excuse  for  your  sin.  You  are  not  unaware
that  a  sentence  was  pronounced  by  our  lord,  Pope  Innocent
of  good  memory,  with  the  general  consent  of  the  Roman
Curia  and  of  yourselves,  making  void  the  election,  or  rather
the  intrusion,  of  William  of  York,  unless  the  other  William,
who  was  at  that  time  Dean,  should  deny  on  oath  what  was
charged  against  his  namesake.  And  it  did  not  escape  you
that  this  was  not  a  judicial  sentence  but  one  of  mercy,  and
undoubtedly  so,  because  William  had  himself  asked  for
this.  Would  that  that  may  be  adhered  to,  and  that  what
has  been  done  against  it  may  not  stand.  For  the  one  did
not  swear,  and  the  other  sits  in  the  chair,  which  I  now  call
a.  chair  of  pestilence.  Who  is  there  to  send  against  this
fornication  the  sword  of  Phinehas,  or  to  make  Peter  exer
cise  his  power,  and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  slay  the
wicked  ?  Many  are  calling  on  me  with  all  their  heart  to
urge  you  to  punish  this  sacrilege  as  it  deserves.  Other
wise  I  am  bound  to  tell  you  that  there  will  be  an  exceeding
great  scandal  in  the  Church  of  God,  and  I  am  afraid  that
the  authority  of  the  Roman  See  will  receive  heavy  loss  and
great  damage,  if  punishment  is  not  inflicted  on  the  man
who  has  perverted  its  general  sentence,  and  in  such  a  way,
too,  that  others  may  fear  to  do  the  like.

2.  WThat  am  I  to  say  of  his  boast  that  he  has  secret
letters,  truly  letters  of  darkness  ?  I  would  that  they  were
from  the  princes  of  darkness,  and  not  from  the  princes  of
the  Apostles.  Behold  the  children  of  the  uncircumcised
have  heard  ;  they  whisper  it  about  that  the  Roman  Curia,
.after  having  given  so  outspoken  a  sentence,  now  sends
contrary  letters  privately.  What  am  I  to  say  to  you  ?  If
this  grievous  scandal  which  is  scandalizing  not  only  babes,
but  also  the  mighty  and  the  perfect,  does  not  rouse  you  ;  if
you  have  no  compassion  for  the  poor  abbots  whom  the


LETTER CCXXXVI.  695

Apostolic  summons  has  dragged  from  the  ends  of  the  earth,
if  you  feel  no  pity  for  the  great  and  godly  monasteries,
which  are  threatened  with  destruction  under  the  burden  of
this  man,  if  (which  I  ought  to  have  said  first)  zeal  for  t he-
House  of  God  is  not  eating  you  up,  is  the  craft  of  so  deadly
a  foe  to  be  allowed  so  to  prevail  that  the  princes  of  the
Church  bear  with  equanimity  her  infamy  and  their  own
shame?  What  matters  it  though  the  man  did  obtain
sacrilegious  consecration?  Surely  it  will  be  far  more
glorious  to  overthrow  Simon  when  he  has  been  elevated
than  to  frustrate  his  efforts  to  rise.  Moreover,  what  will
you  do  for  the  religious  men  who  do  not  see  how  with  a
safe  conscience  they  can  receive  even  the  ordinary  sacra
ments  from  the  leprous  hand  ?  If  I  am  not  mistaken  they
will  rather  flee  than  join  hands  with  death.  They  will
prefer  exile  to  eating  things  offered  to  idols.  But  if  the
Roman  Curia  compels  them  against  their  consciences  to
bend  the  knee  to  Baal,  God  will  see  it  and  judge.  So,  too,
will  that  heavenly  court  in  which  no  ambition  can  subvert
judgment.  Lastly,  your  son  beseeches  you  by  the  bowels
of  mercy  of  our  God  that,  if  you  have  any  zeal  for  God,
you,  as  friends  of  God,  will  have  pity  on  His  Holy  Church,
and,  as  far  as  you  can,  prevent  any  countenance  being
given  to  so  detestable  an  affair.


LETTER CCXXXVIL (A.D. 1145.)

TO THE WHOLE  ROMAN  CURIA, WHEN THEY CHOSE THE

ABBOT  OE  S.  ANASTASIUS  FOR  POPE  (EucENius).1

Bernard  expresses  liis  surprise  and  apprehension  at
f/iis  election.  He  begs  the  attendance  and  faithful  help
of  the  Cardinals  for  the  Pope  Elect.

1  Lucius  II.,  successor  of  Celestine,  died  A.D.  i  145,  when  Bernard,  Abbot  of
S.  Anastasius,  at  Rome,  was  made  Pope  under  the  title  of  Eugenius  III.  He
had  been  a  disciple  of  S.  Bernard,  and  to  him  S.  Bernard  addressed  his  book  De
Consideratione.  Ep.  344  was  written  by  him  to  S.  Bernard  while  he  was  still
abbot ;  also  when  Pope  he  wrote  the  Letter  prefixed  to  ep.  273.  Ep.  475  was
written  on  his  death.


696  LETTER CCXXXVII.

To  the  lords  and  reverend  fathers,  all  the  Cardinals  and
Bishops  of  the  Curia,  the  son  of  their  holiness  wishes
health.

i.  May  God  forgive  you  what  you  have  done  !  You
have  recalled  to  the  world  a  man  who  was  buried ;  you
have  again  involved  in  cares  and  thrown  amongst  crowds  a
man  who  had  fled  from  both.  You  have  made  the  last  first,
and  lo !  his  last  state  is  more  dangerous  than  the  first.
He  was  crucified  to  the  world  ;  through  you  he  now
lives  again  to  the  world,  and  you  have  chosen  him  to  be
lord  of  all,  who  had  chosen  to  be  a  door-keeper  in  the  house
of  his  God.  Why  have  you  confounded  the  counsel  of  the
poor?  Why  have  you  destroyed  the  resolve  of  one  who
was  poor  and  needy  and  stricken  in  heart  ?  He  was
running  well.  What  made  you  block  up  his  roads,  turn
aside  his  paths,  and  entangle  his  footsteps?  He  will  fall
among  robbers  just  as  though  he  were  going  down  from
Jerusalem,  instead  of  ascending  from  Jericho.  And  so  he
who  had  powerfully  shaken  off  from  himself  the  hands  of
the  devil,  however  violent  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  the
glory  of  the  world,  could  not  yet  escape  from  your  hands.
Did  he  leave  Pisa  only  that  he  should  be  taken  to  Rome  ?  l
Did  he,  who  shrank  from  being  the  second  in  command  in
one  church,  require  the  supreme  command  over  the  whole
Church  ?

1  Eugenius  had  formerly  been  vice-dominus  of  the  Church  of  Pisa,  and  a
MS.  of  Dunes  quoted  by  Henriquez  calls  him  Suffragan  ;  he  then  became  a  dis
ciple  of  S.  Bernard,  then  Abbot  of  S.  Anastasius,  or  of  Trois  Fontaines  at  Aquae-
Salviae,  near  Rome.  Contrary  to  the  usual  custom,  the  cardinals  elected  as  a
successor  to  Lucius,  A.D.  1145,  not  a  Cardinal,  but  an  Abbot.  And,  therefore.
Bernard  expresses  his  wonder  that  one,  who  had  found  the  office  of  vice-dominus
of  a  single  Church  too  heavy  for  him  to  bear,  should  have  been  called  to  govern
the  whole  Church.  We  will  briefly  say  what  the  office  of  vice-dominus  (Vidame)
was,  for  there  are  some  Churches  or  Dioceses  which  still  retain  the  title.  At  one
time,  indeed,  each  Bishop  was  bound  to  have  a  vice-dominus  and  a  steward
(Distinct.  89,  cap.  "  Volumus  ").  And,  therefore.  S.  Gregory  the  Great,  writing
to  the  sub-deacon  Anthelm  (lib.  ix.  ep.  66),  says: — "  We  will  that  our  Brother
Paschasius  appoint  for  himself  a  vice-dominus  and  a  major-domo,- whose  duty
it  shall  be  to  care,  as  far  as  possible,  for  any  guests  that  may  come,  and  to  hear
complaints  which  may  arise,  etc.''  The  Gloss,  on  "  Volumus  and  Vice-
dominus,"  then  explains  the  word:  "A  steward  of  the  episcopal  property  whose


LETTER CCXXXVII.  697

2.  What  reason  or  counsel  made  you,  when  the  supreme
Pontiff  was  dead, rush  upon  a  mere  rustic,  lay  hands  on
him in his concealment,  wrest from his hands the  axe,
pickaxe,  or  hoe,  drag  him  to  the  palace,  lift  him  to  a  throne,
clothe him  with purple  ] and  fine  linen,  gird  him  with  a
sword  to  execute  vengeance  on  nations,  to  rebuke  peoples,
to  bind  their  kings  in  chains  and  their  nobles  with links  of
iron? Was  there  no  wise  and  experienced  man  amongst  you
more  fitted  for  such  things  ? It  certainly  seems  absurd  that
a  man  humble  and  ragged  should  be  taken  to  preside  over
Kings,  to  rule  Bishops,  to  dispose  of  kingdoms  and  empires.
Is  it  ridiculous  or  miraculous? Certainly  one  of  these. J
do  not  deny,  I  do  not  doubt,  that  even this  may  have  been
the work of God, who alone worketh great marvels,
especially  when  I  hear  constantly  from  the  mouths  of  many
that this  has been  done  by  the Lord. Nor  do 1 forget
either  the  judgments  of  God  in  olden time  or  the  Scripture
which  tells  us  that  by  the  will  of  God  very  many  have  been
at  different  times called from a private,  or  even a  rustic
life,  to  rule  His  people. For  example,  to mention  but  one
out  of  many,  did  He not  choose  His servant  David  in  this
way,  and  take  him  from  the  sheepfolds,  from  following  the
ewes  great  with  young? So  I  say  it  may  have  happened
by  the  good  pleasure  of  God  with  our  Eugenius.

3.  Yet  I am  not sure; but I fear  for  my  son,  who  is  of
delicate  nature,  and  whose  tender  modesty  is  accustomed
rather  to  leisure  and  quiet  than  to managing  those  things
which  are  without: and it is  to  be  feared  that  he  will  not
execute  the  offices  of  his  Apostleship  with  the  dignity  that  is
fitting. What  sort  of  disposition  do  you  think  a  man  is  likelv
to  have  who  sees  himself  dragged  into  the  midst  from the
depths of spiritual contemplation, and from the pleasing

duty  it  is  to  look  after  that  property  and  to  provide  for  guests" It  adds  :  "  Be-

cause  a  Bishop  cannot  manage  such matters  himself." What  is  said,  then,

about  guests  is  to  be  referred  to  the  Vice-dominus. But  Filesacus  (Thenl.  Pans,

ad  tit.de  Offic.  Jttil.  Ontin.  lib.  i.  Decret.  or  on  the  sacred  authority  of  Bishops)  so

distinguishes  the  two  offices,  that  the  steward's  duty  is  to  look  after  guests,  and

the  Vice-dominus  is  to  act  as  the  deputy  of  the  Bishop  in  hearing  causes  and  suits.

1  At  that  time  the  Pope  was  vested  in  a  red  cope  (Pet.  Damian  lib.  i.  ep.  20).

VOL. II.  45


698  LETTER CCXXXVII.

solitude  of  the  heart,  and  led  like  a  sheep  appointed  to  be
slain  to  such  strange  and  unwelcome  duties.  Unless  the  Lord
support  him  with  his  hand  he  must,  alas!  be  cast  down  and
crushed  under  the  unusual  and  excessive  burden,  whichseems
a  heavy  load  for  the  shoulders  of  a  giant,  so  to  speak,  or  even
of  an  angel.  But  it  has  now  been  done,  and,  as  many  say,
from  the  Lord;  it  is  your  duty,  therefore,  dearly  beloved,  to
anxiously  help  forward  by  your  earnest  efforts  and  faithful
services  what  we  see  has  been  the  work  of  your  own  hands.
If  there  be  any  consolation  in  you,  if  any  power  of  love  in  the
Lord,  if  any  godly  pity,  if  any  bowels  of  compassion,  assist
and  co-operate  with  him  in  the  work  to  which  he  has  been
called  through  you  by  God.  Whatsoever  things  are  true,
whatsoever  things  are  honest,  whatsoever  things  are  just,
whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are  lovely,
whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report,  suggest  them  to  him,
urge  him  to  them,  do  them  with  him;  do  this,  and  the  God
of  peace  shall  be  with  you.


LETTER  CCXXXVIII.  (A.D. 1145.)

To  POPE  EUGENICS:  His  FIRST  LETTER.

Bernard  at  once  congratulates  and  condoles  with the
newly-elevated  Pope.

To  his  loving  father  and  Lord,  EUGENIUS,  by  the  grace  of
God,  supreme  Pontiff,  his  humble  servant  BERNARD,  called
Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  sends  greeting.

i.  We  have  heard  in  this  our  country,  and  it  is  on  the
tongues  of  all,  what  the  Lord  has  done  with  respect  to  you.
Till  now  I  have  forborne  to  write,  I  considered  the  matter  in
silence.  For  I  expected  to  hear  from  you,  and  to  be  pre
vented  with  the  blessings  of  sweetness.  I  was  waiting  for
some  faithful  man  to  come  from  your  side  to  tell  me  every
thing  in  order,  what  was  done,  by  what  means,  and  in  what
manner.  I  was  waiting  to  see  if  by  any  chance  one  of  my
sons  should  return  to  soothe  the  grief  of  his  father,  and  to  say :
Joseph,  thy  son,  is  alive,  and  is  ruler  over  all  the  land  of
Egypt  (Gen.  xlv.  26).  Hence  it  is  that  this  letter  is  not  of


LETTER CCXXXVIII.  699

free  will,  but  of  necessity,  and  is  extorted  by  the  requests  of
my  friends,  to  whom  I  cannot  deny  the  short  remaining  por
tion  of  my  life.  But  as  I  have  once  begun,  I  will  speak  to  my
lord.  For  I  dare  not  call  you  any  longer  my  son,  because
the  son  has  been  changed  into  father  and  the  father  into
son.  He  who  came  after  me  is  preferred  before  me  ;  but
I  feel  no  envy,  because  I  am  confident  that  what  was  lacking
to  me  he  will  supply,  who  came  not  only  after  me,  but  also
through  me  ;  for  if  you  will  let  me  say  so,  I  begot  you  in
-one  sense  through  the  Gospel.  What,  then,  is  my  hope
and  joy,  and  crown  of  rejoicing?  Is  it  not  you  before
God?  A  wise  son  is  the  glory  of  his  father  (Frov.  x.  i).
But  henceforward  you  will  not  be  called  a  son,  but  a  new
name  will  be  given  you  which  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  has
spoken  (Is.  Ixii.  2).  This  change  is  of  the  right  hand  of  the
Most  High,  and  many  shall  rejoice  in  this  change.  For  as
formerly  Abram  was  changed  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  5),
Jacob  to  Israel  (Gen.  xxxii.  28),  and,  to  mention  your  pre
decessors,  Simon  was  changed  to  Cephas  (S.  John  i.  42),
Saul  to  Paul  (Acts  xiii.  9),  so  my  son  Bernard,  by  what  I
hope  is  a  joyous  and  beneficial  translation,  has  been  pro
moted  to  my  Father  Eugenius.  This  is  the  linger  of  God
raising  up  the  poor  out  of  the  dust,  and  lifting  up  the
beggar  from  the  dunghill,  that  he  may  sit  with  princes  and
may  inherit  the  throne  of  glory.

2.  It  now  remains  that,  since  this  change  has  taken  place
in  you,  the  bride  of  your  Lord  who  has  been  entrusted  to
jour  care  may  be  changed  for  the  better,  and  that  no  longer
Sarai  but  Sarah1  shall  she  be  called  (Gen.  xvii.  15).  Under
stand  what  I  say  ;  for  God  shall  give  you  understanding.
If  you  are  the  friend  of  the  Bridegroom,  do  not  say,  "  His
beloved  is  my  princess,"  but  "  His  beloved  is  a  princess."
Claim  nothing  of  hers  as  your  own,  except  Jthat  for  her,  if
need  be,  you  ought  to  lay  down  your  life.  If  Christ  has  sent
you,  you  will  feel  that  you  have  come  not  to  be  ministered
unto,  but  to  minister;  and  to  minister  not  only  of  your
substance,  but,  as  I  said  before,  your  life  itself.  A  true

1  Sarai  (rTO)  =  my  princess,  according  to  all  the  old  commentators:  whereas
Sarah  (nT\c)=a  princess. —  [E.]


7OO  LETTER CCXXXVIII.

successor  of  Paul  will  say  with  Paul,  Not  because  we  have
dominion  over  your  faith,  but  are  helpers  of  your  joy
(2  Cor.  i.  23).  The  heir  of  Peter  will  listen  to  Peter,  who
says :  Neither  as  being  lords  over  God's  heritage,  but
being  ensamples  to  the  flock  (i  S.  Peter  v.  3).  For  by  so
doing  it  will  no  longer  be  as  a  handmaiden  but  as  a  free-
woman,  full  of  beauty,  that  the  Bride  will  be  admitted  into
the  welcome  embrace  of  her  most  glorious  Bridegroom.
By  whom  else  if  not  by  you  is  this  freedom  that  is  her  due
to  be  hoped  for?  By  none,  if  you  too  (which  God  forbid),
seek  in  the  heritage  of  God  the  things  which  are  your  own,
after  having  long  ago  learnt  not  to  call  anything  your  own
which  belongs  to  you,  no,  not  even  yourself.

3.  Therefore,  having  such  confidence  in  you  as  she  seems
to  have  had  for  a  long  time in none  of  your  predecessors,
the whole assembly of the saints everywhere rightly
rejoices,  and  boasts  herself  in  the  Lord  ; and  specially  she
whose  womb  bore you,  and  whose breasts you sucked.
May  I not,  too,  rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice? Shall  I
not be one of the number  of those who are glad  ? 1
rejoiced,  but  it  was,  I  confess,  with  trembling. I  rejoiced,
but  in  the  very  moment  of  my  rejoicing  fear  and  trembling
came  upon  me. For  though  I  have  laid  aside  the  name  of
father,  I  have  not  laid  aside  a  father's  fear,  or  anxiety,  least
of  all  the  affection and heart of  a  father. I look  at  the
height  and I  fear  a  fall. I look at the height of  your
dignity,  and  I  see  the  mouth  of  the  abyss  that  lies  beneath
you. I  notice  the  loftiness  of  your  honour,  and I  shudder
at the  danger  close at hand, because of that  which is
written  : Man being in honour  hath no understanding
(Ps.  xlix.  12). Which saying,  I think, is  to  be referred
rather  to  the  cause  than  the  time,  so  that  we  are  to  under
stand  it  to  mean  that  when  he  is  in  honour  he  has  no  under
standing, because the consciousness of  his honour has
swallowed  up  his  understanding.

4.  And,  indeed,  you  had  chosen  to  be  a  doorkeeper  in  the
house  of  God,  and  to  sit  in  the  lowest  room at  his  banquet,
but  it  has  pleased Him  Who invited  you  to  say:  Friend,
come up higher (S. Luke xiv. 10). And as you have


LETTER CCXXXVIII.  7OI

ascended  on  high,  be  not  high-minded,  but  fear,  lest
perchance  it  happen  to  you  to  utter  at  last  that  piteous  cry,
From  the  face  of  Thy  indignation  and  wrath  Thou  hast
lifted  me  up  and  cast  me  down  (Ps.  cii.  10).  You  have
obtained,  it  is  true,  a  higher  place,  but  not  a  safer;  a
loftier,  not  a  more  secure.  Terrible,  indeed,  a  terrible
position  is  it.  The  place,  I  mean,  where  you  are
standing  is  holy  ground,  it  is  the  place  of  Peter,
it  is  the  place  of  the  Prince  of  the  Apostles,  where
his  feet  have  stood.  It  is  the  place  of  him  whom
the  Lord  made  lord  of  His  house,  and  chief  of  all  His
possession.  And  if  you  should  turn  aside  from  the  way  of
the  Lord,  recollect  that  he  was  buried  in  the  same  place
that  he  may  be  for  a  testimony  against  you.  Deservedly
was  the  Church  entrusted  to  such  a  shepherd,  to  such  a
foster-father  ;  for  while  she  was  still  tender,  still  in  her
swaddling  clothes,  she  was  taught  by  his  precept  and
educated  by  his  example  to  tread  under  foot  all  earthly
things,  for  he  had  kept  his  hands  clean  from  every  gift,  and
could  say  with  pure  heart  and  good  conscience  :  Silver  and
gold  have  I  none  (Acts  iii.  6).  But  enough  of  this.

5.  The  reason  why  I  am  writing  to  you  before  the  time  is
this.  The  Bishop  of  Winchester1  and  the  Archbishop  of
York  do  not  walk  with  the  same  mind  as  the  Archbishop  of
Canterbury ;  but  they  go  contrary  to  him,  and  this  is  an  old
quarrel  about  the  office  of  legate.  But  who  is  he,  and  who
are  they?  Is  not  York'2  the  same  man  who,  while  you  were
one  of  us,  your  brothers  withstood  to  his  face  in  your  pre
sence  because  he  was  to  be  blamed.  But  he  has  trusted
to  the  multitude  of  his  riches,  and  has  obtained  his  way  in
his  vanity.  Yet  it  is  certain  that  he  has  not  entered  into

1  The  Bishop  of  Winchester  (A. D.  1129-1174)  was  Henry  de  Blois,  nephew  of
King  Henry,  who  had  been  formerly  Abbot  of  Glastonbury  \.  he  was,  therefore,
naturally  a  supporter  of  his  kinsman  William.  Theobald  of  Bee  was  at  this
time  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  ;  ep.  361  was  written  to  him.

•  The  York  trouble  mentioned  in  ep.  235  had  not  yet  been  settled  ;  for  Serlo
(MonasL  Anglic.  Vol.  i.  p.  747)  says:  "  He  was  presiding  over  the  Cathedral,  and
using  the  royal  power  against  those  who  withstood  him.''  Henry,  Abbot  of
Fountains,  and  others  summoned  him  before  Eugenius,  by  whom  he  was
deposed.  His  supporters  sacked  Fountains.  See  ep.  252.


JO2  LETTER CCXXXVIII.

the  sheepfold  by  the  door,  but  climbed  in  some  other  way.
If  he  had  been  a  shepherd  he  was  one  to  love  ;  if  a  hireling
to  be  borne  with  ;  but,  as  it  is,  he  is  to  be  avoided  and  re
jected  as  a  thief  and  a  robber.  What  shall  I  say  about  my
lord  of  Winchester  ?  The  works  which  he  does  himself  they
bear  testimony  to  him.  Moreover,  the  Archbishop  of
Canterbury,  whom  they  are  opposing,  is  a  man  of  true  piety
and  of  mild  character.  On  his  behalf,  I  ask  that  his
righteousness  may  answer  for  him,  and  that  their  iniquity
may  be  upon  them,  as  it  is  written  :  The  righteousness  of
the  righteous  shall  be  upon  him,  and  the  wickedness  of  the
wicked  shall  be  upon  him  (Ezek.  xviii.  20).  When  you  have
an  opportunity,  recompense  them  after  the  works  of  their
hands  that  they  may  know  that  there  is  a  prophet  in  Israel.

6.  Who  will  grant  me  to  see  before  I  die,  the  Church  of
God  as  in  the  days  of  old  when  the  Apostles  let  down  their
nets  for  a  draught,  not  of  silver and  gold,  but  of  souls  ?
How  do  I  long  that  you  may  inherit  the  voice  of  him  whose
seat you have obtained  ! Thy money  perish with thee
(Acts viii. 20),  he  said. O  voice  of  thunder!  O  voice  of
magnificence  and  power  !  at  whose  terror  all  who  hate  Sion
are  driven  back  and  put  to  confusion.  This  voice  your  mother
anxiously  expects  and  demands  from  you  ;  the  children  of
your  mother,  both  old  and  young,  ask  for  it,  sigh  for  it,  in
order  that  every  plant  which  our  heavenly  Father  has  not
planted  may  be  uprooted  by  you. For  you  have  been  set
over  nations  and  kingdoms  to  uproot  and  destroy,  to  build
and  to plant. WThen they heard of  your  election many
said : Now  is  the  axe  laid  to  the  root  of  the  trees  (S. Matt,
iii.  10). Many  are  still  saying  to  themselves,  "The  flowers
have  appeared  in our  land,  the  time  for  purging  is  come,
when  the  dead  branches  shall  be  cut  away,  so  that those
which  remain  may  bring  forth  more  fruit."

7.  Be  strong,  then,  and  of  a  good  courage  ;  your  hand  is
on  the  neck  of  your  enemies. By  constancy  of  mind  and
vigour  of  spirit  show  your  right  to  the  portion  which  the
Almighty  Father  has  given  you  above  your  brethren,  which,
too,  he  took  from  the  Amorite  with  His  sword  and  with  His
bow. Still,  in  all  that  you  do,  recollect  that  you  are  a  man,


LETTER CCXXXIX.  703

and  keep  before  your  eyes  the  fear  of  Him  who  takes  away
the  spirit  of  princes.  How  many  Roman  Pontiffs  have  you
seen  with  your  own  eyes  carried  off  in  a  short  time  by
death  !  l  Let  your  predecessors  ever  put  you  in  mind  of
your  own  most  sure  and  speedy  death,  and  inform  you  of  the
short  space  you  have  to  rule  in,  of  the  fewness  of  the  days
that  you  have  to  live.  Amongst  all  the  seductions  of  this
transitory  glory  meditate  constantly  on  your  latter  end,  for,
as  you  have  succeeded  others  in  the  Apostolic  See,  so  will
you  certainly  follow  them  in  death.


LETTER  CCXXXIX. (A.D. 1145.)
To  THE  SAME.

Bernard urges upon him the deposition of William,

Archbishop  of  York.

I  am  troublesome,  I  know,  but  I  have  a  good  excuse,  viz.,
the  Apostleship  of  Eugenius.  They  say  that  it  is  I,  who
am  pope,  not  you,  and  all  who  have  business  come  to  me
from  every  side.  And  amongst  so  great  a  number  of
friends  there  are  some  whom  I  cannot  refuse  to  help  with
out  causing  scandal,  or  even  committing  sin.  And  now  I
have  another  excuse  no  less  pertinent  in  the  goodness  of

1  It  may  be  asked,  and  not  improperly,  what  is  the  cause  that  the  Roman
Pontiffs  retain  their  office  for  so  short  a  time,  that  Peter  is  generally  considered
the  only  one  to  have  reached  25  years ;  why  a  premature  death  takes  off  most  of
them  in  a  few  years,  or  months,  or  even  days,  when  we  see  Emperors  and  Kings
enjoying  a  much  longer  reign.  The  question  is  worthy  of  discussion.  But  who
knoweth  the  mind  of  the  Lord  ?  I  see  that  the  same  question  was  put  by  Pope
Alexander  to  Peter  Damian,  and  treated  carefully  by  him  (epp.  lib.  i.  ep.  17).
He  says  : — "  You  once  asked  me  anxiously  what  seems  to  me  the  cause  of  the
short  life  of  Popes  ;  why  within  so  short  a  time  their  reign  comes  to  an  end  ;  so
much  is  this  the  rule  that  since  the  time  of  the  Apostle  Peter,  who  presided  for
about  25  years,  no  one  of  the  Popes  has  attained  to  so  long  a  term  of  office.
Nay,  in  modern  times,  scarcely  one  has  been  raised  to  the  dignity  who  has
exceeded  four  or  five  years.  And  when  I  think  of  this  a  great  amazement  fills
me ;  because  this  necessity  seems  to  be  laid  on  no  one  else  in  the  world.  But,
as  far  as  the  mystery  of  the  will  of  God  is  revealed  to  mortals,  it  seems  to  me
that  this  is  done  to  strike  fear  of  death  into  the  mind  of  man,  and  to  show
plainly,  by  extinguishing  the  glory  of  the  head,  how  worthless  is  the  glory  of
all  temporal  things  ;  for  since  the  first  of  men  has  to  die  within  so  short  a
time,  each  one  is  filled  with  fear,  and  provoked  to  make  provision  for  his  own


704  LETTER CCXXXIX.

my  cause.  My  pen  is  now  directed  against  that  idol  at
York,  impelled  by  the  very  fact  that  though  I  have  often
aimed  at  him  with  this  weapon,  yet  I  have  never  stricken  him
through.  And  why  is  this?  Perhaps  because  none  of  my
darts  was  wielded  like  the  sword  of  Jonathan,  which  never
returned  empty  ;  but  that  was  not  the  fault  of  the  javelin
but  of  him  who  hurls  it.  For  it  is  evident  that  it  has  not
been  hurled  with  the  necessary  strength.  And  no  wonder;
for  who  save  a  son  of  the  archers  can  shoot  the  arrows  with
a  powerful  hand  ?  He  who  holds  the  place  of  Peter  can  at
one  blow  destroy  Ananias,  at  one  blow  Simon  Magus.
And  to  make  what  I  say  more  plain,  it  is  known  to  be  the
prerogative  of  the  Roman  Pontiff  alone  to  peremptorily
order  the  deposition  of  a  Bishop,  no  doubt  because,  though
many  others  have  been  called  to  a  share  of  responsibility,
yet  he  alone  has  the  fulness  of  power.  So,  if  I  may  be  so
bold  as  to  say  it,  he  alone  is  in  fault,  whenever  a  fault
which  deserves  correction  is  not  corrected,  or  is  corrected
with  insufficient  force.  With  what  force  the  fault  of  the
above-named  intruder  at  York  ought  to  be  corrected,  nay,
destroyed  as  by  a  lightning  stroke,  I  leave  to  your  con
science.  But  I  believe  that  what  has  not  been  done  has
been  reserved  for  you,  that  in  settling  this  scandal  the
Church  of  God,  over  which  He  has  called  you  to  preside,
may  see  the  fervour  of  your  zeal,  the  power  of  your  arm,
and  the  wisdom  of  your  mind  ;  so  that  all  people  may  fear
the  priest  of  the  Lord,  when  they  hear  that  the  wisdom  of
God  is  in  him  to  execute  judgment.

end ;  and  the  human  race,  which  is  a  tree,  when  it  sees  its  topmost  bough  so
soon  perish,  is  smitten  with  a  gust  of  fear,  and  trembles  in  its  smallest
branches."  Damian  gives  the  Popes  a  very  short  time  in  fixing  four  or  five
years  as  their  limit,  but,  if  the  histories  of  the  Popes  be  studied,  they  are,  it
seems  to  me,  to  be  given  even  less  than  that.  S.  Bernard,  therefore,  well  exhorts
Eugenius  in  this  Letter,  to  learn  to  consider  his  own  death  close  at  hand,  by
reflecting  on  the  brief  reigns  of  his  predecessors. —  [Mabillon's  note.]  Looking
forward  from  this  date,  the  only  Popes  who  have  exceeded  twenty  years'  pontifi
cate  have  been  Alexander  III.  (1159-1181);  Urban  VIII.  (1623-1644);  Clement
XL  (1700-1721);  Pius  VI.  (1775-1799);  Pius  VII.  (1800-1823)  ;  and  Pius  IX.,
who  created  a  solitary  exception  to  the  rule  which  had  obtained  for  his  long  line
of  predecessors,  by  a  pontificate  extending  over  thirty-two  years  (1846-1878). —
[E.]


LETTER CCXL.  705

LETTER CCXL.  (A.D. 1146.)
To  THE  SAME,  ox  THE  SAME  SUBJECT.

i.  How  much  do  I  always  desire  to  hear  of  you  that  by
which  God  may  be  glorified,  your  ministry  honoured,  and
my  soul  made  joyful.  This  is  why  I  rejoiced  so  greatly
when  I  heard  of  your  answer  in  the  case  of  some  who
seemed  to  be  filled  with  an  extravagant  ambition  for  the
office  of  legate,  and  to  hope  for  it  with  impudence,  even
more  than  I  can  say.  And  not  only  I  but  all  who  love  your
name  rejoiced  with  exceeding  great  joy.  Moreover,  when
I  read  your  letter  written  in  the  cause  of  the  Church  of
Rodez,1  then  was  my  mouth  filled  with  laughter  and  my
tongue  with  joy.  Such  things  as  these  are  worthy  of  your
Apostleship,  they  honour  the  highest  See,  they  are  just
what  is  becoming  to  the  Bishop  of  the  world.  Whence,
also,  I  bow  my  knees  to  the  Author  of  your  unique
Primacy,  that  he  will  give  you  so  to  think  and  so  to  act  in
pulling  up  and  planting,  in  destroying  and  building.  In
truth,  you  have  been  raised  to  this  chair  for  the  fall  and
rising  again  of  many.  Let  those  fall  who  stand  to  others'
harm,  let  them  fall  ;  but  let  the  worthy  be  raised.  The  axe
is  being  laid  to  the  root  of  the  barren  trees,  the  fruitful  are
being  purged  that  they  may  bring  forth  more  fruit.  With
the  humble  Eugenius  at  the  head  of  all  may  the  mighty  be
put  down  from  their  seat,  and  the  humble  exalted  ;  let  the
hungry  be  filled  with  good  things,  and  the  rich  sent  empty
away.  Lately,  for  example,  this  was  exemplified  in  the
case  of  a  certain  poor  bishop,  to  the  delight  of  the  whole
earth.-'

2.  Come,  then,  let  your  holy  zeal  for  religion  cross  over
to  that  unhappy  church  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  for  it

1  To  depose  an  unworthy  man  who  had  been  elected  to  that  See.

*  This  poor  Bishop,  whose  name  is  not  given,  is  referred  to  again  in  De  Con-
sideratione,  lib.  iii.  c.  3,  where  Eugenius  is  praised  for  furnishing  him  with  the
means  to  give,  that  he  might  not  be  considered  as  niggardly.  He  is  there
described  as  a  Bishop  from  across  the  seas  who  wished  to  buy  at  Rome  his
bishopric,  and  was,  perhaps,  William  of  York.


706  LETTER  CCXL.

is  time  to  have  pity  on  her.  This  vineyard  of  the  Lord  of
hosts,  this  choice,  this  most  beautiful  vineyard  is,  alas  !
almost  reduced  to  a  wilderness,  for  a  ravening  wild  beast  is
devouring  it.  Why  do  they  say  among  the  heathen  "  where
is  its  God  ? "  Where  is  he  whom  they  have  placed  as
guardian  over  the  vineyards  ?  Where  is  the  hand  that
prunes,  where  is  the  knife  of  the  gardener  ?  How  long  is
the  ground  to  be  cumbered  with  a  useless  tree,  and  the
fruit  choked  ?  And  certainly  the  time  for  purging  it  has
come.  Indeed,  the  man  who  was  to  make  his  peace,1  by
wrhose  means  he  hoped  to  clear  himself,  testifies  that  there
is  more  need  of  cutting  off  than  of  purging.  Letters
written  by  him  to  the  legate  of  the  Apostolic  See  are  in
existence,  in  wrhich  he  openly  asserts  that  there  was  an
open  intrusion,  and  denies  the  validity  of  the  election.  So
therefore  he  finds  that  the  witness  that  he  had  himself
brought  forward  is  his  accuser.  And  these  charges  which
are  in  the  mouth  of  everyone  would  be  enough  to  rightly
deprive  a  knight  of  his  military  belt.

3.  How,  then,  shall  he  be  able  to  stand  when  you  have
many  reasons  for  casting  him  down,  and  have  moreover  the
will  ?  I  have  read  in  your  letters  of  your  zeal  for  the
Church,  and  I  now  ask  you  to  show  it.  It  is  not  my  place
to  dictate  to  you  as  a  wise  man  how  you  should  proceed  to
overthrow  him  ;  there  seems  to  be  more  than  one  way.
Nor  do  I  much  care  on  which  side  the  unfruitful  tree  falls,
as  long  as  it  does  fall.  Still,  I  say  that  he  who  claims  to
be  allowed  to  take  possession  on  the  ground  that  private
letters  have  passed  between  him  and  the  Pope,  is  he  not  a
thief  and  a  robber?  Again,  when  he  asserts  that  he  had
private  letters  authorizing  his  "  execration"  he  says  what
is  either  true  or  false.  If  it  is  true,  he  is  guilty  of  theft,
and  is  an  accuser  of  the  Supreme  Pontiff.  If  it  is  false,  he
ought  to  listen  to  the  words,  Hast  thou  killed  and  also
taken  possession  ?  For  the  mouth  that  lies  slays  the  soul
(Wisd.  i.  n).  But  God  forbid  that  we  should  believe  so
great  a  man  guilty  of  such  duplicity,  as  by  this  man  is
alleged  against  him.  If  Innocent  were  here  to  answer  for

1 William,  Dean  of  York.


LETTER CCXLI.  707

himself  he  would no  doubt  say  to  him,  "  I  gave sentence
against  you  openly,  and  in  secret  have  I  said  nothing."


LETTER CCXLI. (A.I). 1147.)

TO HlLDEFONSUS, COUNT OF S. ELOY,1 ABOUT THE

HERETIC  HENRY.

He  describes  the  impious  teachings  of  the  heretic  Henry,
successor  of  Peter  de  Bruys,  and  blames  the  Count  for  per
mitting  such  a  man  to  teach  undisturbed  in  his  dominions.

i.  How  great  are  the  evils  which  I  have  heard  and  known
that  the  heretic  Henry  has  done  and  is  daily  doing  in  the
Churches  of  God  !  A  ravening  wolf  in  sheep's  clothing  is
busy  in  your  land,  but  by  our  Lord's  direction  /  know  him
by  his  fruits  (S.  Matt.  vii.  15,  16).  The  churches  are  with
out  congregations,  congregations  without  priests,  priests
without  their  due  reverence,  and,  worst  of  all,  Christians
without  Christ.  Churches  are  regarded  as  synagogues,  the
sanctuary  of  God  is  said  to  have  no  sanctity,  the  sacraments
are  not  thought  to  be  sacred,  feast  days  are  deprived  of
their  wonted  solemnities.  Men  are  dying  in  their  sins,
souls  being  dragged  everywhere  before  the  dread  Tribunal,
neither  reconciled  by  repentance  nor  fortified  by  Holy
Communion.  The  way  of  Christ  is  shut  to  the  children  of
Christians,  and  they  are  not  allowed  to  enter  the  way  of
salvation,  although  the  Saviour  lovingly  calls  on  their
behalf,  Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  Me  (S.  Matt.

1  Query,  Eligii,  not  Egidii. —  [E.]  Add  "also  of  Toulouse.''  He  was  son  of
Raymund,  Count  of  Toulouse,  and  Elvira;  was  born  in  the  East  (William  of
Tyre,  Bell.  Sac.,  lib.  x.  c.  27),  and  baptized  in  the  Jordan.  The  same  author
(lib.  xvi.  c.  28)  also  says  of  him,  when  speaking  of  his  departure  for  the  East :
"  There  was  at  that  time  in  the  port  of  Acre  the  magnificent  and  illustrious
Count  of  Toulouse,  Anfossus  (?  Alphonsus)  by  name,  son  of  the  elder  Count
Raymond,  whose  exploits  in  the  first  expedition  were  worthy  of  his  renown;  a
man  famous  by  the  name  he  bore,  still  more  illustrious  by"  his  father's  piety.
When  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem  to  give  thanks  to  God  for  his  safe  arrival  he
put  in  at  Caesarea,  and  ended  his  life  there  (as  is  reported)  by  poison  given  by  an
unknown  hand."  Further,  the  county  of  S.  Eloy  is  a  part  of  Gallia  Narbonensis,
named  from  the  saint  who  once  lived  in  it.  The  Count  of  S.  Eloy  calls  himself
Hildefonsus  in  a  treaty  of  A.D.  1135,  drawn  up  between  him  and  Raymund,
Count  of  Barcelona,  where  his  wife  is  called  Fardida.


708  LETTER CCXLI.

xix.  14).  Does  God,  then,  who,  as  He  has  multiplied  His
mercy,  has  saved  both  man  and  beast,  debar  innocent  little
children  alone  from  this  His  so  great  mercy  ?  Why,  I  ask,
why  does  he  begrudge  to  little  ones  their  Infant  Saviour,
who  was  born  for  them  ?  This  envy  is  of  the  devil.  By
this  envy  death  entered  into  the  whole  world.  Or  does  he
suppose  that  little  children  have  no  need  of  a  Saviour,
because  they  are  children  ?  If  so  the  great  Lord  was  made
small  for  no  reason,  to  say  nothing  of  His  being  scourged,
spitted  on,  nailed  to  the  cross,  and  put  to  death.

2.  This  man,  who  says  and  does  things  contrary  to  God,
is  not  from  God.  Yet,  O  sad  to  say,  he  is  listened  to  by
many,  and  he  has  a  following  which  believes  in  him.  O,
most  unhappy  people  !  The  voice  of  one  heretic  has  put  to
silence  all  the  Prophets  and  Apostles,  who  in  one  spirit  of
truth  have  joined  in  calling  together  in  the  faith  of  Christ
the  Church  out  of  all  nations.  Therefore  the  divine  oracles
have  been  deceived  ;  the  eyes  and  minds  of  all  are  deceived
when  they  see  fulfilled  what  they  read  was  predicted.  How
certain  is  it  rather  that  this  man  alone  with  a  dull  and  alto
gether  Jewish  blindness,  either  does  not  see  the  truth  which
is  manifest  to  everybody  else,  or  envies  its  fulfilment,  and
so  by  some  devilish  art  or  other  he  has  persuaded  a  stupid
and  foolish  populace  not  to  trust  their  own  eyes  in  a  plain
matter  of  fact,  and  to  believe  that  our  ancestors  were
deceived,  that  their  descendants  are  in  error,  that  the  whole
world,  even  after  Christ's  blood  has  been  shed,  is  going  to
perdition,  and  that  the  full  riches  of  the  mercy  of  God  and
His  grace  which  saves  the  world  have  come  to  those  only
whom  he  is  leading  astray.  And  now,  because  of  this,
though  in  much  weakness  of  body,  I  have  set  out  on  a
journey  to  those  parts1  which  this  ravening  wild  beast  is
most  laying  waste,  since  there  is  none  to  resist  him  or  to
save  them.  Since  he  has  been  expelled  from  the  whole  of
France  for  similar  wickedness,  he  finds  those  parts  alone
opened  to  him  where,  under  your  protection,  he  is  with  all
his  might  raging  against  the  flock  of  Christ.  How  this  is
consistent  with  your  good  name  I  must  leave  you,  as  an

1 See  Life,  B.  iii.  c.  6.


LETTKR CCXLI.  709

illustrious  prince,  to  judge.  Still  it  is  no  wonder  if  that
crafty  serpent  has  deceived  you,  since  he  has  the  form  of
godliness,  though  within  he  has  denied  its  power.

3.  But  now  hear  who  he  is. He  is  an  apostate ; he  was
once  a  monk,1  but  has  abandoned  the  religious  habit,  and
has  returned,  like  a  dog  to  its  vomit,  to  the  abominations
of  the  flesh  and  of  the  world. Being  unable  to  live  a  life
of  shame  among  his  kindred  and  those  who  knew  him,  or,
rather,  not  being  allowed  to  do  so  because  of  the  greatness
of  his  crime,  he  has  girded  up  his  loins,  and  has  entered  on
a  road  of  which  he  is  ignorant,  and  has  become  a  wanderer
and  a  fugitive  on  the  earth. When  he  began  to  go  about
begging  he put  a  price  on  the  Gospel (for  he  was  well-
educated),  divided  the  word  of  God  for  sale,  and  preached
the  Gospel  that  he  might  earn  his  bread. If  he  was  able  to
extract  more  than  enough  to  live  on  from  the  more  simple
of  the  populace  or  from  any  of  the  matrons  he  would  basely
squander it at dice, or even on baser objects. Often,
indeed,  after  being  applauded  by  the  people  in  the  day,
has  this  famous  preacher  been  found  at  night  with  prosti
tutes,  and  sometimes  even  with married  women. Ask,  if
you  please,  noble  sir,  why  he  left  Lausanne,  why  Le  Mans,
why  Poictiers,  why  Bordeaux,  and  there  is  no  way  of  return
to  any  of  them  open  to  him,  because  he  has  in  all  left  foul
traces  behind  him. Did  you,  pray,  expect  good  fruit  from
such  a  tree  ? He  makes  the  land  in  which  he  is  to  stink  in
the  nostrils  of  the  whole  earth,  because,  according  to  the
saying  of  the Lord,  an  evil  tree  cannot  bring  forth good
fruit  (S.  Matt.  vii.  18).

4.  This,  then,  as  I  said,  is  the  cause  of my  coming. Nor
do  I  come  of  myself,  but I am drawn  thither  alike  by  the
summons  and evil  condition  of  the  Church,  to  see  if  those
thorns and their  little  seeds  while they are little,  can be
rooted up from the land of my Lord, not  by my hand,
for I have  no  power,  but  by  the  hand  of  the holy  Bishops
with whom  I  am,  and  with the assistance of  your strong

1  Geoffrey  (f'itu  Bern.,  lib.  iii.  n.  16)  calls  this  monk  Henry  (and  Exord.
Cister.,  referred  to  in  lib.  iii.  c.  17  of  the  same  life).  The  Acts  of  Hildebert,
Bishop  of  Le  Mans  (Analect.,  Vol.  iii.  p.  314)  call  him  a  hermit.


710  LETTER CCXLII.

right-hand.  Amongst  whom  the .  chief  is  the  venerable
Bishop  of  Ostia,1  sent  for  this  very  purpose  by  the  Apos
tolical  See,  a  man  who  has  done  great  things  in  Israel,
and  by  whom  the  Almighty  Lord  has  often  given  victory
to  His  Church.  It  is  your  duty,  illustrious  Prince,  to  receive
him  honourably,  as  well  as  those  with  him  ;  and  also  to
take  care  according  to  the  power  given  you  from  above
that  the  great  labour  of  these  great  men  undertaken  most
of  all  for  the  salvation  of  you  and  yours  be  not  rendered
inefficacious  and  to  no  purpose.


LETTER CCXLII. (A.D. 1147.)
To  THE  PEOPLE  OF  TOULOUSE  AFTER  HIS  RETURN.

Bernard  exhorts  them  not  only  to  avoid  heretics,  but
also  to  drive  them  away  ;  also  to  exercise  hospitality  and
not  to  listen  to  unknown  preachers.

i.  On  the  arrival  of  our  dear  brother  and  fellow-abbot
Bernard2  of  Grandselve,  I  was  glad  and  rejoiced  greatly  to
hear  what  he  told  me  of  the  constancy  and  sincerity  of  your
faith  in  God,  of  the  perseverance  of  your  love,  and  of  your
devotion  to  me,  of  your  zeal  and  hatred  of  heretics,  so  that
every  one  of  you  is  well  able  to  say,  "Do  not  I  hate  them,
O  Lord,  that  hate  Thee,  and  am  not  I  grieved  with  those
that  rise  up  against  Thee  ?  (Ps.  cxxxix.  21).  /  hate  them
with  perfect  hatred ;  I  count  them  mine  enemies."  I  thank
God  that  my  coming  to  you  was  not  useless ;  and  that  my
stay  with  you,  though  short,  was  not  unfruitful.  When  I
had  made  plain  the  truth  not  only  by  word,  but  also  in
power,3  they  were  seen  to  be  wolves  who  had  come  to  you

1  Alberic,  mentioned  in  Vila  Bernardi,  lib. iii. n. 17,  was born  at  Beauvais,
became  a  Cluniac  monk,  was  created  Cardinal  by  Innocent,  A.D. 1138,  legate
to  England,  then  to  Syria,  and  then  to  Gaul. Ep.  219  was  written  to  him.

2  Mabillon  reads  thus. But  it  is  hardly  doubtful  that  Abbot  Bertrand  is  meant.
MS.  documents  at  Grandselve  mention  an  Abbot  of  that  name,  from  1128  to
M48.— [E.]

3  Refers  to  the  wonderful  miracles  wrought  by  him  (see  f^ita,  lib.  iii.  c.  6).
Even  Berengarius  recognizes  them  in  his  Apology  for  Abaelard  :  '*  Rumour  has
taken  wings  and  carried  the  odour  of  your  sanctity  over  the  world,  has  pro
claimed  your  merits,  published  your  miracles,"  etc.


LETTER CCXLII.  71  I

in  sheep's  clothing,  and  were  eating  up  your  people  as
though  they  were  bread  or  as  sheep  appointed  to  be  slain  ;
the  foxes  which  were  spoiling  your  state,  that  most  precious
vineyard  of  the  Lord,  were  seen ;  they  were  seen  but  not
seized.  Therefore,  beloved,  follow  after  them  and  seize
them,  and  stop  not  till  they  utterly  perish,  and  flee  from  all
your  territories,  for  it  is  not  safe  to  sleep  close  to  serpents.
They  sit  lurking  with  the  rich  in  secret  places  that  they  may
slay  the  innocent.  They  are  thieves  and  robbers  (S.  John
x.  8),  such  as  our  Lord  points  out  in  the  Gospel.  They
have  themselves  been  subverted,  and  they  are  ready  to
subvert  others,  they  utterly  blemish  your  good  name,  and
are  corrupters  of  your  faith.  Evil  communications  corrupt
good  manners  (i  Cor.  xv.  33).  The  word  of  such,  as  the
blessed  Apostle  says,  eats  like  a  canker  (2  Tim.  ii.  17).

2.  Will anyone give me an opportunity to come to
you  once  more  ? For  my  desire  is,  if  in  any  way  by  the
will of  God I may be  able,  to  see  you  again  ; though  I
am  feeble  and  sick  in  body,  I  should  think  nothing  of  the
labour  since  it  would  be  for  your  exhortation  and  salvation.
But  in  the  meanwhile,  beloved,  so  stand in  the  Lord  as  ye
have begun, and as  ye have heard of me. Obey  your
Bishops  and  the  other  rulers  of  the  Church  placed  over  you.
Give  diligence  to  show  hospitality,  for  by  this  many  have
pleased  God. Your  father  Abraham,  through  the  holy  care
that  he  was  wont  to  take  in  entertaining  strangers,  merited
to  receive  Angels  as  his  guests  (Gen.  xviii.). In  the  same
way  his  nephew  Lot,  for  similar  devotion  and  pious  custom
in  receiving  them,  was  made  to  rejoice  (Gen.  xix.). And  so
do  you,  in  like  manner,  receive  not  Angels,  but  the  Lord  of
Angels,  in  the person  of  strangers,  feed  Him in  the  poor,
clothe  Him  in  the  naked,  visit  Him  in  the  sick,  redeem  Him
in  the  captives. With  such  sacrifices  God  is^well  pleased,
Who,  at  the  judgment,  will  say: "  What  you  have  done  to
one  of  the  least  of  these  My  brethren,  you have  done  to
Me"  (S.  Matt.  xxv.  40).

3.  I  give  you  also  the  same  advice  which  I  gave  you  when  I
was with you, that  you  receive  no  strange  or  unknown


7 12  LETTER CCXLII.

preacher,  unless  he  be  sent  to  preach  by  the  Pope,  or  have
permission  from  your  Bishop.  How,  he  says,  shall  they
preach  unless  they  be  sent?  (Rom.  x.  15).  These  are
they  who  put  on  the  form  of  godliness,  but  within  deny  its
power,  who  intermingle,  like  poison  with  honey,  their  pro
fane  novelties  of  terms  and  ideas  with  words  from  Heaven.
Beware  of  them  henceforward  as  pestilential,  and  know
them  to  be  ravening  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing.  Let  the
bearer  of  this  letter,  the  venerable  Abbot  of  Grandselve,  be
kindly  received  by  you,  as  also  his  house,  which  is  also  ours,
having  been  lately  handed  over  to  us  and  our  order  by  him,
and  specially  affiliated  to  the  church  of  Clairvaux.  Show  to
us  in  the  person  of  him  and  the  saints  with  him  how  far  you
have  profited  by  our  admonitions  in  works  of  mercy,  and
give  by  your  treatment  of  them  a  proof  of  your  charity,  and
of  the  love  which  you  have  for  me.  Whatever  you  do  for
them,  think  it  done  for  me.  The  grace  of  God  and  His
peace  be  with  you.  Amen.


LETTER CCXLIII. (A.D. 1146.)
To THE ROMANS WHEN THEY REVOLTED AGAINST

POPE EUGENIUS.1

At  the  instigation  of  Arnold  of  Brescia,  the  Romans
tried  to  establish  the  ancient  Republican  liberty  in  place
of  the  Pope's  authority,  leaving  him  only  tithes  and  free
will  offerings.  Bernard  reproves  them  sharply  for  in
gratitude.

To  ihe  nobles  and  chief  men,  and  to  all  the  people  of
Rome,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  writes,
desiring  that  they  may  eschew  evil  and  do  good.

i. My  speech  is  to  you, O great and famous people,

1  Cf.  DC  Consider  atione,  c.  2  ;  Otto  of  Frisingen  (Chronic.,  lib.  vii.  c.  31  ;
and  Gesta  Frid.,  lib.  ii.  c.  20).  The  followers  of  Arnold  are  called  heretics  by
Bonacursus,  who  classes  them  with  the  Cathari  and  Passagii,  and  accuses
them  of  saying  that  Sacraments  ministered  by  evil  men  avail  nothing  (Spicil.,
Vol.  Hi.  p.  85).


LETTER CCXUII.  713

though  I  am  mean  and  of  no  reputation,  of  small  stature,
and  smaller  influence.  And,  indeed,  when  I  consider  who
I  am  that  write,  to  whom  I  am  writing,  and,  at  the  same
time,  how  differently  another  may  judge  mv  action,  I  am
held  back  by  very  shame.  But  it  is  a  smaller  thing  to
endure  shame  before  men  than  to  be  condemned  before
God  for  silence,  withholding  of  the  truth,  and  concealment
of  righteousness.  For  He  Himself  says:  Tell  MV  people
their  sins  (Is.  Iviii.  i).  It  will  be,  moreover,  tor  a  testi
mony  to  me  before  God  if  I  shall  be  able  to  speak.  /  have
not  Jud  Thy  righteousness  within  mv  heart  ;  I  have
declared  Thy  faithfulness  and  Tliv  salvation  (Ps.  xl.  10).
Therefore  I  am  not  afraid,  though  my  modesty  recoils  from
it,  to  write  from  afar  to  a  glorious  people,  and  by  these
letters  from  over  the  Alps  from  an  obscure  person,  to  warn
the  Romans  of  their  danger  and  sin,  if  perchance  the}'  will
listen  to  me  and  cease  from  their  evil  ways.  Who  knows
whether  they  will  be  converted  at  the  prayer  of  a  poor
man,  though  they  will  not  give  up  their  power  for  threats,
nor  for  the  whole  armed  force  of  the  strong  ?  Did  not  once
in  Babylon  a  whole  people  at  the  words  of  one  person,  and
he  a  youth,  return  to  a  just  judgment,  after  they  had  been
seduced  by  old  men,  but  unjust  judges,  and  so  innocent
blood  was  saved  on  that  day  (Susannah  i.)  ?  So  also  now.
though  I  am  but  a  youth,  and  of  no  reputation,  a  youth,  I
mean,  not  by  the  small  number  of  my  years,  but  of  my
merits,  yet  God  is  able  to  give  such  power  to  my  words
that  it  may  come  to  pass  that  a  people  which  has  been  con
fessedly  led  astray  may  return  to  a  better  judgment.  This,
then,  is  my  answer  to  those  who  may  think  that  they  ought
to  be  angry  with  me  or  indignant  at  my  interference.

2.  If  this  is  not  enough,  I  add  another  consideration.
The  cause  is  common  to  all,  and  there  is  no  distinction  of
small  or  great.  There  is  pain  in  the  head,  and  therefore  it
is  not  a  matter  of  no  concern  to  the  smallest  or  the  most
extreme  members  of  the  body.  Nor  does  it  pass  one  by.
'I  his  great  pain,  because  it  is  so  great,  has  reached  even  to
me,  though  I  am  the  least  of  all.  and  because  it  is  of  the

VOL.  II.  46


714  LETTER CCXLIII.

head  it  cannot  but  affect  also  the  body,  of  which  I  am  a
member.  When  the  head  suffeis,  does  not  the  tongue
exclaim  for  all  the  members  of  the  body  that  it,  too,  suffers
with  the  head,  and  do  they  not  all  confess  by  it  that  the
head  is  theirs,  and  its  pain  is  theirs  too?  Suffer,  me  then,
a  little  to  bewail  before  you  my  grief,  which  is  not  only
mine,  but  that  of  the  whole  Church.  Is  it  not  her  voice
which  to-day  is  heard  crying  throughout  the  world  :  "  My
head  suffers,  my  head  is  ill  ?  "  Is  there  any  one  Christian  in
the  whole  world,  even  though  he  be  the  last,  who  is  not
proud  of  this  head,  which  has  been  exalted  by  the  triumph,
adorned  by  the  blood  of  those  two  princes  of  the  earth  who
bent  their  heads/the  one  to  the  axe,  the  other  to  the  Cross  P1
And,  therefore,  any  wrong  done  to  the  Apostles  affects
every  Christian,  and  as  their  sound  went  out  into  all  lands
(Ps.  xix.  4)  so  their  wrong  is  felt  by  all  everywhere,  every
where  it  is  bewailed  and  wept.

3.  What  has  made  you,  O  Romans,  offend  the  princes  of
the  world,  who  are,  too,  your  own  special  patrons?  Why
do  you  provoke  against  yourselves,  by  a  madness  which  is
as  unbearable  as  irrational,  the  King  of  the  Earth  and  the
Lord  of  Heaven,  by  audaciously  and  sacrilegiously  attacking
the  holy  Apostolic  See,  which  has  been  raised  on  high
above  all  others  by  its  sacred  and  regal  privileges,  and  why
are  you  stiiving  to  lessen  its  honour  when,  if  need  were,  you
should  defend  it  alone  against  the  world  ?  Are  you,  O
Romans,  so  foolish  as  not  to  judge  and  discern  what  is
i^ood,  and,  instead,  to  defile  as  much  as  you  can  the  head  of
all  as  well  as  of  yourselves,  for  which  you  should  not  shrink
from  laying  down  your  own  lives  if  necessity  demanded  it  ?
Your  fathers  brought  the  world  under  the  rule  of  your  City  ;
you  are  hastening  to  make  your  City  the  derision  of  the
world.  See,  the  heir  of  Peter  has  been  driven  by  you  from
the  seat  and  city  of  Peter.  See,  by  your  hands  the
Cardinals  and  Bishops,  ministers  of  the  Lord,  have  been
robbed  of  their  goods  and  houses.  O  dull  and  foolish
people  !  O  silly  dove  without  heart !  Was  not  he  your

1  I.e.,  S.  Peter  and  S.  Paul  :  of  whom  the  latter  was  beheaded,  the  former
crucified,  at  Rome. —  [E.]


LETTER CCXLII1.  715

head,  and  were  not  his  eyes  yours?  What,  then,  is  Rome
now  but  a  body  deprived  of  its  head,  a  face  without  eyes,  a
darkened  countenance?  Open,  unhappy  nation,  open  your
•eyes,  and  see  your  desolation  even  now  close  at  hand.
Hoiv  in  a  short  time  lias  her  beauteous  colour  been  changed
(Lam.  iv.  i)  ;  how  is  she  become  as  a  widow,  she  that  was
great  among  the  nations  and  princess  among  the  provinces
(Lam.  i.  i).

4. But  these  are  but  the  beginnings  of  evils,  I  fear  worse.
If  you  persist,  are  you  not  on  the  point  of  perishing? Re
turn,  return,  O  Shunamite  !  return  to  a  better  disposition  ;  !
recognize  now,  though  it  be  late,  the  ills,  the  great  ills,  which
you  have  suffered,  or  are  still  suffering. Bethink  you  for
what  cause  and  reason,  by  what  agents,  and  to  what  uses
you  have,  not  long  ago,  squandered  all  the  ornaments  and
revenues  of  all  the  churches  belonging  to  you  ; think  how,
by  impious  hands,  all  the  gold  and silver  which  could  be
found  on  the  altars  or  in  the  [form  of]  altar  vessels,  or  in
the  sacred  images  themselves,  has  been stolen  and  carried
off. Of  all  this  how  much  do  you  now  find  in  your  purses  ?
Further,  the  beauty  of  the  house  of God  has  irrecoverablv
perished. And  what  has  made  you now repeat  this  evil-
doing,  to  call  down  on  you again  those  evil  days  ? What
ampler  gain  or  more  sure  hope  is  there  now  to  rouse  you  ?
There  is  only  this,  that  your  latest  doings  are  seen  to  be
more  heedless  than  the  former,  because  then  not  only  many
-of  the common people, but  also  some  of  the  clergy  and
princes  in  different  parts  of  the  world  took  your  part  in  that
schism. But  now  your  hand  is  against  all,  and  the  hand  of
all  against  you. The  whole  world  is  wholly  clear  from  your
blood,  except  you  yourself  alone,  and  your  children  within
you. Woe  then to you now, O wretched people, and
double woe, and this not now as before from foreign
nations, not from the ferocity of barbarians, not from
thousands  of  armed soldiers. Wroe to  you only  from the
face  of  your  own  people  ! Woe  to  you  from  your  servants
and  friends,  from  civil  war,  from cruel  searchings  of  heart,
from  the  sufferings  of  your  children.

1 Ad  cor  (mini.


716  LETTER CCXLIII.

5.  Do  you  now  recognize  that  all  are  not  peaceably  dis
posed  who  are  of  your  own  house,  nor  all  friendly  who  seem
to  be  so?  And  even  if  we  had  known  it  before,  we  are  now
taught  more  plainly  by  your  example  the  full  truth  of that
saying  of  the  Lord  which  He  spake — that  a  man's  enemies
shall  be  those  of  his  own  household  (S.  Matt.  x.  36). Woe
to  brother  from  the  brother  in  his  midst,  and  to  children
from  their  parents. Woe  to  them,  not  from  the  sword,  but
from  lying  lips  and  a  deceitful  tongue.  How  long  will  you  so-
evilly  encourage  each  other  in  your  evil-doing? How  long
will  you  lay  one  another  low  with  the  swords  of  your  lips,
ruin  one  another,  be  consumed  one  by  another? Assemble
yourselves,  ye  scattered  sheep,  return  to  your  pastures,  and
to the Shepherd and Bishop of  your souls. Return, ye
wanderers,  to your  first  love. 1  say  this  not  as  an  enemy
to  revile  you,  but  as  a  friend  to  rebuke  you. True  friend
ship  brings  sometimes  rebuke,  never  flattery.

6.  But  I  add  to  it  entreaty. For  Christ's  sake,  I  beseech
you,  be  reconciled  to  God,  be  reconciled  to  your  princes  (I
mean  Peter  and  Paul),  and  to  him  their  vicar  and  successor,
Eugenius,  whom  you  have  driven  from  his  house  and  home.
Be reconciled  to  the princes  of  the  world,  lest  haply  the
world  begin  to  take  up  arms  on  their  behalf  against  your
folly. Know  you  not  that  when  they  are  offended  you  can
do  nothing,  that  when  they  are  favourable  you  have  nothing
whatever to fear? Under  their protection you  need  not
fear,  O  renowned  city,  home  of  the  brave,  for  thousands  of
the  people  that  set  themselves  round  about  you. Be  recon
ciled,  then,  to  them,  and  at  the  same  time  to  the  thousands,
of  martyrs,  who,  indeed,  are  with  you,  but  yet  against  you,
because  of  the  grievous  sin  which  you  have  committed,  and
to  \vhich  you  obstinately  cling. Be  reconciled  to  the  whole
Church  of  the  Saints,  who  are  everywhere  scandalized  when
they  hear  of  your  evil  doings. Else  will  this  very  page  be
a  witness against you. And the  Apostles and Martyrs
themselves  will  make  a  firm  stand  against  those  who  have
dishonoured  them  and  deprived  them  of the  glory  of  their
labours. But  let  us  all  now  alike  hear  an  end  of  talking. I
have  pointed  out  what  is  right,  pointed  out  beforehand  to


LETTER CCXL1V.  717

you  your  danger,  not  concealed  the  truth,  exhorted  you  to
better  things.  There  now  remains,  either  that  I  be  delighted
by  your  speedy  amendment,  or  grieve  inconsolably  at  the
sure  knowledge  of  the  righteous  punishment  ready  to  fall
on  you,  that  I  wither  and  pine  away  for  fear  and  looking
after  those  things  which  shall  come  on  the  whole  city.


LETTER  CCXLIV. (A.I). 1146.)
To  CONRAD,  KING  OF  THE  ROMANS.

He  urges  the  King  to  defend  the  Papal  authority  against
the  rebellious  Romans.

i.  Never  more  sweetly,  more  harmoniously,  or  more
closely  could  kingship  and  priesthood  have  been  united
or  planted  together  than  when  they  both  alike  met  in  the
person  of  the  Lord,  since  He  was  made  for  us  out  of  both
tribes  according  to  the  flesh,  at  once  High  Priest  and  King.
And  not  only  so,  but  he  also  mingled  them  and  united  them
in  His  Body,1  which  is  the  whole  Christian  people,  Himself
being  their  Head  ;  so  that  the  Apostle  calls  this  race  of
men,  A  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood  (i  S.  Pet.  ii.
cj).  In  another  Scripture  are  not  all  as  many  as  were  pre
destinated  to  life  called  kings  and  priests?  (Rev.  i.  6  and  v.
10).  Therefore,  what  God  hath  joined  together  let  not  man
put  asunder.  What  Divine  authority  has  sanctioned  let
man's  will  be  the  more  diligent  to  fulfil,  and  let  those  whom
precepts  have  united  be  united  in  their  minds.  Let  them  help
each  other,  defend  each  other,  bear  each  other's  burdens.
The  Wise  Man  says,  If  a  brother  help  his  brother,  both
shall  receive  consolation  (Prov.  xviii.  19).  But  shall  they
not  both  receive  desolation  if,  which  God  forbid,  they  bite
and  devour  each  other  ?  May  my  soul  never  come  into  the

1  Cf.  Suger,  ep.  74  :  "  Since  it  is  agreed  that  the  glory  of  the  Body  of  Christ,
which  is  the  Church  of  God,  consists  in  the  indissoluble  connection  of  royalty  and
priesthood,  it  is  surely  plain  that  he  who  provides  for  the  one  cares  for  the  other  ;
for  that  the  earthly  kingdom  is  rendered  steadfast  by  the  Church  of  God,  and
the  Church  of  God  profits  by  the  earthly  kingdom,  is  plainly  recognized  by  all
people  of  discernment."  See  John  of  Salisbury,  ep.  44.


71 8  LETTER CCXLIV.

counsel  of  those  who  say  that  either  the  peace  and  liberty
of  the  Churches  is  injurious  to  the  Empire,  or  that  the
prosperity  and  exaltation  of  the  Empire  are  harmful  to  the
Churches.  For  God,  the  Founder  of  both,  has  not  joined
them  for  destruction,  but  for  edification.

2.  If  you know  this,  how  long  do you  continue  to  pass
over  their  common  reproach,  their  common  wrongs  ? Is  not
Rome at once  the  Apostolic See and  the  capital  of  the
Empire  ? To  say  nothing,  then,  of  the  Church,  is  it  to  the
King's honour  to  hold  in  his hands  a  broken  sceptre? I
know  not, indeed, what  advice your  wise  men and the
heads  of  your  kingdom  may  give  you  on  this  matter,  but  I,
speaking  in  my  folly,  will  not  keep  back  what  I  think. The
Church  of  God  has  from  the  beginning  down  to  the  present
time many  times suffered tribulations, and many  times
been  set  free. Listen  to  what  she  says  about  herself  in  the
Psalm,  Many  a  time  have  they  fought  against  me  from  mv

youth  up,  but  they  have  not  prevailed  against  me.  The
sinners  built  upon  my  back,  and  made  long  their  iniquity
(Ps.  cxxix.  2,  3).  The  Lord,  certainly,  O  King,  will  not  now
let  the  rod  of  sinners  come  into  the  lot  of  the  righteous.
The  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened  or  weakened  that  it
cannot  save.  He  will  at  this  time  again  without  doubt  set
free  His  Spouse,  whom  He  redeemed  with  His  own  Blood,
endowed  with  His  Spirit,  adorned  with  Heavenly  gifts,  and
enriched  none  the  less  with  earthly  bounties.  He  will  set
her  free,  I  repeat.  He  will  set  her  free,  but  if  by  the  hand
of  another,  even  the  princes  of  the  realm  can  see  whether
that  would  be  to  the  King's  honour  or  to  the  beneiit  of  the
kingdom.  It  would  not  be  to  either.

3.  Therefore  gird  thee  with  thy  sword  upon thy  thigh,
O,  most  mighty,  and  let  Caesar  restore  to  himself  the  things
which  are  Caesar's,  and  to  God  the  things  which  are  God's.
It  is  well  known  that  both  are  in  the  charge  of  Caesar,  viz.,  to
guard  his  own  crown  and  to  defend  the  Church. One  befits
the  King ;  the  other  the  defender  of  the  Church.  The  victory,
I  trust  in God, is in  your hands. The  haughtiness  and
arrogance  of  the  Romans  are  greater  than  their  courage.


LETTER CCXLIV.  719

How  is  it?  Would  any  Emperor  or  King,  no  matter  how
great  and  powerful,  presume  to  offer  such  an  insult  at  once
to  the  Empire  and  the  priesthood  ?  But  this  accursed
and  turbulent  people,  which  knows  not  how  to  measure  its
strength,  to  think  of  its  object,  to  consider  the  issue,  has  in
its  folly  had  the  audacity  to  attempt  this  great  sacrilege.
God  forbid  that  popular  violence  and  the  rashness  of  the
vulgar  should  for  a  moment  be  able  to  stand  before  the
face  of  the  King.  I  have  become  as  a  fool,  in  that,  though
a  mean  and  unknown  person,  I  have  thrust  myself  like
some  great  one  into  the  counsels  of  such  greatness  and
such  wisdom,  and  in  a  matter,  too,  of  such  importance.  But
the  more  unknown  and  humble  I  am,  the  freer  I  am  to  say
what  charity  suggests.  And  therefore  I  add  also  this  in  my
folly:  I  do  not  suppose  that  anyone  will,  but  if  anyone
should  attempt  to  persuade  you  to  anything  else  but  what
I  have  urged  upon  you,  it  is  certain  that  either  he  does  not
love  the  King  or  has  but  little  perception  of  what  befits  the
royal  majesty,  or  else  he  seeks  his  own  advantage,  and  does
not  thoroughly  care  either  for  what  is  God's  or  for  what  is
the  King's.

LETTER CCXLV. (A.D. 1146.)
To  POPE  EUGENIUS,  ON  BEHALF  OF  TIIK  BISHOP  OF

ORLEANS.1

He  praises  the  zeal  of  the  Pope  in  this  matter.
Thus  act  always,  I  pray  you. Always  look  at  the  petition,

i  Helias.  After  the  death  of  John,  Bishop  of  Orleans,  A.D.  1 133,  Hugh,  the
Dean,  was  chosen  to  succeed  him.  This  is  on  the  authority  of  Onieric  (lib.
xiii.  on  the  year  1 134),  who  writes  as  follows  : — "  After  the  aged  John,  Bishop
of  Orleans,  had  given  up  his  Bishopric  with  his  life,  Hugh,  the  Dean,  was
elected  to  the  vacant  office  ;  but  returning  from  the  King's  Court  he  was  attacked
by  desperadoes  and  died,  thus  leaving  the  Diocese  to  be  for  a  long  time  tossed
about  without  a  ruler,  like  a  ship  on  the  sea  without  a  rudder."  This  lasted  till
A.D.  1136,  when  Helias,  after  a  protracted  disagreement  between  the  clergy  and
laity,  was  chosen  by  the  unanimous  vote  of  all.  He  was  a  monk  and  Abbot  of
S.  Sulpicius  of  Bourges.  Peter  of  Cluny  (lib.  i.  ep.  n)  calls  him  "a  man  full
of  piety,  prudence,  and  learning."  Peter  wrote  for  his  confirmation  to  Innocent,
and  he  was  consecrated  by  him  in  April,  1137.  After  some  years,  viz.,  in


720  LETTER CCXLV.

not  at  the  petitioner.  The  King's  intercession  for  the
Bishop  of  Orleans  was  not  listened  to,  yet  he  was  not
offended,  because  his  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  God.  But
even  if  he  had  been,  you  would  have  had  to  bear  it,  lest
God  should  be  offended,  Who  will  be  the  more  propitiated,
and  more  quickly  give  us  deliverance  from  the  evils  that
we  suffer  and  from  our  grief,  if  righteousness  be  held  fast
and  truth  not  given  up.  It  is  not  easy  to  say  how  much  my
heart  is  gladdened  by  such  actions  as  these  of  yours,  which
are  daily  being  noised  abroad,  to  the  great  joy  of  all.  So
much  for  this.  For  the  future,  if  anyone  suggests  to  you
that  more  might  be  put  upon  me,  know  that  my  strength  is
unequal  to  what  I  now  bear.  Inasmuch  as  you  spare  me
you  will  also  spare  yourself.  I  think  that  you  know  that  it
is  my  determination  not  to  leave  my  monastery  again.1  In
the  matter  of  brother  Balditius,  though  he  is  beloved  by
and  is  useful  to  me,  I  have  obeyed  you  without  delay.
With  regard  to  sending  an  Abbot  to  S.  Anastasius,2  if  it
has  not  been  done  it  shall  be  directly  I  know  that  it  has
not.  Further,  as  to  sending  someone  else,  as  in  your  last
letter  you  said  nothing  about  it,  I  did  not  presume  to  do  it.
But  this  shall  be  done  as  quickly  as  you  see  fit  to  hasten  it.
My  lord  of  Auxerre  and  brother  Balditius  will  give  you  an
answer  about  everything  more  at  length  and  more  plainly.
What  Baldwin,  Archbishop  of  Pisa,  did  in  Sardinia  in  the
matter  of  the  excommunication  of  the  judge  of  Arvora,  I
ask  that  you  will  uphold,  ratiiied  and  unshaken  by  your
authority,  because  I  believe  that  so  good  a  man  would  not
have  done  this  except  justly.  Lastly,  let  the  judge  of
1 144,  he  was  accused  before  Lucius  II.  of  grievous  crimes  by  the  clergy  of
Orleans,  and  when  he  could  not  clear  himself,  and  when  the  Pope  could  not  be
induced  to  show  him  favour,  either  by  Peter  (lib.  v.  epp.  19,  21,  27)  or  by  King
Louis  himself,  he  of  his  own  accord  resigned  his  See  on  the  advice  of  S.  Bernard,
A.D.  1146,  when  Eugenius  had  succeeded  Lucius.  It  is,  therefore,  remarkable
that  Alberic  should  say  (Chron.,  A.D.  1149)  tnat  "  Atto,  Bishop  of  Troyes,  and
the  Bishop  of  Orleans  were  deposed  in  a  council  held  at  Rheims,"  when  each  of
his  own  free  will  resigned  his  office,  as  is  clear  in  the  case  of  the  Bishop  of
Orleans  from  this  Letter,  and  in  the  case  of  Atto  from  the  notes  to  ep.  23.

1  See  epp.  227,  228.

2  Rualene  (epp.  258,  259,  260)  was  sent.


LETTER CCXLVI.  721

Torre,1  since  he  is  said  to  be  a good prince,  find  favour
with  you  and  receive  a  welcoming  hand.


LETTER CCXLVJ. (A.D. 1146.)

To  THK  SAME,  ON  BEHALF  OK  THE  SAME  BISHOP  OF
ORLEANS,  AFTER  HIS  DEPOSITION.

He commends to the Pope the Bishop  of  Orleans, who
Jiad  voluntarily  resigned  his  See.

i.  It  is  now  time  for  me  to  write,  not  as  before,  on
behalf  of  a  Bishop,  but  for  a  poor  and  lowly  monk,-  which
is  a  more  distressing  task  than  if  it  were  for  one  who  is
rich  and  in  good  position.  Hence  there  is  no  room  now  for
flattery,  but  only  for  mercy.  Many  wrote  on  his  behalf  to
ask  that  he  might  remain  Bishop,  but  this  was  too  much  to
ask.  I  could  not  be  induced  to  venture  on  that.  But  now
if  the  affair  is  looked  at  more  gently,  humanity  demands
now,  what  before  1  avoided  asking.  The  man  had
hope  until  now,  and  the  reason  of  his  hope  was  of  this
kind.  He  said:  "The  state  of  affairs  has  been  greatly
changed  since  the  sentence  that  I  should  purge  myself  was
pronounced  against  me.  And,  indeed,  the  sentence  that  I
received  was  severe  enough,  and  one  that  could  hardly  be
fulfilled  by  the  most  innocent.  But  how  can  it  now  when
everything  has  made  it  impossible  ?  There  is  no  Bishop  at
Nevers,  nor  yet  even  at  Troves.  The  Bishop  of  Auxerre
has  crossed  the  Alps.  These  three  form  a  great  part  of  the
number  of  comprovincials  by  whom  I  was  to  purge  myself.
Those  who  can  purge  me  are  certainly  not  lacking,  but  the
Bishops  are  either  non-existent  or  absent.  Can,  then,  that
be  rightly  exacted  from  me  which  cannot  be  found  ?  If  the

1  This  seems  to  be  Gunnar,  once  judge  and  tetrarch  of  Sardinia,  who,  coming
to  the  grave  of  S.  Martin,  returned  by  way  of  Clairvaux,  where,  being  welcomed
by  Bernard,  he  afterwards  became  a  monk (Heribert,  De  Mirac.  Bern.,  lib.  ii.
c.  13).

2  He  was  first  Abbot  of  S.  Sulpicius,  then  Bishop  of  Bourges,  and  then  again
<i  monk.


722  LETTER CCXLVI.

judge  finds  the  case  thus,  is  it  wonderful  if  he  relieve  me
from  an  impossible  sentence?  Or  if  it  is  not  wholly  im
possible,  he  will,  of  his  own  accord,  pass  lightly  over  or
not  scrutinize  too  severely  acts  which  are  of  small  impor
tance.  Surely  he  wishes  for  mercy  and  not  sacrifice.  For
what  advantage  is  there  in  my  blood  that  he  should  search
out  my  iniquity  and  examine  into  my  sin?  But  because  he
is  kind  and  merciful,  something  he  will  forgive,  something
he  will  pass  over,  and  will  add  somewhat  of  his  own.  He
is  the  lord  ;  is  it  not  lawful  for  him  to  do  what  he  will  ?
Even  if  the  Pope,  as  a  man  of  apostolic  gentleness  and
authority,  does  not  care  to  supply  me  with  an  excuse,  as,
indeed,  he  need  not,  why  should  he  not  use  the  liberty  he
enjoys,  and  promptly  let  mercy  triumph  over  justice?

2.  When,  then,  this  hope  was  allowed  him  in  the  midst
of  his  fear,  and  not  in  vain,  as  it  seemed  to  him  and  his
friends,  yet  he  gave  way,  and  trusted  himself  entirely  to  my
judgment.  And  in  order  that  he  might  not  trouble  the
Church  too  long  with  his  case,  on  my  advice  he  anticipated
the  end,  and  the  descent  of  the  axe,  and  resigned  his
bishopric.  There  is  one  source  of  consolation,  most
merciful  father,  which  this  noble  and  repentant  man  has  in
the  midst  of  his  sad  fortune.  Do  you  ask  what  that  is  ?
Certainly  he  does  not  exercise  himself  in  great  matters,  nor
in  things  too  high  for  him.  It  is  enough  for  him  if  by  your
indulgence  he,  who  was  once  a  bishop,  may  remain  a  priest ;
if  only  the  shield  of  your  favour  may  be  held  before  him  to
save  him  from  the  mark  of  infamy,  and  from  being  branded
for  ever  with  disgrace.  A  prayer,  surely,  that  is  worthy  of
being  listened  to.  He  does  not  ask  this  from  pride,  but
lest  he  who  was  once  so  high  should  sink  lower  than  the
lowest.  He  will  be  contented  with  any  position  mid-way.
Let  him  as  he  falls  from  on  high  stay  himself  on  whatever
honourable  step  he  can  lay  hold  of  in  his  fall,  and  not
descend  to  the  lowest  step  of  shame.  He  is  young,  of
noble  birth,  has  been  placed  in  a  high  position,  and  yet  he
does  not  shrink  from  a  lowly  place,  but  from  one  of  shame.
Shall  not  even  his  humility  gain  him  somewhat  ?  The


LETTER CCXIA'I.  723

impious  Ahab  humbled  himself  and  was  profited  by  it  (i
Kings  xxi.  27-29)  ;  and  shall  not  humility  bring  its  reward
to  one  who  is  faithful  and  noble?  Far  be  it  from  the
highest  See,  and  far  from  your  holy  mind,  to  despise  a
humble  and  contrite  heart.

3.  If  I  should  say,  "  He  has  humbled  himself,  let  him
be  lifted  up,"  this  would  not  be  too  rash  or  presumptuous
for  me  to  say  for  him  ;  I  should  only  be  invoking  a  rule
that  you  know  (S.  Matt,  xxiii.  12).  But  as  it  is,  I  do  not
ask  that  he  be  lifted  up,  but  that  he  be  not  trodden  under
foot,  and  that  I  be  not  disappointed  of  my  hope.  Nay,
indeed,  if  we  have  received  evil  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord,
shall  we  not  also  receive  good  ?  For  have  you  not  the
power  to  put  down  the  mighty  from  their  seat,  and  to  exalt
the  humble  and  meek  ?  Further,  when  we  have  received
power,  to  prefer  to  use  it  against  evil  rather  than  for  good,
is  to  abuse  it.  Besides,  he  is  worried  by  many  debts,  since
he  is  now  poor  and  needy.  Let  your  authority  order  them
to  be  paid  from  the  episcopal  revenues.  It  is  hard  to  be  at
once  deprived  of  honour,  and  to  be  burdened  with  a  load  of
debts.

LETTER  CCXLVII. (A.I). 1146.)
To  THE  SAMK,  FOR  THE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  RHKIMS.

Bernard  is  displeased  at  the  severity  shown  towards
the  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  in  withdrawing  from  him  tin-
use  of  the  pallium.

To  his  loving  father  and  lord  Ki/GEMi'S,  by  the  grace  of
God  Supreme  Pontiff,  his  humble  servant  BERNARD,  Abbot
of  Clairvaux,  sends  humble  greeting.

i.  May  God  forgive  you  !  What  have  you  done?  You
have  shamed  the  face  of  one  of  the  most  conscientious  of
men,  and  humiliated  in  the  face  of  the  Church  one  whose
praise  is  in  the  Church.  You  have  made  all  his  adversaries
to  rejoice,  but  how  many  do  you  suppose  you  have  grieved/
There  is  no  measure  to  the  sympathy  that  he  receives,  be-


724  LETTER CCXLVII.

cause  his  friends  are  numberless.  A  man  beloved  by  God
and  men  is  suffering  the  punishment  due  to  a  great  crime,
though  it  has  not  been  brought  home  to  him,  nor  confessed.
We  hold,  we  feel,  the  zeal  of  Phinehas ;  the  Israelite  is
thrust  through,  but  not  with  the  Midianitish  woman.  It  is
charged  against  him  that  he  crowned  the  King,1  but  he  does
not  think  that  in  so  doing  he  has  exceeded  the  tenor  of  his
privileges.  It  is  objected  against  him  that  he  knowingly
presumed  to  celebrate  in  a  church  lying  under  an  interdict.
He  denies  it.  In  good  time  that  will  be  brought  to  the
1  I  find  that  Louis  the  Younger  was  more  than  once  crowned.  The  first  time
was  during  the  lifetime  of  his  father,  when  he  received  the  crown  from  Innocent
A.D.  1131,  at  Rheims.  The  second  took  place  (Ordericus  Vitalis  says)  at
Bourges,  A.D.  1138.  He  writes: — "In  the  year  1138  Louis  King  of  France
was  crowned  at  Bourges  on  Christmas  Day,  and  there  was  gathered  together  a
large  assembly  of  the  nobles  and  of  lesser  men  from  all  Gaul  and  Aquitaine,
and  from  the  surrounding  countries.  Thither  assembled  the  metropolitans  with
their  suffragans,  thither  came  the  consuls  and  other  high  personages  to  show
their  loyalty  to  the  new  king/'  Ordericus  speaks  of  him  as  a  "  new  king  "  be
cause,  on  the  death  of  his  father,  he  was  crowned  King  of  Aquitaine.  Here  we
see  him  crowned  again  by  Samson,  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  before  setting  out
for  Jerusalem,  perhaps  that  he  might  receive  the  oath  of  loyalty  in  solemn
assembly  before  he  left  his  vassals.  Horst  thinks  that  the  place  where  this  last
ceremony  took  place  was  Chartres,  where  the  question  of  the  expedition  to
Jerusalem  was  discussed.  But  from  the  tenor  of  this  Letter  it  is  evident  that  this
coronation  took  place  at  Bourges.  The  same  thing  is  evident  from  the  Letters
of  Eugenius,  from  which  we  see  that  Eugenius  was  under  the  impression  that
the  church  of  Bourges,  in  which  Samson  had  performed  the  ceremony,  had
been  placed  under  an  interdict.  From  this  Letter,  and  from  another  of  Ivo's  to
be  quoted  presently,  it  further  appears  that  the  Archbishop  of  Rheims  contended
that  it  was  his  prerogative  to  crown  the  king  whenever  the  ceremony  took  place.
This  was  denied  by  Peter  of  Bourges,  and  by  Ivo  of  Chartres  before  him.  But
in  this  Letter  S.  Bernard  does  not  deprive  the  Archbishop  of  Rheims  of  this  pre
rogative,  nay,  he  rather  seems  to  admit  it.  Silvester  II.  mentions  it  in  a  bull
sent  to  Arnulf,  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  whom  he  had  suspended  for  a  breach  of
good  faith,  and  whom  he  restored  A.D.  999  to  his  former  dignity  and  all  his
rights.  He  says: — "  We  grant  to  you  by  the  provisions  of  this  edict  permission
to  resume  the  ring  and  staff,  and  to  discharge  the  office  of  Archbishop,  and  to
enjoy  after  the  usual  manner  all  the  insignia  which  belong  to  the  metropolis  of
the  holy  Church  of  Rheims,  to  use  the  pall  at  the  wonted  solemnities,  at  the
benediction  of  kings,  and  of  your  suffragan  Bishops."  And  certainly  it  was
most  suitable,  since  the  "  most  Christian  Kings  "  had  received  the  dignity  of  the
royal  priesthood  from  the  blessed  Remigius,  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  and  also  the
pledge  of  their  heavenly  crown  through  their  baptism  and  profession  of  the
Christian  religion,  that  they  should  give  to  his  successors  the  right  of  consecrat-


LKTTKR C  CXI  A  II.  725

test,  and  he  be  cleared.  But  be  it  so,  let  us  suppose  that
all  that  his  adversary  has  been  allowed,  or  has  cared,  to  say
against  him  in  his  absence  is  true.  Is  it  right  that  om-
whose  other  actions  have  been  so  praiseworthy  should  for
this  single  excess  be  so  hardly  dealt  with,  so  severely
punished?  To  have  exceeded  this  once  only,  might  havr
been  thought  even  a  virtue,  if  the  judgment  on  his  action
had  proceeded  from  you  and  not  from  his  enemies.  What
ought  he  to  have  done  in  such  difficult  circumstances  ?  The
day  had  been  fixed,  the  court  was  solemnly  assembled,  the

ing  and  crowning  kings  ;  as  for  a  like  reason  the  Emperors  gave  it  to  the  Arch
bishop  of  Mayence  because  of  S.  Boniface,  the  Kings  of  Spain  to  Toledo  because
of  S.  Eleutherius,  the  Kings  of  England  to  Canterbury  because  of  S.  Augustine  ;
although,  of  course,  this  privilege  of  the  Archbishop  of  Rheims  was  liable  to  be
dispensed  with  by  lawful  authority  as  time  and  place  might  require.  And  I  do
not  think  that  Ivo  of  Chartres  meant  anything  more  in  his  famous  Letter  189,  in
which  he  defends  the  solemn  coronation  of  Louis  VI.  by  Daimbert,  Archbishop
of  Sens.  For  elsewhere  (ep.  48)  he  admits  that  this  was  the  prerogative  of  the
Church  of  Rheims  ;  when  writing  to  Pope  Urban  he  says  that  that  See  "  holds
the  king's  diadem."  And  again  in  another  Letter  he  protests  that  he  does  not
begrudge  it  to  Rheims,  he  does  not  oppose  it,  is  not  grieved  if  the  Kings  of
France  have  such  an  affection  for  it,  as  to  prefer  to  be  crowned  by  it  than  by
any  other.  But  yet  he  defends  the  dispensation  for  what  was  done  by  Daimbert
as  a  rightful  one.  "  What  we  did,"  he  says  (ep.  189),  "  we  did  after  wholesome
deliberation  and  provident  dispensation.  There  were  certain  men,  troublers  of
the  kingdom,  who  were  eagerly  on  the  watch  for  an  opportunity  to  transfer  the
kingdom  to  another,  or  to  diminish  its  dignity  in  no  small  degree."  His  asser
tion  that  that  privilege  was  not  based  on  reason,  custom,  or  law,  must  not  be
taken  too  literally,  for  the  tenor  of  his  argument  against  custom  is  to  show  that
"  the  Kings  of  France  had  not  all  been  consecrated  at  Rheims,  or  by  the  Arch
bishops  of  Rheims/'  which  is  admitted.  He  seems  to  be  directing  all  his  efforts
to  deny,  putting  aside  the  question  of  a  dispensation,  that  the  consecration  of
kings  must  always  take  place  at  Rheims  under  pain  of  an  anathema  being  in
curred  by  anyone  who  for  any  reason  should  do  otherwise,  which  seemed  to  be  the
contention  of  the  representatives  of  Rheims  in  the  matter.  (Cf.  Aimoin,  Continua
tion  of  Acts  of  the  Franks,  lib.  v.  c.  50,  and  Hugh  in  Chron.  Auxerre,  A.D.
i  154).  At  last,  to  prevent  any  future  dispute,  Louis  VII.,  A.D.  1 179,  confirmed
this  prerogative  of  the  Archbishop  of  Rheims  by  a  solemn  decree,  and  it  was
afterwards  confirmed  by  Letters  of  Alexander  and  Innocentlll.  It  is  astonishing
to  us  now  what  a  value  was  then  put  on  the  use  of  the  pall,  which  had  been
interdicted  to  Samson  by  the  Pope;  so  much  so  that  S.  Bernard  would  rather
that  he  himself  was  forbidden  to  celebrate  mass  than  that  the  Archbishop
should  be  deprived  of  the  use  of  the  pall.  Moreover,  S.  Malachy  did  not
hesitate,  in  order  to  obtain  it,  to  cross  twice  from  Ireland  to  Rome.


726  LETTER CCXLVII.

young  King  was  there,  and,  above  all,  the  business  for
which  they  had  assembled  was  God's  business,  viz.,  the
expedition  to  Jerusalem.  All  these  things  plainly  forbade
that  the  solemn  crowning  of  the  King  should  be  put  off,  or
that  it  should  be  deprived  of  the  wonted  masses,  and  of  its
due  honour.  Neither  was  it  expedient  for  the  Archbishop
of  Bourges  to  prevent  this  honour  being  shown  to  the
King.

2.  And  since  this  is  how  the  case  stands,  I  think  that  it  is
not  one  without  an  opportunity  for  mercy,  since  great  neces
sity  can  excuse  any  appearance  of  contumacy. Have  you
power  to  strike  only,  and not  to  heal  ? You  know  who
said,  /  will  wound  and  I  will  heal  (Deut.  xxxii.  39). Far
be  it  from  you  not  to  use  the  words  of  Him  Whose  place
you  hold,  especially  His  words  of  fatherly  love. Therefore,
for  this  time  only  let  the  arrow  of  Jonathan  speed  quickly
back,  and  if  need  be  let  it  be  shot  at  me  instead. I  should
think  it  more  tolerable,  I  confess,  for  me  to  be  forbidden  to
•celebrate  mass  than  for  the Archbishop  to  be  deprived  of
his  pall. There  is  also  another  reason  of  no  small  weight
which  stands  in  the  way  of  your  godly  severity  here,  and
that  is,  that  it  may  give  great  occasion of offence  and  irri
tation  to  your  son,  King  Louis,  since  he  will  seem  the  whole
cause  of  all  this  trouble; and  this  plainly  is unadvisable
just  now,  for  the  good  work  which  under  your  exhortation
he has set about zealously and earnestly may fail of  a
worthy  ending  if  he  does  it  while  angry  and  offended. As
to  the  rest,  you have  ordered, I  have  obeyed ; and  your
authority  has  caused  a  ready  obedience  to  be  paid  to  the
injunctions. I have declared and spoken,  they  are  more
than  I  can  number. Cities and castles are made empty  ;
and now they find with difficulty one man that seven
women  can  lay  hold  of, so  many  widows are there  every
where,  and  their  husbands  still  living.


LETTER CCXLVIII.  727

LETTER CCXLVIII. (A.D. 1146.)
To  THE  SAME.

Bernard  forewarns  the  Pontiff  not  to  lend  an  ear  to
the  Bishop  of  Seez,  who  is  endeavouring  to  be  reinstated
in  his  diocese.

1.  It  is  not my  custom,  as  it  is  with  many,  to  use  any
preface,  any  roundabout  phrases  with  you. I  begin  at  once
with  the  matter  itself.  A  deceitful  man  is  on  his  way  to  you.
to  deceive  you,  I  believe,  but  I  hope  that  he  will  not  succeed.
For  this  could  not  happen  except  with  very  great  danger  to
many. It is always an evil to deceive anyone ; it is
commonly  also  an  evil  to  be  deceived  by  anyone. But  it
makes  a  difference  who  it  is  that  is  deceived,  and  in  what
he  is  deceived. The  greater  your  power  and  dignity  is,  the
more dangerous and more disgraceful is it  to  take  any
advantage  of  you,  especially  in  ecclesiastical  matters. For
example,  this  deceitful fox of Seez is craftily laying  his
snares  for  you,  hoping  by  his  craft  to  catch  you,  and  you
ran  imagine  with  what malignity  he  will  rage  against  the
vineyard  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  no  small  part  of  which  he  has
in  a  short  time  laid  waste,  if he  is  allowed  to  return  to  it
fortified by your  authority. Alas  ! what is left he will
speedily  devour. He  who  came  a fox will return  a  lion,
and  he  will  no  longer  use  cunning  but  cruelty  against  some
of  the  clergy,  as  well  as  some  of  the  laity. You  must,  then,
be  on  your  guard  against  his  cunning,  so  that  his  violence
may  not  break  out  a  second  time.

2.  Be not moved by the piteous face of the man,  his
mean dress, his suppliant look, his downcast eyes, the
humility of his words, nor yet  by his crocodile's tears,
running,  they  say,  at  will,  and  practised  to  further  his  lies.
All  these  are  but  the  appearance,  and  you  know  Who  said,
Judge  not  according  to  tJie  appearance  (S.  John vii.  24).
In  such  things  as  these  consists  the  form  of  godliness,  but
not always its power. These  are  sheep's clothing, often
put  on,  as  the Lord  warned us, by  wolves for  the  greatest


728  LETTER CCXLVIII.

destruction  of  the  sheep.  The  sheep  do  not  hide  them
selves,  for  the  wolves  come  to  them  disguised  (S.  Matt.  vii.
15).  Thence  it  is  that  some  of  my  friends,  taken  in  by  his
falsehoods,  have  written  on  his  behalf,  not  paying  attention
to  what  was  wisely  and  truly  said  by  the  Wise  Man,  There
is  one  who  wickedly  humbles  himself,  and  his  inward  parts
are  full  of  deceit  (Ecclus.  xix.  23).  Pay  no  attention,
then,  to  his  words,  or  to  the  gestures  of  his  body  ;  examine
his  deeds.  By  his  fruits  you  will  know  him.  Many
grievous  things  are  said  of  him  ;  they  will  also  be  said
against  him  if  there  is  one  that  seeketh  and  judgeth.  I  am
unwilling  to  tell  you  all  that  I  have  heard.  For  everything
is  not  to  be  believed  ;  but  neither  is  everything  to  be  dis
believed.  I  briefly  mention  one  conjecture  of  mine;  you
will  judge  if  there  is  anything  in  it.  Why  did  he  refuse
the  judges  given  him  ?  If  he  objects  to  them  personally,
they  were  under  no  suspicion.  If  he  objects  to  the  place,
it  was  in  his  own  land,  amongst  his  own  kindred,  where  the
whole  matter  could  be  investigated  easily,  and  without
trouble,  at  small  expense,  and  without  a  long  journey.
We  can  clearly  only  conclude  that  he  appealed  to  you  as
an  expedient  to  escape  from  the  great  number  of  his
accusers  who  would  be  unable  to  pursue  him  outside  his
native  land  because  of  the  expense.  We  must  thank  the
Bishop  of  Lisieux,  whose  zeal  for  the  House  of  God  has  made
him  spare  neither  his  purse  nor  his  individual  trouble.  He
is  a  good  brother,  whose  desire  it  is  to  raise  up  seed  to  his
dead  brother.1  Do  you,  too,  thank  him,  because  this  diligent

1  He  skilfully  applies  the  old  and  now  antiquated  command  of  God,  that  if  a
man  died  without  children  his  brother  should  raise  up  seed  to  him,  to  Arnulf,
Bishop  of  Lisieux  ;  who  by  Letters  to  the  Pope,  and  by  his  close  attention,  so  pre
served  the  rule  of  S.  Augustine,  which  had  been  given  by  his  brother  John,
Bishop  of  Seez,  to  secular  canons,  and  which  had  been  allowed  to  be  grievously
neglected  by  his  successor,  that  S.  Bernard  here  happily  remarks  that  he  had
raised  up  his  brother's  seed,  which  another's  carelessness  and  license  had  well
nigh  choked.  It  is  likely  that  he  laboured  in  this  matter  for  some  twenty  years,
as  appears  from  a  Letter  of  his  to  Pope  Alexander  III.,  beginning,  "  There  is  one
who,"  etc.  John,  the  brother  of  Arnulf,  died  A.D.  1143,  and  was  succeeded  by
Girard,  the  second  of  that  name,  formerly  a  secular  canon,  who  from  the  above
Letter  to  Arnulf  seems  to  have  been  refused  consecration  as  Bishop  until  he  pro-


LETTER CCL.  729

care  of  his  will  shed  no  small  lustre  on  your  name,  for  by
it  the  wicked  is  made  manifest,  and  so  overthrown,  which
is  your  glory.

LETTER  CCXLIX. (A.D. 1145.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  commends  as  worthy  the  Prior  of  Chaise  Dieu ,  elected
to  the  Sec  of  Valence.

If  rarity  gives  value  to  things,  nothing  in  the  Church  is
more  precious,  nothing  more  to  be  wished  for,  than  a  good
and  useful  pastor.  Truly  such  is  a  rare  bird.  Accordingly,
whenever  such  is  found,  and  an  occasion  is  given,  imme
diately  men's  hands  are  laid  upon  him,  and  they  strive
with  all  their  might,  using  every  possible  violence  and  act
of  wickedness  to  prevent  his  promotion  and  the  good  fruit
that  it  promise's.  I  have  heard  that  in  the  Church  of
Valence  the  Prior  of  Chaise  Dieu1  has  been  elected  by  the
vote  of  both  clergy  and  laity.  I  should  be  greatly  surprised
if  he  were  not  a  good  and  useful  man  in  the  work  to  which
he  has  been  called.  Do  you  wish  to  know  why  I  think  so?
Good  men  wish  it,  and  one  who  pleases  good  men  cannot
but  be  good.  And  it  is,  it  seems  to  me,  no  less  a  real  proof
of  his  goodness  it  he  is  displeasing  to  the  bad  in  the  neigh
bourhood.  It  becomes  your  holiness  to  confirm  the  election
of  these  good  men,  lest  if  their  choice  be  rejected  you
receive,  by  the  efforts  and  conspiracy  of  the  wicked,  some
other  whom  vou  would  not  wish.


LETTER CCL.

To  BERNARD,'-  PRIOR  OF  FORTES.

Bernard  tliinks  that  the  refusal  of  the  Pope  to  raise
fcssed  the  same  Order  himself.  But,  as  the  same  Letter  say^s,  this  Bishop  was
declared  to  have  conceived  the  detestable  desire  of  uprooting  this  plantation  of
regular  canons.  For  this  reason  he  is  htre  alluded  to  by  Bernard.

1  On  the  death  of  John,  Bishop  of  Valeuce,  A.D.  1145,  Orilbertus,  Prior  of
Chaise  Dieu,  was  elected,  and  this  Letter,  as  well  as  ep.  270,  was  written  on  his
behalf.

1  The  second  of  the  name. He  left  the  See  cf  Bellay  A.D.  1142,  and  returned

VOL.  ii.  47


730  LETTER CCL.

Brother  Noel  on  account  of  his  youth  to the  Episcopate
ought  not  to  be  resented  by  the  brethren.

To  the  most  reverend  fathers  and  loving  lords,  BERNARD,
Prior  of  Fortes,  and  the  saints  with  him,  BERNARD,  called
Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  sends  greeting  in  the  Lord.

1.  From  a  passage  in  the  reply  of  your  Beatitude  I  find
that  I  wrote  something  which  made  you  think  that  I  was
troubled,  and  that  you  fear  that  not  a  little. But  if  so  it  is
without cause. For  there is no reason why you, most
reverend  fatheis,  should  fear  anything  from  your  child  who
loves  you  in  truth  as  friends  and  holds  you  as  saints. Un
less, perchance, you  feared not me,  but  for me,  with a
fatherly love, because I seemed to you  to  be  troubled
without  reason, or  if  with  reason, more,  perhaps,  than I
ought. I  was  troubled,  I  admit, not  against  you,  but  for
you,  and that  but  little. If  this,  too,  was hastiness,  then
without  hastiness  I  confess  against  myself  my  unrighteous
ness,  and  you  will  forgive  the  hastiness  of  my  sin. Pardon
me,  such  is  my  nature ;  the  zeal  of  your  house  eats  me  up.
I  will  not  allow,  so  far  as  in  me  lies,  such  an  example  of
sanctity  to  lose  its  lustre,1  for  God  forbid  that  I  should  be
afraid  of  its  being  corrupted. In  exactly  the  same  way  in
a. beautiful body not only disease,  but even a  mole is
distressing. Evidently  the  colour  is  not  good  if  any  one  of
the  saints  seems  to  be  vexed  at  his  lowly  position  ;  he  is
far  from  perfect  if  he  does  not  rejoice  and  even  glory  in  it.
Moreover, for any imperfection to appear in one  who
purposes  to  aim  at  perfection  is  as  a  mole. This  colour,
then, in  our  Brother  Noel  displeased  me. For  even  if  he
is  pure  in  the  sight  of  God ;  what  then  ? We must  also
provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all  men.

2.  But  you  say,  "  It  is  we  who  were  vexed,  not  he." We

to  the  Carthusian  House  at  Fortes,  and  there,  before  A.U.  1147,  he  succeeded
Bernard,  the  first  prior  (see  note  to  ep.  153).  I  cannot  say  with  certainty  that
Noel  here  mentioned  was  called  to  preside  after  him  over  the  Church  of  Bellay.
William,  at  all  events,  succeeded  Bernard,  Antelm  (or  Nantelm)  William.
Antelm  had  been  Prior  of  Fortes,  and  ep.  234  (Duchesne)  to  Louis  the  younger
seems  to  be  about  his  promotion.

1  Decolor ari. See  the  next  sentence  but  one.


LETTER CCL.  731

come  back  to  the  same  question.  Again,  I  say  what  I
think.  I  do  not  see  why  you  should  be  vexed,  unless  you
yourselves  think  that  the  matter  is  serious  enough  to  be
vexed  about.  Judge  for  yourselves  whether  this  feeling
was  becoming  to  him,  especially  in  newness  of  life.  For
before  he  took  the  vows,  let  me  by  his  leave  say  it,  this
blot  was  seen  in  him,  whether  rightly  must  be  left  to  his
own  conscience.  And,  perhaps,  the  Pope  thought  the  same
about  him,  since  you  say  he  has  refused  to  confirm  his
election.  I  suppose  that  he  was  afraid  of  the  tongues  of
traducers,  and,  therefore,  withheld  a  too  speedy  promotion
from  a  novice,  lest  slanderous  tongues  should  say  that  this
was  the  reward  he  aimed  at  when  he  took  the  cowl.  But
whatever  the  mind  of  the  Pope  may  have  been,  whether  this
or  something  else,  I  must  tell  you  that  I  knew  nothing  of
his  intention,  lest  anyone  should  say  that  it  was  done  at  my
instigation.  For,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  it  was  my
rt  solution  that  whenever  I  had  an  opportunity  I  would  not
only  not  hinder,  but  even  with  all  my  might,  and,  as  they  say,
with  both  hands,  help  him  whenever  he  should  by  the
grace  which  is  in  him  be  in  a  position  to  bring  forth  fruit  to
God.  Who  will  give  me  the  happiness  of  seeing  learned
and  holy  men  set  over  the  Church  of  God  as  pastors,  if  not
in  all  places,  yet  in  many,  or  at  all  events  in  some  ?  For
what  matters  it  if  a  youth  declares  that  once  he  behaved  in
a  youthful  way?  Old  things  are  passed  away,  all  things  are
become  new.  Shall  I  a  second  time  rake  up  his  buried
vices  when  he  has  a  second  time  been  buried  with  Christ
by  the  baptism  of  the  wilderness  [/>.,  monasticism]?1

3.  I  was  very  much  displeased  when  I  heard  of  the  hard
things  which  the  Abbot  of  Chezy,'2  or  he  of  Troyes,  is  said
to  have  written  to  you,  and  when  I  have  an  opportunity  I
will  tell  him  so,  as  far  as  I  may  consistently  with  charity

1  Bernard  evidently  held  with  other  Fathers  that  profession  of  the religious
life was  a second  baptism. This  is  dwelt  on  at  length  in  lib.  <le  Precepto  el
Di.\pcnsatione,  c.  17.

2  Was  this  Simon,  Abbot  of  Chezy,  to  whom  ep.  263  was  directed  ? His
successor,  Tes.  (so  his  name  is  given  abbreviated),  is  pointed  to  here,  although
we  li  ive  no  Letters  of  his  against  the  Carthusians,  but  many  in  their  favour.


732  LETTER CCL.

and  with  the  brotherly  intimacy  that  exists  between  us.  I
thank  God,  who  has  enabled  you  not  to  be  overcome  with
evil,  but  to  overcome  evil  with  good,  inasmuch  as  you  have
not  returned  him  evil  for  evil,  or  cursing  for  cursing.
Further,  you  must  know  that  the  letters  which  you  had
before  written  to  me  against  the  above-named  Abbots  did
not  come  to  their  knowledge  by  any  efforts  or  wish  of  mine.
But  enough  of  these  matters.

4.  I  must  now  forget  not  myself.  My  burdened
conscience,  and  my  life,  which  resembles  some  fabled
monster,  cry  aloud  to  you.  For  I  am  a  kind  of  chimaera  of
the  age,  acting  neither  as  a  clerk  nor  as  a  layman,  for  I  have
long  since  put  off  the  life  of  a  monk,  but  not  the  habit.  I  do>
not  like  to  wrrite  to  you  what  I  daresay  you  have  heard  from
others,  what  I  am  so  busy  about,  what  I  am  striving  for,
through  what  pitfalls  my  walk  lies,  down  what  precipices,
I  should  rather  say,  I  am  hurled.  If  you  have  not  heard,
then  I  pray  you  to  make  inquiries,  and  according  to  what  you
hear,  give  me  your  counsel  and  the  benefit  of  your  prayers.


LETTER  CCLI. (A.D. 1147.)
To  POPE  EUGENIUS.

Bernard  prays  him  to  pardon  the  monks  of  Banmc,
whom  he  had  rightly  punished,  and  to  reconcile  them  with
those  of  Autun.

To  his  loving  father  and  lord,  EUGENIUS,  by  the  grace  of
God  Supreme  Pontiff,  his  humble  servant  BERNARD,  called
Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  sends  his  humble  greeting.

The  monks  of  Baume  have  sinned  grievously,  but  not
with  impunity.1  To  you,  therefore,  there  are  praise  and
1  We  gather  what  this  crime  of  the  monks  of  Baume  (in  the  Diocese  of
Besan9on)  was  from  two.  rescripts  of  Pope  Eugenius,  one  to  Humbert,  Archbishop
of  Besangon,  another  to  William  or  Guy,  Count  of  Macon,  in  which  he  reduces
Baume  from  an  Abbey  to  a  Priory,  "  because  of  its  execrable  and  horrible
wickedness,  and  its  unheard  of  contempt  of  the  Roman  Church  shown  to  its
beloved  master  Osbert,"  as  well  as  from  Letters  of  William,  Count  cf  Macon,
consenting  to  the  degradation.  The  Letters  of  Eugenius  were  dated  May  zyth,
1147,  Paris.  They  are  in  the  Cluniac  registry.  However,  Baume  afterwards
regained  its  title  of  Abbey.


LETTER CCLI.  733

thanksgiving  due  from  the  whole  Church,  because  you  have
not  kept  silence,  not  passed  it  over,  not  been  inactive.  You
rightly  roused  yourself ;  you  struck,  but  it  was  to  heal.
But  if  my  lord  forgets  to  have  mercy,  and  shuts  up  his  pity
in  wrath,  where  will  the  healing  come  from  ?  Therefore,
I  confidently  wait  for  mercy  after  judgment,  that  I  may  sing
to  the  Lord  of  mercy  and  judgment.  I  know  well  that  you
will  not  depart  from  the  footsteps  of  Him  whose  vicar1  you
-are,  especially  because  he  says  :  If  any  man  will  serve  Me
let  him  follow  Me  (S.  John  xii.  26).  But  the  Prophet  says
of  Him  :  H7io  knoweth  if  God  will  turn,  and  pardon,  and
leave  a  blessing  behind  Him  ?  (Joel  ii.  14).  And  this
blessing  I  boldly  ask  from  you  who  have  come  after  Him.
Besides,  it  is  not  right  to  destroy  the  innocent  with  the
guilty.  For  those  who  did  the  evil  have  been  removed.
What  remains  but  that  those  who  remain  may  be  saved  ?
\Yhy  should  not  they  who  obeyed  both  you  and  your  pre
decessor  be  saved  ?  I  speak  with  Paul,  who  said :  Put
away  from  among  yourselves  tliat  wicked  person  (i  Cor.  v.
13).  Therefore,  have  pity  on  them  ;  and  let  not  the  iniquity
of  the  wicked  prejudice  the  righteousness  of  the  innocent.
I  say  this  because  their  cause  comes  before  the  presence  of
your  majesty  together  with  that  of  the  monks  of  Autun,  and
they  are  afraid  that  the  iniquity  of  these  others  may  injure
them.  I  beseech  you  most  of  all  to  strive  for  their  harmony
and  peace;  indeed,  I  wish  well  to  both,  and  so  I  think  it  is
expedient  for  both.

LETTER CCLII. (A.D. 1147.)

To  THE  SAME,  ABOUT  THE  DISPUTED  ELECTION  AT

YORK.

Bernard  begs  Jiim  to  cause  the  sentence  of  Pope  Innocent
against  the  Archbishop  to  be  executed.

Ambition  frustrated  is  furious,  nay,  it  is  desperate,  even
to  madness.  The  man  of  perdition  is  running  his  head  into

1  The  Supreme  Pontiff  is  here  called,  not  obscurely,  Vicar  of  Christ;  but  in
the  old  writers  he  was  usually  called  Vicar  of  Peter,  epp.  346,  183,  of  Peter  and
Paul,  ep.  243.


734  LETTER CCLII.

the  noose,  and  accelerating  the  sentence  of  condemnation
that  he  has  so  long  deserved.  Truly,  his  sins  are  now  mani
fest  going  before  unto  judgment.  The  accursed  and  thorn-
bearing  tree  is  anticipating  the  hand  which  is  to  cut  it  down,
and  calling  down  on  itself  the  axe  which  was  delaying  to
strike.  Alas  !  how  much  more  just  would  it  have  been  if  it
had  long  ago  fallen,  rather  than  those  saints  whom,  against
right  and  justice,  he  has  by  his  attacks  cast  down.  For  if
he  had  not  been  standing  he  would  never  have  overthrown
those  who  were  standing  fast.  And  they  who  were  stand
ing  to  much  more  good  than  he  have  perished  in  their
innocence,  and  for  their  innocence  ; l  but  their  innocent  blood
will  be  required  at  the  hands  of  those  who,  by  giving  this
mischievous  tree  their  secret  support,  have  prevented  its
immediate  downfall.  The  blood  of  the  saints  cries  from
the  earth  against  them  ;  the  saints  whose  souls  are  in  the
hand  of  the  Lord,  and  whom  no  torment  of  wickedness  can
touch.  Still  they  were  my  children ;  they  have  been
scattered  abroad,  and  I  get  no  consolation  from  words.
And  even  if  these  could  afford  me  any  solace  or  remedy,
yet  they  fail  me  because  of  my  grief;  sorrow  shuts  them  in,
sighs  interrupt  them.  Yet,  listen,  or  rather  read,  one  last
word  which  I  can  better  write  than  speak.  If  he  is  still
standing,  alas  !  that  I  should  say  it,  there  is  great  fear  that
his  standing  is  your  fall;  and  his  continued  ill-doing,  like
an  evil  tree  which  cannot  but  bring  forth  evil  fruit,  will  be
deservedly  imputed  not  to  him,  but  to  you.

1  Bernard  here  speaks  of  the  destruction  of  the  Cistercian  Abbey  of  Fountains
by  the  supporters  of  William.  Serlo  the  monk  describes  it  at  length  in  his  history
of  the  monastery  (Mvnast.  Anglic.  Vol.  i.  p.  747),  where  he  says  that  on  the
rejection  of  William  by  Eugenius,  his  supporters  hastened  to  the  monastery,
whose  Abbot,  Henry,  was  William's  rival,  and  plundered,  burnt,  and  trampled
down  everything,  without,  however,  causing  any  loss  of  life;  Bernard,  however,
implies  that  some  of  the  monks  were  slain.  Serlo  adds,  that  Henry  the  Abbot,
when  elected  Archbishop,  repaired  to  S.  Bernard  at  Clairvaux,  and  from  ihere
went  to  meet  Eugenius  at  Treves,  by  whom  he  was  consecrated  and  given  the
pall.  He  was  at  length,  after  much  opposition,  received  by  his  diocese.


LETTER CCLIII.  735

LETTER CCLIII. (A.D.  1150.)
To  THE  ABBOT  OF  P


Bernard  replies  with  gentleness  to  their  bitter  com
plaints  against  lii  m,  and  reminds  them  of  the  benefits  they
have  received  from  him.

i.  I  have  read  vvlnt  you  have  heard  of  me,  and  I  fear.
For  you  write  against  me  bitter  things,  but  I  hope  with
more  severity  than  truth.  What  wrong  have  I  done?  Is
it  that  I  have  ever  loved  your  person,  been  kindly  disposed
to  your  Order,  and  helped  it  whenever  I  could  ?  If  you
believe  not  my  words,  let  my  deeds  be  my  witness.
Indeed,  my  conscience  tells  me  that  I  ought  to  have  been
commended  by  you.  But  since  you  have  seen  fit  to  speak
and  write  against  me,  I  will  lend  power  to  my  words  from
the  testimony  of  my  actions.  It  goes,  indeed,  against  the
grain.  I  may  seem  to  be  boasting  of  my  good  deeds,  and
this  is  not  seemly.  But  you  compel  me  to  act  as  a  fool.
Whenever  have  you  or  yours  wanted  my  help  and  failed  to
receive  it?  In  the  very  lirst  place,  the  land  of  Premontre,
in  which  you  are  living,  was  formerly  mine,  and  you  had  it
as  a  gift  from  me.2  For  our  brother  \Vido3  (so  the  first

1  This  was  Hugh,  first  disciplw  of  Norbert,  and  his  successor  in  the  govern
ment  of  Premontre'. He  had  been  Chaplain  to  the  Bishop  of  Cambray. He  is
highly  praised,  not  only  in  the  lite  of  S.  Norbert,  but  also  by  his  namesake,
Hugh  of  S.  Marianus,  Chronicler  of  Auxerre,  and  by  Hermann,  a  monk  of  Laon
(/>  Mirac.  S.  Maria*,  B.  iii.  c.  vi.,  viii.,  x.). Norbert  also  in many  places  is
greatly  extolled  by  the  same  author,  ami  is  even  put  before  Bernard,  both  as  the
first  founder  of  his  Order,  and  also  of  the  nuns  of  the  same  Order,  who  at  that
time  were  more  than  10,000  in  number.

2  Authorities  differ  as  to  the  origin  of  Premontre. What  Francis  Alut,  in  his
history  of  the  family  of  Coucy  (lib.  ii.  c.  19),  says  appears  fabulous.  Gordon,  of
the  Society  of  Jesus,  in  his  Chronology,  A.D.  1  1  16,  says  that  this  Order  received  its
name  from  the  site  having  been  pointed  out  beforehand  from  heaven.  But  that  the
place  was  so  called  before  S.Norbert's  time  is  evident  from  Jiis  life  (c.  17),  where
he  is  said  to  have  chosen  "  a  place  utterly  desert  and  removed  from  men,  which
used  to  be  called  Premontre"  (see  also  Hermann  below). What  S.  Bernard  says
here  about  the  ground  being  given  by  him  seems  at  variance  with  the  letters  of
foundation  of  Premontre  given  in  the  name  of  Bartholomew, Bibhop  of  Laon,
in  which  the  place  in  question is said to  have belonged  to  the  monks  of  S.
Vincent,  and  to  have  been  given  by  Bartholomew  to  S.  Norbert. Bartholomew


736  LETTER CCLIII.

inhabitants  of  the  place  called  him)  had  given  it  to  me
through  the  Bishop.  Next,  it  was  principally  through  my
efforts  that  the  monks  of  Beaulieu1  affiliated  themselves  to
you.  When  King  Baldwin  was  alive  he  gave  me  the  place
of  the  holy  Samuel  at  Jerusalem/  and  at  the  same  time  a

had  received  it  first  from  Adelbero,  Abbot  of  S.  Vincent,  whose  grant  was  con
firmed  by  his  successor  Seifred.  Hermann,  the  monk  (Mime.  S.  Mary  of
Law,  lib.  iii.  c.  4),  says  the  same.  "When  they  came,"  he  says,  "to  the
above-named  place,  called  Pre'montre',  they  entered  a  church  built  there  in
honour  of  S.  John  Baptist,  for  the  purpose  of  prayer.  This  was  by  per
mission  of  the  monastery  of  S.  Vincent  of  Laon."  A  late  writer  in  his  notes  to
the  life  of  S.  Norbert  (c.  19),  in  commenting-  on  this  grant  of  S.  Bernard's,  says
that  he  adheres  to  the  statement  that  the  site  was  given  by  the  monks  of  S.
Vincent  at  the  hand  of  the  Bishop  Bartholomew.  But  though  there  were  six
hundred  arguments  against  it,  yet  the  word  of  S.  Bernard  himself  ought  to  stand
against  them  all  ;  but  if  the  matter  be  considered  a  little  more  carefully,  these
opposite  statements  are  easily  reconciled.  For  it  is  well-known  that  the  monastery
of  Pre'montre'  in  its  early  days  did  not  stand  on  the  same  spot  on  which  S.
Norbert  had  first  placed  it,  but  on  another  side  of  the  mountain,  to  which  his
successor  Hugh,  to  whom  this  Letter  is  addressed,  had  transferred  it.  Hermann
himself,  in  the  place  quoted  above,  says  the  same  thing,  where  he  describes  the
foresight  of  S.  Norbert  in  providing  for  the  translation  of  the  monastery,  an  i
again  in  c.  10,  when  he  gives  an  account  of  the  change.  He  says:  "  Hugh,
seeing  that  the  church  (viz.,  S.  John  Baptist,  which  had  been  given  by  the
monks  of  S.  Vincent)  was  too  small,  and  not  able  to  hold  the  large  numbers
which  now  were  filling  the  monastery,  and  which  were  daily  increasing  by  the
grace  of  God,  knowing  also  that  Norbert  had  provided  by  the  Spirit  that  a  larger
church  should  be  built  on  another  part  of  the  mountain,  took  counsel  with  his
1  rethren,  and  when  all  the  offices  had  been  mapped  out  he  asked  the  Bishop,
Bartholomew,  to  come  and  lay  the  foundation-stone."  The  first  site  may  have
been  given  by  the  monks  of  S.  Vincent,  but  what  is  there  against  the  second
having  been  given  by  S.  Bernard,  who  had  it  from  the  hermit  Wido  ?  Two
letters  of  Philip,  Abbot  of  Bonne-Esperance,  should  also  be  read;  this  seems  to
be  a  reply  to  them.

3  We  read  of  Wido  in  the  history  of  the  monastery  of  Vicoigne,  near  Valen
ciennes  (Spied.,  Vol.  >ii.  p.  534),  where  Wido,  or  Guy,  "a  Breton  by  birth,
a  priest  by  office."  is  said  to  have  lived  at  Premontre  at  the  time  that  Norbert
went  there,  and  to  have  given  place  to  a  greater  than  he,  by  retiring  to  Vicoigne,
vshere  he  laid  the  foundations  of  a  monastery  which  he  put  under  the  care  of
Walter  of  S.  Martin  at  Laon,  as  Abbot.

1  Beaulieu  was  a  house  of  regular  canons  in  the  Diocese  of  Troves,  and  was
ceded  to  the  Praemonstratensians  A.D.  1140.  Ep.  407  was  written  toOdo,  Abbot
of  Beaulieu.

a  Geoffrey,  in  Book  iii.,  n.  22,  of  the  Life  ofS.  Bernard,  says  on  this  passage  :
"  In  short,  like  a  fruitful  vine  he  sent  out  his  branches  on  every  side,  except
that  he  refused  to  send  his  brethren  to  Jerusalem,  although  a  place  had  been


LETTKR CCLl  11.  737

thousand  crowns  with  which  to  build  ;  I  gave  you  both  the
site  and  the  money.  Many  know  how  hard  I  laboured  that
you  might  have  the  church  of  S.  Paul  at  Verdun  ;  and  you
enjoy  the  fruit  of  my  labour.  If  you  do  not  admit  this  fact
against  you,  my  letters  to  Pope  Innocent  of  blessed  memory
are  in  existence,  as  true  judges  and  living  witnesses  to  the
truth  of  what  I  say.  Your  brothers  of  Sept-Fontaines  hold
from  me  the  place  wh;ch  they  occupy,1  which  the  lirst
inhabitants  called  Francs- Yals.

2.  For  which of  these  acts  do  you  wish to  leave  your
friends  ? Are  you  not  rewarding  evil  for  good  ? For  you
threaten  to  break  your  compact,-  to  dismiss  the  peace  that
there is  between us, to  give up  fellowship,  to break our
unity. But  suppose  that  it  is  not  for  a  good  work  that  you
stone  me,  but  for  injury  done  you,  in  that  I  received  brother
Robert, who  was  once  of  your  Order, and gave  him the
monk's habit. 1 do not deny it  ; he is with us. But I
thought  that  I  sufficiently satisfied  you  about  this  when  I
truly  told  you  by  word  of  mouth, and not  once  only,  the
reason,  method,  and  necessity  of  receiving  him. But  since
you are not yet  contented I shall not  be displeased  to
repeat  my  former  reply, as  you do not  hesitate  to  repeat
the  charge  to  which  I  had  given  my  defence.

3.  I never  at  any time urged brother Robert  to leave
you  ; nay,  rather,  for  many  years- — rot  once,  but  often — I
checked his desire to  do  so. Again, how  can I  be sus
pected of having enticed  him from you when you have
Magister  Otho  as  the  adviser  and encourager  of  his  with
drawal  ? If  you  do  not  know  this,  ask  him. If  I  know  the

offered  him  there,  because  of  the  dangers  from  the  Saracens,  and  the  unfavour
able  climate.''  Of.  ep.  175  to  the  Pattiarch  of  Jerusalem,  who  offered  him  a
site,  and  ep  355,  in  which  he  com  men  is  the  Praetnonstratensians  to  the  Queen
of  Jerusalem.  For  the  monastery  of  S.  Paul,  see  notes  to  ep.  178.

1  Sept-Fontaines  was  in  the  Diocese  of  Langres close  to  Mont-Clair.

2  Manrique describes  this agreement, which  was entered into  A.D. ii4Z
between  the  Cistercians  and  Prsemcnstratensians  for  the  sake  of  peace,  as  fixing
•two  leagues  between  their  monasteries  and  one  between  their  granges  or  farms.
Hence Bernard says that  the  house of Basse-Font  was outside  the  limits
.agreed  on. It  was  situated  in  the  Diocese  of  Troyes,  and  was  founded  A.D.


73$  LF.TTKR CCLIII.

man  well  he  will  not  deny  it.  I  could  also,  perhaps,  give
you  the  names  of  others  ;  many  others,  too,  who  had  either
turned  to  you  or  returned  to  you,  whom  you  would  not
have  now  if  I  had  not  either  persuaded  or  even  compelled1
them  to  remain  with  you.  But  I  spare  you,  not  because  I
am  short  of  matter,  but  because  I  am  rich  in  modesty.  I
have  known  men  within  your  walls  who  had  been  touched'
and  converted  by  my  preaching  and  disposed  to  join  us,
but  who  afterwards,  on  the  solicitations  of  your  members,
altered  their  minds,  and  were  received  and  kept  in  your
order  and  habit.  Then,  again,  their  consciences  began  to>
prick  them,  and  they  wished  to  leave  you,  and  would  have
done  so,  unless  I  make  a  mistake,  if  they  had  not  been  held
back,  not  only  by  my  refusal  to  receive  them,  but  by  my
exhortations  to  remain  where  they  were.

4.  But  since  you  wish  it  again,  listen how  it  was  that I
received  brother  Robert. The  Pope,  on  his  own  solici'a-
tion  and  that  of  his  friends,  enjoined  it. He  said  that  his
request  had  been  granted  by  you  and  also  by  his  Abbot,  so-
that  no  one  might  say  that  he  extracted  it  from  you  by  the
Papal injunction. If  you deny  this, what  is that  to  me?
Let  him  see  to  it. If  you  think fit  to  charge  the  supreme
and  holy  Pontiff  with falsehood  you must  pardon me  for
thinking  it  impious  not  to  believe  so  great  holiness  and  not
to  obey  so  great  majesty. Moreover,  the  venerable  Abbot
Gottschalk, who is one of your  confraternity and had
been  specially named  to  you  by  the Pope  to  see  to  this
matter, has clearly  not denied  that  he had  brought  back
from  you  both  a  free  emancipation  of  the  brother  and  your
spontaneous  avowal  of  it.

5.  Again,  in  the  matter  of  brother  Fromund  you  have  no-
ground  for  attacking  me,  since  I  did  not  receive  him  with
out  the  voluntary  permission  of  his  Abbot. And  that  you
were  not  ignorant  of  this  is  shown  by  that  bitter  letter  in
which  you  bring  a  calumnious  charge  against  me  on the
single  point  of  the  unexpected  connivance  of  the Chapter,
as  if,  indeed,  that  had  been  forbidden  by  our  mutual  agree-


LETTER CCLIII.  739

mcnt,  or  as  though  the  emancipation  of  a  monk  was  the
privilege  of  the  Chapter  and  not  of  the  Abbot  alone.

6.  You  add  as  another  complaint  that  I  removed  a  house
of  your  brethren  at  Basse-Font,  although  you  omit  to  say
that  it  was  built  outside  the  boundaries  assigned  you. I
wish  that  before you  condemned me  you would  ask  the
brothers  themselves  not  only  who  removed  it,  but  also  the
cause  of  its  being  removed. I  do  not  think  that  they  would
have  concealed  the  truth  from  you. But  hear  it  now  from
me,  and  then,  if  you  like,  ask  them. They  had  begun  to
build  a  place,  where  they  placed  some  of  their  sisters,  a
long  way  from  their  Abbey,  but  close  to  two  farmhouses
of  our  house, and near  the  pastures  where  we  feed  our
sheep. We  asked  them  as  friends,  and  as  those  who  might
be  useful  to  them,  not  to sow  the  seeds  of  a  scandal,  and
prepare  a  ground  of  quarrels  to  be  left  as  a  legacy  both  to
their  posterity  and  ours. But  they,  nevertheless,  went  on
with  the  building. This  was  all  the  violence  that  I  used,
this was the  way  that I removed them. If to make a
request  is  to  use  violence,  then  I  am  inexcusable.

7.  As a  matter of  fact, which cannot be denied, the
Bishop,  who  was  indignant  that  they  had  ventured,  without
consulting  him,  to  erect  an oratory  in  his  diocese, and  a
monastery  on  the  land  of  the  Church,  and  on  the  estate  of
his  vassal,  tried  to  put  a  stop,  though  in  vain,  to  the  work
that  they  had  begun. For  they  did  not  give it  up even
when  forbidden  to  proceed. Afterwards,  as  I  was  passing
through  that  district,  I  met  the  then  Abbot  of  Basse-Font,
who  told  me  that  they  had  stopped  building. But  I  gathered
from  what  he  said  that  they  had  done  this  not  so  much  on
my  account,  but  because  of  the  Knight  who  seems  to  have
given  them  the  land,  and  who  in  many  ways  was  harassing
them  so  much  that  they complained  bitterly of  his  treat
ment  of  them. But  even  if  they  had  abandoned  the  work
of  their  own  accord,  and  from  love  of  us,  it  would  but  have
been  becoming  to  their  religion,  and  would  have  seemed
perhaps  a  kindness  to  those  who  had  some  small  claims  on


74°  LETTER CCL1II.

them.  I  can  only  wonder  where  this  complaint  originated,
tor,  if  I  mistake  not,  the  Abbot  ended  this  present  life  with
devoted  goodwill  towards  us,  and  his  successor,  who  often
consults  me  intimately  about  his  needs,  has  never  made  any
mention  of  this  complaint,  and,  besides,  I  have  since  been
very  hospitably  received  in  the  same  monastery,  but  I  have
never  heard  there  from  the  Abbot  or  anyone  else  anything
about  it.  Moreover,  the  Abbot  was  with  us  afterwards  at
Clairvaux,  and  also  very  recently  when  a  chapter  of  your
Order  was  held  at  Bar,  whence  came  those  letters  of  yours,
which  are  rather  calumnies  than  complaints;  and  yet  I
cannot  recollect  that  either  at  the  one  place  or  the  other,
either  by  him  or  by  you,  was  the  slightest  mention  made  of
this  matter.

8.  You  say,  besides,  that  the  monastery  at  Igny  has
burnt  a  little  house  of  your  brethren  at  Braine.1  Do  you
call  it  a  house?  It  was  nothing  but  a  hut  of  boughs
which  gave  shelter  to  the  brother  whose  duty  it  was  to  keep
watch  over  the  standing  corn.  Nor  was  it  burnt  by  malice,
as  I  am  told  on  good  authority,  but  because  it  was  placed
in  a  field  of  the  brethren  of  Igny,  and  occupied  land  which
had  to  be  cultivated.  In  short,  the  house,  as  you  call  it,  was
hardly  worth  a  penny;  and  I  believe  that  such  satisfaction
has  already  been  given  to  the  Abbot  of  Braine  that  he
makes  no  complaint,  and  has  no  ground  for  it  either.  But
if  not,  I  am  ready  to  give  every  satisfaction  as  soon  as  you
let  me  know.  And  so  with  regard  to  the  Abbot  of  Long-
Font;'-  as  soon  as  I  heard  of  your  complaint  that  he  wished
to  build  a  cell  within  your  lands  I  prohibited  him,  and,  what
is  more,  I  believe  that  he  desisted  even  from  laying  the
foundations.  But  if  not,  it  shall  be  done  as  soon  as  I  know
that  it  has  not  been  done.  You  complain  especially  that
our  Abbot  of  Villars  has  been  the  means  of  an  interdict

1  Brena,  or  Braine,  is  a town  on  the Aisne,  four  leagues  above  Soissons  ; it
had  a famous Praemonstratensian Abbey, dedicated to S. Euodius. Igny,
belonging  to  the  Cistercians,  in  the  Diocese  of  Rheims,  was  not  far  away. The
Abbot  of  Igny  was  Humbert,  to  whom  ep.  141  was  written.

2  The  Abbey  of  Long- Pont,  two  leagues  from  Soissons,  was  Cistercian,  as  was
Viilars  in  Brabant,  in  the  Diocese  of  Namur,  where  Fastred  was  then  Abbot.


LETTER CCLIIl.  741

being  placed  on the Church  of  S.  Foillan,1  which  belongs
to  your  Order. But  it  would  be  more  just  if  you  were  to
complain  of  the  incredible obstinacy of  your  brother  and
co- Abbot  of  the  aforesaid  house,  rather  than  find  fault  with
the  punishment  inflicted by  the  supreme  Pontiff. I  know
for  a  certainty that the  quarrelsomeness  of  the  Abbot  is
strongly  condemned by many  of  your  brethren,  so  it  is  a
great wonder that you do not also  condemn  it. And,
therefore, I say to you  that this is the cause  of your
indignation. Indeed, it is this man's covetousness or
stubbornness which has brought the interdict on your
brethren. It is a tedious business, and it would be
difficult to set down all his subterfuges within the
compass  of  a  letter. Still,  I  will  state  in  as  few  words  as  I
can  the  cause  of  the  interdict. After  two  or  more  agree
ments of  peace, after  a  definite sentence  issued  by  your
abbots  and  ours,  according  to the  determination  of  your
Chapter,  the Bishop of Cambray, in whose diocese  the
house  of S. Foillan is  well-known to be, was  at length
called  in,  and  when  he  saw  that  the  Abbot  was  obstinately
bent  on  breaking  through  all  agreements,  he  meant,  as  he
said,  to  proceed  against  him  by  an  ecclesiastical  sentence.
Then the Abbot, to gain time, appealed  to  the  supreme
Pontiff. The  case  came  before  him. And  when  he  knew
for  a  certainty, on  the  testimony  of  your  own  abbots,  as
well  as  of  other  religious,  that  the  Abbot  of  S.  Foillan  not
only  refused  to  stand  by  any  engagements,  but  that  he  also
was withstanding a judicial sentence, he ordered the
Church  to  be  laid  under  an interdict  until  he  should  give
satisfaction. At  length,  in  the  presence  of  the  Bishop,  who
had  received  an  order  to  pronounce  the  interdict,  the  lord
(Abbot)  of  Citeaux  was  asked  by  you,  by  the  Abbot  him
self,  and  by  us,  to  see  that  some  form  of  peace  was  pro-
1  The  Abbey  of  the  Irish  S.  Foillan  (S.  Foy),  near  Koeux,  a  town  of  Hainault,
the  place  of  his  martyrdom,  belonged  to  the  Praemonstratensians. In  addition
to  the  other  gifts  of  S.  Bernard  to  this  Order,  add  that  of  a  site  in  the  woodland
of  Ourthe,  by  Louis  the  Younger,  "  at  the  request  of  Bernard  of  happy  memory,
Abbot  of  Clairvaux." The  Abbot  of  S.  Marianus,  of  Auxerre,  acknowledges
this  (in  cp.  282,  Duchesne).


742  LETTER CCLIII.

vided,  and  this  was  gained  by  the  entreaties  both  of  your
members  and  of  yourselves.  In  the  absence  of  the  Abbot
of  Villars  an  agreement  was  drawn  up,  and  the  Bishop  said
that  if  the  Abbot  of  S.  Foillan  would  keep  it  he  would
refrain  from  publishing  the  interdict.  However,  when  he
had  left  the  meeting  he  did  not  keep  it,  and  what  is  more,
that  house  which  a  judicial  sentence  and  all  the  agreements
drawn  up  had  commanded  to  be  pulled  down,  so  much  so
that  once  even  it  had  been  destroyed,  was  again  in  the
meanwhile,  contrary  to  his  promise  and  the  judicial
sentence,  rebuilt ;  and  this,  I  say,  he  held  and  still  holds,
and  he  has  besides  built  another.  Why  should  not  the
Bishop  execute  the  order  to  issue  the  sentence  of  interdict
which  he  had  received  from  the  Apostolic  See,  especially
when  the  Abbot  has  been  guilty  of  double-dealing?  .1,
however,  was  still  hoping  to  overcome  evil  with  good,  and  I
caused  the  sentence  to  be  postponed  till  the  Octave  of
Epiphany,  in  order  to  see  in  the  meanwhile  if  the  man
would  either  determine  to  obey  the  sentence  or  observe
some  mode  of  compromise.  And  I  hope  that  this  may
still  happen  ;  may  the  God  of  peace  grant  that  our  peace
may  rest  upon  him.

9.  And  since  this  is  the  true  state  of  things  you  have
no  cause  to  complain  of  me;  it  rather  seems  that  I  might
more  justly  complain  of  you.  It  only  remains  that  you
love  those  who  love  you,  and  especially  endeavour  to  keep
the  unity  of  the  spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace.  That  is  the
bond  between  us  and  you,  which  has  strengthened  the  cause
of  peace  and  charity,  and  no  less  beneficially  for  you,
perhaps,  than  for  us.  You  must  decide  if  it  is  to  be
broken,  it  is  certainly  not  expedient  for  you  that  it  should
be.  And  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  in  any  way  right  for  you
to  break  it.  For  since  the  cause  is  common  to  us  both  it
ought  not  to  be  prejudiced  by  the  fault  of  an  individual,
even  if  those  things  were  true  which  you  say  against  me.
But  whatever  you  may  do,  brethren,  I  have  made  up  my
mind  to  love  you  always,  even  though  my  love  is  not
returned.  Let  him  who  wishes  to  abandon  Jiis  friend  seek


LETTER CCIJ 1 1.  743

occasion  for  it ;  my  desire  is,  and  always  will  be,  not  to
give  any  of  my  friends  a  just  cause  to  leave  me,  nor  to
look  for  it  in  another;  for  the  one  is  the  mark  of  a  feigned,
the  other  of  an  injured  friendship.  And  since  the  prophet
says  that  //  is  a  good  thing  to  be  joined  together  (Is.
xli.  7)  you  will  be  able  to  loosen,  or  even  to  cut  off,
yourselves,  but  not  me.  I  will  cling  to  you,  even  if  you
wish  it  not;  1  will  cling  to  you,  even  if  I  do  not  wish  it
myself.  Formerly  I  bound  myself  bv  the  strong  bond  of
•charity  unfeigned,  which  never  faileth.  When  you  quarrel
I  will  be  peaceful;  and  lest  I  give  place  to  the  devil,  I  will
give  place  to  the  wrath  of  those  who  quarrel  with  me.  I
•will  be  overcome  by  revilings,  I  will  be  overcome  by  kind
nesses ;  I  will  help  those  who  wish  not  for  it,  I  will  heap
benefits  on  the  ungrateful,  and  I  will  honour  those  who
despise  me.  And  now  is  my  sotii  sorrowful  because  in
some  way  I  have  offended  you,  and  it  will  be  sorrowful
until  your  kindness  relieve  it.  If  you  delay  I  will  go  and
make  excuses,  I  will  keep  knocking  at  your  doors,  I  will  be
urgent  opportunely,  importunately,  until  I  either  merit  or
extort  a  blessing.  The  winter  is  more  than  half  over,  and
I  am  still,  to  no  purpose,  it  seems,  waiting  for  my  tunic.1


LETTER  CCLIY. (A.D. 1136.)
To WARREN,-  ABBOT  OF S.  MARY  OF THE ALPS.

Bernard  praises  in  this  aged  Abbot  the  zeal  with  which  he
undertakes  the  reformation  of  his  house.

To  his  reverend  father,  worthy  of  all  veneration,
WARREN,  Abbot  of  the  Alps,  and  to  all  his  brethren  in
the  same  place,  Brother  BERNARD,  the  servant  of  their
holiness,  desires  that  they  may  ever  advance  from  good  to
better.

i.  I  find  that  to  be  true  of  you,  my  father,  which  I
recollect  that  I  have  read  in  Holy  Scripture :  When  a  man
has  been  perfected,  then  only  he  begins  (Kcclus.  xviii.  6).

1  I.e.,  charity.  -'  Or  Guarine.


744  LETTER CCLIV.

Rest  is  due  to  you  in  your  old  age,  you  have  won  your
crown,  and,  lo  !  like  some  new  soldier  in  Christ  you  are
stirring  up  opposition  to  yourself  afresh,  you  are  provoking
the  adversary,  and  though  a  weary  old  man  you  are  taking
on  you  the  part  of  the  strong  by  compelling  your  old  enemy
to  renew  the  conflict,  and  that  in  some  degree  against  his
will.  For  in  relinquishing  churches  and  ecclesiastical
benefices  under  an  inspiration  from  heaven,  contrary  to
your  usual  custom  and  the  traditions  of  your  predecessors,1
you  are  destroying  synagogues  of  Satan,  i.e.,  cells  under  no
parent  house,2  in  which  three  or  four  brothers  are  wont  to
live  with  no  rule  and  no  discipline,  and  in  banishing  women
from  the  monastery,3  and  in  being  more  than  ever  vigilant
in  other  good  deeds  of  piety  and  sound  learning,  you  are
making  the  first  and  greatest  sinner  fulfil  the  verse  :  He
shall  see  it,  and  be  wrath,  lie  shall  gnash  with  his  teeth
and  consume  away.  But  what  matters  it  ?  You,  on  the
other  hand,  amid  his  confusion  are  solaced,  and  can  sing  to
your  God,  They  that  fear  Thee  shall  see  me,  and  rejoice
because  I  have  put  my  trust  in  Thy  word  (Ps.  cxix.  74).
And  there  is  no  fear  that  the  enemy  will  overcome  one  who
has  not  yielded  to  old  age.  The  mind  is  stronger  than
time,  and  even  while  the  body  is  growing  cold  in  death  a
holy  zeal  glows  in  the  heart,  and  while  the  limbs  grow
helpless  the  vigour  of  the  will  remains  unimpaired,  and  the
ardent  spirit  feels  not  the  weakness  of  the  wrinkled  flesh.
And  this  is  no  wonder.  For  why  should  it  fear  the
destruction  of  its  old  home  when  it  sees  a  spiritual  building-
daily  rising  on  high  and  growing  for  eternity  ?  For  we
know  that  if  this  earthly  house  is  dissolved  we  have  a

1  I.e.,  in  relaxing-  discipline  (see  ep.  91).

2  To  scatter  cells  of  this  kind  broadcast  would  be  fatal  to  the  observance  of
discipline  ;  the  rule  could  not  be  observed  by  so  small  a  number. Ep.  400  calls
them  "  obediences,"  so  does  ep.  150,  n.  2.

3  That  is from  the Church,  for  formerly  in  the Benedictine, as well  as
Cistercian  houses,  the  rule  was  observed  of  not  admitting  even  strange  monks
into  the  Church  (Orderic.  tit.,  lib.  viii.  p.  714). The  Carthusians  admitted
religious  only  into  the  choir  (Guigo  Statuta  ex.). For  the  interdiction  of  women
from  entering  into  Benedictine  Churches  see  Prefalio  ad  Scecul.  i.  n.  112,  and
ad  Scec.  ii.  n.  53.


LETTKR CCL1V.  745

build i tiff  of  God,  an  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in
the  heavens  (2  Cor.  v.  i).

2.  But  someone  will  say,  "  What  if  a  man  is  cut  off  by
death  before  the  spiritual  building  is  finished?"  I  answer,
that  the  perfect  can  advance  no  further.  And  he  who  is
advancing  shows  by  the  very  fact  that  he  is  advancing  that
he  is  not  yet  perfect.  We  can  with  all  confidence  give  an
unhesitating  reply  to  that  question.  We  will  say,  He,
being  made  perfect  in  a  short  time,  fulfilled  a  long  time
(Wisd.  iv.  13).  He  who  embraces  eternity  may  well  be
said  to  embrace  a  long  time.  For  has  not  he  who  passes
into  eternity  fulfilled  a  long  time?  And,  therefore,  he
rightly  claims  for  himself  a  reward  proportioned  to  the
time  he  has  spent  here,  if  it  be  measured  not  by  length  of
years,  but  by  greatness  of  mind,  that  is,  not  by  the  flight  of
time,  or  number  of  days,  but  by  devotion  of  the  soul  to  God,
or  by  its  inextinguishable  desire  of  ever  advancing  further.
For  he  retains  by  virtue  what  he  loses  by  time.  Moreover,
real  virtue  knows  no  end,  is  not  bounded  by  time.  Thence
it  is  that  the  verse  says,  Charity  never faileth  (i  Cor.  xiii.  8).
And,  again,  The  patient  abiding  of  the  meek  shall  not  peris/i
for  ever  (Ps.  ix.  18) ;  and,  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  clean  and
abideth  for  ever  (Ps.  xix.  g).  The  righteous  never  thinks
that  he  has  attained  (Phil.  iii.  13),  he  never  says,  //  is
enough  ;  but  he  is  always  hungering  and  thirsting  after
righteousness,  always  striving  as  much  as  he  can  to  be  more
righteous,  always  endeavouring  with  all  his  might  to
advance  from  good  to  better.  For  he  gives  himself  up  to
the  service  of  God,  not,  like  a  mercenary,  for  a  year  or  for
a  fixed  time,  but  for  ever.  Hear  again  the  voice  of  the
righteous  as  he  says,  /  ?£•///  never  forget  Thy  precepts,  for
with  them  TJwu  hast  quickened  me  (Ps.  cxix.  93).  It  is  not,
then,  for  a  time  only.  Therefore  his  righteousness  remains,
not  for  some  little  space,  but  for  ever  (Ps.  <?xii.  3).  And
so  the  everlasting  hunger  of  the  righteous  deserves  an
everlasting  satisfaction.  And  though  he  is  made  perfect  in
a  short  time,  yet  he  is  reckoned  to  have  fulfilled  a  long  time
because  of  the  endlessness  of  his  virtue.

VOL.  II.  48


746  LETTER CCLIV.

3.  How,  again,  can  shortness of  time  be  a  hindrance  to
the  devotion  of  the  good  if  it is not  enough  to  excuse  the
obstinate  wickedness  of  the  lost  ? For, undoubtedly,  the
evil  of  an impenitent and obstinate mind, even though
worked  out  in  a  short  time, is  visited  with  eternal  punish
ment,  because  what  was  short  in  time,  or  in  deed,  was  made
up  for  by  obstinacy of  will ; so  much  so,  that  if  he  were
never  to  die  he  would  never  cease  to  wish  to  sin  ; nay,  he
would  wish  to  live  always  that  he  might  sin  always.  There
fore  the  same  thing  in another  way  can  be  said  of  him,
Being  perfected  in  a  short  time,  he  fulfilled  a  long  time,
inasmuch  as  he  deserved  to  receive the reward  of  many
ages,  nay, of  all ages, who  never  wished  to  change  his
mind. And  so  an  unwearied  desire for progress, and a
ceaseless  striving  for  perfection  is  reckoned  to  be  perfection.

4.  But if  to  be  anxious  to be  perfect  is  to  be  perfect,
evidently  not  to  wish  to  go  forward  is  to  fall  back. Where,
then,  are  they  who  are wont  to  say, "  It  is  enough  for  us,
we  do  not  wish  to  be  better  than  our  fathers  ?  " O,  monk  !
do  you  not  wish  to  go  forward  ? "  No." Do  you  wish  then  to
go  back  ? "  Certainly  not." What do you wish, then  ?
"I  wish  so  to  live,  and  to  remain  in  what  I  have  attained
to,  as never  to suffer  myself  to  become  worse, nor  wish
myself  to  become  better." Then you wish for what  is
impossible. For what is there that stands still in this
world  ? And  certainly  of  man  it  has  been  specially  said,
He  fleeth  as  a  shadow, and  never  continueth  in  one  stay
(Job  xiv.  2). Again,  did  the Maker  Himself  of  man  and
of  the  world  stand  still  as  long  as  He  was  seen  on  the  earth
and  dwelt  with  men? On  the  testimony  of  Scripture,  He
went  about  doing  good  and  healing  all  (Acts  x.  38). He
went  about,  then,  not  unfruitfully,  not  carelessly,  not  idly,
not  with  slow  foot,  but  as  it  was  written  of  Him,  He  rejoiced
as  a  giant  to  run  His  course (Ps.  xix.  5). Moreover,  no
one  catches  a  runner  if  he  does  not  run  himself. What  avails
it  to  follow  Christ  with  the  feet if  we  do  not  succeed  in
laying  hold  of  Him  with  the  hand? Therefore  Paul  said,
So run  that  ye  may  obtain (i  Cor. ix. 24). Do  you, O


LETTER CCLIV.  747

Christian,  place  the  goal  of  your  course  and  of  your  race
where  Christ  placed  His.  For  however  far  you  may  have
run,  if  you  do  not  persevere  even  unto  death  (Phil  ii.  8)  you
do  not  obtain  the  prize.  The  prize  is  Christ.  But  if  while
He  runs  you  stop  still,  you  do  not  make  Christ  yours,  but
you  rather  put  Him  at  a  distance,  and  you  will  have  to  fear
what  David  speaks  of  when  he  says,  Lo  !  they  that  are  far
from  Thee,  O  Lord,  shall  perish  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  27).  And  so,  if
to  advance  is  to  run,  when  you  cease  to  advance  you  cease
to  run.  And  when  you  begin  to  leave  off  running,  then  you
begin  to  go  back.  Hence,  we  plainly  see  that  not  to  wish
to  advance  is  nothing  but  to  go  back.

5.  Jacob  saw  a  ladder,  and  on  it  angels,  where  none  was
.seen  sitting  down  or  standing  still,  but  all  seemed  either  to
ascend  or  descend  (Gen.  xxviii.  12) ;  whence  we  are  plainly
given  to  understand  that  in  the  state  of  this  mortal  life  no
half  way  between  going  forward  and  going  back  can  be
found  ;  but  in  the  same  way  as  our  body  is  always  either
increasing  or  decreasing,  so  also  must  our  spirit  be  either
advancing  or  retreating.  We  must  notice,  however,  that
the  spirit  does  not  receive  its  increase  or  suffer  its  loss  from
the  changes  of  the  body.  For  in  a  robust  and  active  bodv
there  always  dwells  a  more  effeminate  and  lukewarm  soul  ;
and,  again,  in  a  weak  and  infirm  body  a  stronger  and  more
vigorous  soul  flourishes.  And  this  the  Apostle  testifies  that
he  found  true  in  his  own  case  :  When  I  am  weak,  he  says,
then  am  I  strong.  And  he  also  gladly  glories  in  his
infirmities,  in  order,  he  says,  that  the  power  of  Christ
may  dwell  in  me  (2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10).

6.  And  what  I  thus  show  by  example  I  can  also  prove  by
sight,  whilst  in  you,  my  father,  is  manifested  to  us  the  truth
•of  the  saying,  Though  our  outward  man  perish,  yet  the
inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  For
whence  springs  your  zeal  to  renew  your  Order  if  it  is  not
from  a  renewed  mind?  So  does  a  good  man  out  of  the
good  treasure  of  his  heart  bring  forth  good  things  (S.
Matt.  xii.  35).  So  does  a  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit
(S.  Matt.  vii.  17).  Your  fruit  is  the  first  and  purest.  But


748  LETTER CCLIV.

what  tree  but  purity  of  heart  bore  it?  Did  ever  an  impure
mind  seek  after  and  choose  purity  with  such  zeal  for  the
monastic  rule  ?  Pure  water  does  not  flow  from  a  muddy
spring,  nor  does  a  pure  thought  from  an  unclean  mind.  It  is
undoubtedly  from  within  that  this  delightful  fount  arises  ;
and  from  that  inward  fulness  there  bursts  forth  that  plenteous
supply;  so  that  which  is  beautiful  in  the  mind  is  also  pleasing
in  action.

7.  Follow  your  father,  my  sons  ;  be  imitators  of  him,  as
he  is  of  Christ.  Say:  We  will  run  in  the  savour  of  thy
ointments  (Cant.  i.  3).  In  truth,  he  is  a  good  savour  of
Christ  in  every  place  (2  Cor.  ii.  14).  For  to  say  nothing  of
you,  who,  being  with  him,  perceive  his  fragrance  around
you,  there  has  come  to  us,  who  are  so  far  away,  such  a
plenteous  and  pleasant  odour  from  his  zealous  efforts,  that
it  is  to  us  most  certainly  an  odour  of  life  unto  life.  I  think
that  in  heavenly  places  also  they  have  perceived  this
pleasant  odour,  and  that  they  sing  with  more  festive  joy
than  usual:  Who  is  this  that  cometh  out  of  the  wilderness
like  a  pillar  of  smoke  perfumed  with  myrrh  and  frankin
cense,  with  all  powders  of  the  merchant?  (Cant.  iii.  6).  And
again  another  :  Thy  plants  are  an  orchard  of  pomegranates-
with  pleasant  fruits  (Cant.  iv.  13).  If  any  of  you  does
not  hear  this  joyous  strain  in  heaven  he  is  envious.  If  any
one  does  not  perceive  this  odour,  let  him  (by  your  leave  I
say  it),  let  him  imagine  that  it  exists.

LETTER CCLV. (A.D. 1134-)
To Louis,1 KING OF FRANCE.

Bernard  advises  the  King  not  to  hinder  the  assembling
of  a  Council,  which  was  become  needful  both  for  the  Church
and  for  the  Realm.

To  the  most  illustrious  Louis,  by  the  grace  of  God  King
of  France,  and  to  his  beloved  wife  and  children,  his  faithful
servant,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health
from  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.
1 Louis  le  Gros.


LETTER CCLV.  749

i.  The  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  and  the  rights  of
kingdoms  remain,  surely,  sure  and  unharmed  in  obedience
to  their  lords  when  they  do  not  resist  the  ordinances  and
commandments  of  God.  Why  is  my  lord's  anger  kindled
against  the  chosen  of  God  whom  his  Highness  also  welcomed
and  chose  for  himself  as  father,  for  his  son  as  Samuel  ?
The  royal  indignation  is  in  arms,  not  against  foreigners,
but  against  himself  and  his  own  house.  It  is  no  wonder  if
the  wrath  of  man  ivorkctli  not  the  righteousness  of  God
(S.  Jas.  i.  20),  when  it  makes  you  neither  see  the  danger
nor  feel  the  loss  to  your  own  advantage,  to  your  own  honour
<ind  safety,  although  all  can  plainly  see  it.  A  council  is
called  together.1  How  does  this  derogate  from  the  honour
of  the  King,  or  the  good  of  the  kingdom  ?  There  a  ready
and  special  devotion  will  be  both  felt  and  shown  by  the
whole  Church  to  your  exalted  position  ;  especially  because
you  were  the  tirst  king,  or  among  the  first,  to  go  to  the
defence  of  your  mother  Church  in  a  most  energetic  and
Christian  spirit  against  the  violence  of  those  who  were
persecuting  her.  There  well-deserved  thanks  will  be
given  to  you  in  glorious  fashion  by  that  large  multitude,
there  will  prayers  be  offered  for  you  and  yours  by  thousands
of  saints.

2.  Beyond  this,  every  one  knows  how  necessary  at  the
present  juncture  is  an  assembly  of  Bishops,  except  anyone
who  is  hard-hearted  enough  to  pay  no  attention  to  the
troubles  of  his  mother  Church.  But,  they  say,  heat  is
excessive,  and  our  bodies  are  not  of  ice.  It  is  true,  but  our
hearts  are  frozen  certainly,  and  that  there  is  no  one,  as  the
Prophet  says,  who  is  grieved  for  the  affliction  of  Joseph
(Amos  vi.  6).  But  of  this  at  another  time.  Now  I,  who  am
the  le,ast  in  your  kingdom  in  dignity,  though  not  in  loyalty,
tell  you  that  it  is  inexpedient  for  you  to  wish  to  hinder
so  great  and  so  necessary  a  good.  And  "there  are  not
wanting  either  reasons  by  which  I  could  make  that  plain  to
you,  which  are  ready  to  my  hand  to  bring  before  you  if  I

1  Held  at  Pisa,  A.U.  1134;  the  King  .forbade  the  French  Bishops  to  go
because  of  the  great  heat.


750  LETTER CCLVI.

did  not  think  that  what  I  have  said  is  enough  for  a  wise
man.  Still,  if  anything  has  come  from  the  severity  of  the
apostolic  power  to  make  your  Highness  think  that  you  have
reason  to  be  angry,  your  faithful  servants,  who  support1  you,
will  strive  with  all  their  might  to  have  it  in  some  way
recalled,  or  moderated,  as  may  be  suitable  to  your  honour.
In  the  meanwhile,  if  I  can  do  anything  I  will  not  omit  it.


LETTER CCLVI. (A.D. 1146.)
To POPE EUGENICS.

Bernard  urges  upon  the  Pope  to  come  to  the  succour  of
the  Eastern  Church,  and  not  to  be  discouraged  at  the  loss
of  Edessa.

i.  It  is  no  light  news  which  we  have  heard;  it  is  very
sad  and  grievous.  And  to  whom  is  it  sad  ?  To  wrhom  is
it  not  ?  The  children  of  wrath  alone  do  not  see  God's
wrath,  they  do  not  mourn  with  those  that  mourn,  but  they
rejoice  and  exult  in  the  worst  evils.  Besides,  the  sorrow
is  common,  because  the  cause  is  common  to  all.  You  have
done  well  in  praising  the  most  righteous  zeal  of  our
Gallican  Church,  and  in  strengthening  it  by  the  authority
of  your  letter.  I  must  say  that  we  must  not  in  such  a
general  and  grievous  matter  act  without  zeal,  much  less
timidly.  I  have  read  in  some  wise  man  or  other:  "  He  is
not  a  brave  man  whose  courage  does  not  rise  in  the  midst  of
difficulties"  (Seneca,  ep.  22  to  Lucillus).  But  I  say  that  one
who  is  faithful  may  be  trusted  even  more  in  disaster.  The
waters  have  come  in  even  unto  the  soul  of  Christ,  the  apple
of  His  eye  has  been  touched.  In  this,  the  second  Passion
of  Christ  both  the  swords  must  be  drawn  which  He  allowed
on  the  first  occasion.  And  who  should  draw  them  but  you  ?
Both  swords  of  Peter  must  be  unsheathed  as  often  as  neces
sary,  the  one  at  his  command,  the  other  by  his  hand.  And,  in
deed,  of  the  one  of  which  it  seemed  that  he  ought  not  to  make
use  it  was  said  :  Put  up  thy  sword  into  its  sheath.  There
fore  that,  too,  was  his,  but  not  to  be  drawn  by  his  own  hand,

1  Otherwise  "  cling  to  you,"  adhcerent.


LETTER CCLVI.  751

2.  I  think  that  now  is  the  time,  when  necessity  bids  both
be  drawn  in  defence  of  the  Eastern  Church. You  must  not
fall  below  the  zeal  of  him  whose  place  you  occupy. What
shall  we  say  of  one  who  holds  the  primacy  and  shrinks  from
its  ministry? There  is  the  voice  of  One  crying, "  I  go  to
Jerusalem  to  be  again  crucified"  (Hegesippus  de  Excid.  lib.
iii.  c.  2). Though  some  be  lukewarm,  some  deaf  to  those
words,  yet  the  successor  of  Peter  may  not  neglect  them.
He  himself  will  say,  Though  all  shall  be  offended  yet  will
not  I  (S.  Matt.  xxvi.  33). Nor  will  he  be  deterred  by  the
losses  of  the  former  army,  but  will  do  his  best  to  repair
them. Is  not  man  bound  to  do  his  duty,  because  God  does
what  He  pleases  ? I, for  my  part, as  a  faithful  Christian,
will  hope  for  better  things in  place  of  such  misfortunes,
and will think it all  joy  that  we  are  falling into  divers
temptations  (S.  Jas.  i.  2). Truly  we  have  eaten  the  bread  of
affliction,  and  have  drunk  of  the  wine  of  sorrow. Why,  O
friend  of  the  Bridegroom,  are  you  cast  down,  as  though  it
were  not  that  the  kind  and  wise  Bridegroom  has,  according
to  His  custom,  kept  the  good  wine  until  now  ? Who  knows
if  God  will  return  and  forgive,  and  leave  a  blessing  behind
Him?  (Joel  ii.  14). And  certainly  the  Wisdom  that  is  above
is  wont  so  to  work,  so  to  determine  ; I  speak  to  a  wise  man.
When  has  great  good  ever  come  to  men  which  has  not  been
preceded  by  great  evil  ? For,  to  speak  of  nothing  else,  did
not  the  death  of  the  Saviour  precede  the  supreme  and  un
paralleled  gift  of  our  salvation?

3.  Do  thou,  then,  O  friend  of  the  Bridegroom,  prove  thy
self  a  friend  in  His  need. If  thou  lovest,  as  thou  oughtest,
Christ  with  all  thy  heart,  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy
strength,  with  that  triple  love  of  which  thy  predecessor  was
asked  (S.  John  xxi.  15-17),  then  thou  wilt  withhold  nothing,
thou  wilt  leave  nothing  undone  in  this  danger  of  His  bride;
but  thou  wilt  devote  to  Her  whatever  strength  thou  hast,
whatever  zeal,  whatever  watchfulness,  whatever  authority,
whatever  power. A  great  danger  demands  a  great  effort.
The  foundation  is  shaken,  and  we  must  put  forth  all  our
strength  as  though  the  building  were now ready  to  fall.


752  LETTER CCLVI.

And  these  things  I  have  said  to  you  with  full  trust  in  you,
as  well  as  loyalty.

4.  I  suppose  you  have  heard  the  news  that  at  the
assembly  at  Chartres,1  by  some  strange  caprice,  I  was
chosen  as  general  and  leader  of  the  expedition.  Be  assured
that  this  was  not  of  my  seeking,  and  was  and  is  against  my
will  ;  and  that,  as  I  gauge  my  strength,  it  is  altogether  be
yond  my  powers.  Who  am  I  that  I  should  have  charge  of  a
camp  and  go  out  before  the  faces  of  armed  men  ?  Is  there
anything  more  inconsistent  with  my  profession,  even  if  I
had  the  necessary  strength  and  skill  ?  But  it  is  not  my
place  to  teach  you  wisdom  ;  you  know  all  these  things.
Only  I  implore  you,  by  that  love  which  you  specially  owe
me,  give  me  not  over  to  the  will  of  man,  but,  as  is  peculiarly
incumbent  on  you,  seek  for  counsel  from  God,  and  en
deavour  that  His  will  may  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in
Heaven.


LETTER CCLVII. (A.D. 1146.)
To  THE  SAME,  FOR  BROTHER  PHILIP.

i.  There  is  a  matter  which  I  do  not  mingle  with  other
things,2  because  it  affects  others  and  troubles  me,  and  needs
more  than  usually  urgent  prayers  on  my  part.  Our  brother
Philip,  when  he  exalted  himself  was  humbled,  when  he
humbled  himself  he  was  not  exalted,  as  though  the  Lord  had
not  spoken  equally  of  both  (S.  Matt,  xxiii.  12).  There  is
rigour,  but  no  relaxation.  There  is  judgment,  but  without
mercy.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  many  have  given  this
measure,  but  no  one  has  ever  wished  this  measure  to  be
given  to  himself.  But  if  with  what  measure  we  mete  it
shall  be  measured  to  us  again  (S.  Matt.  vii.  2),  certainly  he

1  Held  A.D.  1146. Respecting  this,  consult  the  Letters  of  Peter  the  Venerable,
and  of  Suger.

2  We  gather  from  this  that  this  Letter  was  sent  with  the  one  before  to  plead
for  Philip. We  read  of  him  in  the  Catalogue  of  the Priors  of  Clairvaux: —
"  Philip,  who  had  been  Bishop  of  Taranto,  and  was  degraded  at  the  time  of  the
schism '  for  supporting  Anacletus,'  came  to  Clairvaux,  and,  out  of  pity,  was
allowed  to  officiate  as  Deacon." Hence  this  Letter. He  was  Prior  when  S.
Bernard  died.


LETTER CCLVII.


753


\vho  shows  no  mercy  will  have  judgment  without  mercy.
Your  Apostolic  authority  is  capable  of  showing  both
righteous  zeal  and  mercy.  The  honour  of  majesty,  it  is
true,  loves  judgment  ;  but  God  forbid  that  this  should
banish  gentleness.  That  steward,  too,  whose  praise  is  in
the  Gospel,  chose  to  inflict  loss  on  his  Lord  rather  than  not
show  mercy  to  his  neighbour.  For  a  hundred  in  one  case
he  took  eighty,  in  another  fifty.  And  justly  was  he  praised
for  preferring  that  his  master  should  rather  lose  his  goods
than  his  men.  And  because  he  who  so  works  is  worthy  of
his  reward,  by  one  such  deed  he  both  kept  them  as  his
master's  servants  and  made  them  his  own  friends  (S.  Luke
xvi.  1-8).

2.  But  what  am  I  doing  ?  I  seem  to  be  arguing  the  case
rather  than  offering  my  prayer.  This  is  not  good.  If  I  go
on  saying  such  things  I  shall  provoke  judgment,  not  mercy.
I  have  no  more  confidence  in  such  arguments  than  in
spiders'  webs.  In  vain  is  the  net  spread  in  the  sight  of
any  bird  (Prov.  i.  17).  I  know  how  much  more  convincing
arguments  can  be  brought  in  reply,  and  especially  by  such
ability  as  yours.  Wherefore  my  weapons  are  the  prayers
of  the  poor,  and  in  them  I  am  rich.  To  these  engines  that
tower  of  strength,  no  matter  how  impregnable  else,  must
needs  yield.  The  father  of  the  poor,  the  lover  of  poverty,
will  not  reject  the  prayers  of  the  poor.  Who  are  they  ?  I
am  not  alone,  and  even  if  I  were  1  might  presume  still  to
make  my  petition.  All  your  sons  who  are  with  me,  and
those  who  are  not  with  me  too,  join  me  in  this  supplication.
Who  can  number  them  ?  Of  course  brother  Philip  is  ex-
cepted,  who  neither  asks  nor  seeks  that  others  should  ask,
and  I  do  not  know  if  he  even  wishes  it;  for,  as  far  as  he  is
concerned,  he  would  rather  be  a  door-keeper  in  the  house
of  his  God.  But  not  even  I  ask  only  for  the  man,  but  on
behalf  of  our  Order,  believing  that  a  dispensation  in  this
case  will  be  highly  beneficial  to  it.


754  LETTER CCLVIII.

LETTER CCLVIII. (A.D. 1145.)
To  THE  SAME,  FOR  BROTHER  RuALENE.1

Bernard  begs  that  Brother  Rualene,  who  had  become
Abbot  of  S.  Anastasius,  might  be  allowed  to  resign  his
post.

In  truth,  I  find  that  our  Brother  Rualene  has  not  yet
learnt  to  acquiesce  in  his  position,  and  I  cannot  hope  that  he
ever  will.  Therefore,  both  for  him  and  for  me,  there  is
need  of  a  speedy  remedy.  I  tell  you  that  I  am  even
consumed  so  long  as  he  is  made  to  offend.  Do  not  be
surprised  at  this  ;  we  are  of  one  soul,  except  that  I  am  the
mother,  he  the  son  ;  for  the  name  and  authority  of  father  I
have  yielded  to  you.  That  alone  which  could  not  be
transferred,  the  affection  which  is  torturing  me,  that
remains  to  me  still.  A  mother  cannot  forget  the  child  that
she  bore  (Is.  xlix.  15).  The  sadness  of  my  breast,  and  the
grief  of  my  heart  for  him,  proclaim  me  his  mother.  You
ask  what  I  complain  of  ?  About  myself  I  complain  to  you,
about  you  I  complain  to  myself.  I,  a  cruel  yet  loving
mother,  spared  not  my  own  child,  that  I  might  purify  my
heart  by  loving  obedience.  I  have  offered  a  dear  pledge  of
my  bosom  as  a  sacrifice,  not  of  constraint,  I  admit,  but
willingly  did  I  obey  that  will  which  constrains  whom  it  will.
But  he  thought  not  so.  When  constrained  by  me  as  well
as  by  you  he  struggled,  though  in  vain.  Had  I,  then,  any
reason  to  fear  that  he  would  always  resist  so  obstinately  ?
It  is  the  mark  of  a  loving  heart  to  yield  to  stubbornness
which  will  not  allow  itself  to  be  placed  in  its  proper  position.
Besides,  to  hold  one  against  his  will  to  a  position  in  which
he  was  placed  against  his  will  is  hard  for  him,  beneficial  to
no  one.  Again,  to  occupy  the  ground  and  not  to  bring

1  He  had  been  Prior  of  Clairvaux,  and  after  the  election  of  Eugenius  he  was
made  Abbot  of  S.  Anastasius,  at  Rome  (see  ep.  245).  It  is  his  absence  which  is
lamented  in  ep.  43.  Nicholas  of  Clairvaux  was  admitted  by  S.  Bernard's
influence  most  of  all;  he  afterwards  wrote  several  Letters  in  S.  Bernard's  name,
and  epp.  23  and  25  among  them,  which  wrongly  bear  the  title  of  Rivaulx
instead  of  Rualene.


LETTER CCLIX.  755

forth  fruit  is  not  good  for  the  ground,  and  is  not  becoming
to  you  or  to  me.  No  one,  as  blessed  Ambrose  says,  does
good  under  compulsion,  even  if  what  he  does  is  good,  be
cause  the  spirit  of  fear  avails  nothing  when  the  spirit  of
charity  is  absent  (S.  Ambr.  in  Ps.  i.).  And  so  I  beseech
you  by  the  bowels  of  mercies  of  our  God  to  show  the  love
of  a  father  and  send  back  to  his  mother's  breasts  the  child,
while  he  lives,  whose  whole  weakness  is,  perhaps,  caused
by  his  having  been  weaned  too  soon.  It  is  better  to  suffer
him  to  live  than  to  divide  him.  What  profit  is  there  in  his
blood?  One  thing  I  know,  and  that  is  that  it  is  not  a
lather's  or  a  mother's  voice  which  says,  Let  it  be  neither
mine  nor  thine,  but  let  it  be  divided  (i  Kings  iii.  26).  Per
haps  you  are  not  afraid  of  this,  because  you  do  not  believe
that  it  is  likely  to  happen.  But  his  letters  and  murmurings
which  frequently  come  to  me  fill  me  with  fear  of  such
an  issue,  for  he  is  threatening  to  fly  and  to  divide  him
self,  or  rather  to  tear  himself  asunder  both  from  you  and
me.

LETTER  CCLIX. (A.D.  1145-)
To  THE  SAME,  FOR  THE  SAME.

Although  I  at  one  time  wished  what  you  wished  me  not
to,  your  condescending  gentleness  provokes  me  now  not
only  to  wish,  but  to  wish  eagerly  for  what  you  do.  It  is
your  pleasure  that  Brother  Rualene  should  be  Abbot  of  S.
Anastasius,  and  this  had  been  my  wish  before,  but  because
he  was  much  opposed  to  it  I  gave  way.  Again,  since  your
will  does  not  concur  with  mine  I  again,  as  is  right,  give
way  and  return  to  my  first  mind.  We  can  make  the
experiment.  What  you  ordered  has  been  done,  not
because  you  ordered  it,  but  because  you  wished  it.  The
speedy  execution  of  your  command,  of  free 'will,  and  not
grudgingly  or  of  necessity,  proves  our  obedience,  and  let  my
pen  be  examined  as  to  my  good-will.  If  I  had  not  been
content  to  execute  your  command  should  I  not,  according  to
the  word  of  the  Lord,  have  been  an  unprofitable  servant  in


756  LETTER CCLX.

doing  what  I  was  bound  to  do?  (S.  Luke  xvii.  10).  But
now,  since  I  have  acted  with  willingness  also,  I  am  no  longer
a  servant  but  a  son.


LETTER  CCLX. (A.D. 1145.)
To  ABBOT  RUALENE.

Bernard  sympathizes  with  Rualene in  his  unhappiness,
but  declares  that  he  must  remain  at  his  post.

Your  absence,  my  dear  Rualene,  has  affected  me  enough,
and  more  than  enough,  but  I  am  far  more  troubled  to  hear
of  your  sadness.  For  I  seem  to  myself  to  lament  more
properly  for  you  than  for  our  losing  or  being  deprived  of
you,  although  that  loss  is  by  no  means  small,  and  causes
no  small  discomfort,  since  it  is  for  so  dear  a  son,  so  useful
a  brother,  so  necessary  a  fellow-helper.  But  the  more
vividly  I  call  to  mind  your  loveableness,  the  more  deeply
do  I  sympathize  with  your  grief,  holding  your  discomfort
of  more  importance  than  my  loss,  and  being  more  dis
tressed  at  it.  But  I  have  not  been  negligent,  not  been
idle,  not  held  my  peace,  and  have  tempted  God  in  this
matter,  almost  even  to  the  point  of  angering  the  supreme
and  holy  Pontiff,  that  in  some  way  or  other,  even  though  it
were  to  my  own  danger,  I  might  be  allo\ved  to  recall  you.
But  since  I  have  so  far  failed  in  all  my  plans  and  efforts
for  you,  I  have  at  last,  from  very  weariness,  given  way  to
higher  judgment,  and  yielding  to  powrer,  am  forced  to  be
content  with  what  I  can  get,  since  I  cannot  have  what  I
would.  Do  you,  too,  my  dear  brother,  greatly  longed  for,
be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  do  not  kick  against  the  pricks,
lest  when  you  are  hurt,  very  many,  who  greatly  love  you  in
the  Lord,  be  equally  hurt.  Spare  yourself,  spare  me,  who
from  love  of  you  have  not  spared  myself.  But  the  rather
put  on  strength,  trusting  and  knowing  that  your  strength
is  the  joy  of  your  Lord.  Put  on  the  joy  of  salvation  that
I,  too,  rejoice  in  your  joy,  and  may  give  thanks  and  praise
to  God,  who  loves  a  cheerful  giver,  for  your  peace  of  mind,
and  for  my  own  comfort  in  you.


LETTER CCLXI.  757

LETTER CCLXI.

To POPE EUGENIUS.

Bernard  prays  the  Pope to absolve the Abbot  of  S.

Urbain,  who  had  been  subjected  to  censure.
One  of  the  Knights  of  the  Temple  wished  to  become  a
monk  of  our  Order, and found  amongst  us  some  to  join
him in  his  wish. But since  they  dared not, contrary  to
Rules, receive him within their walls, they took him
secretly  to  a  certain  Abbey  which  is  called  Vaux,1  telling
and  suggesting  to  the  Abbot  to  cause  to  be  given  to  the
man  a  black  habit  of  some  other  Order  of  monks,  and  then
they  would  receive  him  and  give  him  ours. And  so  it  was
done. The  matter  became  known  to  me,  and  was  brought
by  me before  the  Chapter, and by the decision  of the
Chapter  that  brother  was  expelled. But  the  Templars,  not
content  with  this,  brought  letters  from  your  Majesty  to  the
Bishop  of  Chalons  by  which  he  was  to  suspend  the  Abbot
of  S.  Urbain, who  had  given  the  soldier the  habit, from
entering  the  Church  till  he should  have  presented  himself
before you. Thence it is that the Abbot of Vaux, at
whose request he did this without  suspecting  anything
wrong,  was  forced in great trouble  of mind  to  send to
implore  your  mercy  the  brother who  bears  this  letter,  in
order  that  he  who  was  entangled  by  him  might  by  him  be
set  free, if  that  is  to  say  he  as  well  as  we,  your  children,
may  win  this  boon  from  your  Paternity.

LETTER CCLXII.

To  THE  SAME,  FOR  THE  MONKS  OF  S.  MARiE-suR-MEUSE.2

I  cannot  but  again  support  the Bishop  of Rheims  in  his

petition, especially  since it is one  which deserves  to  be

1  It  is  uncertain  whether  this  Abbey,  which  belonged  to  the  Cistercians,  was
actually  within  the  Diocese  of  Chalons,  or  close  to  it.  It  had  a  monastery
dedicated  to  S.  Urbanus,  mentioned  below,  built  A.D.  865  by  Herchenraus,
Bishop  of  Chalons  (Heric,  the  monk,  de  Mirac.  S.  German.  Auxerre,  c.  14).

3  The  Cistercian  codex  has  the  heading,  "On  behalf  of  Samson,  Archbishop  of
Rheims."  But  the  meaning  is  the  same,  fur  the  Letter  was  written  at  the  request


75$  LETTER CCLXIII.

listened  to.  I  pray,  therefore,  and  earnestly  supplicate  on
behalf  of  the  poor  monks  of  S.  Marie-sur-Meuse,  that  they
may  be  quickly  set  free  from  the  oppression  under  which
they  suffer,  and  that  by  your  powerful  hand  the  injuries
and  accusations  of  the  malignant  may  be  warded  off  from
them  ;  of  these  the  bearer  of  this  letter  will  inform  you.
It  is  for  this  that  these  poor  men  have  sent  messengers
from  afar  to  cry  to  you.  And  what  answer  you  should  send
back  by  them  you  may  learn  from  the  righteousness  and
poverty  of  these  men  who  love  you,  and  from  the  honour
due  to  the  above  Bishop,  who  has  intervened  on  their
behalf,  and  who  loves  you  not  a  little.


LETTER CCLXIII.

TO THE BISHOP OF SOISSONS, FOR THE ABBOT OF

CHEZY.1

I  besought  you,  when  I  might,  perhaps,  have  enjoined
you,  and  I  thought  that  my  prayer  had  been  granted.  But
since  I  find  that  it  has  not,  it  seems  that  I  shall  not  have
now  to  ask  simply  and  in  common  with  others,  but  to
cry  aloud.  For  I  cannot  bear  a  refusal,  lightly  or  with
equanimity,  and  hitherto  I  have  not  met  with  one.  Do,
then,  what  you  ought ;  do  what  you  are  wont  to  do ;  for
custom  has  made  you  my  debtor  ;  do  it,  I  repeat,  if  not
because  you  are  asked,  yet  because  you  are  enjoined.
Return,  therefore,  to  judgment,  for  it  does  not  seem  just
that  the  Abbot  of  Chezy,  who  is  a  pious  man,  a  friend  of
mine,  and  your  son,  should  lose  the  rights  of  his  monastery
because  of  a  word  spoken  by  him  incautiously  and  incon
siderately,  and  without  the  assent  of  his  church.  And

of  Samson,  on  behalf  of  the  monks  of  the  famous  monastery  of  S.  Mary  on
the  Meuse,  in  the  Diocese  of  Rheims,  under  the  Benedictine  Congregation  of  S.
Vito.  There  is  nothing  about  this  letter  in  the  Chronicle  of  S.M.  sur  M.,  Spicil.
Vol.  iv.

1  I.e.,  Simon,  see  ep.  293.  The  Letter  is  best  headed  to  Joscelyn,  Bishop  of
Soissons,  in  whose  Diocese  the  Cistercian  abbey  of  Chezy  was.  Perhaps  we  must
itake  it  that  the  deposition  of  this  Simon  is  what  is  spoken  of  in  lib.  ii.  ep.  14  of
Peter  of  Celles.


LETTER CCLXIV.  759

although  his  accuser  sticks  obstinately  to  that  word,  being
one  who  has  no  confidence  in  the  righteousness  of  his
cause,  it  ought  not,  I  think,  to  prevent  the  Abbot  from
receiving  a  just  decision  ;  especially  when  those  by  whose
dissimulation  the  matter  has  been  brought  before  you
know  very  well  that  he  did  not  mean  what  he  said,  nay,
rather  was  opposed  to  it.  I  hope  that  you  will  not  be  put
out  with  me  because  of  this,  nor  be  vexed.  May  God  so
rejoice  your  soul,  and  may  He  so  preserve  you  free  from
all  troubled  feelings,  O  father,  greatly  to  be  loved  and
honoured,  as  by  all  the  servants  of  Christ,  so  in  particular
by  me.

LETTER CCLXIV. (A.D. 1149.)

PKTKR,  ABBOT  OF  CIAJNY,  TO  BERNARD,  ABBOT  OF
CLAIRVAUX.

He  expresses his  friendship  towards  Bernard,  and  asks
that  a  monk  named  Nicholas  may  be  sent  to  him.

To  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  the  strong  and  splendid
pillar  of  the  monastic  order,  nay,  of  the  whole  Church  of
God,  PETER,  the  humble  Abbot  of  Cluny,  wishes  the  salva
tion  which  God  has  promised  to  those  that  love  Him.

If  it  were  allowed  me,  if  the  Providence  of  God  did  not
forbid  it,  if  man's  path  through  life  were  in  his  own  power,
I  should  have  preferred  to  be  united  by  an  indissoluble
bond  to  your  dear  and  blessed  self,  rather  than  reign  any
where,  or  be  a  prince  amongst  men.  Ought  not  your
dwelling,  which  is  pleasing  not  only  to  men,  but  to  the
angels  themselves,  to  be  preferred  by  me  before  all  earthly
kingdoms?  If  I  were  to  say  that  you  were  a  fellow-citizen
with  them,  though  hope  has  not  yet  passed  into  possession,
by  the  mercy  of  God  I  shall  not  be  found  a  liar.  If  it  had
been  given  me  to  be  here  with  you,  even  to  my  last  breath,
it  would,  perhaps,  be  given  me  after  death  to  be  for  ever
where  you  might  be.  Whither  should  I  run  save  after  you,
drawn  by  the  savour  of  your  ointments?  But  since  this  is
not  given  always  I  wish  that  it  could  be,  at  all  events,  given


760  LETTER CCLXV.

often.  And  since  even  this  cannot  be,  I  wish  at  least  that  I
could  often  see  those  sent  by  you.  And  since  this  also
happens  but  seldom,  I  wish  next  that  your  Holiness  in  the
person  of  your  messenger,  Nicholas,  who  loves  you,  would
come  and  stay  with  me  till  the  Octave  of  the  Lord;1  and  in
this  request  I  think  your  heart  partly  joins  my  heart  wholly.
I  shall  see  you,  holy  brother,  in  him,  I  shall  hear  of  you
through  him,  and  I  will  entrust  to  him  whatever  I  wish  to
make  known  secretly  to  your  wisdom.  To  your  holy  soul,
and  to  all  the  Saints  who  serve  Almighty  God  under  your
rule,  I  commend  myself  and  mine  with  all  possible  prayer,
with  all  possible  devotion.


LETTER  CCLXV.  (A.D.  1149.)

To  PETER,  ABBOT  OF CLUNY  (REPLY  TO  THE  ABOVE).

He  disclaims  praises  as  being  unworthy.

What  are  you  doing,  my  dear  friend  ?  You  are  praising
a  sinner,  you  are  beatifying  a  wretched  man.  You  must
now  pray  that  I  may  not  be  led  into  error.  I  shall  certainly
be  led  into  it,  if  I  begin  to  be  ignorant  of  myself  from  the
delight  I  might  take  in  your  praises.  That  did  well-nigh
happen  to  me  when  I  saw  the  letters  of  your  Beatitude
which  beatified  me.  How  happy  should  I  now  be  if  words
could  effect  it  !  Still  let  me  call  myself  happy,  not,  how
ever,  because  of  my  own  merit,  but  your  good-will.  I  am
happy  in  being  loved  by  you,  and  in  loving  you.  However,
I  do  not  think  that  this  sweet  morsel  which  you  offer
me  ought  to  be  swallowed  whole,  nor,  as  they  say,  even
admitted  even  into  the  mouth.  You  wonder  why,  perhaps.
Because  I  cannot  see  anything  in  myself  which  makes
me  worthy  of  love,  especially  such  as  yours.  I  know,  too,
that  a  righteous  man  will  never  wish  to  be  loved  more  than
is  right.  Would  that  I  could  as  easily  imitate  as  admire  so
great  an  example  of  humility  !  Would  that  I  might  enjoy
what  I  so  greatly  long  for,  your  holy  conversation — I  do
not  say  always,  I  do  not  say  often,  but  even  once  in  a  yearl

1 I.e.,  of  Christmas. —  [E.]


LETTER CCLXV.  761

I  think  that  I  should  never  return  from  it  empty.  It  would
not  be  in  vain  that  I  beheld  a  model  of  virtue,  a  perfection
of  discipline,  a  mirror  of  sanctity.  Nor  would  it  be  fruitless
for  one  to  see  with  the  eye  of  faith  how  well  you  have
learnt  from  Christ  what  I  have  not  yet  learnt — his  meekness
and  lowliness  of  heart.  But  if  I  go  on  to  do  to  you  what  I
complain  that  you  have  done  to  me,  though  I  speak  the
truth,  yet  I  shall  not  agree  with  the  law  of  truth,  which
says,  What  you  do  not  wish  done  to  yourself  do  not  to
another  (Tob.  iv.  15).  And  in  answer  to  the  little  request
with  which  you  ended  your  letter  I  have  to  say  that  the
brother  whom  you  asked  me  to  send  you  is  not  just  now
with  me,  but  with  the  Bishop  of  Auxerre,  and  he  is  so  ill
that  I  am  told  that  he  cannot  yet  come  to  us  without  the
greatest  risk.

LETTER CCLXVI. (A.n.  1151.)

To  SUGER,  ABBOT  OF  S.  DENYS, *  TO  COMFORT  HIM  ON
His  DEATH-BED.

Bernard  encourages  him  to  meet  death  bravely,  and  ex
presses  a  great  desire  to  see  him  before  he  dies.

To  his  dear  and  intimate  friend  SUGER,  by  the  grace  of
God  Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  Brother  BERNARD  wishes  the
glory  which  is  within  and  the  grace  which  cometh  down
from  above.

1  Suger's  death  took  place  A.D.  1152,  as  the  Chronicle  of  S.  Denys  records  as
follows  : — "  This  was  the  last  year  of  Abbot  Suger,  of  happy  memory.  But  no
one  is  excepted  from  the  necessity  of  death.  When  he  began  to  be  troubled
with  the  illness  from  which  he  died  he  was  carried  by  the  hands  of  the  brethren,
and  at  his  own  request  taken  into  the  Chapter-room.  There,  after  edifying
words,  he  threw  himself  with  tears  and  lamentation  at  the  feet  of  each  monk,
and  asked  humbly  that  for  love's  sake  they  would  forgive  him  if  he  had  injured
them  directly  or  by  his  negligence.  This  request  all  the  brethren  most  readily
granted  with  sincere  affection  and  with  much  shedding  of  tears.  The  venerable
father  passed  away  while  reciting  the  Lord's  Prayer  and  Creed  on  the  i.^th
January,  in  the  7<Dth  year  of  his  age,  in  the  2Qth  of  his  rule  over  the  Abbey.
Six  Bishops  and  many  Abbots  and  the  most  Christian  King  Louis  were  present
at  his  funeral.  The  King,  from  the  fulness  of  his  heart  and  heedless  of  his
Royal  dignity,  wept  bitterly  while  he  was  being  buried."  The  inscription  over

VOL.  II.  4g


762  LETTER CCLXVI.

i.  Fear  not,  O  man  of  God,  to  put  off  that  man  which  is  of
the  earth,  which  weighs  you  down  to  the  earth  and  tries  to
sink  you  to  hell.  He  it  is  that  vexes,  burdens,  attacks  you.

him  was  simply  "  Here  lies  Abbot  Suger" — short  indeed,  but  Sugar's  name  was
sufficient  description  of  him.  Robert  of  Hereford  highly  praises  him  in  ep.  216,
amongst  Suger's  remains.  Francis  Chifflet  has  published  a  very  beautiful
eulogy  of  him,  composed  by  Simon  Chevre-d'Or,  a  canon  of  S.  Victor  of  Paris.
It  runs  thus  : —

"  The  Church's  flower  is  dead — her  gem,  her  crown,  her  pillar,

Her  banner,  shield,  and  helm,  her  light  and  pride.

Abbot  Suger,  the  pattern  of  uprightness  and  justice,

Respected  for  his  piety,  pious  though  in  high  repute,

High  souled,  wise,  and  eloquent,  generous,  upright,

At  councils  present  in  body,  but  in  mind  self  controlled.

The  King  his  kingdom  ruled  by  him  with  prudence  great,

And  thus  the  King's  Viceroy  was  changed  into  his  King.

And  while  the  King  long  years  spent  over  sea

The  realm  he  ruled,  discharging  the  duties  of  the  King.

He  joined  two  things  which  no  one  else  has  joined —

Approved  himself  to  men,  was  good  in  sight  of  God.

He  added  by  his  own  glory  to  the  reputation  of  an  Abbey  already  famous,

He  reformed  its  abuses,  and  increased  the  number  of  its  members.

Epiphany's  seventh  light  him  bereft  of  light,

The  true  Epiphany  gave  true  light  to  the  hero/'

A  lengthy  and  elegant  eulogy  of  him  was  written  by  the  Fathers  of  the  Con
gregation  of  S.  Maur  with  golden  letters  on  a  sheet  of  brass.  See  also  notes  to
epp.  78  and  369.  On  the  receipt  of  the  Letter  of  S.  Bernard  Suger  wrote  for
the  last  time,  and  sent  him  the  following  Letter,  thanking  him  for  giving  him
comfort  in  his  last  moments,  and  commending  himself  to  his  prayers  : —

"  To  his  loving  lord  and  venerable  father  BEKNARD,  by  the  grace  of  God
Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  SUGER,  till  now  a  humble  servant  of  S.  Denys,  wishes
salvation  and  love  unfeigned.

"  You  have  visited  me  with  your  letter  ;  may  the  Dayspring  from  on  high
visit  you.  You  have  sent  to  me,  a  miserable  sinner,  your  presents — nay,  rather,
splendid  gifts — a  precious  cloth,  bread  of  your  blessing,  letters  of  consolation,  in
which  are  contained  good  words,  holy  words,  words  flowing  with  milk  and
honey ;  in  my  last  moments  you  have  given  me  comfort.  But  if  I  could  have
seen  your  angelic  face  but  once  before  my  departure  I  should  depart  with  greater
safety  from  this  miserable  world.  Be  assured  that  if  I  had  merited  to  live  here
for  a  thousand  years  or  more  I  should  not  care  to  remain  unless  it  were  the
good  pleasure  of  God.  My  trust  is  not  in  works  of  righteousness,  but  in  the
mercy  of  God  alone,  which  He  always  shows  to  them  that  put  their  trust  in
Him  ;  to  Him  with  all  my  heart  I  long  to  return.  And  therefore  I  devoutly
commend  my  soul  into  your  hands,  that  by  your  prayers  and  those  of  your
sacred  congregations  it  may  win  the  divine  mercy.  I  humbly  ask  the  prayers
of  your  Holiness  "  (Vol.  i.  Anecd.,  R.  P.  Edm.  Martene).


LETTER CCLXVI.  763

What  have  you  to  do  with  earthly  coverings,  who  art  about
to  go  to  heaven  to  be  clad  with  the  robe  of  glory  ?  It  is
near,  but  it  will  not  be  given  to  one  that  is  clothed.  It  is
.able  to  clothe  you,  but  not  if  you  are  already  clothed  upon.
Be  not  distressed,  then — nay,  rejoice  to  be  found  naked
and  unclothed.  God  Himself  wishes  man  to  be  clothed,
but  only  when  He  is  naked  and  unclothed.  The  man  of
God,  then,  will  not  return  to  God  unless  that  which  is  of
the  earth  first  return  to  the  earth,  for  these  two  are  at
enmity  with  each  other,  and  there  will  be  no  peace  till  they
are  separated.  And  if  peace  do  come  it  will  not  be  the
peace  of  the  Lord  nor  with  the  Lord.  You  are  not  one  of
those  who  say,  Peace,  when  there  is  no  peace  (Ezek.  xiii.  10).
The  peace  which  passeth  all  understanding  awaits  you,  the
righteous  wait  for  this  peace  to  be  given  you,  the  joy  of
your  Lord  awaits  you.

2.  And  I,  my  dearest  friend,  greatly  long  to  see  you
once  more  that  I  may  receive  a  dying  man's  blessing.  But
since  it  is  not  in  man's  power  to  choose  his  path  I  dare  not,
since  I  cannot  be  certain,  promise  certainly  to  come,  but
though  I  do  not  at  present  see  how  I  can,  I  shall  do  all
that  I  can  to  come.  Perhaps  I  may  come,  perhaps  1  may  not ;
but  whichever  it  is  I  have  loved  you  from  the  first,  I  will
love  you  without  end.  I  say  with  all  confidence  that  I
cannot  lose  one  so  loved  to  the  end.  He  is  not  lost  to  me,
but  he  goes  before,  for  my  soul  clings  to  his  with  a  force
which  nothing  can  destroy,  and  is  united  by  a  bond  which
can  never  be  broken.  Only  forget  not  me  when  you  arrive
where  I  hope  to  follow  you,  so  that  it  may  be  granted  me
to  come  quickly  to  you.  In  the  meanwhile  never  think  that
the  sweetness  of  the  thought  of  you  can  ever  leave  me,
though  the  loss  of  your  presence  leave  us  grieving.  Yet  we
must  not  doubt  the  power  of  God  to  give  you  even  now  to
our  prayers  and  to  preserve  you  to  us  who  have  such  need
of  you.


764  LETTER CCLXVIII.

LETTER CCLXVII.
To  THE  ABBOT  OF  CLUNY.

Your  son,  Brother  Gaucher,  has  also  become  ours  ac
cording  to  the  rule,  All  mine  are  thine,  and  thine  are
mine  (S.  John  xvii.  10).  Let  him  be  not  less  loved  because
he  is  common  to  us  both,  but,  if  possible,  let  him  be  more
loved  and  held  in  greater  favour;  as  he  is  mine  because
yours,  so  let  him  be  yours  because  mine.


LETTER CCLXVIII.

To  POPE  EUGENIUS.

Bernard  warns  him  of the  promotion  of  a  certain  un
worthy  person  which  had  been  surreptitiously  made.

Let  others  fear  your  majesty  and  scarce  come  with
trembling  lips  and  fingers,  by  long  windings  and  many
turnings,  to  the  business  in  hand.  I,  however,  only  look  to
your  good  and  your  honour,  and,  therefore,  plainly  and
openly  state  my  case,  and  am  not  afraid  to  say,  as  though  to
one  of  ourselves,  without  any  hesitation  or  circumlocution,
what  it  is  necessary  for  the  Apostolic  See  to  do.  I  say
without  any  hesitation  that  you  have  been  grievously
imposed  upon.  Who  has  induced  you  to  thrust  into  an
ecclesiastical  dignity  a  man  stamped  with  ambition,
convicted  of  it,  and  condemned  because  of  it  ?  As  though
it  were  not  enough  by  itself  that  the  man  should  have
wished  to  heap  honours  on  himself !  Is  he  not  the  same
man  that  Bishop  Lambert,1  of  holy  memory,  caught  in
detestable  wickednesses  which  his  ambition  had  urged  him
to,  and  whom  he,  therefore,  solemnly  degraded,  not  only
from  the  rank  that  he  then  held,  but  also,  as  was  fitting,
from  hope  of  all  future  promotion  ?  You  are  simply
revoking  his  sentence.  And  because  of  the  anxiety  of  the

1  He  was  Bishop  of  Angouleme  after  Gerard.  In  this  diocese  was  the
Benedictine  monastery  of  the  Crown.  Lambert  is  praised  in  Vita  Bernardi,  lib.
iv.  n.  29.


LETTER CCLXIX.  765

holy  brethren  of  "The  Crown,"  who  call  to  you  for  this,
because  of  the  respect  due  to  the  holy  and  learned  Bishop,
who  was  the  prime  mover  in  this  matter,  and  also  for
conscience  sake  (conscience,  I  say,  your  own,  not  another's),
there  only  remains  that  to  satisfy  my  own  conscience,  I
remind  you  of  the  saying,  Be  angry  and  sin  not  (Ps.  iv.  5).
For  you  sin  if  you  are  not  angry  with  the  man  that  suggested
such  a  fraud  and  stole  from  you  such  an  unworthy  sentence.


LETTER CCLXIX.

To  THE  SAME.

Bernard  begs  the  Pope  to  regard  as  null  and  of  no  value
a  letter  obtained  from  him  by  surprise.

The  serpent  beguiled  me.  The  crafty,  chameleon-
coloured  man,  destitute  of  righteousness,  afraid  of  an
interview,  the  enemy  of  his  own  conscience,  guilty  of  a
wrong  done  to  his  brother,  got  from  me  unawares
letters  in  his  own  favour  through  the  Bishop  of  Beauvais.1
For  what  is  there  that  I  would  not  do  for  him  ?  If  you  do
not  wish  to  burden  my  conscience  beyond  measure  let  this
cunning  man  gain  nothing  by  his  imposition,  and  let  him
not  by  any  letters  oppress  the  innocent.  And  not  even
this  will  satisfy  me,  if  this  most  malignant  pilferer  and  most
greedy  extortioner  is  not  made  to  suffer  the  punishment
that  he  deserves.


LETTER CCLXX. (A.D. 1151.)
To  THE  SAME.

Bernard  writes  on  behalf  of  the  Prior  of  Chartreux
against  certain  malcontents.  He  reports  the" death  of  the
Abbot  of  Citeaux  and  recommends  his  successor.

i .  Our  tempters  neither  slumber  nor  sleep.  They  have
laid  their  snares  in  the  desert,  even  as  they  but  lately

1  Arnulph  of  Maiole  most  likely  (see  ep.  278).


766  LETTER CCLXX.

persecuted  openly  in  the  mountains.  The  Carthusians  have
been  put  to  confusion.1  They  have  been  put  to  confusion
and  made  to  stagger  like  a  drunken  man,  and  all  their
wisdom  has  been  well-nigh  swallowed  up.  Know,  my  lord,
that  an  enemy  hath  done  this,  and  is  still  doing  it.  He  still
has  confidence  that  the  fruits  of  their  holiness  will  fall  into
his  mouth.  He  has  chosen  them  as  his  food,  as  you  know  welL
He  has  raised  up  traitors  against  those  whom  he  could  not
drive  out  himself,  and  by  their  means  he  attacks  them  with
domestic  and  civil  war.  From  the  first  founding  of  the  place
and  of  the  Order  it  has  never  been  heard  that  anyone  who
went  away  was  to  be  taken  back  without  giving  satisfaction.

1  The  author  of  the  French  Life  of  S.  Bernard  (lib.  vi.  c.  10)  has  stated  the
cause  of  this  as  given  in  the  Life  of  S.  Anthelm,  or  Nanthelm,  who  was  firstly
Prior  of  the  Great  Chartreux  and  then  Bishop  of  Bellay.  It  is  there  said,  "  For
when  the  new  Prior,  Anthelm,  was  endeavouring,  whenever  the  ancient  strict
ness  of  the  Order  had  received  any  loss,  to  have  it  reformed  according  to  the
original  constitutions,  he  strove  to  call  back,  that  they  might  bear  better  fruitr
whomsoever  he  saw  negligent  or  rebellious,  by  kindly  admonitions,  by  words  and
threats,  by  precepts  also,  and  rebukes.  But  if  anyone  refused  to  amend,  and  was
evidently  obstinate,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  expel  him  from  the  society  of  the
brethren.  There  were  some  who  spurned  his  wholesome  instructions  because
they  were  great  in  their  own  eyes,  men  of  a  malicious  disposition,  and  prone  to
strife,  who  did  .not  scruple  to  withstand  him.  But  he  refused  to  submit  to  their
arrogance,  and  expelled  them  from  the  monastery  that  they  might  not  disturb
the  peace  of  the  rest."  Some  of  them,  as  we  can  readily  believe,  fled  to
Eugenius,  got  absolution,  and  were  sent  back  without  any  penance  being  imposed
on  them.  It  is  of  this  that  S.  Bernard  complains  that  "  it  had  not  been  heard
from  the  foundation  of  the  place  that  anyone  who  left  should  be  received  back
without  giving  satisfaction."  Manrique  (Annals,  A.D.  1151,  c.  2)  assigns
another  cause  from  the  Letters  of  Peter  the  Venerable  (B.  vi.  n.  12),  viz.,  the
strife  which,  when  Hugh,  Bishop  of  Grenoble,  was  translated  to  the  Arch
bishopric  of  Vienne,  arose,  A.D.  1151,  on  the  occasion  of  the  new  election  be
tween  the  different  Carthusian  monasteries,  Chartreux,  Durbuy,  Fortes  de  Mailly,
Selve,  and  Anvers.  Some  said  "  that  the  man  elected  ought  not  to  be  made
Bishop,"  and  they  wanted  to  have  the  case  tried  judicially.  Others,  on  the
other  hand,  declared  that  li  it  was  not  their  business  to  go  to  law,  but  only  to
say  what  they  thought,  not  to  have  recourse  to  the  tribunals  to  plead."  But
since  in  this  last  matter  it  is  an  altercation  between  the  monasteries,  which  is
the  question,  not  a  rebellion  of  the  monks,  which  Bernard  implies  in  this  Letter,
this  must  be  referred  rather  to  the  first.  We  refer  them  to  the  year  1151,
because  they  happened  a  little  after  the  death  of  Rainauld,  Abbot  of  Citeaux,
as  appears  from  the  Letter.  He  died  December  i5th,  A.D.  1150,  as  Manrique
proves  from  the  Cistercian  Martyrology  on  the  year  1151,  c.  i.


LKTTER CCLXX.  767

Those  who  did  wrong  in  leaving  have  done  worse  in  their
return,  inasmuch  as  they  have  added  treachery  to  their  mis
doing.  What  do  you  think,  Holy  Father,  that  they  are
likely  to  do,  who  went  out  with  transgression,  and  came
back  in  pride  ?  And  now  their  pride  is  ever  going  higher
(Fs.  Ixxiv.  23).  They  exult  in  their  evil  doing,  they  insult
those  who  suffer  wrong.  They  have  conquered,  they  are
triumphing.  The  Prior  is  now  no  longer  Prior.  "  When  the
wicked  is  lifted  up  the  poor  is  consumed."  He  even  wishes
to  leave  the  Order,  for  he  cannot  bear  to  see  its  destruc
tion.  And  he  would  have  left  ere  now  if  he  could  have  left
alone.  And  the  Prior  must  be  a  good  man,  for  I  hear  from
good  men  that  those  on  whose  advice  he  leans  are  good.

2. Do you see, most gracious father, how you have
been  imposed  on  ? Shall  not  the  author  of  this  deception
receive  what  he  deserves? If  I  know  you  well,  he  will  bear
his  judgment,  whoever  he  is. They  came  to  you  in  sheep's
clothing,  and  their sacred  habit  deceived  you,  for  you  are
but  a  man. Hut now that the  fraud  has  been  discovered,
let  your  zeal  show  itself,  and  boldly  do  its  duty  against  the
wicked. Let  not  your  soul  come  into  their  council,  let  the
counsel  of  Ahithophel  be  confounded. Watch  over  your
self. To  be  imposed  on  through  ignorance,  and  to  let  zeal
sleep  are  not  alike  in their  guilt. Ignorance  is  the  excuse
for  the  one, negligence  makes  the  other  inexcusable. He
will,  perhaps,  take  another  ground,  and  try  to  persuade  you
of  something  else. Let  his  iniquity  lie  against  himself  and
not  against  my  lord,  for  the  truth  of  the  case  is  as  I  have
stated  it. Nothing  is  pleasanter,  nothing  more  just  in  your
judgments, than when an occasion of  this sort presents
itself,  when  a  man  is  ende  avouring  to  injure  others,  that  he
should  fall  into  the  pit  that  he  himself  made,  and  that  his
mischief  should  come  upon Jiis  own  liead , ami  Jus  wicked
ness  fall  on  his  own  pate  (Ps.  vii.  16, 17). The  zeal  of  the
Lord  will  do  this. And  the  Prior  will  again  be  made  Prior,
I hope, so  that iniquity may not  altogether  boast itself;
else  (and this  is  no  empty  fear)  the Order  will  not  long
remain  safe  if  the  Prior  be  not  restored  to  his  office. May


LETTER CCLXX.

God  give  you  the  grace  to  receive  this  as  a  father,  and  to
give  a  good  answer  for  our  comfort,  for  we  have  been
greatly  harassed  and  afflicted  beyond  our  strength.

3.  My  Lord  Abbot  of  Citeaux1  has  gone  from  us,  to  the
great  loss  of  the  Order.  And  now  we  have  as  head  in  his
place,  Goswin,  Abbot  of  Bonneval.  Let  it  be  your  pleasure
to  strengthen  him  with  letters  from  the  Apostolic  See,  and
by  your  favour  to  confirm  his  election.  You  know  him,
and  there  is  no  need  to  commend  him  to  you,  for  his  life
and  the  wisdom  given  him  by  God  are  a  sufficient  recom
mendation.  My  lord  of  Valence  is  better,  and  when  he  is
able  he  performs  good  works.  Besides,  all  lovers  of  good
love  him,  and  he  them.  From  this  his  goodness  is  plain.
It  is  yours  to  love  and  cherish  such  men.  Your  son  is  more
feeble  than  usual,  his  life  is  ebbing  drop  by  drop,  perhaps
because  he  is  not  worthy  of  being  killed  at  a  blow,  and  so
coming  quickly  to  life.


LETTER CCLXXI. (A.D. 1151.)

To THEOBALD, COUNT OF CHAMPAGNE.

Bernard  warns  him  that  he  ought  not  to  advance  his  young
son  to  dignities  in the Church.

You  know  how  much  I  love  you,  but  how  much  God
knows  better  than  you.  I  do  not  doubt  also  that  for  the
sake  of  God  I  am  beloved  by  you.  And  if  I  should  offend
Him  you  ought  no  longer  to  love  me,  for  God  would  not  be
on  my  side.  For  who  am  I  that  so  great  a  prince  as  you
should  care  for  one  so  small  as  I,  unless  it  is  that  you
believe  God  to  be  in  me  ?  Therefore  to  offend  Him  will  not
be  good  for  you.  And  this  I  shall  certainly  do,  if  I  do  what
you  ask.  For  I  am  not  unaware  that  honours  and  eccle
siastical  dignities  are  the  due  of  those  who  have  both  the  will
and  the  power  to  administer  them  worthily,  and  for  God.
Moreover,  you  must  know  that  it  is  neither  right  for  you,
nor  safe  for  me,  that  those  should  be  acquired  for  your  little
1  Reynold  died  A.D.  1151,  and  was  succeeded  by  Goswin,  Abbot  of  Bonneval.


LETTER CCLXXI.  769

boy  by  my  prayers,  or  by  yours.1  And,  moreover,  in  most
churches  it  is  unlawful  even  for  an  adult  to  hold  pluralities,
except  under  dispensation  given,  either  because  of  some
great  necessity  of  the  Church,  or  great  individual  benefit.
Wherefore,  if  this  reply  seem  to  you  ungracious,  and  you
are  determined  to  carry  out  what  you  have  in  your  mind,
spare  me  in  this  matter,  for,  unless  I  mistake,  you  can  easily
obtain  what  you  want  by  yourself  and  by  your  other  friends.
And  so  you  will  none  the  less  gain  what  you  wish,  and  I
shall  not  have  sinned.  Assuredly,  I  wish  well  in  all  things
to  our  little  William,2  but,  above  all,  that  he  may  have  the
favour  of  (iod.  Thence  it  is  that  I  am  unwilling  that  he
should  have  anything  against  the  law  of  God,  lest  he  lose
God's  favour.  And  if  another  wish  differently,  I  am  un
willing  that  he  should  gain  it  through  me,  lest  I,  too,  lose
God.  But  when  he  wants  anything  which  he  can  have
according  to  God's  will,  I  will  prove  myself  a  friend,  and,  if
need  be,  will  not  withhold  my  efforts.  I  need  not  labour
much  to  excuse  my  righteous  dealing  before  a  lover  of
righteousness.  Please  excuse  me  to  your  Countess,3  in
accordance  with  this  reply  of  mine.

1  We  must  notice  and  admire  in  this  Letter  the  signal  virtue,  zeal,  and  con
stancy  of  the  Saint,  who,  in  a  matter  which  he  felt  was  contrary  to  the  interests
of  the  Church  and  to  his  own  conscience,  refused  to  comply  with  the  request  of
a  great  prince  like  Theobald,  to  whom  he  was  greatly  indebted  as  a  liberal
benefactor  to  Clairvaux.  Bernard  (ep.  42  n.  25)  ]  complains  bitterly  that  boys
are  promoted  to  ecclesiastical  dignities  because  of  their  high  birth,  and  that
pluralities  are  allowed.  It  is  extant  among  his  tractates,  the  second  in  order,
Vol.  ii.

8  This  was  the  fourth  son  of  Theobald  ;  he  was  raised  first  to  the  See  of
Chartres,  then  to  Sens,  then  to  Rheims,  and  finally  was  made  Cardinal  and
Legate  of  the  Roman  Church  in  Gaul.  He  consecrated  his  nephew,  Philip
Augustus  ;  it  was  to  gratify  him  that  Alexander  III.  confirmed  to  the  See  of
Rheims  the  right  of  consecrating  the  French  King.  Pet.  Cell,  writes  of  him
(ep.  5  lib.  i);  Peter  of  Blois,  epp.  28  and  122,  and  others.

3  This  was  Matilda,  daughter  of  Count  Engelbert,  brother  of  the  Bishop  of
Ratisbon,  as  appears  from  the  Life  of  Norl-ert,  c.  32,  where  we  read  :  "  Norbert
took  the  legate  of  Count  Theobald  to  Ratisbon.  For  the  Bishop  of  that  State
was  of  noble  birth,  and  his  brother  was  the  powerful  Count  Engelbert,  who  had
some  grown  up  unmarried  daughters,  one  of  whom,  Matilda  by  name  (Orderic
sub  finem  lib.  13)  was  espoused  to  Count  Theobald."


770  A LETTER OF POPE EUGENIUS

LETTER  CCLXXII.  (A.D.  1152.)

TO THE BISHOP OF LAON.1
Bernard  presses  him  to  show  pious  liberality.

I  am  yours.  If  you  know  this,  nay,  because  you  know
it,  the  bearer  of  this  can  be  effectually  and  surely  reconciled
by  me  to  you,  and  through  you  to  everyone  else  that  he
may  have  offended.  Otherwise  you  offend  one  whom  you
admit  to  be  your  friend,  and  this,  surely,  you  dare  not  do.
Since  you  first  became  a  Bishop  till  now,  I  have  received
no  blessing  from  you,  neither  purse,  nor  scrip,  nor  sandals
for  the  feet.


A LETTER OF POPE EUGENIUS TO THE
CISTERCIAN CHAPTER.

(To  WHICH EP.  CCLXXIII. WAS  AN  ANSWEK).

EUGENIUS,  Bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his
beloved  children  G.,2  and  all  the  Abbots  assembled  at
Citeaux,  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  health  and  Apostolic
benediction.

i.  We  should  much  like,  dearly  beloved,  to  be  present  in
person  at  the  meeting  of  your  holy  brotherhood,  because,
as  we  walk  with  you  in  the  unity  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  so
would  we  discuss  together  His  life-giving  power,  and  His
advances  in  the  soul.  But  since  we  have  been,  by  the
Divine  will,  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean  to  guide  the
ark  of  the  Church,  and  as  we  are  tossed  about  by  a  succession
of  raging  storms,  so  that  we  have  to  do,  not  what  we  would
wish,  but  what  we  wish  not ;  and  as  we  are  tied  by  the
duties  of  the  government  entrusted  to  us,  and  cannot,
therefore,  turn  our  steps  wheresoever  we  will,  we  come  to

1  This  was  Walter  of  S.  Maurice,  formerly  Abbot  of  S.  Martin  at  Laon,  who,
A.D.  1151,  was  appointed  to  succeed  the  pious  Bishop  Bartholomew,  who,  after
an  episcopate  of  33  years,  retired  to  the  Cistercian  Abbey  of  Foigny,  which  he
had  himself  founded. There  is  extant  a  beautiful  Letter  of  his to Samson,
Archbishop  of  Rheims,  in  which  from  his  retreat  at  Foigny  he  clears  himself
from  the  accusation  of  having  wasted  the  goods  of  the  Church  at  Laon.

2  Goswin,  fifth  Abbot  of  Citeaux.


TO THK CISTKRCIAN CHAPTER.  771

you  in  spirit  and  by  letter,  and,  so  far  as  is  possible,  are
present  in  your  assembly  in  charity  and  earnest  desire  for
you  ;  we  desire,  indeed,  and  pray  you  with  our  whole  heart
to  be  of  one  mind  with  us,  and  to  implore  by  your  common
prayers  a  greater  gift  of  God's  grace  for  us.  Though
stationed  on  the  top  of  a  mountain,  and  beaten  by  the
winds  that  blow  from  every  quarter,  yet  we  hope  by  God's
help  to  be  able  to  withstand  the  tempest,  if  we  merit  to
obtain  God's  help  through  your  prayers.  But  that  we  may
be  able  to  have  confidence  that  your  prayers  for  us  are
heard,  and  that  we  may  obtain  by  your  intercessions  what
we  cannot  obtain  by  our  merits,  we  wish  you  of  your
charity,  in  those  things  which  belong  to  God,  such  as  the
obedience  due  to  the  Order,  and  the  maintenance  of  dis
cipline,  to  be  anxiously  looking  forward  to  those  things
which  are  before,  neglecting  what  is  behind,  so  that  no
cloud  may  show  itself  in  your  works,  to  prevent  your
prayers  at  any  time  from  rising  to  the  throne  of  God.

2.  And,  therefore,  as  you  come  together,  dearly  beloved,
take  common  counsel  to  correct  whatever  amongst  some  of
you  needs  correction,  and  to  enact  whatever  may  need
enactment  for  the  salvation  of  souls  and  the  good  of  your
Order,  because  he  who  despises  little  things,  by  little  and
little  decays  (Ecclus.  xix.  i),  and  do  not  leave  uncorrected
any  lesser  faults  you  may  find  among  yourselves.  For  to
no  purpose  are  the  gates  of  the  city  guarded  if  a  single
opening  is  left  to  the  enemy,  as  the  Scripture  says,  A  leak
neglected  is  as  bad  as  a  violent  wind,  and  You  have  escaped
threat  perils ;  see  that  you  do  not  perish  on  the  beach.
Look,  I  beseech  you,  to  the  ancient  fathers  who  founded
our  sacred  Order,  and  notice  how  they  left  the  world,
despised  all  earthly  things,  let  the  dead  bury  their  dead,
fled  into  solitude,  and  sat  with  Mary  at  the^feet  of  Jesus
(S.  Luke  x.  39),  while  others  were  busying  themselves  in
their  various  ministries  ;  and  so  the  further  they  had  fled
from  Egypt  the  more  copious  showers  of  heavenly  manna
did  they  receive.  They  truly  went  forth  from  their  land
and  from  their  kindred  ;  they  forgat  their  own  people  and


772  A LETTER OF POPE EUGENIUS.

their  father's  house ;  and  since  their  King  greatly  desired
their  beauty  He  made  them  to  increase  into  a  great  nation,
and  He  sent  out  their  shoots  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  so
that  the  brightness  of  their  charity  filled  the  whole  body  of
the  Church,  and  the  woman  of  Zarephath  (i  Kings  xvii.
10-16)  at  their  words  filled  numberless  vessels  with  the
little  oil  which  she  had  in  a  cruse.  Truly  they  received  the
first  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  and  their  pleasant  ointment  has  run
down  even  to  us.

3.  See,  then,  in  thought  and  deed  that  you  do  not  fall
below  their  virtues,  but  that  you  be  in  the  bough  what  you
were  in  the  seed,  and  bring  forth  the  same  seed  and  fruit
as  did  they  from  whom  you  received  your  life.  Take  notice
how  they  whose  lamps  are  extinguished  desire  to  receive
oil  from  you,  and  how  many,  who  have  become  filthy  by
wallowing,  like  sows,  in  their  own  mire,  ask  to  be  placed
under  your  rule  and  to  be  commended  to  your  prayers,  that
they  may  receive  grace  from  above.  And  since  the  children
of  this  world  are  always  endeavouring  to  drag  you  against
your  will  into  obedience  to  them,  and  sometimes  wish  to
call  you  from  the  quiet  of  contemplation  and  the  silence  of
the  desert  to  take  part  in  their  affairs,  recall  to  your
memory  the  institutions  of  your  fathers,  and,  looking  upon
them  as  examples  for  all  time,  prefer  to  be  doorkeepers  in
the  house  of  God  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  ungodliness
(Ps.  Ixxxiv.  n).  And  because  you  have  nothing  which  you
did  not  receive,  think  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord,  of  your
own  unworthiness,  so  as  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  Him
who  said,  When  ye  have  done  all  that  is  commanded  you,
say  we  are  unprofitable  servants  (S.  Luke  xvii.  10).  If  you
have  received  diversities  of  tongues,  grace  for  working
healings,  knowledge  of  prophesying,  if  your  words  are
more  fragrant  than  the  most  costly  ointments,  if  the  world
honours  you  and  takes  pleasure  in  running  in  the  odour  of
your  ointments,  it  is  all  nothing  but  the  work  of  Him  who
says,  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work  (S.  John
v.  17).


LETTER  CCLXXIII.  773

LETTER CCLXXIII. (A.D. 1150.)
To  POPE  EUGENIUS.

Bernard  thanks  the  Pope  for  the  affectionate  letter  he
liad  sent  to  the  Chapter  of  Citeaux.

To  his  loving  father  and  lord,  EUGENIUS,  by  the  grace  of
God  Supreme  Pontiff,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  sends  humble  greeting.

i.  The  voice  of  the  turtle  has  been  heard  in  our  Chapter  ;
we  have  exulted  and  rejoiced.  Your  words  are  pure,  burn
ing  with  zeal,  prudent  and  discerning.  The  spirit  of  life
breathes  in  your  letters,  a  spirit  mighty,  thundering,  chiding,
and  provoking  us  with  a  godly  jealousy.  I  cannot  say
which  pleased  me  most,  your  graciousness  or  our  benefit ;
the  condescension  of  your  majesty,  or  the  exaltation  of
our  humility  ;  the  sharpness  of  your  severity,  or  the  sooth
ing  sweetness  of  your  fatherly  love.  Those  amongst  us
who  in  any  small  degree  were  hungering  after  righteous
ness  were  refreshed ;  those  who  cared  little  for  it  were
moved ;  those  who  cared  nothing  were  confounded.1  1
beseech  you  to  act  in  this  way  always.  That  care  which
you  are  bound  to  take  for  all,  is  not  to  be  withdrawn,  nay,
rather  it  is  the  more  anxiously  to  be  given  to  those  whose
special  due  it  is.  Charity  is  kind  and  can  spread  itself
abroad,  but  not  diminish  aught.  Let  her  call  together
others,  then,  but  let  it  be  in  our  company.  It  specially
becomes  your  Apostleship  to  cherish  all  who  can  say  with  the
Apostles,  Lo  !  we  have  left  all  and  followed  Thee  (S.  Matt.
xix.  27).  They  ought  not  to  be  left  who  have  left  them
selves.  They  are  the  Lord's  little  ones,  and  put  their  trust
in  Him  ;  they  will  not  be  abandoned  by  a  faithful  and  wise
servant,  least  of  all  by  Him  to  whom  the  whole  has  been
entrusted.  This  little  flock  is  a  part  of  the  "whole,  little,
indeed,  but,  unless  I  am  mistaken,  they  have  merited  to

1  These  three  classes  are  found  in  every  Order,  no  matter  how  holy  it  may  be,
and  chaff  will  never  be  wanting  in  the  Lord's  threshing-floor.  See  Sermon  3
on  the  Ascension  ;  Sermon  on  the  Dedication  of  a  Church,  n.  3  ;  Sermon  30,
"  de  Diversis,"  n.  i  ;  and  Sermon  46,  on  Canticles,  n.  6.


774  LETTER CCLXXIII.

have  God  for  their  Father,  and  they  will  receive  a  crown  of
glory  from  the  hand  of  their  Lord,  and  a  diadem  from
Him  in  the  Kingdom  of  their  God.  For  they  do  not  think
it  robbery  to  be  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ.
They  have  heard  the  words :  Fear  not  little  flock,  it  is
your  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom
(S.  Luke.  xii.  32).  Enough  of  this.

2.  The  Abbot  of  Trois-Fontaines1  had  been  planted  well
beside  the  streams  of  waters.  But  I  am  afraid  that  a  good
tree  bringing  forth  good  fruit  may,  when  taken  up,  bring
forth  none.  I  have  sometimes  seen  a  vine  fruitful  when
first  planted,  then  barren.  I  have  seen  a  tree  when  well
planted  flourish,  and  when  transplanted  wither  away.  And,
therefore,  if  you  do  not  send  him  back  to  me  you  will  wound
my  feelings  grievously,  for  we  are  one  heart  and  one  soul.
As  long  as  that  heart  is  divided,  each  part  must  necessarily
be  stained  with  its  own  blood.  How  shall  I,  having  lost  the
prop  of  my  old  age,  be  able  to  bear  alone  the  burden  which

1  This  Hugh,  to  whom  the  following  Letter  was  written,  was  Abbot  of  Trois-
Fontaines,  in  Champagne,  not  of  S.  Anastasius,  at  Trois-Fontaines,  near  Rome,
whatever  Wion,  Ciaconius,  and  others  may  say  to  the  contrary.  In  the  first
place,  the  name  of  "  Three  Fountains,"  especially  at  that  time,  is  restricted  to
the  Abbey  in  Champagne,  as  appears  from  S.  Bernard's  life,  and  from  the  head
ing  of  ep.  69  to  the'Abbot  of  Trois-Fontaines,  while  the  monastery  at  Rome  was
wont  to  be  called  after  the  name  of  S.  Anastasius,  as  is  proved  by  the  inscrip
tion  of  ep.  345,  "to  the  Brethren  of  S.  Anastasius."  In  the  second  place,
Rualene,  who  had  been  Prior  of  Clairvaux,  was  then  Abbot  of  S.  Anastasius,
as  is  seen  from  epp.  245,  258,  and  the  two  following,  as  well  as  from
•ep.  43  of  Nicholas  of  Clairvaux,  to  Rualene,  Abbot  of  S.  Anastasius.
Besides  this,  the  next  Letter  of  S.  Bernard's  (274)  is  directed  to  "Hugh,
Abbot  of  Trois-Fontaines,  when  he  was  at  Rome,"  which  clearly  implies  that
his  monastery  was  at  some  little  distance  from  Rome.  Moreover,  Bernard  in
this  Letter,  273,  tells  Eugeniusthat  he  is  inconvenienced  because  Hugh  had  been
summoned  to  Rome,  doubtless  to  be  made  Cardinal ;  and  he  adds  that  he  will
suffer  great  loss  if  he  is  not  sent  back  to  him.  This  Hugh,  then,  was  an  Abbot
in  Gaul.  Lastly,  from  ep.  274,  it  appears  that  Bernard,  who  was  then  in  Gaul,
was  present  to  take  part  in  the  election  of  a  successor  to  Hugh.  Again,  Hugh,
A.D.  i  150,  was  made  by  Eugenius,  in  the  third  creation,  Cardinal-Bishop  of
Ostia,  and  at  the  same  time  Ciaconius  says  two  other  monks  of  Clairvaux  were
raised  to  the  same  dignity,  whose  names  were  Henry  and  Roland ;  it  then
happened  that  Velletri  was  united  to  Ostia  because  of  the  small  population  of  the
Jatter.  Hugh  is  mentioned  again  in  epp.  274,  287,  290,  296,  306,  and  307.


LETTER CCLXXIV.  775

we  found  it  heavy  to  bear  together?  If  my  trouble  is  of
little  account  let  the  no  small  loss  of  the  whole  Order  touch
you,  and  do  not  wish,  from  the  hope  of  some  uncertain
good,  to  bring  about  in  the  meanwhile  evils  that  are  certain.
But  if.  finally,  you  determine  to  keep  him,  I  beseech  you,
hold  him  in  great  esteem,  and  lift  up  your  hands  to  God
that  He  would  vouchsafe  to  provide  that  house  with  a  suit
able  man  in  his  place.  As  to  the  rest,  I  earnestly  ask  for  a
speedy  answer  from  your  Benignity,  and  one  of  deed,  not
word,  to  those  matters  concerning  the  whole  Order,  and
the  other  businesses  which  I  thought  it  good  to  entrust
to  the  above-named  Abbot  to  convey  to  you.


LETTER CCLXXIV. (A.D. 1151.)

To  HUGH,  ABBOT  OF  TROIS-FONTAINKS,  WHEN  HE  WAS

AT  ROME.

Bernard  regrets  to  have  recommended  the  nephew  of  the
Bishop  of  Anxerre.

I  am  sorry  that  I  wrote  on  behalf  of  that  youth,  and  I
wish,  if  possible,  my  prayer  to  be  recalled,  for  by  it  I  seem
to  have  approved  the  decision  of  my  friend1  about  the
office  of  provost  conferred  by  him,  and  badly  assigned,  too.
And  this  I  do  not  approve,  nor  have  ever  done  so.  But  I
was  induced,  I  admit,  by  the  great  affection  with  which  I
was  bound  to  the  youth's  uncle,  an  affection  very  great
indeed,  but  in  this  case  not  spiritual  enough.  I  was  urged
on,  too,  by  my  sorrow  for  his  recent  death.  I  may  seem  to
have  acted  carelessly,  but  I  would  rather  be  thought  by  my
lord  to  have  written  too  hastily  than  be  suspected  before
God  of  having  been  guilty  of  falsehood.  Although  indeed,
it  would  be  no  excuse  even  if  I  had  written  with  caution
and  foresight,  for  I  knew  for  a  certainty  that"  his  two  pre
decessors  had  ordered  it  otherwise,  and  had  confirmed  it
otherwise  by  their  authority.  But  if  you  have  any  influence
with  him  you  will  do  a  good  work  if  you  can  restore  her
1  Hugh,  Bishop  of  Auxcrrc.


776  LETTER CCLXXV.

privileges  to  the  Church,  and  give  force  to  those  privileges.
Would  that  we  could  purge  the  holy  Bishop  from  this  blot
on  his  line,  and  provide  for  the  youth  in  other  ways.


LETTER  CCLXXV.  (A.D. 1151.)
To  POPE  EUGENIUS,  ABOUT  THE  ELECTION  OF  A  BISHOP

AT AUXERRE.

He  makes  the  Pope  aware  of  the  bad  faith  which  had  been
shown  in  this  election.

When  I  first  wrote  to  you  about  the  church  at  Auxerre  I
had  heard  of  the  first  election,  but  not  of  the  second.  And
lo  !  just  as  if  I  were  a  prophet,  the  scandal  which  I  suspected
has  followed,  and  the  fear  which  I  feared  has  come.  Recol
lect  what  took  place  at  Nevers,1  and  see  if  it  is  not  in  like
manner,  by  a  very  similar  artifice,  by  double-dealing,
and,  as  they  say,  with  the  very  same  person  as  pro
moter,  that  a  second  election  has  now  been  ventured
on  :  when,  after  one  candidate  was  nominated,  both  were
rejected,  and  finally  a  third,  whom  they  wished  to  elect,
craftily  brought  forward.  They  sent  to  me  to  ask  me
to  write  to  you  on  their  behalf,  and  I  thought  it  good
to  send  a  brother  from  my  side,  to  learn  something
more  certain  about  both  actions,  and  to  acquaint  me  with
the  facts.  When  he  had  entered  the  church,  and  made
diligent  inquiries  about  everything,  he  found  on  the  testi
mony  of  all  who  had  come  together  that  there  were  on
that  side  none  of  the  presbyters  except  one,  viz.,  Hugh,
the  brother  of  Brother  Geoffrey,'2  and  none  of  the  deacons
except  Stephen  only ;  I  must  except,  of  course,  those
officials  of  the  church  who  had  been  the  chief  agents  in  the

1  This  is  repeated  at  the  end  of  the  next  Letter. He  refers  to  the  disturbances
which  took  place  at  the  election  of  Raymond,  Bishop  of  Nevers. Cf.  ep.  246.

2  He  seems  to  have  been  the  candidate  of  the  turbulent  party  ;  but  at  length  the
election  of  Alan  was  accepted. He  was  Abbot  of  the  Cistercian  monastery  of
La  Rivour,  in  the  Diocese  of  Troyes,  and  wrote  a  short  life  of  S.  Bernard. In  the
Acts  of  the  Bishops  of  Auxerre  the  See  is  said  to  have  been  vacant  for  a  year.
See  ep.  280  and  282,  etc.,  and  De  Consideratione,  lib.  iii.  n.  n.


LETTKR CCLXXVI.  777

matter,  the  precentor,  the  archdeacon,  and,  as  it  seemed,
the  treasurer,  for  he  was  not  himself  present  at  the  time.
Further,  he  found  that  there  were  on  the  other  side,  be
sides  others  of  the  lower  order,  nine  deacons  and  eleven
presbyters.  The  twelfth,  who  is  also  arch-priest,  declared
that  he  had  not  subscribed,  and  would  not  subscribe,  for
either  side,  although  he  was  in  favour  of  the  first.  The
above-named  Hugh  held  the  seal  of  the  church,1  a  man  not
of  peace,  but  of  discord,  and  one  who  in  giving  his  account
paid  more  attention  to  his  own  wishes  than  to  the  truth.
So  the  matter  stands.  And  with  my  usual  presumption  1
say  one  thing :  wickedness  ought  not  to  be  allowed  to
boast  itself,  it  is  unseemly  for  wisdom  to  be  deceived,
inexpedient  for  a  church  to  have  its  functions  longer
suspended.

LETTER  CCLXXVI. (A.D. 1151.)

To  THE  SAME,  AFTER THE DEATH  OE  THE  BISHOP  OE

AUXERRE.

He  informs  the  Pope  of  a  strange  will  made  bv  the  Bishop.

i.  I  have  a  point  to  mention,  which  I  would  have  brought
before  you  earlier,  if  I  had  known  what  I  now  know.  There
is  a  man  who  has  made  Israel  to  sin.  He,  I  mean,  who,
when  the  holy  Bishop-  was  somewhat  dull  and  confused  in
the  presence  of  death,  made  him  die  almost  intestate.  For
on  the  suggestion  and  entreaty  of  Stephen  he  left  to  his
nephew  according  to  the  flesh,  a  young  man,  and  a  secular,
incapable  of  being  of  service  to  the  Church,  almost  all  that
he  had  got  together  for  the  episcopal  table,  and  left  little
or  nothing  for  the  poor  and  the  churches.  They  say  that
he  has  left  him  seven  churches,  tithes,  and  the  meadows  in
the  Bishop's  own  forest,  besides,  which  is  a  blot  on  all
religion,  of  his  moveables,  all  his  vessels  of  gold,  and  his

1  It  appears  from  this  that  the Bishop  and  the  Cathedral  of  Auxerre had
different  seals.

2  That  is  Hugh,  who,  from  being  first  Abbot  of  Pontigny,  became  Bishop  of
Auxerre. He  died  Oct.  10,  A.U.  1151.

VOL. II.  50


778  LETTER CCLXXVI.

own  equipages,  and  since  these  would  not  be  enough  to
enable  him  to  complete  a  journey  to  you  to  get  these
bequests  confirmed,  they  say  that  he  has  left  orders  for  the
equipages  of  a  monastery  to  be  handed  over  to  him.  There
are  some,  indeed,  who  think  that  the  Bishop  knew  nothing  of
these  bequests,  but  that  Stephen  did  all  and  set  his  seal  to
what  he  liked,  and  it  is  very  likely  ;  for  only  last  year,  when
the  Bishop  was,  as  was  thought,  at  the  point  of  death,  they
made  him  give  a  church  to  this  same  nephew ;  but  when
he  afterwards  recovered  he  declared,  as  I  have  found  out,
that  he  knew  nothing  of  having  made  the  donation.  Again,
who  can  believe  that  a  holy  and  spiritual  man,  if  he  had  his
understanding,  and  was  in  his  right  mind,  would  have  made
a  will  like  this  ?  What  man  of  the  world  is  there  who  would
say  that  this  was  the  will  of  a  priest?  Is  this  the  disposi
tion  of  that  sober  and  spiritual  man  who  adjudges  all  things
and  is  himself  judged  by  none  ?  Who  in  heaven  or  in  earth
would  not  sit  in  judgment  on  him  if  this  is  to  remain  so?

2.  Dothou,then,  O  servant  of  God  who  holdest  the  sword
of  Peter,  cut  off  this  shameful  confusion  from  religion,  this
scandal  from  the  Church,  this  crime  from  the  Bishop,  and
from  all  spiritually-minded  men  who  loved  him  in  the  spirit
and  not  according  to  the  flesh,  and  take  bitterness  and
grief  from  your  own  heart.  Arise,  Phinehas,  stand  and
make  propitiation  that  the  plague  may  cease.  Stand,  I
say,  inflexible  against  flesh  and  blood,  the  battering  ram
by  which  undoubtedly  the  children  of  this  world  attempt
to  shake  the  wall  of  your  constancy.  You  will  show  true
affection  for  the  uncle  if  in  a  matter  of  this  kind  you  oppose
the  nephew.

3.  Know  this  also,  that  the  holy  men,  the  Dean  of  S.
Peter  at  Auxerre  and  the  Prior  of  S.  Eusebius,  acting  for
himself  as  well  as  for  the  Abbot  of  S.  Laurence,  when  ready
to  set  out  to  you  to  lay  before  you  the  first  election  of  the
Church  of  Auxerre,  were  prevented  by  the  opposite  party
through  the  Count  of  Nevers,1  and  deterred  from  coming.

1  William  IV.,  who  succeeded  his  father  on  his  retirement  to  Chartreux,  A.D.
1147. Of.  ep.  280  and  note.


LKTTER CCLXXVI.


779


Indeed,  the  Count  himself  summoned  them  to  him,  and
commanded  them  not  to  think  of  it,  and  prohibited  them
with  grievous  and  open  threatenings,  and  this  the  Prior
made  known  to  me  and  complained  of  by  the  above-named
abbot,  and  his  brother  according  to  the  flesh,  and  by  the
Dean  sent  to  us  about  this  same  matter,  and  he  asks  me  by
them  to  bring  it  before  you.  I  said  before,  and  I  repeat  it,
recollect  what  took  place  at  Nevers.  The  law  is  sometimes
best  observed  when  something  is  done  contrary  to  law.
Those  who  discourse  wisely  about  your  Keys,  place  the
one  in  discretion,  but  the  other  in  power.


LETTER CCLXXVII. (A.D. 1146.)
To  THE  SAME,  ON  BEHALF  OE  THE  ABBOT  OF  CLUNY. '

He  asks  that  the  Abbot  of  Cluny  may  be  received  honour
ably  and  kindly.

It  seems  a  foolish  thing  to  write  to  you  on  behalf  of  the
Abbot  of  Cluny,  and  to  seem  to  wish  to  act  as  patron  for  a
man  whom  all  wish  to  have  as  their  patron.  But  I  write,
not  because  it  is  necessary  for  him,  but  to  satisfy  my  own
affection  for  him  ;  my  own,  I  say,  not  another's,  for  as  I
cannot  be  with  him  in  person  I  follow  my  friend  on  his
journey  by  letter.  Who  shall  separate  us  ?  Neither  the
height  of  the  Alps,  nor  the  cold  of  the  snows,  nor  the  length
of  the  journey.  And  now  I  am  present  with  him  to  help
him  by  my  letters.  He  shall  never  be  without  me.  I  am  a

1  S.  Bernard  gave  this  Letter  commendatory  to  Peter  the  Venerable,  who  was
going  to  Eugenius  to  receive  some  mark  of  honour  at  his  hands.  He  mentions
this  journey  in  lib.  ii.,  De  Miraculis,  c.  25,  where  he  says:  "In  the  first  year  of  the
Pontificate  of  Pope  Eugenius  I  went  to  Rome  to  see  both  him  and  our  common
mother  the  Roman  Church."  And  again,  writing  to  Bernard  (lib.  vi.,  ep.  46),
he  says  :  "  I  saw  him  (that  is,  Eugenius)  at  Rome  in  the  first  "year  of  his  Ponti
ficate."  It  was  on  this  journey  that  he  was  stripped  of  his  goods  by  the  Marquis
Opizrn  on  his  way  through  Italy.  He  recovered  everything,  however,  afterwards
by  the  help  of  the  men  of  Placentia.  (See  lib.  vi.,  ep.  44.)  He  paid  another
visit  to  Eugenius,  however,  A.D.  1 1 5  i,  and  in  a  Letter  to  S.  Bernard  bears  witness
to  the  kindness  of  his  reception,  and  Bernard's  good  offices  on  this  occasion.


780  LETTER CCLXXVII.

debtor  to  his  worth,  by  which  I  have  been  counted  worthy
to  be  admitted  to  such  a  degree  of  grace.  But  grace  itself
has  freed  me  from  the  debt,  for  necessity  has  passed  into
will.  Honour  the  man  as  one  who  is  truly  an  honourable
member  of  Christ ;  unless  I  am  mistaken  he  is  a  vessel  for
honour,  full  of  grace  and  truth,  filled  writh  all  good  works.
Send  him  back  with  joy,  that  he  may  rejoice  very  many  by
his  return.  Hold  him  worthy  of  more  grace,  as  indeed  he
is,  so  that  when  he  returns  we  may  all  receive  of  his  fulness.
If  he  asks  anything  of  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus
he  ought  not  to  meet  with  any  difficulty.  For  if  you  do  not
know  it,  let  me  say  that  he  it  is  who  is  always  stretching
out  a  helping  hand  to  the  poor  of  our  Order ;  he  cheerfully
and  frequently  distributes  for  food  the  goods  of  his  church,
as  far  as  he  can  by  the  consent  of  his  brethren.  Notice
why  I  say  "  in  the  Name  of  Jesus."  For  if,  as  I  suspect  and
tVar,  he  seeks  to  be  set  free  from  the  government  of  his
Order,  who  that  knows  him  can  think  that  he  asks  in  the
name  of  Jesus  ?  I  am  mistaken  if  he  is  not  oppressed  by
fear  more  than  usual,  if  he  has  not  become  better  than  him
self  since  you  saw  him.  Moreover,  almost  from  the  time
that  he  entered  on  his  office  he  is  known  to  have  improved
the  Order  in  many  ways,  e.g.,  in  the  observance  of  fasting
and  of  silence,  and  in  the  care  he  takes  for  precious  and
curious  vestments.


LETTER CCLXXVIIL (A.D. 1150.)
To  THE  SAME,  FOR  THE  BISHOP  OF  BEAuvAis.1

There  is  no  need  that  one  should  teach  you  how  worthy
is  the  Bishop  of  Beauvais,  your  son,  to  obtain  his  petitions.
He  himself  will  easily  enough  persuade  your  fatherly  affec-

1  Henry,  brother  of  Louis  the  Younger,  and  afterwards  Archbishop  of  Rheims.
Cf.  epp.  269,  305,  and  307.  Honorius  II.  took  him  at  the  hand  of  his  father
Louis  for  the  service  of  God,  for  which  see  his  Letter  (in  Spicil.,  Vol.  iii.  p.  150),
where  there  is  another  following  it  of  King  Louis'  to  the  Apostolic  Legate  about
giving  this  same  Henry  a  prebend  in  the  Church  of  Pontoise.  He  was  Abbot  of
S.  Mary  at  Etampes,  and  also  Archdeacon  of  Orleans.


LETTER CCLXXVIII.  781

tion  what  it  is  meet  and  right  to  do.  Still  I  plead  for  him.
He  is  a  devoted  young  man,  fit  to  be  honoured  by  his
lather's  favour,  and  the  righteous  zeal  which  he  displays  for
his  church  should  be  not  only  approved,  but  also  assisted.
So  will  he  daily  become  more  devoted,  more  fervent,  and
•more  strong,  as  he  feels  that  the  vexations  and  tribulations
which  are  always  harassing  his  church1  from  evil  men  arc-
directly  lessened  by  the  unfailing  help  of  your  right  hand.
J  ask,  too,  that  the  petition  of  Arnulph  of  Mai'ole  be  granted.
Master  G. — ,  this  is  the  messenger's  name,  will  tell  you
what  it  is.  As  to  the  petition  of  the  Abbess  of  the  Para
clete,'2  you  can  ascertain  for  yourself  if  it  is  a  Fitting  one,
and  if  it  is  fitting  to  grant  it.

1  This  comes  out  in  two  Letters  of  Anselm  to  Urban  II.  (lib.  ii.,  epp.  33  and
^4). See  also  ep.  87  for  what  Ivo,  Bishop  of  Chartres,  says  of  the  state  of  the
<Jhurch  of  Beauvais. Me  says:  "The  said  Church of  Beauvais  has  so  long
given  up  the  practice  of  having  good  pastors  that  it  seems  the  proper  thing  for
it  to  have  bad  ones,  and  wrong  to  choose  good  ones,"  etc.

2  This  was  Heloise,  once  the  wife  of  Peter  Abaelard,  then  a  nun,  then  Abbess
of  the  nunnery  at  Argenteuil  on  the  Seine,  which  flows  through  the  Diocese  of
Paris. In  the  year  1127  the  monks  of  S.  Denys,  after  a  long  interval,  resumed
possession  of  this  house,  having  proved  their  right  from  an  old  charter,  which
gave  it  them  under  the  gift  of  Hermenric,  and  Numma,  his  wife. For  Theo-
drada,  wife  of  Charlemagne,  had  placed  there  a  Sisterhood,  which  was  ejected
on  its  rejecting the monastic discipline. Shortly  before,  as was said  above,
Peter  Abaelard,  with  the  consent  of  the  Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  had  retired  into  solitude
in the  environs  of  Troyes,  where  he  had  built  and  dedicated,  first  of  all  to  the

I  loly  Trinity,  an  oratory  made  of  reeds,  rushes,  straw,  and  flags  interwoven.  He
afterwards  gave  it  the  invocation  of  the  Paraclete,  because  there  at  last  he
thought,  after  his  many  troubles,  he  had  found  some  comfort.  This  place  he
afterwards  handed  over  to  Heloise.  Some  call  Heloise  Helwida,  and  Hugh
Metellus  wrote  her  two  Letters  under  this  name.  "To  Helwida,  venerable
Abbess  of  the  Paraclete.  Rumour  tells  me  that  you  have  surpassed  your  sex,
by  your  words  and  verses,  and,  what  is  better  than  all,  how  you  have
overcome  the  weakness  of  woman,"  etc.  Bernard  once  visited  her,  and  gave
her  some  exhortation  (Abaci.,  ep.  v.).


782  LETTER CCLXXX.

LETTER  CCLXXIX.  (A.D.  1152.)

To  COUNT  HENRY.
He  entreats  the  Count  to  enforce  restitution  for  an  injury.

The  Abbot  of  Chatillon,1  a  man  of  piety,  when  setting  out
for  Rome,  committed  all  his  goods  to  the  custody  of  me
under  God.  And  lo  !  the  servants  of  Simon  de  Belfort  have
stolen  his  pigs.  I  would  rather  that  they  had  taken  mine.
I  require  them  at  your  hands.  The  Prince  of  the  Kings  of
the  earth  has  made  you  a  prince  on  the  earth,  in  order  that
under  Him,  and  for  Him,  you  may  cherish  the  good,  restrain
the  evil,  defend  the  poor,  help  them  to  right  that  suffer
wrong.  If  you  do  these  things  you  do  the  work  of  a  prince,
and  my  hope  is  that  God  will  extend  and  establish  your
power.  If  you  do  them  not,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  He  will
take  from  you  the  honour  and  power  which  you  seem  to
have.


LETTER CCLXXX. (Circa A.D. 1152.)
To  POPE  EUGENICS  ABOUT  THE  TROUBLE  AT  AUXERRE.

Bernard  complains  that  the  Pope s  decision  in  this  matter
has  been  disregarded.

i.  You  do  well  in  strengthening  one  who  is  weak-hearted,
and  comforting  one  who  is  weary  of  the  time  that  he  has
yet  to  spend  here,  by  so  often  listening  to  him  graciously.

1  Baldwin,  to  whom  Letter  401  was  written,  was  afterwards  Bishop  of  Noyon
(ep.  402).  The  Abbey  of  Chatillon  here  alluded  to  was  without  doubt  the  house
of  regular  Augustinian  canons  on  the  Seine,  in  the  Diocese  of  Langres,  where
Bernard  received  his  earliest  education,  and  which  he  turned  from  a  secular  into
a  regular  Order :  it  was  not  the  Neustrian  Chatillon,  as  some  wrongly  think.
Chatillon,  of  which  this  Baldwin  was  Abbot,  was  not  far  from  Clairvaux,  so
close  indeed  that  the  Abbot,  when  about  to  set  out  for  Rome,  entrusted  his  goods
to  Bernard's  care.  Moreover,  Belfort,  which  from  the  context  of  this  Letter  was
not  far  from  Chatillon,  was  situated  on  the  river  Voire,  which  flows  into  the
Aube  below  Clairvaux,  and  the  town  of  Bar-sur-Aube.  In  the  ancient  records  of
Chatillon  of  Langres  Baldwin,  moreover,  is  reckoned  as  second  Abbot,  after
Aldon,  the  first.


LETTER CCLXXX.  783

I,  indeed,  do  not  deserve  it,  but  it  becomes  you.  Do  not
suppose  that  I  take  any  pleasure  in  abusing  your  kind
ness  so  as  to  use  it  merely  to  get  my  own  way  ;  mv
conscience  is  my  witness  that  I  am  ready  to  accept  as
gladly  what  you  think  it  right  to  refuse  as  what  you  grant.
1  like  to  have  my  wishes  gratified,  as  every  man  does,  but
not  if  they  are  opposed  to  righteousness,  prejudicial  to  the
truth,  or  displeasing  to  you.  I  say  this  lest  you  should
think  either  that  I  do  not  notice  a  kindness,  or  that  I  have
no  gratitude  for  it.  Now  let  your  Holiness  hear  what  the
case  demands.  As  far  as  1  am  concerned  the  loss  is  very
small,  and  such  as  can  be  easily  repaired.  I  think  that
there  is  no  medicine  better  suited  to  allay  the  stings  of  my
conscience  than  insults  and  revilings.  It  is  certainly  not
for  myself  that  I  am  moved,  being  as  I  am  a  man  of  no
worth,  deserving  shame  and  contempt.  But  if  ever  the
injuries  of  the  wicked  touch  the  anointed  of  the  Lord  my
patience,  I  confess,  gives  way,  and  almost  all  my  meekness
disappears.  Have  I  ever  sought  from  my  lord  the  ordering
of  Churches,  the  disposing  of  Bishoprics,  the  making  of
Bishops  ?  A  fitting  instrument  truly  should  I  be,  an  ant
dragging  a  waggon.  You  wished  the  promotion  of  a  man
against  whom  not  even  those  who  wished  otherwise  could
lind  a  word  to  say.

2.  The  decision  of  your  good  pleasure  was  made  known
to  all  whom  it  concerned.  It  was  publicly  announced,  but
so  far  we  are  deprived  of  any  fruit  or  benefit  from  it.  You
ask  who  is  the  cause  of  this  ?  It  is  the  man  of  your  peace
in  whom  you  trusted.  He  is  a  man  to  whom  religion  is
hateful,  to  whom  wisdom  is  burdensome,  righteousness
terrible,  who  has  no  scruples  to  prevent  him  from  disclosing
his  master's  secret,  and  nullifying  his  decree.  It  is  no
wonder,  then,  that  he  was  not  ashamed  to  show  himself  in
his  true  colours.  He  has  yielded  to  his  own  enVy  and  malice,
and,  therefore,  he  is  not  likely  to  show  much  consideration
tor  you.  I  have  been  put  to  shame,  but  what  matters  that?
I  do  not  shrink  from  the  shame  which  zeal  has  allied  to
obedience.  The  cup,  indeed,  has  not  passed  from  me,  but


784  LETTER CCLXXX.

through  me  it  has  passed  on  to  you.  When  the  decision
that  you  have  given  is  affronted,  not  to  say  perverted,  it
must  be  evident  to  everyone  that  it  is  the  author  rather
than  the  promulgator  that  is  affected.  Ought  the  pro
motion  to  have  been  rendered  uncertain  of  a  man
against  whom  no  ill  could  be  said  ?  l  One  of  two  things  is
certain  :  either  the  word  which  I  have  testified  has  gone
out  of  your  lips  will  stand  fast,  or  I  shall  be  thought  a  liar,
as,  indeed,  I  am  now.  But  it  will  be  better  and  more
worthy  of  your  Apostleship  that  he  wrho  has  been  powerful
in  iniquity  should  not  boast  himself  in  his  wickedness.

3.  Your  command  has  been  in  part  obeyed,  and  by  the
greater  part.  It  was  entrusted  to  three  ;  one  scorns  it,  two
uphold  it.  What  remains,  then,  but  that  your  voice  should
supply  what  is  wanting  ?  And  you  may  do  this  safely.  You
have  nothing  to  fear  from  the  offence  of  those  of  whom  the
Lord  says,  Let  them  alone,  they  are  blind  leaders  of  t/ie

1  On  the  death  of  Hugh,  Bishop  of  Auxerre,  AD.  1151,  "when  the  clergy
wished,  according  to  custom,  to  choose  another  Bishop,"  says  Bernard  (De
Consid.,  lib.  iii.  c.  2),  "  a  certain  youth  interposed  with  an  appeal  and  forbade
the  election  to  go  forward  till  he  had  been  to  Rome  and  returned.  He  did  not,
however,  carry  out  this  appeal.  For  when  he  saw  that  he  was  scorned  for
having  appealed  without  any  reason,  he  held  a  meeting  of  all  whom  he  could
get  to  support  him,  and  had  himself  elected  on  the  third  day  after  the  election
had  been  held  by  the  others"  (ep.  275).  Eugenius,  on  hearing  of  this,  entrusted
the  decision  to  three  arbitrators,  of  whom  Bernard  was  one.  S.  Bernard  and
one  of  the  others  agreed,  the  third  dissented,  and  hence  S.  Bernard  asks
Eugenius  in  this  Letter  to  supply  what  is  wanting.  The  Bishop-elect  seems  to
have  been  Alan,  who  at  length  succeeded  Hugh.  The  "  Book  of  Burials"  of
Clairvaux  thus  speaks  of  him  :  "  To  the  right  of  Godfrey,  formerly  Bishop  of
Langres,  near  the  Choir,  lies  Alan,  Bishop  of  Auxerre,  who  was  educated  as  a
boy  in  a  Church  in  a  famous  town  of  Flanders,  called  Lille,  and  took  the
religious  habit  under  S.  Bernard  at  Clairvaux.  He  was  afterwards  made  first
Abbot  of  the  monastery  called  La  Rivour,  over  which  he  presided  for  twelve  years,
and  by  the  help  of  God  left  it  enriched  with  members  and  goods.  In  the  last
year  of  the  life  of  B.  Bernard  he  was  unanimously  elected  Bishop  of  Auxerre.  He
showed  great  hospitality  to  the  many  religious  who  visited  his  houses,  and  at
length,  after  having  occupied  his  See  for  thirteen  years,  he  resigned  it  by  the
permission  of  the  Pope  and  retired  to  Clairvaux.  He  died  i4th  Oct.,  A.D.  1 181."
When  his  election  is  spoken  of  as  having  been  unanimous  we  must  understand
that  finally  all  the  votes  were  given  to  him,  as,  indeed,  S.  Bernard  says  (ep.  282)
to  King  Louis.


LKTTKR CCLXXX.  785

blind  (S.  Matt.  xv.  14).  For  the  rest,  the  people,  the  better
part  of  the  clergy,  the  King  himself,  and  the  whole  Church
of  the  Saints  will  rejoice.  You  have  shown  this  age  many
good  works  of  the  grace  which  has  been  given  you.  But
nothing  will  redound  more  to  your  glory  than  this  action.
I  bear  my  testimony  against  them,  that  they  have  nomi
nated  many  to  offices  in  the  Church,  not  because  they  love
religion,  but  because  they  wish  to  see  it  weak,  so  that
there  may  be  none  to  restrain  their  wickedness,  or  have
strength  to  repel  force  by  force,  and  so  that  they  need  not
fear  the  power  of  those  whose  holiness  they  hate.  The
Count  of  Nevers1  does  not  walk  in  the  steps  of  his  father  ;
he  is  opposed  to  this  man,  as  well  as  to  every  good  man.
He  is  a  foe  to  the  lands  and  goods  of  the  Churches,  like  a
lion  ravening  for  his  prey.  He  is  ready  to  receive  even  a
Saracen  or  a  Jew,  if  he  may  be  free  from  this  man,  who  is
the  only  one  who  seems  to  have  the  ability  and  power  to
withstand  his  wickedness  and  cunning.  Hence  it  is  that
he  has  silenced  many  of  the  clergy  by  threats  and  open
charges,  to  prevent  the  opposite  side  from  glorying  in  their
numbers.

4.  And  to  say  briefly  what  1  think,  if  you  think  it  worth
while  for  the  monasteries  in  that  diocese  to  be  im
poverished,  the  Churches  to  be  down-trodden,  religion  to  be
held  up  to  scorn,  the  episcopal  See  itself,  whose  goods  and
possessions  he  particularly  covets,  to  be  reduced  to  slavery,
then  let  not  the  man  of  Regny-  by  any  means  rule  as  bishop.

1  This  Count  of  Nevers  was  William  IV.  (ep.  276),  whom  we  read  of  as
having  conferred  many  benefits  on  many  churches,  for  he  restored  to  the  church
of  Vezelai  the  goods  which  his  father  had  taken  from  it.  He  gave  a  free  gift
of  lands  to  the  church  at  Pontigny,  and,  to  mention  no  more,  he  honoured  the
church  of  S.  Germanus,  at  Auxerre,  with  his  favour,  and  there  he  has  his  tomb
in  the  chapter-room,  although  he  had  chosen  to  be  buried  in  the  graveyard.  His
father,  whose  ways  he  is  said  not  to  follow,  was  William  III.,  a  man  full  of
piety  and  religion,  of  whom  Hugh,  the  monk,  speaks  as  follows: — "  In  the
year  1147  William,  Count  of  Nevers,  resigning  his  throne,  and  despising  all
earthly  honour,  sought  Chartreux,  and  spent  his  last  days  with  Go;t  in  the  most
humble  poverty,  and  within  a  year  of  his  conversion  happily  ended  his  life."

2  This  is  said  in  irony,  if,  at  least,  we  are  to  understand  it  of  Alan,  to  whom
Bernard  applies  this  name,  perhaps,  because  he  was  born  in  the  village  of  Regny,


786  LETTER CCLXXXI.

Where  is  now  the  spirit  which  you  showed  in  the  York
affair  ?  Shall  not  he  who  has  attempted  a  like  crime  feel  the
same  spirit  ?  I  hear  that  he  is  coming  to  you  in  the  spirit
of  him  who  stirred  up  the  Curia  against  me  to  see  if  he  can
accomplish  the  same  object.  Let  me  remind  you  again  of
the  business  of  the  Bishop  of  Lund.  The  charge  of  bribery
has  now  been  removed,  and  nothing  remains  to  be  done  but
what  was  to  have  been  done.  And  let  me  add  this  :  To
have  a  chancellor  who  is  good,  just,  and  of  good  repute  is
no  small  part  of  the  Apostolic  dignity,  no  mean  support  to
the  Apostolic  administration,  no  despicable  guardian  of
the  Apostolic  conscience.  An  evil  appointment  is  always
pernicious,  and  after  long  deliberation  even  disgraceful.


LETTER  CCLXXXI.

To  ABBOT  BRUNO  OF  CmARRAVALLE.1

He  reproves  Bruno  for  writing  passionately  and
imprudently.

Doest  thou  well  to  be  thus  angry  ?  I  think  not.  Your
own  words  condemn  you,  for  they  have  not  been  calmly
considered,  but  uttered  in  haste  and  anger.  For  a  calm
judgment  reasons  thus,  Better  are  the  wounds  of  a  friend
than  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  (Prov.  xxvii.  6).  "  But,"  you
say,  "  I  am  beaten  for  nothing."  Well,  suppose  that  you
are.  Still,  none  the  less,  if  my  words  wound  you  they
show  my  loving  anxiety  for  you.  The  little  that  I  said
breathes  of  the  solicitude  of  a  father.  And  so,  if  you  have

or  Reninghe,  in  Belgium,  not  far  from  Ypres.  The  "  Book  of  Burials  "  of  Clair-
vaux,  'cited  above,  implies  that  he  was  called  "  of  Lille,"  as  he  everywhere  is,
from  the  place  of  his  education,  and  not  of  his  birth.  For  he  cannot  be  named
from  the  monastery  of  Regny,  since  he  was  taken  from  Clairvaux  to  be  Abbot  of
La  Rivour,  and  then  elected  to  the  Bishopric  of  Auxerre.  It  is  possible,  however,
that  in  the  second  election  at  Auxerre  a  monk  of  Regny  was  chosen,  for  whom
S.  Bernard  writes  here,  and  that  on  the  opposition  of  so  many  Alan  was  at
length  chosen  at  a  third  election.

1  The  older  editions  give  Clairvaux,  but  the  better  MSS.  give  Chiarravalle.
The  latter  was  a  famous  Cistercian  Abbey  near  Milan. See  ep.  134.


LETTER CCLXXXII.  787

done  no  wrong,  I  have  not  injured  you.  Your  own  con
science  acquits  you.  If  you  have,  then  it  is  against  you
rather  than  against  me  that  anger  should  arise.  You
complain  that  I  did  not  believe  you,  just  as  if  you  had  ever
said  a  single  word  to  me  on  the  matter.  But  suppose  that
I  did  believe  him  who  complained  of  you.  How  was  I  to
believe  or  disbelieve  you  when  you  said  nothing?  Do
what  you  said  you  would.  Pay  what  you  owe  as  soon  as
you  can,  lest  perhaps  scandal  arise  amongst  us,  if  not
amongst  others  about  us.  But  think  well  of  me,  and  of  all
who  think  well  of  you,  and  who  do  not  disbelieve  you,  as
you  say  passionately,  not  knowing  what  you  say.  These
words  are  my  own  ;  they  express  my  affection  for  you.

LETTER CCLXXXH.  (A.D. i  [52.)

To  Louis,  KING  OF  THE  FRENCH,  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE
BISHOP-ELECT  OF  AUXERRE.

He  begs  the  King  not  to  oppose  the  Bishop-Elect.

i. Have  I  ever  wished  for  the  honour  of  the  King  and

the  good  of  his  kingdom  to  be  in  any  way  lessened  ? God

knows,  and  your  own  conscience,  I  trust,  will  reply. Take

care lest those  who  are disturbing the election do not

rather  do  you  harm,  lest  we  have  in  the  churches  men  who

seem  to  serve  the  King,  but  who  rather  serve  themselves

out  of  the  Church's  revenues. I  intervened  in  the  election

at Auxerre. All  was  harmony, because the clergy,  who

before  this  had  taken  opposite  sides,  now  at  length,  by  the

mercy  of  God,  had  come  to  an unanimous agreement. I

know  the  Bishop-Elect  well  ; I  bear  testimony  to  him  that

he  is  a  good  man. Moreover, I  believe  that  no  one  was

present  in that  assembly  who  had  any  doubt  about  your

assent,  for  your  assent  was  contained  in  the  letter  that  you

had written. Who  could have imagined  that  your  first

assent  was  not  enough  and  that  another  must  be  asked  for,

especially  when  no  second  election  had  taken  place  since

you  wrote? Is  it  necessary  to  seek  the  approbation  of  the


788  LETTER CCLXXXII.

King  as  many  times  as  the  clergy  happen  to  disagree?
This  is  neither  according  to  reason  nor  custom.  For
example,  you  will  perhaps  recollect  that  in  the  Church  of
Soissons  the  clergy  disagreed  as  often  as  they  met  together
to  elect  a  Bishop,  and  separated  without  finishing  the  busi
ness,  and  yet  I  do  not  suppose  that,  having  once  obtained
your  assent,  they  sought  it  every  time  that  they  assembled.
2.  So,  my  lord  King,  you  have  no  ground  for  disannulling
the  elections  that  have  taken  place,  when  it  is  evident  that
you  had  given  your  assent  to  their  being  held.  But  there
are  some  who  are  troubling  you  and  are  striving  to  trouble
the  Churches,  seeking  their  own  profit,  and,  what  is  more
serious,  endeavouring  with  diabolical  zeal  to  break  the
mutual  goodwill  and  affection  which  exist  between  the
Supreme  Pontiff  and  the  King's  Excellency.  May  God
forbid  it.  They  will  bear  their  judgment,  whoever  they
are,  and  the  King  will  always  act  like  a  good  King,  as  he
has  hitherto  done.  And  so  see  that  more  welcome  instruc
tions  are  issued,  so  that  the  Church,  which  has  been  so  long
harassed  and  afflicted,  may  no  longer  sit  in  sadness.  Let
the  King  entertain  no  suspicion  about  the  person  elected,
for  either  I  am  much  mistaken  or  he  will  be  faithful,  and
the  King  will  be  well  pleased  with  him.  I  trust  in  the
Lord  that  you  will  not  sadden  the  hearts  of  the  multitude
of  saints  in  that  diocese  and  of  me,  your  servant,  wTho,  to
speak  the  truth,  have  never  borne  anything  at  your  hands
so  distressing  as  this  will  be  if  you  persist  in  your  present
intention,  which  may  God  avert.


LETTER CCLXXXIII. (A.D. 1150.)
To  POPE  EUGENIUS,  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  MONKS  OF

MOIREMONT.1
He  begs  the  Pope  to  intervene  to  settle  a  dispute  which  had


arisen.


1  The  Cistercian  MSS.  have  the  heading,  "  On  behalf  of  the  brethren  of
Moiremont."  Some  MSS.  "  For  the  brethren " :  the  editions  "  for  those
of  Gigny."  But  it  is  all  the  same,  for  this  Letter  was  written  against  the
monks  of  Gigny  and  for  the  brethren  of  Moiremont.  For  when  Innocent  gave


LKTTKR CCLXXXUI.  789

At  Cluny  I  met  the  monks  of  Gigny  in  the  hope  of  peace,
for  which  we  have  worked  hard,  but  without  success,  for
the  only  result  of  our  four  days'  labour  was  the  destruction
of  our  hopes. According  to  the  instructions  contained in
your  letters,  the  reparation  of  the  losses  and  the  restitu
tion  of  the  goods  removed  were  demanded,  but  in  vain. It
seemed  a  great  demand  to  them,  because  they  had  done
great injury, inasmuch as the worth of the losses was
reckoned  at  more  than 30,000 solidi. Indeed, not  to  go
into  details,  our  abbey  was  totally  destroyed. Since  the
loss  had  been  so  heavy  I  was  prepared  to  forego  much  of
it,  but  they  offered  so  little  that  the  venerable  Abbot  of
Cluny,  who  was  labouring  with  more  zeal  than  success  for
the  purpose  of  peace,  did not  think  it  worthy  of  accept
ance. And so no agreement was  come to, because so
ridiculously small an amount  was offered in reparation.
What they said was this  : "  Some  evil-disposed persons
amongst  us  have  done  this  evil. What  is  that  to  us  ? Let
them  see  to  it." But  this  is  absurd. It  was  well  known  in
the  whole  neighbourhood  that  this  great  misdeed  had  been
perpetrated by  men  belonging  to  the Church, that some
monks  also  had  been  present,  and  that  all  had  consented  to

to  the  Cistercians  exemption  from  paying  tithes  he  greatly  incensed  the  Cluniacs
(as  was  said  in  the  notes  to  ep.  228),  and  especially  theCluniac  house  of  Gigny,
in  the  county  of  Burgundy,  against  their  neighbours,  the  Cistercians  of  Moire-
mont,  both  of  whom  were  in  the  province  of  Lyons. To  such  a  pitch did  their
resentment  go  that  they  did  not  hesitate  to  destroy  the  house  of the  brethren  of
Moiremont,  and  when  Eugenius  heard  of  this  he  wrote  a  stern  Letter  to  Peter  the
Venerable,  bidding  him  see  that as  soon  as  possible  satisfaction  was  given  to
the  Cistercians  for  their  losses,  and  denouncing  severe punishment  against  the
guilty  monks  if  this  were  not  done. Me  also  gave the  Archbishop  of  Lyons
power  to  use  ecclesiastical  censures  against  them  if the  losses  were  not  made
good  within  twenty  days. S.  Bernard  and  Peter  the  Venerable  met  at  Cluny  to
settle  the  matter. For  four  days  they  discussed  it,  and  found  the  loss  to  be  com
puted  at  more  than  30,000  solidi. But  as  the  monks  of  Gigny  were  tardy  in
obeying  the  sentence  Bernard  signified  their  tardiness  to  Eugenius  in  this  Letter.
After  the  death  of  Bernard  an  arrangement  about  the  tithes  was  come  to  between
the  monks  of  both  places,  A.D.  1155. But  though  we  have  no  record  of  com
pensation  having  been  given  by  the  monks  of Gigny,  yet  the munificence  of
Peter  the  Venerable  is  recorded  in  giving  to  the  Cistercians  what  had  been  left
at  Cluny  by  Baroni,  a  sub-deacon  of  Rome. See  epp.  388  and  389.


790  LETTER CCLXXXIV.

it.  For  up  to  the  present  I  have  not  heard  of  even  one  who
has  opposed  the  evil-doers.  Lastly,  the  Abbot  of  the  Order
himself  openly  rebuked  and  condemned  shufflers  of  this
sort  by  declaring  that  what  was  known  to  have  been  lost
through  the  Church  was  with  justice  demanded  at  the
Church's  hand.  Your  decision  is  now  awaited  in  this
matter,  which,  as  it  has  been  sufficiently  proved,  cannot  be
set  right  except  by  a  strong  hand.


LETTER  CCLXXXIV. (Circa A.D. 1151.)

To  POPE  EUGENIUS,  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  ARCHBISHOP  OF
RHEIMS  AND  OTHER  PERSONS.

My  lord,  Samson,  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  lives  in  the
house  of  the  great  Father  as  a  vessel  made  to  honour.  If
you  know  this,  preserve  his  honour,  and  the  honour  of  his
church.  If  I  know  the  man  well,  the  more  you  honour
him,  the  more  by  him  and  in  him  will  God  be  honoured.
The  Bishop  of  Arras1  is  a  simple  and  upright  man,  and  one
who  up  to  the  present  has  refused  promotion,  so  that  there
is  no  need  for  him  to  be  humbled  by  another,  lest  he  lose
his  authority,  and  so  his  usefulness.  If  you  think  him
worthy,  give  him  this  authority,  because  he  will  never  have
it  of  his  own  seeking,  being  one  who  is,  as  far  as  he  is
concerned,  content  with  his  lowly  position.  There  is  one
who  opposes  himself,  and  is  puffed  up,  and  there  is  need  of
a  Bishop  to  humble  him,  and  it  will  be  not  less  beneficial  to
the  man  himself.  To  resist  the  proud  and  to  give  grace  to
the  humble  is  what  your  Lord  delights  to  do,  and  you  have
heard  Him  saying:  If  any  man  serve  Me,  let  him  follow
Me  (S.  John  xii.  26).  The  Abbot  of  Ancourt2  is  a  good

1  Godeschalc  (see  epp.  214  and  253)  succeeded,  A.D.  1 150,  Alvisus,  mentioned
in  epp.  6^  and  395.  The  dispute  alluded  to  here  seems  to  have  been  with  Guerric,
Abbot  of  S.  Vedast,  to  whom Eugenius wrote "that he  should promise  in
writing  obedience  to  Godeschalc  for  those  things  which  he  held  from  the  church
of  Arras."

2  This  was  a  house  of  regular  Canons  of  S.  Augustine,  near  Bapaume. It
is  variously  written  in  the  MSS.


LETTER CCLXXXV.  791

man,  let  him  be  rewarded  according  to  his  goodness.  Let
him  be  listened  to  when  speaking  of  his  necessities,  and
let  not  an  apostate  be  heard  against  him.  The  Dean  of
Bethune,  by  the  wish  of  his  Bishop,  and  the  assent  of  the
advocate  for  his  church,  has  determined  to  set  on  foot  a
good  work  in  the  same  church,  and  it  is  well  that  it  should
be  confirmed  by  your  authority.  In  the  same  way  I  plead
for  the  Deans  of  Soissons  and  Cambray,  that  they  may
obtain  their  requests.  I  have  been  in  perils  amongst  false
brethren,  and  many  letters  have  been  forged,  and  fraudu
lently  sealed  with  my  seal,  and  have  gone  forth  into  many
different  hands,  and  my  chief  fear  is  that  this  treachery  may
have  reached  even  to  you.  This  is  why  I  am  forced  to  dis
continue  the  use  of  my  former  seal,1  and  to  use  this  new
one,  which  you  notice  is  fresh,  containing  both  my  device
and  my  name.  Do  not  accept  the  other  seal  as  mine  for
the  future,  except  in  the  case  of  the  Bishop  of  Claremont,
to  whom  I  gave  a  letter  sealed  with  that  seal  before  I  had
this  one  made.

LETTER CCLXXXV. (Circa A.I). 1153.)
To  THE  SAME,  ON  BEHALF  OK  Quo,'2  ABBOT  OF  S.  DENYS.

He  recommends  this  Abbot  to  the  Pope,  and  declares  him
innocent  of  the  accusations  brought  against  him.

i.  1  should  not  hesitate  to  write  on  behalf  of  the  church  of
S.  Denys,  and  for  Odo,  its  Abbot,  even  if  no  one  else  would.

1  From  this  it  is  plain  that  what  William,  the  third  Cistercian  Abbot  of  the
name,  says  in  a  Letter  to  Theobald,  Count  of  Champagne,  is  not  true,  viz.,  that
a  seal  of  the  Abbot  of  Buzay,  recently  discovered,  was  spurious,  because  on  it
was  engraved  the  name  of  the  Abbot, when,  as  he  said,  no  Order  ever  had  its
Abbot's  name  engraved on its seal. Certainly, in a document of Bernard
himself,  written  to  settle  a  strife  between  the  monasteries  of  S.  Genevieve  and  S.
Victor,  the  seal  of Bernard  was  appended  with  his  name  and  effigy,  holding  in
his  right  hand  a  book  and  in  his  left  a  pastoral  staff. See  Letter  of  M. Deville
(Vol.  ii.  p.  457.)

2  Odo,  who  was  formerly  a  monk  of  S. Denys,  near  Paris,  then  Abbot  of  S.
Cornelius,  at  Compiegne,  was  chosen  to  succeed  Suger  as  Abbot  of  S.  Denys,
A.D.  1151. For  his  ordination  and  merits  see  epp.  Suger,  156  ft  seij.,  especially


7Q2  LETTER CCLXXXV.

The  cause  is  a  good  one,  and  doubtful  on  neither  account ;
the  church  is  a  famous  one,  and  the  Abbot  is  of  good  report.
The  one  is  known  to  the  world,  the  other  to  us,  his  neigh
bours.  Add  to  this,  that  both  he  and  the  church  have  a
special  claim  on  you.  And  because  of  all  this,  as  I  have
said,  if  need  were  I  should  not  be  ashamed  to  write  for
them,  even  though  I  were  alone.  But  as  it  is,  others  are
writing  as  well  as  I,  who  would  not  be  disbelieved  even  if
I  did  not  write.  They  are  men  who  have  often  treated  of
this  matter.  They  know7  wrhat  the  Abbot  has  done,  and
what  they  know  they  say.  My  prayers  for  him  may  go
forth  with  confidence  when  supported  by  such  indubitable
testimonies.  With  confidence  I  solicit  and  entreat  you  to
take  some  thought  for  the  property  of  yours  which  he  holds,
which  has  been  wickedly  attacked,  and  grievously  harassed.
I  ask  you,  I  beseech  you,  lift  your  hand,  stretch  out  your
arm,  and  cover  him  w7ith  your  shield.  Let  the  sword  of
Peter  defend  the  patrimony  of  Peter.

2.  In  vain  have  men  risen  against  him  ;  his  reputation  is
his  sufficient  excuse,  nay,  the  universal  esteem  in  which  he
is  held  is  his  commendation.  They  are  good  sons,  forsooth,
who,  prying  too  curiously  into  the  secrets  of  their  father,
have  dreamt  of  some  crimes  or  other  which  no  one  else  has
discovered.  Those  who  hear  of  this  sudden  and  unexpected
change  stand  amazed.  They  are  ashamed,  because  nothing
of  this  sort  had  ever  before  been  said  of  Odo.  The  Abbot
of  S.  Denys  cannot  be  said  to  be  hid  under  a  bushel.  He
stands  on  a  candlestick,  and  however  much  he  may  wish  it,
he  cannot  hide  what  he  is.  His  light,  and  so  his  smoke,
must  be  seen  by  all.  Why  have  these  men  turned  on  him
their  lynx  eyes,  seeing  what  no  one  else  has  ever  yet  been
able  to  see  ?  Their  charge,  I  confess,  seems  to  me  sus
picious.  What  makes  me  more  incredible  is  the  fact  that
one  of  their  number  is  a  man  named  Raymond,  who,  they
say,  is  the  head  of  this  wickedness  that  they  have  attempted  :

ep.  162,  which  is  one  of  Baldwin,  Bishop  of  Noyon,  who,  writing  to  Eugenius.
says  that  he  was  "  a  religious  and  energetic  man,"  duly  elected,  and  blessed  by
himself.


LETTER CCLXXXVI.  793

whom  I  have  found  loquacious  enough  face  to  face,  but
secretly  a  back-biter,  ambitious  to  excess,  currying  favour
by  his  flatteries,  wholly  set  on  deceit,  and  no  less  on  causing
confusion.  I  have  marked  the  wolf  under  the  sheep's  cloth
ing,  or  by  certain  signs  I  have  pointed  him  out,  so  that  now
he  may  either  be  afraid  to  bite,  or  be  powerless  to  do
harm .

LETTER  CCLXXXVI. (A.D. 1153.)
To THE SAME, ON BEHALF OF THE SAME.

If  secret  calumnies  and  craft  have  prevailed  against  the
Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  I  am  clean  from  his  blood,  for  I  wrote
before  against  his  bitter  foes.  But  what  accusation  do  they
bring  against  the  man  ?  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  they  cannot  find
whereof  to  accuse  him  ?  And  if  they  have  good  grounds
for  accusing,  how  is  it  that  he  is  acquitted  by  all  his
neighbours  who  are  of  a  right  conversation  ?  He  is  accused
of  having  incurred  many  debts,  of  having  mortgaged  his
lands,  and  wasted  his  goods,  as  though  all  this  could  not
have  happened  from  necessary  and  good  causes.  An
assembly  of  that  Church  gave  me  an  account  of  all  these
things,  and  testified  through  a  trustworthy  person  that
things  are  not  as  they  have  been  reported  to  you.  Neverthe
less,  let  an  inquiry  be  held,  for  in  matters  of  this  kind  we
place  more  confidence  in  what  we  see  than  in  any  oath  ;
and  if  things  are  found  to  be  as  his  accusers  maliciously
state,  no  matter  how  it  came  about,  then  let  not  the  Abbot
be  excused.  If  they  are  not  so,  then  let  not  these  informers
gain  anything  by  their  falsehood.  They  charge  him  with
the  death  of  a  certain  man  ;  if  he  cannot  clear  himself  let
him  die.  And  yet  anyone  can  see  how  unlikely  it  is  that
he  should  have  handed  over  to  death  a  man  whom  but  a
little  before  he  had  rescued  from  it.  How  can  these  men
have  the  audacity  to  insinuate  such  charges  into  your  mind,
when  they  have  seen  and  known  the  zeal  of  the  Abbot  in
freeing  those  who  before  had  committed  homicide,  and  in
punishing  those  who  had  avenged  the  blood  of  a  relation  ?

VOL.  II.


794


LETTER CCLXXXVIII.


Lastly,  if  you  had  known  them  well,  it  would  be  enough  to
make  you  disbelieve  any  unsupported  statement  of  theirs.
May  God  help  your  Holiness,  that  the  deceitful  tongue  may
not  avail  anything  against  the  Abbot's  innocence.


LETTER  CCLXXXVII. (A.D.  1153.)

TO  THE  BISHOP  OF  OSTIA,1  ON  BEHALF  OF THE  SAME

ABBOT.

My  lord,  the  Abbot  of  S.  Denys  is  being  accused  by  the
wicked,  but  by  all  the  good  men  in  his  Church  and
neighbourhood  he  is  excused.  I  ask  your  Christian  love
for  him  the  more  earnestly  because  my  esteem  for  him  has
been  and  still  is  very  great.  Befriend  him  with  your  kind
ness,  if  not  because  he  is  a  friend  of  mine,  yet,  at  all  events,
because  the  charges  brought  against  him  are  neither  true,
nor  likely.  If  he  is  burdened  with  debts,  then  the  necessity
of  the  time  is  evidently  the  cause  of  it,  although  his  debts  are
nothing  like  the  amount  stated.  As  to  the  alienation  of  his
lands,  the  charge  is  easily  proved  to  be  false.  For  I  suppose
that  not  even  his  enemies  themselves  can  possibly  suspect
him  of  the  death  of  G — ;  inasmuch  as  he  kept  this  same
G —  and  all  his  companions  in  shelter  from  their  enemies,
and  with  much  labour  snatched  them  from  the  very  jaws  of
death.  For  all  this,  and  because  especially  I  know  of  the
underhand  dealing  of  Raymond,  I  earnestly  beg  you  to
vindicate  writh  all  care  the  innocence  of  the  Abbot.


LETTER  CCLXXXVIII. (A.D. 1153.)

To  HIS UNCLE  ANDREW,  A  KNIGHT  OF  THE  TEMPLE.

Bernard  deplores  the  unhappy  issue  of  the Crusade.

i.  The  letter  which  you  lately  sent  me  found  me  lying
in  bed.  I  received  it  with  open  hands,  joyfully,  read  and
re-read  it,  but  should  have  been  more  joyful  could  I  have

1  Hugh. See  epp.  273,  274.  290,  296,  306.


LETTER CCLXXXVIII.  795

seen  you  yourself.  I  read  in  it  of  your  desire  to  see  me,
and  of  your  fear  because  of  the  danger  threatening  the  land
which  the  Lord  honoured  by  His  presence,  the  State  which
He  consecrated  by  His  own  blood.  Woe  to  our  princes  !  l
In  the  Lord's  land  they  did  no  good,  in  their  own,  to  which
they  returned  with  all  speed,  they  practise  incredible
mischief,  and  they  are  not  grieved  for  the  affliction  of
Joseph.  They  are  mighty  to  do  evil,  but  good  they  cannot
do.  But  I  trust  that  the  Lord  will  not  reject  His  people,  and
will  not  cast  away  His  inheritance.  Moreover,  the  right  hand
•of  the  Lord  will  yet  execute  power,  and  His  arm  will  help
Him,  that  all  may  know  that  it  is  better  to  trust  in  the  Lord
than  to  put  any  confidence  in  princes.  You  do  well  to
•compare  yourself  to  an  ant.  For  what  else  are  we  children
of  men,  who  are  born  of  the  earth,  always  labouring  after
useless  and  empty  things  ?  What  profit  is  there  to  a  man
for  all  his  labour  wherewith  he  labours  under  the  sun  ?
Let  us,  therefore,  climb  up  above  the  sun,  and  let  our
•conversation  be  in  heaven  ;  let  us  in  mind  go  before  thither
whether  we  shall  one  day  follow  in  body.  There,  my  dear
Andrew,  is  the  fruit  of  your  labour,  there  is  your  reward.
You  are  warring  under  the  sun,  but  it  is  for  One  who  sits
.above  the  sun.  Let  us  who  tight  here  expect  from  Him  our
largesse.  The  reward  of  our  warfare  is  not  of  the  earth,  is
not  from  beneath  ;  its  prize  is  from  afar,  and  from  the  utmost
Jand.  Under  the  sun  is  want,  above  the  sun  abundance.
Good  measure,  pressed  down,  and  shaken  together  and  run
ning  over,  shall  men  give  into  our  bosom  (S.  Luke  vi.  38).
2.  You  wish  to  see  me;  and  you  say  that  the  gratification  of

1  This  is  to  be  understood  of  the  unfortunate  expedition  to  the  E  ast.  For
ambition,  quarrels,  and  rivalry  between  the  Christian  leaders  of  that  holy
expedition  broke  their  strength  and  frustrated  their  undertaking,  so  Bernard  says
(De  Consid.  lib.  ii.  c.  i),  and  so  says  Otto  of  Fnsingen,  an  eye-witness,  in  his
de  Gest  binder,  lib.  i.  c.  78,  where,  after  relating  the  great  disasters  that
fell  on  the  Christian  army,  he  adds  :  "  Yet,  notwithstanding  such  reverses,  the
haughtiness  of  the  Kings  to  each  other  that  had  sprung  up  did  notecase."  See
Emilius  on  Louis  VII.,  where,  treating  of  the  siege  of  Damascus,  he  says  that  it
would  have  been  taken  if  it  haa  not  been  saved  by  the  ambition  of  the  Christian
leaders.  See  also  Sigonius  de  Reg.  Hal.  lib.  xi.,  an, I  De  Consid.  lib.  ii.  c.  i.


yg6  LETTER CCLXXXVIII.

your  wish  depends  on  me.  For  you  hint  that  you  wait  for  an
order  from  me  to  come.  What  shall  I  say  to  you?  I  both
wish  for  you  to  come,  and  yet  fear  your  coming.  So  placed
between  wishing  and  not  wishing,  I  am  in  a  strait  between
two,  and  which  to  choose  I  know  not.  On  one  side  is
the  wish  to  satisfy  what  is  at  once  your  own  desire
and  mine  ;  on  the  other,  the  doubt  whether  I  ought  not  to
believe  rather  the  common  report  of  you,  which  says  that  you
are  so  necessary  to  the  land  that  no  small  disaster  is  likely
to  happen  if  you  leave  it.  And  so  what  I  dare  not  command
I  yet  wish  for,  viz.,  that  I  may  see  you  before  I  die.  You
can  see  and  know  better  than  I  if  you  can  anyhow  come
without  loss  and  reproach  to  the  country.  And  it  might  be
that  your  coming  would  not  be  altogether  unprofitable.
Perhaps,  with  God's  blessing,  some  would  be  induced  to
accompany  you  on  your  return  to  support  the  Church  of
God,  since  you  are  known  and  beloved  by  all.  God  can
bring  it  to  pass  that  you,  too,  can  say  with  holy  Jacob,
With  my  staff  I  passed  over  this  Jordan,  and,  lo  !  I  return
with  three  bands  (Gen.  xxxii.  10).  One  thing,  I  say,  if  you
do  come,  do  not  delay,  lest,  perchance,  you  come  and  find
me  not.  For  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered,  and  I  do  not
think  that  I  have  much  more  time  to  spend  on  earth.  Who
will  give  me  the  happiness  of  being  somewhat  refreshed
before  I  depart  hence,  with  your  sweet  and  gladsome
presence?  I  have  written  to  the  Queen  as  you  wished,
and  I  rejoice  in  the  good  report  which  you  give  of  her.
Salute  in  the  Lord  your  Master  and  brethren  of  the  Temple,
likewise  those  of  the  Hospital.  Salute  also  all  who  are
shut  up,  and  all  the  Saints  to  whom  you  have  an  opportunity
of  speaking,  and  commend  me  to  their  prayers.  Be  instead
of  me  to  them.  I  hear  that  our  Gerard,1  who  spent  some
time  in  our  house,  has  now  been  made  Bishop  ;  him,  too,  I
salute  most  warmly  with  great  affection.

i  Was  this the  Gerard,  Bishop  of Bethlehem,  of  whom William  of  Tyre
speaks  in  the  beginning  of his  i;th  Book  under  the  year 1146,  and  again  at
the  end  under  the  year  1152  ?  or  was  he  Bishop  of  Sidon  ?


LETTER CCLXXX1X.  797

LETTER  CCLXXXIX. (Circa  A.I). 1153.)
To THK QUEEN  OF  JERUSALEM.

Bernard  instructs  her  how  she  should  behave  if  she
would  be  an  honourable  widow  before  God  and  queen
before  men.

To  his  beloved  daughter  in  Christ,  MlLLSENDLS,1  Queen  of
Jerusalem,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes
mercy  from  God  our  Saviour.

i.  I  wonder  why  I  have  not  seen  any  letter  from  you  for
so  long  a  time,  and  have  not  had  your  usual  salutations.  I
cannot  forget  your  old  affection  for  me,  which  I  have
ofttimes  put  to  the  proof.  I  have  heard,  I  confess,  some
evil  reports  of  you ;  and  although  I  do  not  altogether
believe  them,  yet  I  am  grieved  that,  whether  they  are  true
or  false,  your  good  fame  should  be  so  compromised.  But
my  dear  Uncle  Andrew  has  written,  and  I  cannot  disbelieve
him  in  anything  ;  he  gives  me  a  better  account  of  you  ;  he
says  how  peaceably  and  meekly  you  bear  yourself,  how
wisely  you  rule  yourself  and  yours  by  the  advice  of  wise
men,  how  you  love  the  brethren  of  the  Temple,  and  cherish
them,  with  what  foresight  and  wisdom,  according  to  the
measure  given  you  by  God,  you  meet  with  sound  counsels
and  aids  the  dangers  threatening  the  Holy  Land.  These
are  the  actions  that  become  a  brave  woman,  a  lowly  widow,
an  exalted  queen.  For  though  you  are  a  queen,  it  is  no
disgrace  to  be  a  widow,  and  if  you  had  wished  it  you  would
not  be  one.  I  think  that  it  is  your  glory,  especially  among
Christians,  to  live  no  less  as  a  widow  than  a  queen.  One
is  of  succession,  the  other  of  virtue  ;  one  of  birth,  the  other
of  the  gift  of  God  ;  that  came  by  good  fortune,  this  by  a
brave  spirit.  The  honour  is  twofold,  one  according  to  the
world,  the  other  according  to  God,  but  each  from  God.  Nor

1  Milisendis,  or  Melusina,  was  daughter  of  Baldwin,  the  second  Latin
King  of  Jerusalem.  He  was  succeeded  by  his  son-in-law,  Fulk,  husband  of  this
Milisendis,  who  was  thrown  on  his  head  from  his  horse  while  hunting,  and  died
after  three  days,  A.D.  1142.  Ep.  206,  354,  and  355  were  written  to  her.  Her
sister,  Ivera,  was  a  nun  (Will,  of  Tyre,  lib.  xv.  subjlnem).


798  LETTER CCLXXXIX.

let  the  honour  of  widowhood  seem  to  you  small,  about
which  the  Apostle  says,  Honour  widows  which  are  widows
indeed  (i  Tim.  v.  3).

2.  You  certainly  have  before  you  a  second  familiar  piece
of  advice  in  the  wholesome  words  of  the  Apostle,  who
teaches  you  to  "provide  things  honest  not  only  in  the  sight
of  God,  but  also  in  the  sight  of  men"  (2  Cor.  viii.  21).  In
the  sight  of  God,  as  a  widow  ;  in  the  sight  of  men,  as  a
queen.  Recollect  that  you  are  a  queen,  and  that  your  good
deeds  cannot  lie  in  obscurity  under  a  bushel.  They  are  on
a  candlestick  that  they  may  be  seen  of  all.  Recollect  that
you  are  a  widow,  and  that  you  have  not  now  to  please  your
husband,  but  to  please  God  alone.  Happy  are  you  if  you
place  your  Saviour  as  a  wall  before  you  for  a  guard  to  your
conscience,  and  a  bulwark  to  repel  infamy.  Happy,  I  say,
if  like  one  desolate  and  a  widow  you  entrust  yourself
wholly  to  God,  for  Him  to  rule  you.  Else,  if  you  are  not
well  ruled  you  do  not  rule  well.  The  Queen  of  the  South
came  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  that  she  might  learn
to  be  ruled,  and  so  to  rule.  And  behold  !  a  Greater  than
Solomon  is  here  (S.  Matt.  xii.  42).  I  speak  of  Jesus,  and
Him  crucified.  Commit  yourself  to  Him  to  rule  you,  to
be  taught  by  Him  how  you  ought  to  rule.  Learn  as  a
widow,  for  He  is  meek  and  lowly  of  heart  (S.  Matt.  xL
29) ;  learn  as  a  queen,  because  he  judges  the  poor  witli
righteousness,  and  reproves  with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the
earth  (Is.  xi.  4).  Therefore,  when  you  think  of  your
dignity,  forget  not  your  widowhood,  because  (to  say  to  you
plainly  what  I  think)  you  cannot  be  a  good  queen  if  you
are  not  a  good  widow.  You  ask  how  a  good  widow  is  to
be  known.  From  the  words  of  the  Apostle:  If  she  have
brought  up  children,  if  she  have  lodged  strangers,  if  she
have  washed  the  Saints'  feet,  if  she  have  relieved  the
afflicted,  if  slie  have  diligently  followed  every  good  work
(i  Tim.  v.  10).  If  thou  doest  these  things,  happy  art  thou,
and  well  will  it  be  with  thee.  May  the  Lord  bless  you  out
of  Sion,  my  daughter  renowned  in  the  Lord,  worthy  of  all
veneration.  My  admonition  has  been  sent  first ;  I  shall


LETTER CCXC.  799

now  expect  a  reply  to  follow.  I  have  given  you  the  occa
sion,  and  will  admit  of  no  excuse,  if  our  friendship  is  not
renewed  by  your  sending  me  frequently  for  the  future
words  and  letters  of  friendship.


LETTER  CCXC. (A.D.  1152.)

TO THE BISHOP OF OSTIA ABOUT CARDINAL JORDAN.  l

Bernard  describes the  Legate  of  tJie  Holy  See,  and  wliat
disgraceful  traces  he  had  everywhere  left  behind  him.

Your  legate  has  passed  from  nation  to  nation  and  from
one  kingdom  to  another  people,  leaving  with  us  foul  and
horrid  traces  everywhere.  From  the  foot  of  the  Alps  and
the  Kingdom  of  the  Teutons  this  Apostolic  man  has  gone
about  in  every  direction  through  nearly  all  the  churches  of
France  and  Normandy,  as  far  as  Rouen,  and  he  has  filled
them  not  with  the  Gospel,  but  with  sacrilege.  He  is  said
to  have  done  disgraceful  things,  to  have  carried  off  spoils
from  churches,  to  have  promoted,  when  he  could,  boys  to
ecclesiastical  honours  writh  no  other  qualifications  than  their
beautiful  faces,  and, where  he  could  not,  to  have  wished  to  do
it.  Many  bribed  him  not  to  come  to  them.  He  exacted  and
extorted  money  by  his  messengers  from  those  to  whom  he
could  not  go.  In  the  schools,  the  courts,  the  very  streets,
he  has  made  himself  a  proverb.  Seculars,  religious,  all
speak  ill  of  him.  The  poor,  and  the  monks,  and  the  clergy
all  complain  of  him.  It  is  the  men,  too,  of  his  own  pro
fession  who  are  loudest  in  expressing  their  abhorrence  of
his  reputation  and  his  life.  He  has  this  report,  too,  both
from  those  within  and  those  without.  Not  so  did  John
Faperon,-  not  so  he  whose  praise  is  in  the  Churches,  as  of

1  The  legate  spoken  of here was  Jordan  Orsino,  and  was  sent,  A.D.  1151,  as
legate  into  Germany  to  the  Emperor  Conrad.

2  John  Paperon  or  Papyrion,  A.D.  1 152,  on  the  testimony  of  John  Hagustald,
"  set  out  for  Ireland,  and  distributed  four palls  to  their  respective Sees,  and
taught  that  nation  the  law  of  marriage  to  which  they  had  been  strangers.' Up
to  that  time  the  Irish  Bishops consecrated their  own Bishops. See  Gerald,

.  Mil',  c.  17.


800  LETTER CCXCI.

one  who  honours  his  ministry  everywhere.  Read  this
letter  to  my  lord.  Let  him  see  what  is  to  be  done  with
such  a  man ;  I  have  freed  my  soul.  Yet  I  say,  with  my
usual  rashness,  that  it  will  be  good  for  him  to  purge  his
court,  and  so  free  his  conscience.  I  had  determined  to  say
nothing  about  this,  but  the  venerable  Prior  of  Mont  Dieu  !
impelled  me  to  this,  and  inspired  me  to  write.  Know,  too,
that  I  have  said  less  than  is  openly  talked  of  in  public.

LETTER CCXCI.

To  POPE  EUGENIUS  FOR  THE  CHURCH  OF  S.  EUGENDUS'-'
IN  THE  JURA.

If  what  is  said  is  true,  and  it  is  not  wholly  to  be  rejected,
the  famous  monastery  of  S.  Eugendus,  formerly  renowned
for  its  wealth  and  piety,  is  ready  to  perish.  I  grieve  to  see
houses  belonging  to  it,  which  are  near  us  and  known  to  you,
partly  destroyed  already,  and  partly  being  destroyed  daily.
What  we  see  in  the  members  we  have  heard  by  report  is
worse  even  in  the  head.  But  why  should  I  give  you  an
account  now  of  these  evils  which  are  numberless  ?  The
bearer  of  this,  a  monk  of  the  same  monastery,  and  the
Prior  Archegaud,  a  man  long  known  to  me  for  his  worth,
and  beloved  for  his  piety,  will  be  able  to  tell  you  what  they
know  more  fully  than  I  do,  although  not  everything.  For
who  could  do  this  ?  The  evils  are  so  many  and  so  great
that  it  is  a  wonder  if  they  do  not  compel  the  apostolic  axe
to  lift  itself  and  strike,  even  though  it  be  hiding  itself  and
sleeping.  I  have  liberated  my  soul,  but  it  is  not  enough,
unless  the  monastery  be  also  liberated.  Its  life  and  death
are  in  your  hands.

1  Gervase  was then Prior  of Mont  Dieu,  a  Carthusian  foundation in  the
Diocese  of  Rheims, founded,  A. D.  1136,  by Odo,  Abbot of S. Remigius. It
seems  from  this  passage  that  Gervase,  as  well  as  the  monastery,  enjoyed  the
esteem  of  Bernard.

2  It  was formerly  named  after  Augendus,  who was a holy  Abbot of  the
renowned  monastery  of  Conde,  built  by  S.  Romanus  on  the  mountains  of  Jura.
He  gave  to  it  the  name  of  S.  Eugendus,  which  was  afterwards  changed  into  S.
Claudius. It  was  in  the  Diocese  of  Lyons.


LETTER CCXCI1.  8oi

LETTER CCXCII.
To  A  CERTAIN  SECULAR.

Bernard reproves him  for dissuading a novice named
Peter,  his  relative,  from  taking  the  vows.

1.  Though  unknown  to  me  by  face,  yet you  are  not  by
fame,  for  I  have  gathered  that  you  are  a  wise  man,  and  one
held in honour  by  the  world. My  beloved  son Peter,  to
whom  you  seem  to  be  well  known  and  to  be  in  some  degree
related,  has  wished me  to  write  to  you,  or  rather  reply  to
you. For  you wrote to him, and I wish that you had
written  what  was  honourable  to  yourself  and  expedient  for
him. You did not  so. You  ventured  to  dissuade a  new
soldier  of  Christ  from  the  service  of his  Lord. I  tell  you
that  there  is  one  that  seeketh  and  judgeth. Were  not  your
own  sins  enough  for  you  that  you  must  involve  yourself  in
those  of  others,  and,  again,  as  far  as  you  could,  recall  to  his
sins  a  youth  who  was  penitent,  and  so,  according  to  your
hardness  and  impenitent  heart,  keep  up  for  yourself  wrath
against the day  of  wrath? Was it not enough that  the
devil  himself  tempts  him, but  you must  help  that  tempter,
vou,  a  Christian,  his  leader,  and  his  familiar  friend  ? You,
indeed,  have  played  the  part  to  him  of  another  serpent,  but
he  has  not  acted  as  a  second  Eve. He  was  moved  by  what
you  said,  but  not  overturned. He  was founded  on  a  firm
rock.

2.  Nevertheless,  I  do  not  pay  you  back  in  your  own  coin,
but  I  overcome  evil  with  good. I  pray  for  you, I  wish  for
you  better  things,  and 1 write  better  things. In  the  first
place,  as  you  are  said  to  be  a  wise  man, I send  you  to  a
wise  man in  order  that  what  is  said  of  you may  be more
true. He  says,  Do  not  prevent  liim  who  can  do  good t  and,
if  you  can,  do  good  yourself  (Prov.  iii.  27). "You  have  now-
time  in  which  to  do  good. But  how  long  will  you  have  it  ?
Consider  how  little  time  you have  to  live, especially  now
that  you  are  old. Life  is  a  vapour  that  cometh  forth  for  a
brief  space  and  is  quickly  dispersed. If  you  are  wise  you
will  know  whether  that  curse  is  coming  on  you,  /  have  seen


802  LETTER CCXCIII.

the  foolish  firmly  rooted,  and  straightway  /  cursed  his
beauty  (Job  v.  3).  Well  did  he  who  was  truly  wise  call  the
fool  falsely-wise,  knowing  that  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is
foolishness  with  God  (i.  Cor.  iii.  19).  O  that  thou  wert
wise,  and  didst  understand  and  provide  for  thy  latter  end
(Deut.  xxxii.  29).  That  thou  wert  wise  in  the  things  of
God,  understood  what  the  things  of  this  world  are,  and
provided  for  the  things  beneath  the  earth  !  Surely  you
would  fly  from  the  things  beneath,  you  would  yearn  for  the
things  above,  you  would  spurn  the  things  which  make  for
evil.  My  mind,  or  rather  my  spirit,  prompts  me  to  say
many  things  to  you  about  the  salvation  of  your  soul,  but
until  I  see  by  your  answer  how  you  take  this,  I  will  add
nothing  further,  lest  I  become  burdensome  to  one  to  whom
I  wish  for  the  future  to  be  a  friend,  and,  if  he  will  let  me,  a
helper  in  the  way  of  salvation.  I  salute  your  wife,  beloved
by  me  in  Christ,  although  she  has  done  nothing  to  merit
this  affection.


LETTER CCXCIII. (Circa  A.D. 1150.)

To  PETER,  ABBOT  OF  MOUSTIER  LA  CELLED  ON  BEHALF
OF  A  MONK  OF  CHKXY,  WHO  HAD  CHANGED  OVER
TO  CLAIRVAUX.

To  the  cause  of  your  writing  I  thus  reply.  I  think  that
the  annoyance  of  my  lord  of  Chezy  is  not  more  annoying
to  anyone  than  to  myself.  But  I  suppose  that  you  know
that  a  long  time  ago,  by  his  own  wish  and  precept,  that
monk  was  made  mine,  and  that  he  promised  obedience  to

1  Petrus  Cellensis  is  better  known  by  having  been  Abbot  of  Cella,  a  monastery
in  the  suburbs  of  Troyes,  than  from  having-  been  Abbot  of  S.  Remigius,  or  even
Bishop  of  Chartres.  He  wrote  two  Letters  to  the  monks  of  Che'zy,  which  are
epp.  14  and  15,  lib.  ii.  Nothing  is  known  of  this  monk,  except  that  his  name
seems  to  have  been  Adam,  from  two  Letters  written  in  his  name  to  Peter  of
Cella  by  Nicholas  of  Clairvaux,  in  which  Peter  is  congratulated  on  the  reforma
tion  of  his  monastery.  It  was  this  Peter  who  defended  the  memory  of  S.  Bernard,
and  his  opinion  about  the  Conception  of  the  Blessed  Mary,  against  the  attacks  of
another  Nicholas  (ep.  174  note).  He  says  that  he  was  a  disciple  of  S.  Bernard
in  lib.  ix.  ep.  8  to  the  Cistercian  Chapter  (see  also  ep.  263).


LETTER CCXCIV.  803

me,  and  that  I  undertook  the  charge  of  him.  It  is  not  easy
to  recollect  how  often  since  then  I  have  opposed  his  desire
to  come  to  me,  and  sent  him  back  when  he  came.  Only
now  at  last  has  he  come  and  remained,  but  against  my
will,  and  I  can  in  no  way  persuade  him  to  return.  He  said,
indeed,  that  if  I  sent  him  away  he  would  go  away  altogether
and  never  return.  But  not  even  so  had  he  my  consent  ;
nay,  he  entered  even  against  my  advice.  But  having
entered  so,  my  conscience  would  not  let  me  reject  him,  nor
can  I  now  do  so,  inasmuch  as  he  was  before  put  under  my
care,  as  I  said,  and  I  shall  have  to  give  account  of  him.
For  a  long  time,  I  confess,  had  I  passed  over  this  danger  to
my  conscience,  lest  I  should  annoy  the  good  abbot ;  and  1
would  have  still  have  passed  it  over,  if  the  monk  would
have  in  any  way  listened  to  my  advice.  But  since  this  is
the  state  of  things,  it  is  yours  to  console  the  abbot,  to  blot
out  his  sadness,  to  make  my  excuse  to  him  for  this  reason
able  cause.  Lastly,  he  himself,  as  you  know,  is  in  a  state
of  uncertainty,  and  has  often  thought  of  leaving  his  house.1
But  if  he  wished  now  to  carry  out  what  he  has  meditated  I
would  not  stand  in  his  way,  because  I  know  that  he  remains
in  the  house  not  without  great  anxiety.


LETTER CCXCIV. (Circa  A.n. 1150.)

To  POPE  EUGEMUS,  ON  BEHALF  OF  THE  BISHOP  OF  LE

MANS.

He  recommends  the  Bishop  and  others  to  the  Pope.

The  Bishop  of  Le  Mans  is  here.-  If  you  do  not  know
him  let  me  say  that  he  is  a  man  of  whose  truth  and  honesty
no  one  has  any  doubt,  except  those  who  do  not  know  him
well.  From  his  youth  up  he  has  been  known  and  beloved
by  me  for  his  well-known  virtues,  as  well  as  for  the  other

1  Ep.  15  of  Peter  of  Cella  to  the  monk  of  Che'zy,  lib.  ii.,  alludes  to  this  :  "  As
long  as  you  can  retain  with you  your  father,  who  is  also  ours  ;  do  not  think  of
another.'' This must  be  understood  of  Simon,  who  finally,  on  the  death  of
Bernard,  retired  to  Clairvaux. See  above  on  ep.  263.

2  William  of  Passavant,  formerly  Archdeacon  of  Rheims.


804  LETTER CCXCV1.

good  points  in  his  character.  If  any  slander  against  him
has  been  brought  before  you,  holy  Father,  either  I  am
deceived,  or  the  slanderer  has  lied  to  his  own  harm.  Hear
the  Bishop,  and  dismiss  him  in  the  fulness  of  your  favour.
I  have  been  deceived  if  he  has  not  been  well  placed.  I  ask
that  the  Abbot  of  Vendome,  who  is  specially  devoted  to
you,1  may  find  special  favour  with  you,  and  that  his  reason
able  request  may  be  obtained  without  difficulty.  The  Bishop
of  Angers  is  sending  a  messenger,  seeking  something  at
your  hands,  both  by  himself  and  through  one,  and  I  ask
that  he  may  be  heard  for  his  righteousness,  and  that  a  lying
slanderer  may  not  be  heard  against  him.  It  is  Fitting  that
you  who  live  for  all  should  have  power  for  all  according  to
their  merits.


LETTER  CCXCV. (Circa  A.D. 1150.)
To  CARDINAL  HENRY,-  FOR  THE  SAME  BISHOP.

I  write  to  you  as  if  to  myself,  and  this  every  time  that  I
write  to  you.  For  where  you  are,  there  I  hope  to  be,  for  I
love  you  as  myself.  If  you  love  me  as  much,  or,  I  should
say,  because  you  love  me,  see  that  my  lord  of  Le  Mans,  as
far  as  you  can,  does  not  have  to  return  disappointed  in  any
way.  Otherwise  I  shall  be  disappointed  too,  for  I  love  him
for  his  uprightness,  and  I  wish  him  to  be  loved  by  you.


LETTER  CCXCVI.  (Circa  A.D. 1150.)

TO THE BISHOP OE OSTIA, EOR THE SAME.

A  certain  cleric  is  said  to  have  gained  the  ear  of  my  lord,
and  to  have  brought  a  charge  against  his  own  Bishop,  who

1  So  he  said  also  of  Odo,  Abbot  of  S.  Denys :  "  His  Church  and  himself  are
specially  devoted  to  you,"  doubtless  because  both  the  Abbey  of S.  Denys,  and
that  of  Vendome,  over  which  Robert  then  was,  are  directly  under  the  power  and
jurisdiction  of  the  Roman  Pontiff.

2  Otherwise  "  to  Cardinal  Helias."  Ernald  speaks  of  him  in  lib.  i.  of  his  Life  of
S.  Bernard,  whose  monk  he  had  been  at  Clairvaux.  His  title  was  of  SS.  Nereus
and  Achilles.  A  Letter  of  his  is  extant  in  Vol.  iii.,  Bibtioth.  Cislerc.,  p.  239,  about
the  due  election  of  Alexander  III.


LETTER CCXCVI1I.  805

is  a  friend  of  mine,  to  satisfy  his  own  greed.  If  you  have
any  regard  for  me,  or  rather  for  the  righteousness  of  God,
take  care  that  this  malignant  slanderer  gain  nothing  by  his
falsehood,  and  let  not  the  innocent  Bishop,  my  faithful
friend,  take  any  harm.


LETTER  CCXCVII.

To  THE  ABBOT  OF  MONTIER  RAMEY,T  ox  BEHALF  OF  A
FUGITIVE  MONK.

The  bearer  of  this  was  lately,  at  my  request,  admitted
into  your  society,  but  prompted  by  folly  and  carelessness
he  threw  off  the  sacred  habit,  and  left  you.  But  he  is  now,
it  seems,  penitent,  and  wishes  to  return,  and  humbly  begs
to  be  received  again  ;  and  I,  too,  beg  the  same  thing  for
him,  that  for  the  love  of  God  and  of  me  you  will  not  refuse
admission  and  the  habit  to  one  who  is  now  penitent.


LETTER CCXCVIII. (A.I). 1151.)
To  POPE  EUGENIUS,  ABOUT  NICHOLAS.

Nicholas2  has  gone  out  from  us  because  he  was  not  of  us,
but  he  has  left  behind  him  foul  footprints. I  long  ago  knew

1  Guido,  to  whom  ep.  398  was  written.

2  This  is  the  Nicholas  of  whom  Peter  of  Cluny  made  so  much,  as  we  see  in
his  Letters. From  a monk  of  Montier  Hamey,  in  the  Diocese  of  Troyes,  he
became  a  Cistercian,  and  Bernard's  secretary. He  was  a  powerful  writer,  and
only  second  to  Bernard  himself. His  Letters  are  extant  in  the  Cologne  edition
of  the  Library  of  the  Fathers,  edited  by  John Picard,  of  S.  Victor,  at  Paris.

But  he  was  a  traitor,  and  for  a  long  time  concealed  his  wolf's  disposition  under
sheep's  clothing,  and  at  length  manifested  his  hypocrisy.  For  it  was  not  once
only  that  he  fraudulently  used  Bernard's  seal ;  and  when  his  fraud  was  dis
covered  he  took  to  flight.  It  is  commonly  reported  that  he  fled*into  England,  on  the
account  of  there  being  a  certain  Nicholas  a  monk  of  S.  Albans,  in  Hertfordshire,
who  attacked  the  opinion  of  S.  Bernard  on  the  Conception  of  the  Blessed  Virgin
after  Bernard's  death.  It  was  not,  then,  without  cause  that  Bernard  wrote  to
Kugenius  that  he  was  in  peril  among  false  brethren.  But  since  Peter  of  Cella,
who  undertook  to  defend  S.  Bernard  (lib.  vi.  ep.  23,  and  lib.  ix.  ep.  9),  calls  him
English,  and  indicates  that  he  is  well-known  to  him,  and  his  friend,  and  as  it


•806  LETTER CCXCVI1I.

what  he  was,  but  I  had  been  waiting  either  for  God  to  con
vert  him  or  for  him  to  show  himself  a  Judas.  This  he  has
done.  Besides  books,  silver,  and  much  gold,  there  were
found  on  him  when  he  left  three  seals,  one  his  own,  one  the
prior's,  the  third  mine,  and  that  not  a  very  old  one,  but  the
new  one  which  I  had  been  forced  to  use  because  of  his
treachery  and  secret  frauds.  This  is  why  I  wrote  to  you,  I
recollect,  without  giving  my  name,  because  I  was  in  perils
among  false  brethren.  Who  can  say  to  how  many  people
he  wrote  what  he  chose  under  my  name,  and  without  my
knowledge  ?  Who  will  give  me  the  satisfaction  of  seeing
your  Curia  thoroughly  purged  of  the  dregs  of  his  lies,  and
of  seeing  that  the  innocence  of  those  with  me  is  sufficient
to  excuse  us  to  those  who  have  been  circumvented  and
prevented  by  his  lies  ?  It  was  partly  proved,  and  partly  he
•confessed,  that  he  had  written  to  you  more  than  once  in
this  underhand  way.  The  earth  is  stained  by  his  disgrace
ful  deeds,  and  they  have  become  proverbial  amongst  all  ;
1  refrain  from  polluting  with  them  my  lips  and  your  ears.  He
boasts  that  he  will  come  to  you,  and  that  he  has  friends  in  the
Curia.  If  he  does  come,  remember  Arnold  of  Brescia  ;  he
is  a  greater  sinner  than  Arnold.  No  one  better  deserves
life-long  imprisonment,  no  litter  sentence  could  be  pro
nounced  against  him  than  one  of  perpetual  silence.

is  agreed  that  the  other  was  a  Gaul,  and  familiarly  known  to  and  beloved  by
Peter  of  Cella,  as  is  plain  from  the  Letters  that  they  interchanged,  we  must  come
to  the  conclusion  that  they  were  not  the  same  person.  To  say  nothing  else,  his
style  is  not  so  biting,  but  is  too  courteous  to  let  us  think  that  he  could  have
addressed  Peter  of  Cella  so  outrageously  as  Peter  complains  that  Nicholas,  the
Englishman,  had  done  (lib.  ix.  ep.  9).  But  Nicholas  passed  over  from  the
monastery  of  Montier  Ramey  to  Clairvaux  in  S.  Bernard's  absence,  A.D.  1146,
when  certainly  Eugenius  was  Pope,  as  is  seen  from  ep.  7,  which  he  wrote  to  the
monks  of  Clairvaux  before  his  admission.  But  he  fled  A.D.  115:,  no  doubt
after  the  election  at  Grenoble,  about  which  see  notes  to  ep.  270  ;  and,  indeed,  he
is  found  to  have  written  his  name  to  ep.  389,  where  that  election  is  dealt  with.


LETTER CCXCIX.  807

LETTER CCXCIX. (Circa  A.D. 1150.)

To THE COUNT  OF ANGOULEME, ON BEHALF OF THE

MONKS  OF  S.  AMAND  DE  Boissn.1
He  complains  of  the  heavy  exactions  J'rom  his  brethren  by

the  Count.

Do  not  think  it  strange  of  me  if  I  regard  as  excessive
the  rent-charge  which  you  demand  of  our  brethren  for  the
domain  of  Boisse,  since  we  are  not  accustomed  to  pay
anything  like  that  amount.  We  have  founded  many
Abbeys,  and  none  of  them  has  been  rendered  liable  to
such  heavy  dues.  But  as  this  is  your  absolute  will,  and  as
God  more  willingly  accepts  a  voluntary  offering  than  a
forced  one,  I  will  ratify  the  agreement  which  my  brethren
have  made  with  you,  until  God  shall  inspire  you  with  a
more  indulgent  spirit  towards  us,  as  I  do  not  despair  that
He  will  do.  In  the  meantime  honour  them  with  your
affection  and  favour,  give  them  your  protection  and  sup
port  ;  there  is  no  better  means  of  enabling  you  to  appear
with  confidence  before  the  tribunal  of  Christ  than  to  have
the  poor  for  your  friends  and  intercessors.

LETTER  CCC.

To  THE  COUNTESS  OF  BLOIS.-

He  consoles  the  Countess  for  the  excesses  of  her  son,
i  In  the  first  Lyons  edition  of  the  Letters  of  S.  Bernard,  in  1494-  reads
Comiti  Angelterto  (perhaps  the  same  who  is  spoken  of  in  Letter  123)
pro  jratritus  de  Bruxia.  In  another  edition,  1530,  Comiti  Engelterto  pro
fratribus  de  Bruxia.  In  another  at  Lyons  in  1520,  and  in  all  following,  except
one,  it  stands  as  given  in  the  text.  The  authors  of  our  age  prefer  this  subscrip
tion,  asserting  that  William,  surnamedTaillefer,  Count  of  Angouleme.  granted
to  the  Cistercians  in  1143  a  spot  situated  in  the  territory  of  Boisse,  where  was
situated  the  Benedictine  Abbey  of  S.  Amand,  founded  by  Count  Arnald  in  the
tenth  century.  But  these  last  having  protested  against  the" grant  made  to  the
Cistercians,  Bernard,  for  the  sake  of  peace,  gave  it  up  in  1 153  ;  but  on  the  con
dition,  says  Picard,  that  the  monks  of  S.  Amand  should  repay  sixty  silver  marks
to  those  of  Clairvaux  for  the  buildings  which  they  had  raised  and  other  things
acquired  by  them  in  that  place.

'-'  Matilda  of  Flanders,  the  wife  of  Theobald  the  Great,  Count  of  Champagne.
Bernard  seems  to  have  comforted  the  Countess  not  with  a  vain  hope,  but  rather


808  LETTER CCC.

which  he  imputes  to  his  age,  and  encourages  her  to  hope
for  a  better  future  for  him  ;  he  advises  her  to  treat  him
with  kindness  and  indulgence,  rather  than  with  harshness.

If  your  son  has  ever  fallen  into  any  unsuitable  conduct
towards  you  I  greatly  regret  it ;  and  deplore  the  excess  of
the  son  as  well  as  the  injury  to  the  mother;  but  after  all  his
conduct  is  excusable  in  a  young  man.  For  the  faults  of
youth  find  both  their  cause  and  their  excuse  in  the  heedless-
ness  of  that  age.  Do  you  not  know  that  the  thoughts  and
imaginations  of  man's  heart  are  given  to  evil  from  his
youth?  (Gen.  viii.  21).  Console  yourself  in  the  hope  that
there  will  be  a  change  in  him  for  the  better  by  the  merits
and  alms  of  his  father.1

Because  of  this  you  must  be  more  and  more  earnest  in
your  prayers  and  vows  to  God  for  him  ;  for  although  he
may  not  show  all  the  filial  affection  and  respect  at  all  times
that  he  should,  yet  a  mother  ought  never  to  forget  her
motherly  affection,  nor,  indeed,  is  she  able  to  do  so.  Can
a  woman  forget  the  son  of  her  womb  ?  And  if  she,  He  says,
should  forget,  yet  I  will  not  forget  thee  (Isaiah  xlix.  15).
Let  us  entreat  and  lament  before  God  ;  as  for  me,  I  have
good  hope  that  He  will  in  His  mercy  cause  a  young  man  of
such  excellent  qualities  to  endeavour  to  imitate  his  fathers
noble  character.  Treat  with  him,  then,  in  a  spirit  of  gentle
ness  and  with  affectionate  intentions  :  because  he  will  thus
be  better  induced  to  good  actions  than  if  he  is  exasperated
with  reproaches  and  reprimands.  In  this  way  I  feel  sure
that  both  your  heart  and  mine  will  equally  be  gladdened  in

with  a  prophecy.  For  I  find  that  she  hore  to  Theobald  four  sons  ;  Henry,  Count
of  Blois,  who  succeeded  his  father  in  1151;  Theobald,  Dapifer,  successively  of
Louis  the  Younger  and  Philip  Augustus,  in  which  charge  he  succeeded  Ralph,
Count  of  Vermandois;  Stephen,  afterwards  a  monk  of  the  Chartreuse;  and,
finally,  William,  who  is  mentioned  in  Letter  271,  for  the  promotion  of  whom  to
Church  dignities  while  yet  a  boy  Bernard  refuses  to  make  interest.  Bernard
seems  in  this  Letter  to  speak  of  Henry,  the  first  of  these,  who  on  his  return  from
Syria,  inflated  with  his  succession  to  his  father's  power,  allowed  himself  to  fall
into  some  excesses,  easily  to  be  understood  at  his  age.  Letter  279  is  to  him.

1  This  was  Theobald  the  Grtat,  for  whom  see  the  Notes  to  Letter  37.  The
Life  not  only  of  Bernard,  but  also  of  Norbert,  speak  of  his  alms-giving  and
other  good  deeds.  See  also  Letter  416.


LETTER CCCI.  809

a  short  time  by  the  happy  change  which  will  take  place  in
him.  You  will  not  doubt  that  I  desire  as  fervently  as  you
to  see  him  return  to  a  better  mind.  Would  that  I  may  find
him  always  towards  everyone  such  as  I  have  always  found
him  towards  myself;  for  I  do  not  think  that  he  has  ever
refused  to  yield  to  any  wish  of  mine;  may  the  Lord  recom
pense  it  to  him  !  But  you  may  believe  that,  as  you  have
frequently  requested,  I  have  remonstrated  with  him,  and  I
will  continue  to  do  so  whenever  the  occasion  shall  offer.

LETTER CCCI. (Circa A.I). 1149.)
To  SANCHIA,  SISTER  OK  THE  EMPEROR  OK  SPAIN.*

He  begs  her  to  use  tier  influence  to  close  a  controversy
which  had  arisen  with  some  other  monks  about  the  reception
of  a  certain  moncisterv  amonv  them.

i.  As  relates  to  the  reception  of  the  monastery  of  Thol-
danos,  you  know  that  what  has  been  done  was  not  done  by

1  This  was  Alfonso  of  Castile  and  Leon,  King-  or  Emperor,  for  the  Kings  of
that  date  loved  to  be  honoured  with  the  latter  title.  He  was  frequently  called
"  the  Good  ";  Sanchia,  his  sister,  was  much  attracted  towards  S.  Bernard,  and.
had  founded  in  i  147  in  the  Diocese  of  Palencia  a  Cistercian  monastery  called  S.
Peter  d'Espina.  S.  Bernard  sent  thither  a  colony  of  monks  under  the  charge
of  his  brother  Nivard.  A  little  time  afterwards  the  black  monks  of  the
monastery  of  Tholdanos,  in  the  kingdom  of  Leon,  recently  founded  by  the
Infanta  Elvira,  detached  themselves  from  the  monks  of  Caracetta,  upon  which
they  were  dependent,  and  put  themselves  under  the  authority  of  the  Cistercians.
Immediately  the  monks  of  Caracetta  protested,  and  begged  Sanchia  to  use  all
her  influence  with  S.  Bernard.  What  was  the  issue  of  this  affair  will  be  seen
from  an  ancient  document  which  Manrique  has  published  in  his  Annals  under
the  year  1148,  c.  8.  It  reads  thus:  "After  the  death  of  Dom  Klorentius,  the
Abbot  Ferdinand,  Abbot  of  Tholdanos,  declared  himself  without  reason
against  the  Convent  of  Caracetta,  and  led  by  a  spirit  of  rebellion,  betook  him
self  to  the  house  of  Clairvaux.  The  Lady  Sanchia,  the  Queen,  who  held  the
monastery  of  Caracetta  in  much  affection,  was  displeased  a4  this,  and  wrote  to
the  Abbot  and  community  of  Clairvaux  not  to  receive  the  before-mentioned
Abbot  in  an  illicit  manner.  The  Abbot  of  Clairvaux  yielded  to  the  wishes  of
the  Queen,  refuse.!  to  receive  the  Abbot  Ferdinand,  unless  he  should  obtain  the
licence  of  the  Abbot  of  Caracetta  (for  his  admission.  As  he  was  never  able  to
obtain  this  he  died  without  being  a  monk  either  at  Clairvaux  or  Caracetta."

Nevertheless,  some  years  afterwards  this  monastery  passed  under  the  rule  of
Ctteaux.

VOL. 11.  52


8io  LETTER CCCI.

me,  since  I  was  absent  and  knew  nothing  of  what  was  going
on. That  it  was  done  by  my  brethren I do  not  deny,  but
they  took  care  to  surround  it  in  every  respect  with  precau
tions,  taking  the  advice  of  many  persons  of  piety,  assuring
themselves  of  the  consent  and  assistance  of  the  Bishop  of
the Diocese,  and having  acted only on  the request of a
noble  lady  who  had  founded  that  house  upon  her  own  lands;
and  in  no  respect  was  it  done secretly. They  supposed
that  they  were  able to accept freely  what  the foundress
offered  to  them  spontaneously,  declaring  it  free  and inde
pendent  of  any  other  religious  house,  and  it  was  even  said
that  she  had  the  written  proofs  of  his  in  her  hands. But  as
you  inform  me  that  the  monks  of  Caracetta  complain  that  in
this  matter  their  rights  have  been  injured,  and  as,  instead
of  following  the  advice  of  Solomon,  who  says  to  them,  Do
not  hinder  him  who  desires  to  do  well,  and  do  well  thyself
if  thou  art  able  (Prov.  iii. 27),  they  opposed  themselves
under  these circumstances  to us in this good work, and
since it does  not  become the servants  of God  to  strive
(2 Tim. ii. 24), my  conclusion  is  to  put  back  the  whole
matter  into  your  hands,  that  you may  set  at  rest,  by  your
action and authority, a  calumny altogether, as they say,
unfounded  and  unjust,  and  that  for  the  glory  of  God  and
the health of  your  own soul you may restore calm and
peace  to  an  Order  established  in  the  Church.

2.  For  my  brother  Nivard,  who  praises  your  bounty
much,  advises  me  to  put  entire  confidence  in  you  on  this
occasion,  as  well,  because  of  your  especial  goodwill  for  our
Order,  as  because  of  the  promise  which  you  have  had  the
goodness  to  make  to  him.  I  cannot  suppose  that  our
opponents  will  refuse  to  submit  themselves  to  your  salutary
warnings  or  advice.  If,  however,  they  should  do  so  it  will
be  necessary  to  commit  the  judgment  in  this  matter  to  the
two  Bishops  in  whose  dioceses  the  places  in  question  are
situated,  so  that  the  whole  controversy  between  them  may
be  terminated.  Whatsoever  they  shall  have  determined  or
agreed  upon  by  mutual  consent  it  will  be  your  part  to
ratify  and  see  executed.  If  you  fear  God,  do  not  suffer  that


LETTER CCCII.  8ll

so  good  a  work  should  be  hindered,  nor  that  the  wish  of
that  pious  lady  should  be  frustrated,  nor  that  those  religi
ous  should  be  deprived  of  the  fruit  of  their  devotion,  nor
finally,  that  God  should  be  defrauded  of  an  offering  so
acceptable  to  Him  as  that  of  an  Order  reformed.1

I  entreat  you  also  to  show  your  maternal  affection  for
your  new  foundation.  I  mean  the  house  of  Espina.  Let
those  brethren,  sustained  by  your  generosity,  continue  in
the  service  of  God  according  to  the  Rule  of  their  Order.


LETTER CCCII. (A.D. 1153.)

To  THK LEGATES-  OE  THE  HOLY  SEE,  ON BEHALF  OF
THE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  MAYENCE.

He  commends  to  tliem  tJic  cause  of  the  Archbishop,  who
was  oppressed  by  his  adversaries.

To  my  Lords  and  reverend  Fathers,  Legates  of  the  Holy
See,  the  son  and  servant  of  their  Holiness,  BERNARD,  called
Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health,  and  that  through  all

1  Lambert  Deschamps,  author  of  the  edition  of  1520,  remarks  in  the  margin
upon  this  passage  "  that  even  in  the  time  of  S.  Bernard  mention  was  made  of
a  reform  of  the  monasteries."

2  Baronius  speaks  thus,  under  the  year 1153, of this Legation  :  "In  the
same  year  Pope  Eugenius  sent  a  Legation  into  Germany  to  judge  the  Arch
bishop  of  Mayence. For  this  duty  were  chosen  the  Presbyter  Bernard  and  the
Deacon  Gregory,"  etc. Bernard  was  the  Prior  of  the  regular  Canons  of  the
Lateran,  when  he  was  made  Cardinal-l'resbyter  with  the  title  of  S.  Clement,  in
i  145,  by  Pope  Eugenius. As  for  Gregory,  he  is  believed  to  be  the  same  who
•was  made  Cardinal,  with  the  title  of  S.  Angelo,  by Pope  Innocent  in 1137.
Bishop  Conrad,  who  wrote  a  Chronicle  of  Mayence  a  hundred  years  later,  says
that  Archbishop Henry was  deposed, and  lays  all the  fault  upon  a  certain
Arnold,  who  had  betrayed  him  ;  but  Dodechin,  in  his  Appendix  to  Marian  us  in
Canonicos,  imputes  the  deposition  of  the  Archbishop  to  the  Legates,  whom  the
Chancellor  Arnold  had  succeeded  in  corrupting  by means  of money. Never
theless,  Otto  of  Freisingen,  who  was  present,  asserts  that  he  was  justly  deposed
(l)e  Vit.  Frid.  ii.  9).

To  the  same  Henry  Letter  365  was  written.

However  this  may  have  been,  Henry  after  his  deposition  retired  into  Saxony,
and  a  little  time  after  made  a  happy  and  pious  death  in  a  Cistercian  Convent.


812  LETTER CCCIII.

things  they  may  please  God  and  bring  forth  worthy  fruits
of  their  mission.

Although  far  removed  in  body,  I  am  closely  united  with
you  by  affection  and  goodwill ;  and  I  desire  and  pray  that
your  acts  and  intentions  may  be  directed  in  everything  to
justice  and  right.  Having  then  learned  that  the  unfortunate
Archbishop  of  Mayence  has  been  cited  to  appear  before
you  in  order  to  reply  to  the  accusations  of  his  adversaries,
I  have  taken  upon  me  to  make  an  appeal  to  your  goodness
on  his  behalf.  I  believe  that  you  will  honour  your  ministry
if,  as  far  as  justice  allows,  you  support  this  feeble  and
tottering  wall  by  the  shoulders  of  your  authority  ;  and  that
you  will  not  permit  the  bruised  reed  to  be  broken  nor  the
smoking  flax  to  be  quenched,  as  far  as  in  you  lies.  Let  him
feel,  I  entreat  you,  that  my  intercession  has  been  of  service
to  him  ;  and  let  him  not  be  utterly  lost  by  that  simplicity
of  soul,  because  of  which  he  is  said  to  have  been  entrapped
by  false  brethren,  rather  than  discovered  in  any  action
rendering  him  worthy  of  deposit^


:ion.


LETTER CCCIII.
To  Louis  THE  YOUNGER,  KING  OF  FRANCE.

Bernard  advises  the  King  how  he  ought  to  act  in  the
cause  of  a  certain  Breton  seigneur,  who  was  adulterous
and  excommunicated.

If  by  the  promise  to  absolve  him  from  the  excommunica
tion  which  he  has  incurred,  it  would  be  possible  to  determine
that  seigneur  from  Brittany  to  send  away  the  adulteress,  per
mitting  her  to  enjoy  the  lands  which  her  father  has  left  her
according  to  the  division  which  she  has  made  with  her
brother  ;  although  she  is  unworthy  of  any  such  concession,
perhaps  it  ought  not  to  be  refused,  so  that  you  may  by  this
means  obtain  the  support  and  aid  of  a  powerful  seigneur.
Otherwise  it  is  not  the  advice  of  your  humble  and  faithful
servant  that  either  land  should  be  granted  to  a  stranger,  or
your  favour  accorded  to  a  man  excommunicated  and  inces-


LETTER CCC1V.  813

tuous  :  lest  (which  may  God  avert)  you  may  one  day  hear
the  words  applied  to  you  :  When  thou  saivest  a  thief  thou
consentedst  unto  him,  and  hast  been  partaker  with  the
adulterers  (Ps.  1.  18).  Yet  I  would  not  advise  precipitate
action,  or  a  sudden  breach  with  the  man.  Action  should
be  taken  through  some  faithful  and  prudent  agent,  by
whom,  if  possible,  he  may  be  led  on,  and  time  gained.  It
he  will  not  listen  to  any  proposal  and  remains  obstinate,  you
may  have  confidence  in  the  Lord  that  he  will  not  prevail ;
since  justice  will  be  on  your  side  and  will  be  a  powerful
aid.  I  know  not  whether  the  Bishop1  of  that  district  would
be  a  fit  and  suitable  person  for  this  purpose  :  not  that  he  is
not  faithful  to  you,  for  he  is,  on  the  contrary,  most  loyal  ;
but  on  account  of  his  position  towards  that  seigneur,  who
detests  him,  and  would  not,  I  fear,  have  any  confidence  in
him.  He  is,  however,  prepared  to  do  everything  in  your
service,  which,  with  the  will  of  God,  might  be  in  his  power.
If  he  should  make  any  more  private  suggestion  to  you  as
from  me  you  will  know  that  it  comes  from  me,  and  please
to  receive  it  as  from  my  mouth.  For  he  is  a  man  whom  I
love  much  and  in  whom  I  have  considerable  confidence ;
you  also  may,  I  believe,  safely  confide  to  him  whatever  you
think  proper.


LETTER  CCCIV. (A.D. 1153.)
To  THE  SAME.

Bernard  thanks  tJie  King  for  tJic  interest  that  he  takes
in  his  health,  and  says  some  words  in  favour  of  the  King's
brother  Robert.

The  letter  which  your  Highness  has  deigned  to  send  to
me  has  rejoiced  my  soul  :  may  God,  who  has  inspired  you
with  this  good  thought,  recompense  you  also  with  a  similar
joy.  What  am  I,  or  what  is  my  father's  house,  that  your
royal  Majesty  should  trouble  about  my  life  or  my  death?

1  He  refers  here,  perhaps,  to  John,  Bishop  of  Aleth  or  S.  Malo,  who  had  been
a  monk  at  Citeaux,  and  to  whom  Peter  de  Celle  wrote  many  Letters.  (Book  i.
Letter  15  and  following.)


814  LETTER CCCV.

But  since  you  do  me  the  honour  to  inquire  respecting  my
health  I  may  reply  that  I  am  somewhat  better,  and,  I  believe,
out  of  danger,  though  I  am  still  very  weak.  I  take  this
opportunity  to  inform  you  that  Lord  Robert,  your  brother,
has  done  me  the  honour  and  kindness  to  visit  me  during  my
sickness  ;  he  has  spoken  to  me  in  a  manner  that  has  filled
me  with  joy  and  better  hope  on  his  behalf.  Remember  to
show  him  some  affection  ;  I  promise  you  that  he  will  give
you  satisfaction,  if  his  actions  answer  to  his  words.  Have
the  kindness  to  express  to  him  your  satisfaction  at  knowing
that  he  is  willing  henceforth  to  rule  his  conduct  according  to
the  advice  which  I  have  given  him,  and  that  of  good  men.
I  have  not  my  seal  at  hand,  but  I  hope  that  he  who  reads  this
will  recognize  my  style,  because  I  have  myself  dictated1
this.  _

LETTER  CCCV. (A.D. 1153.)
To  POPE  EUGENIUS.

Bernard  recommends  to  the  Pope  the  cause  of  the
Bishop  of  Beauvais,  who  is  detained  by  fust  causes  from
travelling  to  Rome.

The  Bishop  of  Beauvais,2  your  son  (whom  I  might  also
call  mine  if  it  were  not  presumption  on  my  part  thus  to
speak),  having  been  summoned  to  your  presence,  would
have  come  willingly,  being  strong  in  the  justice  of  his
cause,  and  confiding  in  your  fatherly  favour.  But  I  have
detained  him,  and  have  had  much  difficulty  in  so  doing,  so
desirous  w^as  he  to  see  your  face.  What  made  me  wish  to
keep  him  back  was  chiefly  (among  other  good  reasons)  that
I  was  doubtful  \vhat  was  your  wish  in  respect  of  him.
Besides,  without  speaking  of  many  other  considerations

1  That  is,  1  have  written  ,•  as  may  be  gathered  from the words  themselves.
In  this  sense  also  the  same  word  dictavi  is  used  in  other  epistles,  e.g.,  85,  n.  4,
and  in  Letters  307,  310. But  dicto  is  used  in  a  different  sense  from scrilo  in
Letters  89  and  90,  n.  i.

2  This  was  Henry,  brother  of  the  King  of  France,  Louis  the  Younger,  who  is
mentioned  in Letter  278. See Letter 307. Bernard gives him the  name  of
Son,  and  in  the  following  Letter  calls  him  your  brother  because  he  had  been  a
monk  at  Clairvaux,as  may  be  seen  in  the  Life,  iv.  15.  See  the  notes  on  Letter  307.


LKTTKR CCCV.  815

which  opposed  themselves  to  his  departure,  he  and  his
brother,  the  King,  do  not  walk  together  in  one  mind,  and
it  would  not  be  altogether  safe  for  him  to  be  long  absent
from  his  diocese.  Do  not  ask  me  on  which  side  is  the
v.-rong  :  it  is  not  for  me  to  bring  a  charge  against  anyone;
it  is  sufficient  for  me  to  excuse  the  Bishop.  I  have  seen
him  in  the  King's  presence,  showing  to  him  every  mark  of
submission  and  respect,  and  that  to  no  purpose.  However,
you  may  be  sure  that  whatever  he  may  have  to  fear  and
whatever  may  happen  in  his  absence,  he  will  come  to  you
without  delay  whenever  he  shall  have  learned  that  you
desire  him  to  do  so.  His  person  and  his  interests  are  in
your  hands.  Nor  has  he  so  acted  in  the  post  committed  to
him  that  he  should  not  be  able  to  count  on  your  goodwill.
Therefore  he  has  sent  this  person  in  his  place,  well  knowing
that  he  might  act  towards  you  as  towards  a  father.  Would
it  please  you  to  know  what  orders  have  been  given  to  him  ?
To  do  nothing  without  your  direction,  and  to  follow  in  all
respects  your  wishes,  to  which  he  wholly  commits  himself.
And  he  is  confident  that  you  will  do  better  for  him  than  act
merely  as  his  judge,  but  that  you  will  be  his  support,  his
strength,  and  his  protector.  If  it  should  please  you  to
commit  the  cause  to  the  judgment  of  the  Lord  Archbishop
of  Rheims,  I  believe  it  would  be  speedily  terminated  with
the  help  of  God,  especially  if  the  right  of  Appeal  was
taken  away  from  each  party.


LETTER CCCVI. (A.D. 1151.)

TO THE BISHOP OF OSTIA,1 FOR THE ELECTION OF
THOROLD,  ABBOT  OF  TROIS-FONTAIXES.

He  justifies  himself  from  the  reproach  which  Hugo  had
thrown  upon  him  of  having  named  Tliorold  as  Abbot  oj
Trois-Fontaincs,  in  preference  to  a  certain  monk  named

1  He  was  named  Hugo,  and  had  been  Abbot  of  Trois-Fontaines  in  Cham
pagne,  as  we  learn  from  Letters  273  and  274.  This  was  why,  after  he  had
become  Cardinal,  he  took  a  special  interest  in  that  Abbey.


8l6  LETTER CCCVI.

Nicholas,  whom  Hugo  had  intended  for  that  post.  He
also  explains  the  election  of  Robert  as  Abbot  of  a  newly-
founded  monastery.

1.  Woe  to  the  world  because  of  offences  (S.  Matt,  xviii.
7). Do I offend  you? am  I  an  offence  unto  you? Who
could  believe  that  such  a  thing  could  happen  except  those
to whom the unity  of feeling, and mutual affection, in
which we have  walked in  the  house  of God  together, is
altogether unknown  ? What a sudden and lamentable
change  for  me  ! He  who  used  to  support  me  now  prepares
to  oppress  me  ; and  the  very  person  who  used  to  defend
me now frightens me with threats, and accuses me of
prevarication and even of  blasphemy  ! Our first  parents
were not punished for their  only  fault,  although  a  grave
one, until they had  been questioned  and convicted: the
Ninevites  had  time  given  them  for  penitence  (Jonah  iii.  10),
and  the  people of  Sodom were  punished  not  merely  after
hearing, but  also after  sight  of  their  sins  (Gen.  xix. 16).
But how differently my judge acts with me, no doubt
because I am so  much  more  contemptible  than  these  ! I
am  not  thought  worthy  of  being  placed  on  my  defence,  of
being  invited  to  justify  myself,  to  render  a  reason,  of  having
opportunity  given  me  for  reply. I  am  judged  without  being
summoned,  and  condemned  without  being  convicted.

2.  But  now  listen,  if  you  will be  so  good,  to  my  excuse,
and  if  it  does  not  seem  sufficient  to  you,  it  is  at  all  events
a  true  one. You  had  wished  that  Brother  Nicholas  should  be
substituted  for  yourself  in  your  post, and  I  remember  well
that  I did not disagree with you. You  and I  were  thus
completely  agreed,  and  because  we  were  so,  I  thought  and
said  that  there could  be  no difficulty in  thus  settling  the
matter. That  it  was  not  so  settled  was  owing  to  necessity
and not  to  any  duplicity on  my  part. The matter was
variously  taken  by  others,  and  caused  discord. Do  I  say
discord  ? It  was  rather  concord  ; for  all  the  electors  were
found  to  be so completely  agreed in disagreeing  to  the
plan which  we had  determined upon,  that not even one


LETTER CCCVI.  817

monk  or  lay-brother,  except  two  or  three  who  were  your
countrymen,  was  willing  to  give  consent  to  our  plan.
Nevertheless,  I  tried  by  many  arguments,  now  entreating,
now  threatening,  to  bring  about  the  resolution  we  desired,
but  they  withstood  me  with  as  much  agreement  as  obsti
nacy.  I  might  have  been  able  to  use  force,  but  this  I
omitted  to  do,  and  I  pray  God  to  spare  me,  as  I  spared
that  monk  for  whom  we  were  interested,  in  not  casting
into  the  midst  of  such  a  storm  and  of  so  many  rebellious
spirits  a  man  humble,  timid,  and  inclined  to  avoid  the
weight  of  the  charge  attempted  to  be  laid  upon  him.  For
without  speaking  of  all  those  outside  duties  in  which  you
yourself  have  had  experience  of  him,  all  the  other  duties
of  this  charge  seem  to  be  beyond  his  strength.  Therefore,
permitting  him  to  go  forth  from  his  monastery  with  those
who  were  of  like  mind  with  himself,  I  have  put  him  at  the
head  of  a  house  which  will  be  so  much  more  easy  for  him  to
govern,  as  he  will  be  seconded  by  my  own  monks  in  the
performance  of  the  work.  For  it  is  a  place  newly  founded
by  my  own  brethren,  and  very  near  to  me,  so  that  I  can
frequently  visit  it.  Of  all  the  Abbots  who  were  in  a  con
dition  to  occupy  your  post,  I  did  not  venture  to  propose
any,  since  I  had  not  your  approval ;  and  Brother  Robert,  in
default  of  a  better  person,  seemed  to  me  more  fitted  than
anyone  else  for  it.  I  proposed  him,  then  :  when  the  reply
came  from  you,  and  by  your  judgment  he  was  shut  out  from
it.  Why  should  I  prolong  the  story?  They  accepted  the
man,  who,  as  I  learn,  displeases  your  Holiness.

3.  Nor  is  the  cause  unknown,  as  I  am  told  you  declare
loudly  that  he  is  a  man  of  bad  character,  and  that  because
of  his  crimes  he  was  expelled  from  the  monastery l  over
which  he  had  before  presided.  It  may  have  been  the  case  ;

1  This  was  the  Abbey  of  Fountains  in  England,  over  which  after  Maurice,  a
monk  named  Thorold,  or  Thurold,  presided  as  Abbot  "  for  two  years,  acting
greatly  by  his  own  arbitrary  authority,  and  presuming  to  do  some  things  against
the  advice  and  direction  of  the  venerable  Archbishop,  with  whom  he  speedily  dis
agreed.  Wherefore,  by  the  order  of  the  holy  Father  Bernard,  he  resigned  his
office  and  returned  to  Rivaulx,  from  which  he  had  been  taken"  (Serlo,  Hisi.
Fonton.,  Mon.  Aug.  \.  p.  748).


818  LETTER  CCCVI.

but  as  far  as  I  am  competent  to  be  a  witness,  I  declare
before  God  and  his  Angels  that  I  have  never,  up  to  this
time,  heard  anything  of  that  kind  respecting  him.  Not
even  his  Archbishop,1  when  he  was  making  every  effort  to
obtain  his  removal,  ever  signified  to  me  by  letter  or
messenger,  anything  to  that  effect.  Can  you  possibly
believe,  that  if  it  had  been  otherwise,  I  should  be  a
supporter  of  disorder  or  turpitude  ?  If  your  Excellence
thought  thus  of  me  I  do  not  know  how  the  long  friendship
with  which  you  have  honoured  me  up  to  this  day,  and
the  great  kindness  which  you  have  never  ceased  to  show
me  could  at  all  be  justified.  And  what  could  you  say  or
think  of  the  Archbishop,  who  had  put  at  the  head  of  a  house
of  which  he  had  himself  been  superior,  a  man  of  such  a
character  of  which,  if  it  wrere  a  matter  of  long  and  public
notoriety,  he  could  not  have  been  ignorant  ?  As  for  me,
God  forbid  that  I  should  in  the  least  suspect  of  such  con
duct  a  man  of  such  high  character  and  office.  It  is  true
that  he  who  had  promoted  the  man  to  be  Abbot,  himself
removed  him.  I  do  not  deny  it.  For  what  reason  he  did  so
is  a  matter  that  only  concerns  himself.  But  he  is  known  to
have  displeased  many  by  so  doing,  and  has  been  accused  of
not  observing  either  reason,  rule,  or  custom  in  that  removal.
The  Archbishop  acted  simply  according  to  his  own  pleasure,
and  in  order  not  to  cause  him  annoyance,  this  Abbot  at  my
entreaty  gave  place  to  wrath,  and  retired  from  his  place  in
peace.

4.  One  thing  I  must  say.  From  the  time  that  he  entered
into  this  house2  no  one  has  remarked  in  him  (and  this  is
the  testimony  of  all)  anything  which  would  render  him
unworthy  of  the  post  to  which  he  was  elevated.  He  lived

1  The  Archbishop  of York,  Henry Murdach, an Englishman  by  birth,  and
previously  a  monk  at  Clairvaux. It  is  to  him  that  Letter  106  is  addressed. He
also  had  been  Abbot  of  Fountains,  as  may be  seen  by  the  Letter  cited,  and  in.
the  notes  to  Letter  321.

2  He  ha'l  then  quitted  Rivaulx,  to  take  up  his  abode  at  Clairvaux. As  to
his  learning,  Serlo  speaks  of  it  in  these terms  : — "  He was  a man unusually
versed  in  sacred  literature,  and  equally  well  instructed  in  the  liberal  arts."


LKTTER CCCVI.  819

without  disagreement  with  anyone;  besides  this,  he  is
versed  in  literature  and  theology,  he  is  of  pleasant
demeanour  and  appearance,  and  affable  in  speech.  It  is
true  that  he  was  too  short  a  time  with  us  to  make  these
testimonies  quite  irrefutable.  This  I  confess.  He  will
perhaps  do  well,  and  perhaps  badly.  I  distrust  all  that  I
do,  and  am  unable  to  foresee  what  will  come  of  any  step  I
take.  Since  then  I  am  not  fully  assured,  I  am  unable  to
express  positive  certainty  to  you.  It  is  done,  and  what  is
done  cannot  be  undone.  If  I  had  been  a  prophet  it  is  cer
tain  that  I  should  have  avoided  to  give  to  a  friend  cause  of
offence,  to  trouble  the  mind  of  a  saint,  to  give  scandal  to  a
Bishop.  What  do  you  wish  that  I  should  do,  since  I  was
obliged  by  necessity  to  act,  and  to  act  according  to  regular
order  ?

5.  This  is  my  excuse.  If  it  is  sufficient,  let  the  ill-feeling
be  taken  away  from  between  us;  if  not,  I  will  endure  your
judgment,  of  whatever  character  it  may  be.  It  would  be
painful  to  me  to  destroy  so  quickly  with  my  own  hand
what  I  have  built  up,  unless  some  convenient  opportunity
should  offer,  which,  perhaps,  in  course  of  time,  may  be  the
case.  But  if  you  wish  to  depose  him  the  power  is  in  your
hands ;  you  will  find  in  me  no  resistance.  Why  should  I
oppose  myself  to  a  torrent?  Unjustly  I  have  not  acted.
If  I  seem  to  have  acted  foolishly  it  is  in  your  power  at  once
to  correct  my  folly,  or,  if  you  think  the  case  requires,  even
to  punish  it.  Yet  I  add  that  if  I  am  dealt  with  piously  and
christianly,  a  righteous  man  will  correct  me  in  mercy,  and
if  he  shall  reprimand  me  will  not  in  anger  disgrace  me
before  others.  Here  you  have  my  position,  unless  I  have
given  you  some  fresh  offence,  even  in  this  letter.  For,
although  your  indignation  against  me  has  become  known
to  me  by  others  and  not  by  yourself,  yet  I  have  guarded
myself  from  replying  in  a  similar  manner,  but  have  pre
ferred  to  complain  to  you  of  yourself  in  these  lines.  For
the  rest  I  bless  God,  who  has  Himself  deprived  me  before
my  death  of  this  consolation  which  He  had  bestowed,  and
which,  perhaps,  I  enjoyed  with  too  great  pleasure,  namely,


$20  LETTER CCCVII.

the  favour  of  my  lord1  and  now  yours,  so  that  I  might
learn,  even  by  my  own  experience,  not  to  rest  my  hope
upon  man.

LETTER  CCCVII. (A.D.  1153.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  defends  the  Bishop  of  Beauvais  against  unfavourable
reports.  He  relates  in  what  extremely  poor  health  he  is  ;
and  what  had  happened  to  the  Archbishop  of  Lyons.

i.  I  write  to  you  in  great  haste,  and  consequently  with
less  care,  because  the  traveller  who  is  to  convey  this  is
hastening  his  departure.  It  is  a  wonderful  coincidence,  but
a  very  convenient  one.  Brother  G.  Fulcher  has  just  arrived
with  your  letter  and  that  of  my  lord  almost  at  the  same
moment  as  [he  stranger  who  bears  this  ;  by  the  providential
care,  no  doubt,  of  God  that  I  might  have  a  means  for  reply
ing  to  you  at  once;  which  otherwise  I  might  not  have  been
able  to  do.  however  much  I  wished,  with  sufficient  quick
ness.  As  you  placed  first  what  concerned  the  Bishop  of
Beauvais,  so  I  begin  with  this  in  my  reply.  You  know  that
he  is  a  free  agent,  his  life  and  character  are  not  in  my
power,  but  in  that  of  the  State.  If  he  acts  sometimes
otherwise  than  he  ought,  or  is  becoming  to  him,  i  am  able
to  lament  it,  but  however  much  I  may  wish  to  correct  it,
that  is  not  in  my  power.  But  yet  I  ought  to  say  to  you
that  up  to  the  present  I  have  had  no  occasion  to  remark
that  he  absents  himself  frequently  from  his  diocese  ;  nor
have  I  ever  heard  that  this  is  the  case.  His  brother  Robert
has  come  to  him,  and  now  is  staying  with  him.  I  have  not
yet  heard  that  he  has  committed,  or  led  the  Bishop  to
commit,  any  action  disgraceful  or  criminal,  and  it  would  be
very  wonderful  if  any  such  had  reached  you  while  it  was
unknown  to  me.  I  will  do  all  in  my  power  to  persuade

1  Viz.,  of  Pope  Eugenius,  who  had  become  alienated  from  S.  Bernard,  as  had
also  Innocent  II.  See  Letter  218.  So  difficult  is  it  to  retain  the  favour  of  the
great,  however  distinguished  be  the  services  rendered  to  them,  without  the  sacri
fice  of  truth  !


LETTER CCCVII.  821

him  as  you  wish,  to  resign  his  See,  if  ever  I  have  a  fitting
and  reasonable  opportunity.  I  should  already  have  done
so  if  I  had  been  able  without  offending  the  Bishop,  and  if  I
had  not  feared  to  see  him  replaced  by  some  one  still  more
useless  in  the  Diocese.  He  came  himself  to  see  me  in
Lent,  prepared  to  go  to  Rome  on  account  ot  a  certain
appeal  ;  and  he  would  have  done  so  if  I  had  not  dissuaded
him.  The  motive  of  my  dissuasion  was  this,  that  it  did
not  seem  to  me  that  the  purpose  which  called  him  to  Rome,
or  the  people  by  whom  he  was  accompanied,  were  such  as
were  becoming  to  the  person  of  a  young  man  who  was  a
Bishop.  Yet  he  still  proposes  to  set  out  at  a  convenient
season.  He  is  your  brother  ;  you  ought  to  have  considera
tion  for  him,  so  that  his  adversaries  may  not  prevail  against
him.  I  could  wish  that  you  had  written  to  him  rather  than
to  me,  and  given  him  a  brotherly  warning  respecting  the
reports  which  have  reached  you  about  his  conduct.1

1  Henry,  the  son  of  Louis  le  Gros,  and  brother  of  Louis  the  Younger,  Kings
of  France,  being  then  Bishop  of  Beauvais,  did  not  enjoy,  it  appears,  a  very  good
reputation  with  the  Pope.  Wherefore  Bernard  replies  that  he  lamented  the
errors  of  the  Bishop,  if  there  were  any,  but  was  quite  unable  to  amend  them.

In  the  Life,  B.  iv.  c.  3,  is  recorded  how  S.  Bernard  had  predicted  that  it  would
not  be  long  before  this  young  man  was  converted,  and  embraced  a  religious
life.  Following  Baronius  in  his  Chronology,  we  have  placed  that  event  in  1 149.
It  appears  certain  that  it  was  in  this  year  he  was  made  Bishop  of  Beauvais,  as
Sirmondus  remarks.

The  date  of  1161  for  his  election  to  this  See  by  Henriquez  is  then  far  from
the  truth.

He  became  Archbishop  of  Rheims  in  1 163.

It  was  quite  against  his  own  will  that  he  was  promoted  to  the  Episcopate,  as
is  shown  by  many  of  his  Letters.  S.  Bernard  himself  was  uneasy  on  account  of
his  premature  elevation,  and  thought  that  Peter,  Abbot  of  Cluny,  ought  to  be
consulted,  as  may  be  seen  in  his  Letters  (B.  v.  L.  8).  There  is  a  Letter  of  the
same  Henry,  written  to  Suger,  Abbot  of  S.  Dcnys,  in  Gallia  Christiana,  in
Episc.  Bel  vac.

Another,  written  to  the  Abbot  of  Cluny,  which  we  add  to  j:his  note,  we  suspect
to  have  been  dictated  by  Bernard  himself,  or,  at  least,  composed  in  imitation  of
Bernard.  It  is  not  improbable  that  it  was  the  former,  since  Bernard  wrote  many
times  for  other  persons,  even  for  Bishops.  If  it  is  not  by  him  it  cannot  be
denied  that  it  is  imitated  from  his  writings.  Compare  the  beginning  with  Letter
236,  and  the  latter  part  with  Letter  16.

"To  the  most  reverend  of  fathers  and  the  most  dear  of  friends,  Dom  PETEK,
Abbot  of  Cluny,  Brother  HENRY,  by  the  will  or  the  permission  of  God  Bishop-


822  LETTER CCCVII.

2.  I  have  felt  that  you  were  anxious  about  the  state  of
my  health. It  is  true  what  you  have  heard. I  have  been
sick  even  to  death,1  but  for  the  present I  am in  a  measure
restored. But  I  feel  that  it  is  not  for  long,  for  the  state  of
weakness in which I am passes all belief. This I say,
however,  without  pretending  to  set  bounds  to  the  Providence
of  God,  which  is  able  to  recall  even  the  dead  to  life. Kindly
let  my  reply  in  this  matter  be  not  only  to  yourself,  but  also
to  my  lord,  for  whom  I  earnestly  pray. Be  so  good  also  as
to  associate  with  yourself  the  Bishop  of  Frascati,  to  express
to him in my name, and with  the  fullest  devotedness  in
your  power,  my  best  thanks  for  his  extreme  condescension
and  anxiety  about  my  health.

3.  As  to  what  has  happened  to  the  Archbishop  of  Lyons,2
this is the truth. He had  set  out  on  a  journey,  with  an
honourable suite, as became an Archbishop, and much

Elect  of  Beauvais,  offers  his  own  self  and  all  that  he  *is  able  to  do.  May
Almighty  God  forgive  you  what  you  have  done.  You  have  recalled  to  men  a
man  who  was  buried,  and  by  your  advice,  which  has  been  too  well  confided  in,
I  find  myself  exposed  and  resting  on  a  terrible  sea  of  cares,  so  that  the  lofty
height  of  honour  claims  me  again.  In  my  ignorance  my  soul  is  troubled
because  of  the  chariots  of  Aminadab,  which  I  have  undertaken  to  rule,  while  I
have  need  of  being  ruled  myself,  and  not  to  rule  others.  They  have  put  my
hands  to  brave  deeds  when  I  have  need  of  bravery.  I  am  made  a  watchman  to
the  House  of  Israel  while  I  have  not  the  needful  prudence.  I  am  become  a
debtor  to  the  wise  and  to  the  unwise,  for  which  I  need  righteousness,  and  am
sent  to  be  a  preacher  to  the  people  of  God,  for  which  I  have  need  of  temperance,
lest  perhaps  when  I  have  preached  to  others  I  should  myself  (which  may  God
forbid)  be  a  castaway.  But  what  are  those  things  and  what  am  I,  or  where
are  they  and  what  am  I  ?  .  .  .  .  But  in  whatever  manner  this  be  done,  and
whatever  issue  the  Lord  our  God  give  to  the  matter,  I  am  none  the  less  one  of
your  followers,  and  entirely  prepared  to  render  you  all  the  services  that  you  may
deign  to  demand  of  me.  Receive  me  as  your  servant,  your  friend,  your  son,
.and  associate  me  by  a  lasting  bond  to  the  holy  community  over  which  you
preside  by  the  grace  of  God,  as  one  of  its  members,  a  monk  in  its  bosom,  for  I
do  not  wish  to  call  myself  here  by  my  title  of  Bishop." — [A/We  of  Horst.]  I  think
that  this  Letter  was  not  written  by  Bernard,  but  rather  by  Nicolas  of  Clairvaux,
his  secretary,  who  has  written  many  other  Letters  under  the  name  of  Henry,  and
particularly  the  thirteenth,  to  Peter  the  Venerable,  and  the  twenty-sixth,  to
Hugo  of  Compiegne. — [Note  of  Mal'illonJ\
It  is  clearly  not  by  S.  Bernard. — "[E-]

1  Geoffrey  cites  these  words  in  the  Life,  B.  v.  n.  3.

2  Heraclius.


LETTER CCCVIII.  823

money;  but  when  he  was  scarcely  beyond  his  own  limits,
lo  !  he  fell  into  an  ambuscade  of  his  enemies.  What  would
a  man  of  his  impetuosity  of  character  do?  To  pass  on
was  impossible  ;  to  retreat  and  give  up  his  journey  Deemed
to  him  less  tolerable  than  any  captivity.  Part  of  his  people
he  sent  back,  part  he  caused  to  scatter;  he  disembarrassed
himself  of  most  of  the  money  he  had  brought  with  him,
retaining  only  sufficient  to  meet  the  cost  of  his  journey
with  the  few  followers  which  he  kept  with  him.  What
more?  He  went  forward  with  only  three  or  four  atten
dants,  he  himself,  nevertheless,  being  dressed  as  a  servant ;
mixed  up  his  troop  with  the  promiscuous  crowd  of  travellers,
as  one  of  them,  and  so  reached  Saint-Eloi.1  There  finding
himself  ill,  he  was  conducted  to  Montpellier;  where  he
remained  a  considerable  time,  and  spent  on  physicians  all
the  money  he  had,  and  more.


LETTER  CCCVIII. (A.D. 1153-)
To ALFONSO,  KING OF  PORTUGAL.

Bernard  replies  that  he  has  done  his  best  to  comply  with
the  King's  request,  and  he  predicts  that  in  a  short  time
his  brother,  who  was  then  engaged  in  the  warfare  of  earth,
would  pass  over  into  that  of  Heaven.

To  ALFONSO,  the  illustrious  King  of  Portugal,  BERNARD,
called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  desires  all  that  the  prayer  of  a
sinner  can  obtain  for  him.

I  have  received  with  extreme  joy  the  letter  and  greet
ing  of  your  Highness,  and  am  glad  in  Him  who  sendeth
health  unto  Jacob.  What  I  have  done  in  this  matter  will
be  shown  by  the  event,  and  you  yourself  will  be  able  to
appreciate  it  by  that  means ;  you  will  see  .with  what  zeal
and  ardour  I  have  wished  to  respond  to  your  commands,
and  to  the  exigency  of  the  case.  Peter,'2  the  brother  of  your

1  See  notes  to  Letter 241.

2  This  Peter,  brother  of  Alfonso,  King  of  Portugal,  was  one  of  those  young
men  who  were  passionately  fond  of  tournaments, and  whom (it  is said) S.
Bernard  prepared fur conversion  by  a  draught  of  beer,  which  he  blessed  when


824  LETTER CCC1X.

Highness,  a  meritorious  and  accomplished  Prince,  has
made  me  acquainted  with  your  wishes.  After  having
crossed  France  with  his  men-at-arms,  he  is  now  carrying
on  war  in  Lorraine,  but  he  will  not  be  long  before  he  is  a
combatant  in  the  armies  of  the  Lord.  My  son,  Brother
Roland,  brings  to  you  a  letter  bearing  the  liberality  of  the
Holy  See.  I  commend  him  to  you,  also  the  Brothers  of  my
Order  dwelling  in  your  realm,  and,  lastly,  myself.


LETTER  CCCIX.1 (A.D. 1153.)
To  POPE EUGENIUS.

He  praises  Abbot  Suger and  recommends  his  deputies  to

the  Pope.

To  his  very  dear  father  and  lord  EUGENIUS,  by  the  grace
of  God  supreme  Pontiff,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot
of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health  and  offers  his  humble  homage.

If  in  our  Gallican  Church  there  is  any  vessel  capable  of
doing  honour  to  the  palace  of  the  Great  King;  if  the  Lord
counts  among  us  a  second  David,  coming  in  and  going  out
at  His  command  (i  Sam.  xxii.  14)  ;  in  my  judgment  it  is
no  other  than  the  venerable  Abbot  of  S.  Denys.  I  know
that  great  man  perfectly ;  if  he  is  faithful  and  prudent  in
temporal  things  he  is  not  less  fervent  and  humble  in
spiritual  things ;  and  is  equally  without  blame  (which  is  a
very  difficult  thing  indeed)  in  the  management  of  both.
Before  the  King  he  behaves  as  one  of  the  Court  of  Rome,

giving  it  to  him.  Concerning  this  see  the  Life,  B.  i.  c.  ii.  n.  155.  What  directions
Alfonso  had  sent  to  Bernard  about  him  appear  in  the  Letter  from  that  King  to
that  Saint,  which  Henriquez  prints  in  his  Menology  under  May  9.  This  is  the  sub
ject  of  it:  After  having  defeated  the  Moors,  Alfonso  had  assumed  the  title  of  King,
which  was  offered  by  his  subjects,  but  the  King  of  Castile  refused  his  consent
unless  a  certain  tribute  was  paid  to  him  in  return  for  the  concession.  He  re
quested  of  S.  Bernard,  in  this  Letter,  to  obtain  for  him  the  title  of  King  from  the
Pope,  preferring,  if  it  were  necessary  to  pay  tribute  to  someone,  to  pay  it  to  S.
Peter,  or  to  the  Holy  See,  than  to  a  neighbouring  and  jealous  Prince.  See  Letter
419.

1  This  Letter  is  numbered  361  in  the  Royal  Edition;  Duchesne  has  placed  it
at  the  head  of  the  Letters  of  Suger,  where  is  added  also  the  reply  of  Eugenius.
See  Letter  7  of  that  Collection.


LETTER CCCX.  825

and  when  in  the  church  before  God  as  one  of  the  Court  of
Heaven.  I  request  and  entreat  you  to  receive  kindly  the
messages  of  so  good  a  man,  and  to  reply  to  him  as  becomes
you,  and  as  he  is  worthy  of  receiving,  in  good  and  friendly
words,  full  of  familiarity  and  affection,  of  goodness  and
favour;  for  you  may  be  quite  sure  that  to  show  special
love  and  honour  to  his  person  is  a  sure  means  of  doing
honour  to  your  own  office  and  ministry.


LETTER  CCCX. (A.D. 1153.)
To  ARNOLD  OK  CHARTRKS,  ABBOT  OF  BONNEVAL. *

Bernard  was  almost  at  the  point  of  death,  when  he
addressed  to  his  friend  tin's  letter,  which  was  the  last  he
ever  wrote.

\  have  received  the  marks  of  your  affection  with  grati
tude,  I  cannot  say  in  pleasure,  my  sufferings  are  too  great

1  Many  modern  writers,  among  them  Horst,  Charles  de  Visch,  and  the  author
of  a  Life  of  S.  Bernard  in  French,  do  not  share  the  opinion  of  Trithemius,
Bellarmine  and  many  others,  but  distinguish  this  Arnold  from  the  author  of  the
second  Life  of  S.  Bernard,  to  whom  they  give  the  name  of  Bernard  and  the
title  of  Abbot,  not  of  Bonneval  or  Bonnevaux  in  Poitou  or  Rouergue,  but  ot
Bonneval  or  Bonnevaux,  a  Cistercian  house  in  the  Diocese  of  Vienne  in
Dauphiny.

They  adduce  still  another  Arnold,  Abbot  of  Bonneval,  a  Benedictine  house  in
the  Pays  Chartrain,  and  to  whom  was  addressed  this  Letter.

But  all  these  great  writers  will  permit  me  to  say  that  all  these  Arnolds  are
only  one  and  the  same  person.  For  as  regards  the  difference  in  the  two  names,
we  see  that  the  author  of  the  second  Life  is  written  Ernald  in  the  very  ancient
MS.  of  Corbie,  by  which  name  our  Arnold  of  Chartres  is  designated  by  Arnulf,
Bishop  of  Lisieux,  in  his  Letters  to  him.

But,  putting  aside  this  controversy  about  the  name,  it  is  certain  that  the
second  book  of  the  Life  was  written  while  Godfrey,  Bishop  of  Langres,  was  still
living.  For  he  writes  (c.  v.  n.  29)  :  "  Godfrey,  Prior  of  the  same  house,  his
relative  both  in  the  flesh  and  in  the  spirit  .  .  .  became  afterwards  Bishop  of
Langres,  where  he  continues  to  this  day,  going  out  and  coming  in  in  all  good
reputation."  That  was  written  before  1 161,  in  which  year  Godfrey,  resigning
his  See,  "  returned  to  Clairvaux,  to  the  embrace  of  his  Rachel,"  as  the  Chronicle
of  Clairvaux  records.  The  same  register  mentions  his  death  on  the  8th  Nov.,
1164.  And  from  the  foundation  of  Bonneval  in  Dauphine,  in  1117  up  to  the
year  1 180  no  Abbot  named  Bernard  is  found  to  have  ruled  that  house.  The  first
Abbot  was  S.  John  from  1 1  18  to  1 138  ;  then  Gozevin,  who  was  succeeded,  in  1151,

VOL.  n.  53


826  LETTER CCCX.

for  that ;  still,  what  I  endure  seems  to  me  tolerable  in  com
parison  with  what  I  feel  when  obliged  to  take  food.  Sleep
has  departed  from  me,  so  that  I  suffer  without  intermission
through  the  exhaustion  of  nature.  All  my  ailments  resolve
themselves  into  a  great  weakness  of  stomach,  which  has  to
be  supported  frequently  day  and  night  with  very  small
quantities  of  liquid  food  ;  for  I  am  entirely  unable  to  bear
anything  solid.  It  is  not  without  excessive  suffering  that  it
endures  the  little  that  is  given  to  me,  but  still  worse  is
feared,  if  it  should  be  entirely  without  any  at  all.  A  drop
more  than  is  absolutely  needful,  however,  causes  me
extreme  pain.  My  feet  and  ankles  are  swollen  as  if  I  were
dropsical.  In  the  midst  of  all  this,  for  I  ought  not  to  hide
anything  from  you  of  the  state  of  a  friend  for  whom  you
are  anxious,  as  to  the  inward  man  I  may  declare  (but  I
speak  as  a  fool)  that  the  spirit  is  vigorous,  though  the  flesh
is  weak.  Pray  our  Saviour,  who  willeth  not  the  death  of  a
sinner,  that  He  will  not  put  off  my  departure,  which  is
fully  seasonable,  and  that  He  will  guard  me  when  I  pass
away.  Give  diligence  to  strengthen  by  your  prayers  a
poor,  humble  soul,  bare  and  devoid  of  all  merit,  that  the
crafty  enemy  may  not  find  place,  to  seize  me  and  inflict  a
mortal  wound.  I  wished,  notwithstanding  the  state  in
which  I  am,  to  write  these  fewr  words,  that  you  may  recog
nize,  on  seeing  the  handwriting  you  know  so  well,  how
much  I  love  you.  But  I  should  have  preferred  to  reply  to
a  letter  from  you  than  to  write  the  first.

by  Rainald  of  Citeaux.  After  him  came  Peter;  then  in  1171  Hugo  of  happy
memory.  He  was  still  Abbot  of  Bonneval  at  his  death  in  1 180.  Where,  then,
is  to  be  placed  an  Abbot  Bernard  who  wrote  the  Life  before  1164,  as  we  have
shown  above  it  must  have  been  written  ?  Our  argument  rests  on  the  Annals  of
Manrique.

But  besides,  it  is  evident  to  every  attentive  reader  of  the  preface  to  Book  II.  of
the  Life  that  it  was  not  written  by  a  Cistercian.  We  conclude,  then,  that  the
author  of  Book  II  ,  and  that  friend  to  whom  S.  Bernard  wrote  this  Letter  just  be
fore  his  death,  was  Arnold  or  Ernald,  Abbot  of  Bonneval  in  the  Pays  Chartrain.


LETTER CCCXI.  827

LETTER CCCXI.1 (Circa A.I). 1125.)
To  HAIMERIC,  THE  CHANCELLOR.

He  sharply  chides  those  envious  persons  who  are  opposing
e  efforts  of  the  good,  and  takes  occasion  to  urge  H aimer ic
to  a  sedulous  care  for  the  good  of  the  Church.

To  the  illustrious  lord  HAIMERIC,  Chancellor  of  the  Holy
Roman  See,  HUGO,  Abbot  of  Pontigny,  and  BERNARD  of
Clairvaux  send  greeting,  in  the  hope  that  their  conduct  in
the  house  of  God  may  ever  be  such  as  it  ought  to  be.

i.  The  good  which  Bishops  seek  to  gain  is,  as  we  believe,
the  gain  of  Christ,  since  their  business  is  properly  the  cause
of God. Let those, therefore, who see for God make
commom  cause  with  them. If  anyone  hangs  back  let  him
hear  what  the  Lord  says  :  He  that  is  not  with  Me  is  against
Me  (S.  Matt.  xii.  30). There  is  no  middle  course. Either
they  will follow the advice  of  the Apostle, who says to
them,  Quench  not  the  Spirit  (i  Thess.  v. 19),  or  they  will
certainly hear,  as  the  Jews did, Ye  do  always  resist  the
Holy  Ghost  (Acts  vii.  51),  and,  as  the  Prophet  said, Woe
unto  them  that  call  evil  good  and  good  evil, that rejoice
when  they  commit  sin  and  exalt  over  wickedness  (Isaiah  v.
20,  and  Prov.  ii.  14). They  will  not  be  able  to  rejoice  also
in  good,  nor  can  the  righteous man, for  his righteousness,
and  the  sinner  in  his  evil  desires  be  praised  together  by  the
.same  lips. And  yet  what  is  there  strange  in  it  if  the  good
tiling,  which  is  an  odour  of  life  to  the  good,  should  be  an
odour  of  death  to  the  wicked  ? Do  we  not  know  that  He
who  is  the  source  and  origin  of  all  good  was  born for  the
ruin  of  many  as  for  the  resurrection  of  many,  and  for  a  sign
that  is everywhere spoken  against? (S. Luke  ii.  34, and
Isaiah  viii.  14). Even  to-day  to  how many is~  the  Saviour
found  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  a rock  of  offence (Isaiah
VIM. 14). And  yet  those are not wanting  who  say  with
willing  heart,  He  is  our  peace, who  hath made  both  one
(Ephes. ii. 14). He to whom the Peace Himself is a
1  Formerly  numbered  313. That  which  was  before  No.  311  is  now  No.  374.


828  LETTER CCCXI.

stumbling-block,  what  peace  can  there  be  for  him?  Or  he  for
whom  the  Saviour  Himself  is  the  cause  of  condemnation,  in
whom  can  he  hope  to  be  saved  ? It  is  written,  In  his  house
(without  doubt  that  of  the  righteous  man)  shall  be  wealth
and  riches  (Ps.  cxii.  3),  and  he  explains  what  he  means  by
wealth and riches, for he adds, And his righteousness
endureth for ever, and in truth there is no glory,
no riches  to  be compared  with  the righteousness of  the
conscience of the just. But what is it that the un
righteous  loses  ? If  Paul  boasts  of  the  riches  in  his  heart,
saying, Our  rejoicing  is  this, the testimony  of  our con
science (2 Cor. i. 12),  who  is injured  thereby? Yet the
Prophet assures us that the  sinner  shall  see it  and  be
grieved (Ps. cxii. 10). What  perversity! These  riches
are in nowise like those of  the earth,  which cannot be
acquired  without  others being deprived of them. Why,
then,  art  thou  angry,  who hast  lost  nothing  ?  or  why  dost
thou  envy  good  things  to  good  men,  and  those  good  things
which  thou  dost  not care  to  acquire  for  thyself? Is  it  not
like  the  dog  in  the  fable,  who  forbad  to  others  the  hay
which  he  was not  able  to  eat  ? But  although  thou  mayest
gnash  with  thy  teeth  and  consume  away,  yet  the  work  of
God cannot be undone. Whether you will or no, the
righteous  shall  see  it  and  rejoice,  and  all  the  wicked  shall
keep  silence.

2.  But  all  this  only  concerns  those  who  can  be  suspected.
But  to  you  we  say  this  :  use  well  the  talent  committed  to
you,  and  you  shall  receive  the  recompense.  What  profit  is
it,  wrapped  in  a  napkin,  when  one  day  it  will  be  required
again  with  usury  ?  While  we  have  time,  why  do  we  neglect
to  make  use  of  it  ?  It  is  true  that  in  your  office  it  is  always,
the  time  to  seek  diligently  the  interests  of  piety  ;  but
especially  is  the  present  moment  favourable  for  indulging  a
holy  avarice  ;  you  have  only  to  be  diligent  in  using  the  trea
sure  of  the  Lord  which  He  has  put  into  your  hands  to  this  end.
Otherwise,  if  wisdom  be  unused,  or  a  treasure  unknown,
what  usefulness  is  there  in  either?  (Ecclus.  xx.  32).  It  is
said  that  you  are  disposed,  as  well  by  your  own  desire,  as  by


LETTER CCCX1.  829

the  duty  of  your  office,  to  do  good  unto  all  men  ;  as  you  are
specially  bound  to  do  to  those  of  the  household  of  fait ti
(Gal.  vi.  10).  That  command  of  the  Apostle  is  general,  yet
we  may  venture  to  be  so  bold  as  to  remind  you  that  it  is  a
special  privilege  of  your  office  and  ministry.  Unless
perhaps  (which  we  do  not  in  the  least  think)  you  hold
more  to  the  position  itself  than  to  the  honour  of  fulfilling
its  duties.  Indeed,  since  there  is  scarcely  any  good  work
or  supposed  good  work  in  the  whole  world  which  does  not
pass  at  some  time  or  other  through  the  hands  of  the  Chan
cellor  of  Rome,  which  is  not  submitted  to  his  judgment,
shaped  by  his  advice,  strengthened  by  his  good  will,  and
assisted  by  his  help  ;  and  what  can  be  more  fitting  than  that
it  should  devolve  upon  him  to  take  action  when  anything  in
these  various  projects  is  either  incomplete  or  wrongly
directed,  especially  as  the  glory  of  all  holy  and  praise
worthy  enterprises  is  sure  to  redound  upon  him  ?  Thus,
as  we  have  said,  the  man  who  fills  that  post  is  either  the
most  happy  of  men,  or  the  most  miserable  ;  as  he  is,  by  his
position,  either  always  a  sharer  in  every  good  work,  or  its
enemy  :  and  justly,  therefore,  the  entire  praise  or  blame,
according  to  the  issue  of  each,  and  his  zeal  in  regard  to  it,
will  fall  upon  him.  Blessed,  then,  is  he  who  shall  be  able
to  say  unto  the  Lord  :  /  am  a  companion  of  all  them  that
fear  Thee,  and  keep  Thy  precepts  (Ps.  cxix.  63).

3.  But  what  are  we  doing?  While  we  have  taken  in
hand  to  speak  to  you  of  your  obligations  we  have  almost
forgotten  that  we  are  pouring  these  observations  into  ears
most  fully  occupied.  We  trust,  however,  that  we  shall  not
seem  needlessly  intrusive:  not  that  we  claim  the  least  right
to  speak  to  you  as  we  have  done,  but  that  we  have  present
to  our  mind  that  you  have  deigned  to  be  the  first  to  solicit
by  your  gifts  the  friendship  of  such  humble  persons  as
ourselves.  We  hold  this  as  a  remarkable  sign  of  your  con
descension  and  piety  that  your  Excellency,  being  so  great  a
person  and  busied  with  such  important  affairs,  should  have
thought  it  worth  while  to  salute  such  obscure  and  humble
persons  as  ourselves,  and  even  to  honour  us  with  presents.


830  LETTER CCCXII.

May  God  Himself  recompense  you,  and  give  you  the
spiritual  gold,  which  is  wisdom,  in  exchange  for  the
material  gold,  which  you  have  bestowed  upon  us,  so  that
not  only  we  may  rejoice  in  your  gift,  but  you  also  in  the
reward  which  shall  be  returned  to  you.  Adieu.


LETTER CCCXII.  (A.D. 1130.)
To  RAYNALD,1  ARCHBISHOP  OF  RHEIMS.

Bernard  thanks  him  for  a letter  which  he  had  received
from  him.

To  the  most  reverend  father  and  lord  R.,  by  the  grace
of  God  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  Brother  BERNARD,  of  Clair-
vaux,  wishes  health  and  whatever  the  prayers  of  a  sinner
can  effect  on  his  behalf.

I  thank  the  Lord  who  has  inspired  you  with  the  thought
of  consoling  me  with  a  letter  from  your  hand.  I  am,
indeed,  well  enough  able  to  return  letter  for  letter,  but
when  shall  I  ever  be  able  to  acquit  myself  to  you  of  the
debt  of  gratitude  which  you  have  placed  me  under  by  the
goodness  that  you  have  shown  towards  me,  in  encouraging
me  by  the  sweetness  of  your  blessing,  in  rousing  me  by
your  exhortations,  and  honouring  me  with  your  salutation  ?
Assuredly  there  never  was  anyone  less  worthy  than  I  of  the
names  that  you  bestow  upon  me,  or  less  worthy  to  be  known
to  you  ;  but  the  less  I  am  worthy  the  more  I  am  grateful  to
you.  It  is  true,  though,  that  when  you  act  thus  you  act  as
becomes  you,  and  as  recognizing  that  you  are  debtor  to  the
unwise  as  well  as  to  the  wise.  You  say  to  me  that  the
reputation  of  which  the  report  has  come  to  your  Excellency
has  moved  you  to  this  condescension  towards  so  humble  a
person  as  myself;  but  this  is,  indeed,  not  only  too  flatter
ing,  but  also  dangerous  to  me.  It  is,  however,  a  very

1  This  Letter  is  new;  ihe  former,  No.  312,  is  now  398.  Raynald,  or
Reginald,  second  Archbishop  of  Rheims  of  that  name,  occupied  that  See  from
1 1 24  to  1139,  according  to  our  calculation,  and  died  on  the  I3th  of  January
of  the  latter  year,  as  we  have  noted  upon  Letter  170.


LETTER CCCXIII.  831

happy  and  agreeable  thing  for  me  that  a  breath  of  reputa
tion,  though  it  be  only  like  an  empty  puff  of  wind,  should
have  moved  a  priest  of  the  Most  High  of  such  high  rank  to
have  such  kind  feeling  toward  me,  before  even  I  had  merited
to  come  to  his  personal  knowledge.  The  monk  who  is  the
bearer  of  this  letter  will  tell  your  Holiness  with  respect  to
my  coming  to  you  why  I  have  not  come  at  the  present
time,  and  at  what  time  I  should  be  able  to  come.  He  will
reply  also  with  faithfulness  to  any  other  questions  that  it
may  please  you  to  put  to  him  with  respect  to  me  ;  it  is  for
that  purpose  that  I  have  sent  him,  while  waiting  until  I
shall  be  able  to  come  to  you  myself.


LETTER CCCXIII. (A.I). 1132.)
To  GEOFFREY,  ABBOT  OF  S.  MARY  AT  YORK.1

Bernard  recommends  him  not  to  hinder  those  who  wished
to  enter  a  religious  Order  more  austere  ;  and  declares  that
those  should  be  regarded  as  apostates,  who,  after  having
thus  removed,  fall  back  to  their  former  manner  of  life.

To  the  venerable  Dom  GEOFFREY,  Abbot  of  the  Church
of  S.  Mary  at  York,2  Brother  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
sends  salutation  in  our  Lord.

i.  It  has  pleased  your  Reverence  to  write  and  consult  so
humble  a  person  as  myself  on  some  doubtful  questions.
But  I  am  afraid  to  give  any  decisive  answer ;  and  hesitate
the  more  to  do  so,  inasmuch  as  if  men  with  the  purest
intentions  are  unable  to  discern  the  minds  of  their  nearest
companions,  they  are  still  less  able  to  discern  the  secret
designs  of  the  Divine  Will.  Again,  I  am  afraid  in  so
speaking  to  wound  those  who  do  not  share  my  opinion  ;
and  this  is  certain  to  happen  with  those  unsatisfied  souls
who  only  seek  to  justify  their  conclusion  in  their  own  eyes
by  a  cloud  of  incoherent  and  obscure  reasonings.  But  yet

1  This was  formerly  numbered  371, the  former  No  313 is  now No.  311.
The  subject  depends  upon  that  of  Letter  94.

2  Benedictine.


832  LETTER CCCXIII.

their  conscience  itself  is  the  avenger  of  this  voluntary
darkness :  because  at  the  same  time  thaf  they  strive  to
delude  themselves  with  regard  to  that  they  have  done,  the
truth  of  the  matter  comes  back  to  them  in  the  shape  of
remorse  which  wounds  and  preys  upon  them.  Of  such  a
character  was  the  gnawing  remorse  from  which  the
Psalmist  prays  of  God  to  be  delivered,  saying:  Bring  my
soul  out  of  prison  that  I  may  praise  Thy  name  (Ps.  cxlii.
7).  If,  then,  I  do  not  reply  to  your  questions  in  a  manner
as  satisfactory  as  you  would  wish,  or  if  I  do  not  dare  to
express  myself  as  fully  as  I  might,  do  not,  Reverend  sir,
suppose  that  it  is  from  a  studied  artfulness.  Your  letter
begins  by  complaints  upon  the  painful  position  in  which  the
departure  of  a  certain  number  of  your  monks  has  placed
your  old  age,  since  they  have  quitted  you  only  to  embrace
a  manner  of  life  stricter  and  more  secure.  It  seems  to  me
that  in  this  case  you  ought  rather  to  be  afraid  that  your
sorrow  is  the  sorrow  of  this  world  which  worketh  death.

2.  For  if  there  is  any  reason  at  all  in  the  opinion  of  men,
it  is  a  thing  not  to  be  lamented  if  a  man  ever  endeavours
to  devote  himself  with  greater  strictness  to  the  practice  of
the  law  of  his  Creator.  And  we  indeed  should  be  acting
not  merely  not  holily,  but  even  without  ordinary  fatherly
care  and  interest,  if  we  should  envy  the  advances  made  by
our  sons.  If,  then,  you  wish,  as  I  suppose,  chiefly  to  make
your  profit  of  one  good  counsel  out  of  a  thousand,  not
only  should  you  strive  to  prevent  those  who  still  remain
with  you  under  a  mitigated  rule,  from  falling  into  a  lower
state  through  their  relaxations ;  but  also  you  should  be,  as
says  the  prophet,  the  first  to  bring  bread  (Is.  xxi.  14),  the
first  to  favour  the  design  of  those,  who,  fearing  that  the
health  of  their  souls  would  suffer  if  they  remained  longer
in  a  house  of  less  severity,  aspire  to  observe  their  pro
fession  in  all  its  purity.  On  the  first  you  ought  to  lavish
the  greatest  care  lest  they  grow  careless  to  their  spiritual
loss;  but  to  the  second  you  ought  to  show  every  kind  of
goodwill,  that  they  may  attain  to  the  crown.  For  those
who  meditate  continually  in  their  heart  on  the  means  of


LETTER CCCXI1I.  833

rising  higher  are  those  who  go  from  strength  to  strength  ;
they  merit  to  behold  the  Lord  of  Lords  in  Sion,  and
that  the  more  surely  because  they  are  consumed  with  a
fervent  zeal  to  adhere  to  Him  by  a  more  holy  and  perfect
life  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  5,  7).

3.  As  for  the  monks  Gervase  and  Ralph,  whose  with
drawal  Archbishop  Thurstan,  like  a  true  father  and  a
worthy  Bishop,  had  sanctioned,  and  to  which  you,  as  you
yourself  declare,  had  consented,  I  am  sure  that,  far  from
erring,  they  would  have  done  well  to  have  remained  firm  in
that  more  perfect  path  of  purity  to  which  they  had  ascended,
and  to  have  persevered  in  it  laudably.  It  is  evident  to  me,
nevertheless,  that  if  they  wished  to  regain  the  path  of
purity  from  which  they  have  rashly  descended,  they  would
be  deserving  of  very  great  praise  for  that  proof  of  Christian
valour,  as  soldiers  who  return  to  the  fight  contend  the
more  bravely  for  the  victory,  that  they  had  for  a  moment
shamefully  fled  from  the  battle  field.  You,  indeed,  are
quite  able,  I  believe,  to  recall  the  permission  you  had  given,
but  the  judgment  of  the  Almighty  cannot  be  thus  rendered
of  no  effect.  You  allow  that  their  life  would  afterwards  be  a
more  holy  one ;  but  you  say  that  they  would  not  be  able  to
support  its  rigour,  on  account  of  the  delicacy  of  their  con
stitution,  or  of  ties  of  relationship  impossible  to  break.  To
this  you  add,  that  their  presence  is  necessary  to  you  ;  and
therefore  you  urge  me  to  say,  whether  they  may  not  with
out  fault  remain  in  a  house  which  they  have  not  been  able
to  quit  without  offence.

4.  To  this  I  reply,  that  there  are  different  kinds  of
offences  ;  that  carnal  affections  ought  to  be  entirely  cut  off
lor  the  sake  of  Christ,  that  the  Gospel  loudly  declares,  and
one  passage  in  the  Scripture  repeats  after  another,  that
temporal  advantages  and  enjoyments  are  to  be  abandoned
for  the  salvation  of  the  soul  ;  and  that  to  be  ignorant  of  this
is  a  fault  so  gross  as  to  be  almost  heretical.  But  I  am  not
certain  whether  such  a  return  as  you  speak  of  could  be
made  without  fault  needing  punishment.  Certainly,  it
would  expose  them  to  evident  peril,  and  a  fall  almost


834  LETTER CCCXIII.

certain,  because  it  is  presuming  on  the  mercy  of  God  against
His  justice,  and  to  set  up  the  one  against  the  other.  The
Scripture  says  :  Be  not  without  fear  to  add  sin  to  sin  and
say  not,  His  mercy  is  great  (Ecclus.  v.  5,  6).  For  it  is  a
bad  kind  of  discretion  that  makes  the  less  important  con
sideration  preponderate  over  the  more  important,  and  tries
to  put  the  worse  in  the  same  line  with  the  better.

5.  Lastly,  you  protest  vehemently  against  the  name  of
apostates  being  applied  to  these  men  if  they  should  return
to  their  own  monastery,  and  endeavour  to  discharge  the
sacred  rules  of  their  profession.  As  for  me,  I  reply,  it  is
not  my  business  to  condemn  them.  The  Lord  knowetli
them  that  are  His  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).  Everyone  shall  bear  his
own  burden  (Gal.  vi.  5).  He  whom  the  darkness  does  not
comprehend  shall  manifest  Himself  as  the  Lord  in  the  day
of  judgment,  and  the  sinner  shall  be  taken  in  the  work  of
his  own  hands  (Ps.  ix.  16).  Each  person  may  judge  him
self  as  leniently  as  he  will ;  as  for  me  I  will  say  what  I
think  about  myself.  I,  Bernard,  if  after  I  had  passed  over
by  my  own  free  will  from  a  good  state  to  a  better,  from  a
dangerous  condition  to  one  more  secure,  I  had,  by  a  culpable
change  of  will,  presumed  to  go  back  again  to  what  I  had
left,  should  have  feared  not  only  that  I  was  an  apostate,  but
that  I  was  also  unlit  for  the  kingdom  of  God.  This  also
S.  Gregory  says  :  '  Whosoever  has  proposed  to  himself  a
higher  good  is  no  longer  free  to  follow  one  which  is  lower.
For  it  is  written  :  No  man  putting  his  hand  to  the  plough
and  looking  back  is  fit  for  the  Kingdom  of  God  (S.  Luke
ix.  62).  And  such  is  the  man  who,  having  embraced  a
higher  life,  falls  back  again  on  one  who  is  lower  (Pastor.
iii.  28.)  As  to  a  certain  excommunication  on  which  you
desire  to  open  a  discussion  in  your  letter,  it  appears  to  me
that  it  would  profit  you  nothing  to  discuss  that  question,
and  that  it  is  not  my  business  to  decide  it.  You  know  that
the  law  refuses  to  judge  anyone  until  he  has  been  first
heard  :  and  it  is  always  rash  to  deliver  judgment  on  an
absent  person.


LETTER CCCXIV.  835

LETTER  CCCXIV. (A.I). 1134.)

TO POPE INNOCENT.1

Bernard,  having  reconciled  the  Milanese  to  the  ChurcJi,
had  set  out  at  the  command  of  Innocent  to  endeavour  to
restore  peace  among  the  other  cities  of  Lombardy,  first
proceeding  to  Pavia  and  Cremona.  But  not  succeeding
with  the  Crcmonese,  he  acquaints  the  Pope  with  their
obstinacy,  and  he  advises  that  the  very  severe  sentence
which  was  being  prepared  against  the  Archbishop  of  Milan
should  be  for  a  while  sit sp ended.

To  his  very  dear  father  and  lord,  Supreme  Pontiff,
INNOCENT,  Brother  BERNARD  sends  his  humble  homage.

i.  The  Cremonese  are  hardened,  their  worldly  prosperity
is  their  ruin.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Milanese  think
lightly  of  others,  their  self-confidence  deceives  them.
These,  who  put  their  hope  in  their  war  chariots  and
their  horses,  have  frustrated  my  endeavours,  and  rendered
my  labour  useless.  I  was  sadly  departing  when  behold
the  great  consolation  with  which  you  favoured  me:  so
that  although  my  tribulations  for  Christ  abound,  yet  my
consolations,  through  him,  abound  also.  I  have  received
your  wished-for  letter,  which  brings  sweetness  to  my
soul  in  the  news  of  your  safety,  of  the  successes  of
our  friends,  and  the  reverses  of  our  enemies.  Unfor
tunately  the  end  of  the  letter  tempered  the  joy  which  I  had
felt  on  reading  the  first  part.  For  whom  would  not  your
indignation  cause  to  tremble?  I  confess  that  it  is  just,  and
therefore  fear  it  the  more.  Yet  I  would  say  that  that  which
has  not  yet  been  done  should  indeed  be  done,  but  at  the  fit
time  which  God  will  point  out.  You  will  then  be  equally
free  to  do  what  you  propose,  and  it  will  perhaps  not  be
equally  dangerous.  To  act  at  the  present  time  is  alas  !  to
destroy  utterly  all  that  God  by  an  extraordinary  stroke  of  His
grace  has  accomplished  in  this  city,  and  which  has  cost  so

1  Formerly  No.  318.  That  Letter  which  was  numbered  314  is  now  390.
This  Letter  relates  to  the  same  affair  as  Letters  131.  132,  and  133.


836  LETTER CCCXIV.

much  care  and  labour  to  you  and  your  assistants.1  It  will
be  strange  if  such  a  proceeding  is  pleasing  to  Him  who,
as  we  read,  exalts  mercy  over  justice  (James  ii.  13.)  But
oh  !  that  unhappy  Bishop  who,  having  been  translated  from
a  kind  of  earthly  paradise  to  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  finds  him
self  become  a  brother  to  dragons,  and  a  friend3  of  ostriches.
What  can  he  do  ?  He  wishes  to  obey,  and  behold  the
beasts  of  Ephesus  gnash  their  teeth  upon  him.  He  wishes
to  dissimulate  prudently  for  the  moment,  and  incurs  all  the
harshness  of  your  far  more  formidable  indignation.  There
are  difficulties  for  him  everywhere,  unless  he  should  find  it
his  better  course  to  be  without  a  see,  than  without  a  lord  :
and  should  hold,  as  it  becomes  him  to  do,  the  favour  of  the
Pope,  as  of  greater  value  than  the  See  of  Milan.  Have
you  any  doubt  of  his  attachment  ?  If  any  one  has  been  so
malicious  as  to  persuade  you  to  suspect  him,  he  shows  him
self  really  less  loyal  than  the  suspected  person,  since  in  his
envy  he  has  blackened  with  his  faithless  tongue,  the  good
name  of  a  prelate  of  such  high  reputation.  Have  con
sideration,  good  Father,  for  your  faithful  servant,  have
consideration  for  work  which  is  so  new,  for  a  plant  which
has  not  had  time  to  take  root ;  have  consideration  for
people  wrho  are  attaching  themselves  to  you,  and  do  not
efface  the  memory  of  those  very  benefits,  which,  as  you
yourself  most  truly  declare,  you  have  bestowed  upon  them.
Remember,  pious  Pontiff,  those  wrords  of  your  Lord  :
Behold  these  three  years  I  come  seeking  fruit  upon  this
fig  tree,  and  find  none  (S.  Luke  xiii.  7).  But  you  have
waited  for  scarcely  three  months,  and  yet  you  are  pre
paring  the  axe.  If  you  had  waited  three  years,  you  would
have  followed  even  in  the  fourth,  as  a  faithful  servant
should,  the  example  of  your  Master.  Let  us  then  say  :

1  These  were  Guy  of  Pisa  and  Matthew  of  Albano ;  they  had  been  sent  by
Innocent  to  the  inhabitants  of  Milan  as  legates  of  the  Holy  See,  with  Bernard,
as  we  see  in  Letter  131.

2  I  imagine  that  there  is  here  a  reference  to  Ribald,  who  had  been  elected
and  confirmed  Archbishop  of  Milan,  in  the  place  of  Anselm,  who  had  been
driven  from  his  See,  as  we  learn  in  Letter  131.


LETTER CCCXV.  837

Let  it  alone  this  year  also  ;  perhaps  during  that  time  the
ground  may  be  trenched  with  the  spade  of  penitence,  and
enriched  with  tears,  and  it  may  be  that  He  who  has  given
you  this  sterile  ground  of  the  hearts  of  the  Milanese  to  cul
tivate,  will  enable  it  to  bring  forth  the  fruit  which  you  desire.


LETTER CCCXV. (Circa A.D. H34.)1
To  MATILDA,  QUEEN  OF  ENGLAND.2

Bernard  begs  her  to  receive  favourably  a  request
already  presented  to  her  on  behalf  of  the  monks  of  La
Chapelte*

To  the  illustrious  lady  and  beloved  daughter  in  Christ
(which  I  say  in  affection,  not  of  presumption),  MATILDA,  by
the  grace  of  God  Queen  of  England,  BERNARD  wishes
health.

It  is  not,  I  trust,  a  matter  of  surprise  to  you  if  I  presume
somewhat  in  addressing  your  Highness.  I  am  not  alone  in
thinking,  what  indeed  all  are  aware  of,  that  you  have  some
kindness  towards  me,  and  that  I  have  in  some  degree  your
favour.  Because  of  which  I  have  a  request  to  make  on
behalf  of  a  certain  friend  of  mine,  the  venerable  Abbot  of
La  Chapelle,3  who  has  asked  me  to  remind  you  of  a  certain
tithe  which  I  have  already  asked  from  you  at  Boulogne,  if
you  are  kind  enough  to  remember,  and  which  request  you
then,  with  your  accustomed  kindness,4  favourably  enter
tained.  But  because  what  I  then  asked  has  not  yet  been
carried  out,  I  write  to  pray  you  that  it  may  at  length  be

1  Formerly  No.  344  ;  the  former  No.  315  is  now  34.1.

2  This  was  Matilda,  daughter  of  Malcolm  III.,  King  of  Scotland  ;  wife  of  the
Emperor  Henry  V.,  and  afterwards  of  Henry  I.  of  England. She  had,  by  the
latter,  Henry  II.,  of  whom  Bernard  speaks  at  the  end  of  this  Letter,  which  was
written  before  the  death  of  Henry  I. There  was  another  Matilda,  daughter  of
Fulk,  Count  of  Anjou,  who  married  William,  son  of  Henry  I. Her  husband
perished  by  shipwreck ; when she took  the  veil  at Fontevraud  and  became
Abbess  of  that  house. Peter  de  Celles  wrote  a  Letter  to  her  (B.  i.  n.  10).

3  A  house  of  the  Benedictine  Order,  in  the  diocese  of  Boulogne.

4  Matilda  had  such  esteem  and  affection  for  Bernard,  that  when  she  was  at
Boulogne,  she  went  out  of  the  town  on  foot  to  meet  him. See  Life  B.  iv.  n.  6.


838  LETTER CCCXVI.

effectually  done.  Let  me  beg  that  you  will  take  good  care
for  me  of  the  son  whom  you  have  borne  :  because  I  also,
if  it  will  not  displease  the  King,  claim  some  portion  in
him.  Adieu.


LETTER CCCXVI. (Circa  A.D. 1135.)'

To  HENRY,  ARCHBISHOP  OF  SENS,  AND  HAIMERIC,  THE
CHANCELLOR.

He  begs  them  not  to  oppose  a  certain  nobleman  in
possession  of  Church  property  who  proposed  to  restore  this
to  certain  religious.

It  is  a  good  work  for  a  layman  to  be  willing  to  give  up
abbeys  or  ecclesiastical  benefices  which  he  possesses  con
trary  to  the  canons,  but  when  he  is  willing  to  transfer  them
for  the  use  of  servants  of  God  the  good  is  doubled.  But  as
these  resignations  cannot  be  carried  out  except  by  the
consent  of  the  Bishop  of  the  Diocese,  it  follows  that  a
Bishop  would  commit  a  double  evil  by  refusing  this  assent
or  a  double  good  by  giving  it.  What  a  certain  knight  asks
of  you  in  this  matter,  this  you  ought  to  have  asked  of  him.
For  you,  surely,  cannot  believe  that  a  sanctuary  of  God  is
better  as  the  family  possession  of  a  man  of  war  than  in  that
of  the  saints  of  God.  If  such  be  your  view,  it  will  be
strange  if  all  who  hear  do  not  wonder  at  you.  Avoid  this,
I  pray  you,  lest  the  sons  of  the  uncircumcised  should  hear
and  rejoice.  Suppose  that  you  are  able  to  take  the  captive
Abbey  from  the  hands  of  the  powerful,  and  to  re-estab
lish  it  in  its  rights,  which  I  do  not  at  all  suppose.  What
heir  and  successor,  I  ask,  would  you  prefer  to  choose  ?  A
soldier  who  would  do  service  for  it  in  the  armies  of  the
King,  or  a  monk  who  would  intercede  for  their  sins  ?  Do,
therefore,  what  is  just,  what  is  worthy  of  you,  what  is
agreeable  to  God,  and  to  all  good  men  ;  what,  finally,  if
there  were  no  other  reason,  I  should  confidently  demand  of
you  for  the  sake  of  your  affection  for  me.

1 Formerly  No.  375  ;  the  former  No.  316  is  now  356.


LETTER CCCXVII.  839

LETTER  CCCXVII. (A.IX  n38.)1
To HIS PRIOR,  GODFREY.-'

The  schism  being  extinct  and  peace  concluded,  Bernard
announces  to  him  his  return  with  the  least  possible
tie  I  ay.

To  Brother  GODFREY,  Brother  BERNARD  health.

On  the  very  day  of  the  octave  of  Pentecost,  God  has
filled  up  the  cup  of  my  desire  in  giving  unity  to  the  Church
and  peace  to  Rome.  On  that  day  all  the  supporters  of
Peter  Leonis  came  to  prostrate  themselves  together  at  the
feet  of  the  Pope,  and  to  take  an  oath  of  fidelity  to  him,
and  become  his  liege  men.  The  schismatic  clergy  also,
together  with  the  idol3  whom  they  had  set  up,  knelt  at  the
feet  of  the  lord  Pope  to  promise  him  obedience  with  all
the  formalities,  and  there  was  great  joy  among  the  people.
For  some  time  past  I  felt  certain  that  events  would  not
long  delay  to  take  this  turn  ;  it  is  that  which  has  kept  me
so  long  here,  and  if  it  had  been  otherwise  I  should  long
since  have  returned  to  you.  At  present  there  is  nothing
to  detain  me  here.  I  am  doing  what  you  have  earnestly
urged  upon  me;  I  am  turning  "I  will  come,"  into  "I
come."  For  behold  I  come  quickly,  and  my  reward  is  with
me,  the  victory  of  Christ  and  the  peace  of  the  Church.
The  messenger  whom  I  sent  to  you  left  Rome  on  the
Friday  after  that  day.  Therefore,  when  I  return  I  shall
come  with  gladness  bearing  sheaves  of  peace.  These  are,
indeed,  pleasant  words,  but  the  facts  are  still  pleasanter.
So  pleasant  are  they  and  glorious  that  whosoever  does  not
rejoice  in  them  must  be  either  foolish  or  wicked.  Farewell.

1  Formerly  No.  320  ; the  former  No.  317  is  now  No.  357.

2  In  Letter  142  Bernard  calls  him  very  dear. He  afterwards  became  Bishop
of  Langres,  as  we  have  seen  upon  Letter  364. Pe'rard  has  preserved  his  Letter
on  p.  122  ; in  the  year  41  he  completed  the  second  year  of  his  Episcopate.

3  This  was  the  anti-Pope  Victor,  whom  the  party  of  Anacletus  had  chosen  as
his  successor.


840  LETTER CCCXIX.

LETTER  CCCXVIII. (Circa  A.D. 1138.)'
To POPE INNOCENT.

He  represents  to  the  Pope  the  distress  of  the  Church  of
Rheims,  and  desires  speedy  help  from  him.

To  his  very  dear  father  and  lord,  INNOCENT,  supreme
Pontiff,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
health  and  his  humble  homage.

The  Church  of  Rheims  is  on  the  point  of  ruin.  That
glorious  city  is  overwhelmed  with  disgrace  :  she  cries  to  the
passers-by  that  there  is  no  sorrow  like  unto  her  sorrow.
For  without  are  fightings,  within  fears.  And,  indeed,  there
are  fightings  within  also,  for  her  own  sons  fight  against  her,
nor  has  she  a  spouse  to  set  her  free  :  her  only  hope  is  in
you  ;  it  is  only  Innocent  who  can  wipe  the  tears  from  her
cheeks.  But  how  long,  my  lord,  must  she  wait  before  she
is  covered  with  the  shield  of  your  protection  ?  How  long
shall  she  be  trodden  under  foot,  and  you  not  arrive  to  her
assistance  ?  Behold,  the  King  has  yielded,  and  his  anger
has  already  sunk  into  silence.  What  then  remains  but
that  the  afflicted  Church  should  be  sustained  by  your
apostolic  arm,  and  her  wounds  tended  and  healed?  The
first  thing  to  be  done,  in  my  opinion,  is  to  hasten  the
election  of  a  Bishop,  lest  the  presumption  of  the  people  of
Rheims  should  scatter  what  still  remains,  if  the  popular
disorder  be  not  checked  with  a  high  hand.  If  this  election
be  made  according  to  the  prescribed  forms,  I  trust  that  God
will  give  a  good  issue  by  His  grace  in  other  matters  also.


LETTER CCCXIX. (Circa A.D.

To  THURSTAN,  ARCHBISHOP  OF  YORK.

He  advises  and  begs  him  not  to  resign  his  See  :  but  if
there  are  &ood  reasons  for  his  doing  so,  and  the  Pope
sanctions  it,  he  should  seek  a  religious  house  of  strict
observance  for  his  place  of  retreat.

1  Formerly  No.  329  ;  the  former  No.  318  is  now  No.  314.
2  Formerly  No.  372;  the  former  319  is  now  No.  399.


LKTTKR CCCXIX.  841

To  the  Reverend  father  and  lord  THURSTAN,  by  the
grace  of  God  Archbishop  of  York,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot
of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health  in  the  present  life  and  in  the
future  life  eternal.

1.  I  praise  you for  desiring  quiet,  and  that  you  long  to
rest  in  peace in  the Lord. But  those reasons  which  you
allege  for  laying  down  your  pastoral  charge  seem  to me
insufficient : unless  (which I do  not  believe,  and  may  God
torbid)  you  have  some  mortal  sin  to  reproach  yourself  with,
or  permission  has  been  given  you  by  the  supreme  Pontiff
to  resign.1 You  have  not  forgotten,  I  am  sure,  that  rule  of
the  Apostle: Art  thou  bound  unto  a  ivife?  seek  not  to  be
loosed  (i  Cor.  vii.  27). By  an  engagement,  such  as  you  say
you  have  taken,  a  Bishop  is  not  bound  any  farther  than  that
he  should  persevere  in  the  ministry  to which  he  has  been
called.

2.  It  seems,  then,  to  me, without  attempting  to  impose
'my  advice  upon  you to  the  prejudice  of  any  that  is  wiser,

that  you  should  continue  to  hold  the  office  that  you  have
now,  and  should  exhibit  in  a  Bishop  the  humble  dress  and
the  holiness  of  life  of  a  monk.-  However,  if  some  secret

1  Bernard  here  recognizes  two  legitimate  reasons  in  a  Bishop  for  laying  down
his  charge  :  the  necessity  for  doing  penance  on  account  of  some  great  crime,
and  the  permission  of  the  Pope.  At  one  time  Bishops  were  reduced  to  the  rank
of  simple  priests  on  account  of  capital  crimes,  for  instance  on  account  of  fornica
tion,  theft,  perjury,  and  homicide  ;  but  it  seems  after  these  words  of  Bernard,  that
there  was  some  other  mortal  sin  which  rendered  it  necessary  for  a  Bishop  to
resign  and  retire  into  a  monastery  in  order  to  do  penance  for  it.  This  Letter
appears  to  have  been  written  a  little  before  the  death  of  Thurstan,  which
Ordericus  places  in  1139  (B.  xiii.  p.  i  19,  where  he  speaks  of  him  as  brother  of
Andin,  Bishop  of  Evreux).  To  the  same  Thurstan  were  written  Letters  195
and  235.

2  It  was  not  permitted  to  monks,  when  they  became  Bishops,  to  change  their
former  habit  and  manner  of  living  (Read  Prcefat.il.,  Satcul*  iv.  n.  178,  sij(j.  et.
189).  But  how  many  things  have  changed  since  that  time  !  Read  a  sermon  of
Abaelard  on  S.  John  the  Baptist,  p.  966  !  The  conviction  spread  in  many  minds
that  the  life  of  a  Bishop,  as  it  then  existed,  was  incompatible  with  the  practice
of  monastic  rules  ;  and  many  monks  who  were  elected  to  the  Episcopate  refused
altogether  to  accept  it.  Such  was  Guy,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  who,  having  been
elected  to  the  See  of  Rheims,  at  the  death  of  Archbishop  William,  constantly
refused  to  accept  it  for  that  very  reason  (Baluz,  Miscell.  Vol.  ii.  p.  247).

VOL.  II.  54


842  LETTER CCCXX.

motive  makes  it  a  duty  for  you  to  lay  down  your  charge,  or
if  the  Pope  indulges  your  wish  for  quiet,  I  advise  you,
according  to  my  humble  lights,  not  to  let  any  degree  of
hardship  in  food  or  clothing,  nor  any  extremity  of  poverty
deter  you  from  entering  some  religious  house  where  you
may  hope  to  find  the  most  strict  observance.  Although
you  must  remember  in  houses  of  this  kind,  though  every
thing  is  sacrificed  to  the  soul,  yet  this  must  be  so  done
that  due  account  is  taken  of  age  or  of  weakness.  As  I  am
entirely  devoted  to  you,  I  pray  God  most  earnestly  to
inspire  you  to  whatever  course  of  action  may  be  for  the
best ;  and  to  enable  you  so  to  carry  the  burden  and  heat  of
the  day  that  you  may  receive  in  the  evening  the  denarius
of  the  parable  impressed  with  the  image  of  the  King.


LETTER CCCXX. (A.D. 1138.)'

TO ALEXANDER,2 PRIOR OF FOUNTAINS, AND TO HIS

BRETHREN  AT  THE  SAME  PLACE.

Bernard  urges  upon  him  that  the  election  of  a  new  Abbot
should  be  made  with  unanimous  accord.

To  his  most  dear  brethren  in  Christ,  ALEXANDER,  the
Prior,  and  the  whole  community  of  Fountains,  Brother
BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  health  and  his  humble
prayers.

i.  Your  venerable  Father  has  perfected  his  course  in  a
blessed  end,  and  has  fallen  asleep  in  the  Lord.  But  I,  as
at  all  times  I  think  of  you  with  the  anxious  care  and
tenderness  of  a  father,  so  am  specially  careful  on  your

1  Formerly  No.  381  ; the  former  No.  32013  now  317.

2  He  was  brother  of  Richard,  second  Abbot  of  that  name,  of  the  Abbey  of
Fountains,  in  England. He  came  to  end  his  days  in  peace  at  Clairvaux  (Serin,
Monast. Anglican.  V.  i.  p.  854,  where  he  is  speaking  of  Kirkstall  Abbey,  or
MountS.  Mary,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  York). Of  this  place  Alexander  was
instituted  as  first  Abbot  in  1 147,  Henry  Murdach,  to  whom  the  following  Letter
is  addressed,  being  then  Archbishop. Another  Alexander,  also  an  Englishman,
was  Abbot  of  Fontaines,  in  the  Diocese  of  Tours. Respecting  Fountains  Abbey
in  England,  see  on  Letters  235  and  252.


LETTER CCCXX.  843

account  at  the  present  time,  when  this  great  necessity  lies
upon  you.  Wherefore,  also,  I  should  have  sent  to  you
long  since  if  I  had  not  been  waiting  to  do  so  with  more
fitness  and  advantage  when  the  venerable  Abbot  Henry1
had  terminated  certain  affairs  which  had  hindered  him  from
coming  sooner.  It  is  upon  him  that  I  had  reckoned  from
the  beginning  as  being  most  worthy  of  this  mission,  and
most  suited  to  acquit  himself  of  it  well.  Him,  therefore,
dearly  beloved  brethren,  receive  with  that  honour  and
affection  of  which  he  is  worthy,  and  listen  to  him  in  all
things  as  to  myself;  and,  indeed,  much  more,  as  he  excels
me  both  in  prudence  and  merit.  I  have  given  to  him  full
powers,  whether  for  the  election  of  your  Abbot,  or  for
making  ordinances,  or  for  introducing  reforms  which  he
may  think  good  to  do  into  your  house,  and  into  those'2
which  depend  upon  it.  I  have  given  him  for  travelling
companion  Brother  William,  who  is  my  very  dear  son.

2.  And  now  I  entreat  you,  as  my  beloved  sons,  to  be  all
of  one  mind  in  the  election  of  your  new  Abbot;  that  there
may  be  no  divisions  among  you,  but  that  you  may  with  one
mind  and  one  mouth  glorify  God. For  He  is  not  a  God  of
dissension,  but  of  peace. Wherefore,  also, it  is in  peace
that  His  abode  is  placed, and  He  says,  He  who  gathereth
not  with  me  scattereth (S. Luke xi. 23). Let  this  be  far
from those who dwell in the school of Christ, under
the  leading  of  the  Holy Spirit, nor  let  them  give  oppor
tunity to  the enemy to rejoice in glory over their  dis
sension. For  by  this they both put their own souls in
peril,  lose  the  entire  fruit  of  their penitence,  endanger  the
good  repute  of  our  Order,  and  cause  the  name  of  Christ  to
be  blasphemed on account of  those  by  whom  it  should  be
most  glorified. On  the  contrary,  choose  with-one  voice  for
1  Henry  Murdach,  then  Abbot  of  Vauclair. The  following  Letter  is  addressed
to  him  ;  he  was  then  occupied  with  a  controversy,  which  grew  very  hot,  between  the
monks  of  Vauclair  and  Cuissy  (See  Herman  de  Laon,  Hook  iii.  c. 16). Henry
had  for  his  opponent  in  this  discussion Luke, the Abbot  of  Cuissy,  to  whom
Letter  79  is  addressed.

*  Upon  Fountains  Abbey  depended  Newminster,  in  the  Diocese  of  Carlisle  ;
Kirkstall  and  Louth  Park  in  that  of  Lincoln.


844  LETTER CCCXXI.

yourselves,  as  becomes  saints  and  servants  of  Christ,  and
as  I  fully  trust  that  you  will  do,  a  fit  pastor  over  your  souls,
in  company  with  the  venerable  Abbots  of  Rievaulx  and  of
Vauclair,  whose  advice  I  wish  you  to  follow  in  all  things  as
my  own.

LETTER CCCXXI. (A.D. iisB.)1

To  HENRY  MuRDACH,2  FIRST  ABBOT  OF  VAUCLAIR,  THEN
OF  FOUNTAINS,  AND  FINALLY  ARCHBISHOP  OF  YORK.

He  orders  Henry  not  to  refuse  his  election  to  the  Abbacy
of  Fountains.

To  his  dearest  brother  and  co-Abbot  HENRY,  Brother
BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  sends  greeting  and
the  assurance  of  his  prayers.

I  enjoin  you,  my  brother  Henry,  not  to  refuse  the  election,
of  our  brethren  at  Fountains,  with  the  advice  of  the  vener
able  Abbot  of  Rievaulx,  if  it  shall  have  fallen  upon  you  ;
but  to  yield  to  it  in  charity.  I  give  this  precept,  I  assure
you,  unwillingly,  knowing  that  by  your  absence  I  shall  be
deprived  of  a  great  consolation.  But  I  do  not  dare  to
oppose  myself  to  a  unanimous  choice,  for  I  believe  that
God  speaks  by  the  conclusions  which  a  number  of  Religious
come  to  with  one  consent ;  as  I  have  read  in  the  Gospel,.
Wheresoever  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  my
Name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them  (S.  Matt,  xviii.  20).
Take  courage,  therefore,  my  dear  brother  ;  receive  their
promises  of  obedience,  and  watch  over  them,  as  the  shep
herd  of  their  souls.  Do  not  fear  on  account  of  the  house
which  you  have  already  undertaken  to  rule.  For  I,  please

1  Formerly  No.  382  ;  the  former  No.  321  is  now  345.

2  This  Henry  was  English  by  birth  ;  it  is  to  him  that  Letter  106  is  addressed.
At  first  he  was  a  monk  at  Clairvaux ;  thence  he  was  sent,  in  1135,  with  twelve
other  monks,  to  found  the  Abbey  of  Vauclair  in  the  Diocese  of  Laon. He  pre
sided  over  this  until 1 138,  when  he  was  translated  to  the  Abbacy  of  Fountains,,
and  accepted  it  at  the  advice  and  bidding  of  S.  Bernard,  as  these  Letters  show.
He  became  Archbishop  of  York  in  1 147,  and  died  in  1153,  on  the  i4th  October,,
according  to  the  necrology  of  Vauclair.


LETTER CCCXXII.  845

God,  will  provide  for  it  a  faithful  administrator ;  for  it  is
very  near  to  me.  Nor  do  you  make  any  difficulty  on
•account  of  the  Bishop ;  l  depend  upon  me  to  arrange  the
matter  with  him.


LETTER CCCXXII.'  (Circa  A.D. 1138.)
To  HUGO,  A  NOVICE,  WHO  AFTERWARDS  BECAME  ABBOT

OK  BONNEVAL.3

Bernard  praises  his  design  of  becoming  a  Religious  ;  he
forewarns  him  against  temptations,  and  exhorts  him  to
perseverance.

To  his  very  dear  son  in  Christ,  HUGO,  who  has  become  a
new  creature  in  Christ,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of
€lairvaux,  sends  greeting,  and  desires  that  he  may  be  made
strong  in  the  Lord.

i.  The  news  of  your  conversion  has  given  me  joy  and
gladness.  Why  should  not  that  be  a  cause  of  rejoicing  to
men,  when  it  is  so  even  to  angels  ?  Already  the  day  is
observed  as  a  festival,  it  resounds  with  songs  of  praise  and
giving  of  thanks.  A  young  man  of  high  birth,  delicately
brought  up,  has  overcome  the  enemy,  despised  the  world,
sacrificed  his  body,  renounced  the  affections  of  his  relatives,
and  burst  the  confining  nets,  which  riches  had  spread
around  his  wings.  From  when  did  you  obtain  this  wisdom,
O  my  son  ?  For  I  do  not  find  so  great  wisdom  in  the  aged
men  of  the  world,4  who,  according  to,  or  rather  in  spite  of
the  word  of  the  Apostle  (i  Tim.  vi.  9),  have  only  one  desire
to  be  rich  in  this  world,  though  they  fall  into  temptation
and  into  the  snare  of  the  devil.  No,  the  wisdom  of  our
dear  Hugo  is  not  from  this  world  but  from  heaven.  I

1  Bartholomew,  Bishop  of  Laon.

2  Formerly  No.  351  ;  the  former  No.  322  is  now  No.  363.

3  This  was  an  Abbey  in  the  Diocese  of  Besancon. Later  on  Hugo  became  its
Abbot,  and  showed  himself  a  very  pious  man,  and  worthy  nephew  of  S.  Hugo,
Bishop  of  Grenoble,  of  whom mention  is  made  in  the  Lift  of  S.  Bernard,  B.  iv.
n.  40.

4  Babylvnis.


846  LETTER CCCXXII.

confess,  O  Father,  that  Thou  hast  hidden  these  things  from
the  wise,  and  hast  revealed  it  to  a  child.  As  for  you,  my
son,  be  not  ungrateful  for  the  goodness  of  the  Saviour  to
you.  Lay  aside  the  disposition  of  a  child  ;  or  rather,  be  a
child  in  malice,  but  not  in  wisdom  (i  Cor.  xiv.  20).  Let
not  the  austerity  of  our  Order  affright  your  tender  age.
Remember  that  the  rougher  thistle  makes  the  softer  web  ;  l
a  severe  life  makes  a  good  conscience.  The  sweetness  of
Christ  shall  make  itself  known  to  you,  and  the  meal  of  the
prophet  shall  render  palatable  the  bitter  and  nauseous
pottage  (2  Kings  iv.  39).  If  you  feel  the  piercings  of
temptations,  look  up  to  the  brazen  serpent  raised  upon  the
pole,  and  draw  life  from  the  wounds,  or  rather  from  the
bosom  of  the  Crucified.  He  shall  be  to  you  kind  as  a
mother,  and  you  shall  be  to  Him  dear  as  a  son;  the  nails
which  fasten  Him  to  the  Cross  shall,  as  it  were,  pierce  your
hands  and  feet  as  they  have  pierced  His.

2.  But  a  man's  enemies  shall  be  those  of  his  own  house
hold  (Micah  vii.  6,  and  S.  Matt.  x.  36).  They  are  those
who  really  love,  not  you,  but  the  enjoyment  which  they
have  from  you,  otherwise  they  would  have  joy  to  hear  you
say,  If  ye  loved  Me  ye  would  rejoice,  because  I  go  to  My
Father  (S.  John  xiv.  28).  "  If  your  father,"  says  S.  Jerome,
"lay  across  the  threshold  to  prevent  your  passing;  if  your
mother,  dishevelled,  should  appeal  to  you  by  the  bosom
whence  you  wrere  nourished  ;  if  your  young  nephew  should
hang  upon  your  neck  to  stop  you,  trample  under  foot  father
and  mother,  and  hasten  without  a  tear  to  the  banner  of  the
Cross.  The  highest  stretch  of  filial  duty  it  is  to  be  cruel
for  the  sake  of  Christ  "  (epis.  i.  ad  Heliodor.}.  Do  not  be  in
fluenced  by  the  tears  of  demented  relatives,  who  mourn  to
see  that  you,  from  having  been  a  child  of  hell,  have  become
a  child  of  God.  Alas  !  why  do  these  unhappy  people
cherish  an  affection  so  violent,  so  cruel,  and  so  unjust  ?
Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners  (i  Cor.  xv.  33).
Wherefore  avoid  as  much  as  possible,  my  son,  conversa-

1  Apparently  a  reference  to'  the  custom  of  using  the  head  of  the  teazle  thistle
to  render  smooth  and  even  the  surface  of  velvet  and  cloth. — TRANS.


LKTTER CCCXXII1.  847

tions  with  guests,  because  these  leave  the  mind  empty  and
the  ears  full.  Learn  to  pray  to  God  ;  to  lift  up  to  Him
your  heart  as  well  as  your  hands.  Learn  in  all  your  needs
to  lift  suppliant  eyes  towards  heaven,  and  to  bring  upon
you  the  pitying  look  of  the  Father  of  mercies.  It  would  be
an  impiety  to  believe  that  God  will  shut  up  His  bowels  of
compassion  from  you,  and  remain  deaf  to  your  groans  and
cries.  For  the  rest  remember  that  you  ought  to  be  docile
to  the  directions  of  your  spiritual  fathers  as  if  they  were
precepts  from  the  Divine  majesty.  Follow  that  rule  of
conduct,  and  you  shall  have  life.  Follow  it,  and  the  bless
ing  of  God  shall  come  upon  you,  and  for  every  single
thing  which  you  have  given  up  you  shall  receive  a  hundred
fold,  even  in  the  present  life.  Distrust  also  the  spirit  that
persuades  you  not  to  do  this  too  hastily,  and  that  this
matter  should  be  deferred  to  a  more  mature  age.  Rather
trust  Him  who  said,  It  is  good  for  a  man  that  he  should
have  borne  the  yoke  from  his  youth.  He  sitteth  alone  and
keepeth  silence  because  lie  has  borne  it  upon  him  (Lam.  iii.
27,  28).  Farewell,  and  study  perseverance,  to  which  virtue
alone  the  crown  is  due.


LETTER CCCXXIIL (A.I). H39.)1
To  POPE  INNOCKNT.

Bernard  defends  the  Archbishop  of  Treves  against  the
Abbot  of  S.  Maximin?

i.  How  often  have  I  experienced,  my  lord,  your  kindly
feeling  and  affection  towards  me  !  And  now  I  am  in  hopes
of  having  a  new  proof  of  it  under  the  present  circumstances.
By  no  means  would  I  dare  to  request  anything  which  I
thought  was  contrary  to  the  will  of  God  and  to  your  honour.
But  as  I  am  persuaded  that  this  petition  which  1  am  about
to  present  to  you  is  both  reasonable  and  honourable,  I  have
considerable  confidence  that  my  prayers  will  not  return  to

1 A  new  Letter. The  former  No.  323  is  now  No.  365.
-  See  Letters  179,  180.


848  LETTER CCCXXIII.

me  void,  especially  as  my  petition  is  to  a  father  for  his  son,
and  to  Innocent  on  behalf  of  an  innocent  person.  It  is  not
necessary  that  I  should  remind  you  in  detail  how  faithfully
the  Archbishop  of  Treves  has  loved  and  upheld  the  honour
of  the  Apostolic  See  and  the  peace  of  the  Roman  Church
from  his  youth ;  how  carefully  and  immoveably  he  has
adhered  to  it  in  time  of  tribulation,  and  for  it  has  borne  the
burden  and  heat  of  the  day  while  others  were  sitting  in  the
shade  ;  and  how  steadily  and  courageously  he  has  main
tained  before  kings  and  princes  the  defence  of  his  brethren  ;
for  all  these  things  are  certainly  present  to  your  mind.  But
furthermore,  to  speak  of  what  I  know,  and  testify  what  I
have  seen,  how  prudently  and  wisely  has  he  extricated  the
goods  and  revenues  of  the  Church  out  of  the  hands  of
strangers,  how  kindly  and  liberally  has  he  imparted  from
his  own  means  for  the  public  good,  and  especially  for  that
of  the  servants  of  God ;  with  wrhat  diligence  and  circum
spection  has  he  guarded  his  own  reputation  from  lying  lips
and  from  the  deceitful  tongue  !

2.  What  then,  in  him,  has  displeased  your  Paternity  ?
Was  it  that  he  freed  the  Abbey  of  S.  Maximin  from  the
royal  power  and  subjected  it  to  that  of  the  Church?  or
was  it  that  he  did  not  accept  for  Abbot  that  man  who,  as
it  is  said,  desired  to  be  a  general  before  he  was  a  soldier  ;
that  is,  to  be  an  Abbot  before  he  was  a  monk  ?  But  if  it
was  this,  or  some  other  matter,  that  displeased  you  in  him,
it  would  have  been  not  unworthy  of  a  kindly  Father  to  bear
in  mind  the  Archbishop's  affection  of  long  standing  towards
him,  to  excuse  with  kindness  a  fault,  and  to  let  the  memory
of  many  good  services  win  indulgence  for  a  man  who  is
praiseworthy  in  many  respects,  if  to  be  blamed  in  a  few.
But  now,  my  lord,  you  have  lifted  up  the  right  hand  of
those  who  oppress  him,  and  made  all  his  enemies  to  rejoice.
It  is  a  subject  of  wonder  in  the  eyes  of  many  on  what
reputation  for  virtue  or  goodness  of  life  a  man  is  placed  in
the  position  to  rule  over  souls,  who  has  given  so  little  heed
to  his  own.  For  how  can  he  rule  others  who  has  not
known  how  to  be  ruled  himself  ?  How  can  he  venture  to


LETTER CCCXXIII.


be  in  the  position  of  a  superior,  who  has  not  himself  learned
to  submit,  or  to  require  the  obedience  from  others,  which
he  himself  has  not  rendered  to  those  above  him  ? If  any
man  has  not  known  how  to  rule  over  his  own  house,  says  the
Teacher  of  the  Gentiles,  how  shall  he  be  capable  of  taking
care  of  the  Church of  God?  (i Tim. iii. 5)- More  than
this:  such  as  is  the  father,  such  are  also  the  sons;  have  they
not  had  the  cruelty,  in  fact,  to  lacerate  their  mother  by  their
favouring  of  dissensions  and  schisms?  and  concerning  their
character  and  manner  of  life  it  is  more  decent  to  be  silent
than  to  say  anything. But  I  do  not  make  these  statements
as  taking  upon  me  to  judge  the  servants  of  another,  who
stand  or  fall  to  their  own  loss  ;  but  because I know  that  if
the  wretched  designs  of those men should  succeed,  that
young  men  averse  to  obedience  will  break off  the  yoke  of
discipline  from  their  necks,  so  as  to  become  wanderers  and
vagabonds  upon  the  earth,  according  to  the  example  given
to  them  by  these. And  if  their design does not  wholly
succeed  they  will  be  able,  at  least,  to  boast  themselves  that
they  have  been  able  to  maintain  resistance  to  their  prelates.
Alas!  how  many  persons,  and  those  of  consideration,  who
suppose  that  they  have  some  ground  to  count  on  your  pro
tection,  will  find  their  hope  and  confidence  altogether  up
rooted,  if  the  first  blast of  the tempest which  threatens  a
son  once  so  beloved  shall  drive  him from your  heart,  and
from  the  consolation  of  your  sympathy.

3.  If,  then,  blessed  father,  there  is  any  hearing  for  my
entreaties  with  your  Excellence,  I  respectfully  beg  of  you,
I  whose  affection  is  for  yourself  rather  than  for  your
favours,  that  you  would  not  abandon,  now  when  it  is  your
day  of  prosperity,  a  man  who  has  remained  firm  to  you  in
your  day  of  trial  ;  and  that  you  would  not  suffer  his  authority
to  be  weakened  in  any  respect;  for  he  may  reasonably
hope  that  from  you  it  will  receive  enlargement,  not  suffer
decrease.  Otherwise,  if  contrary  to  the  general  hope,  and
in  spite  of  the  merits  of  the  man,  it  shall  prove  that
strangers  are  allowed  to  rob  him  of  the  fruits  of  his  labours,
that  his  good  deeds  are  repaid  with  evil,  and  his  good  will


850  LETTER CCCXXIV.

with  hatred  ;  he,  indeed,  alone,  will  receive  a  wound  from
a  hand  at  which  he  did  not  expect  it,  but  many  will  resent
his  persecution.  May  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  who  proceedeth
from  the  Father,  teach  you  to  separate  the  light  from  the
darkness  in  all  your  actions,  so  that  you  may  know  how  to
reject  the  evil  and  to  choose  the  good.


LETTER  CCCXXIV. (A.D.  1139.)'
To ROBERT,2 ABBOT OF DUNES.

Bernard  suggests  the  thought  of  the  future  union  of
their  souls,  and  also  bodies,  in  the  Resurrection,  as  the
solace  of  their  absence  from  each  other.

To  his  brother  and  very  dear  friend,  Abbot  ROBERT,
Brother  BERNARD,  of  Clairvaux,  sends  assurance  of  devoted
friendship.

You  were  late  made  known  to  me,  my  dear  Robert,  and
speedily  taken  away.  But  I  am  consoled  by  this  fact,  that
it  is  only  in  the  body  that  we  are  separated,  and  that  in  soul
you  are  always  with  me.  Yet  how  could  I  bear  even  this  with
resignation,  if  it  were  not  in  the  cause  of  God  Himself?
But  a  time  shall,  shall  come,  when  we  shall  be  restored  to
each  other,  and  when  we  shall  each  of  us  rejoice  in  the
other  as  in  himself  ;  we  shall  be  in  each  other's  presence
with  each  part  of  our  being,  nor  fear  to  be  thereafter  in  any
way  divided.  He  who  is  now  the  cause  of  our  temporary
separation  shall  be  then  the  bond  of  our  close  union.  He
shall  be  present  without  ceasing  to  each  of  us,  and  shall
render  us  constantly  present  to  each  other.  I  salute  all
your  sons,  whom  I  regard  as  mine  also,  and  entreat  that
they  will  pray  for  me.

1  Formerly  No.  336; the  former  No.  324  is  now  No.  382.

2  It  was  this  Robert  who  succeeded  Bernard  as  Abbot of Clairvaux,  having
been  named  by  him  as  his  successor  when  dying. The  Belgians  call  the  hills
or  mounds  of  white  sand  thrown  up  by  the  sea,  Dunes. This  was  a  monastery
founded  by  S.  Bernard,  near  Fumes,  in  Belgium,  and  was  in  a  very  flourishing
condition  ;  but  the  renewal  of  the  wooden  piles  which  hindered  the  advance  of
the  sands  was  neglected  "  through the  calamities  of  war,"  and  the  buildings
being  completely  overwhelmed  the  convent  was  removed  to  Bruges.


LETTER CCCXXV.  851

LETTER  CCCXXV.1 (Circa  A.I). 1139.)
To  THE  SAME,  RESPECTING  THE  NOVICE  IDIEK.

Bernard  advises,  in  answer  to  his  inquiry,  what  course
should  be  taken  with  a  novice  of  difficult  character,  named
Idier.

To  his  very  dear  brother  and  co-Abbot,  ROBERT,  of
Dunes,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
wishes  health.

On  the  subject  of  the  religious  whom  you  have  mentioned
to  me,  and  whom  you  believe  will  be  not  only  useless,  but
also  a  burden  to  the  community,  without  speaking  of  secret
defects,  such  as  you  suspect,  I  will  give  you  such  counsel
as  I  should  act  on  myself  were  I  in  your  place.  After  what
you  have  told  me,  it  seems  to  me  that  during  his  probation
he  has  shown  himself  neither  worthy  nor  capable  of  being
rendered  so,  and  that,  therefore,  you  are  able  with  a  good
conscience  to  put  away  an  evil  person  from  among  you.
If,  however,  it  pleases  your  charity  to  exalt  mercy  above
judgment,  you  are  able  to  allow  him  to  remain  in  your
house  as  long  as  you  shall  see  tit,  but  without  permitting
him  to  take  the  vows.  But  I  dissuade  you  most  strongly
from  receiving  him  to  profession  whilst  he  is  in  this  con
dition  ;  and  let  him  be  subjected  to  a  new  probation  if
perchance  he  should  show  any  sign  of  becoming  that
which  he  ought  to  be.  If  not,  use  resolutely  your  power  of
expulsion,  so  that  one  diseased  sheep  may  not  infect  tin-
entire  flock.

LETTER  CCCXXVI.- (Circa  A.I). 1139.)

FROM ABBOT WILLIAM TO GEOFFREY, BISHOP OF
CHARTRES,  AND  TO  BERNARD,  ABBOT  or  Ci.AiRVArx.3

Abbot William begs  them to  defend  the  cause  of  God

1  Formerly  No.  337  ;  the  former  No.  325  is  now  No.  395.

2  Formerly  No.  391  ;  the  former  No.  326  is  now  No.  400.

3  This  Letter  was  prefixed  by  way  of  preface  to  the  disputation  of  the  same
William,  Abbot  of  S.Thierry  at  Rheims,  with  Abaelard,  which  is  printed  in  Vol.


52  LETTER CCCXXVI.

and  of  the  Church  against  Peter  Abaelard,  and  cites
several  of  his  erroneous  propositions.

To  the  Reverend  Lords  and  Fathers  in  Christ,  GEOFFREY,
Bishop  of  Chartres,  and  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
health  and  prosperity.

i.  I  am  rilled  with  confusion  before  you,  my  lords  and
fathers,  as  God  knows,  by  finding  myself  constrained  to
draw  your  attention  to  a  subject  of  grave  necessity,  and
relating  to  the  common  interest  of  the  Church.  But  as
you  and  others  to  whom  it  belongs  to  speak  keep  silence,
I,  though  a  very  humble  person,  venture  to  address  you.
For  I  see  the  faith  on  which  rests  our  common  hope  gravely
and  dangerously  compromised,  no  one  resisting  or  object
ing;  and  yet  Christ  consecrated  it  for  us  with  His  Blood,
and  the  Apostles  and  martyrs  strove  for  it  even  until  death,
the  holy  doctors  defended  it  with  the  greatest  labour  and
industry,  and  handed  it  down  even  to  our  depraved  times
whole  and  incorrupt.  I  reflect  on  this  with  great  regret,
and  am  obliged  by  my  inward  distress  and  sorrow  to  speak
at  least  a  few  words  on  behalf  of  that  for  which,  if  it  were
needful,  I  should  wish  even  to  lay  down  my  life.  Nor  are
these  attacks  made  on  doctrines  of  small  importance,  but  on
the  faith  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  on  the  Person  of  the
Mediator,  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  grace  of  God,  on  the  sacra
ment  of  our  common  redemption.  For  Peter  Abaelard  is
again  teaching  and  publishing  novelties ;  his  books  cross
the  seas,  pass  the  Alps ;  new  speculations  concerning  the
doctrines  of  the  faith,  and  new  dogmas  are  spread  through
out  provinces  and  realms,  are  openly  preached  and  freely
defended ;  it  is  even  said  that  they  have  partisans  in  the
Curia  of  Rome.  I  say  to  you  that  your  silence  is  dangerous,
as  well  for  yourselves  as  for  the  Church  of  God.  We  are
regarding  it  as  a  matter  of  no  account  that  the  Faith  is
being  corrupted,  although  it  is  for  the  Faith  that  we  have
renounced  our  own  selves,  and  in  order  that  we  may  not  be

iv.  of  the  Billiotheca  Cistercicnsis.  It  is  apparent  from  the  first  lines  of  this
Letter  that  it  was  written  before  all  those  of  Bernard  against  Abaelard,  and
therefore  before  the  year  1 140.


LKTTKR CCCXXVI.  853

attacked  we  do  not  fear  to  offend  God.  I  say  to  you  that
this  evil  is  as  yet  only  in  process  of  birth  ;  unless  it  be
dealt  with  beforehand,  it  will  burst  out  into  a  basilisk,  nor
will  it  be  easy  to  find  an  enchanter  who  can  prevail  against
it.  Give  your  attention,  therefore,  to  what  I  have  to

relate.

2. A  little while ago I read by accident a certain
treatise  of  that  man,  entitled,  Theologia  of  Peter  Abaelard.
I  confess  that  the  title  made  me  curious  to  read  it. I  have
two  copies  containing  almost  the  same, except that  the
one  may  be  a  little  more  lengthy  than  the  other. In  it  I
found  certain  statements  by  which I  was  greatly  shocked  ;
1  have  taken  notes  of  them,  and  subjoined  my  reasons  for
objection. These  I  have  sent  you,  with  the  books  them
selves, so  that  you may  judge  whether  I  was  right  in  my
disapproval. And since my  disapproval was  founded  on
the  unheard-of novelties of phrase which he applies  to
matters of  faith,  as well as to  the  novel  senses  which  he
puts  upon  received  terms,  and  since  I  had  no  one  to  whom
I  might  pour  out  my  suspicions, I  have  found  no  one  but
yourselves  to  whom  I  might  turn, and  upon  whom  I  might
call  in  the cause  of God and  of  the  whole  Latin  Church.
For  you  even  that  man  fears and  pays  respect  to. If  you
shut your eyes, whom  will  he have  any fear of? And
since  he  says  what  he  does  even  now,  what  will  he  not  say
when  he  has no critic to  fear? Almost  all  of  the  great
masters  of  theology  have been taken from the Church
by  death.1 An  enemy  belonging  to  our  own  house,  as it
were,  burst  in  upon  the  empty  territory  of  the  Church,  and
arrogated  to  himself the sole right  of teaching  within  it.
He  proceeds in  treating of  the Holy  Scripture, as  he  is
accustomed to do in dialectics; he brings in his own
devices,  his  recurring  novelties; he  makes" himself  a  critic
of  the  Faith,  and  not  a  disciple; an  improver  of  it,  instead
of  a  follower.

1  Hugo  Metellus,  in  his  fourth  Letter  to  Pope  Innocent  against  the  same
Abaelard,  expresses  himself  in  a  very  similar  way:  "  After  the  death  of  Anselm
of  Laon,  and  of  William,  of  Champeaux,  it  seemed  that  the  light  of  the  word  of
God  failed  upon  the  earth,"  etc.


854  LETTER CCCXXVI.

3. These,  then,  are  the  propositions  collected  from  his
works  which  I  have  thought  it  advisable  to  submit  to  you: —

1.  He  defines  Faith  as  an  opinion  about  things  that  are

not  seen.

2.  That  the  names  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost

are  improper  in  God,  but  only  serve  for  a  descrip
tion  of  the  fulness  of  the  Supreme  Good.

3.  That  the Father is all Power; the Son,  a certain

Power ; but  the  Holy  Ghost,  not  a  Power.

4.  That  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  of the  substance  of  the

Father  and  the  Son,  as  the  Son  is  of  the  substance
of  the  Father.

5.  That  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  soul  of  the  world  (anima

mundi}.

6.  That  we  are  able  both to  will  and  to  act  rightly  by

the  power  of our free  will  alone,  without  the  help
of  Divine  grace.

7.  That  it  was  not  in  order  to  free  us  from  the  yoke  of

the devil that Christ assumed flesh  and suffered
death.

8.  That  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  God  and  Man,  is  not  one  of

the  Three  Persons  in  the  Trinity.

g. That  in  the  Sacrament  of  the Altar  the  form  of  the
earlier  substance  remains  in  the  air.

10.  That  the  devil  inspires his suggestions  into men  by

physical  means.

11.  That  what  we  derive  from  Adam  is  not the fault of

original  sin,  but  the  punishment  of  it.

12.  That  there  is  no  sin,  except  in  consenting  to sin,  and

in  contempt  of  God.

13.  That no sin is committed in concupiscence, or  by

delectation, or by ignorance  ; there is no sin in

these,  but  only  a  fact  of  nature.

4.  These  are  the  propositions,  collected  out  of  the  books
of  Abaelard,  which  I  considered  I  ought  in  the  first  place
to  put  under  your  eyes ;  both  to  arouse  your  zeal,  and  to
convince  you  that  I  have  not  been  disturbed  without  reason.
These,  and  others  which  depend  upon  them,  1  shall  attempt,


LKTTKR CCCXXVII.  855

with  the  help  of  Him  in  whose  hands  are  both  we  and  our
discourses,  to  remark  upon  at  greater  length  ;  and  I  shall
regard  it  as  of  small  account  to  displease  you  by  my  style,
provided  that  I  satisfy  you  in  the  statement  of  my  faith.  I
hope,  too,  if  I  can  by  any  means  show  that  I  have  rightly
formed  an  unfavourable  opinion  of  these  propositions,  to
carry  you  also  with  me  in  so  doing  ;  so  that  you  will  not
shrink  fiom  sacrificing,  in  order  to  save  the  head,  if  need
be,  the  foot  (as  we  may  call  that  man),  the  hand,  or  even
the  eye.  For  I  have  both  loved  him,  and  would  wish  still
to  love  him,  God  is  my  witness;  but  in  this  cause  no  one
shall  ever  [gain  partiality  from  me  as  being]  neighbour  or
friend.  Now  that  the  evil  has  become  so  patent,  and
presses  itself  upon  public  notice,  it  is  no  longer  a  question
of  private  warning  or  correction.  For  there  are,  as  I  hear,
some  other  treatises  of  his  besides,  of  which  the  names  are
Sicct  Non,  Scito  te  ipsum,  and  some  others,  about  which  I
fear  that  their  doctrines  may  be  as  monstrous  as  their  titles
are  strange  ;  but,  as  I  am  told,  they  hate  the  light,  and
cannot  be  found  even  when  sought  for.
But  to  return  to  our  subject  .  .  .  etc.


LETTER CCCXXVII.1 (Circa  A.D. 1139.)
REPLY  OF  BERNARD  TO  ABBOT  WILLIAM.

Bernard  praises  tJic  treatise  written  against  Peter
Abaelard,  an  if  promises  to  confer  ivit/i  liitn  after
Easter.

To  his  very  clear  WILLIAM,  Brother  BERNARD.

In  my  judgment,  your  indignation  was  both  just  and
necessary.  And  your  treatise,  which  refutes  and  belabours
the  mouth  of  them  who  speak  unrighteousness,  shows  that
it  is  not  an  empty  indignation  either.  I  have  not  yet  had
the  time  to  read  it  with  the  attention  that  you  require,  but
have  only  run  through  it  in  haste;  nevertheless,  1  like  it
much,  and  think  it  a  powerful  instrument  for  the  destruction
1  Formerly  No.  392  ;  the  former  No.  327  is  now  No.  339.


856  LETTER CCCXXVIII.

of  that  unhappy  teaching.  But  as  you  well  know,  I  do  not
rely  entirely  on  my  own  judgment,  especially  in  such
weighty  matters  ;  and  I  think  it  will  be  worth  while,  when
a  time  of  meeting  can  be  arranged,  for  you  and  me  to  meet
at  some  convenient  place  and  discuss  all  these  matters.  1
think  this  cannot  be  done  before  Easter,  if  we  are  to  give
ourselves  without  distraction  to  earnest  prayer,  as  this  holy
time  requires.  For  the  present,  then,  suffer  me  to  keep
silence  still  for  a  while  upon  all  these  questions,  of  which
the  greater  number,  not  to  say  all,  are  entirely  new  to  me.1
But  God  is  able  in  His  great  power  to  bestow  upon  me  the
wisdom  and  the  light  which  you  shall  ask  for  me  in  your
prayers.  Farewell.

LETTER CCCXXVIII.2 (Circa A.D. 1140.)
To  THE  ROMAN  PONTIFF^

Against  the  person  elected  Bishop  of  Rodez.

Hitherto  I  have  not  hesitated  to  write  to  you  in  season
and  out  of  season,  at  the  request  of  my  friends  :  but  now,
the  interests  of  the  Christian  religion  would  forbid  me  to
be  silent,  even  if  I  wished  to  be  so.  Cursed  be  he,  says
the  Prophet,  who  keepeth  back  liis  sword  from  blood
(Jer.  xlviii.  10)  [when  he  ought  to  strike].  To-day  malice
is  profiting,  the  desires  of  evil  men  prosper,  and  there  is  no
one  to  oppose  them,  no  one  who  rises  up  to  defend  the
rampart  of  the  house  of  Israel.  Even  in  your  days  most

1  It  is  clear  from  this  that  it  was  William  who  was  among  the  first  to  call
attention  to  the  errors  of  Abaelard  ;  which,  indeed,  William  himself  virtually
asserts  in  the  previous  Letter,  where  he  complains  of  the  silence  of  Geoffrey
and  Bernard.

-  A  new  Letter;  the  former  No.  328  is  now  No.  339.

3  This  Letter  was  placed  immediately  after  that  of  a  certain  A.  To  the  Allot
of  Rieti,  and  inscribed  To  the  Same.  But  it  appears  from  the  Letter  itself,  which
treats  also  of  an  election  of  a  successor  to  Adhemar,  Bishop  of  Rodez,  that  it
is  also  from  the  hand  of  Bernard,  and  was  addressed  to  Pope  Innocent  or  Pope
Eugenius.  In  Letter  240,  n.  i,  Bernard  congratulates  Eugenius  on  having
finished  the  matter  of  the  Church  of  Rodez,  by  deposing,  as  it  seems,  an
unworthy  person  who  had  been  elected  Bishop,  about  whom  this  and  the
following  Letter  is  written.


LETTER CCCXXVIII.  857

corrupt  men  have  made  violent  efforts1  to  climb  up  into
the  most  holy  places  :  they  have  stricken  hands  with  death,
and  made  a  covenant  with  hell.  Why  then  this  patience  ?
The  clergy  of  Rodez2  have  elected  a  man  for  Bishop  who
is  consentient  with  their  vices  ;  and  have  not  been
ashamed,  it  is  said,  to  conceal  the  truth  even  from  your
eyes,  both  as  to  the  business  of  the  election  and  as  to
the  person  elected.  That  man,  chosen  not  by  God,  but
by  men,  has  many  witnesses  of  the  infamous  life  he  has
led,  none  at  all  of  his  repentance  and  change  of  life  ;  and
in  plain  fact,  it  is  more  decent  to  be  silent  concerning  him
than  to  speak.  God  forbid  that  such  wicked  men  should,
under  your  pontificate,  be  promoted,  and  that  one  should
be  set  for  a  shepherd  of  souls,  who  values  at  nought  the
shedding  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  the  price  of  his  own
soul's  redemption.  What  to  them  is  a  cunning  insinuation
of  injury  and  suppression  of  their  appeal,  if  they  can  thus
ingratiate  themselves  with  the  Curia,  and  interest  them  in
their  cause  ?  Do  not  believe  the  word  of  falsehood  :  for,
according  to  the  statement  of  people  of  veracity,  as  there
was  no  appeal,  so  no  suppression  of  it  could  have  followed.
It  is  important  that  you  should  sanction  with  the  weight  of
your  authority  what  the  Bishop  :i  has  done  at  the  advice  of
the  Religious.  I  wish  at  the  same  time  to  commend  more
and  more  the  same  Archbishop  to  you  :  and  I  should
neither  wish  to  ask  this,  nor  to  be  heard  by  you,  it  he
was  not  one  who  respects  and  discharges  diligently  his
function.

1  Man  il'ii  s  et  pediius.

2  Rutilenscs. But  we  ought  to  read  Ru/ine/ises,  as  we  find  from  the  following
Letter. Kutila  was  a  monastery  in  the  Diocese  of  Treves. See  Z.//V,  B.  iv.  n.47.

3  I.e..,  the  Archbishop  of  Bourses,  of  which See  the  Bishop  o( Rodez  was  a
suffragan.


VOL.  II.  55


858  LETTER CCCXXIX.

LETTER CCCXXIX.1 (Circa A.D. 1140.)
To  THE  BISHOP  OF  LIMOGES.

Against the same  person, who  had been  elected  to the
See  of  Rodez.

The  words  which  I  shall  speak  to  you,  I  speak  not  in  my
own  behalf,  nor  in  them  do  I  seek  any  advantage  of  my
own. The  life  of  man  is  very  short  :  as  long  as  you  are
Bishop  of  Limoges,  strive  to  do  honour  to  your  office,  by
letting  us  see  your  good  works. I  have  the  consolation  of
knowing  that  you  have  been  entrusted  by  his  lordship,  the
Pope,  with  the  matter  of  the  election  of  the  Bishop  of  Cahors2
with  full power  to decide it canonically  without  appeal.
See,  then,  what  an  opportunity  you  have  in  this  to  manifest
to  the Church  how  wise  a  course  has  been  taken  by  the
Pontiff;  an  opportunity  that  will  be  realized  if  only  there  is
in you  the fear  of God, a  love  of justice, and a strict
adherence to  the  canons. As to  the Church of Rodez,
there  is  a  question  debated — whether  that  church  shall  re
ceive  a  true  pastor,  a  Bishop  of  souls,  a  successor  to  Christ,
one, I say, who shall raise up offspring to his brother
deceased. Who  shall  be  regarded  as  lit  for  this  ? Shall  it
be  one  whom  his  life  has  defiled,  whom  his  own  conscience
accuses,  whose  reputation  is  a  scandal  ? — a  man  who  has
sunk from abbey  to abbey, or rather  from one  depth  to
another,  and  who  has  not  scrupled  to  violate  the  virgins  to
whom he  had himself given the veil? Would that be
taking  heed  of  the  precept  of  the  Apostle,  A  bishop must
be  blameless,  as  the  steward  of  God  (Tit.  i.  7). Do not,
then,  act  in  contradiction  with yourself, saying  one  thing
and  doing  another,  but  let  your  actions  respond  constantly
to  your  words, so that  the  words  may  not  be  applied  to
you,  Their  own tongues  shall  be  turned  against  them  (Ps.
Ixiv.  8). See,  the  matter  is  in  your  hand. But  keep  your
1  A  new  Letter;  the  former  No.  329,  is  now  No.  318.

•  Catinensis  [Calania]  in  the  text.  It  should  perhaps  be  read  Caturcensis  ;
for  this  Letter  can  scarcely  relate  to  any  other  city.  If  so,  then  this  passage
seems  to  refer  to  the  election  of  Raymond,  whom,  in  consequence,  William  de  la
Croix  wrongly  erases  from  the  list  of  Bishops  of  Cahors.


LETTER CCCXXX.  859

own  soul  free  from  stains,  nor  make  yourself  liable  for  the
offences  of  another.  With  you  it  will  rest  to  uphold  or
to  annul  his  election  ;  but  in  taking  the  latter  course  you
will  make  your  hands  holy  to  the  Lord.

LETTER  CCCXXX.1  (A.D. 1140.)

To  POPE  INNOCENT.
Against  Peter  Abaelard.

To  his  very  dear  father  and  lord  INNOCENT,  BERNARD,
called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  sends  humble  homage.

The  Spouse  of  Christ  weeps  bitterly  in  the  night.  Her
cheeks  are  bedewed  with  tears,  and  there  is  not  one  to
console  her  of  those  to  whom  she  is  dear.  That  Shunam-
mite,  my  lord,  is  committed  to  your  care  during  the  days  of
her  pilgrimage,  and  while  her  Spouse  delays  His  coming.
To  no  one  will  she  contide  her  injuries  and  her  troubles  so
unreservedly  as  to  the  friend  of  her  Spouse.  Because  you
love  Him  you  are  always  prepared  to  listen  to  her  com
plaints  in  time  of  trouble.  And  among  all  the  various  kinds
of  enemies  with  whom  the  Church  is  surrounded,  as  a  city
among  thorns,  there  are  none  whose  attacks  are  more  per
sistent  and  more  dangerous  than  those  whom  she  has  borne
in  her  bosom  and  nourished  at  her  breast.  It  is  they,  and
such  as  they,  who  have  drawn  forth  the  exceeding  bitter
cry,  My  lovers  and  my  friends  draw  near  and  stand
against  me  to  take  away  my  life  (Ps.  xxxviii.  1 1,  12).  There
is  none  more  powerful  to  injure  than  an  enemy  of  our  own
household.  We  may  judge  of  this  from  the  treacherous
attachment  of  Absalom,  and  from  the  kiss  of  Judas.  Other
foundation  for  our  faith  can  no  man  lay  than  that  which  is
laid  (i  Cor.  iii.  n).  Now  in  France  there  is  being  fabricated
a  new  faith  which  does  not  look  at  virtues  and  vices  from  the
point  of  view  of  morals,  at  Sacraments  with  the  eye  of  faith,
which  reasons  about  the  Holy  Trinity  itself  in  away  far  from
simple  or  reverent,  and  arrives  at  conclusions  other  than  the

1  A  new  Letter. The  former  No.  330  is  now  No.  349.


860  LETTER CCCXXX.

truth  we  have  received.  Magister  Peter  and  Arnold,  of  whose
evil  influence  you  have  cleared  Italy,  have  Stood  up  and  taken
counsel  together  against  the  Lord  and  against  His  Anoin
ted. Scale  is  joined  to  scale,  so  that  not  a  breath  can  come
between  them. They  are  corrupt,  and  become  abominable
in  their  pursuits. With  the  leaven  of  their  corruption  they
corrupt  the  faith  of  the  simple,  pervert  the  rules  of  morals,
and soil  the  whiteness of the Church's robe. Like him
who changes himself into the similitude of  an angel of
light, they have  a  form of piety, but  without its  power.
They  are  adorned  like  a  decorated  sanctuary  that  they  may
privily  shoot  at  them  that  are  of  a  right  disposition. Scarcely
have  we  ceased  to  hear  the  roaring  of  Peter  Leonis  occupy
ing  the  seat  of  Simon  Peter  than  we  are  threatened  by  Peter
the  dragon1  assailing  the  faith  of  Simon  Peter. The  one
persecuted  the  Church  of  God  openly,  as a  ravening  lion,
but  the  other,  as  a  dragon, lurks  in hiding  places  that  he
may  murder  the  innocent. But  Thou,  Lord  God,  will  bring
down  the  high  looks  of  the  proud  ; Thou  wilt  tread  under
Thy  feet  both  lion  and  dragon. The  one  did evil  as  long
as  he  lived,  but  death  put  an end  to his malice ;  but  the
other,  committing  his  new  dogmas  to  writing,  provides  for
the  transmission  of  his  poison  to future  generations. In
short,  to  describe  this  theologian in  few  words, he  distin
guishes  with  Arius  degrees  and  inequalities  in  the  Trinity  ;
with  Pelagius  he  prefers  free  will  to  grace  ; with  Nestorius
he  divides Christ in excluding  His  humanity  from union
with  the  Trinity. But  in  all  these  things  he  boasts  that  he
has  opened  the  fountains  of  knowledge  to  the  cardinals  and
ecclesiastics  of  the  Curia  ; that  his  books  are  in  the  hands
of  the  Romans,  his  maxims  in  their  hearts,  so  that  he  takes
those  by  whom  he  ought  to  be  judged  and  condemned  to  be
the  protectors  of  his  error.  With  what  intention,  with  what
effrontery  can  you  [I  ask  him],  who  art  the  persecutor  of
the  faith,  appeal  to  the  protection  of  its  defender,  and  with
what unabashed boldness can you, the insulter of the
Church,  dare  to  look  in  the  face  the  friend  of  the  Church's

1  Draconis.


LETTER CCCXXXI.  86l

Bridegroom  ?  If  the  care  of  my  brethren  and  the  weak
state  of  my  health  did  not  keep  me  here,  how  greatly
should  I  wish  to  behold  the  friend  of  the  Bridegroom  exert
ing  himself  zealously  in  di  fence  of  the  Church,  in  tin-
absence  of  her  Spouse  !  Can  I  possibly  endure  the  wounds
of  the  Church  when  I  could  not  bear  in  silence  the  injuries
done  to  my  lord  [the  Pope]  ?  Do  thou,  then,  most  dear
father,  cease  to  withhold  thy  help  from  her.  Rise  up  in
her  defence ;  gird  thee  with  thy  sword.  For  already,
through  the  overflowing  of  iniquity,  the  love  of  many  waxes
cold,  and  unless  you  put  to  your  hand  I  foresee  the  day
when  the  Spouse  of  Christ  will  go  forth  and  follow  strange
paths,  and  be  led  astray  by  false  pastors.


LETTER CCCXXXI.1 (A.D. 1140.)

To  CARDINAL  STEPHEN,  BISHOP  OF  PALESTRINA.

On  the  Same  Subject.

To  the  venerable  lord  and  very  dear  father  S  .  .  .,  by
the  grace  of  God  Bishop  of  Palestrina,  Brother  BERNARD,
Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  health  and  that  he  may  be  strengthened
to  act  firmly  in  the  Lord.

I  impart  to  you  the  distresses  and  complaints  of  the
Spouse  of  Christ  with  the  more  confidence,  because  I  am
well  aware  that  you  are  the  friend  of  the  Bridegroom,  and
rejoice  greatly  because  of  his  voice.  If  I  have  rightly
known  your  inward  disposition,  I  am  confident  that  the
Lord  may  count  on  you,  since  you  seek  not  your  own
interests,  but  those  of  Jesus  Christ.

The  life,  the  character,  and  the  books  already  published
of  Peter  Abaelard  show  him  to  be  a  persecutor  of  the
Catholic  faith  and  the  enemy  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  He  is
a  monk  in  outward  appearance,  but  within  he  is  a  heretic,
having  nothing  of  the  monk  beyond  the  name  and  the
habit.  He  opens  the  old  cisterns  and  the  dried-up  pools  of
the  heretics  that  the  ox  and  the  ass  may  fall  therein.  He

1  A  new  Letter  ;  the  former  No.  331  is  now  No.  350.


862  LETTER CCCXXXI.

had  been  long  silent,  but  while  he  kept  silence  in  Brittany
he  conceived  sorrow,  and  now  in  France  he  has  brought
forth  iniquity.  The  serpent  of  many  coils  has  come  forth
from  his  cavern,  and,  like  the  Hydra,  produces  seven  heads
for  one  that  has  been  struck  off.  A  single  one  was  lopped
off,  a  single  heresy  of  that  man,  at  Soissons,  but  in  its
place  seven,  or  it  may  be  more,  heresies  have  appeared,  of
which  I  have  and  send  you  a  copy.  Scarcely  has  he
separated  his  young  and  unskilled  scholars  from  the  rudi
ments  of  dialectic  than  he  introduces  them,  who  are  as  yet
barely  able  to  comprehend  the  first  elements  of  the  faith,
to  the  mystery  of  the  holy  Trinity,  the  holy  of  holies,  the
very  chamber  of  the  King,  and  even  to  Him  who  makes
darkness  His  dwelling-place.  In  short,  our  new  theologian
distinguishes  with  Arius  degrees  and  inequalities  in  the
Trinity,  with  Pelagius  prefers  free  will  to  grace,  with
Nestorius  he  divides  Christ  in  excluding  His  Humanity
from  union  with  the  Trinity.  Proceeding  thus  through
almost  all  the  Sacraments  and  sacred  doctrines,  he  touches
on  each  with  the  utmost  boldness,  and  treats  each  in  a  most
blameable  manner.  Besides  this,  he  boasts  that  he  has
imbued  the  Curia  at  Rome  with  the  infection  of  his
novelties;  that  his  books  and  his  opinions  have  made  their
way  into  the  hands  and  the  minds  of  Romans,  and  that
those  by  whom  he  ought  to  be  judged  and  condemned  are
the  protectors  of  his  erroneous  teaching.  May  God  keep
guard  over  His  Church,  for  which  He  gave  His  life,  so  as  to
present  her  to  Himself  without  spot  or  wrinkle  ;  and  may
He  so  order  that  perpetual  silence  may  be  imposed  upon
that  man,  whose  mouth  is  filled  only  with  cursing,  and
bitterness,  and  woe.

LETTER  CCCXXXII.1  (A.D.  1140.)

To  CARDINAL  G  .  .  .
Also  against  Peter  Abaelard.
To  the venerable lord and most dear father G . . .,

1  A  new  Letter;  the  former  No.  332  is  now  No.  367.


LETTER CCCXXXII.  863

Cardinal  of  the  holy  Roman  Church,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  desires  the  spirit  of  counsel  and  might.

I  cannot  hold  my  peace  respecting  the  injuries  done  to
Christ, the difficulties and troubles of the Church, the
misery  and  complaints  of  the  poor. We  are  fallen  upon
perilous times. We have  doctors  prone  to  flattery, and
scholars  who  close  their  ears  to the  truth  and  turn  aside
unto  fables. We  have  in  France  Peter  Abaelard,  a  monk,
who  lives without rule;  a  prelate, who has no spiritual
charge ;  an abbot  without an abbey, who disputes with
boys  and  converses  with  women. In  his  books  he  provides
for  his  followers  secret  waters  and  bread  eaten  in secret,
while in his oral discourses he leads them to profane
novelties  of  phrase  and  of  meaning. He  approaches  to  the
thick  darkness  in  which  God  is,  not  alone,  as  did  Moses,
but  with  the  numerous  crowd  of  his  disciples. Along  the
streets  and  in  the  open  spaces  people  dispute  about  the
Catholic  Faith,  about  the  childbearing  of  the  Virgin,  about
the Sacrament  of  the  Altar, about  the incomprehensible
mystery  of  the  holy  Trinity. We  have  ceased  to  hear  the
roaring  of Peter  Leonis  only  to  hear  the  hissing  of Peter
Draconis. But  thou,  O Lord  Jesu,  shalt  bring  down  the
high  looks  of  the  proud,  Thou shalt  tread  under  foot  both
lion and  dragon. The one  did  harm  but  as  long  as  he
lived,  and  when  his  life  ended,  so  did  his  mischief,  but  the
other  is  making  provision  for  preserving  his  poison  to  the
harm  of  generations  yet  to  come. He  has  put  upon  record
with  pen  and  ink  his  poisonous  novelties  ; I  have  procured
his  books,  and  send  them  to  you  that  you  may  judge  of  the
author  from  his  works. You  will  see  that  this  theologian
distinguishes with Arias grades  and inequalities in the
Trinity,  that  with  Pelagius  he  prefers  free  will  to grace,
that with Nestorius he divides  Christ  in.  excluding  His
Humanity  from  the  Trinity. These  are  but  a  few  things
out  of  many.  Will  there  be  no  one  among  you  who  laments
this  attack  upon  Christ,  who  loves  righteousness  and  hates
iniquity? If  the  mouth  that  speaks  perverse  things  be  not
stopped,  let  Him  see  to  it  and  judge,  who  alone  considers
our  distress  and  trouble.


864  LETTER CCCXXXIV.

LETTER CCCXXXIII.1 (A.D. 1140.)
To  CARDINAL  G  .  .  .2

To  his  venerable  friend  G  .  .  .,  Cardinal-deacon  under
the  title  of  SS.  Sergius  and  Bacchus,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  wishes  health  and  joy.

It  used  to  be  your  custom  to  rise  before  me  as  often  as  I
entered  the  Curia,  and  I  trust  that  you  will  do  so  now.  Do
not  think  thac  I  am  merely  in  joke,  for  there  is  a  serious
matter  to  be  decided.  At  this  very  moment  I  present
myself  before  the  Curia,  if  not  in  person,  at  least  in  the
cause  which  is  referred  thither.  As  you  were  accustomed  to
rise  to  greet  me,  so  rise  to  greet  my  cause,  or  rather,  that
of  Christ;  for  it  is  His,  and  it  is  His  truth  which  is  in  ques
tion.  Rise,  or  rather  start  up  in  wrath,  against  the  man
who  disputes  about  the  faith  in  order  to  destroy  the  faith,
and  contradicts  the  law  in  words  of  the  law  ;  whose  hand
is  against  every  man,  and  the  hands  of  all  against  him.
This  is  Peter  Abaelard,  who  writes,  dogmatizes,  and  dis
putes,  deciding  exactly  as  he  pleases,  upon  morals,  upon
the  Sacraments,  yea,  concerning  the  Father,  the  Son,  and
the  Holy  Spirit.  After  having  disturbed  and  troubled  the
Church,  he  presents  himself  before  the  Curia,  not  to  offer
excuses  for  his  errors,  but  to  defend  them.  If  you  are  a
true  son  of  the  Church,  defend  her  now  who  has  borne  you
and  nourished.

LETTER CCCXXXJV.3 (A.D. 1140.)
To  GUY, OF Pis  A.4

Against  the  same  Abaelard.

To  GUY,  Abbot  of  Pisa,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
wishes  a  sound  mind  in  a  sound  body.

1  A  new  Letter ;  the  former  No.  333  is  now  No.  386.

2  This was Gregorius Tarquinius, Cardinal-deacon of SS. Strgius and
Bacchus,  who  was  created  by  Callistus  II.

3  A  new  Letter  ;  the  former  No.  334  is  now  No.  362.

4  Guy  Moricot  de  Vico,  a  Pisan,  created  by  Pope  Innocent  Cardinal  under  the
title  of  SS.  Cosmasand  Damian.


LETTER CCCXXXV.  865

I  know  that  you  have  so  much  affection  for  me  (as  I  for
you)  that  I  should  with  great  confidence  entrust  to  you  my
dearest  interests  ;  but  it  is  with  more  confidence  still  that
I  entrust  to  you  those  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  to  be  loved
tar  more  than  I.  The  cause  is  Christ's,  since  Christ
Himself  is  in  question,  and  the  truth  is  in  peril.  The
garments  of  Christ  are  being  divided,  when  the  Sacraments
of  the  Church  are  rent  in  pieces  ;  but  His  seamless  robe  is
entire,  which  is  woven  from  the  top  throughout.  For  this
tunic  is  the  unity  of  the  Church,  which  does  not  admit  of
cutting  or  division.  Man  is  not  capable  of  dividing  that
which  has  been  compacted  from  above,  and  made  firm  by
the  Holy  Spirit.  Though  heretics  sharpen  their  tongues
like  serpents,  though  they  arm  themselves  with  the  sharpest
weapons  of  the  intellect,  in  order  that  they  may  disturb
the  peace  of  the  Church  ;  yet  though  they  are  the  gates  of
hell,  they  shall  not  prevail  against  her.  If  you  are  truly  her
son,  if  you  recognize  the  bosom  which  bore  you,  do  not
desert  your  mother  in  her  peril,  do  not  withdraw  your
support  in  the  time  of  tribulation.  Magister  Peter  has
recourse  to  the  Curia,  that  the  authority  of  the  Apostolic
See  may  serve  him  as  a  wall  and  a  rampart  to  protect  the
errors  which  he  has  taught  and  written,  and  in  which  he  has
impugned  the  Catholic  Faith.

LETTER CCCXXXV.1 (A.I). 1140).

To  A  CERTAIN  CARDINAL  PRESBYTER.-'

Also  against  Peter  Abelard.

To  the  CARDINAL  PRESBYTER,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  wishes  health  and  happiness  in  the  Lord.

Let  no  one  despise  your  youth.  It  is  not- white  hairs  nor
weight  of  years  that  is  required  by  the  Lord,  but  maturity

1  A  new  Letter;  the  former  No.  335  is  now  No.  368.

2  Edward  Martcne  remarks  upon  this  :  "  Letter  335,  which  in  the  editions  is
inscribed  : To  a  certain  Cardinal  Presbyter,  is  in  the  Vedastine  MS. 'addressed  by
name  to  the  Cardinal Peter." (Amplis. Collect.  /•>/.  Scripi.  et  Munumenl.,  p.
745-)


866  LETTER CCCXXXVI.

of  mind  and  a  blameless  life.  Neither  Jeremiah  nor
Daniel  feared  nor  trembled,  though  both  of  them  were
young  men,  before  old  men  disgraced  by  vice,  though  heavy
with  the  weight  of  ill-spent  days.  And  I  might  rightly,
perhaps,  treat  as  disgraced  that  man,  who  tried  to  corrupt
the  beauty  of  the  Church,  and  to  stain  the  purity  of  the
Faith.  That  is  Peter  Abaelard,  who  disputes  and  defines
as  he  chooses,  and  differently  from  accepted  tradition,  upon
matters  of  faith,  upon  the  Sacraments,  and  the  mystery  of
the  holy  Trinity.  Now,  after  having  disturbed  the  Church
and  thrown  it  into  confusion,  he  presents  himself  to  the
Curia,  not  that  he  may  make  amends  for  the  mischief  he
has  done,  but  because  he  relies  upon  the  crafty  subterfuges
that  he  has  at  his  command  to  conceal  his  errors.  It  is
now  that  those  who  know  themselves  to  be  the  Church's
sons  will  stand  firmly  in  her  defence.


LETTER CCCXXXVI.1 (A.D. 1140.)

To  A  CERTAIN  ABBOT.*

On  the  Same  Subject.

To  his  very  dear  brother  and  co-Abbot,  Brother  BERNARD,
Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  a  zeal  for  the  Lord  according  to
knowledge.

It  must  needs  be  that  offences  come,  so  that  those  who
are  approved  may  be  made  manifest.  If  any  one  is  the
Lord's  servant,  let  him  take  the  Lord's  side,  for  His  cause
is  now  in  question.  The  truth  is  attacked ;  the  vestments
of  Christ  are  torn  in  pieces,  the  Sacraments  of  the  Church
divided.  From  the  sole  of  the  foot  to  the  crown  of  the
head,  the  well-being  of  the  Church  is  compromised,  and  the
simple  faith  of  believers  ridiculed  ;  the  lion  is  on  the  point
of  arising  from  his  lair  against  the  Church  that  he  may
make  a  prey  of  the  nations.  Already  Peter  Abaelard

1  A  new  Letter  ;  the  former  No.  336  is  now  No.  324.

2  This  was  perhaps  an  Italian  Abbot  named  Bernard,  whom  S.  Bernard  had
sent  to  Rome. See  Letters  343  and  344.


LETTER CCCXXXV1I.  867

goes  before  Antichrist  to  prepare  his  ways,  speaking
differently  from  tradition  with  respect  to  matters  of  faith,
of  the  Sacraments,  and  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the
Holy  Ghost.  He  writes,  teaches,  and  disputes;  and  his
words  tend  to  the  subversion  of  the  hearers.  With  Arius
he  distinguishes  degrees  and  inequalities  in  the  Trinity  ;
with  Pelagius  he  prefers  free  will  to  grace  ;  with  Nestorius
he  divides  Christ,  by  excluding  His  Humanity  from  the
fellowship  of  the  Trinity.  But  in  all  these  things  he  boasts
that  he  has  won  over  the  Roman  Church  to  his  side;  that
the  Romans  have  received  his  books  and  his  opinions  into
their  hands  and  hearts  ;  and  that  those  by  whom  he  ought
to  be  judged  and  condemned  have  taken  upon  them  his
defence.  May  the  Lord  look  upon  it,  and  judge,  if  the
mouth  of  that  man  who  speaketh  unrighteousness  be  not
speedily  closed.  The  bearer  of  this  will  explain  to  you  the
details  at  greater  length.


LETTER  CCCXXXVII.1  (A.D. 1140.)
To  POPE  INNOCENT,  IN  THE  NAME  OK  THE  BISHOPS

OF FRANCE.2

The  Bishops  of  Gaul  explain  to  the  Pontiff  what  had
been  done  in  the  case  of  Peter  Abaelard,  who  had
challenged  Bernard  to  a  discussion  in  Synod ;  but  being
unwilling  to  make  answer  to  the  specific  charges  of  heresy
made  against  him,  had  appealed  to  the  Apostolic  See.

1  Formerly  No.  370  ;  the  former  No.  337  is  now  No.  325.

2  In  the  Vatican  MS.  numbered  662,  this  Letter  is  placed  next  after  No.  189,
with  the  title  The  Bishop*  of  France  to  Pope  Innocent  ;  where  by  the  word  France
is  understood  the metropolitan  province  of  Sens. Hence  in Letter 161,  the
voice  of  the  blood  of  Archembald,  subdean  of  Orleans,  is  said  to  cry  from  the
earth  of  France  to  Pope  Innocent;  and  Letter 126, n. 4,  Distinguishes France
from Burgundy. Nevertheless, even at  that time  a great  part of  Belgica
Secunda*  was  included  under  the  name  of  France. — [Mabillon's  Note.']

*  This  was  the  northern  of  the  two  provinces  into  which  Belgica  was  divided
soon  after  B.C.  44.  It  may  roughly  be  said  to  be  the  district  between  the  Rhine,
the  Scheldt,  the  Moselle,  and  the  Sea.  It  was  generally  known  as  Germania
Secunda. —  [E.]


868  LETTER CCCXXXVII.

To  the  most  reverend  father  and  lord  INNOCENT,  by
the  grace  of  God  supreme  Pontiff,  HENRY,  Archbishop  of
Sens,  GEOFFREY,  Bishop  of  Chartres,  and  servant1  of  the
holy  apostolic  See,  ELIAS,  Bishop  of  Orleans,  HUGO,  Bishop
of  Auxerre,  ATTO,  Bishop  of  Troyes,  MANASSES,  Bishop  of
Meaux,  send  the  assurance  of  their  earnest  prayers  and  due
obedience.

i.  As  it  is  certain  that  those  things  which  are  established
by  the  Apostolic  authority  are  considered  settled,  so  that
they  cannot  be  interfered  with  or  altered  by  the  objections
or  bad  motives  of  any  one,  we  have  thought  it  proper,
most  holy  Father,  to  make  you  aware  of  all  that  took  place
at  our  meeting  lately,  in  order  that  your  Serenity  may  deign
to  approve  and  permanently  confirm  by  your  judgment  and
authority  what  we,  with  the  help  of  many  pious  and  learned
persons,  have  thought  fit  to  do.  Therefore,  since  through
out  almost  the  whole  of  France,  in  towns,  villages,  and
castles,  by  scholars  not  only  within  the  schools,  but  in  the
roads  and  public  places,  disputes  are  carried  on  about  the
holy  Trinity  and  the  Nature  of  God  ;  and  that  not  only
among  learned  or  passably  instructed  persons,  but  among
children  even  and  simple  and  ignorant  persons  ;  and  be
sides  all  this,  many  propositions  are  put  forth  by  these
disputants,  not  less  contrary  to  reason  than  to  the  Catholic
Faith,  and  to  the  doctrine  of  the  holy  Fathers ;  and  since,
though  frequently  warned  by  those  who  thought  more
justly  on  these  matters  that  they  should  lay  aside  those
foolish  fancies  (ineptias),  those  persons  showed  themselves
more  ardent  still ;  and,  relying  on  the  authority  of  their
master,  Peter  Abaelard,  and  especially  upon  his  book
entitled  Thee  log  ia,  as  also  of  other  treatises  of  his  of  a
similar  kind,  persisted  more  and  more  in  sustaining  and
defending  these  dangerous  novelties,  to  the  detriment  of
many  souls  ;  we,  though  distressed  and  alarmed,  as  were
many  others,  at  this  state  of  things,  were  fearful  to  meddle
with  these  [difficult]  questions.

1  That  is,  legate.  Geoffrey  used  to  call  himself  by  this  name  through  modesty,
as  we  see  in  the  Cartulary  of  S.  Stephen  at  Dreux.  The  legates  of  the  Holy
See  were  frequently  called  its  vicars.


l.KTTKR CCCXXXVII.  869

2. But  the lord  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  who  had frequently
heard  from  various  persons  of 'these  matters,  happened  also
to meet  with  a  copy  of  the  previously  mentioned  book  of
Magister  Peter,  called  his  Theologia,  and  of  other  books  of
his,  and  having  read  them  attentively,  thought  it  incumbent
on  him  to  meet  the  author,  and  to  admonish  him,  at  first  in
private,  and  then,  according  to  the precept  of the  Gospel
taking  with him two or three witnesses,  invited  him  in  a
kind  and  friendly  manner  both  to  restrain his  hearers  from
occupying  themselves  with  such  questions,  and  also  that  he
should  correct  his  books. Many  of  his scholars,  also,  the
Abbot  exhorted  to  cease  from  reading,  and to  reject  those
writings  full  of  poison  ;  also  to  refrain  from,  and  be  on  their
guard, against  doctrine  which injured the Catholic faith.
Magister  Peter  was  enraged at  this,  and scarcely  able  to
restrain  his  anger;  nor  did  he  desist  from  frequent  demands
until  we  had  written to  the  Abbot of Clairvaux upon the
matter,  and  fixed  a  day,  viz.,  that  of  the  octave  of  Pentecost,
on which he should appear  before us at Sens. Thither
Magister  Peter  professed  himself  willing  to  come  prepared
to  defend  and  prove  the  propositions  which  the  Abbot  had
as aforesaid blamed as partaking  of heresy. But the
Abbot  on his side  would  neither  promise  to  appear  on  the
appointed day, nor to accept the argument before us
against Peter. But  as  in  the  interval  the  latter  had  begun
nevertheless  to call together his followers from  all  sides,
and  to  entreat  them  to  be  present  at  the  disputation  which
was  about  to  take  place  between  himself  and the  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  so  as  by  their  presence to support his  opinions
and  his  system  ; the  Abbot,  to  whom this became known,
fearing  that his absence might be made an  occasion  for
unthinking  persons  as  well  as  for  the  partisans  of  error,  to
regard all  the opinions,  or rather all the  "fancies  of  their
master  as  being more  certain than they  really  were  ; and
touched  with the fervour  of a holy  zeal,  or  rather  kindled
by  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  presented  himself  before  us
on  the  very  day  which  had  been  named  to  him,  although  he
had not at  all engaged  to do  so. On  that day,  in  fact,


870  LETTER CCCXXXVII.

being  the  octave  of  Pentecost,  all  our  brethren  the
Suffragan  Bishops  of  our  province  had  assembled  to  us  in
the  town  of  Sens  to  contribute  by  their  presence  to  the
honour  and  reverence  paid  to  the  holy  relics,  of  which  we
proposed  to  make  an  exposition  to  the  people  in  our
cathedral  church.

3.  In  the  presence,  then,  of  the  glorious  King  of  France,
Louis,  of  the  pious  William,  Count  of  Nevers,  of  the  lord
Archbishop  of  Rheims  with  certain  of  his  suffragans,  of  us
also and all our  suffragans, except  those of Paris and
Nevers,  of  a  great  number  of  Abbots  as  pious  as  wise,  and
of  clergy  well  instructed,  the  lord  Abbot  of  Clairvaux  and
Magister  Peter,  with  his  supporters,  respectively  appeared.1
To  speak  briefly, the lord Abbot brought before  us  the
book Theologia, written  by Magister  Peter,  and pointed
out  from  this  book  various  propositions,  which  he  stigma
tized  as  absurd,  or  even  as  plainly  heretical,  in  order  that
Magister  Peter  might  either  deny  that  he  had  written  them,
or,  if  he accepted  the  authorship, might  either  justify  or
correct  them. But  Magister  Peter  appeared  to  be  at  a  loss
what  to  do ;  and,  in  order  to  make  a  way  of  escape,  refused
to  reply,  although  he  had  a  free  hearing  given  to  him,  a  safe
place,  and  impartial  judges;  but  appealing  to  your  hearing
in  person,  most  holy  Father,  he  left  the  assembly  with  all
his  supporters.

4.  But we, although that appeal seemed to us not
canonical,  yet out of  respect to the Apostolic See,  we
abstained from pronouncing any judgment against him
personally. But as to  his errors in doctrine,  which had
infected  many,  and  had  penetrated  into  the  deepest  recesses
of  not  a  few  hearts,  we  had  condemned  them  the  day  before
Abaelard made his appeal, after  having  read and reread
them in  public  audience, and  having  heard them plainly
and  undoubtedly  proved  to  be  heretical,  both  by  convincing

1  All  the  historians,  with  Hugo,  Chronographer  of  S.  Marianus,  place  this
ceremony  in  1140;  but  they  do  not  mention  the  exposition  (relevatio)  of  the
relics,  nor  does  the  Chronicle  of  S.  Peter  Vivus.  In  treating  of  this  synod,
Otto,  Bishop  of  Frisingen,  says  that  Theobald  Count  Palatine,  with  other
nobles,  was  present  there  (de  Ge.stis  Frider.,  B.  i.  c.  48).


LETTER CCCXXXVIII.  871

reasonings  and  by  authorities  cited  from  S.  Augustine  and
other  Fathers by  the  Abbot  of  Clairvaux. And  because
they  draw  many  to  most  hurtful  and  evidently  destructive
error,  we  beg,  most  just  Father,  unanimously  and  with  the
utmost  earnestness,  that  you  would  condemn  with  a  per
petual  judgment, by  your authority, both them and all
persons  who  obstinately  and  contentiously  maintain  them.
And  as  for  the  before-mentioned  Peter,  if  your  Reverence
would  impose  silence  upon  him,  would  suspend  altogether
his  powers  of  lecturing  and  writing,  and  would  condemn
his  books  as being without doubt filled with erroneous
teaching,  you  would thus root  up the thorns and briars
from  the  field  of the  Church,  and  would  enable a  joyful
harvest  to increase in flower and  fruit  for  Christ. We
transmit  to  you,  Reverend  Father,  the  list  of  certain  pro
positions  which  we  have  condemned,  that  by  these  extracts
vou  may  the  more  easily  form  an  idea  of  the  remainder  of
the  work.

LETTER CCCXXXVIII.1 (A.D. 1140.)
To HAIMERIC, CARDINAL AND CHANCELLOR.

He  urges  that  Peter  Abaelard,  having  been  convicted
of  heresy,  ought  not  to  fnd  the  abodes  of  the  Cardinals
and  the  Roman  Curia  open  to  him  as  a  refuge.

To  his  illustrious  and  very  intimate  friend  HAIMERIC,
Cardinal-deacon  and  Chancellor  of  the  holy  Roman  Church,
BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  desires  that  he  may  act
wisely  before  God  and  before  men.

i.  I  have  both  heard  of  the  opinions  of  Magister  Peter
Abaelard,  and  I  have  seen  his  books.  I  have  remarked  his
words,  1  have  taken  note  of  the  hidden  senses  (mys-
teria]  of  them,  and  found  them  to  be  mysteries  of  iniquity.
This  divine  contradicts  the  Law  in  the  very  words  of  the
Law.  He  casts  that  which  is  holy  to  the  dogs,  and  pearls

i  Formerly  No.  369;  the  former  No.  338  is  now  No.  401.  See  Letter  187
and  those  following  it ;  also  the  Notes.


872  LETTER CCCXXXVIII.

before  swine  ;  he  corrupts  the  faith  of  the  simple,  defiles
the  purity  of  the  Church.  It  is  said  that  "the  vase  will
long  preserve  the  odour  with  which  it  has  once  been
imbued/'1  His  book  had  passed  through  the  fire,  and  was
brought  into  a  place  of  refreshment.  The  enemy  of  the
Church  reposes  in  the  bosom  of  the  Church,  the  persecutor
of  the  faith  finds  in  it  an  asylum.  He  was  utterly  con
quered.  Let  him  not  rise  again  (it  is  said)  who  has  invaded
the  couch  of  his  father  and  defiled  it !  Now  that  man  has
dishonoured  the  Church,  and  infected  with  his  vices  the
minds  of  the  simple.  He  endeavours  to  scrutinize  by  the
light  of  his  reason  alone,  the  mysteries  which  are  appre
hended  by  the  pious  mind  only  by  the  intuition  of  faith  :
the  faith  of  the  pious,  which  believes  and  does  not  discuss.
But  that  man  holds  even  God  in  suspicion,  nor  is  willing  to
believe  anything  unless  he  shall  have  first  considered  it  by
reason.  Though  the  Prophet  says,  If  you  will  not  believe,
re  shall  not  understand  (Is.  vii.  9,  Ixx.  version),  that  man
blames  spontaneous  faith  as  mere  credulity,  making  an  ill
use  of  that  saying  of  Solomon  :  He  that  is  hasty  to  give
credit  is  light-minded  (Ecclus.  xix.  4).  He  blames,  then,
the  B.V.  Mary  for  believing  without  hesitation  the  word  of
the  angel  which  announced  to  her :  Behold,  thou  shalt
conceive  and  bear  a  Son  (S.  Luke  i.  31).  Let  him  blame
also  him  who  at  the  last  hour,  almost  the  last  moment,
of  life,  believed  the  words  spoken  to  him  by  One  who
was  dying  likewise  :  To-day  thou  shalt  be  with  Me  in
Paradise  (S.  Luke  xxiii.  43)  ;  and  let  him  reserve  his
praise  for  those,  the  hardness  of  whose  hearts  merited  the
reproach  spoken  of  them  :  O  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to
believe  all  that  the  prophets  have  spoken  (S.  Luke  xxiv.
25),  and  commend  also  the  slowness  of  belief  in  him,  to
whom  it  was  said :  Because  thou  hast  not  believed  My
words,  thou  shalt  be  dumb  and  not  able  to  speak  (S.  Luke  i.
20).

2.  Finally,  in  order  to  abbreviate  a  multitude  of  observa
tions  into  the  strait  limits  of  a  letter,  I  will  say  shortly,  that

1 Horace,  Epp.  b.  i.  ep.  ii.  v.  69,  70.


LETTER CCCXXXVIII.  873

this  admirable  Doctor  with  Arius  distinguishes  degrees
and  inequalities  in  the  Trinity;  with  Pelagius  prefers  free
will  to  grace;  with  Nestorius  divides  Christ  by  excluding
His  Humanity  from  the  fellowship  of  the  Trinity.  But  in
all  these  matters  he  boasts  that  he  has  opened  the  fountains
of  knowledge  to  the  Cardinals  and  ecclesiastics  of  the
Curia;  that  his  books  are  in  the  hands,  and  his  opinions  in
the  minds,  of  the  Romans;  and  he  relies  on  those  persons,
by  whom  he  ought  to  be  judged  and  condemned,  being  a
protection  to  him.  Hyacinth1  has  shown  me  much  ill-will,
but  has  done  me  no  harm  ;  simply  because  he  was  unable.
'1  his  I  endure  with  equanimity,  since  he  spares  not  Rome,
nor  the  Curia,  nor  even  the  person  of  the  Pope.  What  else
I  have  seen  and  heard,  my  dear  Nicholas,  who  is  equally
devoted  to  you  as  to  me,  will  tell  you  better  by  word  of
mouth.

LETTER  CCCXXXIX.2 (Circa  A.D. 1140.)

To  POPE  INNOCENT.

Bernard  maintains  the  innocence  of  Alvisus?  Bishop  of
Arras,  against  his  calumniators.

To  his  very  dear  father  and  lord,  INNOCENT,  by  the
grace  of  God  supreme  Pontiff,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  offers  respectful  homage.

It  is  a  thing  neither  new  nor  wonderful  that  the  mind  of
man  should  be  able  to  be  both  deceived  and  deceiving.
But  as  this  is  a  double  evil,  and  each  part  of  it  has  to  be
guarded  against,  the  Angel  of  great  wisdom  has  suggested
to  you  a  safeguard  against  either  danger,  when  he  says,  Be
ye  wise  as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves  (S.  Matt.  x.  16).
Prudence  will  prevent  your  being  deceived,  and  simplicity
will  prevent  your  deceiving  others.  The  monks  of  Mar-
chiennes4  have  come  to  present  themselves  before  you,  in

1  See  Letter  189,  and  Note.

2  Formerly  No.  327  ;  the  former  No.  339  is  now  No.  402.

3  ?  Aloysius  or  Alois.  —  [E.]

«  Marchiennes  was  a  Benedictine  Abbey,  situated  at  Scarpe,  in  the  Diocese  of
Tournay. It  was  founded  in  the  seventh  century  by  S.  Rictruda


VOL. II


874  LETTER CCCXXXIX.

a  spirit  of  falseness  and  error,  against  the  Lord,  and
against  His  anointed.  They  have  made  a  false  accusation
against  the  Bishop  of  Arras,  whose  life  and  conversation  is
in  good  report  in  every  place.  Who  are  they,  to  bite
reputations  as  dogs,  who  call  good  evil,  and  give  light  the
name  of  darkness  ?  Who  are  they,  who  against  the  law
curse  the  deaf  and  put  a  stumbling  block  before  the  blind  ?
(Lev.  xix.  14).  Wherefore,  my  lord,  are  you  angry  with
your  son  and  do  you  give  joy  and  gladness  to  his  enemies?
Have  you  forgotten  that  warning  of  the  Apostle,  Believe
not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God
(i  S.  John  iv.  i).  I  trust  in  the  Lord,  that  He  will  confound
their  projects  :  and  by  making  the  truth  appear,  put  false
hood  to  flight,  and  turn  their  deception  against  themselves.
I  have  heard  with  my  own  ears  how  faithfully  and  firmly  he
spoke  in  defence  of  the  Roman  Church  in  the  presence  of
the  King  and  his  nobles.  He  proposes,  in  the  innocence  of
his  heart,  to  go  on  the  day  when  he  is  summoned,  to  pre
sent  himself  before  you:  but  in  the  meantime,  he  has  sent
before  him  his  Archdeacon,  who  is  the  bearer  of  this  letter,
and  whose  person  and  character  I  commend  to  your  kind
ness.

I  learn  also  that  the  Abbot  of  S.  Vedast 1  is  coming  to
have  an  interview  with  you  :  he  is  one  who  is  an  enemy  to
himself,  and  no  less  to  his  Religious  and  to  his  Abbey:  he
has  undertaken  only  the  bare  name  of  Abbot,  since  he
seeks  his  own  interests,  not  those  of  Jesus  Christ.  As  for
the  Religious  G — ,  who  accompanies  him,  all  that  can  be
said  is  that  he  is  a  worthy  son  of  such  a  father :  he  spares
neither  his  reputation  nor  his  conscience ;  so  that  he  is
become  the  derision  of  his  entire  neighbourhood.  May
the  Spirit  of  truth  grant  you  to  divide  the  light  from  the
darkness,  to  advance  the  good  and  to  repress  the  evil.

1  This  was  Walter,  who  was  succeeded  in  1147  by  Guerin,  of  whom  mention
is  made  in  Letter  284.  Gallia  Christiana  states  in  his  honour  that  Pope  Inno
cent  did  not  make  any  decree  against  him.


LETTER CCCXLI.


LETTER  CCCXL.1 (Circa  A.D. 1140.)

TO THE SAME POPE INNOCENT.

On  behalf  of  the  Bishop  of  Angers.

To  his  very  dear  father  and  lord,  INNOCENT,  by  the  grace
of  God  supreme  Pontiff,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
sends  his  respectful  homage.

The  Bishop  of  Angers2  is  worn  out  by  his  age  as  also  by
the  labours  and  perils  he  has  endured  :  who  can  look  upon
him  with  an  indifferent  eye,  that  is  not  destitute  of  sensi
bility,  and  even  of  any  human  feeling?  As  for  me,  I  am
not  able,  without  feeling  myself  deeply  moved,  to  look  at
this  aged  man,  to  whom  but  a  single  reproach  could  be
addressed,  whose  life  and  whose  learning  render  him
venerable.  1  am  ignorant  of  what  has  passed  between  him
and  the  Abbey  with  which  he  is  at  variance,  and  I  do  not
presume  to  write  anything  respecting  a  matter  I  am  not
acquainted  with.  But  if  it  shall  appear  that  he  has  ful
filled  his  engagements,  I  suppose  that  there  is  no  other
course  to  be  taken  than  to  restore  him  to  your  favour  and
to  the  exercise  of  his  functions.

LETTER  CCCXLI.  :! (Circa  A.D. 1140.)
To  MALACHI,  ARCHBISHOP  OF  IRELAND.

Bernard  receives  with  thanks  the  letter  and  the  staff,
and  welcomes  the  monks  sent  by  him.  He  recommends
Malachi  to  have  an  abode  prepared  ft  for  Religious  :  and
commends  himself  to  his  prayers.

To  the  venerable  lord  and  most  blessed  father  MALACHI,
by  the  grace  of  God  Archbishop  of  the  Irish4  and  Legate  of
1  A  new  Letter  ;  the  former  No.  340  is  now  No.  403.

Ulger,  to  whom  Letter  200  is  written.

4" Formerly  No.  315.  the  former  No.  34.  is  now  No.  385.
4  Usher  brings  forward  this Letter  among  Irish  precedents,  where  he  shows
against  John  Picard,  that  the  Bishops  of  Armagh  were  styled  Archbishops,  and
exercised  metropolitan  power,  before  they  began  to  receive  the  pallium,  which


876  LETTER CCCXLI.

the  Apostolic  See,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clair-
vaux,  desires  that  he  may  find  grace  in  the  Lord.

1.  Among the  multitude  of  my  anxieties and heartfelt
cares, which distract my mind by their multitude, the
brethren  which  have come  to  me  from a  distant  land,  in
order  that  they  may  [learn  to]  serve  the  Lord,  your  letter,
and  the staff  which  you  have  sent  me,  have  consoled  me
much  :  the  letter  as  a  pledge  of  your  kindly  feeling  towards
me  ; the  staff  to  sustain  my  body,  which  is  bowed  down  by
infirmity; the brethren to serve God in the spirit of
humility. All I  have  accepted  with pleasure  ; all equally
work  together  for  good. As to your  desire  that  I should
send  you  two  Religious  to  assist  you  in  choosing  a  fit  place
of  settlement,1  I  have  thought  it  expedient  not  to  send  you
these  before  the others,  but  to  wait  until  Christ  be  more
fully  formed  in  them,  until  they  shall  be  entirely  equipped
for  the  wars  of  the  Lord. When  then  they  shall  have  be
come  instructed  in  the  school  of  the Holy  Ghost  and  en
dued  with  virtue  from on  high,  then  at  length your  sons
shall  return  to  their  father,  that  they  may  sing  the  Lord's
song  in  their  own  land, and not  any  longer in a  foreign

country.

2.  In the meantime do  you, according  to  the wisdom
which  has been bestowed upon you  by  the Lord, make
choice  of  a  place  of  settlement  for  them,  separated  from  the
tumults of  the  world,  according  to  the  principles  of  choice
which  you  have  seen  acted  upon  with  us. For  the  time  is
at  hand  when,  with  the  grace  of  God  helping,  I  shall  be  able
to  send  you  back  new  men,  instead  of  those clothed  with
the  old  man  whom  you  entrusted  to  me. May  the  Lord  be

was  first  given  in  1150.  Usher  is  surprised  at  the  title  of  Archbishop  being
given  to  Malachi,  who  had  resigned  his  Archbishopric  several  years  before,  to
undertake  the  administration  of  the  Diocese  of  the  Dunes  (Life,  c.  14).  Bernard,
however,  calls  him  by  that  title  probably  because  of  his  former  dignity  ;  but  in
following  Letters  he  styles  him  only  Bishop.

1  Later  the  Abbey  of  Mellifont  (Dioc.  Armagh)  was  thus  chosen,  and  founded
in  1141.  The  first  Abbot  was  named  Christian,  who  is  mentioned  in  Letter
357,  n.  3.  Respecting  this  Abbey,  see  Acts  of  S.  Malachi,  Life  of  S.  Bernard*
and  Duchesne,  Tome  iv.  ep.  254.


LETTER CCCXLI.  877

blessed  for  ever,  of  whose  gift  it  comes  that  your  sons  have
become  also  mine  ;  and  that  from  the  trees  planted  by  your
preaching  and  watered  by  my  exhortation,  God  has  given
increase.  1  pray  your  Holiness  to  apply  yourself  to  the
preaching  of  the  Word  of  God,  that  you  may  give  to  your
flock  the  knowledge  of  salvation.  You  lie  under  a  twofold
obligation  to  do  this  ;  from  your  quality  as  Bishop,  and  your
delegation  from  the  Holy  See.  For  the  rest,  since  in  many
things  we  offend  all  (S.  James  iii.  2),  and  being  placed
among  men  of  this  world,  we  frequently  contract  much  of
the  dust  of  the  world  ;  1  commend  myself  to  your  prayers
and  those  of  your  brethren,  that  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  Him
self  the  fountain  of  holiness,  who  once  said  to  Peter,  If  I
wash  thee  not,  thou  liast  no  part  with  Me  (S.  John  xiii.  8),
would  deign  to  wash  me,  and  to  cleanse  me  in  the  waters  of
His  mercy.  And,  indeed,  I  not  only  earnestly  entreat  this
of  you,  but  require  it  as  in  some  sense  the  payment  of  a
debt,  since  I  do  not  cease  to  call  upon  the  Lord  for  you,  if
the  prayer  of  a  sinner  is  of  any  avail.  Farewell  in  the
Lord.

LETTER CCCXLII.1 (A.D. 1140.)
To  JOSCELYN,  BISHOP  OF  Soissoxs.

Bernard  begs  him  to  appease  the  King,  who  was  displeased
with  the  ArcJibishop  of  Bordeaux.

To  the  venerable  lord  and  very  dear  father,  JOSCELYN,  by
the  grace  of  God  Bishop  of  Soissons,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  sends  greeting,  and  desires  that  he  may  find
grace  with  the  Lord.

i.  It  is  an  injury  to  the  Realm  and  the  nobles  of  it  if  the
plans  of  the  King  are  proclaimed  of  his  own  hasty  motion,
and  made  public  without  mature  consideration.  But  it
pleases  me  much  to  see  that  the  King  trusts  you,  and
confides  in  you  ;  for  I  know  that  you  are  zealous  for  the
Sovereign  and  the  realm  with  a  godly  zeal,  and  I  know  also

1  A  new  Letter;  the  former  No.  342  is  now  No.  383.


878  LETTER CCCXLII.

that  you  have  the  qualities  of  a  good  adviser  for  him.  Both
order  and  reason  require,  in  fact,  that  in  a  Royal  counsellor
should  be  united  in  a  similar  degree  devotedness  and
prudence.  Everything  depends  upon  this  for  him ;  with
these  two  qualities  he  cannot  fail  to  be  a  sound  adviser  and
to  direct  with  wisdom  the  enterprises  of  the  King.  But  if
either  his  devotedness  makes  default  in  prudence,  or  his
prudence  in  devotedness,  when  he  performs  his  duty  as
counsellor,  then  woe  to  the  land  whose  King  shall  be  a
child  !  May  my  soul  never  come  into  the  counsel  of  those
who,  either  though  they  love  me,  are  not  prudent ;  or  being
prudent,  love  me  not.  For  so  Adam,  that  unhappy  one,
fell  from  his  rights  of  immortality,  for  having  yielded  to
the  counsel  of  the  sinful  ;  of  Eve  who,  though  she  loved
him,  was  not  prudent  ;  and  of  the  serpent,  who  was
prudent,  but  loved  him  not.

2.  Why  is  it  that  my  lord  the  King  endeavours  to  draw
the  Archbishop  of  Bordeaux1  into  a  dispute  without  any
reason  ?  Is  that  done  by  your  advice  ?  May  God  keep
you  from  doing  such  a  thing,  and  me  from  thinking  it
possible.  For  what  harm  has  that  man  done  ?  Is  it  that
he  consecrated,  according  as  he  was  free  to  do,  by  the
Canons,  a  Bishop2  elected  by  those  of  Poictiers  with  a
unanimous  voice,  without  opposition  ?  or  that  he  did  not
snatch  from  the  poor  and  from  the  Churches  of  Poictiers,
from  the  mouths  of  the  hungry,  so  to  speak,  the  money
which  a  dying  man  had  left  them  ?  Lo,  their  blood  is
required  at  his  hand.  If  it  is  a  fault  to  have  given  a  pastor
to  wandering  sheep,  to  have  refrained  from  despoiling  the
widow  and  the  orphan,  to  have  maintained  intact  the
privileges  of  the  Apostolic  See,  then  he  cannot  be  accused.
O,  ill-judged  judgment,  in  which  righteousness  is  taken  for
wrong  and  innocence  is  counted  as  guilt  !  Look  to  your
selves,  you  who  are  Bishops.

1  It  was Geoffrey  Loratorio  (de  Loroux)  to  whom Letter 125  was  written T
when  he  was  not  yet  Archbishop.

2  This  was  Grimoard,  elected  in  1140,  but  Louis  VII.  refused  for  some  time
to  ratify  the  choice. He  had  been  Abbot  of  S.  Mary  des  Allois.


LETTER CCCXUI.  879

Your  interests  are  in  question  when  your  neighbour's
wall  takes  fire  (Horace,  Epist.  i.  18,  84).

3.  However  this  may  be,  since  you,  my  lord,  approach
the  King  more  nearly  than  others,  and  you  count  for  much
in  the  transaction  of  his  business,  it  is  your  duty  to  use  all
your  influence  with  the  King  on  behalf  of  your  brethren,  so
that  his  anger  should  not  be  altogether  inflamed.  I  declare
to  you  that  you  have  to  do  with  a  resolute  man,  powerful
in  speech  and  action,  who  will  not  readily  be  driven  from
his  right.  He  enjoys  great  influence  in  that  district.  If
there  should  be  any  dispute,  many  would  side  with  him  in
his  grievances.  See,  then,  to  it,  that  no  one  throws  oil  on
the  fire.  Let  the  flame  be  extinguished  before  it  has  had
time  to  light  up  a  conflagration  :

For  it  is  too  late  to  use  a  remedy  when  by  long  delays
the  disease  has  grown  strong  (Ovid,  de  Remed.  Amor,  91,
92).

LETTER CCCXLIII.1 (A.D. 1140.)
FROM  ABBOT  BERNARD,  OF  ITALY,  TO  POPE  INNOCENT.

He  complains  that  in  the  Abbey  of  S.  Saviour  all  things
arc  not  as  the  Pope  had  promised.

To  the  dearly-beloved  and  longed-for  father,  INNOCENT,
by  the  grace  of  God  supreme  Pontiff,  his  servant  BERNARD
sends  greeting  and  the  prayers  of  the  poor.

I  am  in  deep  perplexity ;  for  on  the  one  side  modesty
requires  me  to  be  silent,  and  on  the  other  necessity  obliges
me  to  speak.  I  shall  speak,  therefore,  to  my  lord,  I  who
am  but  dust  and  ashes  ;  but  I  shall  speak  in  the  bitterness
of  my  soul.  I  complain,  my  lord,  of  you,  but  it  is  to  your
self  ;  my  complaint  is  made  in  strict  secrecy,  but  the  cause
of  my  complaint  is  only  too  manifest.  I  did  as  you  com
manded  ;  I  came  to  the  monastery  of  S.  Saviour,2  as  you

1  A  new  Letter  ;  the  former  No.  343  is  now  No.  384.

a  This  monastery  existed  still  in  the  time  of  Mabillon,  about  eight  miles
from  the  Abbey  of  Farfa,  on  which  it  depended.  It  served  as  a  country  house
for  the  monks  of  Farfa,  who  retired  there  during  the  heats  of  summer.  See
Letter  184,  and  its  Notes.


880  LETTER CCCXLIII.

bade  in  your  letter  to  your  servant,  our  father.1  What
has  become  now  of  your  promises  and  of  my  hopes  ?  I
have  passed  through  fire  and  through  water;  and  unless
the  Lord  had  helped  me,  the  \vater  would  perhaps  have
swallowed  me  up.  I  have  been  afflicted  by  dangers  of
waters  and  of  robbers,  in  cities,  in  solitude,  on  the  land
and  in  the  sea ;  nor  was  there  any  to  help  me.  All  these
things  came  upon  me  :  nor  was  even  then  the  end.  By
your  letter,  my  lord,  I  was  drawn  from  the  bosom  of  my
father,  and,  at  your  mere  bidding,  leaving  my  father  and
my  brethren,  I  hastened  to  obey  your  will.  By  your  letter
I  was  torn  from  the  bosom  of  my  mother,  and  deprived  of
her  consolations  :  driven  forth  from  an  abode  of  happiness  ;
and  that  I  might  not  return  thither,  you,  my  lord,  have
opposed  to  me  a  flaming  sword,  which  turns  every  way.
My  crown  has  fallen  from  my  head,  and  my  songs  of
gladness  have  turned  to  lamentation.  How  could  I,  my
lord,  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land  ?  How  much
more  sweetly  and  safely  did  my  soul  rejoice  herself  in  the
abode  and  bosom  of  my  mother  ?  Now,  I  so  run  as  one  in
uncertainty  ;  I  so  fight  as  one  that  beateth  the  air  :  but  for
this,  my  lord,  your  promise  is  to  blame,  which  I  believe  to
be  full  of  grace  and  truth.  But  now,  since  the  winter  has
departed  and  the  bad  season  is  over,  if  it  shall  please  my
lord,  allow  me  to  leave  this  place,  and  to  seek  wrhere  I
may  find  rest  for  my  feet :  since  hitherto  snow  and  hail,
ice  and  storms  have  prevented  my  so  doing.  It  seems
most  cruel  and  most  inhuman  to  deprive  of  his  wish  him2
who  loved  me  before  he  knew  me,  who  has  shown  himself  to
me  a  father  so  tender  that  he  would  have  torn  out  his  own
eyes  and  given  them  to  me  had  it  been  possible.  My  King
and  my  God,  whose  kingdom  was  not  of  this  \vorld,  had
not  where  to  lay  His  head  :  would  that  the  world  would
drive  us  out  also  and  oblige  us  to  wander  in  deserts,  in
mountains,  in  caves,  and  dens  of  the  earth  !

1  S.  Bernard.
2  This  was  Atenulf,  Abbot  of  Farfa,  respecting  whom  see  below.


LETTER CCCXLIV.  88 1

LETTER CCCXLIV.1 (A.D. 1140.)
FROM  THE  SAME  BERNARD  TO  SAINT  BERNARD.

He  complains of  the  Prelaturc  which Jiad been  forced

upon  him.

To  the  venerable  lord  and  dearly-loved  P — ,2  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  his  son  B —  sends  greeting,  and  prays  that  he
may  have  the  unction  which  teaches  all  things.

As  often  as  I  recall  that  day  of  misery  and  calamity,  on
which  I  was  torn  from  your  consoling  bosom,  I  am  more
inclined  to  weep  than  to  write  anything.  If  the  eloquence
of  my  prayers  equalled  the  abundance  of  my  tears,  I
should  easily  be  able  to  make  you  realize  how  miserable
and  deserted  I  am.  When  I  apply  my  mind  to  reflecting
upon  it,  and  my  hand  to  the  pen,  my  grief  is  renewed.
The  extreme  bitterness  of  my  soul  returns  to  me  as  I
write ;  and  I  am  troubled  by  the  remembrance  of  that
unhappy  day,  on  which  my  foolish  and  unworthy  self  was
placed  in  a  position  of  eminence.  I  do  not,  my  lord,  blame
your  action,  nor  the  motive  of  your  action,  which  is
believed  to  have  been  pointed  out  by  the  ringer  of  God  ;
but  I  lament  a  little  the  unhappiness  of  my  lot.  For,
behold,  after  I  was  driven  away  from  the  sight  of  thine
eyes,  my  life  was  worn  away  in  grief,  and  my  days  in
mourning.  Woe  is  me  !  I  have  lost  sight  of  the  pattern
on  which  I  tried  to  fashion  myself,  the  mirror  of  what  I
ought  to  be,  the  light  of  my  eyes  !  No  longer  does  that
sweet  voice  sound  in  my  ears,  nor  that  kindly  and  pleasant
face,  which  used  to  blush  at  my  faults,  appear  before
my  eyes.  Wherefore,  my  lord,  has  my  hope  been
frustrated,  and  the  desire  of  my  heart  denied  me  ?  My
life  has  been  cut  off  as  the  thread  of  an  unfinished  web,

1  A  new  Letter ;  the  former  No.  344  is  now  No.  315.

2  That  is  to  say  Father  (Pater),  namely,  Bernard,  for  it  appears  clear  that  this
Letter  was  written  to  S.  Bernard,  and  by  that  Bernard  who  at  a  later  period
became  Abbot  of  S.  Anastasius  at  Aquae  Salviae,  near  Rome,  and  at  length  Pope
under  the  name  of  Eugenius  III.  The  preceding  Letter  is  also  his,  and  likewise
Letter  428.  All  these  appeared  at  first  under  the  name  of  S.  Bernard.


882  LETTER CCCXLIV.

and  broken  off  short  as  a  plant  yet  shooting  up.  That
unhappy  sentiment  is  fulfilled  in  me  which  you  quoted  upon
the  Song  of  Songs,  and  which  I  now  read  in  the  book  of
experience,  Man,  being  in  honour,  hath  no  understanding
(Ps.  xlix.  12).  For  I  did  not  sufficiently  understand  when  I
was  in  Clairvaux  that  I  was  in  a  place  of  happiness  among
the  trees  of  Paradise,  and  therefore  I  held  that  Delectable
Land  as  of  no  account.  I  ask  of  you,  my  lord,  why  you
thought  fit  to  determine  this  lot  for  me,  why  you  set  me  as
a  leader  and  a  teacher  of  others,  and  a  chief  over  your
people  ?  Was  it  my  career  in  the  world  ?  But  that  was
foul.  Was  it  my  life  in  the  cloister?  But  that  was  luke
warm  and  backward.  Why,  then,  when  I  was  little  in
mine  own  eyes,  have  I  been  made  the  head  of  a  tribe  in
Israel  ?  Wherefore,  when  I  was  not  myself  clean  from
secret  sins,  have  you  not  spared  to  make  your  servant
responsible  for  those  of  others  ?  What  can  a  man  do  whom
sorrow  for  the  past  renders  unhappy,  the  responsibilities  of
the  present  weigh  down,  and  the  thought  of  the  future
renders  fearful  ?  Overburdened  with  grief  and  affliction,  I
presume,  my  lord  regretted  and  longed  for,  to  say  this  to
you  alone,  because  my  wound  was  received  from  a  hand  the
least  expected.  But,  my  lord,  to  speak  of  this  place  to
which  you  have  sent  me,  I  have  run  as  if  uncertainly,  I  have
fought  as  if  beating  the  air.  For  the  lord  Pope,  on  whose
letter  I  was  sent  forth,  has  not  yet  fulfilled  his  promise  to
confirm  the  donation  of  this  place,  and  what  is  taking  place
at  this  moment  is  a  proof  of  this.  The  Lord  Abbot  of
Farfa1  welcomed  me  at  my  coming  with  great  joy,  and
received  your  sons  with  the  utmost  gladness,  so  that,  if  it
were  possible,  he  would  have  plucked  out  his  own  eyes,  and
have  given  them  to  me.  In  this  one  respect  alone  is  he  to
be  blamed  and  corrected  by  you,  that  he  goes  only  too  far,
exceeding  not  only  his  own  promises,  but  even  our  wishes.
As  this  letter  is  already  so  long,  I  am  able  to  say  nothing

1  Pars.,  but  read  Farfensis. This  was  Atenulf; he  had  asked  for  monks
from  S.  Bernard. See  Life,  B.  iii.  c.  7,  n.  23.


LETTER CCCXLV.  883

shorter,  nothing  truer  about  my  inner  life,  than  that  I  am
wasting  my  time.1

LETTER CCCXLV.2 (A.D. 1140.)
To  THE  BRETHREN  OF  S.  ANASTASIUS.

He  commends  their  zeal  in,  and  strict  observance  of,
the  Religious  life.  And  yet  he  disapproves  of  their  too
great  readiness  to  have  recourse  to  the  art  of  medicine  in
their  maladies.

To  my  very  dear  sons  in  Christ,  the  monks  of  S.  Anas-
tasius,  I,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wish
health,  and  give  the  assurance  of  my  earnest  prayers.

i .  God  in  heaven  is  my  witness  how  greatly  I  long  after
you  all  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ ;  insomuch  that  I
should  have  greatly  desired  to  see  you,  if  the  thing  had
been  possible,  not  only  on  your  account,  but  also  on  my
own.  What  a  joy  and  solace  it  would  be  for  me  to  embrace
you,  who  are  my  own  flesh  and  blood,  my  joy  and  my  crown.
But  since  that  is  not  yet  permitted  to  me  (for  I  firmly  trust
that  in  the  mercy  of  God  it  will  be  permitted,  and  that  the
day  will  come  when  I  shall  behold  you,  and  my  heart  shall
rejoice,  and  my  joy  no  one  shall  take  from  me),  in  the
meantime  it  is  a  great  joy  and  consolation  to  me  to  receive
the  good  report  concerning  you,  which  has  come  to  me
from  my  very  dear  brother  and  co-abbot,  the  venerable
Bernard,  your  abbot.  I  congratulate  you  much  on  the
satisfaction  which  is  given  to  him  by  your  love  for  the
discipline  and  Rule  of  the  Order,  by  your  obedience  and
voluntary  poverty,  for  which,  without  doubt,  a  rich  reward
is  laid  up  for  you  in  heaven.  Wherefore  1^  bid  you,  and
earnestly  entreat  you,  my  dearly  beloved  brethren,  so  to  per
severe,  and  so  to  stand  fast  in  the  Lord,  carefully  keeping
the  observance  of  the  Order,  that  the  Order  may  keep  you,

1  Lit.  laterem  lavo. A  proverbial  saying  used  by  Terence  in  the  sense  of  to-
waste  time. — [E.]

2  Formerly  No.  321  ;  the  former  No.  345  is  now  No.  321.


884  LETTER CCCXLV.

carefully  preserving  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of
peace  (Eph.  iv.  3),  and  having  one  for  the  other,  and
especially  for  your  superiors,  that  humble  charity  which  is
the  bond  of  perfection  (Coloss.  iii.  14).  Follow  humility
before  all  things,  and  peace  above  all  things,  because  of  the
Spirit  of  God  who  dwells  in  you,  and  who  rests  only  upon
him  who  is  of  a  peaceful  and  humble  spirit  (Is.  Ixvi.  2).

2.  But  there  is  one  thing,  indeed,  which  your  venerable
father  asks  me  about,  which  I  can  in  no  wise  approve.
And  I  believe  also  that  I  am  right,  and  have  the  Spirit  of
God  in  the  matter.  I  know,  indeed,  that  the  district  in
which  you  live  is  unhealthy,  and  that  many  of  you  labour
under  infirmities ;  but  remember  him  who  said :  /  will
even  glory  in  my  infirmities  f  that  the  power  of  Christ
may  dwell  in  me  ;  and,  When  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong
(2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10).  I  sympathize,  therefore,  really  and
truly  with  your  infirmities  of  body ;  but  what  is  much  more
to  be  feared  and  avoided  is  infirmities  of  soul.  And  it  is  not
only  not  in  agreement  with  your  vow  as  religious  to  have
recourse  to  medicines  for  the  body,  but  it  is  not  even  really
conducive  to  health.1  It  is  certainly  permitted  to  poor
religious  to  make  use  sometimes  of  simples  of  little  value  ;
and  this  is  frequently  done.  But  to  purchase  drugs,  to  call
in  mediciners,  and  to  take  their  potions  and  remedies,  this
is  neither  becoming  to  the  rigour  of  our  vow  nor  befits  the
honour  and  purity  of  our  Order.  For  we  know  that  those
who  live  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God  (Rom.  viii.  8).
Spiritual  things  are  to  be  compared  with  spiritual  (i  Cor.

1  This  doctrine  seems  somewhat  strange  to  us ;  but,  at  least,  this  passage,
compared  with  another  in  Serm.  50  in  Canlica,  ought  to  restrain  monks,  who
profess  to  hold  their  flesh  in  hatred,  _  from  having  recourse  with  too  much
eagerness  to  the  medical  art,  but  that  they  should  rather  follow  the  example  of
the  ancient  monks,  who  had  recourse  to  the  advice  of  medical  men  sometimes,
but  only  to  learn  from  them  the  means  of  regulating  their  food  and  manner  of
life  (as  we  see  in  the  Life  of  Pac.homius,  c.  i.,  issued  by  Palemon).  It  is
evident  that  the  Cistercians  allowed  their  religious  to  make  use  of  medicines,
from  Letter  405,  and  from  Herbert,  B.  iii.,  c.  15  ;  nor  does  Bernard  in  this  Letter
deny  it,  but  he  wishes  (those  who  could  procure  them)  to  content  themselves
with  local  herbs  and  productions  of  the  garden,  instead  of  drugs  supplied  by
mediciners.


LETTER CCCXLVI.  885

ii.  13),  that  our  potion  may  be  that  of  humility,  and  that
we  may  cry  with  our  whole  heart :  Heal  my  soul,  O  Lord,
for  I  have  sinned  against  Thee  (Ps.  xli.  4).  This  health,
dearest  brethren,  do  ye  strive  for;  follow  this,  preserve
this,  for  vain  is  the  health  given  by  men.

LETTER  CCCXLVI.1 (Circa  A.D. 1141.)
To THE LORD POPE INNOCENT.

He  urges  the  Pope  not to  favour  the  cause  of  the  Arch
bishop  of  York,  as  it  was  unjust.

To  his  very  dear  lord  and  father,  INNOCENT,  by  the
grace  of  God  supreme  Pontiff,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  sends  his  humble  duty.

Since there  are  many  called,  but  few  chosen  (S.  Matt,
xx.  1 6),  it  is  no  great  reason  for  putting  faith  in  a  doubtful
matter,  or  thinking it  praiseworthy,  that it is  praised  by
many  people. The  Archbishop  of  York,  concerning  whom
I have  often  written to  your  Holiness,  has  come  to  you.
He  is  a  man  who  has  not  taken  God  for  his  helper,  but  has
put  his  hope  in  the  multitude  of  his  riches. His  cause  is  a
weak  and  even  a  bad  one,  and,  as  I  learn  from  persons  worthy
of  belief,  from  the  sole  of  its foot  even  to  its  head  there  is
no  soundness  in  it. What  then? What  does  a  man  who
is  without  a  just  cause  expect  to  gain  from  him  who  watches
over  justice  and  protects  equity  ? Does  he  suppose  that  he
will  be  able  to  swallow  up  justice in  the Curia,  as  he  has
done  in  England  ? He  has  swallowed  up  an  ordinary  stream
and  made  nothing  of  it ; and  now  flatters  himself  that  he
can  take  the  river  of  Jordan  also into  his  mouth. He  has
come  accompanied  by  many,  whom  he  has  gained  over  by
money  or  by  entreaties. One  alone  has  escaped  to  bring
you  word  ;  one  alone,  at  the  peril  of  his  life,  stood  fast  as  a
wall  for  the  house  of  Israel,  nor did  he  worship  the  idol  at
the  command of  the King. He is  alone, except  that  his
righteousness  bears  him company; which escaped,  as  an

1  Formerly  No.  377  ;  the  former  No.  346  is  now  No.  405.


LETTER CCCXLVII.

honoured  mother,  with  her  son  (Ecclus.  xv.  2).  What,
then,  will  the  Vicar  of  Peter  do  in  this  matter?  Surely
what  Peter  did  with  the  man  who  thought  that  the  gifts  of
God  might  be  purchased  with  money  (Acts  viii.  20).  If
the  Church  has  been  founded  upon  a  rock,  the  gates  of  hell
shall  not  prevail  against  her  (S.  Matt.  xvi.  18).  I  do  not
speak  thus  on  my  own  account  alone,  but  on  the  testimony
•of  those  who  are  moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God.


LETTER  CCCXLVII.1 (Circa  A.D. 1141.)
To  THE  SAME.

He  recommends  to  the  Pope  the  deputies  of  the  Diocese
•of  York,  who  are  going  to  Rome  on  account  of  the  matter
of  the  Archbishop.

To  his  very  dear  lord  and  father,  INNOCENT,  supreme
Pontiff,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  sends
his  humble  duty.

These  men  whom  you  see  before  you  are  simple,  honest,
and  God-fearing;  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  that  sends  them
to  the  sight  of  your  glory,  and  they  have  no  other  aim  than
to  obtain  justice.  Cast  your  eyes,  I  pray  you,  upon  these
poor  and  wearied  men,2  who,  not  without  cause,  have  come
to  you  from  far,  not  regarding  the  great  distance  by  land,
nor  the  peril  of  the  sea,  nor  the  snows  of  the  Alps,  nor  the
great  cost  of  the  journey,  though  they  are  poor.  Let  my
lord  then  kindly  see  to  it  that  neither  the  intrigue  nor
ambition  of  any  one  render  such  great  fatigues  useless  ;
•especially  since  they  do  not  seek  their  own  advantage,  but
those  things  which  are  of  Jesus  Christ.  For  not  even  an
-enemy,  I  suppose,  can  suspect  them  of  being  influenced  in

1  Formerly  No.  378  ;  the  former  No.  347  is  now  No.  391.

2  Undoubtedly  these  were  the  Abbot  and  monks  of  Fountains,  since  they  had
shown  themselves,  like  the  monks  of Rievaulx (of whom the  two  following-
Letters speak,  also Nos. 353  and  360),  extremely opposed to the intruded
•Bishop.


LETTER CCCXLVIII.  887

this  matter  by  any  private  interest  or  by  personal  hatred,
but  only  by  the  fear  of  God.  Let,  then,  any  one  who  is  a
servant  of  God,  put  himself  on  their  side.  If  the  barren
tree  shall  encumber  the  ground  any  longer,  to  whom  can  I
attach  blame,  except  to  him  who  holds  the  axe  ?


LETTER  CCCXLVIII.1 (A.D. 1141.)

To  THE  SAME.
On  behalf  of  Arnulf,  Bishop-elect  of  Lisiei

To  his  very  dear  father  and  lord,  INNOCENT,  by  the  grace
of  God  supreme  Pontiff,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clair-
vaux,  sends  his  humble  duty.

i.  Blessed  be  God  and  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  Who  has  in  our  day  preserved  His  Church,  the
spotless  Spouse  of  His  dear  Son,  free,  and  delivered  her
from  grief  and  from  the  oppressions  of  the  wicked.  The
schisms  are  extinct,  the  heresies  have  sunk  into  silence,3
the  necks  of  the  proud  and  haughty  are  trodden  under
your  feet.  And,  indeed,  I  have  seen  during  the  schism  the
head  of  the  wicked  lifted  up,  and  lofty  as  the  cedars  of
Libanus;  yet,  I  passed  by,  and  behold,  he  was  not.  During
the  heresy  I  saw  a  multitude  of  errors  shooting  up  again,
as  it  were,  and  flourishing,  but  the  mouth  of  those  speaking
perverse  things  was  stopped.  The  tyrant  of  Sicily4  had
lifted  up  his  heart  on  high,  and  now  is  humbled  under  the
mighty  Hand  of  God  ;  in  short,  there  is  'none  of  any  rank
whatever  over  whom  the  Church  of  God  by  His  mighty

1  Formerly  No.  388  ;  the  former  No.  348  is  now  No.  407.

2  Arnulph  was  Archdeacon  of  Se'ez,  when  he  was  elected  in  1141 Bishop  of
Lisieux  in  Normandy  ;  he  was  a  learned  man,  and  famous  for  the  Letters  which
he  wrote. Peter  the  Venerable  also  wrote  to  Innocent  respecting  his  election  (B.
iv.,  Let.  7). This  Letter  of  Bernard  was  first  brought  to  light  by  John  Picard,
who  placed  it  last,  No. 367. Horst omitted  it,  but it  has  been  recovered  in
Spicil.  B.  iii. Respecting  Arnulph,  see  Let.  248.

3  The  reference  is  to  the  schisms  of  Anacletus  and  Victor,  and  the  heresy  of
Peter  Abaelard.

4  Roger.


LETTER CCCXLVIII.

Hand  and  stretched-out  Arm  has  not  obtained  the  victory
by  your  means.

2.  Yet  there  remains still one  adversary,  the  Count  of
Anjou,  the  Hammer  of  good  men,  and  the  enemy  of  peace,
and  of  the  liberty  of  the  Church. He  is  persecuting  the
Church  of  Lisieux,  in  order  that  the  Bishop  of  that  Church
shall  not  enter  into  the  sheep-fold  by  the  legitimate  door,
but  in  some  other  way. But  what  has  been  done  cannot  be
undone. And  furthermore,  if  the  whole  matter  should  be
closely  and  carefully  examined,  it  will  be  found  that  all  has
been  done  for  the  best,  and  that  what  has  been  done  ought
to  be  confirmed. All  things  concur  to  show  this  :  the  person
chosen,  the  circumstances,  he  who  has  conducted  it,  and
even  the  adversary  who  opposes  it. For  if  you  look  to  the
person  chosen,  he  is  your  dear  son,  in  whom  you  are  well
pleased. If  to  the  order  of  the  proceedings,  they  have  been
carried  out  freely  and  canonically,  and  in  proper  order. If
to  the  manager  of  them,  he  is  a  pious  and  God-fearing  man.
If  to  the  adversary,  behold  he  is  a  man  who  has  not  taken
God  for  his  help,  but  is  hostile  to  the  Church,  and  an  enemy
of  the  cross  of  Christ. Besides,  in  any  affair  in  which  it  is
doubtful  wrhich  course  to  take,  it  is  a  most  powerful  reason
for  regarding  a  particular  course  as  the  better  that  it  pleases
the  good  and  displeases  the  evil. But  it  is  objected  that
the Count  of Anjou  has appealed  to the Apostolic See.
Wherefore,  I  pray  you; what  injury  or  loss  has  he  to  com
plain of? Far  from  being  oppressed,  it is  he  who  is  the
oppressor; and  it  is  not  to relieve  himself  of  an injustice
that  he  has  recourse  to  an  appeal,  but  in  order  that  by  this
means  he  may  put  an  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  consecra
tion  of  the  Bishop.

3.  Since  then in  this matter  not  only  the  piety  of  him
who  has conducted it,  but your  affection for the person
chosen,  and  the  justice  of  his  cause,  combine  to  lead  to  the
same  conclusion, it  seems  superfluous and  useless  to  make
request  on  behalf  of  one  whose  humility  has  already  had
recourse  to  your  authority. I will, however,  who  am but


LETTER CCCXL1X.  889

dust  and  ashes,  speak  unto  my  Lord.  Yes,  I  who  am  the
humble  servant  of  the  Bride  will  speak  unto  the  friends  of
the  Bridegroom  ;  let  my  discourse  be  welcome  to  Him.
The  Church,  my  lord,  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  unto  its
setting,  has  been  committed  to  your  care.  You  ought,  then,
to  be  a  wall  and  a  rampart  to  her  from  the  face  of  her  enemy
and  persecutor.  You  ought  to  nourish  her  sons  under  the
shadow  of  your  wings.  Sustain,  therefore,  the  Bishop  of
Lisieux  as  a  tiue  son  of  the  Roman  Church,  and  send  him
back  with  the  blessings  of  sweetness,  so  that  his  enemy
may  never  say:  I  have  prevailed  against  him.  Gird  on
your  sword,  O  Father,  to  raise  up  your  son,  to  lay  low  the
enemy,  and  to  preserve  the  freedom  of  the  Church.  For  we
are  not  sons  of  the  bond-woman,  but  of  the  free,  and  are
sharers  of  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  has  made  us  free.


LETTER CCCXLIX.1 (Circa A.I). 1141.)

To  THE  SAME.
He  recommends  a  friend  to  the  Pontiff.

To  his  very  dear  father  and  lord,  INNOCENT,  by  the  grace
of  God  supreme  Pontiff,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  sends  his  humble  duty.

I  am  unwilling  to  enjoy  alone  the  favour  I  have  found  in
your  eyes.  I  desire  to  share  it  with  my  friends.  For  I  do
not  fear  that  there  will  not  be  enough  both  for  me  and  for
them.  For  it  is  so  great  that  I  am  able  to  make  a  crowd  of
friends  the  sharers  of  it  without  fearing  to  tind  it  empty
when  1  shall  come  myself.  What,  therefore,  I  have  freely
received  I  will  freely  bestow,  and  your  liberality  makes  me
liberal  with  the  gifts  which  you  have  given- me.  I  recom
mend,  then,  to  you  the  bearer  of  this  letter,  an  estimable
person.  He  is  a  friend,  my  lord,  of  the  poor  of  Christ,
and  a  servant  of  your  servants.  I  entreat,  my  lord,  that  it

1  Formerly  No.  330  ;  the  former  No.  349  is  now  No.  408.
VOL.  II.  57


8gO  LETTER CCCLI.

he  has  any  business  with  you,  you  will  listen  to  him
favourably,  with  your  accustomed  kindness,  for  my  sake,  or
rather  for  his  own,  since  he  is  so  good  a  man  as  to  deserve
that  he  should  obtain  his  petition  because  of  his  own
merit.

LETTER  CCCL.1 (Circa A.D. 1141.)

To  THE  SAME.
He  asks  for  the  Pope's  blessing  for  one  of  his  relatives.

The  young  man  who  will  bring  you  this  letter  is  reputed
to  be  a  brave  and  active  soldier,  and  in  order  that  he  may
perfect  himself  in  actual  warfare  he  is  proceeding  to
Jerusalem.  I,  your  son,  entreat  you  at  his  request  that  in
this  good  work  which  he  is  beginning  he  may  have  the
benefit  and  the  honour  of  your  benediction  and  prayers.
He  is  my  relative,  and,  as  the  Prophet  has  said,  I  ought  to
take  interest  in  those  who  are  of  my  own  flesh  (Is.  Iviii.  7).


LETTER CCCLI.2

To  THE  SAME.
He  recommends  certain  poor  persons.

I  frequently  write  to  you,  and  you  receive  letters  and
requests  from  me  almost  every  day.  I  am  placed  under
the  dilemma  of  being  either  ungrateful  to  my  friends  or
importunate  towards  you.  My  affection  towards  them
incites  me  to  write,  but  shamefacedness  restrains  me  and
modesty  almost  forbids  me  to  discharge  this  duty  of  charity.
But  the  Spouse  of  Christ  has  no  asylum  where  she  may  lay
her  head  or  take  refuge  in  the  time  of  tribulation,  except  it
be  with  the  friend  of  her  Bridegroom.  These  persons
whom  you  see  before  you  are  poor,  and  sent  as  representa
tives  of  the  poor.  Through  many  dangers  of  land  and  sea

;  Formerly  No.  331  ;  the  former  No  350  is  now  No.  409.

2  A  new  Letter  ;  the  former  No.  351 is  now  No.  322.


LETTER CCCLII.  891

they  take  refuge  under  the  shadow  of  your  wings,  they
resort  to  the  rock  of  the  Catholic  faith  and  to  the  bosom  of
your  apostolic  piety  since  they  are  troubled  in  many  things,
and  are  free  but  in  few  from  the  tribulation  and  pain
inflicted  by  the  wicked.  If  you  retain  your  ancient  manner
of  acting  and  the  office  of  your  apostolate,  you  cannot
bring  yourself  to  desert  the  cause  of  the  poor,  nor  to
honour  the  countenance  of  the  rich.  I  entreat  you  then,
tor  these  persons,  for  those  by  whom  they  are  sent  are  my
brethren  and  of  our  Order,  so  that  you  may  incline  the  ear
of  your  Piety  to  their  prayers,  in  respect  of  their  justice  and
lor  the  love  of  Him  who  does  not  despise  the  prayers  of  the
poor.

LETTER CCCLII.1 (A.D. 1131.)

PRIVILEGE  OR  GRANT  MADE BY  POPE  INNOCENT  II.  TO
SAINT  BERNARD.-

Innocent  concedes  very  full  privileges  to  Bernard  and  to
the  Cistercian  Order  on  account  of  their  great  services  to
the  Apostolic  See.

INNOCENT,  Bishop,  and  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to
his  beloved  son  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  and  to  their
successors  regularly  appointed  for  ever,  etc.

To  you,  Abbot  Bernard,  my  beloved  son  in  the  Lord,  to
your  firm  and  indefatigable  constancy,  to  the  fervour  of  your
piety,  and  the  discretion  which  you  displayed  in  defending
the  cause  of  S.  Peter,  and  of  the  holy  Roman  Church  your
mother,  when  the  schism  of  Peter  Leonis  was  beginning;
and  to  the  zeal  with  which  you  opposed  yourself  as  an
impregnable  bulwark  before  the  house  of  God,  and  laboured
to  incline  the  minds  of  Kings  and  Princes,*  and  of  other
persons  both  ecclesiastical  and  lay,  by  pressing  arguments,
made  strong  by  reason,  to  the  unity  of  the  Catholic  Church,

1  A  new  Letter;  the  former  No.  352  is  now  No.  389.

-  It  seems  right  that  this  Piivilegium  should  find  a  place  after  the  Letters
of  Bernard  to  Pope  Innocent.  It  is  to  be  found  in  Spicilegium,  Vol.  x.  p.  383,  in
the  History  of  the  Abbey  of  Fontaines-Blanches,  Diocese  of  Tours.


892  LETTER CCCLII.

and  the  obedience  of  S.  Peter,  and  of  us ;  in  great  measure
are  due  the  happy  condition  in  which  the  Church  of  God,
and  ourselves,  are  found.1

Wherefore,  in  order  to  give  assent  to  your  just  wishes,
we  have  fortified  with  the  protection  of  the  apostolical  See
the  monastery  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary,  Mother  of  God,
over  which,  in  the  providence  of  God,  you  preside,  with  all
the houses depending  upon it. We ordain that all the
possessions  or  goods  whatsoever  which  it  actually  possesses
justly  and  canonically  at  the  present  time,  or  in  the  future
by  the  help  of  God  shall  possess,  whether  by  the  grant  of
Popes, or by  the liberality of Kings or Princes, by  the
offerings  of  the  faithful,  or  by  any  other  just  manner,  shall
remain  firm and unimpaired  to  you and  your  successors.
We  forbid  any  Archbishop  or  Bishop  to  cite  either  you,  or
your  successors,  or  any  Abbot  of  the  Cistercian  Order,  to
any  Council or Synod  except for  causes  that  concern  the
faith. And  as the  monastery  of  Citeaux  is  the  source  and
origin  of  this religious  Order,  let  it  deservedly  enjoy  this
prerogative by our  grant; that,  whenever  it  shall  be  de
prived  of  its  own  pastor,  it  may  freely  choose  for  itself  any
Abbot whatever,  or  monk,  out  of  all  the  Abbeys of  your
Order,  to  preside  over  it,  and  may  obtain  the  person  chosen
without  any  opposition  . We  grant  to  the  other  Abbeys  of
your Order  which have one or more  Abbeys dependent
upon,  or  founded  by  them,  the  free  power  at  the  death  of
their  own  Abbot  of  choosing  whomsoever  they  shall  prefer
from all  the Abbeys  under  their  obedience,  or  any  monk
whatever  from  all  the  Cistercian  congregations. But  those
Abbeys  which  have  no  dependent  houses  may  freely  choose
and have as their Abbot any monk out of  all the con
gregations of the before-named Order. Further, let no
Archbishop, Bishop, or  Abbot presume to receive, or  to
retain, if received, any of your  lay  brothers (converses)
who  are  not  monks,  but  who  shall  have  made  profession in
any  of  your  Houses,  without  your  free  consent. We  ordain
that no one presume  to  demand or  receive  of  you  tithes,

1 These  words  are  praised  by  Geoffrey. Lift,  B.  iii.  22.


LETTER CCCLII.  893

either  on  the  lands  which  you  and  the  brothers  of  your
whole  congregation  cultivate  with  your  own  hands  or  at
your  own  cost,  or  of  the  animals  upon  them.  Let  no  one,
therefore,  etc-.

The  peace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  upon  those  who
preserve  to  the  same  place  the  things  which  belong  to  it ;
let  them  receive  here  below  the  recompense  of  that  good
action,  and  let  them  rind  before  the  tribunal  of  the  Judge
the  rewards  of  eternal  peace.  Amen.

1,  [NNQCENT,  Bishop  of  the  Catholic  Church.

I,  MATTHEW,  Bishop  of  Albano.

I,  ROMANUS,  Cardinal  Deacon  of  S.  Mary  in  Porticu.

I,  JOHN,  Cardinal  Presbyter  of  S.  Chrysogonus.

I,  GREGORY,  Cardinal  Deacon  of  SS.  Sergius  and
Bacchus.

Given  at  Lyons  by  the  hand  of  H AIMER  1C  Cardinal
Deacon  and  Chancellor  of  the  holy  Roman  Church,  the
seventeenth  February,  indiction  x.,  in  the  year  of  the  Lord's
Incarnation  1131,  in  the  third  year  of  the  Pontificate  of
Pope  Innocent  II.

LETTER CCCLIII.1 (Circa  A.I). 1141.)
To  WILLIAM,  AMHOT  OF  RIEVAULX.-

/A' UV//V/.V William to bear rr//// cqiianimitv the unjust
consecration  of  the  Archbishop  of  York.

To  his  dear  brother  and  co-Abbot,  WILLIAM,  Abbot  of
Rievaulx,  Brother  BERNARD  of  Clairvaux  wishes  the  Spirit
of  counsel  and  strength.

I  have  heard  what  has  been  done  about  that  Archbishop,
and  with  the  greatest  regret.  Knowing,  therefore,  your
zeal,  and  fearing  lest  it  might  blaze  up  more  than  was
proper,  and  not  admit  of  wise  moderation,  which  would  be
to  the  detriment  of  our  Order,  and  to  the  harm  of  your

1  Formerly  No.  379; the  former  No.  353  is  now  No.  387.

2  This  was  William,  Abbot  of  Rievaulx,  a  Cistercian  Abbey  in  the  Diocese  of
York;  it  was  he  WIK.  was  assisting  S.  Bernard,  when  the  Letter  to  Robert  (No.  i)
was  written  to  his  dictation. About  Rievaulx,  see  Munusl.  Anglic.,  p.  727.


894  LETTER CCCLIII.

house,  I  have  thought  it  proper  to  address  to  you  some
words  of  consolation  ;  since  when  our  own  conscience  does
not  accuse  us  of  wrong,  other  evils  may  be  borne  with
equanimity.  I  say  it  deliberately;  neither  the  blame  nor
the  sin  belongs  to  you.  You  have  resisted  them  as  long  as
you  were  able;  now,  according  to  the  judgment  of  S.
Augustine,  the  wrong-doing  of  another  cannot  defile  you,
provided  that  you  have  not  given  assent  to  it  in  your
heart,  still  less  if  you  have  protested  against  it  with  your
mouth.  For,  he  says  ;  "  Under  two  circumstances  the
wrong-doing  of  another  does  not  defile  you  ;  if  you  do  not
consent,  and  if  you  protest."1  Be  therefore  of  good  heart
and  do  not  be  troubled.  Respecting  Ordination  and  other
Sacraments,  bear  well  in  mind  that  He  Who  baptizes  and
He  Who  ordains  is  Christ  the  Lord,  the  Chief  Bishop  of
our  souls.  But  if  any  one  is  reluctant  to  receive  Ordination
from  his  hand,  no  one  obliges  you  to  [cause  him  to]  be
ordained.  Yet  I  hold  it  to  be  quite  certain  that  there  is
nothing  to  fear  when  the  sacraments  received  are  adminis
tered  according  to  the  rules  of  the  Church.  Otherwise,  if
we  wished  to  avoid  all  evil  men,  though  the  Church  bears
with  them,  it  would  be  needful  to  go  out  of  the  world.  In
conclusion,  there  will  be  no  long  delay  in  bringing  the
matter  under  the  notice  of  the  Pope,  and  what  he  orders  or
directs  you  will  be  able  with  a  good  conscience  to  hold  and
follow.  In  the  meantime  wait  calmly  and  patiently.


LETTER CCCLIV.2 (A.D. 1142.)

To MILISENDIS,  QUEEN OF  JERUSALEM,  DAUGHTER OF
KING  BALDWIN  AND  WIFE  OF  FULK.

He  advises  the  Queen how  she  ought  to  conduct  herself
now  that her  husband  Fulk  was  dead.

To  the  most  illustrious  Queen  of  Jerusalem,  M.,  BERNARD,
Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health,  and  that  she  may  find
grace  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.

1  Sermons  on  the  Words  of  the  Lord,  No.  Ixxxviii.,  c.  18,  n.  19.
2  A  new  Letter;  the  former  No.  354  is  now  No.  388.


LETTKR CCCLIV.  895

If  I looked  only  at  your  title  of  Queen,  your  power  and
your  illustrious  birth,  it  would  seem  to  me  that  there  was  a
certain  unfitness  in  my  writing  to  you,  among  the  multiplied
cares  and  business  which  trouble  you in  the  midst  of  your
Court. All these things are  before  the  eyes  of  men,  and
those  who  are  without  them  envy  those  who  possess  them,
and  think  the  man  happy  to  whom  they  belong. But  what
blessedness  is  there  in  the  possession  of  those  things  which
are  all  destroyed,  as  it  were,  in  a  moment  like  the  grass  of
the field,  and fall  in a moment like flowers? They are
indeed  pleasant,  but  their  pleasantness  alters  ; it  is  change
able,  perishable,  and  temporary,  because  it  is  the  pleasant
ness  only  of  the  flesh  ; and it is of  the  flesh  and  its  good
things  that  it  is  said,  All  flesh  is  grass  and  the  glory  of  it
as  the  flower  of  grass (Isaiah xl. 6). I ought not,  there
fore,  to  be  withheld  from  writing  to  you  by  such  things  as
those, since  their  favour  is  deceitful  and  their  beauty  vain.
Receive,  therefore,  what I  have  in  a  few  words  to  say  : for
although  I  might  say  much  to  you,  yet  I  shall  make  my  letter
short,  because  of your  many  cares  as  well  as  mine. My
counsels  shall  be  short  but  salutary  :  deign  to  receive  them
from  the  distant land  from  whence  they  come,  like  a  little
seed which shall  one  day produce  an abundant  harvest.
Receive,  I  say,  advice  from  the  hand  of  a  frienc],  who  seeks
in offering  it  your  honour  only,  and  not  any  advantage  of
his own. You know that no one  can  be  a  more  faithful
counsellor  than he  who loves you alone, not  the  favours
which  he  may  receive  from  you. The  King,  your  husband,
is  dead  ;  the  young  King,  your  son,  being  still  unable  by  his
youth to bear  the  burden of the cares  of State  and to
discharge the Royal office, the eyes of all are turned
towards  you,  and  upon  you  alone  all  the  weight  of  govern
ment  rests. You  need,  therefore,  to  put  your  hand  to  brave
actions,  and,  though  a  woman,  to  show  the  spirit  of  a  man  ;
and  to  do  those  things  which  have  to  be  done  in  the  spirit
of  counsel  and  strength. It  is  of  great  consequence  that  you
should take order for  all things  with such  prudence  and
discretion that all  who  behold  you may think  you from


896  LETTER CCCLV.

your  actions  rather  a  King  than  a  Queen.  Let  them  not
say  among  the  nations  :  Where  is  the  King  of  Jerusalem  ?
But  you  will  say:  I  am  not  sufficient  for  these  things.  For
these  are  great  matters,  above  my  strength  and  my  know
ledge.  These  are  the  duties  of  a  man,  and  I  am  but  a
woman,  weak  in  body,  changeable  in  heart,  neither  provi
dent  in  counsel,  nor  accustomed  to  business.  I  know,  my
daughter,  I  know  that  these  things  are  great,  but  I  also
know  this,  that  although  the  waves  of  the  sea  are  mighty,
the  Lord,  who  dwelleth  on  High,  is  also  mighty.  These
things  are  indeed  great,  but  great  is  our  Lord,  and  great
is  His  power.

LETTER CCCLV.1 (Circa A.D. 1142.)

TO THE SAME QUEEN.

He  recommends  to  her  some  Religious  of  Premontre,  IK  ho
were  making  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem.

You  see  how  greatly  I  presume  on  your  goodness,  since
I  venture  to  recommend  others  also  to  you.  However,  it
would  be  as  unnecessary  as  presumptuous  perhaps  for  me
to  say  much  in  commendation  of  these  brethren  of  Pre
montre,  for  they  so  commend  themselves  by  their  own
merit  that  they  have  no  need  to  be  commended  by  another
person.  They  will  be  found,  if  I  mistake  not,  men  of
wisdom,  fervent  in  spirit,  patient  in  tribulation,  powerful
in  word  and  work.  They  have  put  on  the  whole  armour  of
God,  and  have  girded  themselves  with  the  Sword  of  the
Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God,  not  against  flesh  and
blood,  but  against  Spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places.
Receive  them  as  warlike,  and  yet  peaceful:  gentle  towards
men,  warlike  only  towards  evil  spirits.  Rather,  I  should  say,
receive  in  them  Christ  Himself,  who  is  the  cause  of  their
pilgrimage.

1 Formerly  No.  376  ;  the  former  No.  355  is  now  No.  364.


LETTER CCCLVI.  897

LETTER  CCCLVI.1 (A.D. 1141.)
To  MALACHI,  ARCHBISHOP  OF  IRELAND.*

He  sends  back  to  Malachi  the  Religious  confided  to  him
for  training,  and  expresses  regret  that  they  are  not  as
perfectly  instructed  and  practised  in  the  religious  life
as  he  could  wish,  on  account  of  his  many  occupations.

To  MALACHI,  by  the  grace  of  God  Bishop,  and  Legate  of
the  apostolic  See,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  wishes  health  and  all  the  blessing  that  the
prayer  of  a  sinner  (if  it  be  of  any  avail)  can  venture  to  ask.

I  have  done  what  your  Holiness  directed,  if  not  as  well  as
I  could  have  wished,  yet  as  perfectly  as  was  possible  at
this  time.  I  am  overwhelmed  with  affairs  so  numerous  and
difficult  that  I  scarce  know  how  I  have  been  able  to  succeed
in  doing  the  little  I  have  done.  I  send  you  only  a  few
grains  of  seed,  as  you  see,  which  may  avail  to  sow  a  very
small  part  of  that  field  in  which  the  true  Isaac  once  went
forth  to  meditate,  when  first  Rebecca  was  led  to  him  by  the
servant  of  Abraham  his  father,  to  be  happily  joined  to  him
in  an  endless  union  (Gen.  xxiv.),  nor  is  that  seed  to  be
despised  respecting  which  what  was  spoken  in  the  time  of
our  fathers  is  found  to  be  fulfilled  at  this  time  in  the  midst
of  you.  If  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth  had  not  left  us  a  seed  ice
should  have  been  as  Sodom  and  have  been  made  like  unto
Gomorrah  (Isaiah  i.  9).  I  then  have  sowed,  let  it  be  your
duty  to  water,  and  God  will  give  the  increase.  I  salute
through  you  all  the  saints  which  are  among  you,  humbly
commending  myself  to  your  prayers  and  to  theirs.  Fare
well.

LETTER CCCLVII.' (A.D.  1142.)

To  THE  SAME.
He  begs  Malachi  not  only  to  continue  his  friendship  for

1  Formerly  No.  216;  the  former  No.  356  is  now  No.  369.

2  Archbishop  Usher,  who  gives  this  Letter  as  No.  43  in  his  Irish  Letters,  takes
occasion to  enter  into many details about Mellifont  and other Cistercian
Monasteries  of  the  same  province.

3  Formerly  No.  317  ;  the  former  No.  357  is  now  No.  370.


898  LETTER CCCLVII.

him,  but  to  increase  it ;  and  he  asks  Malachi  to  give  him
proof  of  this  by  caring  for  and  favouring  the  brethren  he
has  sent.

To  his  very  dear  father  and  most  reverend  lord
MALACHI,  by  the  grace  of  God  Bishop,  Legate  of  the  holy
and  apostolic  See,  the  son  of  his  Holiness  Brother  BERNARD,
called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health,  and  sends  the
assurance  of  his  humble  prayers.

1.  How  sweet  to  me, lord  and  father, are your words!
how  pleasant  the  remembrance of  your  holiness  ! If  I  am
capable  of  any  feeling  of  affection,  of  devotedness,  and of
gratitude,  it  is  due  to  the  kindness  of  your  feeling  towards
me. But there is no need of many words, where the
feelings are strong ; for I trust  that the Spirit of God
which  is  in  you  will bear  witness with  your spirit, that I
am  entirely  devoted  to  you. You  also,  dear  and  longed  for
father,  will  not  have  forgotten  the  poor Religious,  who is
bound  to  you  by  bonds of  charity, and  whose soul bears
you  in  everlasting  remembrance. For I do  not  commend
myself  to  you  as  if  for  the  first  time,  since  I  now  for  a  long
time glory in the Lord, that my humble self has been
favoured  to  find  grace  in  the  eyes  of your  Holiness  ;  but  I
pray  that  your  friendship, though not new, may increase
daily. I  commend  to  you my  sons, or rather yours, the
more  earnestly  as  they  are  so  far  removed from me. You
know  how  entire  is  my  confidence  in  you, after  God,  since
I  sent  them  to  you,  as it  seemed  to me  that  it would  be
wrong  not  to yield to  the request  of your  Holiness. Do
that which seems good to you, only open to them the
bowels  of  your  kindness, and have a  care  of them. Let
not  your  diligent  solicitude grow  cold  on their  behalf,  nor
the  plantation  perish  which  is  the  work  of  your  right  hand.

2.  I  have  already  learned  both  from  your  letter,  and  from
the  report  of  my  brethren,  that  your  house  is  in  a  prosper
ous  state,  and  is  multiplied both in temporal  and  spiritual
things. I  greatly  congratulate  you  upon this, and render
thanks with my  whole heart both  to God, and to your
paternal solicitude. But as  there  is stiil need of much


LETTER CCCLVII.

vigilance,  especially  in  a  new  country  and  among  a  popula
tion  unaccustomed  to  a  monastic  form  of  religion,  I  entreat
you  in  the  Lord  not  to  withdraw  your  hand,  but  to  perfect
happily  what  you  have  well  begun.  Concerning  my
brethren  who  have  returned  from  that  place,  I  should  have
been  well  pleased  if  they  had  remained  ;  but  it  may  be  the
case  that  those  of  your  country  whose  characters  are  less
disciplined,  and  who  have  shown  a  great  repugnance  for
our  observances,  which  were  new  to  them,  have  been  in
great  measure  the  reason  for  their  return.

3.  I  have  sent  back  to  you  Christian,  my  very  dear  son
and  yours,  having  instructed  him  as  well  as  1  could  in  all  that
concerns  our  Order,  and  I  hope  that  he  will  be  still  more
exact  in  observing  them.  Do  not  wonder  that  I  have  not
sent  any  other  brethren  with  him,  since  it  is  not  easy  to  find
n't  persons  who  will  willingly  consent  to  go,  nor  was  it  my
plan  to  oblige  any  to  go  against  their  will.  My  dear  brother
Robert1  has  acquiesced  in  my  request  for  this  time,  like  an
obedient  son.  It  will,  therefore,  be  your  part  to  render
him  all  the  assistance  in  your  power,  as  well  in  buildings
as  in  other  things  necessary,  that  the  interests  of  your  house
may  be  promoted.  I  suggest  to  your  Paternity,  also,  that
you  should  persuade  those  religious,  upon  whom  you  are
counting  lor  the  house  you  are  about  to  found,  to  unite
others  with  themselves  by  coming  to  their  Order.  That
will  be  of  the  greatest  advantage  to  the  house,  and  you
will  be  the  better  obeyed.  May  your  Holiness  continue  in
health,  and  be  mindful  of  me  before  the  Lord  Christ.

1  It  is  not  quite  clear  who  this  Robert  was.  Perhaps  he  was  the  same  as  the
holy  man  of  that  name,  who  is  praised  by  Serlo  in  his  "  History  ot  Fountains  "
(Monasl.  Anglic.,  pp.  743  and  749).  Formerly  a  monk  at  Whitby,  he  made
common  cause  with  the  Religious,  who  left  a  monastery  at  York,  and  who  are
mentioned  in  Letter  95  and  the  following.  Or  it  may  toave  been  Robert,  the
cousin  of  Bernard  (Let.  I.)


LETTER CCCLIX.

LETTER  CCCLVIII.1  (A.D. 1142.)
To  POPE  CELESTINE.

He  implores  the  assistance  and  influence  of  the  Pope  to

obtain  peace  for  Theobald,  Count  of  Champagne.
That  which  Count  Theobald  asks  of  you  I  ask  also ;  he
is  a  son  of  peace,  and  we  entreat  you  that  it  maybe  brought
about  by  your  assistance.  Your  Apostolate  is  one  of  peace  ;
the  position  which  you  hold  is  a  debtor  to  peace.  All  love
peace,  but  few  merit  it.  But  it  cannot  be  denied  that  your
son  is  one  of  those  who  love  peace ;  whether  he  merits  it
likewise  it  is  for  you  to  judge.  And  if  neither  he  nor  I
merit  it,  the  necessity  of  the  Spouse  of  Christ,  that  is,  the
Church,  requires  it  ;  and  the  friend  of  the  Bridegroom  will
not  distress  her.2  It  belongs  to  the  Apostolic  See  alone  to
extend  its  solicitude  over  all  the  Churches,  that  all  may  be
united  under  it  and  in  it ;  it  is  its  duty,  then,  to  be  careful
for  all,  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace.
Give  us,  then,  this  peace,  send  peace  to  us  :  if  not  to  acquit
yourself  of  an  obligation  towards  us,  at  least  because  you
ought  to  obey  [the  duty  imposed  upon  you].  Enough  for
a  command.


LETTER CCCLIX.3( (A.D. 1143.)

THE  COMMUNITY  OF  CLAIRVAUX  TO  THE  SAME
CELESTINE.

They  ask  that  tlie  Abbot  of  Morimond  may  be  forbidden
to  make  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem.

To  the  sovereign  Pontiff  C.,  the  little  flock  of  Clairvaux
offer  the  homage  of  a  most  devoted  and  humble  obedience,
and  the  assurance  of  their  humble  prayers.

1  Formerly  No.  374;  the  former  No.  358  is  now  No.  376.

2  After  these  words  is  added  in  the Vedastine Codex  : Hre  have  recommended
and  recommend Brother  A7.,  because  he  is  to  be  commended. The  words  of  the
same  epistle  which  follow  in  that  Codex  begin  a  new  line  with  this  title,  To  i lie
Same,  as  if  it  were  another  Letter. So  says Edmund Martene  (Ampliss.  Cull.
Vet.  Script,  et  Monum.,  p.  745).

3  A  new  Letter  ;  the  former  No.  359  is  now  No.  377.


LETTER CCCLIX.  QOI

Since  we  are  happy  to  see  you  filling  the  place  of  Him
who said  that His daily  charge  was the care  of all  the
Churches  (2  Cor.  xi.  28),  notwithstanding  that  the  ears  of
your  piety  are  occupied  with  more  important  matters,  our
necessity  obliges  us  to  ask  for  a  moment  of  your  attention.
Nor  do  we,  though  humble,  fear  that  we  shall  be  repulsed  ;
He, too, will recompense  you for listening  to  His  poor,
whom  you  will one  day  hear  say  respecting  them, That
which  ye  have  done  unto  one  of  the  least  of  the  brethren  ye
have  done  unto  Me  (S.  Matthew  xxv.  40). For  this  is  the
cause,  not  of  our  community  only,  but  of  our  entire  Order.
Certainly  if  your  son,  our  superior  and  father,  had  been  at
home1  at  the  time  when  this  supplication  is  being  addressed
to you, he would either have come in person to your
Majesty,  or  at  least  he  would  have  written  in  his  own  name
this  deplorable  complaint. But not  to  hold  your  charity
longer in suspense, one of our brother  Abbots, who is
called  of  Morimond,2  has  had  the  levity  to  quit  the  monas
tery  over  which  he  presided  under  pretext  of making  the
pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  and it  is  said  that  it  is  his  inten
tion  before  he  goes  farther,  to  try  to  take  your  prudence  by
surprise,  and  to  extort  in  some  way  from  you  the  permission
to  do  so. If  you  should  give  him  any  such  license  (which
we  trust  will  not  happen) consider  what  disastrous  conse
quences  would  follow  to  our  Order:  for  by  this  example  any
Abbot who shall feel himself burdened by his pastoral
charge  will  throw  it  off,  since  he  will  suppose  that  he  may
not  unlawfully  do  so,  especially  among  us,  with  whom  the
post  of  Superior  is  a  great burden,  but  has  not  a  great
amount  of  honour. Furthermore,  in  order  to  complete  the
destruction  of  the  house  committed  to  his  charge,  he  has
taken  with  him  the  best  and  most  exemplary  of  the  brethren
who  were  under  him,  among  whom is  one"  youth  of  good
family,  whom  he  had  already  (not  without  scandal)  carried

1  A  gloss  has  crept  into  this  passage  to  explain  that  "  the  Superior  was  then
absent  for  some  reason,  and  did  not  yet  know  what  had  happened."

2  This  was  Raynauld,  fourth  Abbot  after  Abbot  Arnold,  who  was  the  first
Abbot,  and  who  also  abandoned  his  post  (Let.  4). Raynauld  had  been  Abbot
fifteen  years.


902  LETTER CCCLX.

off  from  Cologne,  as  we  believe  you  are  aware,  which
scandal  will  be  much  increased  by  his  carrying  him  off  a
second  time.  He  will  declare,  perhaps,  as  we  have  heard,
that  he  intends  to  observe  in  those  countries  all  the  rules  of
our  Order,  and  that  it  is  with  this  intention  he  has  taken
with  him  a  certain  number  of  Religious,  but  who  does  not
perceive  that  in  that  land  is  more  need  of  soldiers  to  fight
than  of  monks  to  sing  or  pray  ?  But  our  Order  will  receive
the  greatest  detriment  from  this  action  of  his:  since  it
will  be  made  easy  for  any  Religious  who  takes  it  into  his
head  to  wander  over  the  world,  and  he  will  have  no  scruple  in
pretending  to  undertake  a  pilgrimage  to  some  country  where
lie  will  be  able  to  observe  his  Rule.  We  shall  not  be  so
presumptuous  as  to  suggest  what  you  will  be  pleased  to  do,
or  what  order  you  will  give  in  this  matter,  which  we
commit  to  your  judgment.


LETTER  CCCLX.1  (A.D.  1143.)
To  WILLIAM,  ABBOT  OF  RIEVAULX.

He  again  exhorts  William  to  resignation  and  patience.

To  his  very  dear  brother  and  co-Abbot,  WILLIAM  of
Rievaulx,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
wishes  health  and  the  spirit  of  wisdom.

I  have  striven  to  the  utmost  of  my  power  against  the
common  evil,  and  if  I  have  not  succeeded  in  obtaining  what
I  wished,  yet  the  fruit  of  my  labour  remains  with  Him  who
suffers  no  good  work  to  remain  without  recompense.  This,
then,  is  the  true  consolation  of  us  and  of  all  who  strive  for
the  truth,  that  there  is  laid  up  for  us  a  crown  of  righteous
ness,  which  the  righteous  Judge  shall  bestow  upon  us  in
that  day.  Furthermore,  I  beg  you  now  to  bear  in  mind
[what  He  has  said],  that  if  we  suffer  for  righteousness  sake
happy  are  we,  and  that  the  wrong-doing  of  another  person
to  which  we  have  not  consented,  but  have,  on  the  contrary,

1  Formerly  No.  380;  the  former  No.  360  is  now  No.  378.


LETTER CCCLXI.  903

protested  against,  cannot  defile  us.  This,  then,  is  our
consolation,  so  that  in  our  patience  we  must  now  possess
our  souls  ;  and  since  we  are  unable  to  obtain  help  from  men,
let  us  hope  for  it  from  God,  who  will  not  despise  those  who
hope  in  Him.  For  I  trust  in  the  mercy  of  our  Heavenly
Father,  that  every  plant  which  He  has  not  planted  shall  be
plucked  up,  and  that  He  will  wither  up  with  His  maledic
tion  the  barren  fig  tree,  so  that  it  shall  not  occupy  the
ground  any  longer.  I  beg  and  entreat,  therefore,  of  you,
mv  brother,  to  calm  yourself,  and  not  to  trouble  the  flock
which  has  been  committed  by  God  to  your  charge,  but
rather  console  yourself  and  strive  bravely  to  serve  the  Lord
in  holiness,  and  He  will  deliver  us  from  our  enemies.  I,
however,  have  striven  as  far  as  I  could  to  influence  the  Lord
Bishop  of  Frascati,1  who  is  charged  with  the  functions  of
Legate  in  those  parts,  and  he  has  faithfully  promised  me
that  if  nothing  better  can  be  done  for  us,  this,  at  least,  he
will  observe,  that  under  no  circumstances  will  he  deliver
the  pallium  which  he  bears  to  the  Archbishop  if  the  Dean -
(who  is  now  become  Bishop)  shall  not  have  made  the
statement  on  oath  upon  which  the  whole  case  depends;  but
that  he  will  refer  the  cause  to  the  Pope  for  decision.


LETTER CCCLXI.'  (Circa  A.D. 1144.)

To ARCHBISHOP THEOBALD,-*  ON  BEHALF  OE JOHN OF
SALISBURY.

Bernard, confiding  in the friendship of Theobald, re
commends  John  to  him.

Nothing does me more honour or makes me more
grateful  to  you  than  to see  that my  friends  find favour  in

1  This  was  Ymar,  who  was  Legate  in  England  in  the  yea*r  1 143,  in  which  this
Letter  was  written. It  was  to  him  that  Letters  219  and  230  were  written.

2  This  was  William  of  Sainte-Barbe,  who  from  being  Dean  of  York  became
Bishop  of  Durham  (see  Letter  2.35).

3  Formerly  No.  383  ;  the  former  No.  361  is  now  No.  379.

4  Theobald  became  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  after  having  been  a  monk  at
Bee. Mention  is  made  of  him  in  Letter  238.


904  LETTER CCCLXII.

your  eyes  for  my  sake.  Yet  I  seek  not  glory  from  man,
but  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness.  Thus  it  is
that  I  send  to  your  Highness  the  bearer  of  this  letter,  John,1
who  is  my  friend  and  the  friend  of  my  friends,  and  I
venture  to  ask  for  him  the  goodness  and  kindness  which  I
feel  assured  you  have  for  me,  since  I  have  always  experienced
it  from  you.  For  he  has  the  testimony  of  all  good  men  that
he  is  very  meritorious  as  well  for  his  virtue  as  his  know
ledge.  Nor  have  I  learned  this  from  those  who  use  words
rashly,  but  from  my  own  sons,  wrhose  witness  is  for  me  as
certain  as  if  I  had  seen  it  with  my  own  eyes.  I  had
already  recommended  him  to  you  in  person,  but  now  being
absent  from  you,  I  recommend  him  so  much  the  more
earnestly  and  confidently,  because  I  have  learned  from
trustworthy  witnesses  how  blameless  are  the  life  and
character  of  the  man.  If,  then,  I  have  any  interest  with
you,  or  rather  because  I  believe  that  I  have  much,  make  for
him  some  provision  upon  which  he  may  sufficiently  and
honourably  live,  and  deign  to  do  this  without  delay,  because
he  knows  not  whither  to  turn.  In  the  meantime  be  so  kind
as  to  provide  for  his  needs,  and  let  me  thus  experience,  my
very  dear  father,  the  affection  which  you  retain  in  your
heart  for  me.


LETTER CCCLXII.2 (A.D. 1145.)
To  ROBERT  PuLLEN,3  CARDINAL  AND  CHANCELLOR.

Bernard  entreats  him  to  show  himself  an  efficient  helper
to  Pope  EugeniuSj  then  recently  elected,  in  the  govern
ment  of  the  Church.

1  He  was  originally  from  Salisbury,  and  was  an  intimate  friend  of  S.  Thomas
(Becket),  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  to  whom he  attributed  his  obtaining  the
Bishopric  of  Chartres,  as  is  shown  by  the  commencement  of  most  of  his  letters  :
"  John,  by  the  grace  of  God  and  the  merits  of  the  blessed  martyr,  Thomas,  the
humble  minister  of  the  Church  of Chartres  "  (Spicileg.  V.  x.  p.  39 if where  the
word  "  merits  "  is  omitted).

2  Formerly  No.  334  ; the  former  No.  362  is  now  No.  380.

*  Otherwise  To  the  Chancellor  Roland.  But  the  Cistercian  MS.  has  To  Robert
Pnllen,  and  I  think  more  correctly:  for,  in  the  first  place,  Robert  united  with


LETTER CCCLXII.


905


To  his  lord  and  very  dear  friend  ROBERT,  by  the  grace
of  God  Cardinal-Presbyter  and  Chancellor  of  the  holy
Roman  Church,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clair-
vaux,  health  and  the  assurance  of  his  prayers.

i.  I  have  received  your  letter  with  so  much  the  greater
pleasure  that  I  hold  you  always  in  kindly  remembrance.  I
can  assure  you  that  you  have  no  need  of  letters  of  in
troduction  to  me,  or  of  the  praises  of  anyone,  since  it  is  a
thing  without  doubt,  in  my  mind,  that  the  Spirit  of  truth
testifies  how  sincerely  I  love  you,  and  that  I  am  loved  by
you  ;  that  Spirit,  I  say,  by  whom  charity  is  spread  abroad
in  our  hearts.  Blessed  be  God  who  according  to  His
mercy  has  prevented  our,  or  rather  His,  Kugenius  with  the
blessings  of  sweetness,  preparing  a  lantern  for  His
Anointed  ;  and  has  also  sent  before  him  a  faithful  man  to
be  his  helper,  which  is  to  me  also  a  very  great  consolation,
r-or  when  the  vocation  of  my  friend  and  his  separation  from
his  friend  in  whom  he  delighted  in  the  Lord  was  a  trouble
to  him,  then  the  Lord,  as  I  perceive  plainly  at  this  time,  had
thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of  affliction,  towards  him,  and
was  saying,  What  I  do  thou  kuoivest  not  now,  but  t/ioit
shall  know  hereafter  (S.  John  xiii.  7).  Wherefore  be  thou
careful,  my  dear  friend,  for  him  to  whom  God  has  ordered
that  you  should  be  a  consoler  and  a  counsellor ;  and  watch
carefully,  according  to  the  wisdom  given  to  you,  that  he
may  not,  through  the  multiplicity  of  affairs,  fall  into  the
snares  of  unworthy  people,  and  be  led  into  some  decision
unworthy  of  the  apostolate  of  Eugenius.

2.  Show  yourself,  therefore,  my  dear  friend,  what  you
ought  to  be  in  the  post  which  you  occupy,  and  in  the  high
rank  to  which  you  have  attained  ;  employ  bravely  and
prudently  the  zeal  which  is  in  you  for  God,  to  His  glorv,

S.  Bernard  in  long  and  intimate  friendship  (Letter  205,  to  the  Bishop  of  Rochester).
Then  he  was  a  man  remarkable  for  his  learning,  and  this  suits  no  one  so  well
as  Robert,  who  taught  at  Paris,  and  also  with  much  success  at  Oxford.  He  is
said  to  have  been  sent  before  as  Chancellor,  before  the  Pontificate  of  Eugt-nius,
and  to  his  help.  All  these  particulars  suit  him  much  better  than  Roland,  who
was  not  made  Chancellor  until  the  eighth  year  of  Eugenius  (see  notes  to  Letter
205).  The  doubt  arises  from  the  name  being  written  only  as  R.

VOL. II.  58


906  LETTER CCCLXII.

to  your  own  salvation,  and  to  the  great  good  of  the  Church,
so  that  you  too  may  be  able  to  say,  the  grace  of  God  which
ivas  in  me  was  not  in  vain  (i  Cor.  xv.  10).  Up  to  this  day
you  have  lavished  your  learning  faithfully  and  with  great
use  upon  a  number  of  objects,  as  heaven  and  earth  bear
witness  ;  but  now  the  time  is  come  to  labour  for  God,  and
to  employ  all  your  powers  to  hinder  the  setting  aside  of
His  law  by  the  wicked.  Study,  therefore,  O  Father,  dearly-
beloved  and  longed  for,  to  be  found  a  faithful  and  prudent
servant  of  the  Lord,  even  in  this  post  which  is  committed
to  you  ;  as  far  as  regards  yourself,  show  the  simplicity  of
the  dove,  and  for  the  Church,  the  spouse  of  the  Lord,  which
is  now  entrusted  to  your  care  and  faithfulness,  show  the
wisdom  of  the  serpent,  so  as  to  preserve  her  from  the
envenomed  snares  of  the  old  malignant  serpent,  that  thus
in  each  of  your  virtues  God  may  be  glorified.  I  should  have
many  things  still  to  say  to  you  ;  but  there  is  no  need  of  a  long
letter  where  the  living  voice  is  at  hand.  Wherefore,  sparing
your  many  occupations,  as  well  as  my  own,  I  have  put  my
words  in  the  mouth  of  the  brethren  which  are  present
before  you  ;  listen  to  them  as  to  myself.  Farewell.


LETTER CCCLXIII.1  (A.D. 1146.)
To THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE OF EASTERN FRANCE.

Bernard  exhorts  them  to  take  arms  against  the  Infidels
in  defence  of  the  Church  in  the  East.  In  opposition  to
the  incendiary  appeals  of  a  certain  Religions,  he  tells
them  that  the  Jews  are  not  to  be  persecuted,  much  less
put  to  death.

To  the  lords  and  very  dear  fathers,  the  Archbishops  and
Bishops,  with  the  whole  Clergy  and  the  faithful  people  of
Eastern  France  and  Bavaria,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,  desires  that  they  may  abound  in  the  Spirit
of  strength.2

1  Formerly  No.  322 ;  the  former  No.  363  is  now  No.  37  i.

2  The  inscription  of  this  Letter  in  all  editions  which  have  hitherto  appeared
seems  to  me  (it  is Horst  who  speaks)  far  too  narrow  in  respect  of  Bernard's


LETTER CCCLXIII.  907

i.  I  write  to  you  with  respect  to  a  matter  which  concerns
the  service  of  Christ,  in  whom  is  our  salvation.  This  I  say
in  order  that  the  Lord's  authority  may  excuse  the  un-
worthiness  of  the  person  who  speaks;  let  the  consideration
of  its  usefulness  to  yourselves  also  excuse  the  faults  of  my
address.  I  am,  indeed,  of  small  account;  but  1  have  no
small  love  for  you  all  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  This,
now,  is  my  reason  for  writing  to  you,  that  I  may  thus
approach  you  as  a  whole.  I  would  rather  do  so  by  word
of  mouth,  if  as  well  as  the  will  the  opportunity  were
afforded  me.  Behold,  brethren,  now  is  the  acceptable
time,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation.  The  earth  also  is  moved
and  has  trembled,  because  the  God  of  heaven  has  begun  to
destroy  the  land  which  is  His.  His,  I  say,  in  which  the  Word
of  the  Father  evidently  taught,  and  for  more  than  thirty
years  dwelt  a  man  among  men.  His,  for  He  enlightened  it
with  miracles,  He  consecrated  it  with  His  own  blood;  in
it  appeared  the  first  fruits  of  His  Resurrection.  And  now,
tor  our  sins,  the  enemies  of  the  Cross  have  raised  blasphem
ing  heads;  ravaging  with  the  edge  of  the  sword  the  land
of  promise.  For  they  are  almost  on  the  point,  if  there  be
not  One  to  withstand  them,  of  bursting  into  the  very  city
of  the  living  God,  of  overturning  the  sanctuaries  of  our
redemption,  of  polluting  the  holy  places  of  the  spotless
Lamb  with  purple  blood.  Alas  !  they  rage  against  the  very
shrine  of  the  Christian  Faith  with  blasphemous  mouths,
and  would  enter  and  trample  down  the  very  couch  on
which  for  us  our  Life  lay  down  to  sleep  in  death.

2. What  are  you  doing  then,  O  brave  men? What are

purpose  in  writing  it.  There-fore  I  supply  another  and  a  fuller  one,  which  is
given  by  Otto  of  Frisingen  (tie  Geslis  Frider.  i.  41).  But  1  have  since  found
the  same  Letter,  not  only  on  the  same  subject,  but  also  in  the  same  words,  only
with  a  different  superscription,  addressed  to  different  nations,  provinces,  and
cities.  For  I  find  in  a  MS.  sent  to  me  from  England  one  inscribed  To  the
English  People.  Edmund  Martene  (Ampliss.  Colled.  I 'el.  Scriptur.  p.  745)
says  :  "  Ep.  363  in  a  MS.  at  S.  James  at  Liege  has  this  title  :  *  Hanc  Epistulutn
B.  Bernardus  alias  Clurce-l'alltnsis  jam  in  ejclremis  posilits  dictavit  ad  genlem
AnglorvmS  "  Baronius  gives  it,  with  only  a  few  words  changed,  under  the
superscription  :  "  To  Manfred,  Bishop  of  Brixen,  and  to  the  magistrates,
knights,  and  all  the  people  un  er  his  mle  "  (Ad  aim.  1146,  n.  15).


908  LETTER CCCLXIII.

you  doing,  O  servants  of  the  Cross  ?  Will  you  give  what  is
holy  to  the  dogs,  and  cast  your  pearls  to  swine  ?  How  many
sinners  there,  confessing  their  sins  with  tears,  have  obtained
pardon,  after  the  defilement  of  the  heathen  has  been  purged
by  the  swords  of  your  fathers  !  The  wicked  man  sees  and
is  grieved,  he  gnashes  with  his  teeth,  and  consumes  away.
He  prepares  the  instruments  of  sin,  and  will  leave  no  sign
or  trace  of  so  great  piety,  if  ever  (which  God  forbid)  he
gain  possession  of  this  holiest  of  holy  places.  Verily  that
would  be  an  irremediable  grief  to  all  time — because  an
irrecoverable  loss,  a  vast  disgrace  to  this  most  graceless
generation,  and  an  everlasting  shame.

3.  What  are  we  then  to  think,  brethren  ? Is  the  Lord's
arm  shortened  so  that  it  cannot  save,  because  He  calls  His
weak  creatures  to  guard  and  restore  His  heritage  ? Can
He  not send  more  than twelve legions of  angels,  or  just
speak  the word, and  the land shall be set  free? It is
altogether  in  His  power  to  effect,  when  he  wishes  ;  but I
tell  you,  the  Lord  your  God  is  trying  you. He  looks upon
the  sons  of men,  to  see  if there  be  any  to  understand,  and
seek,  and  bewail  His  error. For  the  Lord  hath  pity  upon
His  people,  and  provides  a  sure  remedy  for  those  that  are
afflicted.

4.  Think what care He uses for your  salvation, and
wonder; behold  the  abyss  of  His  love,  and  trust  Him,  O  ye
sinners. He  wills  not  your  death,  but  that  you  may  turn
and  live; for now he  seeks  occasion,  not against  you,  but
for  your  benefit. What  opportunity  of  salvation  has  God
not  tried and  sought  out, when the Almighty  deigns  to
summon to His service murderers, robbers, adulterers>
perjurers,  and  those  guilty  of  other  crimes,  as  if they  were
a  people  that  dealt  righteously? Doubt  Him  not,  O  sinners  ;
God is kind. If He willed to punish  you, He not only
would  not  seek  your  service,  but  would  not  accept  it  when
offered. Again  I  say,  weigh  the  riches  of  the  goodness  of
the Highest  God,  hear  his  plan of  mercy. He makes  or
feigns a need  for  Himself,  while He  desires  to  help  your
necessity. He  wills  to  be  held  a  debtor,  that  He  may  give


LETTER CCCLXI1I.  909

pay  to  those  that  fight  for  Him,  pardon  of  sins,  and  ever
lasting  glory.  Therefore  I  may  call  it  a  highly-favoured
generation,  which  has  happened  upon  a  time  so  full  of
indulgence,  upon  which  has  come  that  acceptable  year  of
the  Lord,  a  very  jubilee.  For  this  blessing  is  spread  over
the  whole  world,  and  all  fly  eagerly  to  the  sign  of  life.1

5.  Since,  therefore,  your  land  is  fruitful  in  brave  men,
and  is  know^n  to  be  full  of  robust  youth,  your  praise  is  in
the  whole  world,  and  the  fame  of  your  valour  has  filled  the
entire  earth;  gird  up  your  loins,  therefore,  manfully,  and
take  up  arms  prevailingly  in  zeal  for  the  Christian  name.
Let  not  your  former  warlike  skill  cease,  but  that  spirit  of
hatred,  in  which  you  are  accustomed  to  strike  down  and  kill
one  another,  and  in  turn  be  overcome  yourselves.  How
dire  a  madness  goads  those  wretched  men,  when  kinsmen
strike  each  other's  bodies  with  the  sword,  perchance  causing
the  soul  also  to  perish  ?  But  he  does  not  escape  who
triumphs  ;  the  sword  shall  go  through  his  own  soul  also,
when  he  rejoices  at  having  slain  his  enemy  only.  To  enter
such  a  combat  is  madness,  not  valour  :  not  to  be  ascribed
to  bravery,  but  rather  to  foolishness.  Now,  O  brave
Knight,  now,  O  warlike  hero,  you  have  a  battle  you  may
fight  without  danger :  where  it  is  glory  to  conquer,  and
gain  to  die.  If  you  are  a  prudent  merchant,  if  you  are  a
desirer  of  this  world  :  I  show  you  some  great  bargains,  see
you  lose  them  not.  Take  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  and  you
shall  gain  pardon  for  every  sin  that  you  confess  with
contrite  heart.  The  material  itself  being  bought  is  worth
little  :  if  it  be  placed  on  a  devout  shoulder,  it  is  without
doubt  worth  no  less  than  the  kingdom  of  God.  Therefore
they  have  done  well  who  have  already  taken  the  heavenly
sign:  well  and  wisely  also  will  do  the  rest, -if  they  hasten
to  lay  upon  their  shoulders,  like  the  first,  the  sign  of
salvation.

6.  Besides,  brethren, I warn you, and not only I,  but

1  That  is,  the  sign  of  the  Cross:  as  in  n.  5,  where  an  indulgence  is  granted
to  those  who  have  taken  the  Cross,  for  all  sins  which  they  have  confessed  with  a
penitent  heart.  See  Letter  423.


LETTER CCCLXIII.

God's  Apostle,  Believe  not  every  spirit  (i  S.  John  iv.  i).
We  have  heard  and  rejoice  that  the  zeal  of  God  abounds  in
you,  but  it  behoves  no  mind  to  be  wanting  in  wisdom.
The  Jews  must  not  be  persecuted,  slaughtered,  nor  even
driven  out.1  Inquire  of  the  pages  of  Holy  Writ.  I  know
what  is  written  in  the  Psalms  as  prophecy  about  the  Jews,
God  hath  shown  me,  says  the  Church,  thou  shall  not  slay
my  enemies,  neither  shall  my  people  be  ever  forgotten.
They  are  living  signs  to  us,  representing  the  Lord's  Passion.
For  this  reason  they  are  dispersed  into  all  regions,  that  now
they  may  pay  the  just  penalty  of  so  great  a  crime,  that  they
may  be  witnesses  of  our  redemption.  Wherefore  the
Church,  speaking  in  the  same  Psalm,  says,  Scatter  them  in
thy  strength,  and  cast  them  down,  O  Lord  my  Protector
(Ps.  lix.  n).  So  has  it  been.  They  have  been  dispersed,
cast  down.  They  undergo  a  hard  captivity  under  Christian
princes.  Yet  they  shall  be  converted  at  evening-time,  and
remembrance  of  them  shall  be  made  in  due  season.  Finally,
when  the  multitude  of  the  Gentiles  shall  have  entered  in,
then  all  Israel  shall  be  saved  (Rom.  xi.  25),  saith  the
Apostle.  Meanwhile,  he  who  dies  remains  in  death.

7.  I  do  not  enlarge  on  the  lamentable  fact  that  where
there  are  no  Jews,  there  Christian  men  judaize  even  worse
than  they  in  extorting  usury,  if,  indeed,  we  may  call  them
Christians,  and  not  rather  baptized  Jews.  If  the  Jews  be
utterly  trampled  down,  how  shall  the  promised  salvation  or
conversion  profit  them  in  the  end  ?  Evidently  if  their  salva
tion  is  to  be  waited  for  equally  with  that  of  the  Gentiles  the
latter  also  should  rather  be  preserved  than  attacked  with  the
sword.  But  now  when  they  begin  to  be  violent  against  us,
it  behoves  them  to  repel  force  with  force  who  bear  not  the
sword  in  vain.  It  is  the  part  of  Christian  piety  as  much  to
overthrow  the  proud  as  to  spare  the  conquered,  those
especially  whose  kingdom  is  yet  promised,  of  whom  came

1  Bernard  here  speaks  rightly  and  religiously,  and  that  with  far  more  reason
than  if  they  were  Gentiles,  because  the  Jews,  living,  are  striking  representatives
of  the  Lord's  Passion,  and  witnesses  of  Holy  Writ ;  but  not  so  the  Gentiles.
See  Letter  364,  Sermon  64,  in  Cantica,  and  Liter  ad  Milites  Templi,  c.  10.


LKTTKR CCCLXIII.  9!  I

the  patriarchs,  and  of  whom  was  Christ  after  the  flesh,  who  is
blessed  for  ever.  Yet  we  must  require  of  them  according  to
the  apostolic  command,  that  they  should  set  free  from  the
bond  of  usury  all  who  have  taken  the  sign  of  the  cross.

8.  This  also  we  must  warn  you,  dearest  brethren,  that  if
any  love  to  bear  rule  among  you,  and  wish  by  hastening  to
anticipate  the  army  of  his  country,  that  he  by  no  means
attempt  to  do  it.  It  he  pretend  to  have  been  sent  by  us,  it
is  not  true  ;  or  if  he  show  letters  as  if  given  by  us  they  are
altogether  false,  I  warn  you,  or  obtained  by  fraud.  It  is
the  part  of  such  to  choose  warlike  and  skilful  leaders,  and
for  the  army  of  the  Lord  to  set  out  together,  that  it  may
have  strength  everywhere,  and  not  be  able  to  sustain  injury
from  any.  There  was  in  a  former  expedition,  before
Jerusalem  was  taken,  a  certain  man,  Peter  by  name,1  of
whom  you  (unless  I  mistake)  have  often  heard  mention.
He  went  alone  at  the  head  of  a  mass  of  people  who  had
entrusted  themselves  to  his  care,  and  led  them  into  so  great
dangers  that  none,  or  at  least  very  few,  escaped  dying  by
hunger  or  the  sword.  So  there  is  fear  lest,  if  you  do  like
wise,  the  same  fate  should  overtake  you  also,  which  may
God,  who  is  blessed  for  ever,  avert  from  you.  Amen.


LKTTKR CCCLXIV.1-' (A.D. 1146.)
To  PKTKR,  ABBOT  OK  CLUNV.

He  invites  Peter  to  attend  a  meeting  at  Chartres  in
order  to  consult  as  to  rendering  help  to  the  Church  in  the
East.

To  his  very  dear  father  PKTER,  by  the  grace  of  God
the  venerable  Abbot  of  Cluny,  Brother  BERNARD,  of  Clair-
vaux,  wishes  health,  and  sends  the  assurance  of  his  humble
prayers.

1  This  celebrated  Peter  was  known  as  the  Hermit. We  find  a  person  of  that
name  mentioned  as  Prior  of  Mont  S.  Quintin,  near  Peronne,  in  the  Necrology  of
Curbeij. There  is much respecting  Peter in William  of  Tyre,  History  of  the
Crusade,  B.  i.,  and  James  a  Vitry,  Hist.  Occidental,  c.  17.

2  Formerly  No.  355  ;  the  former  No.  364  is  now  No.  381.


QI2  LETTER CCCLXIV.

1.  I  imagine  that  the  sad  and  lamentable  groanings  of
the  Church in  the  East  have  not  failed to  come to  your
ears,  yes,  even  to  the  bottom  of  your  heart. It  becomes
you,  in  the  high  post  which  you  occupy,  to  show  a  sincere
feeling  of  compassion  for  that  Church,  the  common  mother  of
all,  in  the  sad  state  to  which  it  is  reduced,  and  in  the  great
difficulties  by  which  it  is  surrounded. The  more  elevated,
I repeat, is the position which you hold, the more  you
ought  to  be  consumed  with  an  earnest  zeal  for  the  House
of  God. Otherwise,  if  we  harden  our  hearts  and  affections
at  the  sight  of  such  misfortunes  ;  where  is  our  love  towards
God,  or  our  charity  towards  our  neighbours  ? If,  then,  we
do not exert ourselves with all the earnestness in our
power  to  find  and  supply  a  remedy  to  s-uch  great  evils  and
dangers,  how  ungrateful  should  we  not  be  shown  to  be  to
God,  who  shelters  us  in  His  tabernacle  in  the  day  of  evil  ?
and  should  we  not  merit  to  be  punished  the  more  severely,
that  we  had  shown  ourselves  neglectful  both  of  God's  glory,
and  of  the  salvation  of  our  brethren  ? These  considerations
I  have  been  led  to  suggest  thus  confidently  and  plainly,  on
account of  the kindness with  which  your Excellence  has
deigned  to  honour  my  unworthiness.

2.  Our fathers, then, the Bishops of France, with our
lord  the  King  and  his  nobles,  have  determined  to  meet  on
the  third  Sunday  after Easter  at  the  city  of  Chartres  l  in
order to take counsel together about this great  affair :
and I trust that we may  be  favoured  with  your  presence
there  also. For  the  advice  of all  the  more eminent  men
is  needed  : and  you  will  render  a  service  not  unacceptable
to God,  if  you do not hold back from this business,  but
approve  your  zeal in  a  season so  opportune,  in  a  time  of
tribulation. For you know, dear father, that a  friend  is
proved in time of  adversity. I am convinced that your

1  It  was  in  this  assembly  that  Bernard  was  chosen  general  in  chief  of  the
expedition,  a  title  which  he  refused  as  being  incompatible  with  his  monastic
profession  and  entirely  foreign  to  his  character  (Let.  256  ad  Eugen.  n.  4).
Letter  363,  and  the  Letters  of  Suger,  of  which  No.  133  is  from  Peter  the
Venerable,  excusing  himself  from  attending  the  meeting  at  Chartres  on  account
of  a  General  Chapter  to  be  held  at  Cluny  on  the  same  day.


LETTER CCCLXIV.  913

presence  will  be  of  great  advantage  to  this  expedition,  as
well  because  of  the  influence  belonging  to  the  holy  Abbey
of  Cluny,  over  which,  in  God's  Providence,  you  preside,  as
because  of  the  wisdom  and  popularity  which  has  been
bestowed  upon  you  for  the  honour  of  God  and  the  good  of
your  neighbours.  May  He  deign  to  influence  your  mind,
not  to  hesitate  to  come,  and  to  give  the  advantage  of  your
presence  to  His  servants  gathered  in  His  name,  and  for
zeal  in  His  service.


LETTER CCCLXV.1 (A.D. 1146.)
To  HENRY,  ARCHBISHOP  OF  MAYENCE.

He  blames  a  monk  named  Ralph,  who  was  instigating  the
faithful  to  the  massacre  of  the  Jews.

To  the  venerable  lord  and  very  dear  father  HENRY,  Arch
bishop  of  Mayence,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes
health,  and  that  he  may  find  favour  with  God.

i.  I  have  received  your  esteemed  letter  with  the  deep  re
spect  due  to  it;  but  my  reply  must  be  brief,  on  account  of  the
multiplicity  of  business  with  which  1  am  burdened.  The  con
fiding  of  your  complaint  to  me  is  a  sign  and  pledge  of  your
affection,  and  a  proof  of  your  extreme  humility.  For  who  am
I,  and  what  is  my  father's  house,  that  an  Archbishop  should
refer  to  me  a  contempt  of  his  authority  and  an  injury  to
his  metropolitan  See  ?  For  am  I  not  as  a  young  child,  not
knowing  how  to  come  in  and  go  out?  But  yet  I  am  not
ignorant  of  those  words  full  of  truth  which  proceed  from
the  mouth  of  the  Highest  :  //  is  impossible  but  that  offences
come,  but  woe  to  him  from  whom  they  come  (S.  Matt,  xviii.
7).  He-  of  whom  you  speak  in  your  letter  has  received  a

1  Formerly  No.  323  ;  the  former  No.  365  is  now  No.  396.

2  Ralph. Martene, Ampliss. Collect. Vel. Scrip/or,  p.  744- This  RalPh  or
Rolf  is  described  by  Otto  of  Frisingen,  de  Geslis  Frider.  B.  i.  c.  37,  as  the  author
of  a  bloody  persecution  against  the  Jews. His  seditious  doctrines  were  resisted
by  Bernard,  and  he  warned  Ralph  himself,  who  was  then  in  extreme  favour  with
the  people  of  Mayence,  not  to  violate  all  monastic  rules  by  his  wandering  life,  nor
yet  to  assume  the functions of  a preacher by  his own authority. Bernard
brought  him at length,  by virtue of his vow of obedience, to retire  to his


9 14  LETTER CCCLXV.

mission  neither  from  men,  nor  through  men,  and  certainly
not  from  God.  If  he  boasts  that  he  is  a  monk  and  a  hermit,
and  that  therefore  he  has  full  power  even  to  take  the  office
of  a  preacher,  let  him  learn  what  he  ought  to  know,  that  the
office  of  a  Religious  is  that  of  penitence,  not  of  preaching,1
and  that  for  a  true  Religious,  towns  are  prisons  and  solitude
a  Paradise.  It  is  not  so  with  the  man  in  question,  for  him
it  is  solitude  which  is  a  prison  and  a  town  a  Paradise.  O
man  without  feeling  or  modesty  !  whose  foolishness  has
been  placed,  as  it  were,  on  a  candlestick  so  that  it  may
plainly  appear  to  all  in  the  house.

2.  There  are  three  things  in  him  most  worthy  of  blame  :
his  usurpation  of  the  right  to  preach,  his  contempt  of  the
authority  of  the  Bishop,  and  finally  his  inciting  to  murder.
What  new  power  is  this  ?  Do  you  suppose  yourself  greater
than  our  father  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii.),  who  laid  down  his
sword  at  the  bidding  of  him  at  whose  command  he  had
taken  it  up  ?  Are  you  greater  than  the  Prince  of  the
Apostles  who  inquired  of  the  Lord,  Lord,  shall  we  strike
with  the  sword  ?  (S.  Luke  xxii.  49).  If  you  were  instructed
in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians,  that  is  the  wisdom  of
this  world  which  is  foolishness  towards  God  (i  Cor.  iii.  19),
and  you  reply  to  the  question  of  Peter  in  a  different
manner  than  He  did  who  said  to  Peter:  Put  up  again  thy
sword  into  its  sheath,  for  he  who  takes  the  sword  shall
perish  by  the  sword  (S.  Matt.  xxvi.  52).  Does  not  the
Church  triumph  a  hundred  times  better  over  the  Jews  in
convincing  them  every  day  of  their  error  and  in  converting
them  to  the  faith,  than  if  it  were  to  exterminate  them  once
for  all  by  the  edge  of  the  sword  ?  Does  the  Church
universal  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  even  to  its  setting  put
up  to  God  to  no  purpose  that  universal  petition  on  behalf
of  the  unbelieving  Jews  that  our  Lord  God  would  take  away
the  veil  from  their  hearts  and  enable  them  to  pass  out  of
darkness  into  the  light  of  truth  ?  It  would  seem  useless

monastery,  much  to  the  indignation  of  the  people, who,  if  they  had  not  been
restrained  by  S.  Bernard's reputation  for  sanctity,  would  have  certainly  risen  in
sedition  against  the  loss  of  their  favourite. — It-id,  c.  39.
1 S.  Jerome,  adv.  Vigilant,  c.  6. See  notes  to  Letter  89.


LETTER CCCLXV.  915

and  vain  to  pray  for  them  if  she  had  not  hope  that  though
now  without  faith  they  will  one  day  believe.  But  she
understands  with  a  pious  insight  that  the  Lord  who  renders
good  for  evil  and  love  for  hatred  has  a  purpose  of  grace
towards  them.  Where  is  then  that  which  is  spoken,
See  that  than  slay  them  not  (Fs.  lix.  11).  Or  this  :  When
the  fulness  of  t/ie  Gentiles  shall  have  come  in  then  shall
all  Israel  be  saved  (Rom.  xi.  25,  26).  Or  this:  The  Lord
doth  build  up  Jerusalem  and  will  gat  tier  together  the
outcasts  of  Israel?  (Fs.  cxlvii.  2).  Are  you  not  the  man
who  will  make  the  Frophets  liars  and  will  render  empty
and  useless  all  the  treasures  of  the  piety  and  mercy  of
Jesus  Christ?  Your  doctrine  is  not  yours,  but  that  of  your
father  who  sent  you.  It  is  not  surprising  if  you  are  as  your
master:  for  he  was  a  murderer  from  the  beginning,  a  liar
and  the  father  of  falsehood  (S.  John  viii.  44).  O  frightful
knowledge  ;  O  infernal  wisdom  contrary  to  the  Prophets,
hostile  to  the  Apostles,  a  subversion  of  piety  and  grace  !  O
unclean  heresy,  sacrilegious  deceiver,  filled  with  the  spirit
of  falsehood,  which  hath  conceived  sorrow  and  brought
forth  ungodliness  (Ps.  vii.  15).  I  would  wish,  but  fear,  to
say  more.  In  conclusion,  to  sum  up  briefly  all  that  I  think
upon  these  matters  :  the  man  is  great  in  his  own  eyes,  full
of  the  spirit  of  arrogance.  His  words  and  his  actions
reveal  that  he  is  striving  to  make  a  name  for  himself  among
the  great  of  the  earth,  but  he  has  not  the  means  to  succeed
in  his  object.  Farewell.


LETTP:R  cccLxvi.1 (A.D.  1146.)

TO THK ABBESS HlLDEGARDE.2

He  modestly  rejects  her  praises :  he  warns  her  to
recognize  what  she  owes  to  the  Grace  of  God  :  and  begs
her  prayers  for  Jiim  and  for  his  brethren.

i Formerly  No.  386 ;  the  former  No.  366  is  now  No.  410.

1J  She  was  the  Abbess  of  the  Monastery  of  Mont  S.  Rupert,  near  Bingen,  in
the  Diocese  of  Mayence,ancl  was  celebrated  for  her  prophetical  utterances.  Among
the  Letters  of  hers  which  are  preset  ved  in  the  BiHiotheca  Palnim,  there  is  one  in


0,16  LETTER CCCLXVI.

To  his  beloved  daughter  in  Christ,  HILDEGARDE,  Brother
BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health  and  all
that  the  prayer  of  a  sinner  can  obtain.

It  seems  to  me  that  certain  persons  think  very  differently
of  so  humble  a  person  as  myself,  from  that  which  my  own
conscience  knows  to  be  true  :  and  that  it  is  to  be  attributed
not  to  my  merits,  but  to  the  simplicity  of  mankind.  Yet  I
hasten  to  reply  to  the  sweet  and'  charitable  letter  which
you  have  had  the  goodness  to  write  to  me,  although  the
number  of  my  occupations  obliges  me  to  do  so  more  briefly
than  I  could  wish.  I  congratulate  you  on  the  Grace  of  God
which  is  in  you,  and  kindly  warn  you  to  be  careful  to
respond  to  it  in  a  disposition  of  entire  humility  and  de
votion  in  order  that  you  may  retain  this  grace,  knowing
that  God  resisteth  the  proud  and  giveth  grace  to  the  humble
(S.  James  iv.  6).  That  is  the  advice  which  I  give  to  you,  as
far  as  in  me  lies,  and  the  prayer  that  I  make  for  you.  But
what  am  I  to  be  able  either  to  teach,  or  to  give  warning,  to
one  in  whom  is  the  secret  intuition  and  the  anointing  which
teaches  all  things.  For  you  are  said  to  be  so  favoured  as
that  the  hidden  things  of  Heaven  are  revealed  to  you,  and
that  the  Holy  Spirit  makes  known  to  you  those  things  which
pass  man's  understanding.  Wherefore  I  rather  entreat
and  humbly  pray  that  you  would  make  remembrance  of  me
before  God,  and  of  those  who  are  joined  with  me  in
spiritual  society.  For  I  trust  that  when  you  are  united  to
God  in  the  Spirit,  you  will  be  able  to  help  and  profit  us
much.  For  the  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  person
availeth  much  (S.  James  v.  16).  As  for  me,  I  pray  for  you
continually,  that  you  maybe  strengthened  in  good,  that  your
soul  may  be  perfected,  and  you  may  be  enabled  to  attain
unto  eternal  joys  :  so  that  those  who  have  put  their  hope  in
God  may  not  be  led  to  despair  by  seeing  your  failure  :  but
may  be,  on  the  contrary,  strengthened  in  good,  and  may

which  she  congratulates  Bernard  on  the  zeal  which  he  had  displayed  in  the  preach
ing  of  the  Crusade,  and  says  that  she  "  had  seen  him  as  it  were  a  man  in  the  sun
two  years  before."  John  of  Salisbury  asks  Magister  Girard  for  some  account
of  her  visions,  and  says  that  she  was  very  acceptable  to  Pope  Eugenius.


LETTER CCCLXVIII.  917

progress  from  one  degree  of  good  to  another,  by  beholding
the  blessings  and  graces  which  you  have  received  from
God.

LETTER CCCLXVII.1  (Circa  A.D. 1147.)

To  THE  CHANCELLOR  G.
Bernard  recommends  to  him the  Bishop of  Metz.

Your  predecessor,  the  Chancellor  Haimeric  of  good
memory,  held  the  Lord  Bishop  of  Metz2  in  special  affec
tion  ;  and  as  often  as  he  sent  messengers  to  Rome  received
them  with  great  kindness  and  assisted  them  as  much  as  he
could.  Wherefore  I  beg  you  to  be  so  kind  as  to  walk  in
his  footsteps,  and  to  assist  with  the  arms  of  the  Church
that  noble  Bishop,  who  is  placed  in  a  position  of  great
difficulty.

LETTER CCCLXVIII.3 (Circa A.D. 1147.)
To  THE  CARDINAL-DEACON  G.

Bernard  gratefully  thanks  him  for  his  affectionate
letter,  and  the  presents  sent  to  him,  and  dissuades  him
from  the  love  of  riches  and  of  earthly  things.

To  his  lord  and  very  dear  friend  G.,  by  the  grace  of  God
Cardinal- Deacon  in  the  holy  Roman  Church,  Brother
BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  health  and  the  as
surance  of  his  devoted  prayers.

i.  1  thank  you  in  the  Lord  for  having  prevented  me  so
liberally  with  the  blessings  of  sweetness,  and  if  there  be
any  bowels  of  mercy,  any  affection  or  charity  in  me,  the
kindly  humility  and  unaffected  kindness  -of  the  mind  of  one
so  illustrious  fully  deserves  it  from  me.  ForJ  knew  already,
and  rejoiced  over  the  earnest  zeal  in  you,  of  which  I  had
heard  from  my  brethren  ;  but  now  I  feel  myself  so  much

1  Formerly  No.  332  ;  the  former  No.  367  is  now  No.  419.

2  This  was  Guy  Moricot  de  Vico,  born  at  Pisa,  who became  Chancellor  of
the  Roman  Curia  after  Robert  Pullen,  in  1 146. See  Notes  on  Letter  334.

3  Formerly  No.  335  ;  the  former  No.  368  is  now  No.  420.


•QlS  LETTER CCCLXVIII.

more  indebted  to  you  for  the  affection  so  humble  and
devoted  with  which  you  have  commended  yourself  to  so
humble  a  person  as  I.  I  would  wish,  indeed,  to  be  suffi
ciently  powerful  with  God  to  acquit  myself  of  my  obligation
to  you.  Wherefore  I  was  anxious  also  to  read  to  my
brethren  the  letter  in  which  your  heart  is  fully  displayed —
a  letter  filled  with  devoted  affection,  with  piety  and  grace  ;
to  show  them  also  the  blessing1  which  you  had  given  to  us,
•and  to  direct  as  you  had  ordered,  that  the  Holy  Mysteries
•of  the  Mass,  should  be  celebrated  in  those  very  vessels,  for
the  memory  of  you  and  yours.  May  God  make  of  you  a
vessel  to  honour  in  His  great  house  [which  is  His  Church],
so  that  it  may  be  our  happiness  to  hear  one  day  He  is  for
me  a  -vessel  of  election  (Acts  ix.  15).  This  is  our  most
•earnest  prayer.  For  the  Spirit  of  Truth  is  our  witness,  by
whom  also  the  love  of  God  is  spread  abroad  in  our  hearts
(Romans  v.  5),  how  greatly  we  long  for  you  in  the  bowels
of  Jesus  Christ.

2.  As  it  is  in  God  alone  that  I  feel  for  you  the  affection  with
which  my  heart  is  full,  not  only  is  my  intercession  on  your
behalf  directed  to  this,  but  I  wish  you  to  pray  for  yourself
that  you  may  perceive  carefully  how  you  ought  to  behave
yourself  in  the  House  of  God,  and  to  discharge  the  functions
-of  your  ministry.  For  I  say  this,  not  of  presumption,  God
knows,  but  of  charity,  since  the  judgment  is  severe  upon
Ihose  who  bear  rule  if  they  do  not  labour  to  rule  profitably
(Wisdom  vi.  5)  ;  and,  on  the  contrary,  he  who  has  minis
tered  well  shall  gain  a  good  degree  (i  Tim.  iii.  13).  Do
you,  then,  my  lord,  dearly-beloved  and  longed  for,  study,
I  beseech  you,  to  avoid  evil  and  to  do  good  more  and  more  ;
let  no  one  see  you  seeking  your  own  advantage  in  the
heritage  of  Christ,  but  be  always  mindful  of  the  words  of
the  Apostle,  We  have  brought  nothing  into  the  world,  and
it  is  certain  that  we  can  carry  nothing  out  (i  Tim.  vi.  7).
Wherefore  guard  well  your  soul,  since  that  is  your  im-

1 I.e.,  the  gift  of  sacred  vessels  which  Guy  destined  for  the  celebration  of  the
1  loly  Mysteries  at  Clairvaux. We  shall  see  below  that  they  were  certainly  of
or  of  silver.


LKTTKR CCCKXIX.

mortal  part.  Let  it  not  be  able  by  any  temptation  to  be
torn  away  from,  or  uprooted  from  that  disposition  of  which
the  Lord  speaks  in  the  Gospel :  What  shall  it  profit  a  man
if  lie  shall  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  or
what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  /  (S.  Matt,
xvi.  26).  Unhappy,  unspeakably  unhappy,  are  they  who
spend  all  their  lives  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  good  things,
so  as  to  fall  in  an  instant  into  the  depths  of  hell  !  (Job  xxi.
13).  They  will  carry  away  no  tiling  of  all  that  they  possess
when  they  perish,  neither  shall  their  glory  descend  with
them  (Ps.  xlix.  17);  it  is  but  a  vapour,  appearing  for  a
moment  (S.  James  iv.  15).  Think  of  these  things,  my  dear
friend ;  meditate  seriously  upon  them  ;  grave  them  upon
vour  heart,  nor  let  them  ever  depart  from  your  memory.
Farewell.

LETTER CCCLXIX.1 (Circa  A.I). 1147.)
To  ABBOT  STGKR.

He  congratulates  Suger  on  the  reformation  of  the  Ahhev
•of  Ste.  Genevieve,  happilv  set  on  foot,  and  urges  him  to
persevere  in  his  undertaking.

To  his  very  dear  father  and  lord  SUGKR,  by  the  grace  of
God  the  venerable  Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  Brother  BKRNARD,
of  Clairvaux,  health  and  the  assurance  of  his  prayers.

Blessed  be  God  who  by  your  hands  has  re-established
the  salutary  reign  of  rule  and  discipline  -  in  the  Abbey  of  Ste.
Genevieve.  The  Apostolic  authority  itself  thanks  you
because  you  have  set  about  a  great  work  faithfully  and
effectually.  I,  too,  with  all  those  who  love  the  Lord  in
truth,  render  to  you  such  thanks  as  we  can.  I  beg  and
earnestly  entreat  your  Greatness  that,  according  to  the  tenor
of  the  Pope's  letter,  you  would  cause  the  work  to  proceed

1  Formerly  No.  356  ;  the  former  No.  369  is  now  No.  338.
2  Suger  had  established  there  Regular  Canons  of  S.  Augustine  in  place  of  the
monks  whom  Pope  Eugenius  had  sent  thither  to  succeed  the  secular  canons.  The
reference  is  to  the  same  house  in  the  following  Letter,  in  which  it  is  called  Sif.


Q20  LETTER CCCLXX.

with  all  speed,  that  what  has  been  grandly  begun  may  go
on  from  day  to  day  and  be  happily  accomplished.  I  regard
it  as  unnecessary  to  ask  your  kind  help  for  the  Abbey  of
S.  Victor,1  because  I  am  aware  that  the  charge  of  all  the
religious  houses  has  been  committed  to  you.  But  it  is  need
ful  to  be  particularly  watchful  over  those  in  which  the
state  of  religion  leaves  much  to  be  desired.


LETTER CCCLXX.2 (Circa A.D. 1147.)

To  THE  SAME.
He  recommends  to  Suger  the  Abbey  of  Ste.  Genevieve.

To  his  very  dear  father  and  lord  SUGER,  Abbot  of  S.
Denys,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  health
and  the  assurance  of  his  friendship.

It  behoves  you  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  him  who  has  left  you
in  his  stead,3  or  rather  to  do  the  work  of  the  Lord  your
God,  who  has  chosen  you  for  the  functions  which  you  have
to  discharge.  It  is  plainly  the  work  of  God  to  have  restored
religion  and  order  in  the  Abbey  of  Ste.  Genevieve-du-Mont ;
that  new  plantation  finds  in  you  its  great  guardian  and
helper.  I  entreat  you  that  what  you  have  well  begun  you
will  finish  still  better,  and  that  you  will  oppose  yourself  as  a
wall  for  the  defence  of  the  house  of  Israel  that  man  may
not  prevail  against  it.  Be  so  kind,  I  entreat  of  you,  as  to
raise  up  again  the  courage  of  the  Abbot4  of  that  place,
who  is  easily  cast  down  :  that  will  be  especially  conducive
to  the  honour  of  your  person  as  well  as  to  the  saving  of
your  soul,  particularly  at  this  time.

1  See  Letter  410.

2  Formerly  No.  357  ;  the  former  No. 370  is  now  No.  337.

3  Louis the  Younger, before departing  to the  Crusade,  had confided the
Regency  of  the  Kingdom  to  Abbot Suger. It  is  to this  that  Bernard  refers
when  he  says  in  the  previous  Letter  that  the  care  of  Suger  extended  over  all  the
religious  houses  of France,  and  in  Letter  376,  to  the  same,  he  calls  him "the
highest  personage  in  the  realm." In  the  same  way  he  is  addressed  under  the
name  of  "  Majesty  ''  by  Ulger,  Bishop  of  Angers  (Letters  of  Suger,  No.  3).

4  Odo.


LETTER CCCLXXI.  921

LETTER  CCCLXXI.1  (Circa  A.n. 1147.)
To  THE  SAME.

Bernard  opposes  the  marriage  projected  between  the
son  of  the  Count  of  Anjou  and  the  daughter  of  the  King
of  France,  on  account  of  the  impediment  of  consanguinity.

To  the  lord  Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  Brother  BERNARD,  of
Clairvaux,  health  and  the  assurance  of  his  prayers.

I  have  written  thus  to  the  lord  King  :—

"  You  have  undertaken  an  enterprise  important  and
weighty,  which  no  one  is  able  to  carry  through  except  by
the  assistance  of  Divine  strength.  The  business "  in
which  you  are  engaged  is  above  the  powers  of  man,  but
that  is  easy  to  God  which  to  men  is  impossible  (S.  Luke
xviii.  27).

"  Knowing  this  you  ought  to  take  the  greatest  care  not
in  any  way  to  repulse  the  help  so  necessary  to  you,  nor  by
any  project  of  yours  to  offend  God  and  to  deprive  yourself
of  the  furtherance  of  His  grace.  You  ought, 'I  repeat,  now
to  take  the  greatest  care  never  to  provoke  God  so  that  He
should  be  angry  with  you,  should  turn  away  His  face,  and
withdraw  His  assistance  from  you.  For  this  danger  affects

J  O

not  the  King  alone,  but  the  whole  Church  of  God,  since  the
cause  which  you  have  undertaken  is  also  that  of  the  whole
world.  Listen,  and  you  will  learn  the  cause  which  induces
me  to  remind  you  of  these  facts.  I  am  hastening  indeed
to  your  presence,  as  this  letter  shows,  but  I  have  formed  the
project  of  keeping  the  vigil  of  S.  Mary  Magdalene  at  Laon.
Nevertheless,  I  have  taken  care  to  forewarn  you  by  another
letter  of  the  danger  which  I  am  anxious  that  you  should
avoid.  For  I  have  heard  that  the  Count  of  Anjou  is
pressing  you  to  engage  under  oath  your  daughter  to  his

1  Formerly  No.  363  ; the  former  No. 371  is  now  No.  323.

-  That  is,  the  Crusade;  wherefore  this  Letter  was,  no  doubt,  addressed  to
Louis  the  Younger,  who  wished  to  marry  his  eldest  daughter,  Mary,  to  the
son  of  Fulk,  Count  of  Anjou,  who  was  also  setting  out  to  the  East.  But  this
marriage  did  not  take  place,  and  Mary  espoused  instead  Henry,  Count  of
Champagne.

VOL.  ii.  59


922  LETTER CCCLXXI.

son  in  marriage.  Now  this  union  is  not  only  inexpedient,
but  it  is  not  lawful  ;  as  well  for  other  reasons  as  because
of  the  impediment  of  consanguinity  ;  since  I  know  upon
trustworthy  information  that  the  mother  of  the  Queen,  and
of  that  young  man,  the  son  of  the  Count  of  Anjou,  are
related  in  the  third  degree.  On  this  account  permit  me  to
urge  you  by  no  means  to  enter  into  this  engagement,  but
to  fear  God  and  depart  from  evil.  You  have  promised  me
that  you  would  on  no  account  do  this  without  consulting
me  :  and  I  should  have  done  wrong  if  I  had  hidden  from
you  my  view.  My  advice  then  is  by  no  means  to  go  on
with  the  affair.  If  you  do,  you  will  have  acted  both  against
my  advice  and  that  of  many  others  who  are  your  well-
wishers;  and  also  against  the  will  of  God.  Do  not  think
that  after  that  God  will  accept  your  sacrifice,  since  it  is
made  only  in  part:  so  that  while  you  are  combating  on
behalf  of  another  kingdom,  you  do  not  leave  your  own  in
safety,  while  you  order  it  against  the  will  and  the  law  of
God,  as  also  against  what  is  honourable  and  advisable.  I
have  now  freed  my  own  soul  of  responsibility  :  may  God
free  yours  also  from  lying  lips  and  the  deceitful  tongue."


LETTER CCCLXXIL1 (Circa A.D. 1147.)
To  P.,2  BISHOP  OF  PALENCIA,  IN  SPAIN.

Bernard  praises  him  for  his  humility,  and  particularly
for  his  love  of  reading.

To  his  venerable  lord  and  very  dear  father  P.,  by  the
grace  of  God  Bishop  of  Palencia,  BERNARD,  called  Abbot
of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health,  and  prays  that  the  Lord  may
prevent  him  \vith  the  blessings  of  sweetness.

Who  will  give  me  the  wings  of  a  dove  that  I  may  take
my  flight  to  repose  within  the  odour  of  your  sanctity?
Your  saintly  life  and  the  purity  of  your  character  have  filled
me  with  the  odour  of  your  sweetness,  which  seems  to  me,

1  A  new  Letter  ;  the  former  No.  372  is  now  No.  319.

2  This  was  Peter  :  his  name  is  found  subscribed  to  the  act  of  donation  of  the
Abbey  of  Espina,  made  by  Sanchia  to  S.  Bernard  (Manriquez  under  the  year

1 147,  c.  xviii.  n.  3).


LETTER CCCLXXII.  923

as  it  were,  the  odour  of  a  fertile  field  which  the  Lord  hath
blessed.  In  it  my  soul  is  truly  filled  with  marrow  and  fat
ness,  and  in  such  is  the  life  of  my  spirit.  For  how  can  it
be  otherwise,  when  I  hear  of  a  man  of  lofty  character  and
yet  humble,  full  of  cares  and  business,  and  yet  peaceful,  and
trembling  at  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  O  rare  bird  upon  the
earth,  humility  conjoined  with  high  station,  and  a  tranquil
mind  in  the  midst  of  the  hurry  of  business  !  You  have
made  to  rejoice,  my  lord,  the  soul  of  your  servant  ;  may
the  merciful  Lord  make  yours  also  rejoice  with  the  joy  of
His  people.  I  have  rejoiced  with  great  joy  on  hearing
such  things  as  I  had  not  expected  reported  of  you.  For
my  brethren,  the  bearers  of  your  letter,  reported  to  me  your
zeal  in  mortifying  the  flesh  and  reducing  it  to  subjection,
your  habit  of  meditation,  your  love  of  reading,  the  gentle
ness  of  your  manners,  your  kindness  to  all,  and  especially
to  those  who  are  of  the  household  of  faith.  Hut  do  not
think,  my  dear  lather,  that  in  speaking  these  words  I  intend
to  celebrate  your  praises.  The  word  of  blame  spoken  by  the
Prophet  is  before  my  mind :  Those  who  praise  thee,  my  people,
tliey  deceive  thee.1  I  am  unwilling,  though  a  sinner,  to
pour  upon  your  head  the  oil  of  sinful  praise  :  but  rather  the
oil  of  joy  which  proceeds  from  a  pure  heart  and  a  good
conscience,  and  faith  unfeigned.  Nor  am  I  a  trafficker  in  this
oil ;  1  have  only  too  little  with  which  to  anoint  myself  for  the
arena  of  this  world  ;  but  I  cannot  pass  over  in  silence
the  virtues  which  are  to  the  praise  of  Christ.  Let  not  the
•creature,  but  the  Creator  be  praised.  Let  Him  who  gives,
not  he  who  has  received,  be  exalted  :  not  he  who  plants
nor  he  who  waters  are  to  be  praised,  for  they  are  nothing,
but  He  who  gives  the  increase,  that  is  God.  I,  then,  will
praise  the  hand  which  is  stretched  out  to  give,  not  that
stretched  out  to  receive  :  the  praise  of  the*Lord,  and  not  of
His  servant  shall  come  out  of  my  mouth.  Do  thou,  then,
my  dear  father,  recognize,  if  you  are  wise,  or  rather  because
you  are  wise,  that  the  grace  which  is  in  you  does  not  come

1  Isaiah  ix.  16,  Vulg'.,  but  quoted  probably  from  memory.  The  exact  words
-are  :  And  there  it'ill  ie  those  who  praise  the  people  in  order  In  seduce  ihcin,  and
those  who  are  praised  shall  be  given  to  destruction. —  [E.]


924  LETTER CCCLXXII.

from  yourself,  but  descends  from  the  Father  of  Lights,  since
every good  gift  and every  perfect  gift  is  from  above (S.
James  i.  17). I  know  that  there  are  certain  persons  who-
have,  as it  were, a  wise  unwillingness  to know  the  gifts
which  they  have  received  from  the  Lord,  so  that  they  be  not
puffed  up  with  pride nor  fall into  the  snare  of the  devil.
But it seems to me  that I ought to know what I have-
received,  in  order  that  I  may  know  what  is  wanting  to  me,,
and  that  I  ought  to  know  with  the  Apostle  the  things  which
have  been  bestowed  upon me  by  God,  in  order  that  I  may
not  be ignorant  what  I  ought  still  to desire  and  pray  fcr.
For  he  who  has received  something  and knows it  not,  is
exposed  to  the  double  danger  of being  ungrateful  for  what
he  has  received,  and  careless  in  preserving  it. For  how
can  any  one  render  gratitude  to  a  benefactor  if  he  does  not
know  that  he  has  received  anything  from  him  ? Or  how
will  he  be  careful  to  guard  that  which  he  is  not  aware  that
he  has  received? Take  away  from  me,  O  Lord,  the  blame
of  that  ungrateful  people  of  whom  it  is  said  : They  forgat
what  He  had  done  and  the  wonderful  works  that  He  had
showed  for  them  (Psalm Ixxviii.  12). A  benefit  received,
therefore,  even  according  to  the  wise  of  this  world,  is  to  be
graven  deep  in  the  tablets  of  the  memory. It  behoves  us,
then,  that  we  should  know  how  to  take care  of  the  gifts,
which  we  have  received,  and  so  that  the  grace  of  God  in  us
may  not  be  in  vain  : and  that  it  may  remain  in  us  always,
let  us  always  render  thanks  to  the  Lord  our  God. I  think
it  may  be  added,  not  unusefully,  that  you  should  proceed  by
three  steps  to  the  obtaining  of  grace  and  salvation : humility,
faith,  and  fear. For  humility  is  that  quality  to  which  grace
is  given,  faith  that  in  which  it  is  received,  fear  that  in  which
it  is  preserved. If  we  should  wish  to  ascend  to  the  throne
of  grace  without  the  use  of  these  three,  I  fear  that  it  would
be said  to  us, Thou hast nothing  to  draw  with,  and  the
well  is  deep  (S.  John  iv.  n). Let  us,  then,  in  order  to  drink
of  the  water  of  wisdom,  have  the  rope  of  humility  i1  and  let

1  Hcercditatis : but  surely we ought to  read humilitatis, as in the next
sentence. — [E.]


LETTER CCCLXXII.  925

this  humility  be  in  mouth,  in  heart,  and  in  action  :  which
threefold  cord  is  not  easily  broken.  Let  us  have  faith,  as
it  were,  for  a  water  jar,  and  let  it  be  great,  so  that  much
grace  may  be  received  in  it :  and  let  fear  be,  as  it  were,
its  cover,  lest  the  water  of  wisdom  be  defiled  with  the
impurities  of  vainglory:  for  it  is  written,  Every  open  -vessel
which  hath  no  covering  bound  upon  it  sJiall  be  unclean
(Num.  xix.  15).  Your  devotion  to  reading  also,  in  which
you  embrace  not  only  the  writings  of  great  men,  but  also,
the  trifles  which  I  have  penned,  calls  for  some  mention
from  me:  so  that  you  may  perceive  what  joy  your  kindly
feeling  has  given  to  my  heart.

LETTER  CCCLXXIII.1 (Circa  A.D. 1147).
FROM  THE  ABBOT  OF  Siv'  TO  S.  BERNARD.

He  complains  of  the  weight  of  the  charge  laid  upon  him.

To  his  wished-for  lord  and  very  dear  father  BERNARD,
Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  his  son,  the  unprofitable  servant  of
the  Abbey  at  Sp.,  wishes  health  and  the  blessing  of  all
nations.

I  have  greatly  desired  that  this  letter  should  find  you,  if
it  were  possible,  free  and  disengaged  from  other  business.
For  I  have  feared  continually  while  writing,  and  think  now
with  fear,  of  that  man  who  desired  to  see  Jesus,  but  was
unable  for  the  crowd  because  he  was  little  of  stature  (S.
Luke  xix.  3).  And  it  is  not  only  your  leisure  that  I  desire,
but  also  that  I  should  find  grace  in  your  eyes.  For  what
solace  would  your  leisure  alone  be  to  me?  May  God  pardon
you,  what  have  you  done  ?  Where  have  you  placed  me,
being  such  an  one  as  I  am,  whose  powers  are  so  little  in
proportion  to  the  burden  that  I  have  to  bear  ?  It  seems  to
me  to  be  heavier  than  the  sands  of  the  sea.  For  what  am

1  A  new  Letter  ;  the  former  No.  373  is  now  No.  411.

2  No  doubt  of  Espina,  in  the  Diocese  of Palencia, the  founder  of  which  was
Sanchia,  sister  of the Emperor  Alfonso, who  gave  the  place  to  S. Bernard.
Nivard,  brother  of  Bernard,  was  sent  thither  with  some  companions. Mamiquez
does  not  mention  the  name  of  the  first  Abbot  (ad  aim.  1 147,  c.  18,  n.  3).


926  LETTER CCCLXXIII.

I,  and  what  is  my  father's  house  ?  Am  I  not  a  child  who
knows  not  how  to  come  in  or  go  out  ?  What  am  I  that  I
should  be  able  with  my  own  powers  only  to  sustain,  or
rather  raise  up  again  the  Abbey  with  which  I  am  charged  ?
It  resembles  an  enclosure  wrhich  is  crumbling,  or  a  wall  in
ruins.  Such  a  business  is  above  my  powers,  and  I  am
consumed  with  useless  labour.  Still  I  strive  even  amidst
my  groans,  but  of  what  use  are  my  labours  and  my  groans  ?
The  diseases  are  of  long  standing,  the  plague  an  acute  one,
the  mischief  incurable  except  by  a  strong  hand.  Vices
have  been  turned  into  habitudes,  habitudes  into  custom,
custom  has  become,  as  it  were,  a  second  nature,  and  is  now
a  necessity.  O  how  necessary  it  is  that  this  necessity
should  be  drawn  out  by  the  roots  !  But,  I  say  it  with  tears,
it  has  pushed  such  strong  roots  into  the  soil  that  they  are
too  strong  for  me.  So  you  see  that  I  am  absolutely
wanting  in  the  needful  powers  to  give  help.  Even  that
brother  who  is  the  bearer  of  this  letter,  who  was  highly
necessary  to  me,  is  leaving  us.  His  charge  was  to  teach
the  novices  ;  they  profited  under  his  direction.  I  rejoiced
in  it,  and  hoped  by  the  mercy  of  God  a  day  might  come
when  death  might  be  swallowed  up  by  life.  I  render  this
testimony  in  his  favour,  that  as  far  as  one  man  is  permitted
to  judge  of  another,  his  conversation  among  us  has  been
acceptable  to  God  and  pleasing  to  men.  Therefore  his
departure  cannot  be  without  grief  to  me.  You  are  able,
my  lord,  to  turn  my  sorrow7  into  joy  if  I  have  found  favour
in  your  eyes.  So  far  about  these  matters,  other  things  the
bearer  will  explain  at  greater  length.


LETTER CCCLXXIV.1 (A.D. 1148.)
To  THE  BRETHREN IN  IRELAND, ON  THE  OCCASION  OF

THE DEATH2 OF THE BLESSED BlSHOP MALACHI.
That  the  death  of  the  Saints  is  a  subject  rat  her  for  joy

1  Formerly  No.  311;  the  former  No.  374  is  now  No.  358.

2  This took  place  on Nov. 2nd, 1148. See the Life  of  S. Malachi,  by
Bernard,  and  his  two  sermons  on  the  same  Saint.


LETTER CCCLXXIV.  927

than  grief. That  Clairvaux  is  honoured  by  the  death  and
burial  there  of  so  great  a  man.

To  the  Religious  in  Ireland,  and  particularly  to  the  con-
gre^ations  founded  by  Bishop  Malachi  of  blessed  memory,
Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health
and  the  consolations  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

i. If  we  had  here  a  continuing  city,  we  should not  have
to shed  abundant  tears  for  the loss of so noble  a  fellow
citizen. But  if  we  are,  as  we  ought, seeking  one  to  come,
it  is  a  reason  for  no  slight  grief  that  we  are  deprived of  so
valuable  a  guide  ; but  yet,  as  we  ought  to  temper  zeal  with
knowledge,  so  grief  ought to be moderated with  the  con
fidence  of  hope. No one ought to wonder that distress
forces  a  groan  from  us,  that  the  loss of a friend  causes  us
to weep  ; yet we must set bounds to our affliction in
presence  of  the  great  consolation  we  have,  when  we  con
sider  not  the  things which are seen,  but the  things  which
are  not  seen  : for  those which are seen  are  temporal,  but
those  not  seen are eternal. In the first place,  that holy
soul is to be congratulated on his safe attainment of
Paradise, so  that  we may not be  open  to  the  charge  of
want of charity, and  that  be said  to  us  which the Lord
said  to  the  Apostles  : //  ye  loved  Me  ye would rejoice
because  I  go  to  the  Father  (S.  John  xiv.  28). The  spirit  of
our  father  has  only  preceded us into the presence  of  the
Father of spirits. We should be wanting not only in
charity,  but  be  guilty  of  the  highest  ingratitude,  if  we  did
not  rejoice  that he through whom  we  have received  so
many benefits has passed from labour to rest, from
danger  to safety, from  the  world  to  the  Father. If,  then,
it is a mark of pious affection to weep for Malachi
dead, it is still more a mark of this  .to rejoice with
Malachi living. Who doubts that he is living? Un
doubtedly  he  lives, and  that in  a  state  of  happiness. To
the  eyes of the ungodly he  seemed  to  die,  but  he  has
entered  into  peace.

2.  Furthermore, if we  consider  this  death as  it  affects
ourselves, it suggests to us another motive for  joy  and


928  LETTER CCCLXXIV.

gladness,  because so  faithful an advocate, so  powerful a
patron  has preceded us  to  the  court  of  Heaven, whose
fervent  charity  cannot  possibly  forget  his  sons, and  whose
well-proved  sanctky  will  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  God.
For who is so bold as to suppose the holy Malachi
either  loves  his  sons  less  or  is  less  able  to  be  of  service
to them than before  ? For if he was loved by God
before  he quitted  the  earth,  he receives  now  more  certain
proofs  of that  love  ; and since he  had  loved  those  that
were  his  he loved them  to  the end. Far  be  it  from us
to suppose, O holy soul, that  thy  prayer  is  to be con
sidered  less efficacious when it  is  thine  to  offer  it  with
increased  ardour  in  the  presence  of  the  Divine  Majesty  ;
when thou no longer walkest in faith but reignest  in
the sight  of  God  ! Far  be it from us to suppose  that
thy  charity so unwearied  is  enfeebled when thou art  at
the  very  source of  the Eternal charity, and art drinking
long  draughts  of  that Love  for  which  thou  didst  thirst  on
earth  whilst  receiving  only  drops of  it. Charity  which  is
strong  as  death,  yea, stronger  than  death itself, was not
able  to  yield  to  death. Even when dying he  was  not  un
mindful of  his sons,  commending  you most  affectionately
to God, and though I am so unworthy, entreating me
also with his accustomed kindness and humility not
to forget them even to the end. That is why I have
thought  myself  bound  to  write  to  you,  that  you  may  know
that  I  am  entirely  yours  both  in spiritual  things,  if  there  is
anything  in my poor  powers  that  can ever through the
merits  of  him  our  holy father be of  service  to  you,  and  in
temporal  affairs,  if  opportunity  should  ever  be  given  to  me,
I  am  ready  to  be  of  service to  you with the  greatest  will
ingness.

3.  And  now,  also,  my  dearly  beloved,  I  deplore  with  my
whole  heart  the  heavy  loss  which  the  Church  of  Ireland
has  sustained ;  and  I  sympathize  with  you  the  more,  as  I
am  sensible  that  it  imposes  upon  me  greater  duties  on  your
behalf.  God  has  indeed  honoured  us  greatly  in  permitting
that  our  house  should  be  edified  by  the  spectacle  of  his


LETTER CCCLXXIV.  929

blessed  death,  and  enriched  by  the  precious  treasure  of  his
body.  Let  it  not  be  a  source  of  regret  to  you  that  he
should  have  his  resting-place  among  us  ;  for  God  has  so
ordered  it  according  to  the  multitude  of  His  mercy  that  as
you  possessed  him  while  living,  it  should  be  given  to  us  to
possess  him  after  his  death.  He  was  indeed,  and  is,  a
common  father  both  to  us  and  to  you,  for  at  the  very  time
of  his  death  his  will  in  this  respect  was  confirmed  to  us.
Wherefore  let  us  all  be  embraced  as  friends  and  brethren
in  the  bonds  of  mutual  charity,  and  as  we  were  dear  to  so
holy  a  father,  let  this  spiritual  relationship  make  us  dear  to
each  other.

4.  I  conclude  by  exhorting  you,  brethren,  to  follow
diligently  the  steps  of  our  blessed  father,  and  that  so  much
more  earnestly  as  his  holy  life  has  become  quite  well  known
to  you  by  the  sight  of  it  daily,  for  in  this  you  will  approve
yourselves  his  true  sons,  if  you  follow  bravely  the  directions
which  he  gave  ;  and  as  you  saw  in  him  and  heard  from  him
how  you  ought  to  walk,  study  thus  to  walk  and  to  abound
more  and  more,  for  the  wisdom  of  the  sons  is  the  glory  of
their  father  (Prov.  x.  i).  As  for  me,  the  example  before  me
of  such  great  perfection  had  a  great  influence  in  dispersing
my  sloth  and  increasing  my  reverence.  Would  that  he
may  draw  us  after  him,  and  that  the  remembrance  of  his
virtues  may  make  us  run  the  race  that  is  set  before  us,
more  willingly  and  earnestly.  Pray  for  us,  and  may  Christ
have  us  all  in  His  holy  keeping.


LETTER CCCLXXV.1 (A.D. 1148.)
To  IDA,  COUNTESS  OF  NEVERS.

He  complains  to  the  Countess  that  some  of  her  vassals  had
done  injury  to  the  monks  at  Vezelay.

To  his  beloved  daughter  in  Christ,  the  Countess  of
NEVERS,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
wishes  health,  and  assures  her  of  his  prayers.

1 Formerly  No.  390;  the  former  No.  375  is  now  No.  316.


Q30  LETTER CCCLXXVI.

The  venerable  Abbot1  of  Vezelay  complains  that  your
vassals,  and  you  yourself,  prevent  merchants  and  other
persons  from  coming  to  Vezelay  as  they  desire  to  do.  Now
since  Count  William2  of  happy  memory  freely  acknowledged
before  the  Bishop  of  Auxerre,  and  in  my  presence,  that  to
act  thus  was  unjust  and  wrong;  let  me  advise  and  entreat
that  you  should  not  act  in  this  way  any  more.  For  I  fear
if  you  should  continue  such  acts  that  you  may  do  much
injury  both  to  yourself  in  this  world,  and  to  your  husband
where  he  is,  which  I  should  greatly  regret.  Follow,  then,
my  advice,  and  cause  all  these  acts  of  injustice  to  cease.


LETTER  CCCLXXVI.3 (A.D. 1149.)
To  ABBOT  SUGER.

He  ad-vises  and  requests  that  Suger  should  prevent  certain
noblemen  from  fighting  a  duel.

To  his  venerable  father  and  lord  SuGER,  by  the  grace
of  God  Abbot  of  St.  Denys,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot
of  Clairvaux,  wishes  health  and  sends  assurance  of  his
prayers.

It  is  time,  and  there  is  urgent  need,  that  you  should  now
take  up  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God,
against  a  diabolical  custom  which  is  endeavouring  to  grow
up  a  second  time.  Men  who  have  just  returned  from  the
Crusade,  Lord  Henry,  son  of  the  Count,  and  Lord  Robert,
brother  of  the  King,  being  enraged  one  against  the  other,
have  fixed  one  of  those  abominable  meetings4  to  attack

1  This  was  Pontius.

2  This  William  had  retired  to  the  Chartreuse,  as  we  have  already  mentioned ;
his  son  William  had  succeeded  him  in  1147.

3  Formerly  No.  358  ;  the  former  No.  376  is  now  No.  355.

4  Nundinas,  i.e.,  the  ninth  day,  and  thence  any  settled  appointment. What
were  these  nundince? William of  S.  Thierry  (Life  of  S.  Bernard,  B.  i.e.  xi.)
tells  us  in  these  terms  : — "  One  day  there  arrived at  Clairvaux  an  armed  party
of  young  nobles.  .  .  .  Lent  was  approaching,  and  all  the  young  nobles  who
were  engaged  in  the  profession  of  arms  traversed  the  country  looking  for  those
objectionable  meetings  which  are  called  tourneys  (Tornetas). Others  call  them
tournaments  (Torneamentum)." (Matthew  of  Paris,  Hist.  A?igl.,  p.  258.)


LETTER CCCLXXVII.  931

and  slay  each  other,  after  the  festival  of  Easter,  being  bent
on  violating  all  laws.  Judge  in  what  disposition  of  mind  they
have  made  the  journey  to  Jerusalem,  since  they  have  re
turned  in  such  a  mood.  How  fitly  can  this  be  said  of
them  : — We  would  have  healed  Babylon,  but  she  is  not
healed ;  they  arc  stricken,  but  they  have  not  grieved  ;
they  are  consumed,  but  they  have  refused  to  receive  cor
rection  (Jer.  li.  9,  and  v.  3).  After  so  many  hardships
and  perils  ;  after  the  sufferings  and  the  misfortunes  which
they  have  had  to  endure  ;  when  the  realm  is  in  peace,  these
two  return  to  it  only  to  disturb  and  throw  it  into  confusion,
and  that  in  the  absence  of  the  King.  I  advise  and  entreat
your  Highness,  since  you  are  the  chief  person  in  the  king
dom,  to  oppose  this  breach  of  the  peace  resolutely,  and,
either  by  persuasion  or  by  force,  prevent  its  taking  place  ;
your  honour,  the  happiness  of  the  kingdom,  and  the
interest  of  the  Church  all  require  this  of  you.  If  I  appeal
to  force,  it  is  to  that  which  belongs  to  ecclesiastical  dis
cipline.  I  am  writing  in  this  sense  to  the  Archbishops  of
Rheims  and  of  Sens,  to  the  Bishops  of  Soissons  and  of
Auxerre,  to  Count  Theobald  and  Count  Rodolph.  Oppose
yourself  to  these  great  evils  both  on  account  of  the  King
and  on  account  of  the  Pope,  to  whom  the  peace  of  the
realm  is  a  matter  of  concern.


LETTER  CCCLXXVII.1 (A.I). 1149.)
To  THE  SAME.

Bernard  praises  his  zeal  and  care  for  the  good  of  the
kingdom,  and  approves  of  his  having  called  together  the
Estates  of  the  Realm  to  remedy  certain  dangers.  He
encourages  him  to  continue  his  efforts  for  the  benefit
of  all.

To  his  very  dear  father  and  lord  SuGER,  by  the  grace  of
God  Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  Brother  BERNARD,  called  Abbot
of  Clairvaux,  wishes  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  consolation.

1 Formerly  No.  359;  the  former  No.  377  is  now  No.  346.


932  LETTER CCCLXXVII.

1.  I  have  seen  with  extreme  joy  and  pleasure  the  letter
which  your  Highness  has  written  to  the  Lord  Archbishop  of
Tours. May  the Most  High  bless you for  the zeal and
care  with  which  you  fulfil  your  charge  of  the  realm of  our
most  glorious  King,  so  that  he  is  freed  in  a  measure  from
the  troubles  which  threaten  him  at  the  present,  and  would
speedily  be  upon  him  if  they  were  not  warded  off  with  all
your  strength. It  was, indeed, a  counsel  from God  that
you should  call  together  the  chief  men,  both  of  the  State
and  of  the  Church,  for  deliberation  ; so  that  all  who  dwell
on earth may see  that  he  in whose  hands  the  realm  has
been  left  is  a  devoted  friend,  a  prudent  counsellor,  a  strong
and. brave  supporter  to  his  Sovereign. And  that  Sovereign
is  one  who  is  now  in  the  service  of  the  King  whose  kingdom
is for  ever  and ever, who puts nations and kingdoms in
movement  so  that  the  earthly  land  which  belongs  to  the
King  of  heaven,  the  land  upon  which  His  feet  once  stood,
should  not  be  lost. It  was  that  King,  I  say,  who  when  he
was unrivalled in glory, abounding  in riches, enjoying  a
secure peace, victorious in war, and in  the  prime  of  his
youth,  chose  to  exile  himself  from  his  own  country,  to  serve
in  foreign  lands,  yet  to  serve  Him  whose service  is  royal.
Who would dare to trouble his kingdom  ? who would
venture  upon  such  an  impiety  against  the  Lord  and  against
His  anointed? O,  my  lord  King, I  would  that  they  were
•cut  off  who  trouble  thee  ! who  seek  harm  to  thee  and  thine
whilst  thou  art  remaining  alone  among  foreign nations,  so
that  the  place  might not  be  left  desolate  which  the Lord
hath  chosen  out  of  all  lands  to  place  His  Name  there.

2.  Wherefore act bravely, and let your heart be
strengthened,  because the Lord God is with you, and
protects  the  King  who  is  in  voluntary  exile  on  His  account.
He who commands the winds and the sea will easily
smooth  the  billows  when  they  swell. The  whole  body  of
the  Church  of  God  will  be  with  you,  so  that  no  one  may
rise  up  and  make  Israel  to  sin  ; and  will  thus  support  on
the  shoulders  of  all,  the  burden  which  is  so  heavy  for  yours.
For  now  is  the  time  when  there  is  need  for  you  to  act  as


LETTER CCCLXXVIII.  933

becomes  the  place  which  you  hold,  the  dignity  with  which
you  are  invested,  the  power  which  you  have  received  :
so  that  your  memory  may  be  recalled,  not  only  with
blessing,  but  also  with  praise  and  admiration  by  every
generation  which  shall  succeed.  You  have  to  provide  with
care  that  so  important  a  branch  of  the  Church  of  God
should  not  have  the  labour  of  assembling  without  good
result,  and  that  measures  should  be  taken  either  to  prevent
or  crush  all  blameable  projects  for  breaking  the  peace.  I
have  in  mind,  though  myself  humble  and  obscure,  to
address  you  all  when  you  are  assembled  in  the  Name  of  the
Lord,  in  a  letter  which,  if  it  is  of  no  service,  will  at  least
show  the  warmth  of  my  feeling  towards  you.  May  He  who
has  inspired  you  with  this  good  purpose  enable  you  also  to
carry  it  out  with  success;  may  He  bruise  Satan  under  your
feet,  so  that  in  that  assembly  the  Lord  may  be  glorified.
His  Church  honoured,  the  realm  strengthened  and  steadied,
and  those  who  speak  and  do  evil  reduced  to  silence.


LETTER CCCLXXVIII.1  (A.D. 1149.)
To  THE  SAME.

He asks assistance in grain  for the Religious of the
Diocese  of  Bourgcs.

To  my  very  dear  lord  St'GER,  by  the  grace  of  God  the
venerable  Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  Brother  BERNARD,  Abbot  of
Clairvaux,- wishes  health  and  sends  the  assurance  of  his
prayers.

We  have  in  the  Archdiocese  of  Bourges  some  brethren
who  are  in  want  of  bread  ;  they  are  those  from  Maison
Dieu,  and  I  hear  that  the  crops  of  corn  of  the  lord  King
are  very  abundant,  and,  because  abundant,  they  are  not  of
great  value.  Therefore,  I  entreat  you  that  out  of  those
crops  you  would  order  such  a  supply  to  be  bestowed  upon
those  brethren  as  you  shall  see  tit.  For  the  King,  whenever
he  was  in  that  district,  was  accustomed  to  make  some  gift
to  them.

1 Formerly  No.  360  ;  the  former  No.  378  is  now  No.  347.


934  LETTER CCCLXXX.

LETTER CCCLXXIX.i (A.D. 1149.)
»

To  THE  SAME.

He  entreats  Suger  to  come  to  the  help  of  a  certain  Abbot
who  is  in  want.

To  his  lord  and  very  dear  father  SUGER,  by  the  grace  of
God  the  Reverend  Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  Brother  BERNARD,
called  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,  health  and  his  devoted  prayers
in  Christ.

I  send  a  poor  Abbot  to  a  rich  one,  that  the  need  of  the
one  may  be  relieved  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  other.  In
so  doing  I  yield  to  you  the  better  part,  according  to  that
saying  of  the  Truth  that  it  is  better  to  give  than  to  receive
(Acts  xx.  35).  Nor  do  I  doubt  that  you  would  extend  your
bounty  willingly  and  liberally  to  this  one  of  the  poor  of
Christ  if  you  knew,  as  I  do,  his  piety  and  probity,  and  the
extreme  necessity  in  which  he  is.  He  is  burdened  with
debts,  and  he  has  not  bread  to  eat,  because  his  fields  have
produced  only  noxious  herbs  instead  of  grain.  As  your
districts  have  not  been  stricken  with  the  same  sterility,  I
beg  and  entreat  you  of  your  charity  to  assist  him,  and  you
may  be  assured  that  whatever  you  shall  be  pleased  to
bestow  upon  him  could  not  be  devoted  to  a  better  object.


LETTER CCCLXXX.2 (A.D. 1149.)

To  THE  SAME.
On  the  unhappy  state  of  the  Church  in  the  East.

To  his  very  dear  father  and  lord  SUGER,  by  the  grace  of
God  Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  BERNARD,  Abbot  of  Clairvaux,
health  and  the  assurance  of  his  humble  prayers.

The  news  which  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Temple  and
Brother  John  have  brought  I  have  received  as  joyfully  as  if

1  Formerly  No.  361  ;  the  former  No.  379  is  now  No.  353.  Among  the  Letters
of  Suger  it  is  No.  93.

-  Formerly  No.  362  ;  the  former  No.  380  is  now  No.  360.


LETTER CCCLXXX.  935

I  thought  it  came  from  God  Himself.  For  the  Church  in
the  East  utters  such  cries  of  distress  now  that  whosoever
does  not  sympathize  with  his  whole  heart  is  shown  not  to
be  a  son  of  the  Church.  But  though  rejoiced  at  the  news,
I  am  distressed  at  the  short  notice  you  give  me,  which
renders  me  unable  to  come  to  you  at  the  time  you  named.
I  had  promised  the  Bishop  of  Langres  to  meet  him  on  that
day  for  a  conference  on  grave  and  important  matters,  which
he  had  accepted  in  reliance  upon  me.  I  have,  however,
mentioned  a  time  when,  if  convenient  to  you,  I  will  gladly
come  to  you  with  the  same  Bishop,  who  will  be  perhaps  of
great  service  in  the  conference  which  we  are  to  hold.


KM) OK VOL. II.


I  NDEX.


A.

PAGE

Abaelard,  Note  on .  .  .  .  .  . 537

Abaelard,  Theologia  of  .  .  .  .  . 853

Abbot,  Letter  to  a  certain ..... 866

Abbot  of  Sp.  to  S.  Bernard ..... 925

Absolution,  what  is  meant  by  (Abaelard) .  .  . 563

Alexander,  Prior  of  Fountains,  Letter  to  .  . 842

Alfonso,  King  of  Portugal,  Letter  to.  ... 823

Anastasius,  S.,  to  the  Brethren  of  .  .  . 883

Andrew  of  Baudiment  ..... 650

Andrew,  Uncle  of  Bernard,  Letter  to  ... 794

Angouleme,  Letter  to  Count  of  .  .  . 807

Anselm,  Bishop  of  Rochester  .... 615

Archembald,  Sub-dean  of  Orleans,  murder  of  .  476,  493

Arnold  of  Brescia .....  545,  598

Arnold  of  Chartres,  Letter  to  .  .  .  .825

Atonement,  Errors  of  Abaelard  on  the  .  558,  580,  860

Aubin,  S.,  Letter  to  Abbot  of  .  .  .  .614

Augustine,  S.,  on  Charity ..... 665

B.

Baldwin,  Abbot  of  Rieti,  Letter  to .... 609

Bernard  Desportes,  Letters  to  ...  480,  482

Bernard,  Prior  of  Fortes,  Letter  to .  .  .  -7-29

Bernard,  Abbot,  of  Italy,  to  Pope  Innocent .  .  . 879

Bernard,  Abbot,  of  Italy,  to  Saint  Bernard .  .  .881

Bernard  on  proposed  marriage  of  Son  of  the  Count  of  Anjou Q2i
Bertin,  S.,  Abbey  of .  .  .  .  .  . 472

Beneventum,  Loss  of  .  .  .  .  .521

Benedict,  S.,  Rule  of  .  .  .  .665  et  seq.

Bishops  and  Cardinals,  The,  of  the  Roman  Court,  Letters  to 504,  541
Bishops  at  Sens,  Letter  to .  .  .  .  . 537

Blois,  Letter  to  Countess  of  .  .  .  .  . 807

Bonami,  Canon  of  Langres ..... 49^

Bourges,  Archbishop  of  .  .  .  -631

Brethren  in  Ireland.  Letter  to  the,  on  the  death  of  Malachi . 926
Bruno,  Abbot  of  Chiarraville,  Letter  to  . 786

Burchard,  Abbot  of  Balerne,  Letter  to  468


INDKX.  937

r

***•  HAG  K

Capua,  Loss  of . . .  .521

Cardinal  G  .  . .,  Letters  to  .  862,  864,  917

Cardinal  Presbyter,  Letter  to  a . . .  .865

Celestine  II.,  Letters  to  Pope . . .  690,  900
Chancellor  G  .  .  .,  Letter  to .... 917

Charlieu,  Abbey  of . . . . .  . 603

Church  in  the  East,  unhappy  state  of .  -934

Clairvaux,  Position  and  Site  of . . .  . 460

Cluniacs  and  Cistercians,  Causes  of  Strife  between .  . 654

Conception  of  B.  V.  M.,  Opinion  of  Bernard  upon .  -512

Conrad,  King  of  the  Romans,  Letters  to . .  531,  717

Constance,  Letter  to  Bishop  of . .  -598
Coronation  of  Louis  the  Younger .... 724

Crusade,  Second,  Failure  of  .... 794

Curia,  Letter  to  Three  Bishops  of . . .  . 630

Curia,  Letters  to  the  whole  ....  693,  695

D.

Durham,  William,  Bishop  of  . 691

E.

Eugenius,  Letters  to  Pope,  698,  703,  705,  719,  721,  723,  727,  729,

732,  733>  75°-  752>  754,  755.  757.  7<H,  765,  773»  776,  777,

779»  78o,  782,  788,  790,  791,  793,  800,  803,  805,  814,  824

Eugenius,  Letter  of,  to  Cistercian  Chapter . .  . 770

Eustace,  Bishop  of  Valence,  Letter  to .  . 532

F.

Faith,  Abaelard  on . . .  -574

Falco,  Dean  of  Lyons . .  . 499

Falco,  Dean  of  Lyons,  Letter  to . .  . 500

Falco,  Archbishop-Elect  of  Lyons,  Letter  to .  . 5  1 1
Fontevrault,  Abbess  of,  her  quarrel  with  Bishop  of  Angers . 607

France,  Eastern,  Letter  to  Clergy  and  People  of .  . 906

Funerals,  strange  customs  at .  075

*

G.

Geoffrey,  Abbot  of  S.  Mary  at  York,  Letter  to .  -831

Gislebert,  Archbishop  of  Tours . .  . 476

Godfrey,  Prior,  Letter  to .  839

Guido  du  Chatel,  Letter  to ...  . 593
Guido,  the  Legate,  Letter  to. .... 601

Guy,  Abbot  of  Pisa,  Letter  to ...  . 864


938  INDEX.

H.  PAGE

Haimeric,  Letters  to  .  • 485,  493»  494,  529>  827>  871

Heloise,  Abbess,  her  request.  .  • 541,  781

Henry,  Letter  to  Count .  .  . 782

Henry,  Archbishop  of  Sens,  Letters  to  530,  838

Henry,  Archbishop  of  Mayence,  Letter  to .  .  913

Henry,  Letter  to  Cardinal ..... 804
Henry  Murdach,  Abbot  of  Vauclair,  Letter  to  .  . 844

Herbert,  Abbot  of  Dijon,  Letters  to.  .  . 506,  689

Heresies  of  Abaelard,  Heads  of  .  .  . 556

Hildefonsus,  Count  of  S.  Eloy,  Letter  to  .  . 707

Hildegarde,  Abbess,  Letter  to  .  .  .  915

Hugh,  Archdeacon  of  Toul .  .  .  .  .520

Hugh,  Bishop  of  Auxerre ..... 625
Hugh,  Abbot  of  Trois-Fontaines,  Letter  to .  .  . 775

Hugo,  a  Novice,  Letter  to .  .  .  .  -845


I.

Ida,  Countess  of  Nevers,  Letter  to .  .  . . 529

Incarnation,  Errors  of  Abaelard  on  the  .  553,  576,  585
Ivo,  Cardinal,  Letter  to ..... 594

J.

Jerusalem,  Letter  to  the  Patriarch  of  .  . .518

Jerusalem,  Letters  to  the  Queen  of .  .  . 616,  797

John  of  Crema,  Letter  to .  .  . -495

John,  Abbot  of  Buzay,  Letter  to  .  . . 687

Joscelyn,  Bishop  of  Soissons,  Letters  to  .  638,  641,  648,  877


K.

"  Know  Thyself,"  the,  of  Abaelard .... 543

L.

Laon,  Letter  to  Bishop  of  .  .  .  . 770

Legates  of  the  Holy  See,  Letter  to .  .  .  .811

Liege  .  .  .  .  .  .  - 475

Limoges,  Letter  to  the  Bishop  of  .  .  . 858

Lothaire,  the  Emperor  ..... 475

Louis,  King  of  France,  Letters  to .  506,634,635,648,748,

787,  812,  813
Lyons,  Letter  to  the  Canons  of .  .  .  -512


INDEX.

M.

PAuE

Malachi,  Bishop  of  Ireland,  Letters  to  .  .  875,  897

Martin,  S.,  his  choice  of  black  robes  .  .  . 674

Matilda,  Queen  of  England,  Letter  to  .  .  . 837

Mayence,  Archbishop  of .  .  .  .811  (note)

Memmius,  S.,  first  Bishop  of  Chalons  .  .  . 475

Milanese,  Reconciliation  of,  by  Bernard  .  .  . 835

Milisendis,  Queen  of  Jerusalem,  Letters  to  .  .  894,  896

Montier  Ramey,  Letter  to  Abbot  of  .  .  .  . 805

N.

Nicholas,  Bishop  of  Cambray  .  .  .624

Note  to  Letter  190  on  Abaelard .  .  .  -549

o.

Obric,  Canon  of  Langres  .....  495
Odo,  Abbot  of  S.  Denys  .  .  .  .  791

Orleans  ...'.. 476,  4^4

Original  Sin,  Error  of  Abaelard  on  .  .  .  .561

Ostia,  Tusculum  and  Proeneste,  Letters  to  Bishops  of  682,  683,  686
Ostia,  Letters  to  Bishop  of  .  .  794,  799,  804,  815,  820

P.

Paulinus,  Bishop  of  Nola,  his  Letter  to  Sulpicius  Severus  .  674
Peter,  Abbot  of  Cluny,  Letters  to  469,  472,  651,  760,  764,  911
Peter,  Dean  of  Besancon,  Letter  to  .  .  .  .  603

Peter  of  Pisa,  his  deposition  .... 623

Peter,  Abbot  of  Cluny,  Letter  of,  to  S.  Bernard  .  654,  759
Peter,  Abbot  of  Moustier  la  Celle  ....  802
Peter,  Bishop  of  Palencia,  Letter  to  ....  922
Philip,  the  intruded  Archbishop  of  Tours,  Letter  to  .  .  478

Ponce,  Archdeacon  of  Langres .... 499
Pope  Innocent  II.,  Letters  to  473,  479.  483,  484,  486,  491,  493,  495,
501, 503, 505, 510, 520, 522. 523, 527, 528, 532, 543,
565,  591,  604,  606,  620,  621,  623,  624,  625,  626,  627,  629,
835,  840,  847,  859,  867,  873,  875,  885,  886,  887,  889,  890
Pope  Innocent,  Letter  of,  against  Abaelard .  .  -595

Premontre,  Letter  to  Abbot  of  .  .  -735

Privilege  given  by  Pope  Innocent  to  S.  Bernard  . 891

R.

Ralph,  Abbot  of  Vaucelles .  .  .  .  -536

Ralph,  Count  of  Vermandois,  his  divorce  and  remarriage  .  626
Ralph,  a  Monk,  instigates  a  massacre  of  the  Jews  .  .  913


940


INDEX.


PAGE

Raynald,  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  Letter  to .  . 830

Reginald,  Archbishop  of  Rheims .  • 5°8

Revolt  against  Eugenius  under  Arnold  of  Brescia  . .712

Robert,  Dean  of  Langres .  • 495

Robert,  Abbot  of  Dunes,  Letters  to  .  . 850,  851

Robert  Pullen,  Letter  to •  • 9°4

Rochester,  Letter  to  Bishop  of  • • 614

Roger,  King  of  Sicily,  Letters  to .  617,618,619

Romans,  Letter  to  the,  on  behalf  of  Pope  Eugenius  . 712

Roman  Pontiff,  Letter  to  the .  . .856

Rualene,  Letter  to  Abbot . .  . . 756

S.

Salamanca,  Bishop  of,  S.  Bernard's  intercession  for  . .621

Sanchia,  sister  of  the  Emperor  of  Spain .  . 809

Seal  of  S.  Bernard,  the . .  , -457

Secular,  Letter  to  a  certain . .  . .801

Sens,  Letter  to  the  Clergy  of  . .  .612

Sentences  of  Abaelard,  S.  Bernard  on  the .  -542

"  Sic  et  Non  "  of .  • 543

Simon  of  Cambray,  Letter  to .  . • 536

Soissons,  Bishop  of,  Letters  to  650,  758

Stephen,  Bishop  of  Palestrina.  Letter  to  . 86 1

Stephen,  Bishop  of  Praeneste,  Letter  to  .  .  643
Suger,  Abbot  of  S.  Denys,  Letters  to  761,  919,  920,  921,  930,  931,

933,  934,  $35

Suger,  Letter  of,  to  S.  Bernard . .  .762  (note)

S.  Satyrus,  Church  of,  the .  . 475

T.

Theobald,  Count  of  Champagne,  Letter  to .  . 768

Theobald  Notier,  Archdeacon  of  Paris,  his  crime .  . 492

Theobald,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Letter  on  his  behalf  .  621
Theobald,  Abp.,  Letter  to,  on  behalf  of  John  of  Salisbury  .  903
Theofred,  S.,  Abbot  of  .  .  .  .686

Thomas,  Prior  of  S.  Victor,  murder  of  ... 456

Thurstan,  Archbishop  of  York,  Letter  to  .  . 840

Toulouse,  Letter  to  people  of  .  .  .  .710

Treves,  Archbishop  of  .  .  .  • 528

Trinity,  Errors  of  Abaelard  on  the .  .  552,  559,  565

Troyes,  Letter  to  Bishop  and  Clergy  of .  .  .613

,,  ,, on  behalf  of  Bishop  of  ... 479

u.

Ulger,  Bishop  of  Angers,  Letter  to  ... 607


INDEX.  941

v.

Vezelay,  Abbey  of,  its  reformation .  .  . 474

Vezelay,  Abbot  of,  election  to  See  of  Langres  . 496

Viterbo,  Bernard's  stay  at  .  .  . 478,  479

w.

Warren,  Abbot  of  S.  Mary  of  tbe  Alps,  Letter  to .  .• 743

William,  Abbot,  Letter  of,  to  Geoffrey  of  Chartres .  .851

William,  Abbot,  Letter  to .  .  .  .  -855

William,  Abbot  of  Rievaulx,  Letters  to .  . 893,  902

Y.

Yoik,  Disputed  election  to  See  of  .  .  . 690

York,  Unjust  consecration  to  the  See  of  .  . 893
