SAINT  BERNARD

ON  CONSIDERATION

TRANSLATED  BY

GEORGE  LEWIS  M.A.

BALLIOL  COLLEGE  OXFORD:  RECTOR  OF  1COMB
AUTHOR OF c  AN OXFORD PARISH PRIEST '


OXFORD
AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS

1908


6X


HENRY FROWDE,  M.A.

PUBLISHER  TO  THE UNIVERSITY OF  OXFORD

LONDON, EDINBURGH
NEW YORK AND TORONTO


HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

ONLY  some  six  years  had  passed  since  the  death  of
Gregory  VII  when  St.  Bernard  was  bora  (A.D.  1091),  just
two  years  before  Anselm  was  consecrated  Archbishop  of
Canterbury.  The  echoes  of  the  thunders  of  the  great  reform
ing  Pope  had  scarce  died  away,  and  the  memory  of  the
uncompromising  struggle  between  him  and  the  Emperor
Henry  IV  was  still  fresh  in  the  minds  of  men.  Under  his
direction  the  Church  of  Rome  had  taken  enormous  strides
towards  that  absolutism  and  universal  supremacy,  both  in
things  temporal  and  spiritual,  which  was  to  reach  its  climax
under  Innocent  III  (A.D.  1198-1216),  when  papal  power
was  laps  greater  than  ever  before  or  ever  since.  It  was
the  of  the  Crusades,  and  of  the  rise  of  the  Military

R<  s  Orders. The  intellect  of  Europe  was  beginning

to  <  n.  The  popular  story  of  the  discovery  of  the  original
manuscript  of  Justinian's  famous  Pandects,  or  digest  of  Roman
law,  in  the  ruins  of  Amalfi  is  discredited,1  but  the  study  of
civil  law  was  vigorously  pursued,  and  the  profession  was  one
of  great  honour.  Canon  law  received  no  less  attention.  The
vast  materials,  after  twenty-four  years'  labour,  were  formed
into  a  '  body  '  by  Gratian,  and  published  at  Rome  about  1 140.
'The  study  of  this  code  became  of  course  obligatory  upon
ecclesiastical  judges.  It  produced  a  new  class  of  legal  prac
titioners,  or  canonists ;  of  whom  a  great  number  added,  like
their  brethren  the  civilians,  their  illustrations  and  commentaries

1  See  Hallam,  Literary  History,  vol.  I.  p.  62,
A 2


4  Historical  Introduction

for  which  the  obscurity  and  discordance  of  many  passages,
more  especially  in  Gratian's  collection  of  canons,  papal  epistles,
and  sentences  of  fathers,  gave  ample  scope.  From  the
general  analogy  of  the  canon  law  to  that  of  Justinian,  the  two
systems  became  in  a  remarkable  manner  collateral  and  mutually
intertwined,  the  tribunals  governed  by  either  of  them  borrowing
their  rules  of  decision  from  the  other  in  cases  where  their
peculiar  jurisprudence  is  silent  or  of  dubious  interpretation.'  *
Pope  Eugenius  III  was  '  extremely  satisfied '  with  Gratian's
work,2  and  is  said  to  have  instituted  the  earliest  academical
degrees  for  distinction  in  that  branch  of  learning.  St.  Bernard's
feelings  are  clearly  expressed  in  the  De  Consider atione.

It  was  a  time,  too,  of  political  movement.  Arnold  of
Brescia,  a  disciple  of  Abelard,  but  more  famous  for  his
political  heresy,  not  only  preached  reform  in  the  Church,  but
threw  Rome  into  convulsions  by  proclaiming  (A.D.  1143)  a
Republic.  '  He  presumed  to  quote  the  declaration  of  Christ,
that  His  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world ;  he  boldly  maintained
that  the  sword  and  the  sceptre  were  intrusted  to  the  civil
magistrate ;  that  temporal  honours  and  possessions  were  law
fully  vested  in  secular  persons  ;  that  the  abbots,  the  bishops,
and  the  Pope  himself  must  renounce  either  their  state  or  their
salvation ;  and  that  after  the  loss  of  their  revenues,  the
voluntary  tithes  and  oblations  of  the  faithful  would  suffice,  not
indeed  for  luxury  and  avarice,  but  for  a  frugal  life  in  the
exercise  of  spiritual  labours.' 3  The  terror  of  successive  popes,
he  was  hanged,  burnt,  and  his  ashes  cast  into  the  Tiber
(A.D.  1155)  only  two  years  after  Bernard's  death.  The
saint's  advice  to  the  Pope  more  than  once  recalls  the  teaching,
tone,  and  temper  of  Arnold.

1  Hallam,  Middle  Ages,  p.  369.  2  Mosheim,  Cent.  xii.

3  Gibbon,  Decline  and  Fall,  ch.  Ixix,


Historical  Introduction  $

The  Waldcnses  and  the  allied  Albigenses,  claiming  the
right  to  preach  without  commission,  when,  and  where  they
pleased,  and  infected  with  Manichean  errors,  were  already
sowing  the  seeds  of  the  Reformation,  and  the  popes,  by  the
traffic  in  indulgences,  were  contributing  to  the  resources  of
the  revolt.

But  it  is  Abelard  in  whom  centres  so  much  of  the  intellectual
interest  of  the  period,  and  for  whom  it  is  claimed  that  '  he
planted  the  standard  of  impartial  philosophy'.1  He  was  'almost
the  first  who  awakened  mankind  in  the  ages  of  darkness  to  a
sympathy  with  intellectual  excellence.  His  bold  theories,  not
the  less  attractive  perhaps  for  treading  upon  the  bounds  of
heresy,  his  imprudent  vanity,  that  scorned  the  regularly  acquired
reputation  of  older  men,  allured  a  multitude  of  disciples  who
would  never  have  listened  to  an  ordinary  teacher.  It  is  said  that
twenty  cardinals  and  fifty  bishops  had  been  among  his  hearers.'2
The  schools  of  Paris  through  his  stimulus  acquired  some
thing  of  the  character  of  a  University,  and  though  his  life
may  have  been  '  the  shipwreck  of  genius,  there  are  few  lives  of
literary  men  more  interesting,  or  more  diversified  by  success
and  adversity,  by  glory  and  humiliation,  by  the  admiration  of
mankind  and  the  persecution  of  enemies '.  Such  a  man  could
hardly  escape  the  fiery  wrath  of  St.  Bernard,  who  described
him  as  '  with  Arius  disposing  of  the  Trinity  by  degrees  and
measures,  with  Pelagius  preferring  free  will  to  grace,  and  with
Nestorius  dividing  Christ  '.3  One  of  the  most  illustrious  of

1  Lecky,  Rationalism  in  Europe,  i.  p.  48. 2  Hallarn,  Middle  Ages.

8  For  Abelard  Lewes,  Hi*t.  of  Philosophy,  vol.  ii.  p.  13,  sq.,  and
Uebcrweg,  Hist,  of  Philosophy,  vol.  ii.  p.  386-97  (translated  by  Professor
Morris,  Hodder  and  Stoughton,  1872),  may  be  consulted.  Mr.  Reginald
Poole,  in  his  Illustrations  r>f  the  //»>/.  of  Medieval  Thought  in  the
Departments  of  Theology  and  Politics,  strongly  sides  with  Abelard  against
St.  Bernard.  On  the  other  hand  Cardinal  Newman  in  his  '  Rise  and


6  Historical  Introduction

Abelard's  disciples  was  Peter  Lombard  (died  1164),  whose
Book  of  Sentences,  a  collection  of  propositions  from  the  fathers,
with  no  attempt  at  reconciling  them,  placed  him  at  the  head  of
the  scholastic  divines.  Scholastic  theology  and  scholastic
philosophy  were  rapidly  developing  ;  men  were  busy  discussing
the  provinces  of  faith  and  reason,  or  venturing  to  attempt  the
solution,  with  the  aid  of  Aristotle,  of  the  insoluble  in  the
realms  of  metaphysics  and  Christian  dogma.

Amid  all  this  manifold  stir  and  activity  St.  Bernard  was  the
most  commanding  personality.  He  could  *  create  popes,  and
command  kings,  and  lead  councils  by  the  nose.  His  advice
was  asked  by  the  greatest  persons  in  Church  and  State ;  and
he  was  even  adored  by  the  common  people,  who  fancied  that
he  was  an  inspired  man,  and  endowed  with  the  gifts  of  healing.'  *
So  says  a  writer  by  no  means  disposed  to  exaggerate  his
influence,  or  gild  the  merit  of  his  private  character.  *  We
must  accept  him  as  quite  the  eminent  and  governing  man
in  the  Europe  of  his  time — whose  word  carried  with  it  a
sovereign  stress  surpassing  that  of  any  other,  whose  hand  most
effectively  moulded  history.'2

And  there  appears  to  be  a  general  consensus  that  the  treatise
on  '  Consideration ',  brief  though  it  be,  is  the  greatest  of  St.
Bernard's  literary  efforts.  Calvin  declared  that  in  it  the  author
spoke  so  sublimely  as  if  he  were  the  very  truth  speaking.
Neander  regarded  it  as  a  mirror  of  humiliation  to  all  subse
quent  popes.  Mr.  Cotter  Morison  describes  it  as  his  '  great
work ' ;  his  American  admirer,  Dr.  Storrs,  more  in  detail,  as
follows : — '  The  book  has  remained  from  that  day  to  this  the
mirror  of  St.  Bernard's  thoughts  concerning  a  true  pastor  of

Progress  of  Universities'  (Historical  Sketches,  vol.  iii.)  has  a  pungent
criticism  of  the  '  gifted  Abelard  '.

1  Jortin,  Part  II.  p.  294.  2  Storrs,  p.  574.


Historical  Introduction  7

Christendom.  There  is  no  single  work  of  Bernard  in  which
his  spirit  is  more  clearly  or  more  tranquilly  revealed  ;  none
which  is  a  better  memorial  of  him.  And  it  was  written  in
what  he  himself  styled  the  season  of  his  misfortunes — when  the
nations  which  had  been  recently  thrilled  with  his  eloquence,
astounded  by  his  amazing  works,  and  pushed  by  his  energy  to
magnificent  enterprise,  were  stirred  by  griefs  too  deep  for
tears,  and  hot  with  a  rage  that  made  the  air  like  a  fiery  furnace.
I  know  of  no  one  who  could  better  have  taken  to  himself  the
ancient  words  of  Ps.  xxvii.  5  and  Ivii.  I  :  ///  the  day  of  trouble
he  shall  keep  me  secretly  in  his  pavilion,  in  the  covert  of  his
tabernacle  shall  he  hide  me.  Be  merciful  unto  me,  0  God,  be
merciful  unto  me ;  for  my  soul  taketh  refuge  in  thee  ;  yea,  in  the
shadow  of  thy  'wings  'will  I  take  refuge,  until  these  calamities  be
overpast?  l

As  I  learn  on  inquiry  at  the  Bodleian  Library  and  at
the  British  Museum,  no  translation  in  English  of  St.  Ber
nard's  little  masterpiece  has  hitherto  been  published.  For
the  suggestion  that  one  might  with  advantage  be  offered
to  the  public  I  am  indebted  to  my  esteemed  diocesan,
Dr.  Gibson,  Lord  Bishop  of  Gloucester.  Dr.  Sanday's
unfailing  kindness  on  this  and  other  occasions  I  beg  most
gratefully  to  acknowledge.  I  must  also  express  my  gratitude
to  the  Rev.  P.  H.  Kempthorne  (late  Fellow  of  St.  John's,
Cambridge),  Rector  of  Wyck  Risington,  for  favouring  me
with  his  opinion  on  some  obscure  passages.  The  text
adopted  is  that  of  I.  G.  Krabinger,  Custodian  of  the  Royal
Library,  Munich,  1844.  Readers  interested  in  the  career
of  St.  Bernard  may  be  referred  to  Cotter  Morison's  Life  and
Times  (Macmillan,  1901),  the  Rev.  I.  W.  Sparrow's  Lectures

1  Lecture*  on  St.  Bernard  at  the  Lowell  Institute,  Boston,  and  at  the
'Jo/ins  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  pp.  560-1.


8  Historical  Introduction

(1895),  and  to  the  excellent  little  volume  of  the  late
Dr.  Eales  (S.P.C.K.).  Dr.  Storrs'  book,  quoted  above,  is  on
a  much  larger  scale.  A  valued  correspondent  tells  me  that
the  Abbey  of  Clairvaux,  once  the  home  of  700  '  Religious,'
is  now  a  penal  establishment,  where  more  than  1,000  con
victs  manufacture  sheets,  tissues,  &c.  How  are  the  mighty
fallen !


GEORGE LEWIS.


ICOMB  RECTORY,
February  8,  1908.


CONTENTS

HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION 3

CHRONOLOGY 10

ON  CONSIDERATION:

PROLOGUE . . . . . . .11

BOOK  I 13

BOOK  II 36

BOOK  III .  66

BOOK  IV .  • • 95

BOOK  V  . . . . . .124


CHRONOLOGY

A.D.

1091.  Birth  of  St.  Bernard.

1113.  Bernard  enters  Citeaux.

1115. Foundation  of  Clairvaux.

1 130. Election  of  Pope  Innocent  II.

1 1 40.  Council  of  Sens. First  encounter  with  Abelard.

1145.  Pope  Eugenius  III.

1147.  Second  Crusade.

1148.  Council of  Rheims. Errors  of  Gilbert  of  Poitiers

condemned.

1 1 49.  Failure  of  the  Crusade.

First  Book  of  the  De  Consider atlone.

1150.  Second  Book.

1152.  Third  Book.

'  The  two  last  some  small  time  after '  (Du  Pin).

1153.  Death  of  St.  Bernard.


PROLOGUE

1  AM  thinking,  Most  Holy  Father,  Eugenius,  of  writing
something  which  may  edify,  delight,  or  console  you.  But
when  I  would  fain  begin  I  experience  a  strange  hesitation,
and  my  words  falter,  for  your  Majesty  and  the  love  I  have  for
you,  like  rival  commanders,  issue  conflicting  orders.  The  one
bids  me  advance,  the  other  holds  me  in  check.  Your  con
descension  reconciles  their  differences,  inasmuch  as  though
you  might  more  fitly  enjoin  a  task,  you  beg  of  me  a  favour.
If  then  your  Majesty  unbends,  my  modesty  should  surely
also  yield.  True,  you  sit  on  Peter's  seat.  What  of  that  ?
Though  you  walk  on  the  wings  of  the  wind,  you  will  never
outstrip  my  affection.  Love  knows  no  lord  ;  it  recognizes
a  son  even  in  the  robes  of  office.  Love,  by  its  very  nature,
is  lowly  enough  ;  it  needs  no  prompting  to  kindness,  seeks  no
reward  for  obedience,  sets  no  bounds  to  its  respect.  It  is  not
so  with  some,  not  so  :  but  they  are  moved  with  fear  or
avarice.  These  are  they  who  seem  to  bless,  but  there  is  evil
in  their  hearts  ;  they  flatter  to  one's  face,  but  in  the  time  of
need  they  desert  us.  But  charity  never  faileth.1  To  confess
the  truth,  though  I  no  longer  act  as  a  mother  to  you,  I  have
not  lost  a  mother's  affection  for  you.2  In  days  gone  by  you
were  rooted  in  my  very  heart ;  you  are  not  so  easily  to  be
plucked  out.  Ascend  into  heaven,  or  descend  into  the  abyss,
you  shall  not  leave  me  :  I  will  follow  thee  whithersoever  thou
goest.  I  loved  you  when  you  were  poor,  I  will  love  you  now

1  i  Cor.  xiii.  8.

2  Eugenius, it will be remembered, had been  under  St. Bernard  at
Clairvaux.


1 2  Prologue

o

that  you  are  the  father  of  both  rich  and  poor.  For  if  I  know
you  well,  you  have  not  in  becoming  the  father  of  the  poor  lost
your  poverty  of  spirit.  I  am  sure  that  the  change  in  your
circumstances  has  come  to  you  :  it  has  not  been  sought  by
you  ;  and  I  am  no  less  certain  that  your  promotion  has  left
you  what  you  were  before,  though  something  be  added  thereto.
I  will,  accordingly,  admonish  you,  not  as  a  schoolmaster,  but
as  a  mother,  at  all  events  as  one  who  loves  you.  Perhaps  the
fonder  I  am,  the  more  foolish  I  may  seem.  If  so,  it  will  be
in  the  eyes  of  him  who  loves  not,  and  does  not  feel  the  power
of  love.


BOOK I


[Sx.  BERNARD  shows  how  unhappy  a  Pope  must  be  if  he
neglects  himself  and  spends  all  his  time  in  hearing  and  decid
ing  other  men's  differences.  He  complains  of  the  great
number  of  causes  brought  into  the  ecclesiastical  courts,  and
of  the  many  abuses  prevailing  there.  The  conduct  of  such
cases,  he  maintains,  is  more  consistent  with  the  secular  than
the  ecclesiastical  power.  He  would  not  have  Eugenius  follow
the  example  of  some  of  his  predecessors,  who  were  so  im
mersed  in  business  that  they  found  no  time  for  contemplation.
He  would  rather  that  the  Pope  imitated  Gregory  the  Great
(b.  about  A.  D.  550,  d.  A.  D.  604),  who,  when  Rome  was
besieged,  went  on  quietly  working  at  his  Homilies  on  the
Prophet  Ezekicl.  Things  divine  claim  the  first  consideration.
The  nature  and  connexion  of  the  four  primary  virtues  are
discussed,  and  the  book  concludes  with  a  severe  censure  of
the  unbecoming  bickerings  at  the  ecclesiastical  bar,  and  an
earnest  exhortation  to  Eugenius  to  endeavour  to  bring  about
a  reformation.]


CHAPTER I

S/.  Reward  sympathizes  ivtt/j  the  "Pope  in  his
many  cares

i .  Well,  then,  where  shall  I  begin  ?  I  prefer  to  begin
with  your  occupations,  because  it  is  in  these  that  I  most
chiefly  share  your  sorrow.  Share,  1  say,  for  I  take  it  for
granted  that  you  have  sorrow;  otherwise  I  ought  rather  to
have  said  '  I  sorrow  ',  since  where  there  is  no  sorrow  one
cannot  share  it.  Accordingly,  if  you  grieve,  I  grieve  with  you;


14  On  Consideration

if  you  do  not,  still  I  grieve,  and  deeply,  because  I  know  that
the  member  which  is  past  feeling  is  all  the  farther  from  health,
and  that  the  sick  man  who  is  unconscious  of  his  sickness  is  in
the  more  dangerous  condition.  But  God  forbid  that  I  should
have  any  such  suspicion  about  you.  I  know  how  keenly,
not  long  ago,  you  used  to  enjoy  the  luxury  of  a  quiet  life.
You  cannot  so  soon  have  changed  your  habits ;  you  cannot
all  at  once  extinguish  your  regret  for  the  pleasures  so  recently
taken  from  you.  The  fresh  wound  must  be  painful.  The
wound  has  not  already  hardened,  or  in  so  short  a  time  become
past  feeling.  However  this  may  be,  unless  you  dissemble,
your  daily  losses  are  sufficient  reason  for  continual  grief.  If
I  am  not  mistaken,  you  are  reluctantly  torn  from  the  embraces
of  your  Rachel,1  and  as  often  as  that  befalls  you  your  sorrow
must  be  renewed.  But  when  does  that  not  happen  ?  How
often  do  you  wish,  and  in  vain  ?  How  often  do  you  move,
but  not  move  forward  ?  How  often  do  you  attempt,  and
without  result  ?  strive,  and  do  not  obtain  ?  How  often  are
you  in  labour,  and  do  not  bring  forth  ?  venture  out  to  sea,
but  drift  away  ?  where  you  begin,  there  make  an  end  ?  Just
as  you  are  beginning  to  grow,  do  they  not  cut  you  down  ? 2
'  The  children  have  come  to  the  birth/  saith  the  prophet,
'  and  there  is  not  strength  to  bring  forth.' 3  Do  you  know
this  ?  No  one  better.  You  are  a  man  of  shameless  face,
and  like  the  heifer,  Ephraim,  have  learnt  to  love  treading  out
the  corn,4  if,  with  your  consent,  things  go  thus  with  you.

1  In  the  mystical  writers  Rachel  and  Leah  respectively  denote  the  con
templative  and  the  active  life.

*  Or  'beginning  to  weave,  cut  your  thread'.

3  2  Kings  xix.  3.

4  Hos.  x.  II. 'The  treading  out  the  corn  was  an  easy  and  luxurious
service,  since  God  had  forbidden  to  muzzle  the  ox,  while  doing  it. It
pictures  then  the  sweet  gentle  ways  by  which  God  wins  us  to  His  service.


Boot  /,  Chapter  i  17

God  forbid  !  This  is  the  portion  of  him  who  is  given  over
to  a  reprobate  sense.  I  certainly  long  for  you  to  have  peace
away  from  these,  not  in  their  company.  There  is  nothing
I  dread  more  for  you  than  that  peace.  Do  you  wonder  if
such  peace  could  ever  be  yours  ?  Yes,  I  tell  you,  if,  as  mostly
happens,  habit  passes  into  heedlessness.


CHAPTER  II
The  strength  of  evil  custom

2.  Do  not  trust  your  present  feelings  too  much.  There  is
nothing  so  rooted  in  the  heart  but  it  may  by  neglect  in  process
of  time  lose  its  force  and  vigour.  If  you  neglect  the  old
wound  it  grows  callous,  and  in  proportion  as  it  loses  feeling  it
becomes  incurable.  In  fact,  severe  unceasing  pain  cannot  last
long ;  if  it  is  not  got  rid  of  some  other  way,  it  must  of  neces
sity  be  conquered  by  itself.  Beyond  a  doubt  it  will  either  be
relieved  by  some  remedy,  or  it  will  end  in  stupefaction.
Custom  turns  everything  upside  down.  Give  it  time,  and
what  can  resist  its  hardening  effect  ?  What  does  not  yield
to  use  ?  How  many  find  that  the  bitterness  they  had  formerly
dreaded  has  unfortunately  through  use  alone  turned  to  sweet
ness  ?  Hear  how  the  just  man  laments  over  this :  '  What
things  my  soul  refused  to  touch  are  now  through  want
become  my  food.' *  At  first  something  will  seem  to  you

Israel  would  serve  thus  far ;  for  she  liked  the  service  ;  she  was  accustomed
to  it,  and  loved  it.' Pusey,  Minor  Prophet*.

1  Job.  vi.  7.  'The  proper  idea  not  having  been  seized,  the  passage  has
been  given  very  differently  by  prior  expositors;  almost  all  of  whom  are,
at  the  same  time,  at  variance  with  each  other.  In  our  established  text  it


1 6  On  Consideration

unbearable ;  as  time  goes  on,  and  you  get  used  to  it,  you  will
judge  it  of  no  such  great  importance  ;  a  little  later  you  will
think  it  even  unimportant ;  a  little  later  you  will  not  think  it
even  that ;  a  little  later  it  will  delight  you.  Thus  little  by
little  our  hearts  are  hardened,  and  then  we  loathe  goodness.
Just  so,  severe  unceasing  pain  must,  as  I  have  said,  have
a  speedy  ending ;  it  will  either  be  cured,  or  insensibility  will
ensue.

3.  This  is  precisely  why  I  have  always  feared,  and  still  fear,
that  if  you  delay  to  apply  the  remedy,  you  will  not  endure  the
pain,  and  that  you  may  thus  incur  the  risk  of  being  irrevocably
and  hopelessly  overwhelmed.  I  am  afraid,  I  say,  lest,  sur
rounded  by  occupations  so  numerous  that  you  distrust  your
power  of  getting  through  them,  you  may  harden  your  forehead,
and  thus  gradually  in  a  measure  strip  yourself  of  the  feeling  of
a  just  and  profitable  sorrow.  It  would  be  far  more  prudent
for  you  to  even  leave  them  for  a  time,  than  suffer  yourself  to
be  carried  away  by  them,  and  certainly  by  degrees  led  whither
you  would  not.  Do  you  ask  whither  ?  I  reply,  to  a  hard
heart.  Do  not  further  ask  what  that  means  ;  if  you  have  not
greatly  feared  it,  it  is  yours  already.  That  heart  alone  is  hard
which  does  not  shudder  at  itself  for  not  feeling  its  hardness.
Why  ask  me  ?  Ask  Pharaoh.  No  one  ever  got  his  hard
heart  cured  unless  God  haply  took  pity  on  him,  and,  accord
ing  to  the  prophet,  removed  his  heart  of  stone  and  gave  him

occurs  thus:  "Can  that  which  is  unsavoury  be  eaten  without  salt?  or  is
there  any  taste  in  the  white  of  an  egg  ?  The  things  that  my  soul  refused
to  touch  are  as  my  sorrowful  meat  " :  a  mixt  rendering  from  the  different
Latin  copies ;  and  at  the  same  time  offering  no  meaning  whatever.'
Good's  Translation  of  the  Book  of  Job,  Notes,  p.  70.  Good  renders —
'  A  thing  loathful  to  the  taste  of  my  soul,  this  alas !  is  my  sorrowful  meat.'
The  R.  V.,  Margin,  has,  '  What  things  my  soul  refused  to  touch  these  are
as  my  loathsome  meat,'


Book  /,  Chapter  it  17

a  heart  of  llesh.1  What  then  is  a  hard  heart  ?  It  is  a  heart
which  is  not  torn  by  remorse,  nor  softened  by  affection,  nor
moved  by  entreaties  ;  which  does  not  yield  to  threats,  but  is
hardened  by  scourges.  It  is  ungrateful  for  kindnesses,  faith
less  in  counsel,  cruel  in  judgement,  shameless  in  disgrace,
without  sense  of  fear  in  the  midst  of  danger,  inhuman  in  things
human,  heedless  in  things  divine ;  it  forgets  the  past,  neglects
the  present,  does  not  look  on  to  the  future.  It  is  a  heart
emptied  of  all  the  past  except  the  wrongs  it  has  suffered,
which  lets  slip  all  the  present,  which  has  no  forecast  of  the
future,  no  preparation  to  meet  it,  unless  perchance  it  be  with
a  view  to  gratifying  its  malice.  And,  that  I  may  briefly  sum
up  the  mischief  of  this  dreadful  plague,  it  is  a  heart  which
neither  fears  God  nor  respects  man.  See  whither  these
accursed  occupations  can  drag  you  at  their  heels,  if,  as  you
have  begun,  you  continue  to  give  yourself  wholly  to  them,
and  leave  nothing  of  yourself  for  yourself.  You  are  wasting
time  ;  and,  if  I  may  present  myself  to  you  in  the  character  of
another  Jethro,  you,2  like  Moses,  are  spending  yourself  in  this
foolish  labour  over  these  things  which  are  nothing  else  but
torture  of  spirit,  the  enfeebling  of  the  mind,  the  voiding  of
grace.  For  the  fruit  of  these  things,  what  is  it  but  spiders'
webs  ?

CHAPTER III

The  rulers  of  the  Church, ought  not  to  he  for  ever
hearing  and  deciding  lawsuits

4.  Tell  me,  pray,  what  is  the  good  of  litigating  from  morn
ing  till  evening,  or  of  listening  to  litigants  ? And  would  that
sufficient  unto  the  day  were  the  evil  thereof! The  nights  are
1  Ezek.  xxxvi.  26.  a  Exod.  xviii.  18.


SI. LLKNAKL)


i  8  On  Consideration

not  free.  There  is  hardly  enough  time  left  to  give  the  poor
body  a  little  rest  and  satisfy  the  needs  of  nature ;  once  again
up  !  and  to  the  strife.  Day  vomits  forth  lawsuits  unto  day,  and
night  declares  evil  unto  night,  until  it  is  not  possible  to  take
breath  in  goodness,  nor  snatch  a  little  rest  by  way  of  change,
nor  find  even  a  few  scattered  intervals  of  leisure.  I  have  no
doubt  that  you  as  well  as  I  deplore  these  things ;  but  what  is
the  good  of  that  if  you  do  not  strive  to  amend  them  ?  Still,  until
you  do  amend  them,  I  exhort  you  to  go  on  ever  deploring
them,  and  not  allow  yourself  to  grow  hardened  in  them
through  any  familiarity  with  them  or  unremitting  application
to  them.  '  I  have  smitten  them,'  saith  God,  '  and  they  have
not  grieved.' l  Have  nothing  in  common  with  such  persons.
Rather  make  it  your  care  to  appropriate  both  the  feeling  and
the  words  of  the  righteous  man  who  says,  '  What  is  my
strength  that  I  should  endure  ?  or  what  is  mine  end,  that  I
should  be  patient  ?  My  strength  is  not  the  strength  of  stones,
nor  is  my  flesh  of  brass.' 2  Great  is  the  virtue  of  patience  ;
but  I  could  not  wish  for  you  patience  in  these  things.  It  is
sometimes  more  laudable  to  be  impatient.  You  surely  do  not
approve  of  the  patience  of  those  people  to  whom  Paul  was
wont  to  say,  '  Ye  suffer  fools  gladly,  seeing  ye  yourselves  are
wise.'3  Unless  I  am  deceived,  the  Apostle  spoke  ironically,
not  by  way  of  praise ;  he  is  flouting  the  tameness  of  certain
individuals,  who,  as  it  were,  put  out  their  hands  to  the  false
apostles  by  whom  they  had  been  seduced,  and  allowed  them
selves  most  patiently  to  be  carried  away  by  their  teachers  into
all  sorts  of  strange  and  corrupt  doctrines.  And  so  he  adds,
*  For  ye  endure  if  a  man  bring  you  into  bondage.' 4  Patience
is  not  good,  if,  when  you  may  be  free,  you  allow  yourself  to

1  Jer-  v-  3-  2  Job  vi.  II.  3 2  Cor.  xi.  19.

4  Ibid.  20.


I

Book /,  Chapter  Hi  19

become  a  slave.  I  would  not  have  you  disguise  the  slavery
into  which,  though  you  know  it  not,  you  are  daily  brought.
It  is  a  sign  of  a  heart  waxed  gross,  that  it  does  not  feel  its
own  continual  vexation.  '  Vexation  causes  a  report  to  be  under
stood/  saith  one.1  True  ;  but  only  if  it  be  not  excessive.  For
if  it  be,  it  clearly  does  not  cause  the  mischief  to  be  understood,
but  to  be  despised.  In  fact,  when  the  wicked  man  reaches
the  depths  of  wickedness,  he  despiseth  it.2  Rouse  yourself,
therefore,  and  not  only  guard  against,  but  dread,  the  yoke  of
the  worst  of  all  slaveries  at  this  very  moment  threatening  you,
nay  rather  already  pressing  with  no  light  weight  upon  you.  Are
you  therefore  not  a  slave  because  you  are  the  slave  not  of  one
but  of  all  ?  There  is  no  more  disgraceful  slavery,  none  worse,
than  that  of  the  Jews ;  whithersoever  they  go  they  drag  the
chain,  and  everywhere  displease  their  masters.  Tell  me,  pray,
when  you  are  ever  free,  ever  safe,  ever  your  own.  Every
where  is  bustle,  noise,  and  confusion  ;  everywhere  the  yoke  of
your  slavery  galls  you.


CHAPTER IV

What  service  is  worthy ',  what  unworthy  ^  of  the
servants  of  God

5.  And  you  must  not  confront  me  with  the  Apostle's
saying,  *  Though  I  were  free  from  all  1  made  myself  the  bond
servant  of  all.'8  That  is  far  from  being  your  case.  Did  he

1  Isa.  xxviii.  19.  Vtxatio  ilat  intellectum  amlitui.  K.V.  has,  '  It  shall
be  nought  but  terror  to  understand  the  message  (or  report).'  Chcyne
translates  the  Hebrew,  <  It  shall  be  simply  a  terror  to  understand  the
tidings.'  AuditHs  has  the  meaning  re  fort  in  St.  John  xii.  38.

a  Prov.  xviii.  3.  3 I  Cor.  ix.  ly.

K 2


20  On  Consideration

by  this  service  make  himself  the  slave  of  men  in  their  acquisi
tion  of  filthy  lucre  ?  Did  men  full  of  ambition,  avaricious,
simoniacal,  sacrilegious,  keepers  of  concubines,  incestuous,  all
sorts  of  human  monsters  such  as  these,  come  streaming  to
him  from  all  over  the  world,  so  that  by  means  of  his  apostolic
authority  they  might  obtain,  or  retain,  ecclesiastical  distinctions  ?
The  reason  why  the  man  to  whom  to  live  was  Christ,  and  to
die  was  gain — the  reason  why  he  made  himself  a  bondservant
was  that  he  might  gain  the  more  for  Christ,  not  that  he  might
increase  the  gains  of  avarice.  You  must  not,  therefore,  make
Paul's  great  shrewdness,  zeal,  and  love  so  free,  a  plea  for  the
life  of  a  slave  which  you  lead.  How  much  more  worthy
of  your  apostleship,  how  much  more  wholesome  for  your
conscience,  how  much  more  fruitful  for  the  Church  of  God,  if
you  would  rather  attend  to  his  words  elsewhere,  'Ye  are
bought  with  a  price,  refuse  to  be  made  the  servants  of  men/  1
What  is  more  servile  and  unworthy,  specially  of  the  chief
pontiff,  than,  I  do  not  say  every  day,  but  almost  every  hour,  to
toil  at  such  things,  and  for  such  people  ?  When,  then,  are
we  to  pray  ?  when  to  teach  our  people  ?  when  to  build  up  the
Church  ?  when  to  meditate  in  the  law  ?  1  know,  of  course,
that  the  palace  every  day  re-echoes  with  the  sound  of  the  laws,
but  they  are  the  laws  of  Justinian,2  not  those  of  the  Lord.  Is
that  as  it  ought  to  be  ?  See  for  yourself.  Surely,  the  law  of
the  Lord  is  undefiled,  converting  souls.3  But  these  are  not
so  much  laws  as  lawsuits  and  sophistical  arguments  subverting
judgement.  How  is  it  then,  pray  tell  me,  that  you  the
shepherd  and  bishop  of  souls  can  endure  to  have  the  law  of
the  Lord  stand  dumb  before  you,  while  these  laws  never  cease
to  chatter  ?  I  am  mistaken  if  this  perversity  does  not  cause
you  some  anxiety.  I  suppose  that  sometimes  it  even  makes  you

1 i  Cor.  vi.  20. 2  See  above,  Hist.  Introd. 3  Ps.  xix.  7.


Book  I,  Chapter  iv  21

cry  to  the  Lord  with  the  prophet,  « The  wicked  have  told
me  tales,  but  not  according  to  Thy  law.' l  Go  then,  and  dare
to  profess  yourself  a  free  man  while  you  have  this  heavy  load
of  inconsistency  upon  your  shoulders,  from  which  you  cannot
escape.  For  if  you  have  the  power  and  not  the  will,  so  much
the  more  are  you  the  slave  of  this  very  perverse  will  of  yours.
Is  he  not  a  slave  who  is  ruled  by  iniquity  ?  He  is  the  worst
of  all  slaves.  Unless,  perchance,  in  your  judgement  there  is
less  dishonour  in  being  governed  by  a  vice  than  by  a  man.
What  difference  docs  it  make  whether  you  serve  willingly  or
against  your  will  ?  For  though  compulsory  slavery  be  more
pitiable,  slavery  deliberately  sought  is  more  lamentable.  '  And
what,'  say  you,  '  do  you  wish  me  to  do  ? '  I  would
have  you  give  yourself  some  respite  from  these  occupations.
'Impossible,'  you  will  perhaps  reply;  'I  could  more  easily
bid  farewell  to  the  chair.'  A  good  reply  if  I  were  urging  you
to  break  them  off  altogether,  and  not  rather  to  have  some
break  in  them.


CHAPTER V

The  'Pope  should  not  be  so  absorbed  in  other  men  s
affairs  as  to  neglect  himself

6.  Let  me  then  put  before  you  my  rejoinder,  and  offer  you
my  advice.  If  you  give  all  your  life  and  all  your  wisdom  to
action,  and  nothing  to  consideration,  do  I  praise  you  ?  in  this
I  praise  you  not.  I  suppose  no  one  would  who  has  heard
Solomon's  words,  '  He  that  hath  little  business  shall  become
\viM'.'-  Action  itself  certainly  does  not  fare  well  unless

1  I'-,  cxix.  85.  '-'  Kc<  In*,  xxxviii.  25.


22


On  Consideration


preceded  by  consideration.  If  you  wish  to  belong  altogether
to  other  people,  like  him  who  was  made  all  things  to  all  men,1
I  praise  your  humanity,  but  only  on  condition  that  it  be
complete.  But  how  can  it  be  complete  if  you  yourself  are  left
out  ?  You,  too,  are  a  man.  So  then,  in  order  that  your
humanity  may  be  entire  and  complete,  let  your  bosom,  which
receives  all,  find  room  for  yourself  also.  Otherwise,  according
to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  what  does  it  profit  you  if  you  gain
the  whole  world  and  lose  your  own  self?  a  Wherefore,  though
all  possess  you,  take  care  that  you  are  one  among  them.  Why
are  you  alone  defrauded  of  your  reward  ?  How  long  will  you
be  '  a  wind  that  passeth  away  and  cometh  not  again  '  ? 3  Will
the  time  never  come  when  you  will  in  turn  receive  yourself
among  the  rest  ?  You  are  a  debtor  both  to  the  wise  and  to
the  foolish  ;  and  are  you  the  only  one  to  whom  you  deny
yourself?  Wise  and  foolish,  bond  and  free,  rich  and  poor,
male  and  female,  old  and  young,  cleric  and  layman,  righteous
and  wicked,  all  alike  share  in  you,  all  drink  at  the  public
fountain  of  your  heart ;  and  will  you  stand  apart  and  thirst  ?
If  he  is  cursed  who  impairs  his  inheritance,  what  are  we  to  say
of  him  who  strips  himself  of  it  altogether  ?  By  all  means  let
your  waters  stream  down  into  the  streets ;  let  men  and  flocks
and  herds  drink  thereof,  nay  let  the  servants  of  Abraham  give
drink  even  to  the  camels  ;  but  among  the  rest  do  you  yourself
drink  of  the  water  of  your  own  well.  '  Let  not  a  stranger',
saith  the  Scripture,  '  drink  thereat.' 4  Are  you  a  stranger  ?  To
whom  are  you  not  a  stranger,  if  you  are  one  to  yourself  ?  In
short,  if  a  man  is  bad  to  himself,  to  whom  is  he  good  ?  5
So  remember,  I  do  not  say  always,  I  do  not  say  often,  but  at
least  sometimes,  to  restore  yourself  to  yourself.  Among  the

1 i  Cor.  ix.  22.  2  St.  Matt.  xvi.  26.  3  Ps.  Ixxviii.  39.

4  Prov.  v.  17.  °  Ecclus.  xiv.  5.


Booh  /,  Chapter  v  23

many,  or  at  all  events  after  the  many,  do  you  also  make  use  of
yourself.  Can  I  make  a  more  liberal  concession  to  you  ?  For
what  I  say,  I  say  to  spare  you,  not  according  to  my  strict
judgement.  I  suppose  that  in  this  respect  I  am  more  indulgent
even  than  the  Apostle  himself.  '  More,  then/  you  reply,  '  than
I  ought  to  be.'  I  do  not  deny  it.  But  suppose  the
Apostle's  standard  be  the  right  one,  it  matters  not,  for  I  am
confident  you  will  not  be  satisfied  with  my  timid  outline l  of
your  duty,  but  will  more  abound.  It  is  certainly  more  fitting
that  you  should  abound  than  that  I  should  be  too  bold.  I
also  think  it  safer  for  myself  in  dealing  with  your  Majesty  to
err  on  the  side  of  timidity  than  of  rashness.  And  perhaps  this
is  the  way  a  wise  man  should  be  admonished  if  the  Scripture
is  to  be  fulfilled — '  Give  a  wise  man  an  opportunity  and  he
will  be  still  wiser'.2


CHAPTER  VI

The  administration  of  justice  concerns  temporal
governors  rather  than  bishops

7.  Still  I  would  have  you  hear  what  the  Apostle  thinks
about  this.  '  Is  it  so  that  there  is  not  a  wise  man  among
you,'  he  says,  '  who  may  judge  between  brother  and  brother  ?'s
And  he  adds,  *  I  say  this  to  move  you  to  shame ;  those  who
are  of  less  account  in  the  church,  set  them  to  judge.' 4  So,
according  to  the  Apostle,  apostolic  man  though  you  are,  you
usurp  a  mean  office  unworthy  of  you,  and  descend  to  the  level
of  those  who  are  of  less  account.  Hence  it  is  that  as  bishop,

1  Or,  '  Instruction.'  Infnrmator  was  in  mediaeval  Latin  a  school
master.

-  I'rov.  ix.  9.  3 I  Cor.  vi.  5.  «  Ibid.  v.  4.


24  On  Consideration

instructing  a  bishop,  the  Apostle  said,  '  No  soldier  of  God
entangleth  himself  in  the  affairs  of  this  life.' l  But  I  spare
you.  For  my  aim  is  not  to  speak  strongly,  but  to  point  out
what  is  possible.  Do  you  think  the  times  would  endure  it,  if,
when  men  are  wrangling  over  an  earthly  inheritance,  and  are
clamouring  for  your  judgement,  you  were  to  answer  them  in
the  words  of  your  Lord,  '  Men,  who  made  Me  a  judge  over
you  ? ' 2  What  sort  of  a  judgement  would  be  pronounced
on  you  ?  Something  like  this — '  What  says  this  ignorant
boor,  disregarding  his  primacy,  dishonouring  the  sovereign
see,  disparaging  the  apostolic  dignity  ? '  And  yet,  I  suppose,
the  critics  could  not  point  to  a  single  instance  of  an  apostle
sitting  as  a  judge  of  men,  a  fixer  of  land-marks,  or  a  dis
tributor  of  lands.  In  fact  I  read  that  the  apostles  stood  to  be
judged,  not  that  they  sat  to  judge.3  The  time  for  judging
will  come ;  it  is  not  yet.  Does  the  servant  really  degrade
himself  if  he  does  not  wish  to  be  greater  than  his  lord,  or
the  disciple  if  he  does  not  wish  to  be  greater  than  he  who  sent
him,  or  a  son  if  he  does  not  overpass  the  bounds  which
his  fathers  set  ?  '  Who  made  Me  a  judge  ? ' 4  said  our  great
Lord  and  Master.  And  shall  any  wrong  be  done  to  the
servant  and  disciple  if  he  does  not  judge  all  mankind  ?  In  my
opinion  the  man  who  thinks  it  unworthy  of  apostles  or  apostolic
men,  to  whom  judgement  over  greater  matters  has  been  com
mitted,  to  refrain  from  judging  in  these  smaller  ones,  does  not
understand  the  relative  value  of  things.  Why  should  they
not  scorn  to  give  judgement  concerning  men's  poor  earthly
possessions,  seeing  that  they  shall  judge  heavenly  things,  and
angels  too  ?  Your  jurisdiction,  therefore,  is  over  criminal
cases,  not  over  property ;  if  indeed  it  is  for  the  former  pur-

1 2  Tira.  ii.  4.  2  St.  Luke  xii.  14.  3  Acts  v.  27.

4  St.  Luke  xii.  14.


Book  /,  Chapter  vi  25

pose,  not  for  the  latter,  that  you  have  received  the  keys  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven,  which  will,  I  presume,  shut  out  men
because  they  are  transgressors,  not  because  they  are  owners  of
property.  'That  ye  may  know,'  our  Lord  says,  'that  the
Son  of  Man  hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins.'1  Which
seems  to  you  the  greater  dignity  and  power,  that  of  forgiving
sins,  or  that  of  dividing  estates  ?  The  truth  is  that  there  is
no  comparison  between  them.  These  lower  earthly  things
have  their  own  judges,  the  kings  and  princes  of  the  earth.
Why  trespass  on  another  man's  province  ?  Why  put  your
sickle  into  another  man's  harvest  ?  Not  that  men  in  your
position  are  unworthy,  but  because  to  devote  yourselves  to
such  matters  when  you  have  enough  to  do  with  better  is
unworthy  of  you.  Finally,  where  necessity  requires,  this  is
what  the  Apostle  thinks — '  If  the  world  shall  be  judged  by
you,  are  ye  unworthy  to  judge  the  smallest  matters  ? ' 2


CHAPTER VII

Nothing  more  deserving  of  consideration  than
piety  and  things  eternal

8.  But  it  is  one  thing  now  and  then  for  some  urgent  reason
to  turn  aside  to  these  matters ;  it  is  another  of  your  own
accord  to  apply  yourself  to  them  as  if  they  were  of  such
importance  as  to  deserve  the  earnest  attention  of  your  exalted
rank.  Accordingly,  if  I  wished  to  speak  strongly,  or  with
perfect  sincerity  say  all  that  is  right,  I  should  say  all  that
I  have  said  and  a  vast  deal  besides.  But  as  things  are,  for
the  days  are  evil,"  it  is  enough  now  that  you  have  been

1  St.  Matt.  ix.  6.  2  i  Cor.  vi.  2.  3  Epli.  v.  i<V


26  On  Con  side  ratio?]

admonished  not  to  give  yourself  up  altogether,  nor  at  all  times,  to
the  active  life,  but  to  set  apart  some  portion  of  your  heart  and
of  your  time  for  consideration.  But  in  saying  this  I  have  regard
to  the  necessity  laid  upon  you,  not  to  the  claims  of  righteous
ness  :  albeit  there  is  no  unrighteousness  in  yielding  to  neces
sity.  For  if  the  fitting  were  possible,  reason  unanswerably
shows  that  piety,  which  is  profitable  for  all  things,  should
under  all  conceivable  circumstances  be  distinctly  preferred,
and  that  it  ought,  either  alone  or  above  all  else,  to  be  stu
diously  cultivated.  Do  you  ask  what  piety  is  ?  It  is  leaving
time  for  consideration.  You  may  perhaps  tell  me  that  herein
I  differ  from  him  who  defines  piety  as  '  the  worship  of  God  V
I  do  not  really  differ  from  him.  If  you  well  consider  the  point
you  will  find  that  I  have  expressed  his  meaning  in  my  own
words,  only  partly,  however,  I  admit.  What  is  so  essential  to
the  worship  of  God  as  the  practice  to  which  He  exhorts  in
the  psalm,  '  Be  still  and  see  that  I  am  God  '  ? 2  This  certainly
is  the  chief  object  of  consideration.  Is  anything,  in  all
respects,  so  influential  as  consideration?  Does  it  not  by
a  kindly  anticipation  create  the  divisions  of  the  active  life
itself,  in  a  manner  rehearsing  and  arranging  beforehand  what
has  to  be  done  ?  There  must  be  consideration  lest  haply
affairs  which  foreseen  and  premeditated  might  turn  out  well,
may,  if  precipitated,  be  fraught  with  peril.  I  have  no  doubt,
if  you  will  recall  the  incidents,  you  will  find  that  in  law  cases,
important  business  of  various  kinds,  or  in  weighty  delibera
tions,  you  have  yourself  frequently  had  this  sorrowful  experi
ence.  First  of  all,  consideration  purifies  the  very  fountain,
that  is  the  mind,  from  which  it  springs.  Then  it  governs  the
affections,  directs  our  actions,  corrects  excesses,  softens  the
manners,  adorns  and  regulates  the  life,  and,  lastly,  bestows
j  1  Job  xxviii.  28.  2  Ps.  xlvi.  IO.


Booh  I,  Chapter  vii  27

the  knowledge  of  things  divine  and  human  alike.  It  is  con
sideration  that  brings  order  out  of  disorder,  puts  in  the  links,
pulls  things  together,  investigates  mysteries,  traces  the  truth,
weighs  probabilities,  exposes  shams  and  counterfeits.  It  is
consideration  which  arranges  beforehand  what  is  to  be  done,
and  ponders  what  is  accomplished,  so  that  nothing  faulty,  or
needing  correction,  may  settle  in  the  mind.  It  is  considera
tion  which  in  prosperity  feels  the  sting  of  adversity,  in
adversity  is  as  though  it  felt  not  ;  the  one  is  fortitude,  the
other  is  prudence.


CHAPTER VIII
The  four  primary  virtues

9.  And  herein  you  may  observe  a  delightfully  harmonious
connexion  between  the  virtues,  and  their  dependence  one  upon
another.  In  the  present  instance,  for  example,  Prudence  is
the  mother  of  Fortitude,  nor  ought  any  deed  of  daring  to  be
called  fortitude,  but  rather  rashness,  if  it  be  not  the  child  of
prudence.  It  is  consideration,  too,  which  sits  as  it  were
umpire  of  the  strife  between  our  pleasures  and  our  necessities,
settles  the  boundaries  on  either  side,  allotting  and  allowing  to
the  latter  what  is  sufficient,  taking  from  the  former  what  is
excessive,  and  then  from  both  fashioning  a  third  virtue  known
as  Temperance.  For  consideration  deems  the  man  who  denies
himself  what  is  necessary  no  less  intemperate  than  the  man
who  indulges  to  excess.  Temperance,  therefore,  consists  not
only  in  cutting  down  superfluities,  but  in  allowing  necessaries.
The  Apostle  apj>ears  to  be  not  merely  the  supporter  of  this
\iew,  but  its  author,  for  he  teaches  us  that  the  care  of  our


28  On  Consideration

flesh  is  not  perfected  in  the  gratification  of  its  desires.1  When
he  says  that  the  '  care  of  the  flesh  is  not  perfected  ',  he  checks
all  excess  ;  when  he  adds  *  in  the  gratification  of  its  desires  ',  he
does  not  exclude  what  is  necessary.  I  therefore  think  there
is  good  sense  in  the  definition  of  Temperance  given  by  the
writer  who^tells  us  that  it  neither  cuts  off  what  jsjaeccssary,
nor  goes  beyond  it.  This  agrees  with  the  philosopher's
maxim,  ;  Moderation  in  all  things.'

I  o.  Now  as  regards  Justice,  which  is  one  of  the  four,  is  it
not  certain  that  there  must  be  previous  consideration  in  order
that  Justice  may  be  a  mental  habit  ?  The  mind  must  first
reflect  upon  itself  in  order  that  it  may  frame  a  rule  of  Justice,
and  not  be  inclined  to  do  to  another  what  it  would  not  have
done  to  itself,  nor  refuse  to  another  what  it  desires  for  itself.
These  two  assuredly  comprise  the  whole  sphere  of  Justice.
But  Justice  does  not  abide  alone.  Permit  me  to  point  out  to
you  the  beautifully  close  and  harmonious  connexion  which
exists  between  it  and  Temperance,  and  between  both  these
and  the  two  former  virtues.  Prudence  and  Fortitude.  For  if
it  be  a  part  of  Justice  to  refrain  from  doing  to  another  man
what  we  would  not  have  done  to  ourselves,  and  if  perfect
Justice,2  as  our  Lord  says,  consists  in  doing  to  other  men
whatsoever  we  would  they  should  do  to  us,  neither  of  these
will  be  possible  unless  the  will  itself,  which  entirely  deter
mines  the  nature  of  an  action,  be  so  ordered  that  it  neither
desires  anything  superfluous,  nor  superstitiously  refuses  any
thing  necessary ;  and  this  is  the  work  of  Temperance.  In
a  word,  if  Justice  itself  is  to  be  just,  it  must  be  regulated  by
Temperance.  '  Be  not  righteous  over  much '  saith  the  wise
man,8  showing  us  hereby  that  Justice  without  the  curb  and

1  Rom.  xiii.  14,  apparently.  2  St.  Matt.  vii.  12.

3  Eccles.  vii.  16.


Book  /,  Chapter  viii  29

restraint  of  Temperance  is  by  no  means  to  be  approved.  It  is
noteworthy  that  Wisdom  itself  does  not  refuse  the  bridle  of
Temperance,  for  Paul,  according  to  the  wisdom  given  to  him  by
God,  bids  us  not  to  be  wiser  than  we  ought,  but  to  be  soberly
wise.1  But,  on  the  other  hand,  that  Temperance  cannot
dispense  with  Justice,  our  Lord  shows  us  in  the  Gospel,
when  He  rebukes  the  temperance  of  those  who  abstained  that
they  might  seem  to  men  to  fast.2  There  was  temperance  in
respect  of  food,  but  there  was  not  justice  in  the  heart,  because
their  aim  was  not  to  please  God  but  to  please  men.  Again,
how  can  you  have  either  one  or  the  other  unless  you  have
Fortitude,  since  Fortitude,  and  no  slight  Fortitude,  is  required,
if  what  you  desire,  and  what  you  decline,  are  to  be  confined  to
the  narrow  channel  which  lies  between  too  little  on  the  one
side,  and  too  much  on  the  other,  so  that  the  will  may  be  con
tent  with  that  bare,  unmixed,  unalloyed,  consistent,  nicely
balanced,  as  it  were  neatly  trimmed,  moderation,  which  alone,
we  are  agreed,  partakes  of  the  quality  of  virtue.

ii.  Tell  me,  pray,  if  you  can,  to  which  particularly  of
these  three  virtues  you  think  this  middle  place  should  be  given,
which  so  borders  upon  all  that  it  seems  to  belong  to  each.
Arc  virtue  and  the  mean  identical  ?  If  so,  virtue  would  not
be  manifold,  but  all  the  virtues  would  be  included  in  one.  Is
it  not  better  to  maintain  that  unless  the  mean  be  kept  there
can  be  no  virtue  ?  and  that  this  middle  region  of  which  we
speak  is  in  a  sense  the  very  pith  and  marrow  of  all  virtues,
wherein  they  are  so  united  that  they  must  all  seem  to  be  one,
all  the  more  because  by  sharing  in  it  they  do  not  divide  it,  but  it
is  as  an  unbroken  whole  the  property  of  each  ?  For  example,
what  is  so  characteristic  of  Justice  as  Moderation  ?  This  is
so  certain,  that  if  Justice  be  tainted  with  excess,  it  clearly
1  Rom.  xii.  3.  a  St.  Matt.  vi.  16.


30  On  Consideration

does  not  give  to  every  man  his  due ;  yet  this  giving  to  every
man  his  due  is  the  very  object  of  Justice.  Again,  what  is
more  characteristic  of  Temperance,  which  is  surely  what  it  is
for  no  other  reason  than  that  it  allows  nothing  immoderate  ?
But  you  will,  I  suppose,  admit  that  the  observance  of  the
mean  is  no  less  a  mark  of  Fortitude.  Is  not  Fortitude  above
all  things  necessary  to  put  forth  its  power  and  rescue  Modera
tion  from  the  assaults  of  vices  which  on  every  side  try  to
strangle  it?  And  once  it  is  free,  is  it  not  Fortitude  that
makes  it  a  solid  foundation  of  goodness,  and  the  abode  of
virtue  ?  Therefore,  to  keep  the  mean  is  Justice,  Temperance,
Fortitude.  Perhaps  the  difference  between  them  may  be  thus
stated — Justice  is  concerned  with  the  affections ;  Fortitude
makes  Justice  efficacious;  possession  as  well  as  use  are  the
domain  of  Temperance.  It  remains  for  us  to  show  that
Prudence  is  not  excluded  from  this  communion  of  the  virtues.
Is  it  not  Prudence  which  first  discovers  and  gives  attention  to
Moderation  when  it  has  been  too  long  neglected  and  despised,
imprisoned  as  it  were  through  the  jealousy  of  the  vices,  and
hidden  out  of  sight  in  the  darkness  of  inveterate  habit  ?  Why
do  I  tell  you  this  ?  Few  pay  attention  to  Prudence  because
few  possess  it.  So  Justice  seeks,  Prudence  finds,  Fortitude
frees,  Temperance  possesses.  I  do  not  propose  to  now  dis
cuss  these  virtues,  but  this  much  I  would  say  because  I  am
urging  you  to  find  some  time  for  consideration,  through  whose
kindly  service  these  and  such  like  truths  receive  the  attention
they  deserve.  To  bestow  no  labour  in  life  on  securing
leisure  so  pious  and  so  profitable,  is  not  this  to  lose  life
itself?


Rook  /,  Chapter  ix  31


CHAPTER IX

The  recent  practice  of  the  Tope  to  be  gradually
corrected,  the  old  imitated

12.  But  suppose  you  were  unexpectedly  to  devote  yourself
entirely  to  this  philosophy.  Your  predecessors  were  not
wont  so  to  do ;  you  will  be  a  nuisance  to  all  the  world,  inas
much  as  you  are  not  walking  in  the  footsteps  of  your  fathers  ;
and,  what  is  more,  it  will  seem  as  though  your  conduct  were
designed  to  flout  them.  Besides  this,  you  will  be  a  target  for
the  familiar  proverb — '  the  man  who  does  what  nobody  else
does  is  a  marvel  to  everybody ' ;  it  will  be  hinted  that  you
have  a  passion  for  admiration.  And  you  cannot  all  at  once,
or  altogether,  either  correct  the  faults  of  your  critics  or  mod
erate  their  excesses.  After  a  time  you  will  be  able,  according
to  the  wisdom  given  to  you  by  God,  little  by  little  and  as  oc
casion  offers,  to  take  the  business  in  hand.  Meanwhile,  by
all  means  turn  another  man's  badness  to  good  account ;  this
you  can  do.  Still,  if  we  are  to  follow  that  which  is  good,
not  that  which  is  new,  there  have  not  been  wanting  Roman
pontiffs  who  found  leisure  in  the  midst  of  the  weightiest
affairs.  When  the  city  was  besieged,  and  the  sword  of  the
barbarians  was  over  the  necks  of  the  citizens,  was  Pope
Gregory  thereby  deterred  from  writing  words  of  wisdom  at
his  leisure  ?  At  that  very  time,  forsooth,  as  appears  from  his
preface,  he  expounded  with  no  less  diligence  than  elegance
the  concluding  and  most  obscure  portion  of  EzekieJ.


32  On  Consideration

CHAPTER X

The  shameless  trickery  of  advocates,  judges^
and  procurators

13.  'Very  good',  you  say,  'but  different  customs  now
prevail,  we  live  in  other  days,  and  men's  manners  have
changed  ;  dangerous  times  are  not  only  coming  but  have  come.
Deceit,  and  guile,  and  violence  have  grown  strong  upon  the
earth.  Pettifoggers  abound,  a  defender  a  of  the  right  is  rare,
everywhere  the  strong  oppress  the  poor  ;  we  dare  not  fail  to
succour  the  oppressed,  we  cannot  refuse  justice  to  the  sufferers.
Unless  causes  are  pleaded,  and  both  sides  heard,  how  can
judgement  be  given  between  the  parties.'  My  reply  is  this —
Let  the  causes  be  pleaded,  but  in  the  proper  way.  For  the  pre
valent  practice  is  most  execrable,  and  such  as  does  not  become
even  the  forum,  let  alone  the  Church.  It  is  a  marvel  to  me
how  your  religious  ears  can  bear  to  listen  to  the  disputes
of  advocates  2  of  this  class,  and  to  their  battles  of  words,

1  Honorius,  Emperor  of  the  West,  at  the  request  of  African  Councils,
appointed  in  A.D.  407  lay  'defenders'  (defensores}  of  the  Church,  to
watch  over  its  privileges  and  maintain  its  rights,  so  that  the  clergy  should
not  be  obliged  to  appear  personally  in  secular  courts. (Robertson,  Ch.
Hist,  vol.  i.  p.  573.) 'In  Rome,  beginning  with  Innocent  I  (A.D.  402-
417)  the  Defenders  became  by  the  time  of  Gregory  the  Great  a  regular
order  of  officers  whose  duties  were  (i)  to  defend  Church  interests  generally,
(ii)  to  take  care  of  alms  left  for  the  poor,  (iii)  to  go  to  help  applicants
from  a  distance  for  Papal  protection,  (iv)  to  look  after  outlying  estates
belonging  to  St.  Peter's  patrimony.' At  that  time  there  were  seven  such
officers,  each  with  his  own  region. They  were  usually  laymen,  but  some
times  clerics,  and  held  a  sort  of  ecclesiastical  position. (Diet,  of  Christian
Antiq.  vol.  i.  p.  33.)

2  Advocates, Defenders,  or Vicedomini (French Vidames) arose in
Gaul  during  the  sixth  and  seventh  centuries. Except  in  name  they  bore


Book  /,  Chapter  .v  3  3

which  avail  more  to  the  subversion  of  the  truth  than  to  its
discovery.  Correct  the  corrupt  custom,  cut  off  the  tongues
that  speak  vanity,  close  the  deceitful  lips.  These  are  they
who  have  taught  their  tongue  to  utter  lies  ;  they  are  clever  in
withstanding  justice,  learned  in  defending  falsehood.  They
are  wise  to  do  evil,  eloquent  to  assail  the  truth.  These  are
they  who  venture  to  instruct  their  teachers,  who  invent  their
facts,  blackmail  the  innocent,  destroy  the  simplicity  of  truth,
obstruct  the  ways  of  judgement.  Nothing  so  easily  brings
virtue  to  light  as  a  brief  and  simple  narrative.  So  then,  when
cases  must  come  before  you — they  need  not  by  any  means  all
come — I  should  like  you  to  decide  them  with  care,  but  sum
marily,  and  so  cut  short  these  dilatory  adjournments  which
mean  nothing  but  the  hunting  of  the  prey.  Let  the  cause  of
the  widow  come  unto  you,  the  cause  of  the  poor,  and  of  him
who  hath  nothing  to  give.  You  will  be  able  to  hand  over
many  other  causes  to  various  persons  to  dispose  of;  the  vast
majority  you  will  not  deem  even  worthy  of  a  hearing.  For
what  need  is  there  to  admit  to  your  presence  men  whose  sins

no  resemblance  to  the  '  defenders '  of  the  earlier  ages.  They  defended
the  bishops  and  clergy  against  their  rude  and  lawless  neighbours,  acted  as
secular  judge»,  led  the  contingents  to  the  army  furnished  by  church
estates,  &c.  Charlemagne  made  the  appointment  of  such  a  champion  for
every  church  compulsory.  Tire  champion  was  usually  a  powerful  layman,
and  his  reward  was  the  use  of  land  belonging  to  the  church  and  adjacent  to
his  own.  The  '  advocates  '  gradually  became  tyrants  instead  of  protectors,
neglected  their  duty,  usurped  the  right  of  nominating  to  the  church  or
abbey,  made  the  office  hereditary,  and  treated  the  property  of  the  Church
as  if  it  were  their  own.  The  monasteries  were  especially  oppressed  by
their  '  defenders  ',  who  often  paid  largely  to  the  sovereign  for  the  privilege
of  defending  them.  Councils  in  Kngland  restricted  these  usurpations  as
early  as  the  Council  of  Beccanceld  (A. 0.696)  and  Clovesho,  most  prob
ably  Clifl-at-Hoe  near  Rochester  (A.D.  803).  In  St.  Bernard's  time
(A.D.  1148)  the  Council  of  Rhcims  dealt  with  the  subject  in  its  <ixth
Canon.  Robertson,  Ch.  ///»/. ,  Diet,  of  Christ.  Antiq.,  &c.


IT. II  kNAkl)


34  On  Consideration

clearly  go  before  to  judgement  ?  So  gigantic  is  the  impudence
of  some  men,  that  though  their  causes  bear  on  their  very  face
the  swarming  scabs  of  ambition,  they  do  not  blush  to  demand
a  hearing,  thus  revealing  themselves  to  the  consciences  of  the
multitude,  a  tribunal  before  which  they  would,  as  in  the  judge
ment  of  even  their  own  conscience,  be  confounded.  There  was
no  one  to  check  their  effrontery  ;  so  the  numbers  grew,  and  they
lost  all  sense  of  shame.  But,  oddly  enough,  a  vicious  man
does  not  shun  the  consciences  of  other  vicious  men,  and
where  all  are  filthy,  the  stench  of  one  is  hardly  noticed.  For
instance,  when  did  an  avaricious  man  ever  blush  for  another
avaricious  man,  the  unclean  for  the  unclean,  the  luxurious  for
the  luxurious  ?  The  Church  is  full  of  ambitious  men  ;  the  time
has  gone  by  for  being  shocked  at  the  enterprising  efforts  of
ambition  ;  we  think  no  more  of  it  than  a  robber's  cave  thinks
of  the  spoils  of  the  wayfarers.


CHAPTER  XI
Such  iniquitous  greed  to  be  sternly  rebuked

14.  If  you  are  a  disciple  of  Christ,  let  your  zeal  kindle,  let
your  authority  arise  against  this  impudence  and  widespread
pestilence.  Look  to  your  Master,  see  what  He  does,  listen
as  He  says  'Let  my  servant  follow  me.'1  He  does  not
prepare  ears  to  hear,  but  a  scourge  wherewith  to  smite.  He
neither  utters  words  nor  attends  to  them.  For  he  is  not
sitting  to  judge,  but  pursuing  to  punish.  Nevertheless,  he
plainly  indicts  the  offenders — they  had  made  the  house  of
prayer  a  place  of  merchandise.  Do  you  follow  His  example.

1  St.  John  xii.  26.


Book I,  Chapter  xt  35-

Let  traffickers  of  this  description  blush  before  your  counten
ance,  if  possible;  if  that  may  not  be,  let  them  be  afraid.
(You  have  the  scourge  in  your  hand.  Let  the  money-changers
fear  ;  let  them  not  trust  in  their  money,  but  distrust  its  power  ;
let  them  hide  their  money  from  you  because  they  know  you
are  more  ready  to  pour  it  out  than  to  accept  it.  By  earnestly
and  constantly  acting  thus  you  will  gain  many,  because  you
will  win  over  to  more  honourable  pursuits  those  who  follow
after  filthy  lucre,  and  you  will  preserve  many  from  even  daring
to  attempt  anything  of  the  kind.  And  there  is  something
else.  There  will  be  a  substantial  increase  in  the  leisure  time
which  I  am  urging  you  to  secure,  for  you  will  thus  redeem
not  a  few  brief  intervals  to  devote  to  leisurely  consideration,
sometimes  by  not  hearing  the  business  at  all,  on  other  occasions
by  entrusting  it  to  some  one  else.  When  you  deem  the
matter  worthy  to  be  heard  by  yourself,  by  judging  the  case  on
its  merits  you  will  save  both  time  and  expense.  I  am  thinking
of  adding  a  few  remarks  on  this  topic,  but  I  prefer  to  do  so
at  the  beginning  of  another  book.  Here  let  me  end.  I  am
afraid  you  may  not  only  find  my  matter  unpleasant,  but  think
me  tedious.


C 2


BOOK II

[Eugenius  had  delegated  to  St.  Bernard  the  office  of  preach
ing  the  Second  Crusade  (A.  D.  1147),  which  ended  in  '  utter
and  hopeless  failure  '.  *  Soon  ',  says  Mr.  Cotter  Morison
(Life  and  Times  of  St.  Bernard,  p.  417),  'from  the  broad
population  of  Europe,  a  murmur  of  wrath  and  reproach  was
heard,  which,  rising  in  every  swelling  volume,  at  last  broke
into  articulate  utterance, and  thundered  out  the  name  "Bernard"
with  every  mark  of  anger  and  resentment.  .  .  .  Bernard  was
accused  and  reviled  as  the  author  of  the  calamities  which  had
overtaken  the  Crusade.  Why  did  he  preach  it  ?  Why  did
he  prophesy  success  ?  Why  did  he  work  miracles  to  make
men  join  it,  if  this  was  to  be  the  result  ? '  In  the  opening
portion  of  this  book  the  Saint  answers  these  questions  and
attempts  to  justify  himself.

He  next  points  out  the  four  subjects  worthy  of  considera
tion — yourself*  things  beneath  you,  things  around  you,  things
above  you,  and  admonishes  Eugenius  to  consider  who  he  is,
and,  as  to  the  dignity  of  his  profession,  -what  he  is.  First,  he
is  to  reflect  whence  he  is  descended,  which  may  serve  to  abate
his  pride.  His  authority  over  all  churches  is  for  service,  not
for  arbitrary  dominion.  If  he  grasps  at  civil  and  ecclesiastical
supremacy,  he  deserves  to  lose  both.  Secondly.  Eugenius  is
not  only  '  supreme  pastor  over  all  the  flocks,  but  likewise  over
all  the  shepherds '.  Nevertheless,  he  must  remember  that  the
dignity  which  has  been  superadded  to  him  has  not  been  able
to  divest  him  of  his  nature.  Born  a  man,  he  is  still  a  man,
and  ought  to  consider  himself  as  a  man.  '  Draw  the  veil
which  covers  you,  disperse  the  clouds  that  environ  you,  and
you  will  find  yourself  a  poor,  naked,  wretched  creature — in
a  word,  born  in  sin,  with  a  short  life  abounding  in  miseries,
and  full  of  fears  and  complaints.'  Thirdly,  Eugenius  is  to
consider  his  manners  and  conduct,  and,  in  conclusion,  is
exhorted  to  the  pursuit  of  various  virtues. — Du  Pin,  &c.]


Book  II,  Chapter  i  37


CHAPTER  I

St.  Bernard  a/>o/og/zes  for  the  failure  of  the
Second  Crusade

I.  I  remember,  dear  Eugenius,  Father  in  God  and  best  of
men.  the  promise  which  I  made,  alas  !  too  long  ago.  Now,
late  though  it  be.  I  propose  to  redeem  my  pledge.  I  should
be  ashamed  of  the  delay  if  I  were  conscious  of  carelessness  01
contempt.  This  is  not  the  case  ;  but,  as  you  yourself  know,
we  have  fallen  on  evil  times ;  it  seemed  as  though  our  social
life,  not  to  speak  of  our  studies,  was  doomed  to  come  to
a  standstill ;  it  was  as  though  the  Lord,  provoked  by  our  sins,
were  almost  judging  the  world  before  the  time,  with  equity
indeed,  but  forgetful  of  his  mercy.  He  has  not  spared  the
people,  nor  His  own  Name.  Do  they  not  say  among  the
peoples,  •  Where  is  their  God  '  ? !  And  no  wonder.  The
sons  of  the  Church,  and  they  who  bear  the  Christian  name,
lie  prostrate  in  the  desert,  slain  with  the  sword,  or  perished
with  hunger.  Floods  of  strife  have  overwhelmed  our  rulers,
and  the  Lord  has  made  them  to  wander  in  the  waste,  where
there  is  no  way.2  Tribulation  and  misfortune  are  in  their
ways,  terror,  sorrow,  and  confusion  in  the  chambers  of  kings
themselves.3  Confusion  dogs  the  footsteps  of  those  that
bring  tidings  of  peace,  that  announce  good  things  ! 4  We
said  '  peace ',  and  there  is  no  peace ;  we  promised  good
things,  and  lo  !  perplexity.  It  might  be  supposed  we  had

1 Ps.  xlii.  IO.  • Ps.  cvii.  40.

8  Ps.  xiii.  3,  Vulg. Isa.  lix.  7. See  also  Sanday  and  Hcadlani,  Rom.
iii.  15-17.
<  Isa.  Iii.  7.


38  On  Consideration

therein  been  light  or  rash.  We  certainly  ran  therein  not
as  uncertainly,  but  at  your  command,  nay,  rather  at  God's
command  given  through  you.  Why  then  have  we  fasted,  and
He  hath  not  beheld  ?  humbled  our  souls,  and  He  knew  not  ?
For  in  all  these  things  His  fury  is  not  turned  from  us,  but
His  hand  is  stretched  out  stilJ.  How  patiently,  meanwhile,
doth  He  listen  to  the  impious  words  of  the  blasphemous
Egyptians,  '  He  craftily  led  them  out  that  He  might  slay
them  in  the  desert.' J  We  all  know  that  the  judgements  of
the  Lord  are  true.2  But  this  judgement  is  such  a  great  deep
that  I  could  almost  justify  myself  for  calling  him  blessed  who
is  not  offended  thereat.

2.  Still,  how  strange  it  is  that  men  are  so  rash  as  to  dare
to  reprehend  what  they  cannot  possibly  comprehend  !  Let
us  call  to  mind  the  judgements  of  former  times,  which  have
been  since  the  world  began,  if  haply  we  may  find  consolation
in  them.  For  one  spoke  on  this  wise,  '  I  have  remembered
thy  judgements  of  old,  O  Lord,  and  have  comforted  myself.'"
I  speak  of  what  everybody  knew,  and  now  nobody  knows.
Forsooth  this  is  the  way  with  the  wit  of  man.  Knowledge
is  sometimes  superfluous :  when  we  need  it,  we  have  it  not.
Moses,  when  about  to  lead  the  people  out  of  the  land  of
Egypt,  promised  them  a  better  land.  Otherwise,  had  they
known  that  land  only,  were  they  ever  likely  to  follow  him  ?
He  led  them  out,  but  when  they  were  led  out  he  did  not  lead
them  into  the  land  which  he  had  promised.4  Nor  can  the  sad
and  unlooked-for  issue  be  attributed  to  the  rashness  of  the
leader.  He  did  everything  as  the  Lord  commanded,  the
Lord  working  with  him,  and  confirming  his  work  by  signs
following.  But  that  people,  you  say,  was  stiff-necked,  always

1 Ex.  xxxii.  12.  2  Ps.  xix.  9.  3  Ps.  cxix.  52.

4  Deut.  xxxii.  52,  &c.


Book 77, Chapter  i  39

stubbornly  opposing  the  Lord  and  his  servant  Moses.  Well  !
they  were  faithless  and  rebellious  ;  but  what  are  these  ?  Ask
them.  What  need  for  me  to  say  what  they  themselves  con
fess  ?  One  thing  I  do  say.  How  could  they  reach  their
journey's  end  who  were  always  turning  back  on  the  road  ?
Was  there  ever  a  time  in  their  whole  journey  when  they  were
not  in  their  heart  turning  back  into  Egypt  ?  But  if  they  fell
and  perished  on  account  of  their  iniquity,  can  we  wonder  that
our  contemporaries  with  the  same  conduct  have  the  same  j
experience  ?  But  was  their  fall  contrary  to  the  promises  of
God  :  No,  nor  has  the  fall  of  these  latter  been.  For  the
promises  of  God  never  prejudice  the  righteousness  of  God.
And  something  else  I  wish  to  say.

3.  Benjamin  hath  sinned  : ]  the  other  tribes  gird  themselves
for  vengeance,  and  not  without  God's  approval.  In  fact  He
himself  appointed  the  leader  of  the  army.  So  they  fight,
relying  both  on  the  stronger  force  and  on  the  better  cause,  and,
what  is  more,  on  the  divine  favour.  But  how  terrible  is  God
in  His  purposes  towards  the  children  of  men  !  2  The  avengers
of  wickedness  gave  their  backs  to  the  accursed,  and  the  many
fled  before  the  few.  But  they  return  to  the  Lord,  and  the
Lord  bids  them  go  up.3  They  go  up  afresh,  and  again  they
are  scattered  and  confounded.  So  at  first  with  God's  favour,
and  then  at  God's  command,  the  righteous  engage  in  a
righteous  contest,  and  nevertheless  are  overcome.  But  they
were  found  as  superior  in  faith  as  they  were  inferior  in  the
fight.  What  do  you  suppose  our  forces  would  make  of  me  if
at  my  exhortation  they  were  again  to  go  up,  and  again  be  over
come  ?  Are  they  likely  to  listen  to  me  if  I  were  to  advise
them  for  the  third  time  to  march,  and  resume  the  work  in
which  once  and  again  they  have  been  frustrated  ?  And  yet  the
1  Judges  n.  fl,  2  P>.  Ixvi.  =.  s  Judges  xx.  28.


40  On  Consideration

I  Israelites,  taking  no  account  of  their  double  disappointment,
obeyed  for  the  third  time,  and  were  then  victorious.  But  we
shall  perhaps  be  asked,  '  How  are  to  know  that  the  word  has
gone  forth  from  the  Lord  ?  What  signs  do  you  work,  that
we  may  believe  you  ? '  It  is  not  for  me  to  answer  these
questions  ;  I  must  spare  my  modesty.  Do  you  answer  for
me,  and  for  yourself,  according  as  you  have  heard  and  seen,
or,  at  all  events,  according  as  God  has  given  you  inspiration.

4.  But  you  are,  perhaps,  wondering  why  I  take  this  line,  so
different  from  what  I  purposed.  I  do  so,  not  because  I  have
forgotten  my  purpose,  but  because  I  do  not  consider  it  foreign
to  my  purpose.  If  I  remember,  the  subject  of  my  discourse
to  your  Excellency  was  to  be  Consideration.  And  certainly
the  matter  to  which  I  have  referred  is  important  and  requires
much  consideration.  But  if  great  matters  ought  to  be  con
sidered  by  great  men,  who  is  so  well  qualified  for  the  work  as
yourself,  who  have  no  equal  upon  earth  ?  You  will,  I  am  sure,
according  to  the  wisdom  and  power  given  to  you  from  above,
deal  with  this  matter.  It  is  not  consistent  with  my  humility
to  tell  you  that  such  and  such  things  should  be  done.  It  is
enough  for  me  to  have  intimated  that  something  ought  to  be
done  for  the  consolation  of  the  Church,  and  to  stop  the  mouth
of  them  that  speak  wickedly.  Let  these  few  remarks  stand
for  my  apology,  so  that  whatever  your  conscience  may  tell  you
about  me  you  may  from  my  own  lips  know  enough  to  excuse
me,  and  yourself  also.  I  cannot  hope  for  this  from  those  who
judge  by  results,  but  with  you  I  am  safe.  The  testimony  of  a
man's  conscience  is  his  only  perfect  and  complete  excuse.  To
me  it  is  a  very  small  matter  that  I  should  be  judged  by  those
who  call  good  evil  and  evil  good,  who  put  light  for  darkness
and  darkness  for  light.1  And  if  one  of  the  two  things  must

1  Isa.  v.  20.


Book  II,  Chapter  i  41

happen,  I  had  rather  that  men  murmured  against  us  than
against  God.  It  is  good  for  me  if  He  condescends  to  use
-  a  shield.  I  gladly  welcome  the  tongues  that  speak
against  me,  and  the  poisoned  darts  of  blasphemers,  if  only
they  may  not  reach  Him.  I  do  not  refuse  to  be  dishonoured
if  only  violence  be  not  done  to  the  glory  of  God.  Who  can
give  me  the  privilege  of  glorying  thus,  ;  For  thy  sake  have
I  suffered  reproach,  shame  hath  covered  my  face  '  ? 1  My
glory  is  to  become  a  partner  with  Christ,  who  says,  •  the
reproaches  of  them  that  reproached  thee  have  fallen  upon
me.'2  Now  at  last  my  pen  shall  return  to  its  proper  work,
and  my  discourse  go  on  its  way  to  the  goal  we  set  before  us.


CHAPTER II

Consideration  distinguished  from  Contemplation

5.  And  first  of  all  consider  the  word.  I  do  not  wish  it  to
be  regarded  as  exactly  synonymous  with  contemplation,  because
the  latter  is  concerned  with  the  certainty  of  things,  the  former
more  fitly  with  their  investigation.  Accordingly,  contemplation
may  be  defined  as  the  soul's  true  unerring  intuition,  or  as
the  unhesitating  apprehension  of  truth.  But  consideration  is
thought  earnestly  directed  to  research,  or  the  application  of  the
mind  to  the  search  for  truth  ;  though  in  practice  the  two  terms
are  indifferently  used  for  one  another.

1 I'-.  Uix.  7.  - It.id.  v. io.


42  On  Consideration

CHAPTER III

Consideration  fourfold — (/)  The  Tope  himself,
(2)  things  below  him,  (3)  things  around  him,
(4)  things  above  him

6.  Now  as  regards  the  fruit  of  consideration,  I  think  there
are,  as  they  occur  to  me,  four  subjects  worthy  of  your  con
sideration — yourself,  things  below  you,  things  around  you,
and  things  above  you.  Let  your  consideration  begin  with
yourself,  lest,  while  you  neglect  yourself,  you  waste  your
energies  on  other  things.  What  does  it  profit  you  if  you  gain
the  whole  world  and  lose  your  single  self  ? *  Though  you  be
wise,  you  lack  wisdom  to  yourself,  if  you  do  not  belong  to
yourself.  But  how  far  do  you  lack  wisdom  ?  In  my  opinion,
altogether.  Though  you  know  all  mysteries,  though  you
know  the  breadth  of  the  earth,  the  height  of  the  heavens,  the
depth  of  the  sea,  if  you  know  not  yourself,  you  will  be  like  a
man  building  without  a  foundation,  and  will  succeed  not  in
rearing  an  edifice,  but  in  making  a  ruin.  Whatever  structure
you  raise  outside  yourself  will  be  like  a  heap  of  dust  before  the
wind.  He,  therefore,  is  not  wise  who  is  not  wise  to  himself.
The  wise  man  will  be  wise  to  himself,  and  will  first  of  all
drink  of  his  own  well.  Let,  then,  your  consideration  begin  at
yourself ;  and  not  only  so,  let  it  end  there.  Whithersoever  it
may  roam,  recall  it  to  yourself,  and  it  will  bring  with  it  the
fruit  of  salvation.  To  yourself  be  first,  to  yourself  be  last.
Copy  the  example  of  the  Great  Father  of  all,  who  both  sends
forth  His  word  and  keeps  it  with  Him.  Consideration  is
your  '  word  ' ;  if  it  goes  forth,  let  it  not  go  away  ;  let  it  so  go
on  that  it  go  not  out ;  let  it  so  go  outside  that  it  be  not  gone
1  St.  Matt.  xvi.  26.


Book II,  Chapter  Hi  43

altogether.  In  winning  salvation  let  no  one  be  nearer  and
dearer  to  you  than  the  only  one  of  your  mother.1  Think  of
nothing  contrary  to  your  own  salvation.  In  saying  *  contrary  ',
I  have  said  too  little ;  I  ought  to  have  said  besides  your  salva
tion.  Whatever  offers  itself  to  consideration,  if  it  has  not
some  bearing  on  your  own  sahation.  ought  to  be  rejected.


CHAPTER IV

The  threefold  Consideration  leading  to  self- know
ledge. Firstly,  What  the  'Pope  is

7.  And  this  consideration  of  yourself  falls  into  three
divisions,  if  you  consider  what,  who,  and  what  manner  of
man,  you  are.  The  first  refers  to  your  nature,  the  second  to
your  person,  and  the  third  to  your  character.  If,  for  example.
it  be  asked,  what?  a  man  ;  who?  pope  or  chief  pontiff;
what  manner  of  man  ?  kind,  gentle,  and  so  on.  The  inves
tigation  of  the  first  of  these  may  be  more  the  work  of  a
philosopher  than  of  an  apostolic  man  ;  still,  in  the  definition
of  a  man  as  a  rational  mortal  animal,  there  is  something  which
you  may,  if  you  choose,  carefully  ponder.  There  is  nothing  in
it  contrary  either  to  your  profession  or  your  rank,  but  there  is
something  which  may  contribute  to  your  salvation.  For  if
you  consider  these  two  attributes  together,  rationality  and
mortality,  you  gather  good  fruit — the  fact  of  your  mortality
humbles  your  reason,  while  your  reason  supports  you  under  the

1  St.  Bernard  perhaps  has  in  mind  Cant.  vi.  8—'  My  dove,  my
undefiled  (or  perfect)  is  but  OIK-  ;  she  is  the  only  one  of  her  mother;  she
is  the  choice  one  of  her  that  bare  her.'  Symbolically,  the  '  one  dove '  it
the  soul  intent  upon  the  highest  good  .  .  .  *<  una  »/«/'  Deo  vacet.  See
A  Lapide,  Commentary.


44  On  Consideration

thought  of  your  mortality,  and  a  prudent  man  will  not  neglect
either  side.  If  the  point  before  us  requires  further  considera
tion,  it  shall  be  dealt  with  later  on,  perhaps  more  profitably,
when  we  pass  the  whole  of  our  work  under  review.


CHAPTER V
Secondly,  Who  the  Tope  is,  and  whence  he  comes

8.  We  must  next  notice  'who  you  are,  and  what  your  origin
was.  I  have  used  the  word  '  origin  ',  but  I  think  I  had  better-
pass  that  over  and  leave  it  to  your  perception.  This  I  do  say,
that  it  would  be  an  unworthy  thing  for  you,  knowing  the
perfection  you  have  left,  to  stop  short  of  the  perfection  which
lies  before  you.  Should  you  not  blush  to  be  a  minnow  among
the  whales  when  you  remember  that  you  were  a  whale  among
the  minnows  ?  You  have  not  forgotten  your  first  profession  ;
it  is  taken  out  of  your  hands,  but  you  still  have  some  thought
for  it,  and  even  affection.  To  keep  it  in  view  will  not  be
unprofitable  in  the  framing  of  your  several  commands,  judge
ments,  ordinances.  This  consideration  makes  you  a  despiser
of  honour  even  in  the  midst  of  honour.  And  that  is  a  great
thing.  Lay  it  to  heart ;  it  is  your  shield  to  protect  you  from
the  arrow — '  Man  being  in  honour  is  without  understanding'.1
Say,  therefore,  to  yourself,  I  was  of  low  estate  in  the  house  of
the  Lord.  What  means  this,  that,  poor  and  lowly  though  I
was,  I  am  raised  to  rule  over  peoples  and  kingdoms  ?  Who
am  ],  or  what  is  my  father's  house,  that  I  should  sit  above
dignitaries  r  He  who  said  to  me,  '  Friend,  go  up  higher  ',2
surely  trusts  that  I  shall  be  a  friend.  If  I  am  found  less,  it  is

1  Ps.  xlix.  13.  a  St.  Luke  xiv.  10.


Book  //,  Chapter  v  4f

not  indeed  well  with  me.  He  who  has  raised  me  up  can  also
cast  me  down.  Too  late  should  I  complain,  •  Thou  hast  taken
me  up  and  dashed  me  to  the  ground.'1  There  must  be  no
flattery  of  your  exalted  rank,  when  there  is  more  cause  for
anxiety.  The  rank  magnifies  the  danger,  the  anxiety  manifests
the  friend  !  Let  us  give  good  heed  to  this,  unless  we  wish  at
length  with  shame  to  take  the  lowest  place.


CHAPTER VI

The  zeal  befitting  ecclesiastical  rulers

9.  We  cannot  disguise  the  fact  that  we  must  most  carefully
observe  why  it  is  that  you  have  been  set  above  other  men.  I
certainly  do  not  think  it  is  that  you  may  exercise  lordship  over
them.  For  even  the  prophet,  when  he  was  in  like  manner
exalted,  was  told  '  to  pluck  up  and  to  break  down,  to  destroy
and  to  overthrow  ;  to  build,  and  to  plant  '.'•  Which  of  these
has  the  ring  of  pride  in  it  ?  Is  it  not  more  correct  to  say  that
the  labourer's  task  typifies  spiritual  toil  ?  And  if  we  are  to
think  highly  of  ourselves,  we  should  perceive  that  a  burden  of
srma-  is  laid  upon  us,  not  the  privilege  of  lordship  bestowed.
'  I  am  not  greater  than  the  prophet ;  and  if  haply  I  am  his
equal  in  authority,  still  there  is  no  comparison  between  our
deserts.'  Speak  thus  to  yourself,  and  do  you  who  teach
others  teach  yourself.  Suppose  you  are  as  one  of  the  prophets.
Is  not  that  enough  for  you  ?  Yes,  and  more  than  enough.
But  by  the  grace  of  God  you  are  what  you  are.  What  is
that  ?  Suppose  you  are  a  prophet,  .ire  you  more  than  a
prophet  ?  If  you  are  wise  you  will  be  content  with  the
measure  wherewith  God  hath  measured  to  you.  For  what  is
1  Pt.  cii.  10.  2  Jer.  i.  IO.


4.6  On  Consideration

more  is  of  evil.  Learn  by  the  prophet's  example  to  govern,
not  so  much  for  the  purpose  of  commanding  as  of  doing  what
the  time  requires.  Learn  the  lesson  that,  if  you  are  to  do  the
work  of  a  prophet,  what  you  want  is  not  a  sceptre,  but  a  hoe.
The  prophet  does  not  rise  to  reign,  but  to  root  out  the  weeds.
Do  you  not  think  that  you,  too,  may  find  something  to  be  done
in  your  Master's  field  ?  Yes,  and  plenty  of  it.  The  prophets
have  surely  not  been  able  to  clean  all  the  ground ;  they  left
something  for  their  sons,  the  apostles,  to  do  ;  and  your
progenitors  have  left  something  for  you.  Nor  will  you  prove
equal  to  the  whole  task.  You  will  assuredly  leave  something
for  your  successor,  and  he  for  others,  and  50  on  to  the  end.
Accordingly,  we  find  that  about  the  eleventh  hour  the  labourers
were  rebuked  for  idleness,  and  sent  into  the  vineyard.  Your
predecessors,  the  apostles,  were  told  that  '  the  harvest  was
indeed  plenteous,  but  the  labourers  were  few  V  Claim  for
yourself  the  inheritance  of  your  fathers.  For  if  you  are  son,
then  you  are  also  the  heir.2  That  you  may  prove  yourself  to
be  the  heir,  diligently  watch,  and  forgo  sluggish  ease,  lest  to
you  also  it  be  said,  Why  standest  thou  here  all  the  day  idle  ? 3
10.  Much  less  ought  you  to  be  found  dissolved  in  luxury,
or  proudly  exhibiting  yourself.  The  will  of  the  testator
bequeaths  to  you  nothing  like  this.  Need  I  say  that  if  you
are  content  with  its  provisions  you  will  inherit  care  and  toil
rather  than  glory  and  riches.  Does  Peter's  chair  flatter  you  ?
It  is  a  watch-tower  whence,  in  a  word,  you  exercise  super
vision  ;  the  very  name  of  '  bishop '  reminds  you  not  of  lordship,
but  of  duty.  How  fitting  it  is  that  you  are  set  on  high  where
you  can  view  all  things,  inasmuch  as  you  are  appointed  watch
man  over  all.  In  very  truth  the  legitimate  issue  of  that
prospect  is  not  ease,  but  readiness  for  battle.  Where  ease  is
1  St.  Matt.  ix.  37.  -  Gal.  iv.  7.  8  St.  Matt.  xx.  6,


Booh  //,  Chapter  vi  47

unlawful,  what  occasion  is  there  for  glorying  ?  And  case  is
out  of  the  question  when  you  are  burdened  with  the  constant
care  of  all  the  churches.  It  must  be  so ;  for  what  else  did
the  holy  ajx>stle  transmit  to  you  ?  '  Such  as  I  have/  he  says,
4 give  I  thce.'1  What  is  that?  One  thing  I  know— it  is  not
gold,  nor  silver,  for  he  himself  says,  -Sil\er  and  gold  I  have-
not.'2  If  you  happen  to  have  them,  use  them  not  for  your
own  gratification,  but  to  meet  the  necessities  of  the  time.  You
will  then  be  using  them  as  though  you  used  them  not.  In
them^-Kes  as  regards  man's  spiritual  welfare,  they  are
neither  good  nor  b^d ;  yet  the  use  of  them  is  good,  the
pose  is  bad ;  anxiety  about  them  is  worse  ;  the  greed  of
gain  still  more  disgraceful.  Suppose  that  on  the  strength
of  some  other  plea  you  may  claim  them,  you  cannot  do  so  by
apostolic  right.  For  the  apostle  could  not  give  what  he  did
not  himself  possess.  What  he  had,  that  he  gave — the  care,
as  I  have  said,  of  the  churches.  Did  he  bequeath  to  you
lordship  over  them  ?  Hear  what  he  says,  '  Not  lording  it  over
the  charge  allotted  to  you,  but  making  yourselves  example-  to
the  Hock.' 3  And  do  not  suppose  that  the  words  were  prompted
by  humility  only,  and  are  not  based  on  truth.  In  the  Gospel
there  is  the  Lord's  warning,  'The  kings  of  the  Gentiles  hau
lordship  over  them,  and  they  that  have  authority  over  them  are
called  Benefactors.'  *  And  then  He  adds,  -  But  ye  shall  not
be  so.'5  It  is  quite  clear;  the  apostles  are  forbidden  to
exercise  lordship.

i  i .  Go  then,  if  you  dare,  and  either,  as  a  lord  over  God's
heritage,  assume  the  office  of  an  apostle,  or  as  an  apostolic  man
exercise  lordship.  It  is  clear  that  you  are  debarred  both.  If
you  wish  to  have  both  together,  you  will  lose  both.  You  must

1  Act*,  iii.  6.  a  Ibid.  •  1  Pet.  v.  3.

4  St.  Luke  xxii.  25  »  Ibid.


48  .On  Consideration

otherwise  think  yourself  excepted  from  the  number  of  those  of
whom  God  thus  complains,  '  They  have  reigned,  but  not  by
me  ;  they  have  been  princes,  and  I  knew  it  not.' 1  Now  if
you  like  to  reign  without  God,  you  have  whereof  to  glory,  but
not  before  God.  But  if  we  uphold  the  prohibition,  let  us  give
heed  to  the  commandment,  '  He  that  is  the  greater  among  you,
let  him  become  as  the  younger  ;  and  he  that  is  chief,  as  he  that
doth  serve.' 2  Here  is  the  apostolic  pattern  ;  lordship  is
forbidden,  service  is  enjoined  ;  and  this  latter  is  also  com
mended  by  the  example  of  the  Lawgiver  Himself,  who
immediately  adds,  '  but  I  am  in  the  midst  of  you  as  he  that
sen  eth.' 3  Who,  then,  would  think  he  has  nothing  whereof
to  glory  when  he  bears  the  title  by  which  the  Lord  of  Glory
distinguished  Himself?  Rightly  doth  Paul  glory  therein
when  he  says,  'Are  they  servants  of  Christ?  so  am  I.'4
And  then  he  adds,  '  I  speak  as  one  beside  himself,  I  more.
In  labours  more  abundantly,  in  prisons  more  abundantly,
in  stripes  above  measure,  in  deaths  oft.'  Oh  !  splendid
service.  What  sovereignty  does  it  not  excel  in  glory  ?  If
you  must  glory,  the  pattern  of  the  saints  is  set  before  you,  the
glory  of  the  apostles  is  your  model.  Does  that  seem  to  you
insignificant.?  Oh  !  that  some  one  would  give  me  the  power  of
becoming  like  the  saints  in  glory  !  The  prophet  cries  aloud.
*  Thy  friends,  O  God,  are  too  honourable  for  me,  their
sovereignty  hath  grown  too  strong.'5  The  apostle  exclaims,
'  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ.' 6

12.  I  would  have  you  always  glory  in  this  the  best  sort
of  glory,  that  which  apostles  and  prophets  chose  for  them
selves,  and  handed  on  to  you.  In  your  abundant  labours,  in

1  Hos.  viii.  4.  2  St.  Luke  xxii.  26.  3  Ibid.  27.

4  2  Cor.  xi.  23.  5  Ps.  cxxxix.  17.  °  Gal.  vi.  14.


Booh //, Chapter  vi  49

the  cross  of  Christ,  recognize  your  inheritance.  Happy
was  the  man  who  could  say,  'I  laboured  more  than  all.'1
Here  is  glorying,  but  there  is  in  it  no  vanity,  no  softness,  no
pride.  If  the  work  alarms,  the  reward  invites.  For  every
man  shall  receive  according  to  his  work.  And  if  he  laboured
more  than  all,  still  he  did  not  do  all  that  was  to  be  done,  and
there  is  yet  room.  Go  into  your  Lord's  field,  and  diligently
consider  the  dense  thicket  of  thorns  and  thistles  which,  accord
ing  to  the  ancient  curse,  covers  the  ground  even  to  this  day.
Go  out,  I  say,  into  the  world ;  for  the  field  is  the  world,  and
it  is  given  into  your  charge.  Go  into  it,  not  as  a  lordly  owner,
but  as  a  steward,  that  you  may  see  and  attend  to  that  whereof
you  must  give  account.  Go,  I  would  say  ;  traverse  it  with  steps
of  zealous  care,  and  careful  zeal.  For  even  they  who  were
bidden  go  into  all  the  world  did  not  compass  it  with  bodily
presence,  but  with  their  forethought.  And  do  you  lift  up  as  it
were  the  eyes  of  your  consideration,  and  see  the  lands,  if  they
are  not  rather  dry  for  burning  than  white  for  harvest.  How
often  will  what  you  took  for  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  if  you
examine  them  carefully,  prove  to  be  briars  ;  nay  rather,  not  even
briars  ;  they  are  old  and  rotten  trees,  but  certainly  not  fruit  trees  ;
their  only  fruit  is  swine's  food,  acorns  and  husks.  How  long
are  they  to  cumber  the  ground  ?  If  you  go  out,  and  clearly
see  them,  will  you  not  be  ashamed  that  your  axe  is  idle?
Will  you  not  be  ashamed  to  have  had  the  apostolic  sickle  put
into  your  hand  for  nothing  ?

13.  Once  upon  a  time  the  patriarch  Isaac  had  gone  into
this  field  ;  it  was  when  Rebecca  first  met  him ;  and,  in  the
words  of  Scripture,  '  he  had  gone  out  to  meditate.'2  He  went
to  meditate,  you  must  go  to  extirpate.  In  your  case  medita
tion  should  already  have  led  the  way  :  the  time  for  acting  is
1  i  Cor.  xv.  io.  2  Gen.  xxiv.  63.

D


ST. BERNARD


5«o  On Consideration

at  hand. If  you  now  begin  to  hesitate,  it  will  be  too  late.

According  to  the  Saviour's  counsel,1  you  should  have  first  sat

down,  and  estimated  the  work,  gauged  your  strength,  weighed

your  wisdom,  ascertained the relative  value of  things, and

calculated  the  cost  of  virtue. Come  then,  reckon  that  there

is  still  time  for  casting  up  the  account,  although  the  time  for

meditation  on  the  plan  has  gone  by. If  you  have  given  your

heart  to  the  work,  you  must  now  give  your  tongue  and  hand

as  well. Gird  on  your  sword,  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which

is the  word  of God.2 Glorify  your right hand and  arm

by  taking  vengeance  upon nations, by  rebuking  peoples,  by

binding  their  kings  with  chains,  and  their  nobles  with  fetters

of  iron. If  you do  these  things, you honour  both your

ministry and  yourself  the minister. That is no ordinary

sovereignty. In  virtue  of  it  you  drive  out  evil  beasts  from

your  borders,  so  that  your  flocks  may  be  safely  led  into  their

pastures. You  will  vanquish  the  wolves,  but  not  lord  it  over

the  sheep,  the  care  of  which  you  of  course  undertook  that  you

might feed them, not oppress them. If you have well

considered  who  you  are,  you  are  not  ignorant  that  this  is  your

duty. Moreover,  if  you  know  and  do  not,  it  is  sin  to  you.3

You  have  not  forgotten  the  passage,  '  the  servant  who  knew

his  master's  will,  and  did  unworthy  things,  shall  be  beaten

with  many  stiipes.'4 The  prophets  and  apostles  were  wont

to  do  as  I  suggest. They  were  brave  in  war,  not  voluptuaries

robed  in  silk. If  you  are  a  son  of  apostles  and  prophets,  do

as  they  did. Prove  the  nobility  of  your  descent  by  conduct

such  as  theirs; the  only  source  of their nobility was  the

ingenuousness  of  their  character,  and  the  fortitude  of  their

faith. Through this they conquered kingdoms, wrought

1  St.  Luke  xiv.  28.  2  Eph.  vi.  17.  3  St.  James  iv.  17.

4  St.  Luke  xii.  47.


Book II, Chapter  vi  5-1

righteousness,  gained  promises  in  return.1  Here  is  the  con
veyance  of  the  inheritance  of  your  fathers  :  I  have  put  it  before
you,  and  in  it  you  may  see  the  portion  which  falls  to  you.  Be
clad  with  fortitude,  and  the  inheritance  is  yours.  Have  faith,
have  wisdom,  but  the  wisdom  of  the  saints,  which  is  the  fear
of  the  Lord,  and  you  have  what  belongs  to  you.  The  whole
ancestral  estate  is  yours  by  clear  right.  Virtue  is  the  richest
estate.  Humility  is  a  good  estate ;  founded  thereon  the
whole  spiritual  edifice  grows  into  a  holy  temple  in  the  Lord.
Through  humility  some  have  even  possessed  the  gates  of  their
enemies.  For  which  of  the  virtues  is  so  mighty  to  subdue
the  pride  of  demons  and  the  tyranny  of  men  ?  But  though  it
be  to  every  person  alike  a  tower  of  strength  from  the  face  of  the
enemy,  somehow  or  other,  the  greater  the  man  the  greater  its
acknowledged  influence  ;  the  more  distinguished  its  possessor.
the  more  distinction  it  confers.  It  is  eminently  so  in  the  case
of  the  chief  pontiff.  No  gem  in  all  his  gorgeous  attire  shines
with  a  clearer  and  a  purer  light.  For  the  higher  he  is  above
his  fellows,  the  more  through  his  humility  he  conspicuously
surpasses  not  only  other  men,  but  himself  also.


CHAPTER VII
Who  the  Tope  is — (continued}

14.  I  shall  perhaps  be  blamed  for  leaving  the  first  part  of
my  subject  inadequately  treated,  and  going  off  into  the  second  ;
it  will  be  said  that  my  pen  is  beginning  to  tell  what  manner  of
man  you  ought  to  be,  though  it  has  not  fully  stated  who  you
are.  I  suppose  it  blushed  to  see  a  man  standing  naked  on  the

i  Hcb.  xi.  33.
D 2


7


f2  On  Consideration

pinnacle  of  power,  and  hastened  to  clothe  him  in  the  robes  of
office.  Without  these  the  more  clearly  you  are  seen  the  more
unseemly  you  appear.  Can  the  desolation  of  a  city  that  is  set
on  a  hill  be  hid  ?  or  the  smoke  of  a  lamp  extinguished  on  the
stand  escape  detection  ?  We  remember  '  An  ape  upon  the
house-top  :  a  silly  king  upon  the  throne  '.  Now  lend  me  your
ears  as  I  sing  my  song ;  it  may  not  be  altogether  pleasant,  but
it  will  do  you  good.  The  union  of  exalted  rank  with  a  base
spirit  is  a  monstrosity  ;  so  is  the  joining  together  of  the  chief
seat  and  the  lowest  life ;  or  of  a  tongue  that  speaketh  great
things,  and  an  idle  hand  ;  or  of  much  talk,  and  no  fruit ;  or  of
a  severe  look,  and  light  conduct ;  or  of  great  authority,  and  no
steadfastness.  There  is  the  mirror :  let  the  foul  countenance
recognize  itself,  but  you  may  rejoice  that  no  resemblance  to  it
is  found  in  yours.  Still  I  would  have  you  look  into  the
mirror  lest  haply,  although  you  may  have  good  grounds  for
self-satisfaction,  there  may  not  be  wanting  reasons  for  dis
satisfaction.  I  would  have  you  glory  in  the  testimony  of
your  conscience,  but  none  the  less  I  would  have  you  humbled
by  that  same  testimony.  It  is  seldom  a  man  can  say  '  I  know
nothing  by  myself  V  You  walk  more  warily  in  the  ways  of
goodness  if  you  take  care  that  evil  does  not  lurk  there.
Wherefore,  as  I  have  said,  you  should  know  yourself,  so  that
in  the  difficulties  of  your  position,  and  such  difficulties  do
exist,  you  may  not  only  enjoy  a  good  conscience,  but,  what  is
more,  may  also  learn  your  defects.  For  who  is  free  from
defects  ?  He  lacks  everything  who  thinks  he  lacks  nothing.
What  if  you  are  sovereign  pontiff?  Does  it  follow  that
because  you  are  sovereign  pontiff  you  are  supremely  perfect  ?
Let  me  tell  you  that  you  are  at  the  bottom  if  you  think  you  are
at  the  top.  Who  is  at  the  top  ?  He  to  whom  nothing  can
1  i  Cor.  iv.  4.


Book  //,  Chapter  i-ii  5-3

be  added.  You  greatly  err  if  you  think  you  are  the  man.
God  forbid  !  You  are  no^  of  those  who  make  dignities
identical  with  virtues.  You  knew  what  virtue  was  before  you
were  acquainted  with  rank.  Let  emperors  and  others  who
have  not  been  afraid  to  be  worshipped  as  divine  enjoy  that
opinion  : l  Nebuchadnezzar  for  example,  Alexander,  An-
tiochus,  Herod.  As  for  yourself,  consider  that  you  bear  the
title  of  *  supreme '  not  absolutely,  but  relatively.  And  when
I  say  this,  do  not  suppose  that  I  am  comparing  your  merits
with  other  men's.  I  refer  to  functions  of  the  ministry.  Let
a  man  so  account  of  you  as  of  a  minister  of  Christ,  and,
without  prejudice  to  the  holiness  of  any  one,  beyond  dispute
the  chief  of  ministers.  I  would  you  strove  to  be  supreme  in
other  respects,  and  did  not  think  yourself  supreme,  or  wish  to
be  so  regarded  before  you  are.  For  how  can  you  be  pro
ficient  if  you  are  already  self-sufficient  ?  It  follows  that  there
must  be  no  reluctance  to  find  out  what  is  lacking,  or  you  will
have  to  confess  that  you  lack  modesty.  Say  with  your
predecessor,  k  Not  as  though  I  had  received,  or  were  already
perfect.' 2  And  again,  '  I  count  not  myself  to  have  appre
hended.'  3  This  is  the  knowledge  of  the  saints  ;  it  is  far
from  that  which  puffeth  up.  He  who  adds  this  knowledge
adds  sorrow,4  but  it  is  a  sorrow  which  no  wise  man  ever  seeks
to  escape'.  It  is,  forsooth,  a  healing  sorrow,  by  means  of
which  the  deadly  stupor  of  a  hard  and  impenitent  heart  is
excluded.  This  is  why  we  deem  him  a  wise  man  who  could
say  •  My  sorrow  is  ever  in  my  sight  '.ft  1  must  now  gather  up
the  fragments,  if  any  remain,  of  the  topic  from  which  not  long
ago  we  turned  aside.

1  Viz.  that  dignities  are  identical  with  virtues

2  Phil.  iii.  12. 3  Ibid. *  Kcclec.  i.  18.  \.\\viii.  17.


5"  4  On  Consideration

CHAPTER  VIII
The  dignity  and  power  of  the  Tope

15.  Come,  let  us  still  more  closely  investigate  'what  you
are,  that  is  to  say,  the  character  you  represent  for  a  time  in
the  Church  of  God.  Who  are  you  ?  the  chief  priest,  the
sovereign  pontiff.  You  are  the  prince  of  bishops,  the  head
of  the  apostles  ;  in  priority  you  are  Abel,  in  government
Noah,  as  a  patriarch  you  are  Abraham,  in  order  Melchise-
dech,  in  rank  Aaron,  in  authority  Moses,  as  a  judge  you  are
Samuel,  in  power  Peter,  in  virtue  of  your  anointing  you  are
Christ.  You  are  he  to  whom  the  keys  have  been  committed,
and  the  sheep  entrusted.  There  are,  indeed,  other  door
keepers  of  heaven,  and  other  shepherds  of  flocks,  but  as  you
have  received  both  names  in  a  manner  different  from  the  rest,
so  for  you  they  bear  a  more  glorious  meaning.  Other  pastors
have  each  their  several  flocks  assigned  to  them ;  to  you  all
the  flocks  have  been  entrusted,  one  flock  under  one  shepherd.
Do  you  ask  for  proof  of  that  ?  It  is  the  Lord's  word.  For
to  which,  I  will  not  say  of  the  bishops,  but  of  the  apostles,
have  all  the  sheep  been  committed  so  absolutely  and  unre
servedly  ?  '  If  you  love  me,  Peter,  feed  my  sheep.'  !  What
sheep  ?  Are  we  to  say  the  people  of  such  and  such  a  city,
or  region,  or,  at  all  events,  kingdom  ?  '  My  sheep  ',  He  says.
Is  it  not  clear  that  He  has  not  specified  some,  but  committed
to  him  all  ?  There  is  no  exception  where  there  is  no  dis
tinction.  And  perhaps  the  fellow  disciples  of  Peter  were  pre
sent  when  our  Lord  by  charging  him,  and  no  one  else,  with  the
care  of  all  the  flocks,  commended  to  them  all  the  unity  of  one

1  St.  John  xxi.  15.


Book  //,  Chapter  viii  ff

flock  and  one  shepherd,  according  as  it  is  written,  *  My  dove,
my  beautiful,  my  perfect,  is  but  one.' 1  Where  there  is  unity
there  is  perfection.  The  other  numbers  are  not  perfect,  but
admit  of  division,  falling  short  of  unity.  Hence  it  is  that
other  bishops,  understanding  the  mystery,  have  shared  the
various  nations  between  them.  In  fact,  James,  who  seemed
to  be  a  pillar  of  the  Church,8  was  content  with  Jerusalem,  and
gave  up  universal  dominion  to  Peter.3  Admirably  was  James
placed  there  to  raise  up  seed  to  his  dear  Brother  in  the  place
where  his  Brother  was  slain,  for  he  was  the  Lord's  brother.
Now  if  the  Lord's  brother  yielded  to  Peter,  what  other  man
can  dare  to  trespass  on  Peter's  prerogative  ?

1 6.  So  then,  according  to  your  own  authorities,  other
bishops  are  called  to  a  share  in  responsibility,  you  are  called
to  the  exercise  of  plenary  power.  The  power  of  other  men  is
confined  within  fixed  limits  ;  yours  extends  to  those  who  have
power  over  their  fellows.  Have  you  not  power,  for  sufficient
reason,  to  shut  heaven  against  a  bishop,  and  even  deliver  him
to  Satan  ?  Your  prerogative,  therefore,  whether  the  power  of
the  keys  or  the  pastorate  of  the  Hocks,  is  unassailable.  Let
me  point  out  something  else  no  less  confirmatory  of  your  pre
rogative.  The  disciples  were  in  a  boat  when  our  Lord
appeared,4  and,  which  was  more  delightful  still,  appeared  in
His  risen  body.  Peter,  knowing  that  it  was  the  Lord,  cast
himself  into  the  sea,  and  thus  reached  his  Master,  while  the
rest  came  in  the  boat.  What  does  that  mean  ?  It  was  surely  a
sign  of  the  unique  pontificate  of  Peter,  intended  to  show  that
while  the  others  had  charge,  each  of  his  own  ship,  he  was  en
trusted  with  not  one  ship,  but  the  government  of  the  whole
world.  For  the  sea  is  the  world,  and  ships  are  churches.  Hence

1 Cant.  vi.8.  2  Gal.  ii.  <).  s  Ibid.  i.  19.

1 M.  John  xxi.  3,  4.


$6  On  Consideration

it  is  that  on  another  occasion,  like  his  Lord,  he  walked  upon
the  water,  and  thus  proved  himself  the  one  and  only  Vicar  of
Christ,  destined  to  rule  over  not  one  people,  but  all,  that  is  if
the  "many  waters  '  are  '  many  peoples  V  So  then  while  each
of  the  other  bishops  has  his  own  ship,  you  are  in  command  of
the  greatest,  the  Universal  Church  throughout  the  world,  the
sum  of  all  the  other  churches  put  together.


CHAPTER  IX

Sf.  Bernard  invites  the  Tope  to  consider
he  is  ty  nature

17.  Now  we  see  tube  you  are;  but  do  not  forget  what  you
are.  I,  at  all  events,  have  not  forgotten  my  promise  to  return
to  that  point  on  a  fitting  occasion.  And  is  it  not  most  fitting
to  combine  the  consideration  of  who  you  are  with  the  con
sideration  of  what  you  previously  were  ?  Why  do  I  say
'were  ?  You  are  still  what  you  were.  Why  cease  to  regard
what  you  have  not  ceased  to  be  ?  What  you  have  been,  and
what  you  are,  is  one  and  the  same  consideration  ;  your  new
official  character  is  a  different  matter.  In  the  scrutiny  of
yourself  the  one  should  not  exclude  the  other.  For  you  are,
as  I  have  said,  still  what  you  were,  and  no  less  what  you
were  than  what  you  have  since  become,  perhaps  even  more.
In  fact  you  were  that  by  nature ;  this  you  have  borrowed  ;
you  have  been  changed  into  it.  The  former  is  not  thrown
away,  the  latter  is  thrown  in.  Let  us  treat  them  both  together ;
for,  as  I  remember  saying  before,  when  they  are  compared
one  with  the  other  they  will  both  become  more  useful.  When,
1  Apoc.  xvii.  15.


Book II,  Chapter  /.v  57

father  back,  you  were  considering  what  you  are,  I  told  you
to  consider  your  nature  as  a  man :  for  you  were  born  a  man.
Moreover,  if  a  person  inquire  who  you  personally  are,  the
answer  will  be  the  name  of  the  character  you  sustain,  viz.  a
bishop,  and  this  you  have  become :  that  you  were  not  by
birth.  Now  which  of  these  seems  to  you  to  be  absolutely
your  own,  and  above  all  else  to  belong  to  you  ?  That  which
you  have  become,  or  that  which  you  were  born  ?  Must  we
not  say  that  which  you  were  born  ?  I  therefore  counsel  you
to  mainly  consider  what  you  mainly  are,  that  is  to  say,
a  man  ;  such  you  were  by  birth.

1 8.  Nor  should  you  only  observe  what  you  were  born,  viz.,
a  man,  but  also  what  manner  of  man,  if  you  do  not  wish  to  be
defrauded  of  the  fruit  and  profit  of  your  consideration.  Away
then  with  these  hereditary  girdles  which  have  been  accursed
from  the  beginning.  Tear  to  pieces  the  covering  of  leaves
that  conceal  the  shame  but  do  not  cure  the  wound.  Strip  off
the  disguise  of  this  fleeting  honour,  and  the  tinsel  of  this  sham
glory,  so  that  you  may  consider  yourself  in  your  bare  naked
ness,  for  naked  you  came  out  of  your  mother's  womb.1  Did
you  then  wear  the  sacred  fillet  ?  Had  you  then  the  glittering
gems  about  your  person  ?  Were  you  robed  in  flowery  silks  ?
Did  the  plumes  then  wave  upon  your  head  ?  Were  you
decked  with  gold  and  silver  ?  If  you  scatter  all  this  like
morning  clouds  quickly  passing  by  and  soon  to  altogether  pass
away,  if  you  blow  them  from  before  the  face  of  your  considera
tion,  you  will  behold  a  man  naked,  poor,  wretched,  pitiable  ;
a  man  grieving  that  he  is  a  man.  blushing  at  his  nakedness,
weeping  that  he  is  born,  complaining  that  he  is  a  man  born
to  toil,  not  to  honour,2  born  of  a  woman  and  thereby  a  guilty
crratui.  .'  living  but  a  little  while  and  therefore  in  constant
1  Job  i.  21.  2  Ibid.  v.  7.  Ibid.  xiv.  I.


y8  On  Consideration

fear,  full  of  misery  and  therefore  ever  bathed  in  tears.  And,
truly,  miseries  abound,  for  they  are  those  of  body  and  soul
together.  How  can  he  escape  calamity  who  is  born  in  sin,
with  a  frail  body  and  a  barren  mind  ?  Of  a  truth  he  must
be  full  of  misery,  who  through  transmitted  corruption,  the
sentence  of  death,  bears  the  double  load  of  weakness  of  body
and  foolishness  of  heart.  It  will  do  you  good  to  unite  these
two  considerations.  While  you  think  of  yourself  as  supreme
pontiff,  bear  in  mind  as  well  that  you  not  only  were,  but  are,
worthless  ashes.  In  your  thinking,  imitate  nature;  and,
which  is  worthier  of  you,  imitate  the  Author  of  nature,  by
associating  the  highest  and  the  lowest  things.  Has  not  nature
in  the  person  of  man  bound  together  poor  clay  and  the  breath
of  life  ?  Has  not  the  Author  of  nature  in  His  own  Person
tempered  together  the  Word  and  clay  ?  Take  then  for  your
pattern  both  our  original  constitution  and  the  mystery  of  our
redemption,  in  order  that,  though  you  sit  on  high,  you  may
not  be  high-minded,  but  may  think  lowly  of  yourself,  and
condescend  to  men  of  low  degree.


CHAPTER X
W 'hat  manner  of  man  the  Tope  is

19.  Accordingly,  if  you  consider  how  great  you  are,  think
also,  and  above  all,  what  manner  of  man  you  are.  This  con
sideration  keeps  you  well  within  yourself1  ;  it  surfers  you  not
to  fly  from  yourself,  nor  to  walk  in  great  matters,  or  in  things
too  wonderful  for  you.2  Take  your  stand  within  yourself;
you  will  not  then  sink  beneath  your  level,  nor  rise  above  it,

1  See  above.  2  Ps.  cxxxi.  I. R.  V.  Margin.


Book  11,  Chapter  .v  f9

you  will  not  go  too  far,  nor  spread  out  too  wide.  Keep  to
the  middle  if  you  wish  to  keep  moderation.  The  mid  way  is
the  safe  way.  Moderation  abides  in  the  mean,  and  moderation
is  virtue,  livery  abiding  place  outside  the  bounds  of  modera
tion  is  only  exile  to  the  wise  man.  Wherefore,  he  will  not
dwell  in  the  length,  that  is,  beyond  moderation  ;  nor  even  in
the  breadth,  that  is,  outside  it ;  nor,  again,  in  the  height,
or  in  the  depth,  one  of  which  is  above  moderation,  the  other
beneath  it.  In  fact  '  length '  mostly  implies  going  beyond
bounds  ;  •  breadth  '  may  mean  a  rent,  '  height  '  a  fall,  and
'depth'  an  abyss.  I  say  these  things  the  more  plainly  that
you  may  not  think  I  am  repeating  the  apostle's  exhortation
to  comprehend  with  all  saints  the  length,  and  breadth,  and
height,  and  depth.1  This  belongs  to  another  sort  of  discussion,
and  a  different  occasion.  Just  now  by  '  length  '  I  mean  a
man's  promising  himself  a  long  life ;  by  k  breadth  ',  his  being
racked  with  sujx?rfluous  cares ;  by  '  height  ',  his  trusting  too
much  in  himself;  by  'depth',  his  being  unduly  depressed.  Well
then,  if  a  man  measures  out  for  himself  distant  times,  is  he  not
really  starting  to  go  too  far  ?  Is  he  not  in  his  far-reaching
anxiety  passing  the  bounds  of  life  ?  Thus  it  is  that  men,
exiled  from  themselves  in  this  present  life  through  forgetful-
ness,  are  led  by  useless  anxiety  to  migrate  to  distant  ages,
which  will  not  profit,  nay  rather,  may  never  be.  Likewise,
the  heart  which  is  spread  over  many  things  must  of  net
be  torn  by  many  cares,  and  once  it  is  too  thin  there  comes
a  rent.  Further,  if  a  man  have  overweening  confidence  in
himself,  what  is  there  for  him  but  a  headlong  fall  ?  For  you
have  read  what  is  written,  k  Before  a  fall  the  heart  is  lifted
up.M  And  on  the  side  of  excessive  timidity,  what  is  depres
sion  but  in  a  sense  the  loss  of  oneself  in  despair  ?  A  brave
1  Kph.  iii.  18.  2  Prov.  xviii.  13.


6o  On  Consideration

man  will  not  be  so  far  depressed.  A  prudent  man  will  not  be
misled  by  the  uncertainty  of  a  long  life.  A  modest  man  will
moderate  his  cares  ;  he  will  refrain  from  superfluities,  and  will
not  deny  himself  what  is  necessary.  A  righteous  man,  more
over,  will  not  venture  on  what  is  above  him,  but  will  say  with
righteous  Job,  '  If  I  be  righteous,  yet  will  I  not  lift  up  my
head.' 1


CHAPTER XI
The  necessity  for  self-examination

20.  Let  me  beg  you,  then,  in  this  consideration  of  yourself
to  walk  with  caution.  Let  perfect  equity  be  your  companion,
so  that  you  may  not  allow  yourself  more  than  is  due,  nor
deprive  yourself  of  more  than  is  right.  Now  you  fall  into  the
first  of  these  errors  not  only  by  claiming  goodness  which  you
have  not,  but  also  by  taking  credit  for  goodness  which  you
have.  Carefully  distinguish  how  far  you  are  what  you  are
through  your^  own  efforts,  and  how  far  through  the  gift  of
God,  and  let  there  be  no  deceit  in  your  spirit.  Deceit  there
will  be  unless  you  faithfully  separate  what  belongs  to  yourself,
and  honestly  surrender  to  God  the  things  which  are  God's.
I  do  not  doubt  that  you  are  fully  convinced  that  what  is  evil
in  you  comes  from  yourself,  your  goodness  from  the  Lord.
Certainly  while  we  consider  what  manner  of  man  you  are,  we
must  also  recall  to  memory  the  sort  of  man  you  were  ;  we
must  compare  the  end  with  the  beginning.  We  must  see
whether  you  have  advanced  in  virtue,  in  wisdom,  in  under
standing,  in  sweetness  of  character,  or  whether,  which  God
forbid !  you  have  fallen  away.  We  must  note  whether  you

1  Jobx.  15.


Book //,  Chapter  AY  rti

are  more  patient  or  more  impatient  than  you  were  wont  to  be ;
more  prone  to  wrath,  or  more  gentle  ;  more  insolent,  or  more
humble  ;  more  affable,  or  more  austere  ;  more  easily  entreated,
or  more  obstinate;  more  pusillanimous,  or  more  magnani
mous  ;  more  earnest,  or  somewhat  more  careless ;  more  filled
with  the  fear  of  God,  or,  it  may  be,  more  confident  than  you
ought  to  be.  What  a  wide  field  lies  before  you  in  this  kind  of
consideration  !  I  therefore  mention  a  few  points,  indicating,  as
it  were,  some  seed  plots,  though  I  am  not  myself  the  sower,
but  only  the  giver  of  seed  to  the  sower.  You  should
have  a  clear  idea  of  your  zeal,  your  clemency,  and  also  your
discretion,  which  is  the  regulator  of  both  those  virtues  ;  you
should  see  what  you  are  like  in  forgiving  injuries  and  in
avenging  them ;  how  far  on  both  sides  you  prudently  regard
degree,  place,  and  time.  In  the  practice  of  these  three
virtues  these  three  things  must  be  thoroughly  considered,  lest
if  the  conditions  be  not  satisfied  the  '  virtues  '  cease  to  be
virtues ;  for  there  is  nothing  in  their  nature  to  make  them
virtues;  they  are  such  only  by  the  right  practice  of  them.
They  themselves  tell  us  that  they  are  '  indifferent '.  It  is  pos
sible  for  you,  either  by  abusing  them,  or  by  confounding  them
with  one  another,  to  turn  them  into  vices  ;  on  the  other  hand
you  may  by  the  good  and  methodical  use  of  them  make  them
virtues.  When  the  eye  of  discretion  is  darkened,  they  are
wont  to  jump  to  conclusions  and  occupy  their  own  stand
points.  Now  there  are  two  causes  of  this  dim  sight — anger
and  excessive  tenderness.  The  rebuke  of  judgement  is  en
feebled  by  the  latter,  precipitated  by  the  former.  Must  not
a  pious  clemency  be  endangered  on  the  one  side,  or  a  righteous
zeal  on  the  other  ?  The  eye  that  is  disordered  through  anger
views  nothing  in  the  light  of  clemency  ;  the  eye  bedewed
with  tears  of  womanly  tenderness  does  not  see  straight.  You


62  On  Consideration

will  not  be  innocent  if  you  either  punish  him  to  whom,  it  may
be,  mercy  should  be  shown,  or  spare  him  who  ought  to  have
been  punished.

CHAPTER XII

The  spiritual  effects  of  prosperity  and
adversity

21.  And  I  would  not  have  you  disguise  the  manner  of  man
you  have  found  yourself  in  tribulations.  If  you  have  found
yourself  steadfast  in  your  own,  sympathetic  in  other  men's,
rejoice.  Here  you  have  evidence  of  an  upright  heart.  On
the  contrary,  if  perchance  you  are  found  to  be  impatient  in
your  own  trials,  and  are  nevertheless  seen  to  be  by  no  means
compassionate  in  other  men's,  this  is  a  mark  of  a  heart  full  of
perversity.  How  has  it  been  with  you  in  prosperity?  Is
there  nothing  to  call  for  consideration  ?  Of  course  there
is,  if  you  carefully  observe  how  seldom  you  find  a  man
who  does  not,  at  least  to  some  extent,  in  time  of  prosperity
relax  his  vigilance  and  self-discipline.  As  regards  discipline,
when  was  not  prosperity  to  the  unwary  what  fire  is  to  wax,  or
the  rays  of  the  sun  to  snow  and  ice  ?  David  was  wise,
Solomon  wiser;  but,  flattered  by  unlooked-for  success,  the
one  in  part  and  the  other  altogether  acted  foolishly.  He  is
a  great  man,  who,  when  he  falls  into  adversity,  does  not  fall
away  at  least  a  little  from  his  wisdom  ;  and  he  is  as  great
who  has  been  favoured  with  the  smiles  of  Fortune  without
becoming  the  butt  of  her  ridicule.  And  yet  it  is  easier  to
find  men  who  have  kept  their  wisdom  when  fortune  was
against  them,  than  it  is  to  find  men  who  have  not  lost  it  when
fortune  was  on  their  side.  He  deserves  our  choice,  and  he


Booh //, Chapter  .v/V  63

is  a  great  man,  who  in  the  days  of  prosperity  has  at  all  events
withstood  the  stealthy  approaches  of  unbecoming  laughter,  or
rudeness  of  speech  ;  who  has  not  bestowed  too  much  attention
upon  dress,  or  pampered  the  body.


CHAPTER XIII

Idleness,  trifling,  and  profitless  conversation
to  be  shunned

22.  The  wise  man  rightly  admonishes  us  that  if  we  are  to
write  words  of  wisdom  we  must  have  leisure ; *  still  we  must
be  on  our  guard  even  against  leisure  itself.  We  must  accord
ingly  shun  idleness,  the  mother  of  trifles,  the  step- mother  of
virtues.  With  men  of  the  world  trifles  are  trifles  ;  in  the
mouth  of  a  priest  they  are  blasphemies.  Yet,  if  sometimes
they  occur  in  conversation,  we  must  perhaps  put  up  with
them  ;  reply  to  them  in  the  same  strain  we  never  ought.
Rather  we  ought  cautiously  and  prudently  to  put  a  stop  to
trifling.  We  should  do  our  best  to  break  out  into  something
serious  to  which  the  company  would  listen  not  only  with
profit,  but  with  pleasure,  and  refrain  from  idle  talk.  You
have  consecrated  your  mouth  to  the  Gospel ;  to  open  it  for
such  things  is  unlawful,  to  accustom  it  to  them  is  sacrilege.
'  The  lips  of  the  priest,'  says  one,  '  keep  knowledge,  and
men  look  for  the  law  from  his  mouth  ' ; a  certainly  not  trifles,
or  idle  tales.  It  is  not  enough  that  buffoonery,  which  they
glorify  as  wit  and  polish,  be  removed  far  from  your  mouth  ;
it  ought  also  to  be  banished  far  from  your  ear.  It  is  an

1 Ecclus.  xxxviii.  35.  - NU1.  ii.  7-


6 4  On  Consideration

abomination  that  you  are  moved  to  laughter,  it  is  more  abomin
able  for  you  to  move  others.  But  whether  it  is  more  dam
nable  to  disparage  a  man,  or  listen  to  a  disparager,  I  could
not  easily  tell.


CHAPTER XIV

The  Tope  warned  against  accepting  the  person
of  any

23.  I  need  not  trouble  you  to  look  at  avarice,  for  you  are
said  to  value  money  no  more  than  chaff.1  There  is,  assuredly,
no  reason  to  dread  your  judgements  on  that  account.  But
there  is  a  lurking  danger  which  no  less  frequently,  and  no  less
banefully,  besets  the  judgement  seat ;  and  as  regards  this,
I  should  be  very  sorry  if  any  mischief  were  latent  in  your
conscience,  and  you  were  unaware  of  it.  Do  you  ask  to
what  I  refer  ?  The  acceptance  of  men's  persons.  Consider
y  yourself  guilty  of  no  small  sin  if  you  welcome  sinners,  and  do
not  rather  decide  the  causes  of  the  deserving.  There  is  also
another  vice ;  if  you  feel  yourself  to  be  free  from  it  you  will
in  my  opinion  sit  in  solitary  state  among  all  those  whom
1  have  known  to  occupy  the  chair,  because  you  have  really,
in  a  singular  measure,  raised  yourself  above  yourself  as  the
prophet  says.2  I  mean  an  easy  credulity,  a  very  crafty  little

1  This  was  very  rare,  the  property  of  the  Church  being  claimed  entirely
by  the  Popes  of  the  Middle  Ages. Innocent  II  asserted  the  '  feudal  right '
of  the  Roman  Pontiff  with  much  emphasis  at  the  second  Lateran  Council
(A.D.  1139). The  Proctors  of  the  Peers  and  Commons  of  England  bit
terly  complained  at  the  first  Council  of  Lyons  (A.  D.  1245). See  Hussey,
Rise  of  the  Papal  Power,  p.  189,  &c.

2  Lament,  iii.  28. Vulg.


Booh 11,  Chapter  xi  6<>

fox,  against  whose  tricks,  so  far  as  I  have  ascertained,  not
one  of  our  great  men  has  taken  adequate  precaution.  That
was  why  they  were  so  often  angry,  all  for  nothing  ;  that  was
why  they  frequently  abandoned  the  innocent,  and  delivered
premature  judgements  against  men  who  were  not  in  court.
But  I  congratulate  you  (and  I  am  not  afraid  that  you  will
brand  me  as  a  flatterer),  I  congratulate  you,  I  say,  on  having
hitherto  presided  without  much  complaint  about  any  of  these
things ;  whether  you  are  also  free  from  fault,  see  for  your
self.  Now  your  consideration  must  be  directed  to  those
things  which  are  below  you.  But  here  we  start  afresh  ;  for,
bearing  in  mind  your  many  occupations,  the  shorter  the
discourse  the  better.


ST. BERNARD


BOOK III

['  In  the  third  Book  St.  Bernard  treats  of  the  consideration
the  Pope  ought  to  have  towards  those  that  are  under  him,
and  they  are  the  faithful  throughout  the  world.  There  is
no  poison  or  arms  that  he  ought  to  dread  more  than  the  spirit
of  tyranny.  He  next  deals  with  the  Pope's  duty  towards
those  not  in  the  Church.  He  then  protests  against  the
abuse  of  Appeals  to  Rome,  afterwards  condemns  the  like
abuse  of  Exemptions,  discusses  Dispensations,  and  concludes
by  urging  Eugenius  to  see  that  strict  discipline  is  maintained,
and  that  ecclesiastical  institutions  are  respected.  He  recom
mends  him  more  particularly  to  enforce  the  reforms  enjoined
at  the  Council  of  Rheims  relating  to  the  dress  and  manners
of  the  clergy,  as  also  those  respecting  the  age  and  qualifica
tions  of  such  as  were  to  be  admitted  to  benefices '  (Du  Pin).

Appeals.  The  Sardican  Canon  (A.D.  347)  gave  the  Pope
power  to  receive  appeals.  Pope  Nicholas  (A.D.  867)  asserted
that  no  question  in  the  Church  could  be  decided  without  the
consent  of  the  Roman  Pontiff.  Gregory  VII  went  further
in  holding  that  Councils  and  Canons  derive  their  force  from
the  authority  of  Rome.  Thither,  accordingly,  every  eccle-
.siastical  cause  was  to  be  carried  for  final  determination.  All
Europe,  and  England  especially,  cried  out  against  the  grievous
burden  for  centuries  (Hussey,  Rise  of  the  Papal  Power).
The  system,  as  St.  Bernard  knew  it,  was  '  an  elaborate  fabric
built  up  by  the  Canon  Law  of  times  subsequent  to  Charle
magne  upon  the  basis  of  the  False  Decretals.  It  was  a
grand  innovation  whereby  in  the  West  the  entire  system  of
purely  ecclesiastical  appeals  (and  indeed  of  justice)  was  in
effect  perverted  and  frustrated,  viz.  the  right  gradually  allowed
of  appealing  immediately  from  any  ecclesiastical  tribunal,  high
or  low,  upon  any  subject,  great  or  small,  to  the  Pope  at  once '
(Diet,  of  Christ.  Antiq.).  St.  Bernard's  Letters,  178,  179,
1 80,  refer  to  a  case  in  point.


Book 111  67

Exemptions.  'In  the  earlier  stages  of  their  existence,
monasteries  generally  availed  themselves  gladly  of  the  patronage
of  the  bishop  of  the  diocese.  But  as  they  increased  in  wealth
and  power,  they  struggled  to  emancipate  themselves  from  his
control.  .  .  .  Instances  might  easily  be  multiplied  of  the
almost  continual  collision  in  Western  Christendom  between
the  bishops  and  the  monasteries  in  their  dioceses ;  in  which
the  monasteries,  almost  invariably,  had  the  support  of  the
pope,  and,  frequently,  of  the  royal  authority '  (Diet,  of  Christ.
Slntifj.).  Sometimes  a  bishop,  unless  by  invitation  of  the
abbot  or  abbess,  could  not  consecrate  an  altar,  or  even  by
invitation  enter  the  more  private  parts  of  a  convent.  Nor
could  he  hinder  an  appeal  to  Rome.  On  the  other  hand,  it
must  in  justice  be  stated  that  the  oppressive  conduct  of  the
bishops  necessitated  some  refuge  from  their  arbitrary  juris
diction.  '  The  grossness  of  the  tyranny  practised  by  some
bishops  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the  monastic  bodies
often  appealed  against  it  in  synods,  and  that  these,  although
composed  of  bishops,  felt  themselves  obliged  to  condemn  ;t
in  strong  terms  and  to  forbid  its  continuance'  (Robertson,
Ch.  Hist.,  Second  Period,  Bk.  I,  ch.  ix,  p.  202).

Monastic  life.  Church's  Life  of  Anselm,  ch.  iii,  on  '  The
Discipline  of  a  Norman  Monastery  ',  may  be  profitably  con
sulted;  also  Morison's  St.  Bernard,  pp.  16  sq.,  126-33.  The
Cistercian  order,  to  which  St.  Bernard  belonged,  was  founded
A.  D.  1098  by  Robert,  son  of  a  nobleman  in  Champagne.
His  successor  at  Citeaux,  Alberic,  laid  down  the  rule  for  the
new  order,  and  it  was  afterwards  carried  out  with  greater  rigour
by  the  third  abbot,  Stephen  Harding,  an  Englishman,  and  one  of
Robert's  original  companions,  whose  code,  entitled  the  "Charter
of  Love",  was  sanctioned  by  Pope  Calixtus  in  A.D.  1119.
The  Cistercians  were  to  observe  the  rule  of  St.  Benedict,
without  any  glosses  or  relaxations.  Their  dress  was  to  be
white,  agreeably  to  a  pattern  which  the  Blessed  Virgin  had
shown  to  Alberic  in  a  vision.  They  were  to  accept  no  gifts
of  churches,  altars,  or  tithes.  From  the  ides  of  September
to  Easter  they  were  to  eat  but  one  meal  daily.  Their  monas
teries  were  to  be  planted  in  lonely  places  ;  they  were  to  eschew
all  pomp,  pride,  and  superfluity  ;  their  services  were  to  be

E 2


<58  On  Consideration

simple  and  plain  ;  some  of  the  ecclesiastical  vestments  were
discarded,  and  those  which  were  retained  were  to  be  of
fustian  or  linen,  without  any  golden  ornaments.  They  were
to  have  only  one  iron  chandelier ;  their  censers  were  to  be  of
brass  or  iron ;  no  plate  was  allowed,  except  one  chalice  and  a
tube  for  the  eucharistic  wine,  and  these  were,  if  possible,  to  be
of  silver  gilt,  but  not  of  gold.  The  monks  were  to  give
themselves  wholly  to  spiritual  employments,  while  the  secular
affairs  of  the  community  were  to  be  managed  by  the  '  bearded '
or  lay  brethren.  No  serfs  were  allowed,  but  hired  servants
were  employed  to  assist  in  labour.  In  the  simplicity  of  their
church  services  and  furniture,  the  Cistercians  differed  from
the  Cluniacs,  whose  ritual  was  distinguished  for  its  splendour ;
the  elder  order  regarded  the  principles  of  the  younger  as  a
reproach  to  itself,  and  a  rivalry  soon  sprang  up  between
them.  The  white  dress,  which,  although  already  adopted  at
Camaldoli,  was  a  novelty  in  France,  gave  offence  to  the  other
monastic  societies,  who  had  worn  black  habits  as  a  symbol  of
humility,  and  regarded  the  new  colour  as  a  pretension  to
superior  righteousness ;  but  the  Cistercians  defended  it  as  an
expression  of  the  joy  which  became  the  angelic  life  of
the  cloister '  (Robertson,  p.  706 ;  Fleury,  Hist.  Ecc.,
Bk.  LXVII,  c.  48).  St.  Bernard  is  said  to  have  founded
some  1 60  monasteries;  at  the  general  chapter  in  A.D.  H51
there  were  500  ;  in  the  following  century  the  number  had
increased  to  1,800,  and  eventually  became  much  greater.
The  order  grew  rich,  and  reforms  were  necessary,  but  until
the  rise  of  the  Mendicants  they  were  the  most  popular  of  all  the
monastic  societies.

Council  of  Rheims  (1148).  The  chief  canons  related  to
non-residence  ;  chaplains  accepting  posts  without  permission
of  the  bishop,  and  taking  the  oath  of  canonical  obedience  ;  the
arrest,  &c.,  of  the  clergy ;  the  avoidance  by  the  bishops  and
clergy  of  coloured  garments,  divided  skirts,  and  superfluous
ornaments  ;  marriages  of  '  religious  ' ;  appropriation  of  tithes
by  the  laity ;  putting  benefices  into  '  commission  ',  and  the
appointment  of  a  particular  priest  to  each  benefice  with
adequate  maintenance  ;  penance  for  incendiaries  ;  the  treatment
of  Manichean  heretics  (Fleury,^fj/.  Ecc.,  Bk.LXIX,  c.  31.)]


Booh III)  Chapter  i  69


CHAPTER I

The  Tope  should  aim  not  at  subjecting  all  men
to  himself^  but  at  bringing  them  into  the
bosom  of  the  Church

i.  The  end  of  the  previous  book  suggests  the  beginning  of
this.  And  so,  according  to  my  promise,  we  must  consider  the
things  that  are  under  you.  You  cannot  think  it  necessary  to
ask  me  what  they  are,  Eugenius,  best  of  priests  ;  it  were
better  perhaps  to  ask  what  they  are  not.  If  a  man  wishes  to
discover  what  does  belong  to  your  charge,  he  must  go  out  of
the  world.  Your  progenitors  were  destined  to  vanquish  the
whole  world,  not  certain  portions  of  it.  '  Go  ye  into  all
the  world  ' !  was  the  command  given  to  them.  They  indeed
sold  their  garments  and  bought  swords,  fiery  eloquence,  and
an  ardent  spirit,  weapons  powerful  in  the  sight  of  God.
Whither  did  not  those  illustrious  conquerors  come,  those  sons
of  the  mighty  ? 2  Whither  did  they  not  send  their  sharp
arrows  with  hot  scorching  coals?3  Indeed  their  sound  went
forth  into  all  the  earth  and  their  words  to  the  ends  of  the
world.4  Those  words  of  flaming  iire  which  the  Lord  sent

1  St.  Mark  xvi.  15.

1  Ps.  cxxvii.  4.  The  Hebrew  has  'sons  of  the  youth',  or  'sons  of
one's  youth ',  which  the  Septuagint  translators  misunderstanding  rendered
filii  excuswrurn.  The  Vulgate  perpetuated  the  blunder.  St.  Jerome
(Letter  to  Marcella  on  the  Exf  option  of  the  Psalm]  —  I  thank  the  Bishop
of  Gloucester  for  the  reference — in  an  interesting  discussion  of  the  passage
negatives  the  view  that  the  apostles  could  be  called  exeunt;  iiia*much,he
says,  as  they  shook  off  the  dust  of  their  feet  they  would  more  fitly  be
called  excutientts.  In  ordinary  speech,  St.  Jerome  adds,  excussi  was
regarded  as  the  equivalent  of  ves^fti,  r<ibti^ti,  i'x/eili'i.

' \'?.  c.x.x.  4.  4 Ps.  xix.  4.


70  On  Consideration

into  the  earth  made  men's  hearts  glow  in  their  inmost  depths.
Those  indefatigable  warriors  fell  on  the  field  of  battle,  but
they  fell  unconquered  :  even  in  death  they  triumphed.  Their
sovereignty  was  established  beyond  measure :  l  they  were
made  princes  in  all  lands.2  You  have  succeeded  to  their
inheritance.  So  you  are  their  heir,  and  the  world  is  your
inheritance.  But  the  exact  nature  of  your  interest  and  theirs
in  this  heritage  is  a  matter  for  sober  and  careful  consideration.
For  I  do  not  think  you  have  inherited  the  world  absolutely,
but  with  certain  limitations ;  as  it  seems  to  me  you  have
been  entrusted  with  a  stewardship  over  it,  not  put  in  possession
of  it.  If  you  go  on  to  usurp  possession,  He  withstands  you
who  says  'Mine  is  the  world  and  the  fulness  thereof'.3
You  are  not  the  King  of  whom  the  prophet  speaks — '  And
all  the  earth  shall  be  His  possession  '.4  He  means  Christ,
who  claims  possession  both  by  right  of  creation,  and  by  the
merits  of  redemption,  and  by  the  gift  of  the  Father.  For  to
whom  else  has  it  been  said,  '  Ask  of  me  and  I  will  give  thee
the  Gentiles  for  thine  inheritance,  and  the  utmost  bounds  of
the  earth  for  thy  possession '  ? 5  Surrender  possession  and
dominion  to  Him  ;  keep  for  yourself  the  care  thereof.  This
is  your  share :  put  not  forth  your  hand  beyond  it.

2.  'What?'  you  say,  'You  grant  me  precedence:  do
you  prohibit  sovereignty  ? '  Most  certainly.  You  speak  as  if
pre-eminence  in  watchful  care  were  not  good  pre-eminence.  Is
not  the  farm  in  the  care  of  the  steward,  and  the  child,  though
he  be  master,  subject  to  the  tutor  ?  Nevertheless,  the  steward
does  not  own  the  farm,  nor  is  the  tutor  master  of  his  master.
I  would  have  you  also  so  take  precedence  that  you  may
provide,  counsel,  administer,  serve.  Let  your  precedence  be

1  Ps.  cxxxix.  17. Vulg.  a  Ps.  xlv.  16.

3  Ps  1.  12.  4 Ps.  civ.  24.  D  Ps.  ii.  8.  »


Booh 111)  Chapter  i  j\

profitable  to  others ;  '  take  precedence  like  a  faithful  and  wise
servant  *  whom  his  Lord  hath  set  over  his  household  \3  For
what  purpose  ?  That  you  may  '  give  them  food  in  due  season  ' ;
in  other  words,  may  manage,  not  command.  Do  this  ;  and
inasmuch  as  you  too  are  a  man,  do  not  aim  at  lording  it  over
other  men,  lest  all  unrighteousness  gain  dominion  over  you.3
But  I  have  already  pressed  this  upon  you  more  than  enough  in
discussing  who  you  are.  Yet  I  add  this  much  ;  for  I  dread  no
poison  for  you,  no  sword  more  than  the  lust  of  dominion.  If
you  are  not  greatly  deceived,  you  surely  think  you  have  received
no  more  from  the  great  apostle  than  I  have  said  ;  to  claim  this
is  to  take  much  upon  yourself.  Recall  the  words  of  him  who
said  k  I  am  a  debtor  both  to  the  wise  and  to  the  foolish  '.4
And  if  your  judgement  tells  you  that  the  admonition  is  super
fluous,  please  remember  also  that  the  offensive  name  of
k  debtor'  suits  a  servant  better  than  a  master.  The  servant
in  the  Gospel  was  asked  '  How  much  owest  thou  unto  my
Lord  ? ' 5  So  then,  if  you  acknowledge  that  you  are  not
lord  over  the  wise  and  the  foolish,  but  a  debtor  to  them,  you
must  be  exceedingly  careful,  and  must  with  unceasing  vigilance
consider  how  those  who  lack  wisdom  may  become  wise,  how
the  wise  may  be  prevented  from  turning  to  folly,  how  those
who  have  turned  to  folly  may  recover  their  senses.  But  no
sort  of  folly,  so  to  speak,  is  more  foolish  than  unbelief.  So
then  you  are  a  debtor  also  to  the  unbelieving,  both  Jews  and
Gentiles.

3.  We  perceive  then  that  you  must  strive  to  the  utmost
that  they  who  have  not  faith  may  be  turned  to  faith,  that  they
who  have  turned  may  not  turn  aside,  that  they  who  have  thus

1  Prnesis,  ul prosis — 'As  you  are  before  the  rest,  so  be  for  them.'

2  St.  Matt.  xxiv.  45.  3  Ps.  cxix.  133.
4  Rom.  i.  14. ft Luke  xvi.  5.


72-  On  Consideration

turned  may  turn  back ;  moreover,  you  must  see  that  the
perverse  ones  be  set  in  the  paths  of  uprightness,  and  the
subverted  recalled  to  truth  ;  that  the  subverters  of  men's  souls
may  be  convinced  by  invincible  reason,  so  that  they  themselves,
if  possible,  may  either  be  cured  of  their  errors,  or,  if  that  may
not  be,  they  may  lose  their  authority,  and  the  power  of
subverting  other  men.  You  must  certainly  not  allow  yourself
to  be  imposed  upon  by  the  worst  sort  of  foolish  men,  I  mean
heretics  and  schismatics  ;  for  these  are  they  who  are  subverted,
and  subvert ;  they  are  dogs  to  tear,  foxes  to  deceive.  Men,
I  say,  of  this  sort  must  be  corrected  with  special  care  lest
they  perish,  or  must  be  restrained  that  they  may  not  do
damage.  As  regards  the  Jews,  I  grant  time  may  be  your
excuse  ;  they  have  their  fixed  limit,  which  cannot  be  antici
pated.  The  fullness  of  the  Gentiles  must  first  come  in.
But  as  regards  the  Gentiles  themselves,  what  answer  do  you
make  ?  Nay  rather,  what  is  the  verdict  of  your  consideration
on  this  long  delay  ?  Why  did  the  fathers  resolve  to  set  bounds
to  the  Gospel,  and  to  check  the  word  of  faith,  while  men's
hearts  are  hardening  in  unbelief?  Why,  do  we  suppose,  the
word  running  very  swiftly  suddenly  stopped  ? ]  Who  was
the  first  to  forbid  its  life-giving  progress  ?  Some  unknown
cause  perhaps  hindered  them ;  perhaps  necessity  compelled
them.

4.  Our  pretences  will  not  bear  examination.  Can  we  with
confidence  and  a  good  conscience  refrain  from  even  offering
Christ  to  those  who  have  Him  not  ?  Do  we  hold  back  the
truth  of  God  in  unrighteousness  ?  The  fullness  of  the  Gen
tiles  must  certainly  come  some  day.  Are  we  waiting  for  the
faith  to  fall  from  heaven  upon  them  ?  Who  ever  believed  by
accident  ?  How  shall  they  believe  without  a  preacher  ? 2
1  Ps.  cxlvii.  15.  2  Rom.  x.  14.


Booh  ///,  Chapter  i  73

Peter  was  sent  to  Cornelius,1  Philip  to  the  Eunuch ;  2  and  if
we  seek  a  more  modern  instance,  Augustine  was  appointed  by
Gregory  of  blessed  memory  to  deliver  the  mould  of  faith  to
the  English.3  Look  at  things  from  this  point  of  view.  A
word  more  about  the  obstinacy  of  the  Greeks  who  are  with
us,  and  yet  are  not  with  us  ;  united  by  the  bond  of  faith,  and
yet  not  on  terms  of  peace.4  Though,  to  speak  accurately,
they  have  in  the  matter  of  faith  itself  halted  and  wandered
from  the  right  paths.  So  also  respecting  heresy,  which  is
quietly  creeping  in  almost  everywhere  ;  in  some  cases  is  openly
raging.  For  on  all  sides,  and  in  public  too,  it  is  eager  to
swallow  the  Church's  little  ones/'  Do  you  ask  where?  Your

1  Acts  x.  20. 2  Acts  viii.  26. 3  Bright,  Early  Eng.  Ch.  Hist.,  ch.  ii.

4  St.  Bernard  probably  refers  particularly  to  the  dispute  respecting  the
Procession  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  '  for  nearly  a  thousand  years  seemed
to  the  contending  parties  to  be  of  such  importance  as  to  justify  the  rent
between  East  and  West'.  'The  Council  of  Constantinople  (A.  D.  381)
had  inserted  in  the  Creed  of  the  Council  of  Nice  (A.D.  325)  the  words,
"proceeding  from  the  Father  "  ;  and  the  Council  of  Ephesus  (A.D.  431)
had  decreed  that  no  addition  should  be  made  to  that  Creed  henceforth.
Accordingly,  the  Greek  fathers  uniformly  declared  their  belief  in  the  pro
cession  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  the  Father.  The  Latin  fathers,  on  the
other  hand,  having  regard  to  those  passages  of  Scripture  which  speak  of
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  of  the  Spirit  as  sent  by  the  Son,  continually  spoke
of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  proceeding  from  the  Father  and  the  Son.'  In  spite
of  the  decree  oC  the  Council  of  Ephesus  the  Churches  of  France  and  Spain
did  add  to  the  Creed  of  Constantinople  the  words  '  and  the  Son '.  The
contest  was  renewed  at  intervals  with  mutual  excommunications,  and  thus
in  the  eleventh  century  arose  the  schism  which  has  never  since  been  healed.
The  reconciliation  attempted  at  the  Council  of  Florence  (A.D.  1442)  was
only  superficial,  and  was  repudiated  by  the  Greeks.  Stanley,  Eastern
Church;  Robertson,  Ck.  Hut.  ;  Harold  Browne,  Thirty-Nine  Articles;
Mosheim,  Cent.  XV,  &c.

6  The  heresy  which  St.  Bernard  has  in  mind  is  apparently  that  of  the
Henricians,  so  called  after  their  founder,  Henry,  an  Italian  monk,  hermit,
a:id  ardent  reformer.  St.  He-nurd's  influence  proved  too  great  for  him


74  On  Consideration

own  officials  who  often  visit  the  South  know  where  these
heretics  are,  and  can  tell  you.  They  go  to  and  fro  in  their  midst,
or  right  through  them,  but  what  good  they  have  so  far  done
we  have  yet  to  learn.  We  might  perhaps  have  heard  of  some
good  if  the  salvation  of  the  people  of  Spain  had  not  been  as
nought  in  comparison  with  gold.  It  is  your  duty  to  provide
a  remedy  for  this  scourge  also.

5.  But  there  is  a  species  of  folly  which  has  already  nearly
stultified  the  wisdom  of  faith  itself.  It  is  incredible  to  what
an  extent  this  venom  has  infected  almost  the  whole  Catholic
Church.  For  while  we  are  all  of  us  seeking  our  own  therein,
it  happens  that  envying  one  another,  provoking  one  another,
we  are  harassed  till  we  hate  one  another,  and  are  moved  to
do  wrong ;  we  arm  ourselves  for  legal  strife,  quibble  and
sophisticate,  rush  into  slanderous  accusations,  burst  into  male
dictions,  are  oppressed  by  those  who  are  stronger  than  our
selves,  and  in  our  turn  oppress  those  who  are  weaker.  How
worthy  and  laudable  an  occupation  for  the  meditation  of  your
heart  to  discover  some  antidote  for  this  deadly  sort  of  folly,
which  you  contemplate  in  possession  of  the  very  body  of
Christ,  which  is  the  blessed  company  of  all  faithful  people  !
O  ambition  !  the  cross  of  the  ambitious,  how  is  it  that  though
you  torture  all,  you  please  all  ?  Nothing  causes  more  excru
ciating  torment,  or  more  vexing  disquietude ;  and  yet  nothing
creates  more  bustle  and  stir  among  mortal  men  than  its  affairs.
Is  it  not  true  that  the  thresholds  of  the  apostles  are  worn

even  at  Toulouse,  where  his  mission  was  highly  popular.  At  the  Council
of  Rheims  (A.D.  1148)  he  was  condemned  by  Eugenius  111  and  committed
to  prison.  There  he  died  not  long  after.  He  rejected  the  baptism  of
infants,  severely  censured  the  corrupt  and  licentious  manners  of  the  clergy,
treated  the  festivals  and  ceremonies  of  the  Church  with  the  utmost  con
tempt,  and  held  clandestine  assemblies  in  which  he  explained  and  incul
cated  the  novelties  he  taught.  See  Mosheim,  Cent.  XII.


Book ///,  Chapter  i  7$

more  by  the  footsteps  of  ambition  than  by  those  of  devotion  ?
Does  not  your  palace  all  day  long  re-echo  the  tones  of  its
voice  ?  Is  not  the  enriching  of  ambition  the  object  of  the
whole  toiling  practice  of  the  laws  and  canons  ?  Is  not  all
Italy  a  yawning  gulf  of  insatiable  avarice  and  rapacity  for  the
spoils  it  offers  ?  What  is  it,  or  rather  what  else  is  it,  that,
I  will  not  even  say  cuts  m/o,  but  cuts  off  your  own  spiritual
pursuits  ?  How  often  has  this  restless  and  disquieting  mis
chief  caused  your  holy  and  faithful  leisure  to  miscarry  !  It  is
one  thing  for  the  oppressed  to  appeal  to  you  ;  it  is  quite  another
for  ecclesiastical  ambition  to  make  a  tool  of  you  by  seating
itsdf  on  the  throne.  You  should  not  fail  the  former,  nor  in
the  least  give  way  to  the  latter.  Yet  how  iniquitously  ambi
tion  is  fostered,  while  the  oppressed  are  scorned  !  Neverthe
less  you  are  a  debtor  to  both,  to  the  oppressed  that  you  may
lift  them  up,  to  the  ambitious  that  you  may  put  them  down.


CHAPTER II

The  limits  of  appeals  to  the  Apostolic  Sec

6.  And  as  we  have  come  upon  the  question  of  appeals,  it
will  not  be  irrelevant  to  pursue  the  subject  somewhat  farther.
For  the  conduct  of  them  a  deeply  religious  insight  is  required,
so  that  what  was  intended  to  meet  a  great  need  may  not  be
rendered  useless  through  abuse.  It  seems  to  me  that  they
may  even  be  productive  of  much  mischief  if  they  are  not  em
ployed  with  the  utmost  moderation.  Men  appeal  to  you
from  all  over  the  world.  It  is  a  proof  of  your  singular
primacy.  But  if  you  are  wise  you  will  rejoice  not  in  your
primacy,  but  in  its  fruitfulness.  The  apostles  were  told  not
to  rejoice  in  the  spirits  being  subject  to  them.1  Men  appeal
1  St.  Luke  x.  20.


7 6  On  Consideration

to  you,  as  I  have  said,  and  I  would  the  resulting  benefit  were
equal  to  the  necessity.  Would  that  when  the  oppressed  cries
the  oppressor  might  have  reason  to  know  it !  Would  that  the
wicked  in  his  pride  did  not  consume  the  poor  !  What  so
fitting  as  for  the  oppressed  to  call  upon  your  name  and  find
a  refuge,  but  that  the  crafty  should  not  escape  ?  What  on
the  other  hand  is  so  perverse,  so  unfair,  as  that  the  wrong
doer  should  rejoice,  and  he  who  has  suffered  wrong  should  be
harassed  for  nothing  ?  You  sadly  lack  humanity  if  you  are
not  drawn  towards  a  man  whose  heart  is  full  of  grief  through
the  wrong  which  has  been  done  him,  the  toilsome  journey,
and  the  expenses  which  he  has  incurred.  But  there  is  a  no  less
sad  lack  of  spirit  if  you  are  not  roused  against  him  who
is  partly  the  direct,  partly  the  indirect,  cause  of  so  many
calamities.  Rouse  thee,  man  of  God,  when  these  things
happen ;  let  both  your  pity  and  your  indignation  be  stirred.
The  one  you  owe  to  the  injured,  the  other  to  him  who  inflicts
the  injury.  Let  the  former  be  consoled  for  his  losses,  by
satisfaction  for  his  wrongs,  by  putting  a  stop  to  the  malicious
charges  ;  let  the  latter  be  so  handled  that  he  may  be  sorry  for
having  done  what  he  was  not  afraid  to  do,  and  may  not  laugh
at  the  punishment  of  the  innocent.

7.  I  think  he  ought  no  less  to  suffer  who  has  appealed
without  cause.  You  have  the  rule  of  justice  based  on  the
fixed  principles  of  divine  equity,  and,  unless  I  am  mistaken,
also  enjoined  by  the  very  law  regulating  appeals.  This  pro
vides  that  an  unlawful  appeal  must  not  benefit  the  appellant,
nor  prejudice  the  defendant.  Why  should  a  man  be  harassed
for  nothing  ?  It  is  perfectly  just  that  he  who  wished  to  injure
his  neighbour  should  instead  injure  himself.  To  unjustly
appeal  is  to  do  injustice  ;  to  unjustly  appeal  and  escape  scot-
free  only  lights  the  fire  of  unjust  appeals.  Now  every  appeal


Book III,  Chapter  ii  77

is  unjust  which  is  not  necessitated  by  the  failure  of  justice.
An  appeal  is  lawful  only  when  you  are  wronged  ;  it  is  not  a
means  of  wronging  some  one  else.  The  appeal  must  be  from
a  judicial  sentence.  To  anticipate  the  sentence  by  an  appeal
unless  some  wrong  was  clearly  going  to  be  done,  admits  of  no
justification.  He  therefore  who  appeals  when  no  such  wrong
threatens,  obviously  purposes  wrong  to  another  man,  or  to  gain
time.  An  appeal  is  not  a  subterfuge,  but  a  refuge.  How
many  have  we  known  to  appeal  after  defeat  only  that  while
the  appeal  was  pending  they  might  without  let  of  law  indulge
in  what  is  never  lawful  !  The  permission  to  appeal  has  in
some  cases,  we  know,  left  men  unmolested  for  the  whole  of
their  lives  in  the  commission  of  execrable  crimes,  incest,  for
example,  or  adultery.  How  comes  this  about,  that  what
ought  to  be  the  terror  of  villains  is  found  protecting  villainy  ?
How  long  will  you  pretend  not  to  notice,  or  will  really  not
herd,  the  murmurs  of  the  whole  earth  ?  How  long  do  you
mean  to  sleep  ?  How  long  will  it  be  before  your  considera
tion  awakes  to  this  gigantic  confusing  and  abusing  of  appeals  ?
They  are  contrary  to  laws  human  and  divine,  contrary  to
custom  and  established  order.  There  is  no  distinction  of
place,  degree,  time,  cause,  or  person.  These  frivolous,  and,
in  most  cases,  useless  anticipatory  appeals  come  from  all  sides.
Was  not  the  Court  of  Appeal  wont  to  be  the  special  terror  of
malicious  offenders  ?  At  the  present  time  with  its  assistance
they  are  themselves  a  terror,  and  that  to  good  men.  The
antidote  is  turned  to  poison.  The  change  is  not  the  work  of
the  right  hand  of  the  Most  High.

8.  Good  men  have  appeals  brought  against  them  by  the  bad
to  prevent  their  doing  good,  and  in  terror  at  the  voice  of  your
thunder  they  forbear.  Kven  bishops  are  appealed  against  that
they  may  not  dare  to  dissolve  unlawful  marriages,  or  prohibit


78  On  Consideration

them.  They  are  appealed  against  that  they  may  not  presume
to  punish  in  the  least  degree,  or  check  rapine,  theft,  sacrilege,
and  crime  of  that  description.  They  are  appealed  against
that  they  may  be  powerless  to  close  the  sacred  offices  against
unworthy  or  infamous  persons,  or  deprive  them  when  admitted.
What  remedy  are  you  seeking  to  discover  for  this  disease,  so
that  what  was  devised  as  a  remedy  be  not  found  unto  death  ?
The  Lord  was  zealous  for  the  house  of  prayer  when  it  was
made  a  den  of  robbers  l ;  do  you,  his  minister,  disguise  the
fact  that  the  refuge  of  the  wretched  has  been  made  an  arsenal
of  iniquity  ?  On  all  sides  you  may  see  the  oppressed  fore
stalled,  and  those  who  are  eager  to  appeal  are  not  the  wronged,
but  those  who  wish  to  do  wrong.  Here  is  a  mystery.  What
is  the  explanation  ?  It  is  for  you  to  consider,  not  for  me  to
study  the  matter.  And  do  you  ask  why  the  victims  of  these
appeals  do  not  come  to  prove  their  innocence,  and  show  the
malice  of  their  opponents  ?  I  will  tell  you  what  the  usual
answer  is — '  We  don't  care  to  be  troubled  for  nothing.  In
the  court  there  are  men  too  ready  to  favour  the  appellants  and
foster  appeals.  If  we  are  to  give  way  at  Rome,  it  is  better
to  give  way  at  home.'

9.  I  confess  that  I  partly  believe  this.  In  this  vast  number
of  appeals,  which  are  of  daily  occurrence,  can  you  show  me
an  appellant  who  has  even  repaid  the  travelling  expenses  of  the
defendant  ?  It  would  be  passing  strange  if  all  the  appellants
were,  as  this  implies,  after  your  investigation,  found  to  be  in
the  right,  and  those  appealed  against  in  the  wrong.  '  Love
righteousness ',  saith  the  Scripture,  *  ye  that  be  judges  of  the
earth.' 2  It  is  a  small  thing  to  keep  righteousness,  unless  you
love  it  as  well.  They  who  keep  it  do  no  more ;  they  who
love  it  are  zealous  for  it.  A  lover  of  righteousness  inquires

1  St.  Matt.  xxi.  13.  2  Wisd.  of  Sol.  i.  i.


Book Iff,  Chaffer  ii  79

for  righteousness,  and  follows  after  it ;  he,  moreover,  follows
up  all  unrighteousness.  You  have  nothing  in  common  with
those  men  who  think  appeals  good  sport.  I  am  ashamed  to
quote  the  saying  which  among  the  heathen  has  become  a
proverb — '  We  have  roused  two  fat  stags.'  To  speak  more
gently,  there  is  more  wit  than  justice  in  this.  Do  you,  if  you
love  righteousness,  not  encourage  appeals,  but  tolerate  them.
Still,  it  is  but  little  that  the  Churches  of  God  gain  through  the
righteousness  of  a  single  individual  when  the  prevalent  views
are  those  of  men  differently  disposed.  That,  however,  will
be  discussed  elsewhere,  when  we  begin  to  deal  with  the  things
around  you.

10.  Now  do  not  think  it  a  waste  of  time  to  find  leisure  for
considering  how  you  may  restore  appeals,  if  possible,  to  their
lawful  use.  If  you  hereupon  inquire,  or  rather  care  to  know,
what  I  think,  I  say  that  as  appeals  are  not  to  be  despised,  so
neither  are  they  to  be  at  all  unlawfully  used.  And  I  should
find  it  hard  to  say  which  of  these,  in  my  opinion,  indicates  the
greater  insolence,  were  it  not  that  it  seems  as  though  the
unlawful  use  must  of  necessity  induce  some  measure  of
contempt,  and  for  this  reason,  because  it  is  more  injurious,  it
ought  perhaps  to  be  more  vigorously  followed  up.  Is  it  not
really  more  injurious,  bad  in  itself,  bad  in  its  offspring  ?  Is  it
not  this  unlawful  use  which  either  weakens  the  authority  of
the  very  law  of  nature,  or  nullifies  it  altogether  ?  Can  a  man
receive  anything  better  than  the  sacraments  ?  If,  however,
they  are  wrongfully  used  by  the  unworthy,  or  are  unworthily
handled,  they  are  by  no  means  received.  They  bring  the
greater  damnation,  because  they  are  not  duly  reverenced.  I
allow  that  appeals  are  a  great  blessing  to  the  world  at  large,  as
necessary  as  the  sun  itself  to  mortal  men.  In  fact  they  are
as  it  were  a  sun  of  righteousness,  bringing  to  light  and


8o  On  Consideration

convicting  the  works  of  darkness.  They  are  by  all  means
to  be  cherished  and  upheld,  but  only  those  which  are
demanded  of  necessity,  not  those  devised  by  craft  and  cunning.
All  unlawful  appeals  are  of  this  description ;  they  do  not  help
in  time  of  need,  they  only  minister  to  iniquity.  They  could
not  fail  to  become  contemptible.  How  many  defendants  have
in  answer  to  such  appeals  even  abandoned  their  rights  that
they  might  not  be  worn  out  by  a  long  and  fruitless  journey  ?
Yet  there  have  been  more  who,  unable  to  endure  the  loss
of  their  own,  have  shown  but  scant  respect^  for  these
unsuitable  appeals  and  for  personages  bearing  great  names.

ii.  Let  me  tell  of  a  case  in  point.  A  certain  man  had
publicly  betrothed  his  future  wife.  The  solemn  day  of
marriage  had  arrived.  All  things  were  ready;  many  guests
were  invited ;  when  lo  !  a  man  who  coveted  his  neighbour's
wife  all  at  once  announced  his  intention  of  appealing,  on  the
ground  that  the  lady  had  been  first  given  to  him  and  ought  to
belong  to  him.  The  bridegroom  was  thunderstruck ;  there
was  a  dead-lock  ;  the  priest  did  not  dare  to  proceed  ;  all  the
preparations  were  thrown  away ;  everybody  went  off  to  eat  his
supper  at  home;  the  bride  was  barred  from  bed  and  board
until  after  the  return  journey  from  Rome.  This  befell  a
resident  in  Paris,  a  noble  city  of  Gaul  and  the  home  of
royalty.  On  another  occasion,  in  the  same  city,  a  certain  man
became  engaged  and  fixed  the  day  for  the  wedding.  Mean
while  a  false  report  got  abroad  that  the  parties  ought  not  to  be
united.  The  case  was  referred  to  the  judgement  of  the
Church,  but  without  the  least  expectation  of  a  decision  on  the
appeal.  There  was  no  case,  no  allegation.  The  only  object
in  view  was  to  delay  and  frustrate  the  marriage.  But  the
bridegroom,  whether  it  was  that  he  did  not  choose  to  make  his
preparations  for  nothing,  or  that  he  would  not  brook  the  disap-


Book ///,  Chapter  ii  81

pointment  and  be  so  long  kept  from  the  woman  he  loved,  either
treated  the  appeal  with  contempt,  or  feigned  ignorance  of  it,  and
went  through  with  what  he  had  purposed.  To  take  a  recent
case,  what  are  we  to  say  of  the  extraordinary  presumption  of  a
certain  young  man  belonging  to  the  church  at  Auxerre  ?  The
holy  bishop  having  died,  the  clergy,  according  to  custom,  wished
to  elect  another;  but  the  young  man  in  question  intervened
with  an  appeal,  and  forbade  anything  to  be  done  until  after  his
return  from  Rome ;  and  yet  to  that  very  appeal  he  laid  no
information.  For  when  he  saw  that  he  was  treated  with
contempt  for  appealing  unreasonably,  he  called  together  such
friends  as  he  could  three  days  after  the  others  had  made  their
choice,  and  got  himself  elected.

12.  It  is  clear  from  these  and  countless  other  instances  that
the  unlawful  use  of  appeals  does  not  arise  from  the  contempt
for  them,  but  that  the  contempt  of  them  springs  from  the
unlawful  use.  See,  therefore,  why  it  is  that  your  zeal  and
energy  almost  constantly  vindicate  the  contempt,  and  throw
a  veil  over  the  unlawful  use.  Do  you  wish  to  more  com
pletely  bridle  contempt  ?  Take  care  that  the  infant  growth  is
strangled  in  the  very  womb  of  its  abandoned  mother.  And
this  will  be  done  if  the  unlawful  use  meets  with  suitable
punishment.  Stop  the  unlawful  use,  and  there  will  be  no
excuse  for  contempt.  Further,  when  there  is  no  excuse,
audacity  will  be  hissed  off  the  stage.  Let  there  be,  then,  no
usurer  of  the  privilege,  and  there  will  be  no  despiser,  or  very
seldom.  You  do  well  in  refusing  to  sanction  such  appeals,  or
countenance  the  trickery,  and  in  leaving  much  of  the  business
to  those  who  are  familiar  with  the  details,  or  can  quickly  be
come  so.  For  the  easier  investigation  is  made,  and  the  more
certain  its  results,  the  sooner  will  the  decision  be  given,  and
the  sounder  will  it  be.  What  gracious  condescension  it  is  in


ST. BERNARD


8  2  On  Consideration

you  to  thus  spare  so  many  men  enormous  trouble  and  expense  !
But  you  must  take  particular  care  in  selecting  those  whom
you  trust  so  much.  I  might  add  many  useful  hints  on  the  same
subject ;  but  I  am  mindful  of  my  purpose,  and,  content  with
giving  you  an  opportunity  of  making  the  addition,  I  pass  to
other  things.

CHAPTER III
Chunk  rulers  are  for  the  profit  of  their  people

13.  And  I  suppose  I  must  certainly  not  pass  over  the  first
thing  that  occurs  to  me.  You  are  at  the  head  of  affairs,
without  a  rival.  Why  are  you  thus  placed  ?  The  question,  I
tell  you,  requires  consideration.  Is  it  that  you  may  become
great  through  those  beneath  you  ?  By  no  means,  but  that  you
may  make  them  great.  They  have  chosen  you  chief,  but  for
their  own  sake,  not  for  yours.  If  it  is  not  so,  can  you  reckon
yourself  above  the  very  persons  for  whose  favours  you  are  a
candidate  ?  Listen  to  the  Lord's  words,  '  They  who  have
authority  over  them  are  called  benefactors.' *  That,  how
ever,  relates  to  them  that  are  without.  What  has  it  to  do
with  us  ?  You  are  falsely  so  called  if  you  aim  not  so  much
at  being  a  benefactor  as  at  ruling  your  benefactor.  A  man
shows  a  poor  spirit  when  he  seeks  not  the  welfare  of  those
beneath  him,  but  to  make  his  own  profit  out  of  them.  Such
conduct  is  specially  discreditable  in  a  commander-in-chief.
How  beautifully  did  the  Master  of  the  Gentiles  express  his
opinion  that  parents  ought  to  lay  up  for  the  children,  not
children  for  the  parents.2  He  several  times  says,  and  it  is  a
glorious  saying,  '  Not  that  I  seek  a  gift,  but  fruit.' 3  But  now

1  St.  Luke  xxii.  25,  2  2  Cor.  xii.  14  3  Phil.  iv.  17.


Booh  III,  Chapter  Hi  83

let  us  pass  on,  lest  some  one  find  my  lingering  here  an
indication  of  avarice  in  you  ;  though  how  far  you  are  removed
from  that  vice  I  testified  in  a  former  book.  For  I  know  what
tempting  offers  you  have  refused,  and  how  deep  your  poverty
was  when  you  refused  them  If,  then,  I  write  such  things  to
you,  it  is  not  that  you  require  the  admonition.  Surely  what  is
written  for  your  profit  ought  not  to  profit  you  only.  I  am
here  censuring  avarice,  a  vice  from  which  your  character  is
safe  enough  ;  whether  the  censure  is  necessary  is  for  you  to
decide.  I  will  say,  however,  not  to  mention  the  offerings  of
the  poor,  which  you  cannot  bear  to  touch,  that  we  have  seen
the  German  money-bags  dwindling  down  ;  the  bags  were  not
smaller,  but  the  price  paid  was  less.  Silver  was  counted  as
hay.  The  Sagmarii  reluctantly  went  home  with  their  bundles
as  heavy  as  when  they  came.  A  new  thing  !  Was  Rome
ever  known  to  refuse  gold  ?  Even  now  we  do  not  believe
such  practice  commends  itself  to  the  Romans.  Two  men
came  to  Rome,  both  wealthy,  both  culprits.  One  belonged
to  Mayence,  the  other  to  Cologne.  Favour  was  freely  shown
to  one ;  the  other,  unworthy,  I  suppose,  of  any  favour,  was
told,  *  The  same  robe  you  wore  when  you  came  in  you  will
wear  when  you  go  out.'  What  a  glorious  saying  !  The
very  words  of  apostolic  freedom.  Was  it  one  whit  inferior
to  Peter's,  '  Thy  money  perish  with  thee '  ? !  The  only
difference  is  that  the  latter  has  more  zeal,  the  former  more
modesty.  What  did  the  man  get  by  coming  from  over  sea,
almost  from  the  ends  of  the  earth,  crossing  sea  and  land  to
purchase  a  bishopric  twice  over,  once  with  his  own  money,
once  with  other  men's  ?  For  he  had  already  bought  it  once.
He  brought  much  with  him,  but  he  took  it  back ;  not  all,
however.  The  poor  wretch  fell  into  other  hands  than  yours,
1  Acts  viii.  jo.
F  2


84  On  Consideration

more  mighty  to  receive  than  to  give.  You  did  well  to  keep  your
hands  clean  both  ways ;  you  would  not  lay  them  on  the  head
of  an  ambitious  man,  nor  lay  them  under  the  unrighteous
mammon.  You  did  not  thus  hold  aloof  from  a  poor  bishop,
whom  I  could  name,  but  you  gave  him  something  to  give,  so
that  he  mighty  not  be  called  stingy  ;  he  secretly  received  from
you  what  he  openly  gave.  You  thus  with  your  own  purse
shielded  the  man  from  exposure ;  and  at  the  same  time  by
humouring  the  court,  he  (thanks  to  your  kindness)  escaped
the  dislike  of  those  who  love  gifts.  You  cannot  hide  the  deed  ;
we  know  both  the  facts  and  the  person.  Does  the  story
displease  you  ?  The  more  averse  you  are  to  hearing  it,  the
greater  pleasure  I  have  in  telling  it.  If  it  is  good  for  you  one
way,  it  is  good  for  me  another.  Where  the  glory  of  Christ
is  concerned  I  am  under  no  such  obligation  to  silence,  as  you
are  to  refrain  from  seeking  your  own  glory.  And  if  you  go
on  complaining,  I  will  answer  you  out  of  the  Gospel,  'The
more  he  charged  them,  so  much  the  more  a  great  deal  they
published  it,  saying,  he  hath  done  all  things  well.' }


CHAPTER  IV

Ecclesiastical  rank  and  dignity  to  be  respected.
The  abuse  of  privileges  and  exemptions.

i  4.  There  is  something  else — if  it  be  something  else,  for
it  might  perhaps  be  said  to  be  part  of  the  same  subject — and
let  your  consideration  give  good  heed  to  it.  He  does  not  appear
to  be  far  from  the  truth  who  thought  that  what  I  am  about  to
speak  of  should  be  classed  as  a  variety  of  avarice.  For  my-

1  St.  Mark  vii.  36.


Booh III,  Chapter  iv  85-

self,  I  would  not  deny  either  that  it  is  a  kind  of  avarice,  or
that  it  looks  like  avarice.  At  all  events  if  you  aim  at  per
fection  you  should  shun  not  only  things  bad  in  themselves,  but
things  that  have  the  appearance  of  evil.  In  the  one  case  you
have  regard  to  your  conscience,  in  the  other  to  your  reputa
tion.  A  particular  line  of  conduct  under  different  circum
stances  may  be  lawful  ;  nevertheless,  if  it  does  not  look  well,
deem  it  unlawful.  In  a  word,  ask  your  ancestors,  and  they
will  answer,  '  Abstain  from  every  appearance  of  evil.' l  Let
the  Lord's  servant  by  all  means  imitate  his  Lord,  for  He
Himself  says,  '  If  any  man  serve  me,  let  him  follow  me/  2
And  concerning  Him  you  know  it  is  said,  '  The  Lord  hath
reigned,  he  hath  put  on  beauteous  apparel,  he  hath  clothed
himself  with  strength.' 3  Be  you  also  strong  in  faith,  beau
teous  in  glory,  and  you  have  shown  yourself  an  imitator  of
God.  Your  strength  is  the  confidence  of  a  faithful  conscience,
your  beauty  is  the  splendour  of  a  good  character.  So  then,
I  beseech  you.  be  clothed  with  strength,  for  your  strength  is
the  joy  of  the  Lord.  Moreover,  He  delights  in  your  fair
beauty  no  less,  as  it  were,  than  in  His  own  likeness.  Put  on
your  glorious  vestments ;  be  clothed  with  the  two  robes
wherewith  the  virtuous  4  woman  was  wont  to  clothe  her  house
hold.  Let  there  not  be  in  your  conscience  a  trace  of  a  weak
and  feeble  faith :  let  there  not  be  in  your  reputation  the
blemish  of  a  bad  appearance.  You  will  then  wear  the  two
robes,  and  the  Bridegroom  will  rejoice  over  your  soul  which
He  has  betrothed  to  Himself;  your  God  will  joy  over  you.
Are  you  wondering  what  my  drift  is,  and  do  you  not  yet  per
ceive  my  meaning  ?  I  will  not  keep  you  in  suspense  any
longer.  I  refer  to  the  murmuring  and  complaining  of  the

1 i  Thess.  v.  22.  2  St.  John  xii.  26.  '  P«.  xciii.  I.

4  Vulg. /or/is. Prov.  xxxi.  10.


8(5  On  Consideration

Churches.  They  cry  aloud  that  they  are  being  mutilated  and
dismembered.  There  are  none,  or  very  few,  which  are  not
either  already  smarting  under  the  scourge,  or  dreading  its
approach.  Do  you  ask  how  that  is  ?  Abbots  are  exempted
from  their  bishops,  bishops  from  archbishops,  archbishops
from  patriarchs  or  primates.  Does  this  look  well  ?  I  should
be  surprised  if  any  justification  could  be  found  for  such  doings.
The  constant  practice  shows  that  you  have  authority,  but
possibly  not  so  keen  a  sense  of  justice.  You  do  this  because
you  have  the  power,  but  whether  you  have  the  right  is  open
to  question.  You  are  where  you  are  that  you  may  uphold  the
gradations  of  honour  and  dignity,  secure  to  every  one  his
proper  rank,  and  not  grudge  any  one  his  due  ;  as  one  of  your
predecessors  says.  '  Honour  to  whom  honour.'1

15.  The  spiritual  man  of  whom  we  read,  who  judges  all
things  that  he  may  be  judged  by  no  man,2  will  preface  all  his
work  with  a  sort  of  threefold  consideration.  First,  he  will
ask  whether  the  thing  is  lawful ;  then,  is  it  becoming ;
lastly,  whether  it  is  also  expedient.  For  although  Christian
philosophy  undoubtedly  inculcates  that  nothing  is  becoming
unless  it  be  lawful,  and  nothing  expedient  unless  it  be  both
becoming  and  lawful,  it  will  not  of  necessity  follow  that
everything  lawful  is  either  becoming  or  expedient.  Well
then,  let  us,  if  we  can,  apply  these  three  tests  to  the  business
before  us.  Must  it  not  be  unbecoming  in  you  to  make  your
will  the  law  ?  And,  because  there  is  no  appeal  against  you,
to  resort  to  force  while  you  ignore  reason  ?  Are  you  greater
than  your  Lord,  who  says,  ' 1  came  not  to  do  mine  own
will '  ? 3  Whatever  may  be  argued  to  the  contrary,  I  main
tain  that  it  is  a  mark  of  baseness,  no  less  than  of  pride,  for  a
man,  as  though  he  had  not  the  gift  of  reason,  to  make  his

1  Rom.  xiii.  7.  2  I  Cor.  ii.  15.  3  St.  John  vi.  38.


Booh ///,  Chapter  iv  87

pleasure,  and  not  reason,  the  rule  of  action ;  to  be  swayed  not
by  judgement  but  by  appetite.  Is  anything  more  characteristic
of  the  beasts  ?  And  if  it  is  unworthy  of  a  reasonable  being
to  live  the  life  of  cattle,  who  can  endure  that  you,  the  supreme
ruler,  should  so  outrage  nature  and  insult  your  rank  ?  If  you
do  so  degenerate,  which  God  forbid !  you  will  share  in  the
general  reproach,  '  Man  being  in  honour  did  not  understand  ;
he  is  compared  to  the  foolish  beasts  of  burden,  and  is  made
like  unto  them.' l  How  very  unworthy  it  is  of  you,  when  you
possess  all,  not  to  be  content  with  all,  but  you  must  needs
make  a  strange  to-do  over  the  minute  and  inappreciable  trifles
of  the  universal  dominion  entrusted  to  you,  as  if  they  were  not
yours  already  !  And  here  I  should  like  you  to  remember
Nathan's  parable  of  the  man  who,  having  a  hundred  sheep,
coveted  the  one  belonging  to  the  poor  man.2  Let  us  also
recall  the  deed,  or  rather  the  crime,  of  Ahab,  who  was  master
of  all,  and  yet  was  eager  to  get  a  single  vineyard.3  God  grant
you  may  never  have  it  said  to  you  as  it  was  to  him,  '  Thou
hast  slain  and  taken  possession.' 4

1 6.  And  please  do  not  make  the  profit  from  these  exemp
tions  a  pretext  for  them.  There  is  no  profit,  unless  it  be  that
the  bishops  are  thereby  more  insolent,  the  monks  even  more
dissolute.  How  is  it  that  they  are  also  poorer  ?  If  you
examine  the  balance  sheet  of  these  freedmen  with  anything
like  care,  and  look  into  their  lives,  no  matter  where,  you  will
find  the  monks  shamefully  poor,  and  the  bishops  disgracefully
worldly.  These  are  the  twin  offspring  of  a  baneful  freedom.
What  is  there  to  prevent  the  loose  and  disorderly  rabble  from
boldly  sinning,  when  there  is  no  one  to  rebuke  it  ?  What
can  we  exj>ect  but  the  impudent  plundering  and  pillaging  of

1  Ps.  xlix.  12.  2  2  Sam.  xii.  i.  3  I  Kings  xxi.  2.

* i  Kings  xxi.  19.


88  On  Consideration

defenceless  religion,  when  there  is  no  one  to  defend  it  ?  For
where  can  men  find  a  refuge  ?  Shall  they  go  to  the  bishops
complaining  of  injustice  ?  The  bishops  must  have  a  merry
twinkle  in  their  eyes  whether  they  look  at  the  wrongs  done,  or
the  wrongs  suffered.  What  profit  is  there  in  that  blood  ?
The  only  gain,  I  fear,  is  that  which  God  threatened  in  the
prophet,  '  He  shall  die  in  his  iniquity,  but  his  blood  will  I
require  at  your  hand.' l  For  2  if  a  man  is  not  only  exempted  but
puffed  up,  and  he  from  whose  jurisdiction  he  is  exempted  is
inflamed  with  anger,  how  can  the  exemptor  be  innocent  ?
I  have  said  too  little  ;  we  are  smothering  the  fire  ;  let  me
speak  more  plainly.  If  he  who  complains  is  spiritually  dead,
how  can  he  be  alive  who  is  the  cause  of  his  complaining  ?
Must  he  not,  therefore,  be  guilty  of  the  death  of  both  these
persons,  and  give  sentence  of  death  against  his  own  soul  as
well,  for  it  was  he  who  supplied  the  sword  which  caused  the
death  of  both  ?  This  is  what  I  meant  when  I  said,  '  Thou
hast  slain  and  taken  possession/ 3  And  further,  people  who
hear  of  these  things  are  scandalized  ;  they  are  indignant,  dis
parage,  and  blaspheme,  that  is  to  say,  they  are  wounded  even
unto  death.  The  tree  is  not  good  that  bears  such  fruit  as
acts  of  arrogance,  the  breaking  up  of  houses,  rivalries,  the
squandering  of  resources,  so  many  scandals,  so  much  hatred ;
and,  what  is  more  lamentable,  bitter  enmities  and  perpetuul
discord  between  the  churches.  You  see  how  true  are  the
words,  '  All  things  are  lawful  to  me,  but  all  things  are  not
expedient.' 4  But  suppose  the  thing  is  not  even  lawful.
Pardon  me ;  1  shall  not  readily  allow  that  the  source  of  so
much  lawlessness  can  be  lawful.

1 7.  Would  you,  in  fact,  deem  it  lawful  to  cut  off  the  limbs

1  Ezek.  xxxiii.  8.  2  The  text  here  is  in  great  confusion.

3  See  p.  87.  «  i  Cor.  x.  22.


Booh III,  Chapter  re  89

of  churches,  turn  order  into  confusion,  and  remove  the  land
marks  which  your  fathers  placed  ?  Well  then,  it  is  the  work
of  justice  to  secure  to  everybody  what  belongs  to  him;  how
can  it  be  consistent  with  justice  to  rob  any  man  of  what
belongs  to  him  ?  You  err  if  you  reckon  that  your  apostolic
power  is  not  only  supreme,  but  the  only  power  ordained  of
God.  If  this  is  your  opinion,  you  differ  from  the  apostle.
He  says,  "  There  is  no  power  except  from  God.'  *  So  then,
if  that  which  follows,  '  He  that  resists  the  power  withstandeth
the  ordinance  of  God,' a  even  if  this  mainly  makes  for  you,  it
does  not  apply  to  you  exclusively.  In  short,  the  same  writer
says,  '  Let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers.'3  He
does  not  say  *  to  the  higher  power  ',  as  if  all  power  belonged
to  one  man,  but  '  to  the  higher  powers  ',  since  it  resides  in
many.  Your  power,  therefore,  is  not  the  only  power  from
the  Lord ;  there  are  middle  and  lower  powers.  And  as
those  whom  God  hath  conjoined  are  not  to  be  put  asunder,4
so  those  whom  God  hath  subjoined  are  not  to  be  put  on
a  footing  of  equality.  If  you  cut  off  a  finger,  attach  it  to
your  head,  and  let  it  hang  side  by  side  with  your  arm,  as  a
hand  for  the  upper  parts  of  the  body,  you  create  a  monstrosity.
Something  like  this  happens  if  you  place  the  members  in  the
body  of  Christ  otherwise  than  He  Himself  arranged  them.
Unless  you  suppose  it  was  not  He,  but  another,  who  '  set
some  in  the  church,  first  apostles,  secondly  prophets,  thirdly
evangelists,  then  teachers  and  pastors,  for  the  perfecting  of  the
saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  the
body  of  Christ  V  And  yet  it  is  this  body  which  Paul  sets
before  you  with  his  own  true  apostolic  eloquence,  most  admir
ably  uniting  it  to  the  Head,  and  representing  it  as  k  from  Him

1  Rom.  xiii.  r.  2  Rom.  xiii.  2.  s  Rom.  xiii.  T.

«  St.  Matt.  xix.  6.  5  I  Cor.  xii.  28.


90  On  Consideration

fitly  framed  and  knit  together  through  that  which  every  joint
supplieth,  according  to  the  working  in  due  measure  of  each
several  part,  making  the  increase  of  the  body  unto  the  building
up  of  itself  in  love  V  And  do  not  despise  the  mould  on
which  you  are  to  fashion  yourself  because  it  is  the  Church  on
earth  ;  the  pattern  is  derived  from  heaven.  For  not  even
the  Son  can  do  anything  except  what  He  hath  seen  the
Father  do,2  as  is  obvious  from  what  was  said  to  Him  under
the  name  of  Moses,  '  See  thou  make  everything  after  the
pattern  which  was  showed  thee  on  the  mount.' 3

1 8.  He  understood  this  who  said,  '  I  saw  the  holy  city,
New  Jerusalem  descending  from  heaven,  prepared  by  God.'4
I  suppose  a  parallel  was  intended,  viz.  that  as  in  heaven  above
Seraphim  and  Cherubim,  and  all  other  celestial  beings,  even
to  angels  and  archangels,  are  of  varying  rank  under  one  Head,
viz.  God ;  so  in  the  Church  on  earth,  also,  primates  or  patri
archs,  archbishops,  bishops,  presbyters,  or  abbots,  and  all
others,  are  similarly  ranked  under  one  supreme  pontiff.  That
which  has  God  for  its  author,  and  originates  in  heaven,  must
not  be  lightly  esteemed.  But  if  a  bishop  say  '  I  do  not  desire
to  be  under  an  archbishop  ',  or  an  abbot  '  I  do  not  care  to
obey  a  bishop  ',  this  is  not  from  heaven.  Unless,  perhaps,
you  have  heard  one  of  the  angels  crying  '  I  do  not  desire  to
be  under  the  archangels  ',  or  one  of  the  lower  angelic  orders
declare  that  he  could  not  bear  to  be  subject  to  any  one  but
God.  What  !  you  say,  do  you  forbid  me  to  exercise  my
stewardship  ?  What  I  wish  to  prevent  is  the  squandering  of
the  estate.  T  am  not  so  ignorant  as  not  to  know  that  you
have  been  made  stewards ;  but  if  so,  it  is  for  building  up,  not
for  casting  down.5  In  a  word,  it  is  required  among  stewards

1  Eph.  iv.  16.  2  St.  John  v.  19.  3  Exod.  xxv.  40.

4  Apoc.  xxi.  2.  5  2  Cor.  xiii.  10.


Booh  III,  Chapter  iv  9  i

that  a  man  be  found  faithful.1  When  necessity  requires  you
may  be  excused  for  exercising  your  dispensing  power;  if
there  is  some  manifest  advantage,  such  exercise  may  deserve
commendation.  k  Advantage ',  I  say,  of  the  community,  not
your  own.  For  when  no  good  is  done  either  to  the  commu
nity  or  to  yourself,  we  certainly  have  not  a  faithful  steward
ship,  but  a  cruel  waste.  Still,  as  everybody  knows,  there  are
some  monasteries  in  different  dioceses,  which  from  their  very
foundation  have  been  more  closely  associated  with  the  apos
tolic  see  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  the  founders.  But
the  free  gift  of  devotion  is  one  thing ;  the  efforts  of  ambition
intolerant  of  subjection  are  quite  another.  So  much  for  this.


CHAPTER  V

The  Sovereign  Pontiff  should  uphold  the  Apostolic
decrees  and  ancient  ordinances  throughout  the
world

19.  It  remains  for  your  consideration  to  survey  the  condi
tion  of  the  Church  generally,  and  to  ascertain  whether  the
people  are  subject  to  the  clerks,2  the  clerks  to  the  priests,3  the
prints  to  God,  in  all  due  humility ;  if  in  monasteries  and
places  of  religion  order  is  preserved,  and  discipline  is  watchful ;
if  ecclesiastical  censures  are  enforced  against  corrupt  practice
and  perverse  doctrine ;  if  the  vineyards  show  the  goodly

1  i  Cor.  iv.  a.

2  See  Bingham,  Ant.  of  the  Christian  Church,  vol.  i.  p.  47. Inferior
orders,  below  presbyters  and  deacons.

:!  The  fncerdotinm  in  tecundo  et  tertio  online,  i.  e.  presbyters  and
deacons.


92  On  Consideration

bloom  of  priestly  integrity  and  holiness  ;  if  the  blossoms  bear
fruit  in  the  obedience  of  faithful  peoples  ;  if,  now  at  length,
your  own  apostolic  commands  and  ordinances  are  observed
with  fitting  care,  lest  any  portion  of  your  Master's  field  be  found
uncultivated  through  neglect,  or  filched  through  fraud.  You
may  be  sure  that  such  defects  may  be  found.  To  omit  count
less  other  details,  I  could  easily  point  to  parts  of  the  vineyards
on  all  sides  which  are  lying  waste ;  I  could  show  you  that
even  of  those  which  your  own  right  hand  has  planted  some
are  rooted  up.  At  Rheims  was  it  not  your  own  mouth  that
published  the  canons  submitted  to  the  Council  ? *  Who
observes  them  ?  Who  has  observed  them  ?  You  are  de
ceived  if  you  think  they  are  observed.  If  you  do  not  think
so,  you  have  yourself  erred,  either  in  decreeing  what  was  not
to  be  observed,  or  pretending  that  it  is  observed.  '  We
enjoin ',  you  said,  '  that  bishops  as  well  as  clergy  see  that  they
do  not,  either  by  superfluous  apparel,  or  an  unbecoming  medley
of  colours,  or  by  divided  garments,  or  by  the  tonsure,  offend
the  eye  of  the  beholders,  to  whom  they  ought  to  be  a  pattern
and  example ;  but  rather  by  their  own  conduct  so  condemn
these  things,  and  by  their  mode  of  life  evidence  their  love  of
innocence,  as  the  dignity  of  the  clerical  order  requires.  But
if  after  warning  from  their  own  bishops  any  do  not  submit
within  forty  days,  let  them  by  authority  of  the  same  be  de
prived  of  their  ecclesiastical  benefices.  If,  however,  the
bishops  neglect  to  enforce  the  aforesaid  penalty,  inasmuch  as
the  faults  of  inferiors  are  to  be  attributed  to  none  more  than
to  indolent  and  negligent  rulers,  let  them  abstain  from  their
pontifical  office  until  such  time  as  they  do  inflict  the  punish
ment  appointed  by  us  on  the  clergy  subject  to  them.  With
this  we  have  thought  well  to  couple  the  order  that  no  one  be

1  See  introduction  to  this  book.


Book  III,  Chapter  v  93

ordained  archdeacon  or  dean,  unless  he  be  deacon  and  priest.
Morever,  if  archdeacons,  deans,  and  priors,  below  the  afore
named  orders,  contemptuously  refuse  to  be  ordained,  let  them
be  deprived  of  the  honour  they  have  taken  upon  themselves.
We  further  forbid  the  bestowal  of  the  aforesaid  honours  on
youths  not  even  as  yet  admitted  to  holy  orders,  but  distin
guished  for  their  capacity  and  meritorious  lives.'

20.  These  are  your  words;  you  authorized  them.  What
effect  was  given  to  them  ?  To  this  day  youths,  although  not
admitted  to  holy  orders,  are  promoted  in  the  Church.  As
regards  the  first  canon,  luxurious  dress  was  forbidden,  but  it
is  not  checked ;  the  punishment  was  declared,  but  it  has  by
no  means  followed  the  offence.  It  is  now  the  fourth  year
since  we  heard  the  command  given,  and  we  have  not  as  yet
lamented  a  single  cleric  deprived  of  his  benefice,  or  a  single
bishop  suspended  from  his  office.  But  the  sequel  is  intensely
sad.  What  is  the  sequel  ?  Impunity,  the  child  of  careless
ness,  the  mother  of  insolence,  the  root  of  impudence,  the
nurse  of  transgressions.  And  blessed  will  you  be  if  you  make
it  your  earnest  care  to  guard  against  carelessness,  the  first
parent  of  all  evils.  But  you  will  do  your  best  in  this  respect.
Now  lift  up  your  eyes  and  see  if  the  spotted  fur  does  not  dis
grace  the  clergy  just  as  much  as  ever ;  if  the  immoderate
division  in  the  robe  does  not  as  much  as  ever  almost  show
their  nakedness.  '  Does  God  care  what  a  man  wears  ?
Does  He  not  rather  regard  his  character  ?  *  This  is  how
men  talk.  But  the  clothing  I  refer  to  indicates  deformity  of
mind  and  morals.  How  is  it  that  the  clergy  wish  to  be  one
thing  and  seem  another  ?  The  truth  is  that  they  are  not  so
innocent  and  upright  as  they  ought  to  be.  Forsooth,  in  dress
they  are  soldiers,  in  profession  clergy,  in  conduct  neither.
For  they  neither  light  like  soldiers,  nor  preach  the  Gospel


94  On  Consideration

like  clergymen.1  To  which  order  do  they  belong  ?  In  their
eagerness  to  belong  to  both,  they  forsake  both,  confound
both.  '  Every  one ',  says  the  Apostle,  '  shall  rise  in  his  own
order.' 2  What  is  their  order  ?  Having  sinned  without
order,  shall  they  perish  without  order  ?  I  rather  think  that
if  the  all-wise  God  is  truly  believed  to  leave  nothing  unordered,
from  the  height  above  to  the  depth  beneath,  there  is  reason  to
fear  their  '  order '  can  be  only  where  there  is  no  '  order  ',  but
where  everlasting  horror  dwells.  O  unhappy  bride  entrusted
to  the  care  of  bridesmen  such  as  these,  who  are  not  afraid  to
appropriate  to  themselves  what  was  intended  for  her  adorning  !
They  are  surely  not  the  friends  of  the  bridegroom,  but  his
rivals.  And  now  I  have  said  enough  about  the  things  beneath
you  ;  not  enough,  it  is  true,  for  the  adequate  treatment  of  the
subject,  which  is  far  too  great  for  me  to  handle,  but  enough
for  my  purpose.  We  must  now  view  the  things  around  you  ;
but  the  fourth  book  will  open  the  door  and  admit  us  to  them.

1  St.  Bernard  (Cotter  Morison,  p.  1 29)  elsewhere  girds  at  the  '  cross '
between  the  priest  and  the  soldier.  '  Not  only  have  we  lost  the  spirit  of  the
old  monasteries,  but  even  the  outward  appearance.  For  this  habit  of  ours,
which  of  old  was  the  sign  of  humility,  by  the  monks  of  our  day  is  turned
into  a  source  of  pride.  We  can  hardly  find  in  a  whole  province  where
withal  we  condescend  to  be  clothed.  The  monk  and  the  knight  cut
their  garments,  the  one  his  cowl,  the  other  his  cloak,  from  the  same  piece.'
As  early  as  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century  there  are  canons  forbidding
the  clergy  to  wear  a  military  cloak,  or  bear  arms.

3  i  Cor.  xv.  23.


BOOK IV

[  In  the  fourth  book  St.  Bernard  proposes  for  the  Pope's
consideration  'what  is  around  him,  viz.  (a)  the  Clergy,  (b]  the
people  of  Rome,  (c)  the  Cardinals,  and  other  officers  of  the
Court,  and  concludes  by  drawing  a  remarkable  portrait  of  an
ideal  Head  of  the  Church.

The  People  of  Rome.  i  The  root  of  mischief  was  deep  and
perennial ;  and  a  momentary  calm  was  preceded  and  followed
by  such  tempests  as  had  almost  sunk  the  bark  of  St.  Peter.
Rome  continually  presented  the  aspect  of  war  and  discord ;
the  churches  and  palaces  were  fortified  and  assaulted  by  the
factions  and  families ;  and,  after  giving  peace  to  Europe,
Calixtus  the  Second  alone  had  resolution  and  power  to  pro
hibit  the  use  of  private  arms  in  the  metropolis/  Gibbon
(Decline  and  Fall,  ch.  Ixix.  A.D.  1118-1224),  who,  after
quoting  St.  Bernard,  adds,  '  Surely  this  dark  portrait  is  not
coloured  by  the  pencil  of  Christian  charity  ;  yet  the  features,
however  harsh  and  ugly,  express  a  lively  resemblance  of  the
Romans  of  the  twelfth  century.'

Legates.  *  In  addition  to  their  vicars,  the  popes  appointed
legates  to  exercise  some  of  their  functions,  such  as  that  of
holding  councils  for  the  investigation  of  cases  which  had  been
referred  to  Rome,  or  in  which  the  popes  took  it  on  themselves
to  interfere.  These  legates  were  sometimes  ecclesiastics
sent  from  Italy;  but  as  foreign  ecclesiastics  were  regarded
with  suspicion  by  princes,  it  was  more  usual  to  give  the
legatine  commission  to  some  bishop  of  the  country  in  which
the  inquiry  was  to  take  place.  Even  kings  were  sometimes
invested  with  the  authority  of  papal  legates/  Gregory  VII
(circ.  A.D.  1070)  applied  to  his  legates  the  text,  'he  that
heareth  you,  heareth  me.'  Wherever  they  apjvared  they  were
the  highest  ecclesiastical  authorities  ;  and  bishops  trembled
before  the  deacons  and  subdeacons  who  were  imested  with


9  6  On  Consideration

the  pope's  commission  to  control,  to  judge,  and  to  depose
them.  Up  to  the  time  of  Anselm  (circ.  A.  D.  1 100)  they  had
come  but  seldom  to  England  and  only  on  special  business.
When  a  '  legate  of  All  England  '  was  appointed  it  was  stoutly
contended  that  no  one  but  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury
could  be  recognized  as  a  representative  of  the  pope.  Robert
son,  Ch.  Hist.,  &c. ;  Cotter  Morison,  Saint  Bernard,  p.  423.
Election  of  Pope.  The  great  innovation  in  the  method  of
election  dates  from  A.  D.  1059,  when  Nicolas  II,  in  a
Council  held  at  Rome,  published  a  decree  '  that  the  cardinal
bishops  should  first  treat  of  the  election,  that  they  should  then
call  in  the  cardinals  of  inferior  rank,  and  that  afterwards  the
rest  of  the  clergy  and  people  should  approve  the  choice.'
The  choice  of  pope  was  thus  substantially  vested  in  the  car
dinals.  The  election  was  to  be  made  '  saving  the  due  honour
and  reverence  of  our  beloved  son  Henry,  who  at  present  is
accounted  king,  and  hereafter  will,  it  is  hoped,  if  God  permit,
be  emperor,  as  we  have  already  granted  to  him  ;  and  of  his
successors  'who  shall  personally  have  obtained  this  privilege  from
the  apostolic  see.''  There  was  no  emperor  at  the  time,  and
*  our  beloved  son  Henry '  was  a  child  under  female  guardian
ship.  Nicolas,  it  will  be  seen,  so  short  a  time  before
St.  Bernard's  day,  assumed  the  right  to  dispose  of  temporal
sovereignties.  His  successor  did  so  also  when  he  sanctioned
William  the  Conqueror's  invasion  of  England.  See  Robertson,
Book  III,  &c.]


CHAPTER  I

The  things  'around'  the  Pope

i.  If  I  knew  better,  most  loving  Eugenius,  how  you
received  what  I  have  already  sent,  I  should  proceed  to  the
rest  of  my  work  with  corresponding  confidence  or  caution  ;
or  I  might,  of  course,  stop  altogether.  But  since  the  distance
which  separates  us  renders  such  knowledge  impossible,  you


Book  //^  Chapter  i  97

must  not  be  surprised  if,  as  I  approach  (with  some  misgiving,
I  confess)  the  middle  of  my  subject,  my  discourse  flows  less
freely  in  its  divided  channel.  Having  fully  treated  the  first
part  of  consideration  in  the  former  books,  I  now  take  in  hand
the  task  of  adding  my  views  on  the  things  around  you.  They,
too,  are  really  under  you,  but  the  nearer  they  are  the  greater
is  their  importunity.  For  being  before  your  very  eyes  they
allow  no  pretence  of  carelessness  or  forgetful  ness.  They
more  furiously  drive  you ;  they  more  tumultuously  mob  you ;
there  is  reason  to  fear  they  may  carry  you  away  altogether.
I  do  not  doubt  that  you  have  learnt  from  your  own  experience
what  watchful  and  earnest  consideration  is  required  when
things  are  so.  Moreover,  if  careful  and  timely  consideration
does  not  step  in,  your  vexation  will  be  boundless,  and  your
anxiety  unceasing.  You  will  not  have  a  moment  to  spare,
nor  a  free  place  in  your  heart ;  the  labour  will  be  greater,  the
profit  less.  1  have  in  mind  those  things  which  come  upon
you  daily  from  the  city,  from  the  court,  from  your  own
church.  These  things,  I  say,  are  around  you ;  your  clergy
and  your  people,  whose  own  bishop  you  are,  and  to  whom  you
therefore  owe  a  debt  of  special  care.  So  are  they,  too,  who
day  by  day  assist  you,  the  elders  of  the  people,  the  judges  of
the  world ;  they,  too,  who  belong  to  your  household  and  sit  at
your  table,  your  chaplains,  gentlemen  of  the  bedchamber,  and
inferior  clergy  appointed  in  their  different  offices  to  do  you
service.  These  are  your  more  intimate  acquaintance  ;  they
more  frequently  knock,  disturb,  and  vex  you.1  These  arc
they  who  are  not  afraid  to  wake  the  beloved  before  she  wishes
to  be  awaked.

1  Cant.  v.  2,  3.


hi. BLRNARU


9  8  On  Consideration

CHAPTER II

The  clergy  and  people  of  Rome. The  care  and
watchfulness  of  shepherds  in  olden  time

2.  Now,  in  the  first  place,  your  clergy,  who  set  the  pattern
for  the  clergy  throughout  the  Church,  ought  to  be  in  the  best
of  order.  Secondly,  whatever  is  amiss  in  your  presence  re
flects  the  more  discredit  upon  you.  It  concerns  the  glory  of
your  Holiness  that  the  men  you  have  before  your  eyes  be  so
ordered,  so  fashioned,  that  they  may  be  the  mirror  and  the
very  pink  of  a  virtuous  and  well-regulated  life.  Above  all
other  men  they  should  be  found  ready  for  their  duties,  fit  for
the  sacraments,  eager  to  instruct  the  people,  circumspect  in
keeping  themselves  free  from  all  pollution.  What  am  I  to
say  about  the  people  ?  It  is  the  people  of  Rome.  I  could
not  more  briefly,  or  more  definitely,  describe  them.  Yet
I  ought  to  let  you  know  what  I  think  of  your  parishioners.
Is  there  anything  in  history  more  notorious  than  the  wanton
ness  and  pride  of  the  Romans  ?  A  race  unaccustomed  to
peace,  familiar  with  tumult ;  a  race  to  this  very  day  fierce  and
intractable ;  who  will  never  submit  except  when  they  have  no
power  to  resist.  Here  is  the  mischief;  this  is  the  care  that
lies  heavy  upon  you,  and  you  must  not  disguise  the  fact.  You
perhaps  smile  as  you  read  this,  for  you  are  convinced  that
they  will  never  be  cured.  Do  not  despair :  what  is  required
of  you  is  the  care,  not  the  cure.  You  have  surely  heard  the
words,  *  Take  care  of  him  ' ;  our  Lord  did  not  say  '  cure '  or
4  heal '  him.  It  was  a  true  saying,  '  The  doctor  cannot  always
cure  his  patient/  But  set  a  better  ideal  before  you  in  your
work.  Paul  says,  *  I  laboured  more  than  they  all/ *  He
1  i  Cor.  xv.  10.


Booh  IV,  Chapter  ii  99

does  not  say,  <  I  did  more  good  than  all,'  or  '  I  bore  more  fruit
than  all/  for  he  most  scrupulously  avoided  any  word  of  pride.
The  man  whom  God  taught  that  every  one  shall  receive
according  to  his  work,  not  according  to  the  results  of  the
work,1  knew  better  than  that.  Hence  it  was  that  he  thought
he  ought  to  glory  more  in  labours  than  in  successes,  as  you
have  him  saying  elsewhere,  '  In  labours  more  abundant.' a
So,  pray,  do  your  own  work ;  for  God  will  take  good  care
of  His  without  your  solicitude  and  anxiety.  Plant,  water,
bestow  care :  you  have  done  your  part.  God,  when  He  so
wills,  will  certainly  give  the  increase;  it  will  not  be  you.  If
perchance  He  does  not  will  to  give  it,  you  lose  nothing,  for
the  scripture  says,  'God  will  render  to  the  righteous  the
reward  of  their  labours.'3  That  labour  is  safe  which  no
failure  can  render  void.  And  I  would  say  this  without
prejudice  to  the  divine  power  and  goodness.  I  know  the
heart  of  this  people  is  hardened ;  but  God  is  able  of  these
stones  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham.  Who  knows  if
He  will  return  and  pardon,  convert  and  heal  them  ?  But  I  do
not  propose  to  dictate  to  God  what  He  ought  to  do  ;  would
that  I  could  persuade  you  to  do  what  you  ought,  and  as  you
ought.

3.  I  know  I  am  treading  on  dangerous  ground,  and  have  to
deal  with  some  very  nice  points.  How  shall  I  approach  the
perilous  task  of  saying  what  I  think  ?  I  see  clearly  what  is
hanging  over  my  head.  The  cry  of  'innovation'  will  be
raised  ;  for  no  one  can  deny  the  justice  of  my  complaint.
But  I  would  not  allow  even  the  plea  of  novelty.  For  I  am
quite  sure  that  what  I  urge  was  once  the  custom,  and,  like  all
other  customs,  it  might  fall  into  disuse ;  but  nothing  can  dis
turb  the  fact  that  the  custom  once  prevailed.  Can  any  one

1 i  Cor.  iii.  8.  2  a  Cor.  xi.  23.  3  Wisd.  of  Sol.  x.  17.

G 2


ioo  On  Consideration

with  truth  deny  that  to  be  a  custom  which  was  not  only  done
once  upon  a  time,  but  beyond  a  doubt  was  the  practice  for
a  considerable  time  ?  I  will  tell  you  what  I  refer  to,  though
it  will  do  no  good.  Why  ?  Because  it  will  not  please  the
rulers  l  of  the  Church,  who  have  more  regard  for  the  splendour
of  their  office  than  for  the  claims  of  truth.  Before  your  day
there  were  men  who  would  devote  themselves  entirely  to
feeding  the  sheep ;  they  gloried  in  the  shepherd's  work  and
name ;  they  counted  nothing  humiliating  except  what  they
thought  hindered  the  welfare  of  the  sheep,  for  they  did  not
seek  their  own  interests,  but  spent  upon  the  sheep.  They
spent  care,  they  spent  their  substance,  they  spent  even  them
selves.  Wherefore  one  of  them  says,  '  I  will  be  spent  out  for
your  souls.'  2  It  is  as  though  they  said,  '  We  came  not  to  be
•ministered  unto,  but  to  minister ' ; 3  and  so,  as  often  as  it
became  them,  they  made  the  Gospel  free  of  cost.  The  only
gain  they  sought  from  those  in  their  keeping,  the  only  pomp,
the  only  pleasure,  was,  if  possible,  to  make  them  a  perfect
people  for  the  Lord.  That  was  their  constant  concern,  even
in  much  sorrow  of  heart,  and  pain  of  body,  in  labour  and  care,
in  hunger  and  thirst,  in  cold  and  nakedness.

4.  Let  me  now  ask  what  has  become  of  this  practice?
A  very  different  one  has  crept  in :  men's  ambitions  have
undergone  a  great  change,  and  I  would  that  the  change  were  not
for  the  worse  !  We  have  still  among  us,  I  admit,  anxious
care,  wholesome  emulation,  and  a  sense  of  responsibility.
These  have  been  passed  on  to  you  without  diminution.  In
support  of  what  I  say,  there  is  the  fact  that  you  do  not  spare
your  substance  any  more  than  your  predecessors  did.  But  it
is  the  change  in  the  investment  that  makes  the  difference.  It

1  Salrapis. But  see  Judges  iii.  3  ;  2  Chron.  ix.  14,  Vulg.
2.  a  Cor.  xii.  15.  3  St.  Matt.  xx.  28.


Book //',  Chapter  ii  101

is  a  great  abuse.  Few  look  to  the  mouth  of  the  lawgiver  :
all  have  regard  to  his  hands.  And  not  without  good  reason.
The  hands  do  all  the  Pope's  business.  Show  me  a  man  in
the  whole  city  of  Rome  who  welcomed  you  as  Pope  without
having  his  price,  or  hoping  to  get  it.  Even  when  they  profess
to  be  your  very  humble  servants,  they  aim  at  being  your
masters.  They  pledge  their  fidelity  only  that  they  may  more
conveniently  injure  the  confiding.  Hence  it  is  that  there  can
be  no  deliberation  from  which  they  think  they  ought  to  be
excluded;  there  will  be  no  secret  into  which  they  do  not
worm  their  way.  If  the  doorkeeper  keeps  one  of  them
waiting  a  minute  or  two,  I  should  not  like  to  be  in  his  shoes.
Now  for  a  few  illustrations,  so  that  you  may  know  whether
I  understand  this  people's  ways,  and  how  far.  First  of  all,
they  are  wise  to  do  evil,  but  they  know  not  how  to  do  good.
Hateful  to  heaven  and  earth,  they  have  laid  hands  on  both  ;
they  are  impious  towards  God,  heedless  in  holy  things ;
turbulent  among  themselves,  jealous  of  their  neighbours,  bar
barous  to  foreigners,  they  love  no  man  and  are  loved  of  none ;
and  when  they  aim  at  being  feared  by  all,  all  must  fear.
These  are  they  who  cannot  bear  to  be  beneath,  though  they
are  not  qualified  to  be  at  the  head,  faithless  to  superiors,
insufferable  to  inferiors.  They  have  no  modesty  in  asking,
and  no  shame  in  refusing.  They  worry  you  to  get  what  they
want ;  they  cannot  rest  till  they  get  it ;  they  have  no  gratitude
once  they  have  got  it.  They  have  taught  their  tongue  to
speak  great  things,  when  there  is  but  little  doing.  They  are
lavish  promisors,  niggardly  performers ;  the  smoothest  of
flatterers,  and  the  worst  of  backbiters ;  artless  dissemblers,
and  malignant  traitors.  I  allow  myself  to  digress  thus  far
because  I  think  you  ought  to  be  fully  and  precisely  admonished
of  these  things  which  arc  around  you.


102


On  Consideration


5.  Let  us  now  return  to  our  subject.  How  is  it  that
churches  are  robbed  to  provide  the  purchase-money  of  the
flatterers  who  cry  '  Well  done  !  Well  done  !  '  ?  The  susten
ance  of  the  poor  is  scattered  broadcast  in  the  streets  of  the
rich.  The  money  glitters  in  the  mud  ;  men  rush  from  all
sides  to  get  it ;  the  poor  man  does  not  pick  it  up,  but  the
stronger,  or,  it  may  be,  the  swiftest  runner.  Still,  I  must  in
fairness  say  this  custom,  or  rather  this  deadly  disease,  did  not
begin  with  you  ;  would  that  it  might  end  with  you.  But  let
us  proceed.  Amid  these  surroundings  you,  the  shepherd,
parade  in  cloth  of  gold,  with  every  luxury  at  your  command.
The  sheep,  what  do  they  receive  ?  If  I  might  speak  the
truth,  these  are  the  pastures  of  demons  rather  than  of  sheep.
Did  Peter,  forsooth,  do  such  things,  or  Paul  thus  sport  him
self  ?  You  see  that  the  one  object  of  the  Church's  zeal  is
the  preservation  of  your  dignity.  Honour  claims  all,  holiness
nothing,  or  but  little.  If  for  good  reason  you  attempt  to
waive  ceremony,  and  show  a  little  friendliness,  '  No,'  say
they  :  '  it  is  not  becoming ' :  *  it  does  not  suit  the  time ' :  '  it
is  not  accordant  with  your  rank  ' :  '  bear  in  mind  the  impor
tant  part  you  play.'  The  last  thing  mentioned  is  the  will  of
God  ;  there  is  no  hesitation  because  men's  salvation  is  at
stake  ;  let  us  call  nothing  salutary  but  what  is  high  and
mighty  ;  and  whatever  gives  the  scent  of  glory,  let  that  be
righteousness.  Thus  all  humility  is  reckoned  a  disgrace
among  the  inmates  of  the  palace,  so  that  you  may  more  easily
find  a  man  who  really  is  humble  than  you  will  one  who  is
willing  to  appear  so.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  counted  sim
plicity,  not  to  say  folly.  They  revile  a  prudent  man,  who  is
on  good  terms  with  his  own  conscience,  as  a  hypocrite.
A  lover  of  quiet,  moreover,  who  sometimes  finds  leisure  to
think  about  himself,  they  call  a  useless  drone.


Book IV,  Chapter  Hi  103


CHAPTER  III

The  necessity  of  curtailing  extravagance  in
dress,  &c.

6.  How  is  it  then  with  you  ?  Are  you  not  yet  awake,  and
on  your  guard  against  those  who  have  surrounded  you  with
the  snares  of  death  ?  Pray  bear  with  me  yet  a  little  while.
Nay,  rather,  pardon  me  when  I  say  these  things  with  less
temerity  than  timidity.  1  am  jealous  over  you  with  a  godly
jealousy,  and  I  would  it  were  as  profitable  as  it  is  strong.
I  know  where  you  dwell ;  unbelievers  and  subverters  are  with
you.  They  are  wolves,  not  sheep ;  but  you  are  the  shepherd
of  these  as  well  as  of  the  rest.  The  consideration  will  be
profitable  if  it  leads  you  to  the  discovery  of  some  means  of
converting  them  lest  they  subvert  you.  They  were  sheep  and
turned  into  wolves ;  why  despair  of  their  turning  back  again
into  sheep  ?  Here,  here,  I  do  not  spare  you,  so  that  God
may  spare  you.  At  least  cither  deny  that  you  are  shepherd
over  this  people,  or  showjthat  you  are.  You  will  not  deny  it,
lest  he,  whose  chair  you  fill,  deny  that  you  are  his  heir.
I  mean,  of  course,  Peter,  who  never,  so  far  as  can  be  ascer
tained,  i  araded  himself  decked  with  gems,  or  robed  in  silks ;
he  was  not  covered  with  gold,  he  did  not  ride  on  a  white
steed,  he  was  not  surrounded  by  soldiers,  nor  fenced  off  from
his  flock  by  noisy  attendants.  He  thought  that  without  all
this  he  could  amply  fulfil  the  salutary  command,  'If  you  love
me,  feed  my  sheep.'  *  In  all  this  painted  pomp  you  are  not
Peter's  successor,  but  Constantinc's.  What  I  insist  on  is
that  while  you  may  tolerate  such  pomp  and  glory  to  suit  the

1  St.  John  xxi.  15.


io4  0>1  Consideration

time,  you  must  not  claim  it  as  a  debt  due  to  you.  I  rather
urge  you  to  consider  those  things  which  are  a  debt  due  from
you.  If  on  state  occasions  you  are  robed  in  purple  and
decked  with  gold,  I  am  sure  this  does  not  mean  that  you,  the
shepherd's  heir,  shrink  from  the  shepherd's  toil,  or  the
shepherd's  care  ;  it  does  not  imply  that  you  are  ashamed  of
the  Gospel.  Albeit,  if  you  willingly  preach  the  Gospel,  you,
too,  have  a  glorious  place  among  the  apostles.  To  preach
the  Gospel  is  to  feed  the  sheep.  Do  the  work  of  an  evan
gelist,  and  you  have  done  the  work  of  a  shepherd.

7.  '  You  are  advising  me ',  you  say,  '  to  feed  dragons  and
scorpions,  not  sheep.'  For  that  very  reason,  I  reply,  set
about  them ;  but  with  the  word,  not  with  the  sword.  Why
should  you  again  try  to  use  the  sword,  which  you  were  once
for  all  bidden  to  put  into  its  sheath  ?  Yet  if  any  one  should
deny  that  you  have  the  sword,  he  does  not  seem  to  me  to  have
paid  sufficient  attention  to  his  Lord's  words,  *  Put  back  thy
sword  into  the  sheath.'1  To  you,  then,  the  sword  belongs,
and  it  should  be  unsheathed,  it  may  be  with  your  consent,
though  not  by  your  hand.  Otherwise,  if  it  no  way  belonged
to  you,  when  the  apostles  said,  '  Lo,  here  are  two  swords,' 2
the  Lord  would  not  have  replied,  *  It  is  enough  ' ;  He  would
have  said,  '  They  are  too  many.'  Both  swords  belong  to  the
Church,  the  spiritual  and  the  material ;  the  one  is  to  be  used
to  defend  the  Church,  but  the  other  must  even  be  banished
from  the  Church  ;  the  one  is  wielded  by  the  priest,  the  other
by  the  soldier,  but  of  course  with  your  consent,  and  at  the
command  of  the  Emperor.  More  of  this  elsewhere.  Now,
however,  seize  the  sword  which  was  entrusted  to  you  that  you
might  strike  ;  wound,  for  the  saving  of  their  souls,  if  not  all,
if  not  many  even,  at  all  events  as  many  as  you  can.
1  St.  John  xviii.  10,  n.  z  St.  Luke  xxii.  38.  See  Appendix,  p.  171.


Booh y/7,  Chapter  in

8.  You  say,  '  I  am  not  better  than  my  fathers.'  I  will  not
ask  to  which  of  your  fathers  this  exasperating  house  ever
hearkened,  which  of  them  it  did  not  mock.  Therefore  do
you  the  more  firmly  take  your  stand  if  haply  they  may  hear,
and  be  still  ;  insist  even  when  they  resist.  When  I  speak
thus,  I  shall,  perhaps,  be  said  to  use  extravagant  language.
Was  it  I  who  said,  '  Be  instant  in  season,  out  of  season  '  ? l
Call  the  apostle  'extravagant  '  if  you  dare.  The  prophet  is
commanded  to  '  cry  aloud  and  cease  not  '.2  To  whom  was
he  to  cry  unless  it  was  to  the  wicked  and  to  sinners  ?
*  Declare  unto  my  people  their  wickedness,  and  to  the  house
of  Jacob  their  sins.'3  Carefully  observe  that  the  same  people
are  called  k  wicked  ',  and  '  the  people  of  the  Lord '.  Take
the  same  view  of  those  with  whom  you  have  to  do.  Although
they  are  wicked,  although  they  are  unrighteous,  see  that  you
are  not  told,  '  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  not  to  one  of  the  least
of  my  brethren,  ye  did  it  not  to  me.' 4  I  admit  that  this
people  has  ever  been  of  a  hard  forehead  and  of  a  wild  heart ;
but  I  fail  to  see  how  you  can  know  that  their  heart  cannot  be
tamed.  What  has  never  been  may  yet  be.  You  may  despair,
but  with  God  no  word  shall  be  impossible."  If  they  are  of  a
hard  forehead,  do  you  also  harden  yours.  Nothing  is  so  hard
that  it  does  not  yield  to  that  which  is  harder.  The  Lord
said  to  the  prophet,  '  I  have  made  thy  forehead  harder  than
their  foreheads.'0  If  you  have  so  dealt  with  that  people  that
you  can  say,  '  My  people,  what  ought  I  to  have  done  for  thee
that  I  have  not  done/  this  is  your  only  sound  defence.  If
you  have  thus  done,  and  yet  have  done  no  good,  there  is  still
something  that  you  can  do,  something  that  you  can  say.  Go

1 a  Tim.  iv.  2.  2  Iu.  Iviii.  i.

3 Isa.  Iviii.  I.  <  St.  Matt.  x\v.  45.

0  St.  Luke  i.  37.  «  Ez«k.  iii.  8.


106  On  Consideration

forth  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,1  and  say,  '  I  must  preach  the
Gospel  also  to  other  cities.' 2  I  think  you  will  not  regret
your  exile  if  you  exchange  Rome  for  the  world.


CHAPTER  IV

The  Pope's  colleagues  and  coadjutors  at  the
Later  an

9.  Let  us  come  to  your  colleagues  s  and  coadjutors  at  the
Lateran.  They  are  busy  on  your  behalf:  they  are  the  inner
circle  of  your  friends.  It  follows  that  if  they  are  good,  you
more  than  any  one  else  reap  the  benefit ;  if  they  are  bad,  you
more  than  any  one  else  bear  the  loss.  Do  not  say  you  are
well  if  you  have  a  pain  in  your  side  ;  what  I  mean  is,  do  not
say  you  are  good  if  you  rely  on  bad  men.  To  put  it  differ
ently,  suppose  you  are  good,  what  fruit  (as  I  remember  saying
in  a  former  book)  can  your  goodness,  the  goodness  of  an  indi
vidual  man,  bear  ?  What  profit  does  your  individual  righteous
ness  bring  to  the  churches  of  God,  when  the  prevalent

1  Gen.  xi.  31  ;  xv.  7.  2  St.  Luke  iv.  43.

3  St.  Bernard's  word  is  collaterales.  In  the  eleventh  century  the  seven
cardinal  bishops  had  been  appointed  to  the  Church  of  St.  John  Lateran
to  officiate  in  turn  for  the  Pope.  This  basilica,  inscribed  on  each  side  of
the  entrance,  '  The  Mother  and  Mistress  of  all  Churches  of  the  city  and
world/  stands  on  the  site  of  the  house  of  Plautius  Lateranus,  who  was  put
to  death  by  Nero  (see  Tacitus,  Annals,  xi.  30,  36 ;  xiii.  II  ;  xv.  49,  60),
and  is  named  after  him.  It  was  founded  by  Constantine,  who  assisted
with  his  own  hands  in  digging  the  foundations.  '  The  Chapter  of  the
Lateran  still  takes  precedence  of  that  of  St.  Peter's ;  the  ceremony  of
taking  possession  of  the  Lateran  Basilica  is  one  of  the  first  observed  on  the
election  of  a  new  Pope,  whose  coronation  takes  place  in  it,  so  that  for  1,50x3
years  it  has  preserved  its  rank  and  privileges.'  St.  Bernard,  as  his  manner
is,  appears  to  be  playing  with  the  word.


Booh 7/7,  Chapter  iv  107

views  are  those  of  men  otherwise  disposed  ?  The  truth  is
that  not  even  your  own  goodness  beset  by  bad  men  is  safer
than  bodily  health  would  be  with  a  serpent  hard  by.  There
is  no  escaping  from  this  internal  mischief.  And  on  the  other
hand,  if  you  have  good  men  about  you,  the  oftener  they  assist
you  the  better.  But  whether  your  colleagues  relieve  or  aggra
vate  your  cares,  who  deserves  the  credit  of  it  more  than
yourself  for  either  choosing  or  admitting  such  men  ?  I  do
not  speak  of  all ;  for  there  are  some  whom  you  have  not
chosen  ;  they  have  chosen  you.  But  they  have  no  power
except  what  you  have  either  given  or  allowed  them.  So  we
come  back  to  the  same  point.  Blame  yourself  for  whatever
you  have  to  suffer  at  the  hands  of  him  who  has  no  more
power  than  what  you  have  given  him.  As  to  the  rest,  with
these  exceptions,  the  men  for  the  work  of  this  ministry,  as
you  perceive,  are  not  to  be  elected  or  collected  without  due
consideration.  It  is  your  duty,  like  Moses,  to  summon,
whencesoever,  and  admit  to  their  office,  old  men,  not  young
men  ; '  old,  I  mean,  not  so  much  in  years  as  character  ;  men
whom  you  have  got  to  know  because  they  are  the  elders  of
the  people.  Surely  they  who  are  to  judge  the  world  ought  to
be  chosen  out  of  the  whole  world.  By  no  means  let  a  man
meddle  with  this  business  because  he  begs  the  office.  De
liberation,  not  entreaty,  must  be  your  guide  to  action.  Some
things  we  must  yield  to  importunate  request,  or  grant  to  de
serving  need.  But  in  so  doing  we  are  disposing  of  our  own.
When,  however,  it  is  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  as  I  wish
myself,  the  petitioner  has  no  standing-place,  unless,  perchance,
his  petition  is  that  his  wish  may  lawfully  be  mine,  and  not  simply
that  it  may  be  mine.  One  man  intercedes  for  another;
another  perhaps  even  a«-k*  for  himself.  Suspect  the  man  on
1  Num.  \i.  16.  See  Appendix,  p.  171.


io8  On  Consideration

whose  behalf  you  are  entreated  :  the  man  who  asks  for  himself
is  already  judged.  It  does  not  matter  whether  a  man  himself
asks,  or  does  so  through  another  man.  If  a  cleric  who  does
not  belong  to  the  court  is  always  about  the  court,  you  may  be
sure  he  is  the  sort  of  person  who  is  on  the  look  out  for
favours.  A  flatterer,  and  a  man  who  smooths  his  tongue  to
suit  everybody,  regard  as  a  petitioner,  even  if  he  asks  for
nothing.  There  is  nothing  in  the  scorpion's  face  to  cause
alarm;  the  sting  is  in  the  tail.

10.  If,  as  mostly  happens,  you  find  your  heart  softening
under  the  blandishments  of  such  men, remember  what is
written,  '  Every  man  setteth  on  first  the  good  wine,  and  when
men  have  drunk  freely,  then  that  which  is  worse.' l You
should  set  the  same  value  on  the  humility  of  the  man  who
fears  and  of  the  man  who  hopes. The  crafty  and  deceitful
man  has  a  peculiar  knack  of  putting  on  the  garb  of  humility
when  he  wishes  to  get  something ;  he  is  like  those  of  whom
the  Scripture  says,  '  There  is  a  wicked  man  who  hangeth  down
his  head  sadly,  but  inwardly  he  is  full  of  deceit.' 2 To  see
how  true  this  is,  take  a  clear  and  familiar  illustration  from
among  yourselves. How  many  of  suppliant  mien  have  you
admitted  whom  you  have  afterwards  had  to  put  up  with  in  their
moroseness,  insolence,  stubbornness,  rebellion  ? The  secret
mischief,  hidden  at  first,  is  at  last  revealed. The  stripling
full  of  words,  aiming  at  eloquence,  when  he  is  void  of  wisdom,
you  should  look  upon  as  every  way  the  enemy  of  righteousness.
To  guard  you  against  false  brethren  of  this  sort  your  Master
says,  '  Lay  hands  hastily  on  no  man.' 3

1 1 .  So,  then,  having shut out  the  whole  race  of  these
pestilent  men,  make  it  your  chief  care  to  bring  in  those  whose
admission  you  will  not  afterwards  regret. The  frequent  revision

1  St.  John.  it.  10.  2  Ecclus.  xix.  26.  3  I  Tim.  v.  22.


Book  IV ^  Chapter  iv  109

of  your  own  acts  is  discreditable,  and  it  is  not  fitting  that  your
judgement  should  be  frequently  called  in  question.  Accord
ingly,  diligently  examine  for  yourself,  and  with  the  assistance
of  the  men  who  love  you,  whatever  is  to  be  done.  Examine
beforehand,  because,  once  the  thing  is  done,  correction  is
too  late.  The  wise  man's  counsel  is,  '  Do  nothing  without
counsel,  and  when  thou  hast  once  done  thou  shalt  not  repent.' l
And  be  assured  of  this,  that  men  fit  to  be  admitted  can  hardly
find  favour  with  the  court ;  if  possible,  therefore,  your  choice
should  be  of  men  approved,  not  to  be  proved.  We,  in  our
monasteries,  welcome  all  sorts  of  men  in  the  hope  of  doing
them  good,  but  the  court  has  been  accustomed  to  more  readily
welcome  good  men  than  make  men  good.  If,  however,  as
we  have  shown,  there  have  been  at  the  court  more  good  men
who  have  failed  than  bad  men  who  have  improved,  we  must
certainly  look  for  men  whose  failure  we  need  not  fear,  and
whose  progress  we  need  not  desire,  inasmuch  as  they  are
already  perfect.

12.  So  then,  in  choosing  men,  select  not  him  that  willeth,
nor  him  that  runneth,  but  such  as  hesitate  or  refuse ;  even  put
pressure  on  these,  and  compel  them  to  come  in.  Your  spirit
may  rest  in  such,  I  think,  as  are  not  of  a  shameless  forehead,
but  are  modest,  and  have  the  fear  of  God  ;  who  fear  nothing
but  God,  and  hope  for  nothing  but  from  God  ;  who  obsi-ru1
not  the  hands  of  those  who  approach  them,  but  their  neces
sities  ;  who  stand  up  manfully  for  the  afflicted,  and  judge  in
equity  for  the  meek  upon  earth  ;  men  who  are  of  orderly  life,
proved  holiness,  ready  to  obey,  meek  in  suffering,  submissive
under  discipline,  stern  in  censuring,  who  hold  the  Catholic
faith,  are  faithful  in  their  stewardship,  lovers  of  peace  and
concord,  consistent  in  maintaining  unity ;  men  upright  in

1 Kcclus.  xxxii.  19.


I  10


On  Consideration


judgement,  prudent  in  counsel,  discreet  in  commanding,
careful  in  planning,  strenuous  in  action,  modest  in  speech ;
tranquil  in  adversity,  devout  in  prosperity ;  as  regards  zeal,
sober-minded  ;  prone  to  pity ;  in  leisure  time  not  idle ;  given
to  hospitality,  but  not  too  convivial ;  careful  in  business  affairs,
but  not  anxious ;  not  covetous  of  another  man's  goods,  nor
lavish  of  their  own  ;  everywhere,  and  under  all  circumstances,
circumspect ;  men  who  when  bidden,  and  necessity  requires,
would  not  decline  to  serve  as  ambassadors  for  Christ,  nor
unbidden  would  aspire  to  the  office,  nor  make  their  modest
excuses  a  plea  for  obstinate  refusal ;  who  when  sent  do  not
go  after  gold,  but  follow  Christ;  who  do  not  regard  their
commission  as  so  much  gain,  nor  look  for  reward,  but  seek
fruit ;  who  in  the  eyes  of  kings  are  as  John,  to  the  Egyptians
are  as  Moses,  to  fornicators  as  Phinees,  to  idolaters  as  Elijah,
to  the  covetous  as  Elisha,  to  liars  as  Peter,  to  blasphemers  as
Paul,  to  traffickers  as  Christ ;  who  do  not  despise  the  common
people,  but  teach  them  ;  do  not  flatter  the  rich,  but  frighten
them  ;  do  not  oppress  the  poor,  but  cherish  them ;  do  not
dread  the  threats  of  rulers,  but  despise  them  ;  do  not  make
a  great  to-do  when  they  enter  on  their  work,  nor  show  signs
of  anger  when  they  leave  it;  who  do  not  rob  the  churches,  but
improve  them  ;  do  not  empty  men's  pockets,  but  refresh  their
hearts,  and  correct  their  offences ;  who  take  care  of  their  own
reputation,  and  do  not  envy  another  man  his  ;  who  zealously
cultivate  prayerful  habits,  and  in  everything  rely  more  on  prayer
than  on  their  own  industry  and  labour  ;  whose  coming  bringeth
peace,  whose  departure  we  regret ;  whose  speech  is  edifying,
their  life  righteous,  their  presence  a  pleasure,  their  memory
blessed  ;  who  to  the  individual  are  amiable  not  in  word,  but
in  deed,  while  they  command  the  respect  of  the  world  at  large,
not  by  their  arrogance,  but  by  the  discharge  of  their  duties ;


Book  IV,  Chapter  iv  1 1 1

who  are  humble  with  the  humble,  and  innocent  with  the  in
nocent  ;  who  sternly  rebuke  the  hardened,  restrain  the  wicked,
duly  recompense  the  proud  ;  who  are  not  swift  to  enrich  them
selves  or  their  relations  with  the  portion  of  the  widow,  and
the  patrimony  of  the  Crucified ;  who  freely  give  what  they  have
freely  received,  judgement  to  those  who  suffer  wrong,  vengeance
on  nations,  rebuking  peoples  ;  who,  in  short,  like  the  seventy
whom  Moses  chose,  are  perceived  to  have  taken  of  your  spirit,
and  by  it,  whether  absent  or  present,  strive  to  please  you,  and
to  please  God  ;  who  return  to  you,  weary  indeed,  but  not  laden
with  gifts;  while  they  even  glory,  not  because  they  have  brought
with  them  all  the  curiosities  and  treasures  of  the  lands,  but
because  they  have  left  behind  them  peace  to  kingdoms,  the  law
for  barbarians,  quiet  for  monasteries,  order  for  the  churches,
discipline  for  the  clergy,  a  people  acceptable  to  God,  zealous
of  good  works.


CHAPTER V

The  Pope  should  refuse  bribes.  Martin  and
Ciu  itf rid.  The  arrogance  of  the  Pope's  at
tendants

13.  I  think  it  worth  while  to  here  plunge  into  the  story  of
our  dear  brother  Martin,  whose  memory  is  sweet  to  me.  You
have  heard  the  story,  but  may  not  perhaps  remember  it.  He
was  a  Cardinal  Presbyter,1  and  for  some  time  was  Legate

1  Innocent  II  gave  him  this  rank  in  A.D.  1130.  His  'legatio'  date  is
A.D.  1 132.  He  did  not  belong  to  Clairvaux,  and  it  is  not  certain  that  he
was  a  Cistercian  at  all,  He  was  probably  one  of  St.  Bernard's  intimate
friends.  The  origin  of  'Cardinal  Presbyters'  is  not  clearly  ascertained.
Bellarmiii  thought  they  were  so  called  from  being  '  fixed  in  some  principal


112


On  Consideration


in  Dacia,  but  returned  so  poor  that  with  his  money  almost
gone,  and  the  horses  nearly  worn  out,  he  could  scarcely  reach
Florence.  There  the  bishop  of  the  place  gave  him  a  horse,
on  which  he  rode  as  far  as  Pisa,  where  we  happened  to  be  at
the  time.  The  next  day,  I  think  it  was,  the  bishop,  who  had
a  lawsuit  pending,  with  the  day  of  hearing  rapidly  approaching,
followed  Martin,  and  began  to  solicit  the  votes  of  his  friends.
One  by  one  their  support  had  been  solicited,  and  then  came
Martin's  turn.  The  bishop  relied  more  upon  him,  because  he
could  not  be  unmindful  of  the  recent  act  of  kindness.  Martin
thus  replied  :  '  You  have  deceived  me.  I  did  not  know  that
this  business  was  so  close.  Take  your  horse :  there  it  is  in
the  stable.'  And  that  very  hour  he  gave  it  up  to  him.  What
say  you  to  that,  my  dear  Eugenius  ?  To  think  of  a  legate
returning  from  a  land  of  gold  without  gold !  Does  it  not
sound  like  news  from  another  world  ?  To  think  of  his  passing
through  a  land  of  silver,  and  not  know  silver  !  Above  all,  to
have  at  once  rejected  a  gift  which  might  not  have  been  free
from  suspicion !

14.  But  oh  !  how  glad  I  am  here  to  have  an  opportunity  of
reviving  the  memory  of  a  man  who  bears  a  name  of  sweetest
fragrance.  I  mean  Gaufrid,  Bishop  of  Carnotes,  who  for  many
years,  at  his  own  expense,  vigorously  conducted  an  embassy

churches,  where  baptism  might  be  administered,  which  were  therefore
called  Ecclesiae  vel  Titnli  Carditiales\  Stillingfleet  was  of  opinion  that
they  were  the  chief  Presbyters '  in  large  and  populous  cities  .  .  .  chosen  out
from  the  rest,  to  be  as  the  Bishop's  Council ',  and  were  therefore  called
Cardinales  Presbyteri.  See  Bingham,  Antiq.  I,  p.  276.  'As  the  name  of
"pope"  or  "  papa"  was  originally  common  to  all  bishops,  so  the  chief
presbyters  and  deacons  of  any  church  to  which  a  cure  of  souls  was  attached
were  apt  to  have  the  term  "Cardinal "  applied  to  them  by  way  of  distinc
tion  long  before  it  was  applied  to  the  presbyters  and  deacons  of  the  parish
churches  of  Rome  in  particular'  (Diet.  Christ,  Antiq.,  s.  v.  'Cardinal ').
There  were  twenty-eight  chief  parish  churches  in  the  city.


Book //', Chapter  ;•  113

in  Aquitania.  What  I  speak  of,  I  saw  myself.  I  was  with
him  in  that  country  when  a  certain  priest  presented  him  with
a  fish  generally  called  a  sturgeon.  The  legate  inquired  how
much  it  would  fetch.  '  I  cannot  ',  said  he,  *  accept  it  unless
you  receive  the  value  '  ;  and  he  paid  the  would-be  donor,
reluctant  and  blushing  to  take  the  money,  five  gold  pieces.
On  another  occasion,  when  we  were  in  a  certain  town,  a  lady
of  the  place  devoutly  offered  him,  together  with  a  towel,  two
or  three  dessert-dishes,  of  beautiful  workmanship,  but  made  of
wood.  The  man  of  tender  conscience  gazed  at  them  for  some
time,  and  praised  them,  but  he  would  not  accept  them.  Was
he  likely  ever  to  receive  silver  dishes  after  refusing  wooden
ones  ?  Nobody  could  say  to  the  legate,  4  We  have  made
Abraham  rich.'  l  But  he,  like  Samuel,  was  thus  speaking
freely  to  all  :  *  Witness  against  me  before  the  Lord,  and
before  his  anointed  :  whose  ox  have  I  taken  ?  or  whose
ass  have  I  taken  ?  whom  have  I  defrauded  ?  whom  have
I  oppressed  ?  or  of  whose  hand  have  I  taken  a  bribe  ?  and
I  will  this  day  despise  it,  and  I  will  restore  it  to  you.'  a
Oh  !  that  there  were  given  to  us  plenty  of  men  such  as  these
we  have  glanced  at.  You  would  be  the  happiest  man  in
the  world,  and  the  age  the  most  delightful.  Would  not  the
blessedness  of  those  times  seem  to  you  only  next  to  the  joys
of  eternity,  when,  wherever  you  turned,  you  saw  yourself
surrounded  on  all  sides  with  so  glorious  a  band  of  the  blessed  ?
15.  If  I  know  you,  you  are  perplexed;  you  sigh  deeply
and  say  to  yourself,  *  Do  you  suppose  that  is  ever  likely
to  come  to  pass  ?  '  Your  thoughts  run  thus  —  '  Our  present
position  is  plain  enough.  How  far  is  what  you  tell  me
possible  ?  May  I  live  and  have  the  good  fortune  of  seeing
it  accomplished  !  Oh  !  that  I  might  be  spared  to  behold
1  Gen.  xiv.  23.  2  1  Sam.  xii.  3.


ST. BERNARD


ii4  Oft  Consideration

the  Church  of  God  supported  by  such  pillars  !  Oh !  if  I
might  see  my  Lord's  spouse  in  the  keeping  of  such  fidelity,
entrusted  to  such  purity !  How  blessed  would  be  my  lot !
how  safe  !  if  I  might  behold  about  me  men  of  that  class  both
guarding  and  bearing  witness  to  my  life,  to  whom  I  might
safely  impart  my  secrets,  and  communicate  my  plans  ;  to  whom
I  might  pour  out  my  heart  as  to  a  second  self;  who,  if  I  wished
to  turn  aside,  would  not  allow  me,  would  check  me  in  my
headlong  course :  would  wake  me  out  of  my  slumber ;  whose
respectful  freedom  would  check  my  pride  and  correct  my
error ;  whose  constancy  and  courage  would  steady  me  when
wavering,  cheer  me  when  desponding ;  whose  faith  and  holi
ness  would  urge  me  on  to  whatsoever  things  are  holy,  what
soever  things  are  honourable,  whatsoever  things  are  modest,
whatsoever  things  are  lovely  and  of  good  report.'  Now,  my
dear  Eugenius,  look  once  more  at  the  present  condition  of
the  Court  or  Church,  and  the  pursuits  of  the  prelates,
particularly  of  those  who  are  about  your  person.

1 6.  So  far,  so  good.  But  I  have  only  gently  touched  the
wall,  I  have  not  dug  into  it.1  You  may  dig  and  see,  like
the  son  of  the  prophet.  I  must  not  go  farther.  One  obvious
remark  I  will  make.  Your  attendants  ridiculously  endeavour
to  take  precedence  of  their  fellow  presbyters.  This  is  con
trary  to  reason,  to  antiquity,  and  to  the  general  consent  of
authority.  And  if  trickery  works,  as  is  commonly  the  case,
its  own  downfall,  surely  better  this  than  that  the  highest
order  be  despised.  However  that  may  be,  their  chief  plea
in  defence  of  their  ambitious  efforts  is  very  absurd.  *  We ',
say  they,  '  are  those  who  at  every  function  are  more  closely
associated  with  our  master,  the  Holy  Father ;  when  he  sits,
we  sit  nearest  to  him  ;  when  he  goes  in  procession,  we
1  Ezek.  viii.  8.


Book IV,  Chapter  v  1 1  y

follow  next  to  him.'  All  this  is  not  a  privilege  accorded  to
rank,  but  a  debt  due  from  assiduous  service  ;  through  the  very
formalities  of  service  the  work  gives  meaning  to  the  name  of
'  deacon  '.  In  short,  while  the  presbyters  in  ordered  session
surround  the  throne,  ye  deacons  stand  at  the  foot.  Ye  stand
near  that  your  master  may  have  you  in  greater  readiness.  In
the  Gospels  we  read  that  *  there  arose  a  strife  among  the
disciples  as  to  which  of  them  might  seem  to  be  the  greatest  V
You  would  be  happy,  Eugenius,  if  the  rest  of  the  things
around  you  could  be  controlled  after  the  same  pattern.*


CHAPTER VI

//  is  not  becoming  in  the  Pope  to  be  absorbed  in
the  management  of  his  household  to  the  neglect
of  weightier  matters.  He  should  have  a
steward

1 7.  We  are  now  tired  of  the  Court ;  let  us  leave  the  palace  ;
they  are  waiting  for  us  at  home.  The  inmates  are  not  only
around  you,  but  in  a  way  they  are  inside  you.  It  is  not
superfluous  to  consider  how  you  propose  to  order  your  house
hold,  to  provide  for  those  who  are  in  your  lap  and  in  your
bosom.  I  say  that  the  consideration  is  not  only  not  superfluous,
but  that  it  is  necessary.  Listen  to  Paul's  words,  '  If  a  man
knoweth  not  how  to  rule  his  own  house,  how  shall  he  take  care
of  the  church  of  God  ? ' 3  And  again,  '  If  any  man  provideth
not  for  his  own,  and  specially  his  own  household,  he  hath
denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  unbeliever.'  *  When

1  St.  Luke  xxii.  24.

2  That  is,  as  our  Lord  controlled  His  disciples.

3  I  Tim.  iii.  5.  *  I  Tim.  v.  8,

II 2


i  itf  On  Consideration

I  say  this,  I  am  not  admonishing  you,  occupied  as  you  are
with  matters  of  the  highest  importance,  to  devote  yourself
to  the  lowest ;  in  a  way,  to  grow  less,  and  spend  on  trifles
what  you  owe  to  weighty  affairs.  Why  entangle  yourself
in  those  things  from  which  God  has  rescued  you  ?  '  All
these  things ',  He  says,  '  shall  be  added  unto  you. ' *  Still,
you  ought  to  do  these  things,  and  not  leave  the  others  undone.
But  while  you  personally  attend  to  the  great  things,  you  should
also  personally  provide  representatives  to  see  to  your  little
things.  For  if  a  single  servant  cannot  at  the  same  time  look
after  the  cattle,  and  take  charge  of  the  tables,  how  can  you
without  assistance  attend  both  to  your  own  house  and  to  the
house  of  the  Lord  ?  Of  this  latter  we  read,  '  O  Israel,  how
great  is  the  house  of  the  Lord  ! ' 2  Your  mind,  intent  on
matters  of  so  great  and  so  varied  importance,  ought,  in  fact,
to  be  relieved  of  all  anxiety  for  more  trifling  and  baser  things.
It  should  be  free  from  all  prepossessing  and  engrossing  occu
pations.  It  should  be  of  such  nobility  that  no  unworthy
affection  can  drag  it  down.  It  should  be  so  straightforward
that  no  evil  purpose  can  turn  it  aside.  It  should  be  cautious
without  harbouring  stealthy  suspicion.  It  should  be  watchful
lest  it  be  distracted  by  impertinent  and  inquisitive  thoughts.
It  should  be  so  rooted  and  grounded  that  it  be  not  shaken  by
any  sudden  blast.3  It  should  be  invincible,  so  that  it  sink  not
under  even  lasting  tribulation.  It  should  be  so  large  that  it
can  find  ample  room  for  any  temporal  loss.

1 8. Be  quite sure  that  you  must  be stripped  of  these
blessings,  and  smitten  with  these  curses,  if  you  divide  your

1  St.  Matt.  vi.  33.  2  Baruch  iii.  24.

'  The  mind  I  sway  by,  and  the  heart  I  bear,
Shall  never  sagg  with  doubt,  nor  shake  with  fear.'

Macbeth,  v.  iii.  9-10.


Book IV,  Chapter  vi  1 1 7

attention  and  wish  to  share  yourself  between  the  things  of  God
and  your  own  trivial  affairs.  You  must  get  some  one  for  the
work,  some  one  to  do  the  grinding  for  you.  For  you,  I  say,
not  •with  you.  There  are  some  things  you  will  do  yourself,
some  with  the  assistance  of  other  men,  and  some  entirely
through  the  agency  of  others.  Who  is  a  wise  man,  and  he
will  understand  these  things  ?  You  must  not  let  your  con
sideration  go  to  sleep  over  them.  Now,  in  my  opinion,  the
details  of  your  household  management  belong  to  the  class  last
mentioned.  As  I  have  intimated,  you  will  do  them  by  means
of  someone  else.  But  your  representative,  if  he  be  not  faithful,
will  cheat ;  if  he  be  not  prudent,  men  will  cheat  him.  So  then,
you  must  look  out  for  a  man  both  faithful  and  prudent  to  set
over  your  household.1  Still,  he  will  be  useless  if  a  third
quality  be  lacking.  Do  you  ask  what  this  is  ?  It  is  authority.
For  what  is  the  good  of  his  wishing  to  manage,  and  knowing
how,  as  necessity  arises,  if  he  cannot  act  according  to  his
wishes  and  his  knowledge  ?  You  must  therefore  give  him  a
free  hand.  If  you  think  this  is  unreasonable,  bear  in  mind
that  he  is  a  faithful  servant,  who,  nevertheless,  desires  to
follow  reason ;  and  he  is  a  prudent  servant,  who,  never-
tliele^s,  knows  how  to  follow  reason.  But  a  faithful  and
sagacious  will  can  only  avail  when  it  is  so  adequately  sup
ported  that  it  can  act  with  perfect  ease  and  freedom,  and
command  the  unhesitating  obedience  of  all.  All  the  rest
must  therefore  be  under  him.  Let  him  brook  no  opposition.
Let  there  be  no  one  to  say,  *  Why  have  you  done  so  ? '  Let  him
have  power  to  shut  out  and  let  in  whom  he  chooses,  to  change
the  servants,  to  transfer  the  service  to  whom  he  likes  and
when  he  likes.  Let  all  so  fear  him  that  all  may  benefit  by
him.  Let  him  be  before  all  that  he  may  be-  a  boon  to  all,
1  St.  Matt.  xxiv.  45.


1 1 8  On  Consideration

and  in  all  respects.  Do  not  lend  an  ear  when  he  is  secretly
disparaged  by  whisperers  and  backbiters ;  rather  rebuke  such
slanderers.  And  I  would  like  you  to  make  a  general  rule  of
regarding  with  suspicion  any  man  who  is  afraid  to  say  openly
what  he  has  told  you  privately.  But  if  in  your  judgement  it
ought  to  be  told  face  to  face,  and  he  refuse,  pronounce  him  an
informer,  not  an  accuser.

19.  So  then  let  one  person  assign  their  several  duties  to  all
the  rest,  and  let  the  rest  be  responsible  to  the  one  person.
You  should  trust  him,  and  so  gain  time  for  yourself  and  the
Church  of  God. If  the  choice  lies  between  a  trustworthy
servant  and  a  prudent  one,  it  is  better  to  appoint  the  former.
Of  the  two  this  is  certainly  the  safer  course. However,  if
you  cannot  find  a  suitable  person,  even  if  a  man  be  not  so
faithful  as  he  ought,  I  advise  you  to  put  up  with  it  rather
than  lose  your  way  in  this  labyrinth  of  domestic  care. Re
member  that  Judas  was  our  Lord's  steward.1 What  is  more
disgraceful  for  a  bishop  than  that  he  should  spend  his  energy
on  his  furniture,  and  his  bit  of  property  ? He  should  not  be
always  prying  into  things,  asking  about  every  thing,  eaten  up
with  suspicion,  and  disturbed  at  every  little  loss  or  symptom
of  neglect. I  say  this  to  shame  some  of  that  sort,  who  never
let  a  day  pass  without  taking  an  inventory  of  all  their  belong
ings,  reckoning  up  every  item,  and  demanding  an  account  of
mites  and  farthings. Not  so  the  Egyptian  who  gave  up  all
to  Joseph,  and  knew  not  what  he  had  in  his  house.2 The
Christian  should  blush  who  cannot  trust  a  Christian  with  his  pro
perty. He  was  not  a  believer,  but  he  had  faith  in  his  servant,
and  set  him  over  all  his  goods  — and  the  servant  was  a  foreigner.

20.  Herein  is  a  marvellous  thing. The  bishops  can  com
mand  men  enough  and  to  spare  for  the  trust  of  souls,  and  yet

1  St.  John  xii.  6.  2  Gen.  xxxix.  6.


Book  IV,  Chapter  vi  119

cannot  find  a  single  person  in  whose  hands  they  may  place
their  small  estates.  They  must  be  excellent  judges  of  the
relative  values  of  things  to  take  such  great  care  of  the  smallest
matters,  and  so  little  of  the  greatest.  But,  as  we  are  given  to
clearly  understand,  we  do  more  patiently  suffer  Christ's  loss
than  our  own.  We  meet  our  daily  expenditure  with  a  daily
scrutiny,  and  know  nothing  of  the  constant  damage  which  the
Lord's  flock  sustains.  There  is  a  daily  discussion  with  our
servants  about  the  price  of  food  and  the  number  of  loaves :
a  conference  with  our  presbyters  to  consider  the  sins  of  our
people  is  a  very  rare  occurrence.  The  ass  falls,  and  there  is
some  one  to  lift  him  up  :  the  soul  perishes,  and  no  one  takes
account  thereof.  And  no  wonder,  when  we  do  not  perceive
our  own  unceasing  defects  !  Are  we  not  angry,  do  we  not
burn  with  indignation,  are  we  not  tormented  with  anxiety,
whenever  we  cast  up  the  figures  ?  How  much  more  patiently
should  we  bear  material  than  mental  loss  !  '  Wherefore  ',  says
the  Apostle,  '  do  ye  not  rather  suffer  to  be  defrauded  ? ' l
You  who  teach  others,  pray  teach  yourself,  if  you  have  not
already  done  so,  to  set  a  higher  price  upon  yourself  than  upon
your  belongings.  Those  transitory  things  which  cannot  abide
with  you,  make  them  pass  away  from  you,  not  through  you.
The  flowing  stream  hollows  out  a  channel  for  itself;  similarly
temporal  things  coursing  through  the  mind  eat  away  the  con
science.  If  the  torrent  can  sweep  across  the  fields  without
injuring  the  crops,  you  may  confidently  exj  ect  to  handle  such
matters  without  mental  hurt.  I  counsel  you  by  all  means  to
endeavour  to  divert  the  onset  of  these  things.  Many  of  them
should  be  unknown  to  you,  the  greater  number  be  unnoticed,
some  forgotten.

2 1 .  There  are,  however,  some  things  as  to  which  I  would
1  i  Cor.  vi.  7.


i2o  On  Consideration

not  have  you  ignorant :  I  refer  to  the  character  and  pursuits  of
your  various  servants.  You  ought  not  to  be  the  last  to  know
the  faults  of  your  household,  which,  as  we  are  aware,  is  the  ex
perience  of  very  many.  Wherefore,  as  I  have  said,  let  another
manage  the  rest,  but  do  you  yourself  see  to  the  discipline.
Trust  that  to  nobody.  If  in  your  presence  there  is  any  ten
dency  to  arrogant  conversation,  or  showy  dress,  stretch  out
your  hand  against  such  offences  ;  be  yourself  the  avenger  of
the  wrong  done  to  you.  Impunity  is  the  mother  of  audacity,
audacity  brings  forth  excess.  Holiness  becomes  the  house  of
a  bishop,  modesty  becomes  it,  good  repute  becomes  it ;  the
guardian  of  all  these  is  discipline.  The  priests  of  the  house
hold  are  either  more  highly  esteemed  than  others,  or  they  are
the  common  talk.  In  the  look,  dress,  gait  of  the  priests
about  your  person  you  should  allow  no  trace  of  immodesty
or  indecency.  Let  your  fellow  bishops  learn  from  you  not
to  have  about  them  boys  with  their  hair  curled,  or  effeminate
youths.1  It  is  surely  unbecoming  for  a  bishop  to  go  hither
and  thither  surrounded  by  fops  who  wear  the  turban  and  use
the  curling  iron.  And  remember  the  admonition  of  the  wise
man,  '  They  are  thy  daughters :  make  not  thy  face  cheerful
toward  them.' z

22.  And  yet  what  I  am  commending  to  you  is  not  austerity,
but  gravity.  The  former  puts  to  flight  the  weaklings  ;  the
latter  checks  the  frivolous.  If  a  man  be  austere,  he  is  odious  :
if  he  be  not  grave,  he  becomes  contemptible  ;  yet  in  everything
there  is  a  happy  medium.  I  would  not  have  you  act  with

1  Archbishop  Anselm  (A.D.  1094-5)  '  in  the  beginning  of  Lent,  when
the  Court  was  at  Hastings,  refused  to  give  the  customary  ashes  and  benedic
tion  to  the  young  nobles  who  affected  an  effeminate  style  of  dress  and
manners — wearing  long  hair  which  they  curled  and  adorned  like  women.'

2  Ecclus.  vii.  24.


Book  IV ^  Chapter  i<i  121

too  great  severity,  nor  with  too  great  laxity.  What  is  more
pleasing  than  that  moderation  which  prevents  your  severity
making  you  oppressive,  and  your  familiarity  making  you  con
temptible  ?  In  the  palace  be  the  Holy  Father,  at  home  the
father  ot  the  family.  Let  your  household  love  you  ;  if  they
do  not,  make  them  fear  you.  It  is  always  well  to  so  keep  the
door  of  the  lips  as  not  to  shut  out  the  grace  of  affability.  The
hasty  tongue  must  therefore  always  be  bridled,  but  specially
at  the  feast.  Your  deportment  will  be  most  fitting  if  in  action
you  are  strict,  in  look  cheerful,  in  speech  serious.  Let  not
the  chaplains,  and  those  who  are  associated  with  you  in  the
divine  offices,  be  without  honour.  It  is  for  you  to  provide
yourself  with  such  men  as  are  worthy.  Let  all  pay  attention
to  them,  as  it  is  to  yourself.  Let  them  receive  at  your  hand
what  is  necessary  for  their  support.  Let  them  be  content
with  the  provision  you  make  for  them,  and  do  you  see  that
they  want  not.  If  you  catch  one  of  them  begging  more  from
your  visitors,  judge  him  as  you  would  Gchazi ; *  and  you  must
have  the  same  rule  for  the  doorkeepers,  and  the  other  officials.
But  all  this  is  superfluous,  for  I  remember  that  you  long  ago
planned  it  all.  What  is  more  worthy  of  your  apostk'shi]>  :
What  more  wholesome  for  your  conscience,  more  conducive
to  good  report,  more  profitable  by  way  of  example?  It  is  an
excellent  rule  to  banish  greed  beyond  the  reach  of  scandal,2
and  not  only  to  be  innocent  of  it.

1 2  Kings  v.  2O.

8  Isa.  xxxiii. 15. The  Vulgate  has  qiii  proiiclt  .  , .  ex  caiumnia.
R.  V.  'who  despiseth  the  gain  of  oppressions,  or  (Margin"  fraud  '.


122  On  Consideration

CHAPTER  VII
The  ideal  Pope

23.  I  will  now  bring  this  book  to  a  close,  but  in  ending
I  should  like  by  way  of  epilogue  to  either  recapitulate  some
things  already  said,  or  add  some  which  I  passed  over.  Before
all,  consider  that  the  holy  Roman  Church  of  which  God  has
made  you  head,  is  the  mother  of  churches,  not  their  mistress  ;
but  that  you  are  not  sovereign  lord  of  the  bishops,  but  one  of
them,  the  brother,  too,  of  those  who  love  God,  and  a  partaker
with  them  that  fear  Him.  As  for  the  rest,  consider  that  you
ought  to  be  a  model  of  righteousness,  a  mirror  of  holiness,
a  pattern  of  piety,  the  asserter  of  truth,  the  defender  of  the
faith,  the  teacher  of  nations,  the  guide  of  Christians,  the  friend
of  the  bridegroom,  the  leader  of  the  bride  to  her  spouse,  the
ordainer  of  the  clergy,  the  shepherd  of  the  people,  the  instructor
of  the  foolish,  the  refuge  of  the  oppressed,  the  advocate  of  the
poor,  the  hope  of  the  wretched,  the  protector  of  the  father
less,  the  judge  of  the  widow,  the  eye  of  the  blind,  the  tongue
of  the  dumb,  the  staff  of  the  aged,  the  avenger  of  wicked
ness,  the  fear  of  bad  men,  the  glory  of  the  good,  a  rod  for
the  powerful,  a  hammer  for  tyrants,  the  father  of  kings,  the
mitigater  of  laws,  the  dispenser  from  canons,  the  salt  of  the
earth,  the  light  of  the  world,  the  priest  of  the  Most  High,
the  vicar  of  Christ,  the  Lord's  anointed,  and  lastly  the  God
of  Pharaoh.  Understand  what  I  say  :  the  Lord  will  give
thee  understanding.  When  power  and  wickedness  go  hand
in  hand,  we  must  claim  something  for  you  more  than  human.
Let  your  countenance  be  upon  them  that  do  evil.1  Let  him
1  Ps.  xxxiv.  16.


Book  y/7,  Chapter  vii  123

who  fears  not  man,  nor  dreads  the  sword,  fear  the  breath  of
your  anger.  Let  him  fear  your  prayer  who  has  despised  your
admonition.  Let  him  think  that  he  who  incurs  your  wrath
incurs  the  wrath  not  of  man  but  of  God.  He  who  has  not
heard  you,  let  him  quake  at  the  thought  that  God  will  hear
you,  and  will  be  against  him.  We  now  turn  to  the  discussion
of  what  remains,  namely,  the  things  above  you.  I  shall  hope,
with  God's  help,  to  pay  this  debt  in  one  book,  and  so  be  quit
of  my  promise.


BOOK V

[IN  this  book  St.  Bernard  considers  the  things  above  us  (ch.  i),
first  discussing  the  respective  provinces  of  Opinion,  Faith,  and
Understanding  (ch.  ii,  iii),  then  proceeding  to  the  Holy  Angels
(ch.  iv,  v),  the  Being  of  God  (ch.  vi,  vii,  viii,  xi),  the  Person  of
Christ  (ch.  ix,  x).  In  ch.  xii  we  have  God  the  Judge,  and
a  conception  of  Hell  in  striking  accord  with  much  of  the  exposi
tion  of  modern  times.  The  book  concludes  (ch.  xiv)  with  an
impressive  illustration  of  the  mystical  interpretation  of  Holy
Scripture  (Eph.  iii.  18) — God  regarded  as  'length,  breadth,
height,  depth  ',  and  our  '  comprehension  '  of  Him  as  such.

The  Schoolmen.  The  term  scholastic  originally  denoted
a  teacher  in  the  schools  founded  throughout  his  empire  by
Charlemagne  under  the  direction  of  our  countryman,  Alcuin
of  York.  Used  as  an  adjective,  the  word  described  the
subjects  taught — '  scholastic  history/  '  scholastic  philosophy,'
'  scholastic  theology/  during  the  thousand  years  of  the  Tran
sition  Period,  from  the  sixth  to  the  sixteenth  century.

In  a  movement  so  extended  there  were,  of  course,  many
developments.  Of  the  schoolmen  by  whom  St.  Bernard
may  have  been  influenced,  directly  or  indirectly,  we  need  only
mention  John  Scotus  Erigena,  John  the  Irishman  (b.  between
A.  D.  800  and  A.  D.  810,  d.  about  A.  D.  877);  Berengarius
of  Tours  (A.  D.  999-1088);  Lanfranc,  his  opponent  (b.
A.  D.  1005,  d.  A.  D.  1089,  Abbot  of  Bee,  and  from  A.  D.
1070  Abp.  of  Canterbury);  Roscelin,  the  reputed  founder  of
Nominalism  (condemned  at  the  Council  of  Soissons,  A.  D.
1092)  ;  William  of  Champeaux  (b.  A.  D.  1070,  d.  A.  D.  1121);
Abelard,  pupil  of  the  two  preceding  (b.  A.  D.  1079,  d.  A.  D.
1142);  Anselm  (b.  A.  D.  1033,  d.  A.  D.  1109,  also  Abbot
of  Bee  and  Abp.  of  Canterbury)  ;  and  Gilbert  of  Poitiers,
whose  views  were  discussed  at  Rheims  (A.D.  1148).

Whatever  may  be  said  of  after  times  when  Dialectics
became  a  branch  of  professorial  study  in  the  Universities  of
the  Middle  Ages,  it  would  be  doing  great  injustice  to  repre
sent  these  men  as  mere  triflers,  hair-splitters,  verbal  quibblers,
syllogistic  conjurers,  and  so  forth.  They  'often  described


BOO(  r  125-

wearisome  circles,  rushed  vehemently  into  culs-dc-sac,  wandered
about  a  labyrinth,  vainly  demanding  an  outlet '.  Many  of  their
folios  may  be  fossils,  but  '  we  may  surely  believe  that  their
way  was  foreseen,  that  they  had  a  Guide,  that  there  was
a  method  which  all  these  bewilderments  were  to  help  them  in
finding  out '.  There  were  deep  fires  burning  in  their  bosoms,
and  both  the  intellect  and  the  affections  were  in  training  for
the  better  future.

Nor  would  it  be  right  to  represent  them  as  in  revolt  against
authority.  The  human  reason  was  awaking  after  its  long
slumber,  and  the  giant  was  not  easily  controlled.  The
revolt  was  not  so  much  against  authority,  as  against  logic.
John  the  Irishman  rightly  felt  that  Aristotle's  'Categories'
belonged  to  the  regions  of  sensible  and  intelligible  things,
but  that  when  we  ascend  to  the  consideration  of  Him  who
transcends  sense  and  intelligence,  logical  categories  are  out  of
place  — God  is  neither  Genus,  Species,  nor  Accident.  There
was  an  earnest  desire,  not  to  uproot  the  Faith,  but  to  find  an
intellectual  basis  for  it,  not  to  discard  either  reason  or  faith,
but  to  reconcile  their  claims.  *  Realism ',  '  Nominalism,'
'Conceptualism,'  to  vast  numbers  are  only  names,  but  to
those  who  have  eyes  to  see  they  stand  for  the  profoundest
controversy  which  has  ever  engaged  the  thought  of  man,  and
are  expressions  of  man's  determination  to  get,  if  possible,  to
the  bottom  of  things,  and  ascertain  if  reality  anywhere  exists,
or  life  is  but  a  dream.  liven  Abelard — all  grudges  between
him  and  Bernard  were  set  at  rest ;  let  us,  too,  think  tenderly,
and  speak  gently  of  him  ! — is  entitled  to  our  gratitude  and

1  '  How  holily,  how  devotedly,  in  what  a  Catholic  spirit  he  first  made
confession  of  his  faith,  then  of  his  sins ;  with  what  an  affection  of  heart  he
received  the  food  for  his  journey,  the  pledge  of  eternal  life,  the  Body  of
the  Redeemer;  how  faithfully  he  commended  his  body  and  soul  to  Him  ;
our  brothers  are  witness,  and  the  whole  society  of  that  monastery.  Thus
Master  Peter  (Abelard)  finished  his  days,  and  lie  who  was  known  through
out  the  world  for  an  unparalleled  master  of  science,  persevering  in  the
learning  of  Him  who  said  "  Learn  of  me  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  of
heart  ",  passed,  as  we  have  a  right  to  believe,  into  His  presence.'  Let  ten
from  Cluni,  where  Abelard  was  staying  just  before  his  death,  and  where


126  On  Consideration

respect.  There  were  doubtless  faults  in  his  intellectual
temper,  he  may  or  may  not  have  been  the  frst  '  champion
of  free  inquiry ',  but  he  strove  for  the  emancipation  of  reason,
without  which  magna  est  veritas  et  praevalebit  will  never  be
a  maxim  of  the  possible.

From  the  time  when  Boethius  (about  A.D.  520)  wrote  his
treatise  on  The  Unity  of  God  against  the  Arians,  Nestorians,
and  Eutychians,  the  name  into  which  we  are  baptized  was  all
through  the  Middle  Ages  the  subject  of  ceaseless  speculation
and  discussion.  We  may  deplore  the  fact  that  so  sacred
a  theme  should  be  the  shuttlecock  of  logic,  but  once  reason
began  to  move,  it  would  infallibly  set  itself  problems,  onto-
logical,  psychological,  metaphysical,  in  trying  to  solve  the
mystery  of  God — the  highest  and  greatest  object  of  thought,
the  answer  of  both  Anselm  and  Bernard  to  the  question,
'  What  is  God  ? '  And  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  the  working
of  the  principle  of  compensation  :  '  wisdom  is  justified  of  her
children.'  If  theology  '  received  from  logic  a  portion  of  its
dryness  and  formality J,  it  is  no  less  true  that  '  logic  received
from  theology  its  personality  and  vehemence  '.  Some  power
ful  stimulus  to  thought  was  needed  in  the  days  of  barbaric
indifference.  What  likely  to  be  so  potent  as  the  dogmas  of
predestination,  Christ's  presence  in  the  Eucharist,  and,  under
lying  these,  the  being  and  nature  of  God,  '  the  root  of  all
things  and  all  thought '  ?

St.  Bernard  was  neither  by  taste  nor  training  qualified  to
take  a  distinguished  part  in  the  dialectics  of  his  time.  He
could  not  speculate  like  Anselm,  nor  argue  like  Abelard.
He  hated  heresies  '  as  foes  to  practical  life,  as  disturbers  of  the
devotion  of  monasteries,  as  hinderers  of  the  common  action  of
the  Christian  nations  against  the  Infidels ' :  he  was  no  less  a
determined  opponent  of  the  logic  of  the  schools  ;  he  was,  how
ever,  a  saint,  not  a  doctor ;  and  if  he  overcame  the  objects  of
his  fiery  wrath,  if  Abelard  and  Gilbert  both  submitted,  it  was
not  because  of  the  fine  temper  of  his  sword  or  the  skill  with

he  was  first  buried  by  the  monks.  His  remains  were  afterwards  removed
to  the  oratory  of  the  Paraclete  which  he  founded.  Heloise  was  prioress
of  the  latter.


Book  V  127

which  he  used  it,  but  because  he  bore  them  down  by  his
earnestness,  his  impetuosity,  his  reputation  for  holiness,  and
the  sheer  weight  of  his  unrivalled  authority.

Once  more  there  is  perhaps  reason  for  gratitude.  If
St.  Bernard  had  been  differently  constituted,  our  libraries
might  have  been  encumbered  with  more  *  fossil  folios ',  to  the
loss  of  his  inspiring  exhortations  and  such  helpful  medita
tions  on  the  Godhead  as  he  communicated  to  Eugenius.
St.  Anselm  thus  poured  out  his  soul — '  I  do  not  attempt,
O  Lord,  to  penetrate  Thy  profundity,  because  in  no  sense
can  I  compare  it  with  my  intellect :  but  I  do  desire  to
comprehend  Thy  truth,  even  though  imperfectly,  that  truth
which  my  heart  believes  and  cherishes.  For  I  seek  not  to
comprehend  in  order  to  believe,  but  I  believe  in  order  to  com
prehend.  I  believe,  because  if  I  did  not  believe,  I  should
never  comprehend.'  St.  Bernard's  attitude  was  somewhat
different.  It  cannot  be  better  expressed  than  in  the  words
of  Frederick  Denison  Maurice — '  Bernard  did  not  dislike
Abelard  mainly  as  a  rebel  against  authority,  but  as  outraging
what  he  conceived  to  be  the  divine  charity  or  love.  Righteous
ness  was  not  so  much  the  foundation  of  his  mind  as  it  was  of
Anselm's.  He  was  not  nearly  so  just  a  man.  But  no  writer
of  any  age  has  dwelt  more  upon  love  as  constituting  the  very
being  and  nature  of  God,  and  as  the  perfection  of  man  because
he  is  made  in  the  image  of  God.  This  is  the  characteristic
feature  of  his  mind  ;  in  it,  we  believe,  lay  the  secret  of  his
power.  The  idea  of  the  Trinity  was  in  him  the  idea  of  the
absolute,  all-embracing  love.  Any  other  basis  of  divinity  he
abhorred.  The  intellectual  conceptions  of  Abelard  were  in
different  to  him  when  they  were  applied  to  any  other  subject,
were  utterly  offensive  when  applied  to  theology.  The  ex
planations  which  were  welcomed  with  so  much  enthusiasm  by
Abelard's  youthful  hearers,  were  to  him  the  dry,  hard  substi
tutes  for  a  living  truth.  That  which  appeared  to  quicken  and
inspire  them,  smelt  in  his  nostrils  of  the  grave  and  the  charnel-
house/  Hence  St.  Bernard's  portrait  of  Alx-lard  laid  before
the  Pope — Ponit  in  coelum  os  suum  ft  scrutatur  aha  Dei*

1  Maurice,  Mediceval  Philosophy;  Lewes,  ///>/.  of  Philosophy,  vol.  ii  ;


ia8  On  Consideration

Mysticism.  'The  name  given  to  a  school  of  thought  which
arose  in  the  way  of  recoil  from  the  cold  and  exact  logic  of
Scholasticism  in  the  twelfth  century.  Its  leading  idea  is  that
perfect  holiness  and  spiritual  knowledge  are  to  be  attained  by
devout  contemplation  rather  than  by  outward  means  of  grace
and  theological  study.  The  three  stages  of  such  perfection
are  defined  as  Purification,  Illumination,  and  Perfect  Union
with  God'  (Diet,  of  Doctrinal  and  Historical  Theology,  p.  501).
It  was  no  novelty  in  St.  Bernard's  century  ;  contemplative
natures  must  have  been  at  all  times  disposed  towards  it ;  the
older  monastic  systems  are  said  to  have  been  characterized
by  it  in  a  high  degree ;  and  the  writings  of  the  fifth  century,
falsely  attributed  to  Dionysius  the  Areopagite  (Acts  xvii.  34)
had  great  influence  on  the  religious  thought  of  the  Middle
Ages.  John  the  Irishman  was  the  first  to  combine  Mysticism
with  Scholasticism.  In  his  leading  work,  the  De  Divisions
Naturae,  he  puts  the  following  prayer  into  the  mouth  of  the
student — '  God,  our  salvation  and  redemption,  who  hast  given
us  nature,  grant  to  us  also  grace.  Manifest  Thy  light  to  us,
feeling  after  Thee,  and  seeking  Thee,  in  the  shades  of  ignor
ance.  Recall  us  from  our  errors.  Stretch  out  Thy  right
hand  to  us  weak  ones  who  cannot,  without  Thee,  come  to
Thee.  Show  Thyself  to  those  who  seek  nothing  besides
Thee.  Break  the  clouds  of  vain  phantasies  which  suffer  not  the
eye  of  the  mind  to  behold  Thee  in  that  'way  in  which  Thou  per-
mittest  those  that  long  to  behold  that  face  of  Thine,  though  it
is  invisible,  which  is  their  rest,  the  end  beyond  which  they
crave  for  nothing,  seeing  that  there  cannot  be  any  good  beyond
it  that  is  higher  than  itself.'  The  orthodox  mystics  of  the
twelfth  century  had  a  common  aim,  viz.  to  reconcile  the
claims  of  contemplative  piety  with  those  of  scientific  theology,
but  expressed  themselves  very  differently.  Bernard  held  that
not  argument  but  holiness  comprehends  the  things  of  God ;
Hugo  of  St.  Victor  (A.D.  1097-1141)  laid  down  the  principle
that  '  the  uncorrupted  truth  of  things  cannot  be  discovered  by
reasoning ' ;  Richard  of  St.  Victor,  disciple  of  this  last  (d.

Ueberweg,  Hist,  of  Philosophy,  vol.  i ; Morison,  Life  and  Times  of
$t.  Bernard;  Church,  Life  of  St.  Anselm,  &c.,  &c.


Booh


129


A.  D.  1173)  treated  the  faculty  of  mystical  contemplation  as
superior  to  the  imagination  and  the  reason.  Another  Victorian,
Walter  (about  A.  D.  1180)  gave  to  Abelard,  Peter  Lombard,
Gilbert,  and  Peter  of  Poitiers  the  name  of  the  four  labyrinths
of  France.  In  the  following  century  Bonaventura  (d.  A.D.  1274)
rose  to  the  full  height  of  sublimity,  or  extravagance,  by  sub
ordinating  all  human  wisdom  to  divine  illumination.  He  did
not  see — how  could  he,  when  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
the  Source  of  all  life,  physical,  intellectual,  moral,  spiritual,
was  so  little  understood  ? — that  true  human  wisdom  //  '  divine
illumination '.  It  is  related  that  Thomas  Aquinas,  the  '  angeli
cal  '  doctor,  on  a  visit  to  Bonaventura,  whose  '  Itinerary  of  the
mind  to  God '  had  won  for  him  the  title  of  the  '  seraphic '
doctor,  asked  to  be  permitted  to  see  the  latter's  library.  Bona
ventura  pointed  to  the  crucifix,  and  said  it  was  there  that  he
had  learnt  all  he  knew.  This  is  the  *  spirit '  of  the  Mystics,
and  a  beautiful  spirit  it  is.  With  the  Mysticism  of  later
periods  we  are  not  concerned.]


CHAPTER  I

The  things  '  above 3  us,  namely  y  God  and  things
T)ivine,  to  which  we  rise  by  means  of  the
Creatures

i .  The  former  books,  although  they  bear  the  title  *  On
Consideration ',  have  very  much  in  them  relating  to  action,
inasmuch  as  they  teach  or  admonish  that  some  things  should
be  not  only  considered,  but  also  done.  But  the  present  book
will  treat  of  Consideration  only.  For  the  things  which  are
above  you — and  that  is  our  topic— -do  not  call  for  action,  but
for  contemplation.  It  is  impossible  to  take  a  part  in  those
things  which  in  one  sense  ever  are,  and  ever  will  be  :  some  of
which,  moreover,  ever  have  been.  And  I  would  have  you,


ST. BERNARD


130  On  Consideration

my  dear  Eugenius,  wisest  of  men,  shrewdly  observe  what
I  am  going  to  say,  namely,  that  your  consideration  goes  from
home  as  often  as  it  turns  from  the  things  above  to  the  visible
things  below,  whether  these  have  to  be  studied  with  a  view  to
knowledge,  or  sought  for  use,  or  administered  and  performed
in  the  discharge  of  duty.  Still,  if  your  consideration  so  en
gages  in  the  things  below  as  to  seek  the  things  above,  it  is
not  banished  far.  Consideration  thus  employed  is  a  returning
home.  That  is  a  higher  and  worthier  use  of  things  present,
when,  according  to  the  wisdom  of  Paul,  '  the  invisible  things  of
God  are  clearly  seen,  being  perceived  through  the  things  that
are  made.'1  The  citizens,  doubtless,  have  no  need  of  the
ladder  ;  exiles  have,  as  the  author  of  the  words  I  have  quoted
himself  observed ;  for,  although  he  said  that  things  invisible
are  clearly  seen  through  things  visible,  he  significantly  added,
'  from  the  created  world.' 2  And,  indeed,  what  need  of  steps
for  him  who  is  already  on  the  throne  ?  Consideration  is  one
of  the  '  creatures  '  of  heaven,  and  is  equipped  for  deeper
insight  into  the  things  of  heaven.  It  sees  the  Word,  and
in  the  Word  the  things  made  through  the  Word.  It  has  no
need  to  beg  the  knowledge  of  the  Maker  from  the  things
which  have  been  made.  For  even  to  gain  a  knowledge  of
these  things,  it  does  not  descend  to  them  :  it  sees  them
where  they  are  far  better  seen  than  in  themselves.  Hence  it
is  that  to  reach  them  Consideration  does  not  seek  the  medium
of  the  senses:  it  perceives  them  immediately,  and  is  self-
percipient.  That  is  the  best  sort  of  vision  when  you  lack
nothing,  when  you  have  your  heart's  desire,  and  find  con
tentment  in  yourself.  Otherwise,  you  run  some  risk  of

1  Rom.  i.  20.

2  '  Created  universe.' But  the  context  requires  a  contrast  between
mundus  and  coelum. See  Gifford,  Sanday  and  Headlam,  Ep.  Rom.


Book  V,  Chapter  i  131

seeking  satisfaction  elsewhere,  and  this  is  to  fall  beneath  the
standard  of  perfection,  and  enjoy  less  freedom.

2.  And  why  should  you  want  the  lower  things?  Is  it
not  absurd  and  unworthy  of  you  ?  Clearly,  by  longing  for
the  things  below,  you  do  some  wrong  to  the  things  above  :
though  I  admit  that  mortal  man  will  never  be  guiltless  of  such
wrongdoing  until  the  time  come  when  he  will  have  escaped
into  the  freedom  of  the  sons  of  God.  For  they  will  all  then
be  taught  of  God,1  and  without  the  medium  of  any  creature
will  be  blessed  in  God  alone.  This  will  be  a  returning  home,
when  we  leave  the  country  of  our  bodies  and  reach  the  realm
of  spirits — I  mean  our  God,  the  Mighty  Spirit,  the  great
abiding  place  of  the  spirits  of  the  blessed.  There  is  no  place
here  for  the  intrusion  of  sense  or  imagination  ;  this  realm  is
truth,  it  is  wisdom,  virtue,  eternity,  the  highest  good.  For
a  while  we  are  absent  from  it ;  our  present  abode  is  a  valley,
the  vale  of  tears,  where  the  senses  have  dominion,  and  Con
sideration  is  an  exile  :  where  the  bodily  sense  freely  and
powerfully  manifests  itself,  but  the  eye  of  the  spirit  is  veiled
in  darkness.  What  wonder,  then,  if  Consideration,  being  a
foreigner,  needs  a  native's  help?  And  in  passing  through
time  to  eternity  the  traveller  is  to  be  congratulated  who  has
been  able  to  win  for  himself  the  indispensable  services  of  the
citizens  ;  using  them,  not  delighting  in  them  ;  compelling
them,  though  not  master  of  them ;  demanding  them,  not
^r  them.

1  St.  John  vi.  45.


132  On  Consideration

CHAPTER  II
The  Steps  of  Consideration

3.  He  is  a  great  man  who  makes  it  his  concern  to  utilize
the  senses,  spending,  as  it  were,  the  wealth  of  the  citizens  in
thus  providing  for  his  own  salvation  and  the  salvation  of  many.
And  he  is  no  less  a  man  who  has  made  philosophy  a  stepping-
stone  to  the  things  invisible.  The  only  difference  is  that  there
is  more  pleasure  in  the  latter,  more  profit  in  the  former :  the
one  has  more  happiness,  the  other  indicates  more  strength.
But  he  is  the  greatest  of  all  who,  scorning  the  use  of  sensible
things,  so  far  as  human  frailty  permits,  has  accustomed  him
self,  not  by  gradual  steps,  but  by  sudden  ecstatic  flights l  to
soar  aloft  to  the  glorious  things  on  high.  I  suppose  Paul's
ecstasies 2  were  of  this  last  description :  they  were  departures
[from  the  senses],  not  the  ascent  [of  the  senses] ;  for  he  him
self  relates  that  he  did  not  ascend  into  Paradise,  but  was  rather
caught  up  thither.  This  is  what  he  means  by  saying  '  If  we
mentally  depart,  it  is  to  the  glory  of  God  '.3  Moreover,  when
Consideration,  even  in  the  place  of  its  sojourning,  through  the
pursuit  of  virtue,  and  with  the  help  of  grace,  has  gained
the  upper  hand,  these  three  results  follow : — it  either  checks

1  Excessus,  literally  departures. '  Ecstasy '  is  defined  as  '  an  extra
ordinary  state  of  feeling  in  which  the  mind  stands  out  of  or  is  detached
from  sensible  things '.

2  2  Cor.  xii.  4.

3  2  Cor.  v.  13. Vulg.  mente  excedimus,  the  reference  being  to  the
'  ecstasies'  themselves,  not  to  the  criticisms  of  St.  Paul's  opponents  on
them. The  Revised  Version  translates  are  beside  ourselves, i.  e.  are
mad. See  '  Stanley  on  Corinthians ',  &c.


Book  V, Chapter  it  133

the  senses,1  lest  they  assert  themselves  too  strongly:  or
draws  them  in,  lest  they  go  too  far  afield :  or  shuns  them,
lest  they  defile.  In  the  first  case  the  mark  of  Considera
tion  is  strength,  in  the  second  freedom,  in  the  third  purity.
For  such  a  flight  of  the  spirit  is  only  made  with  the  wing  of
purity  on  the  one  side,  and  of  rapture  on  the  other.

4.  You  would  like  to  know  the  distinguishing  names  of
these  various  kinds  of  Consideration.  Let  us  say,  if  you
please,  that  the  first  is  economical,  the  second  estimative,  the
third  speculative.  The  meaning  will  appear  from  the  defini
tions.  Consideration  is  '  economical ' — that  of  the  steward 2
— when  it  makes  systematic  use  of  the  senses  and  of  sensible
things  in  daily  life  so  as  to  win  the  favour  of  God.  It  is
*  estimative ' — that  of  the  valuer — when  it  wisely  and  dili
gently  searches  everything,  and  weighs  everything,  to  find  God.
It  is  '  speculative '  when  it  retires  within  itself,  and  so  far  as
Divine  help  is  given,  detaches  itself  from  human  affairs  in
order  to  contemplate  God.  I  suppose  you  carefully  observe
that  the  last  is  the  fruit  of  the  others,  and  that  the  others,  if
they  stand  unrelated  to  it,  may  seem  to  be  what  they  are  called,
but  are  not  really  so.  And  unless  the  first  keeps  the  last  in
view,  it  sows  much  and  reaps  nothing  ;  moreover,  unless  the
second  makes  the  last  its  goal,  it  walks,  but  does  not  walk
forth.  So  then,  what  the  first  desires,  the  second  scents,"1
the  third  tastes.  To  this  taste,  however,  the  others  also  bring
us,  though  more  slowly  ;  and  there  is  a  further  difference— the
first  is  the  more  toilsome  road,  the  second  the  more  peaceful.

1  Literally,  stmualtty;  but  the  context  ihows  that  the  word  had  not  iu
modern  associations.

2  Oikonomos, for which the Vulgate equivalent is dispensator  in
St.  Luke  xii.  43  ;  i  Cor.  iv.  I,  3  ;  Titus  i.  7  ;  I  Pet.  iv.  10. St.  Bernard's
word  is  disptnsativa.  s  Rcading  odoratur.


134  ®n  Consideration

CHAPTER  III
Opinion,  Faith,  and  Understanding

5.  Enough  about  the  way  up,  you  say  ;  I  have  still  to  tell
you  whither  you  must  ascend.  You  deceive  yourself  if  you
expect  me  to  do  that ;  it  transcends  the  power  of  speech.  Do
you  think  that  I  can  utter  what  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,
and  has  not  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  P1  '  God',  the  apostle
says,  '  has  revealed  them  to  us  by  His  Spirit.' 2  So  then  the
things  which  are  above  are  not  taught  by  words,  they  are
revealed  by  the  Spirit.  But  what  speech  does  not  explain  let
Consideration  seek,  prayer  desire,  the  life  merit,  purity  attain.
At  all  events,  when  I  admonish  you  to  consider  the  things
which  are  above  you,  do  not  think  that  I  am  sending  you  to
gaze  at  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars ;  no,  not  the  firmament  itself,
nor  the  waters  which  are  above  the  heavens.  For  all  these
things,  though  locally  '  above ',  are  in  point  of  value  '  beneath  '
you,  even  in  dignity  of  nature,  as  they  are  material  existences.
Your  portion  is  the  spirit,  whereby  you  in  vain  look  for  any
thing  above  you  which  is  not  spirit.  Moreover,  God  is  a  Spirit,
and  so  are  the  holy  angels,  and  they  are  above  you.  But  God
is  a  Spirit  in  virtue  of  His  nature,  the  angels  are  your  superiors
through  grace.  The  special  excellence  both  of  yourself  and
of  angelic  beings  is  reason  ;  but  in  God  there  is  no  peculiar
excellence  ;  He  is  altogether  excellent.  He,  and  the  blessed
spirits  who  are  with  Him,  must  in  three  ways,  as  it  were  along
their  several  paths,  be  by  our  Consideration  sought  after — the
paths  of  opinion,  faith,  and  understanding.  Of  these,  under
standing  depends  on  reason,  faith  on  authority,  while  opinion
1  Isa.  Ixiv.  4.  2  I  Cor.  ii.  lo.


Book  V,  Chapter  Hi  135-

safeguards  itself  by  probability  only.  Two  of  them  attain  to
the  certainty  of  truth,  but  faith  possesses  truth  out  of  sight  and
implied,  understanding  has  it  naked  and  manifest ;  opinion,
having  no  certainty,  does  not  so  much  apprehend  truth  as  seek
it  through  probabilities.

6.  The  utmost  caution  must  be  exercised  so  as  to  avoid
confusion,  lest  the  uncertainties  of  opinion  crystallize  into
articles  of  faith,  or  the  foundation  verities  of  faith  become  the
questionable  matter  of  opinion.  And  we  should  bear  this  in
mind — that  opinion  venturing  on  assertion  is  rash  ;  faith,  if  it
hesitate,  is  weak  ;  and  understanding,  if  it  try  to  break  into  the
sealed  mysteries  of  faith,  is  deemed  a  burglar,  and  a  spy  upon
the  secrets  of  the  throne.  Many  have  taken  their  own  opinion
for  understanding,  and  have  thus  erred.  And  in  truth  opinion
may  be  taken  for  understanding  ;  understanding  cannot  be  taken
for  opinion.  How  so  ?  Surely  because  opinion  may  be  de
ceived,  understanding  cannot  be ;  if  it  could,  it  would  not  be
understanding,  but  opinion.  For  true  understanding  has  not
only  certain  truth,  but  the  knowledge  of  truth.  We  may  thus
define  each  of  them.  Faith  is,  by  the  exercise  of  the  will,
a  sure  foretaste  of  truth  not  yet  manifested.  Understanding
is  the  sure  and  clear  knowledge  of  some  invisible  thing.
Opinion  is  the  holding  something  provisionally  true  which  you
do  not  know  to  be  false.  So  then,  as  I  have  said,  faith  is
free  from  doubts  ;  if  it  have  doubts  it  is  not  faith,  but  opinion.
How,  then,  does  it  differ  from  understanding  ?  Inasmuch  as,
although  there  be  no  more  uncertainty  in  it  than  there  is  in
understanding,  still  it  has  a  veil  before  its  eyes,  which  is  not
the  case  with  understanding.  In  short,  if  you  understand
a  thing,  further  inquiry  is  needless ;  if  further  inquiry  be
necessary,  you  do  not  understand.  But  there  is  nothing  we
would  rather  know  than  what  we  already  know  by  faith.  When


1 3  6  On  Consideration

the  veil  shall  have  been  utterly  removed  from  the  things  of
which  we  are  now  assured  by  faith,  the  cup  of  bliss  will  be  full.


CHAPTER IV
The  Angels

7.  Well  now,  having  thus  cleared  the  way,  let  us  turn  our
consideration  to  our  mother,  Jerusalem  above,  and  with  caution
and  close  attention,  by  all  three  ways  enumerated,  search  out
the  things  unsearchable,  so  far,  I  mean,  as  may  be  lawful,  or
rather,  so  far  as  shall  be  given  to  us.  And  first  let  us  remember
that  the  citizens  of  that  country  are  spirits,  mighty,  glorious,
blessed,  separate  personalities,  of  graduated  rank,  from  the
beginning  standing  in  their  own  order,  perfect  of  their  kind,
having  ethereal  bodies,  endowed  with  immortality,  passionless ;
not  so  created,  but  so  made — that  is,  through  grace,  not  by
nature ;  beings  of  pure  mind,  benignant  affections,  religious  and
devout ;  of  unblemished  morality  ;  inseparably  one  in  heart  and
mind,  blessed  with  unbroken  peace,  God's  building,  dedicated
to  the  divine  praises  and  service.  All  this  we  ascertain  by
reading,  and  hold  by  faith.  But  as  regards  their  bodies,  some
authorities  hesitate  to  say  not  only  whence  they  are  derived,
but  whether  in  any  real  sense  they  exist  at  all.  If  any  one  is
inclined  to  think  the  derivation  of  these  bodies  a  matter  of
opinion,  I  do  not  dispute  the  point.  Further,  if  we  hold  that
the  angelic  beings  are  endowed  with  understanding,  this  is  not
of  faith,  nor  is  it  mere  opinion  ;  it  is  a  conclusion  of  our  under
standing  ;  for  if  they  had  not  understanding,  they  could  not
be  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature.  There  are  likewise  certain
names,  known  to  us  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  by  means  of
which  the  duties,  merits,  ranks,  orders,  of  these  blessed  ones,


Book  V,  Chapter  iv  137

things  only  faintly  heard  by  mortal  ear,  in  one  way  or  another
may  be  conjectured  and  distinguished.  But,  in  truth,  what
does  not  come  by  hearing  is  not  of  faith,  for  faith  cometh
by  hearing.  *  And  so  we  may  speak  conjecturally  of  these
topics.  For  what  is  the  good  of  our  knowing  the  names
of  the  celestial  beings  if  we  may  not,  without  prejudice  to
faith,  form  some  opinion  as  to  the  things  the  names  denote  ?
Angels,  Archangels,  Virtues,  Powers,  Principalities,  Domin
ions,  Thrones,  Cherubim,  and  Seraphim — these  are  the  names.
What  do  they  signify  ?  Is  there  no  difference  between  those
spirits  who  are  simply  called  Angels  and  those  who  are  called
Archangels  ?

8.  What,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  this  difference  in  degree  ?
Let  us  suppose  (unless  your  consideration  has  showed  you
something  better)  that  they  are  called  Angels  who  are  believed
to  have  been  given  as  guardians  of  individual  men,  sent  to
minister,  as  Paul  teaches,2  on  behalf  of  those  who  are  the
heirs  of  salvation ;  it  was  of  these  the  Saviour  said,  *  Their
angels  do  always  behold  the  face  of  your  Father/  3  Let  us
suppose  that  over  these  are  the  Archangels,  who,  admitted  to
a  knowledge  of  the  Divine  secrets,  are  not  sent  except  for
particular  and  very  weighty  reasons.  From  among  these  the
great  Archangel  Gabriel  was,  as  we  read,  sent  to  Mary,4  and
for  the  greatest  of  all  reasons.  Let  us  suppose  that  above
these  are  the  Virtues,  by  whose  command  or  operation  signs
and  wonders  wrought  in  the  elements,  or  through  the  elements,
appear  for  the  warning  of  mortal  men.  Perhaps  this  explains
why  it  is  that  after  reading  in  the  Gospels/'  "  There  shall  be

1  Rom.  x.  17.

2  Hcb.  i.  14. St.  Bernard  assumes  St.  Paul  to  be  the  author  of  the
Epistle.

8  St.  Matt,  xriii.  10.  *  St.  Luke  i.  26.  •"  St.  Luke  xxi.  25.


138  On  Consideration

signs  in  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  the  stars,'  a  little  farther
on  you  have,  '  for  the  Virtues  of  the  heavens  shall  be  moved ' :  *
the  spirits,  no  doubt,  through  whom  the  signs  are  wrought.
Let  us  suppose  that  the  Powers  are  their  superiors,  and  that
by  their  vigour  the  power  of  darkness  is  checked,  and  the
malignant  spirits  of  this  lower  air  are  restrained,  that  they
may  not  do  harm  to  their  full  intent :  that  they  may  not  be
able  to  show  their  malignity,  except  for  beneficial  ends.  Let
us  suppose  that  the  Principalities  are  also  preferred  to  these
last,  and  that  by  their  regulating  wisdom  all  sovereignty
upon  earth  is  established,  ruled,  limited,  transferred,  curtailed,
changed.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  Dominions  tower  above  the
aforesaid  orders  to  such  a  height  that  in  comparison  of  these
all  the  rest  appear  to  be  administrative  spirits,  and  that  to
the  Dominions,  as  it  were  to  their  masters,  the  Principalities
account  for  their  commands,  the  Powers  for  their  defences,
the  Virtues  for  their  operations,  the  Archangels  for  their
revelations,  the  Angels  for  their  care  and  foresight.  Let  us
suppose  that  the  Thrones  have  winged  their  flight  far  away
beyond  even  the  Dominions,  that  they  are  called  Thrones
because  they  sit  on  thrones,  and  that  they  therefore  sit  because
God  is  seated  in  them.  For  He  could  not  be  seated  in  those
who  were  not  themselves  seated.  Do  you  ask  what  I  mean
by  that  sitting  ?  The  deepest  tranquillity,  the  utmost  calm
ness  and  serenity,  the  peace  which  passes  all  understanding.
Such  is  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  who  sitteth  in  the  Thrones,
tranquilly  judging  all  things,  perfectly  calm,  serene,  peaceful.
And  such  He  made  the  Thrones,  most  like  Himself.  Let

1  The  corresponding  Greek  word  elsewhere  (Rom.  viii.  38,  I  Pet.  iii,
22)  denotes  the  angels,  but  in  this  passage  and  the  parallel  passage  in
St.  Matt,  it  probably  denotes  the  greater  heavenly  bodies,  the  ruling
lights.  See  Alford,  &c.


Book V,  Chapter  iv  139

us  suppose  the  Cherubim  to  drink  at  the  very  fount  of  wisdom,
the  mouth  of  the  Most  High,  and  in  turn  to  pour  forth  the
streams  of  knowledge  for  all  their  fellow  citizens.  May  not
this  be  the  '  rushing  river,  the  streams  whereof  make  glad  the
city  of  God/  l  of  which  the  prophet  spake  ?  Let  us  suppose
the  Seraphim  to  be  spirits  inflamed  with  the  Divine  fire,  kindling
all  things,  so  that  the  citizens  may  be  each  a  burning  and
a  shining  lamp,  burning  with  charity,  shining  with  knowledge.
9.  How  good  it  is,  Eugenius,  for  us  to  be  here  !  But
how  much  better  will  it  be  if  we  ever  altogether  follow  on
whither  we  have  in  part  gone  before !  Our  hearts  lead  the
way,  but  not  our  whole  hearts  ;  only  a  part,  and  too  often
a  small  part.  While  our  affections  are  weighed  down  by  the
bodily  tabernacle,  and  our  desires  cleave  to  the  mire,  contem
plation,  thin  and  spiritless,  is  left  to  wing  its  flight  all  alone.
And  yet  out  of  the  depths  of  its  poverty  it  will  cry,  'O  Lord,
I  have  loved  the  beauty  of  Thine  house,  and  the  place  where
Thy  glory  dwelleth.' 2  But  suppose  the  soul  were  to  collect
itself,  and  the  affections  were  brought  back  from  all  places
wheresoever  they  are  kept  captive,  through  fearing  what
they  ought  not,  loving  what  they  should  not,  sorrowing  in
vain,  rejoicing  still  more  in  vain.  Suppose  the  soul,  I
say,  accompanied  by  these  affections  and  possessed  of  full
freedom,  were  to  wing  its  vigorous  unimpeded  flight,  satis
fied,  as  it  were,  with  the  marrow  and  fatness  of  grace  ;
once  it  begins  to  travel  round  the  abodes  of  light,  and
more  intently  gaze  upon  Abraham's  dear  bosom,  and  see
4  beneath  the  altar ',  whatever  that  may  mean,  the  souls  of  the
martyrs  with  utmost  patience  waiting  in  their  first  robe  to  be
clothed  with  the  second,  will  it  not  then  much  more  earnestly
say  with  the  prophet,  *  One  thing  have  I  asked  of  the  Lord,
1  Ps.  xlvi.  4.  a  Ps.  xxvi.  8.


140  On  Consideration

that  will  I  seek  after :  that  I  may  dwell  in  the  house  of  the
Lord  all  the  days  of  my  life,  to  behold  the  fair  beauty  of
the  Lord,  and  to  visit  His  temple  '  ? l  What  prevents  the
heart  of  God  being  there  revealed  ?  Why  should  it  not  there
be  proved  what  is  *  the  will  of  God,  the  good,  acceptable,  and
perfect  will '  ?2 — good  in  itself,  pleasing  in  its  effects,  accept
able  to  those  who  have  fruition  of  it,  perfect  to  the  perfect
who  seek  nothing  beyond  it.  Bowels  of  mercy  are  disclosed,
thoughts  of  peace,  the  riches  of  salvation,  the  mysteries  of  the
good  will,  secrets  of  loving-kindness,  which,  shut  out  from
mortal  ken,  are  only  guessed  at  even  by  the  elect.  But  even
in  this  there  is  something  salutary:  men  might  otherwise  cease
to  fear  before  they  are  found  fit  to  worthily  love.

10.  In  the  heavenly  beings  who  are  called  Seraphim  we  may
discern  how  He  loves  who  has  no  cause  to  love,  and  who  also
hates  nothing  that  He  has  made ;  how  He  cherishes  those
whom  He  has  made  for  salvation,  teaches  them  to  go,3  embraces
them,  how  the  fire  of  His  love  consumes  the  sins  of  His
elect  youth,  and  the  chaff  of  their  ignorances,  throughly
purifying  them  for  Himself,  and  making  them  most  worthy  of
His  love.  In  the  Cherubim,  who  have  a  name  for  fullness
of  knowledge,  we  may  perceive  that  the  Lord  is  a  God  of
knowledge,  who  only  knoweth  all  things,  and  in  Him  is  no
ignorance  at  all ;  who  is  altogether  light,  and  in  Him  is
no  darkness  at  all ; 4  who  is  all  eye,  and  who  cannot  possibly
be  deceived,  because  that  eye  is  never  closed ;  who  seeks  not
outside  Himself  for  light  which  He  may  approach  that  He
may  see,  for  He  sees  in  the  light  of  His  own  Being.  In  the
Thrones  we  may  behold  how  the  Judge,  trusted  by  all  that  is
innocent,  sits  in  them  ;  He  who  will  not  deceive,  and  cannot

1  Ps.  xxvii.  4.  2  Rom.  xii.  2.

3  Hos.  xi.  3,  Exod.  xix.  4,  &c.  4 I  John,  i.  5.


Book  V,  Chapter  iv  141

be  deceived,  inasmuch  as  He  loves,  as  has  been  said,  and
sees,  as  has  been  said.  Nor  is  this  His  '  sitting '  without
significance  ;  it  indicates  tranquillity.  May  my  sentence  go
forth  from  such  a  presence  l  where  love  is  found,  but  no  error,
no  confusion  !  In  the  Dominions  we  may  see  how  majestic
is  the  Lord,  who  at  His  pleasure  establishes  His  empire,  that
empire  which  is  as  wide  as  the  universe  and  shall  endure  for
ever.  In  the  Principalities  we  may  perceive  the  fount  of  all
things  ;  as  a  door  turns  on  its  hinge,  so  the  universe  depends
on  the  King  Himself.  In  the  Powers  we  may  see  how  power
fully  the  First  Cause  protects  those  over  whom  He  rules,  keep
ing  off  and  driving  back  the  hostile  powers.  In  the  Virtues
we  may  see  everywhere  equally  present  that  one  Virtue  through
which  are  all  things,  life-giving,  active,  invisible,  unmovable,
yet  moving  all  things  for  beneficial  ends,  and  holding  them
in  its  grasp.  When  this  Virtue  breaks  forth  into  effects  less
familiar  amongst  men,  we  hear  of  miracles  or  prodigies.
Lastly,  as  we  contemplate  the  Angels  and  Archangels,  we
may  see,  and  marvel,  how  true  it  is  in  our  experience  that
'He  careth  for  us';3  He  who  never  ceases  to  delight  us  with
the  visits  of  such  glorious  beings,  to  instruct  us  with  their
revelations,  admonish  us  through  their  suggestions,  solace  us
by  their  zealous  attention.


CHAPTER V
God  is  the  Source  of  Angelic  Gifts  and  Graces

1 1 .  All  these  gifts  and  graces  were bestowed  on  these
spirits  by  their  Creator,  one  and  the  self-same  Spirit  dividing

1  P$.  xvii.  7.  2  i  Pet.  v.  7.


142  On  Consideration

to  them  severally  as  He  willed.  It  is  He  who  worketh  them
in  His  creatures,  it  is  He  who  has  given  to  His  creatures  the
power  of  working  them,  but  in  different  ways.  The  Seraphim
burn,  but  with  the  fire  of  God,  or  rather  with  fire  for  God.
Their  chief  characteristic  is  their  love,  but  they  love  not  as
much,  nor  in  the  same  way,  as  God.  The  Cherubim  shine,
and  excel  in  knowledge,  but  by  participation  in  the  truth ;
and  accordingly  they  know  not  as  the  Truth  knows,  nor  as
much.  The  Thrones  sit,  but  by  the  favour  of  Him  who
sitteth  in  them.  They  also  tranquilly  judge,  but  not  so  fully,
nor  in  the  same  way,  as  the  Peace  that  giveth  peace,  the  Peace
which  passes  all  understanding.  The  Dominions  rule,  but
they  rule  in  subjection  to  a  ruler,  and  serve  Him  as  well.
What  is  this  in  comparison  with  the  supreme,  everlasting,
unparalleled  dominion  ?  The  Principalities  lead  and  govern  ;
but  they  themselves  are  governed :  so  that  they  would  no
longer  know  how  to  govern,  if  they  ceased  to  be  governed.
In  the  Powers  there  is  surpassing  strength ;  but  He  to  whom
they  owe  their  strength  has  more  strength,  and  of  a  different
kind:  He  is  not  so  much  strong,  as  strength  itself.  The
Virtues,  in  accordance  with  their  ministry  and  their  might,  are
busy  rousing  the  sluggish  hearts  of  men  by  the  novelty  of
signs ;  but  it  is  Virtue  itself,  immanent  in  them,  that  does  the
works.  They  also  do  them,  but  in  comparison  with  that
doing  they  do  them  not.  In  short,  so  great  is  the  difference
that  the  prophet  says  to  Him,  as  standing  apart  from  all
others,  'Thou  art  God  who  doest  wondrous  things,'1  and
also  concerning  Him,  '  Who  alone  doeth  great  and  marvellous
things.'2  Angels  and  Archangels  are  with  us,  but  He  is
more  our  own  who  is  not  only  with  us  but  in  us.

1 2.  But  if  you  say  that  an  Angel  may  also  be  in  us,  I  do
1  Ps.  Ixxvii.  14.  2  Ps.  cxxxvi.  4.


Book  V,  Chapter  v  143

not  deny  it.  I  remember  that  it  is  written,  '  The  Angel  who
spake  in  me.' l  And  yet  there  is  a  difference  even  here.
The  Angel  is  in  us  suggesting  what  is  good,  not  bestowing
it :  stimulating  us  to  goodness,  not  creating  goodness.  God
is  so  in  us  as  to  give  the  grace,  and  infuse  it  into  us ;  or  rather,
so  in  us  that  He  Himself  is  infused  and  partaken  of,  so
that  one  need  not  fear  to  say  that  He  is  one  with  our  spirit,
although  He  be  not  one  with  our  person,  nor  one  with  our
substance.2  For  you  know,  *  He  that  is  joined  unto  God  is
one  spirit.'3  The  Angel,  therefore,  is  with  the  soul,  God
is  in  the  soul.  The  Angel  is  in  the  soul  as  a  comrade,
God  as  life.  It  follows  that  as  the  soul  sees  in  the  eyes,
hears  in  the  ears,  smells  in  the  nostrils,  tastes  in  the  palate,
has  the  sense  of  touch  in  all  the  rest  of  the  body,  so  God
worketh  different  effects  in  different  spirits  :  for  instance,  in
some  He  manifests  Himself  as  love,  in  others  as  perception,
in  others  as  action  of  various  kinds,  according  as  the  mani
festation  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal.4
What  are  we  to  think  of  Him  who  is  so  common  a  topic  of
our  speech,  but  who  is  so  far  removed  from  us  in  reality  ?

1  Zcch.  i.  14.

*  It  should  be  remembered  that  Pantheism  was  prevalent  all  through  the
Middle  Ages,  and  that  it  was  not  confined  to  individual  thinkers,  but  was
adopted  by  considerable  communities  (sec  Flint,  Anti-theistic  Theories,
P-  357)-  St.  Bernard  may  have  had  in  mind  the  teaching  of  John  Scotus,
who  regarded  the  Deity  as  the  '  substance  '  of  all  things.  He  affirmed  the
'  doctrine  of  the  descent  of  the  Triune  God  into  finite  things,  not  only
with  reference  to  the  single  instance  of  the  Incarnation,  but  with  reference
to  all  created  things  or  existences.  Our  life  is  God's  life  in  us  ...  The
knowledge  which  angels  and  men  have  of  God  is  God's  revelation  of
Himself  in  them.'  (Ueberweg,  Hist,  of  Philosophy,  vol.  i,  pp.  362-3).
How  far  St.  Bernard  agreed  with  this,  and  how  far  he  differed  from  it,  is
clear.

3 i  Cor.  vi.  17.  4 I  Cor.  xii.  7.


144  ®n  Consideration

How  is  it  that  He  whom  we  describe  with  mortal  words
hides  Himself  in  the  depths  of  His  own  Majesty,  and  alto
gether  shuns  our  human  forms l  and  affections  ?  Hear  what
He  says  to  men,  '  As  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,
so  are  my  ways  higher  than  your  ways,  and  my  thoughts  than
your  thoughts/  2  We  are  said  to  love,  so  is  God  :  we  are
said  to  know,  so  is  God  :  and  much  to  the  same  purpose.
But  God  loves  like  Charity,  knows  like  Truth,  sits  in  judge
ment  like  Equity,  rules  like  Majesty,  governs  like  Authority,
guards  like  Safety,  works  like  Virtue,  reveals  like  Light,
stands  by  us  like  Affection.  All  these  things  the  Angels
also  do,  and  so  do  we,  but  in  a  far  inferior  way,  not,  of  course,
by  our  native  goodness,  but  by  the  goodness  whereof  we
partake.

CHAPTER VI
The  Eternal  Self- existence  of  God

12.  Now,  then,  let  us  pass  from  these  spirits,  if  haply  you
too  may  be  able  to  say  with  the  spouse,  '  It  was  but  a  little
I  passed  from  them  when  I  found  him  whom  my  soul  loveth.' 3
Do  you  ask,  '  What  is  His  name  ? '  That  is  surely  not  a
better  question  than  '  What  is  His  character  ? '  The  answer
which  God  wished  to  be  given  respecting  Himself,  the
answer  which  He  Himself  taught  Moses,  and  which  Moses
at  God's  command  told  the  people  was — '  I  am  what  I  am ;
He  who  is  hath  sent  me  unto  you '. 4  Fitly  was  this  answer
given.  Nothing  could  better  describe  eternity,  and  God  is
eternal.  If  you  say  that  God  is  good,  great,  blessed,  wise,

1  Aspectus.  2  Isa.  Iv.  9.

3  Cant.  iii.  4.  4  Exod.  iii.  14. Vulg.


Book  V,  Chapter  vi  145-

or  any  such  thing,  the  starting-point  is  this  —  God  is.  Of
course,  the  very  meaning  of  God's  existing  is  that  all  these
attributes  constitute  existence.  If  you  add  a  hundred  others
you  have  not  got  away  from  the  fact  of  His  existence.  By
naming  them  you  have  not  added  anything  ;  if  you  do  not
name  them,  you  have  not  diminished  aught.  If  you  now  per
ceive  the  nature  of  this  unparalleled,  unique,  supreme  existence,
will  you  not  agree  that  in  comparison  thereof  whatever  is  not
included  therein  may  more  accurately  be  said  not  to  exist  than
to  exist  ?  Do  we  ask  further,  '  What  is  God  ?  '  We  reply,
4  That  without  which  nothing  is.'  We  say  nothing  can  exist
without  Him,  just  as  He  Himself  cannot  exist  without  Him
self.  He  is  self-existent.  He  is  existence  to  all  else.  And
so,  in  a  certain  sense,  He  is  alone,  who  is  the  source  of  His
own  existence,  and  of  the  existence  of  all  beside.  What  is
God?  The  Beginning,1  as  He  Himself  replied  concerning
Himself.  In  the  world  of  sense  many  things  are  called
beginnings,  but  in  respect  of  things  that  come  after.  If,
instead  of  looking  forwards  you  look  backwards,  you  will
allow  Him  to  be  the  beginning  of  all.  Wherefore,  if  you
wish  to  find  the  true,  unconditioned  '  beginning  ',  you  must
discover  that  which  has  no  beginning.  That  from  which  all
began  could  not  possibly  have  had  a  beginning.  For  if  it  had,
there  must  of  necessity  have  been  some  source  from  which  it
sprang,  since  nothing  is  self-originating.  If  it  be  imagined
that  the  non-existent  2  could  give  itself  a  beginning,  or  that
something  may  be  before  it  is,  I  reply  that  both  these  altcrna-

1  St.  John  viti.  25. The  later  Latin  text,  Principium,  quia  et  Inquor
vobis, is  what St.  Bernard  has  in  mind. Sec Westcott's  supplementary
note  on  this  very  difficult  passage.

2  '  Non-existent  '  in  the  seme  of  that  which  has  absolutely  no  being,  or
mere  privation. St.  Bernard  was  familiar  with  other  meanings,  philoso
phical  and  religious,  of  the  '  non-existent*.


ST. Utk.MAUU


i  \6  On Consideration

tives  are  contrary  to  reason,  and  it  clearly  follows  that  nothing
was  its  own  beginning.  Moreover,  whatever  had  not  its
beginning  from  itself  was  not  the  first  beginning.  The  true
beginning,  therefore,  by  no  means  began,  but  was  altogether
the  fount  of  its  own  being.

14.  What  is  God  ?  He  for  whom  the  ages  have  neither
come  nor  gone,  and  yet  with  whom  they  are  not  co-eternal.
What  is  God  ?  He  'from  whom  are  all  things,  through
whom  are  all  things,  in  whom  are  all  things  V  '  From
whom ',  by  creation,  not  by  propagation.2  '  Through  whom  ',
lest  you  should  suppose  there  is  some  other  author  and
some  other  maker.  *  In  whom  ',  not  locally,  but  potentially.
'  From  whom ',  as  the  one  beginning,  the  one  author  of  all.
'  Through  whom ',  lest  some  other  beginning  be  brought  in
as  the  originator.  '  In  whom ',  lest  a  third  term,  place,  be
introduced.  '  From  whom ',  not  as  though  God  were  the
matter  of  which  things  are  made  ;  He  is  the  efficient,  not
the  material  cause.  In  vain  do  philosophers  look  to  matter
to  solve  the  difficulty;  God  has  no  need  of  matter.  For
He  did  not  seek  a  workshop,  nor  an  artificer.  He,  through
Himself,  in  Himself,  made  all  things.  Whence  ?  Out  of
nothing ;  for  if  He  made  them  out  of  anything,  He  did  not
make  that,  and  therefore  did  not  make  all  things.  God  forbid
that  out  of  His  own  incorrupt  and  incorruptible  substance
He  should  be  thought  to  have  made  so  many  things  that  are
doubtless  good,  but  are  nevertheless  corruptible.  You  ask,
'  If  all  things  are  in  God,  where  is  God  Himself  ? '  Still,
I  find  no  place  which  can  contain  Him.  You  ask  where  He
is  not  ?  I  cannot  tell  this  either.  What  place  is  without

1  Rom.  xi.  36.

2  Seminabiliter. Not  as  the  human  race  from  Adam,  or  the  plant  from
the  seed.


Book  V^  Chapter  vi  147

God  ?  God  is  incomprehensible ; l  but  you  have  appre
hended  not  a  little  if  you  have  ascertained  this  much  about
Him,  that  He  is  nowhere  who  is  not  enclosed  by  space,  and
that  He  is  everywhere  who  is  not  shut  out  by  space.  In
His  own  sublime  and  incomprehensible  way,  as  all  things
are  in  Him,  so  He  is  in  all  things.  In  a  word,  as  the
Evangelist  says,  '  He  was  in  the  world.'  2  But  in  a  different
way  He  is  there,  where  He  was  before  the  world  was  made.
You  must  not  ask  where  He  was  ;  except  Himself  there  was
nothing.  Therefore  He  was  in  Himself.


CHAPTER VII
The 'Divine  Trinity  in  Unity

15.  What  is  God  ?  The  best  object  of  thought.3  If  you
approve,  you  ought  not  to  countenance  the  belief  that  there
is  something  which  is  the  essence  of  Godhead,  and  yet  is  not
God.4  If  there  were,  it  would  doubtless  be  better  than  God.
Must  it  not  of  necessity  be  better  than  God  if  it  is  not  God,

1  In  modern  English,  omnipresent. '  Incomprehensible  '  appears  to  be
used  here  as  it  is  in  the  Creed,  and  expresses  '  that  which cannot  be
grasped  by,  or  contained  within,  any  space'. St.  Bernard's  word  is  not,
however,  imrnensus,  but incomprehensibilis. A little  lower  down  the
word  is  used  in  the  sense  'inconceivable',  '  beyond  the  grasp  of  the  mind.'

2  St.  John  i.  10.

3  So  St.  Anselm  nearly — '  the  greatest  object or  being  that  can  be
conceived '.

4  Gilbert,  Bishop  of  Poictiers,  whom  St.  Bernard  opposed  at  the  Council
of  Paris,  A.  D.  1147,  and  in  the  following  year  at  the  Council  of  Rheims,
distinguished  the  divine  essence  from  the  Deity,  the  properties  of  the  three
divine  Persons  from  the  Persons  themselves,  not  in  reality,  but  by  abstrac
tion. It  is  this  distinction  between  Dtus  and  divinitat  which  St.  Ber
nard  condemns. Mosheim,  iii.  p. 79; Ueberweg,  Hist.  Philosophy, i.
P-  MJ-

K  2


148  On  Consideration

but  constitutes  His  being  ?  But  it  is  wiser  for  us  to  confess
that  the  divinity  which  men  say  is  the  essence  of  God  is
the  same  as  God.  Unless  it  be  God  it  cannot  be  in  God.
'  What ',  say  our  opponents,  '  do  you  deny  that  God  has
divinity  ? '  No  ;  but  what  God  has,  that  He  is.  '  Do  you
deny  that  God  exists  in  virtue  of  His  divinity  ? '  No  ;  but
we  say  that  He  exists  in  virtue  of  no  other  divinity  than  that
which  He  Himself  is.  If  you  have  discovered  some  other
divinity,  I  fall  back  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  Tri-une  God,
and  stiffen  my  back  against  your  new-found  '  divinity  '.  You
may  divide  the  world  into  four  quarters  if  you  please  :  you
must  not  so  map  out  the  Godhead.  God  is  a  Trinity  :  God
is  each  of  the  three  Persons.  If  you  like  to  add  a  fourth
divinity,  I  have  already  fully  convinced  myself  that  no  divinity
which  is  not  God  ought  to  be  worshipped.  I  suppose  you
think  so  too  :  for  *  thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,
and  Him  only  shalt  thou  serve  '.l  That  is  truly  a  glorious
divinity  which  dare  not  claim  for  itself  divine  honours.  But
we  do  better  in  rejecting  the  fourth  term  altogether  than  in
receiving  it  without  due  honour.  We  say  that  there  are  many
things  in  God — it  is  sound  Catholic  doctrine — but  the  many  are
but  one.  Otherwise,  if  we  regard  them  as  individually  distinct,
we  have  God  not  only  fourfold,  but  a  hundredfold.  For
example,  we  speak  of  His  greatness,  goodness,  justice,  and
innumerable  other  attributes ;  but  unless  you  consider  them  all
as  one  in  God,  and  with  God,  you  will  have  a  manifold  God.
1 6.  It  is  not  difficult  for  me  to  frame  a  better  idea  of  God
than  this  of  yours.  '  What  is  your  view  ? '  you  say.  I  regard
God  as  absolute  simplicity.2  A  sound  judgement  prefers

1  St.  Matt.  iv.  10,  St.  Luke  iv.  8.

2  In  the  sense  of  singleness. '  The supreme unity  ', '  the  simplest
unity  of  all,'  are  perhaps  equivalent  phrases.


Book  V,  Chapter  vii  149

simplicity  of  nature  to  that  which  is  manifold.  I  know  the
usual  answer  to  this.  '  We  maintain  ',  say  they,  4  that  the
many  attributes  do  not  constitute  the  being  of  God,  but  only
one  divinity  composed  of  them  all.'  You  assert,  then,  that
although  God  is  not  manifold,  He  is  twofold,  and  you  have
not  reached  the  highest  conception  of  God  as  absolute  sim
plicity.  That  is  as  far  from  being  simple  which  involves
even  one  form,1  as  she  is  no  longer  a  virgin  who  is  known
to  even  one  man.  I  speak  freely  ;  even  a  twofold  God  shall
not  be  my  God  :  I  have  a  better  one.  Suppose  I  do  prefer
a  twofold  Divine  Being  to  a  God  multitudinous  and  manifold;
I  nevertheless  utterly  despise  such  a  God  in  comparison  with
a  God  of  a  *  simple '  nature.  My  God  is  none  other  than
what  He  is  in  the  catholic  sense.  We  must  not  institute
a  comparison  between  what  He  includes  and  excludes.  He  is
what  He  is.  We  are  not  told  all  that  He  is.  He  is  pure  spirit,
simple,  complete  in  Himself,  self-consistent,  adding  nothing  to
Himself  from  time,  place,  material  things,  losing  nothing  of
Himself  in  them;  incapable  of  numerical  division,  and  not  com
posed  of  several  parts  to  make  a  collective  whole.  For  He  is
a  unit,  not  a  union.  He  has  no  corporeal  parts  like  our  bodies  ;
no  different  affections,  like  our  souls ;  He  is  not  susceptible
of  many  *  forms ',  like  all  creation  ;  nor  does  He  assume  even

1  In  the  philosophy  of  Aristotle  the  principle  of  form  or  essence  was
the  substitute  for  the  Platonic  idea.  Form  may  be  defined  as  '  that  which
exists  in  itself  and  for  itself.  Combined  with  matter  it  constitutes  indi
vidual  existences,  the  '  form '  of  the  thing  being  the  actual  nature  it
possesses.  God  was  regarded  as  pure  form  without  matter,  the  imma
terial  and  eternal  form,  the  pure  Actuality  in  which  is  no  potentiality,
the  self-thinking  Reason,  or  absolute  Spirit.  '  Form*  is  also  regarded  as
equivalent  to  species,  a  substantial  part  of  the  genus,  or  the  substantial
unity  of  the  individuals  included  in  the  species,  and  sometimes  as  the
differentia,  by  the  addition  of  which  the  materia  becomes  a  ipecies.  See
Ucberwcg,  Hist,  of  Phil.,  &c.


i  y o  On  Consideration

one  form,  as  our  opponents  conceive  of  *  form '.  Surely  God  is
greatly  to  be  praised  for  that  He  is  content  with  one  '  form ',
so  that  He  may  exempt  Himself  from  all  deformity.  This  is
equivalent  to  saying  that  the  nature  of  all  else  is  conditioned
in  many  ways,  but  that  God's  nature  is  absolute.  What  ?
Will  He,  through  whose  goodness  all  things  exist,  stoop  for
His  being  to  the  goodness  of  another  ?  That  praise,  to  use
a  common  expression,  means  blasphemy.  Is  it  not  higher
excellence  to  need  nothing  than  to  need  one  thing  ?  Have
reverence  for  God,  so  that  you  may  give  Him  the  best.  If
your  heart  has  been  able  to  rise  to  this  level,  how  will  you
place  your  God  lower  down  ?  He  is  His  own  '  form ',*  His
own  essence.  For  a  while  I  look  up  to  Him  at  this  eleva
tion  ;  if  a  higher  rank  were  revealed  to  me,  I  would  rather
give  it  to  Him.  We  surely  need  not  fear  that  thought  will
soar  above  Him.  However  high  it  may  attain,  He  is  still
beyond.  To  look  for  the  Most  High  beneath  the  summit
of  man's  thought  is  absurd  ;  to  place  Him  there  is  impious.
He  must  be  sought  beyond  it,  not  on  this  side  of  it.

17.  Ascend  thus  far  if  you  can;  lift  up  your  heart,  and
God  will  be  exalted.  God  is  not  dependent  on  form.  He
is  pure  form.2  God  is  not  a  feeling,  He  is  a  state  of  feeling  ;
He  is  not  compound,  but  absolute  simplicity ;  and  you  know
full  well  what  I  mean  by  '  simplicity ' :  the  word  is  synony-

1  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  Gilbert,  St.  Bernard's  antagonist,
advanced  the  doctrine  of  native  forms.  John  of  Salisbury  thus  sums
up  the  doctrine — est  autem  forma  nativa  originalis  exemplum,  et  quae
non  in  mente  Dei  consistit,  sed  rebus  creatis  inhaeret.  It  was  related  to
the  '  idea '  in  the  mind  of  God  as  the  exemplum  to  the  exemplar.  '  In
sensible  or  natural  things  form  and  matter  are  united  :  the  forms  do  not
exist  as  native  forms  apart  from  things,  but  with  them.  In  God,  who  is
pure  form  without  matter,  the  archetypes  of  material  things  (corporum
fxemplaria}  exist  as  eternal,  immaterial  forms.'

8  See  note  above.


Book  V,  Chapter  vii  1 5 1

mous  with  unity.  In  proportion  as  God  is  one,  He  is  simple.
Now  He  is  one  in  such  a  sense  as  nothing  else  is.  If  the
phrase  be  permissible,  He  is  most  of  all  one.1  There  is  one
sun  as  no  other  can  be  ;  one  moon  also,  as  no  other  can  be.
So  it  is  with  God,  but  more  so.  How  '  more  so '  ?  He  is
one  even  to  Himself.  Would  you  like  a  little  light  upon  this  ?
He  is  always  the  same,  and  never  changes.  It  is  not  so  with
the  one  sun,  or  the  one  moon.  Both  proclaim  that  they  are
not  one  to  themselves,  the  sun  because  of  its  movements,  the
moon  on  account  of  her  phases.  But  God  is  not  only  one  to
Himself,  He  is  also  one  in  Himself.  He  has  nothing  in
Himself  but  Himself.  He  knows  no  change  through  time,
no  difference  in  His  substance.  Hence  the  saying  of  Boethius2
concerning  Him — '  This  is  the  true  unity  which  is  indivisible,
and  admits  nothing  foreign  to  itself.  Nor  can  this  unity  be
reduced  to  "  forms  ",  for  it  is  pure  form.' 3  Compare  with  this
unity  all  that  can  be  called  unity ;  God's  unity  will  not  be
found  there.  Yet  God  is  Three  in  One.  What  follows?
Do  we  upset  what  has  been  said  about  the  Unity  by  bringing
in  the  thought  of  the  Trinity  ?  No  ;  but  we  establish  the
Unity.  We  speak  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit ;  still
we  maintain  there  are  not  three  Gods,  but  one  God.  What,
if  I  may  so  speak,  is  the  meaning  of  this  number  which  is  not
a  number  ?

If  there  are  three  particulars,  must  there  not  be  numerical
distinction  ?  If  there  is  but  one,  what  becomes  of  the  enumera
tion  ?  But  I  have,  you  say,  something  that  can  be  numbered,
and  yet  not  numbered.  There  is  one  substance,  there  are

1  Unissimus.

2  The  famous  Latin  philosopher  and  statesman,  beheaded  A.  D.  526
for  opposing  Arianism. The  passage  is  to  be  found  in  the  Basle  Edition
of  his  works  (1570),  p.  1 1  23.

3  That  is,  Joes  not  allow  of  division  into  sptcits. See  above.


if 2  On  Consideration

three  Persons.  Is  there  anything  strange  or  obscure  in  this  ?
Nothing,  if  the  persons  are  conceived  of  separately  from  the
Substance.  The  truth  is  that,  inasmuch  as  the  three  Persons
are  one  Substance,  and  the  one  Substance  is  the  three  Persons,
there  is  no  denying  that  we  do  number  them,  for  they  are
really  three  ;  yet  on  the  other  hand  we  do  not  number  them,
for  they  are  really  one.  If,  again,  you  think  an  easy  explana
tion  is  found  by  calling  them  three,  tell  me  what  it  is  you
have  numbered.  Natures  ?  There  is  one  nature.  Essences  ?
There  is  one  essence.  Substances  ?  There  is  one  substance.
Godheads  ?  There  is  one  Godhead.  '  I  do  not  number
these ',  you  say,  '  but  the  Persons,  and  they  are  not  that  one
nature,  that  one  essence,  that  one  substance,  that  one  divinity.'
You  are  a  Catholic  ;  you  are  not  in  the  least  likely  to  make
such  a  concession.


CHAPTER VIII

The  plurality  of  Persons  in  the  Godhead,  and
their  several  ' properties' '.  The  unity  and
simplicity  of  the  Essence

1 8.  The  Catholic  Faith  confesses  that  the  '  properties  '  of
the  Persons  are  identical  with  the  Persons  themselves  ;  and
that  the  Persons  themselves  are  nothing  else  than  one  God,  one
Divine  Substance,  one  Divine  Nature,  one  Divine  and  Supreme
Majesty.  Number,  therefore,  if  you  can,  either  the  Persons
without  the  Substance,  which  they  themselves  are,  or  the
characteristics  without  the  Persons  with  whom  they  are  iden
tical.  Or,  if  any  one  endeavour  to  separate  the  Persons  from
the  Substance,  or  the  characteristic  attributes  from  the  Per-


Book  V,  Chapter  vi'ii  15-3

sons,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand  how  he  can  profess  to
be  a  worshipper  of  the  Trinity  after  dividing  the  Godhead
into  such  a  vast  multitude  of  particulars.  Let  us  therefore
maintain  that  there  are  three  Persons,  but  not  to  the  prejudice
of  the  Unity  :  let  us  hold  that  there  is  one  God,  but  not  so
as  to  confound  the  Trinity ;  for  these  are  not  mere  names,
nor  idle  words  void  of  meaning.  If  any  one  asks  how  this
can  be,  let  him  be  content  to  hold  that  it  is  so,  though  I  must
add  that  if  the  doctrine  be  not  clear  to  reason,  it  is  no  halting
opinion,  but  the  firm  conviction  of  faith.  This  is  a  great
mystery,  worthy  of  all  veneration,  not  to  be  keenly  scrutinized.
How  can  plurality  consist  with  unity,  or  unity  with  plurality  ?
To  closely  examine  the  fact  is  rashness,  to  believe  it  is  piety,
to  know  it  is  life,  and  eternal  life.  Wherefore,  Eugenius,  if
you  think  it  worth  while,  let  me  have  your  undivided  considera
tion  as  I  run  through  the  many  arguments  which  tend  to  show
the  greatness  of  this  unique  unity.  There  is  a  unity  which
we  may  call  *  collective ',  as,  for  example,  when  many  stones
make  one  heap.  There  is  a  *  constitutive '  unity,  as  when  many
members  make  one  body,  or  many  parts  constitute  one  whole.
There  is  a  unity  such  as  that  of  man  and  wife,  whereby
two  are  no  longer  two,  but  one  llesh.  And  there  is  a
'  natural '  unity,  whereby  soul  and  body  are  one  man.  There
is  a  *  potential '  unity,  the  realization  of  which  is  the  constant
endeavour  of  a  virtuous  man,  so  that  he  may  not  be  unstable,
nor  unlike  himself.  There  is  the  unity  of  agreement,  when
the  love  of  many  men  leads  to  their  being  of  one  heart  and
one  soul.  There  is  also  the  unity  of  devotion,  when  the  soul,
ck-aung  to  God  with  complete  surrender,  is  one  spirit.  And
there  is  the  unity  of  condescension,  whereby  our  poor  nature
was  taken  by  the  Word  of  God  to  make  one  person  in  Himself.
19.  But  what  arc  all  these  compared  with  that  supreme,  and,


i  f  4  @n  Con  sidera  tion

so  to  speak,  unique  unity  which  results  from  the  consubstan-
tiality  of  the  three  Persons  ?  If  you  find  a  likeness  between
any  one  of  the  foregoing  and  this  unity,  the  resemblance  is
but  partial ;  if  you  compare  them  with  it,  there  will  be  no  true
resemblance.  Therefore,  among  all  things  which  are  rightly
called  '  One  ',  the  unity  of  the  Trinity,  whereby  three  Persons
are  one  Substance,  is  the  highest.  Next  comes  that  surpassing
unity,  whereby,  conversely,  three  substances  are  in  Christ,  one
Person.  Moreover,  real  sober  consideration  proves  that  the
foregoing,  and  whatsoever  else  can  be  called  '  One ',  have  the
title  in  virtue  of  their  resemblance  to  that  supreme  Unity,  not
because  they  allow  of  comparison  therewith.  Nor  do  we
forsake  this  profession  of  the  Unity  by  our  upholding  of  the
doctrine  of  the  three  Persons,  since,  when  we  speak  of  the
Trinity,  we  do  not  mean  a  multiplicity  of  gods  any  more
than  in  speaking  of  unity  we  imply  loneliness.  Wherefore,
when  I  speak  of  One  I  am  not  disturbed  by  the  consideration
of  number,  which  does  not  multiply  the  essence,  nor  change
it,  nor  divide  it.  Again,  when  I  speak  of  three  things,  if
I  view  them  as  one,  whatever  the  three  things  may  be,  I  am
not  proved  wrong.  Nor,  if  I  speak  of  the  three  Persons
of  the  Godhead,  am  I  obliged  to  confound  the  Persons,  or
reduce  the  three  to  the  One.


CHAPTER IX

As in God  there  are three Persons  and  one
Nature :  so  in  Christ  there  are  two  Natures
and  one  Person
20.  My  views,  I  confess,  are  similar  respecting  the  unity

which  I  have  ranked  next  in  honour  to  that  which  is  unique.


Book  /7,  Chapter  ix  1 5-  5-

I  say  that  in  Christ  the  Word,  the  human  soul  and  body,  are
without  confusion  of  the  essences  one  Person,  and  I  further
maintain  that  the  human  and  divine  remain  numerically  dis
tinct  without  prejudice  to  the  unity  of  person.  Nor  would
I  deny  that  this  unity  is  of  the  same  class  as  that  unity  whereby
soul  and  body  are  one  man.  It  was  fitting  that  a  mystery
devised  for  man's  welfare  should  have  a  more  intimate  relation
to  man's  nature  and  more  closely  resemble  it.  It  was  fitting,
too,  that  it  should  harmonize  with  that  highest  unity  which  is
in  God  and  is  God,  so  that  as  three  Persons  in  the  Trinity
are  one  Essence,  so  in  the  Incarnation,  by  a  most  appropriate
contrast,  the  three  Essences  are  one  Person.  Do  you  not  see
how  beautifully  the  unity  of  Christ  is  set  between  the  unity  of
God  and  the  unity  of  man  ?  I  mean,  of  course,  the  unity  of
the  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  man  Christ  Jesus.
Most  beautiful,  most  appropriate,  I  say,  that  the  mystery  of
salvation  should  so  fitly  correspond  to  both,  to  God  our
Saviour  on  the  one  side,  to  saved  humanity  on  the  other.
Thus  this  unity  of  the  two  natures,  standing  between  the
other  two  unities,  must  be  pronounced  inferior  to  the  one  and
superior  to  the  other,  being  as  much  above  the  lower  as  it  is
below  the  higher.

21.  In  a  word,  so  closely  and  so  clearly  are  the  natures
united  in  the  Person  of  the  one  Christ,  who  is  God  and  Man,
that  you  can  without  error  in  speaking  of  them  use  either  mode
of  expression,  and  with  the  true  Catholic  Faith  l  declare  both
that  God  was  man  and  man  was  God.  But  you  cannot,  with
out  sheer  absurdity,  similarly  assert  either  that  the  soul  is  the
body,  or  the  body  the  soul,  although  in  like  manner  soul  and
body  is  one  man.  And  it  is  not  surprising  if  the  soul,  with  all

1  So  Hooker  on  the  Communicatio  idiomatum,  Ecc.  Pol.,  Bk  v.  liii.
3,4


i  f  6  On  Consideration

its  vital  energy,  considerable  though  it  is,  and  notwithstanding
its  affections,  cannot  so  closely  bind  the  body  to  itself  as  the
Divinity  united  to  itself  that  man  who  was  predestined  to
be  the  Son  of  God  with  power.1  The  divine  predestina
tion  is  a  long  and  strong  chain  for  binding  close  :  for  it
reaches  from  the  Eternal.  What  is  longer  than  eternity  ?
What  more  mighty  than  Deity  ?  Hence  it  is  that  this  unity
could  not  possibly  be  severed  by  death,  although  soul  and  body
were  separated  from  one  another.  And  perhaps  John  felt  this
when  he  professed  himself  unworthy  to  undo  the  latchet  of
His  shoe.2


CHAPTER X
The  Parable  of  the  three  Measures  of  Meal

22.  We  remember  the  three  measures  in  the  Gospel,  which
were  mixed  and  leavened  to  make  one  loaf.3  If  any  one  were
to  apply  the  parable  to  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation  I  should
think  he  was  not  far  wrong  in  so  doing.  How  well  the
woman  leavened  them !  And  so,  in  the  parallel,  without
dividing  the  body  and  soul,  the  Word  was  distinct  from  the

1  Rom.  i.  4.

2  St.  Mark  i.  7. In  the  mystical  theology  the  '  shoe '  was  taken  to
denote  the  humanity  of  Christ,  which  the  Baptist  confessed  himself  un
worthy  '  to  serve,  bear  upon  his  shoulder,  or  carry  in  his  hands '. '  Unde
S.  Bernardus :  Calceo,  ait,  hnmanitatis  nostrae  calceata  fuit  Verbi  mate'
stas ;  quia  enim  calceamenta  in  extrema  corporis  parte  sunt,  et  ex  mortuis
fiunt  animalibus,  idcirco  iuxta  S.  Gregorium  et  S.  Hieronymum  in  Marci
cap.  i.  7  recte  significant  incarnationem  Christi,  quam  se  explicare  non
posse,  nee  ad  hoc  dignum  esse  hie  confitetur  S.  loannes.' A Lapide,
Comm.  on  St.  Matt.  iii.  II.

3  St.  Matt.  xiii.  33,  St.  Luke  xiii.  21.


Book  V,  Chapter  x  if?

body  and  sod,  yet  so  that  in  the  separation  the  inseparable
union  was  maintained.  For  the  partial  separation  is  no  ob
jection  against  the  unity  which  remained  between  all  three.
Whether  two  of  the  three  were  conjoined  or  dissevered,  the
personal  unity  none  the  less  continued  in  all  three.  The  one
Christ  and  one  Person,  the  Word,  soul  and  body,  remained
just  the  same  even  after  the  death  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus.
In  my  opinion  this  mingling  and  leavening  took  place  in  the
Virgin's  womb ;  she  was  the  woman  who  mixed  and  leavened
the  three  measures.  For  I  should  not,  perhaps,  err  greatly  in
saying  that  the  leaven  was  Mary's  faith.  She  was  clearly
blessed  in  believing,  since  the  things  which  were  told  her  by
the  Lord  were  accomplished  in  her.1  But  they  would  not
have  been  accomplished  if  anything  had  hindered  the  whole
from  being  leavened,  and  continually  leavened,  according  to
the  word  of  the  Lord,  so  as  to  preserve  for  us,  as  well  in  His
death  as  in  His  life,  the  one  perfect  Mediator  between  God  and
man,  the  man  Christ  Jesus  in  union  with  His  own  Godhead.
23.  In  this  admirable  mystery,  corresponding  to  the  number
of  the  measures,  we  may  observe,  most  beautifully  distin
guished,  the  three  steps  of  the  new,  the  old,  and  the  eternal.
By  the  '  new '  I  mean  the  soul,  which  is  believed  to  be  created
out  of  nothing  when  it  is  infused  into  the  body  ;  by  the  '  old  ',
the  jlcsh,  which  we  know  to  have  been  transmitted  even  from
Adam,  the  first  of  human  kind  ;  by  the  '  eternal ',  I  mean  the
Word,  whom,  as  a  certain  truth,  we  assert  to  be  co-eternal  with
the  Father,  and  to  be  begotten  of  Him.  And  in  the  fore
going,  if  you  carefully  notice,  there  is  a  triple  exhibition  of
Divine  power,  inasmuch  as  then.-  was  something  made  out
of  nothing,  the  new  out  of  the  old,  the  eternally  blessed
out  of  that  which  was  sentenced  to  death.  How  docs  this
1  St.  Luke  i.  45.


iy8  On  Consideration

concern  our  salvation  ?  Much  every  way.  Firstly,  because,
reduced  to  nothing  through  sin,  we  are  through  the  mystery
as  it  were  created  anew,  that  we  may  be  a  sort  of  first  fruits  of
His  creatures.1  Secondly,  because,  translated  from  our  old
slavery  into  the  liberty  of  the  children  of  God,  we  walk  in
newness  of  the  spirit.  Lastly,  because  we  have  been  called
from  the  power  of  darkness  to  the  kingdom  of  the  eternal
glory,  wherein  He  has  already  made  us  to  sit  with  Him  in
Christ.  May  they  be  no  friends  of  ours  who  endeavour  to
estrange  from  us  the  flesh  of  Christ,  impiously  asserting  that
it  was  newly  created  in  the  Virgin,  not  taken  from  the  Virgin.
Well  did  the  Spirit  of  Prophecy  long  before  meet  this  opinion,
or  rather  blasphemy  of  wicked  men,  when  He  said,  'A  shoot
shall  spring  from  the  root  of  Jesse,  and  a  flower  out  of  his
root.'2  He  might  have  said  that  the  flower  should  come
from  the  shoot,  but  He  preferred  to  say  '  from  the  root ',  that
He  might  show  the  flower  and  the  shoot  to  have  the  same
origin.  So  we  see  that  the  flesh  was  taken  thence  whence
the  Virgin  sprang;  it  was  not  newly  created  in  the  Virgin,
but  came  from  the  root.


CHAPTER XI
The  consideration  of  God  continued

24.  I  suspect  you  are  a  little  vexed  at  my  again  asking,
What  is  God?  The  question  has  already  been  asked  so
often,  and  you  are  doubtful  whether  the  answer  will  ever  be
found.  Dear  Eugenius,  Father  in  God,  what  I  say  is  this —
He  alone  is  God  who  never  can  be  sought  in  vain,  not  even

1  James  i.  18.  8  Isa.  xi.  i.


Book  V^  Chapter  xi  15-9

when  He  cannot  be  found.  Your  experience  may  teach  you
this ;  or,  if  not,  believe  one  who  has  had  the  experience  ;  I  do
not  mean  myself,  but  the  saint  who  says,  '  Thou  art  good,
O  Lord,  to  them  that  hope  in  Thee,  to  the  soul  that  seeketh
Thee.'1  What,  then,  is  God?  As  regards  the  universe,
He  is  the  final  end  ;  in  respect  of  election,  He  is  salvation  ;
as  regards  Himself,  He  is  self-knowledge.  What  is  God  ?
He  is  almighty  will  moved  by  loving-kindness,  virtue,  eternal
light,  incommunicable  reason,  highest  blessedness ;  He  is  the
creator  of  minds  to  enjoy  Himself ;  He  endows  them  with
life  to  perceive  Him,  disposes  them  to  long  for  Him,  enlarges
them  to  receive  Him,  justifies  them  to  be  worthy  of  Him,
fires  them  with  zeal,  fertilizes  them  that  they  may  bear  fruit,
guides  them  into  sweet  reasonableness,  moulds  them  to  loving-
kindness,  regulates  them  for  wisdom,  strengthens  them  for
virtue,  visits  them  for  consolation,  illuminates  them  for  know
ledge,  preserves  them  for  immortality,  fills  them  for  happiness,
is  about  their  path  for  safety.

CHAPTER  XII

God  the  rewardev  of  the  good,  and  the  righteous
judge  of  the  wicked

25.  What  is  God  ?  No  less  the  punishment  of  the  per
verse  than  the  glory  of  the  humble.  We  may  say  He  is
reason  and  sweet  reasonableness  directing  itself  with  fixed
unchanging  aim,  and  everywhere  operative.  Any  ]>erversity
in  collision  with  that  must  of  necessity  be  confounded.  Of
course,  all  swelling  pride  and  unseemliness  which  dashes  itself
against  that  must  be  broken  to  shivers.  Woe  to  all  creation  if

1 Lain.  iii.  ^.


160  On  Consideration

it  chance  to  get  in  the  way  of  unbending  righteousness !  for
that  righteousness  is  strength.  There  is  no  more  deadly  foe
of  wills  wickedly  disposed  than  to  be  for  ever  attempting,  ever
in  conflict,  and  all  in  vain.

Woe  to  wills  opposed  !  Surely  they  only  bring  upon
themselves  the  penalty  of  their  own  reluctance.  What
penalty  is  so  severe  as  to  be  ever  choosing  what  shall
never  be,  ever  refusing  what  shall  never  cease  to  be?  Is
there  any  hell  like  a  will  under  this  necessity  of  choosing
and  refusing,  so  that  whichever  way  it  moves  misery  must  be
as  constant  an  attendant  as  perversity  ?  As  long  as  eternity
shall  last  it  will  not  get  its  choice  ;  and  what  it  refuses  it
shall  no  less  through  eternity  endure.  And  such  a  will  meets
with  its  due  deserts  ;  he  who  is  never  disposed  for  what
becomes  him,  should  never  attain  to  what  delights  him.  Who
doth  this?  The  righteous  Lord  our  God,  who  with  the  per
verse  also  shows  Himself  perverse.  Straight  and  crooked  can
never  agree,  for  these  are  contrary  one  to  the  other,  though
they  do  not  injure  one  another.  One  of  the  two  is  injured  ;
it  cannot  be  God.  '  It  is  hard  for  thee ',  He  says,  *  to  kick
against  the  goad ' :  *  that  is,  not  hard  for  the  goad,  but  hard
for  him  who  kicks.  God  is  also  the  punishment  of  the  base,
for  He  is  light ;  and  what  is  so  hateful  to  filthy  and  degraded
minds  ?  Surely,  '  Every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  light.'2
But  I  say,  will  they  not  be  able  to  shun  the  light  ?  Not
in  the  least.  It  shines  everywhere,  though  not  to  all.  In
a  word,  it  shineth  in  darkness,  and  the  darkness  comprehends
it  not.3  The  light  sees  the  darkness,  for  with  it  seeing  and
shining  are  the  same  thing  ;  but  it  is  not  in  turn  seen  by  the
darkness,  because  the  darkness  comprehends  it  not.  They,
then,  are  seen  that  they  may  be  confounded  ;  and  they  do  not
1  Acts  ix.  5.  a  St.  John  iii.  20.  3  St.  Johu  i.  5.


Book V,  Chapter  xii  161

see  that  they  may  not  be  consoled.  Nor  are  they  seen  only
by  the  light ;  they  are  also  seen  in  the  light.  By  what  person
or  persons  ?  By  every  one  who  sees,  so  that  the  greater  the
number  of  beholders  the  greater  may  be  their  confusion.  But
out  of  the  whole  multitude  of  the  spectators  there  is  no  eye
more  troublesome  to  a  man  than  his  own.  There  is  no  glance,
whether  in  heaven  or  on  earth,  which  a  benighted  conscience
would  rather  escape,  or  is  less  capable  of  escaping.  The
darkness  is  not  hidden  even  from  itself;  though  it  sees  naught
else,  it  sees  itself.  The  works  of  darkness  follow  it,  and
there  is  no  hiding-place  from  it,  not  even  in  the  darkness.
This  is  '  the  worm  that  dieth  not ' l — the  memory  of  the  past.
Once  it  gets  within,  or  rather  is  born  within  through  sin,
there  it  stays,  and  never  by  any  means  can  be  plucked  out.
It  never  ceases  to  gnaw  the  conscience  ;  feeding  on  it  as  on
food  that  never  can  be  consumed  it  prolongs  the  life  of  misery.
I  shudder  as  I  contemplate  this  biting  worm,  this  never-dying
death.  I  shudder  at  the  thought  of  being  the  victim  of  this
living  death,  this  dying  life.

26.  This  is  the  second  death,  which  never  kills,  but  is
always  killing.  Will  no  one  grant  them  to  die  once  for  all
that  they  may  not  evermore  be  dying  ?  They  who  say  to
the  mountains,  *  Fall  on  us,  and  to  the  hills,  cover  us,' 2  what
do  they  desire  but  to  put  an  end  to  death  by  the  kindness  of
death,  or  to  escape  from  it  ?  In  short,  they  will  call  upon
death,  and  death  will  not  come.3  I  would  have  you  see  thi^
clearly.  It  is  certain  that  the  soul  is  immortal,  and  so  long
as  it  has  life  it  must  have  memory;  for  otherwise  it  might
some  day  cease  to  be  the  soul.  So  then,  while  the  soul
lasts,  memory  also  lasts.  But  what  is  memory  like  ?  It  is

1  Isa.  l.xvi.  24  ;  St.  Mark  ix.  48.  2  St.  Luke  xxiii.  30.

3  Apoc.  ix.  6.

ST. BEJtNAHO  j


1 62  On  Consideration

burdened  with  foul  disgrace,  horrid  crimes,  swelling  vanity ;
through  scorning  (the  better  part)  it  is  like  a  field  rough  and
neglected.  These  former  things  have  passed  away,  and  have
not  passed  away.  They  are  out  of  hand,  but  not  out  of
mind.  What  has  been  done  cannot  be  undone;  the  doing
was  in  time,  but  the  effect  of  the  doing  will  be  eternal.
That  does  not  pass  with  time  which  passes  all  times.  The
wrong-doing  that  you  remember  for  ever  must  therefore  for
ever  be  a  torment.  This  will  be  to  realize  the  truth  of  the
words,  '  I  will  reprove  thee  and  set  before  thine  eyes  what
thou  hast  done.' *  It  is  the  Lord  who  thus  spoke ;  all
that  opposes  Him  must  of  necessity  oppose  itself ;  so  that  at
last  there  will  be  the  complaint,  '  O  thou  watcher  of  men,
why  hast  thou  set  me  as  a  mark  for  thee,  so  that  I  am
a  burden  to  myself?'2  These  are  the  facts,  Eugenius.
Nothing  can  contradict  God  and  be  consistent  with  itself;
on  the  contrary,  whosoever  shall  be  reproved  by  God  shall
be  reproved  also  by  himself.  When  the  soul  is  torn  from
the  body,  and  stands  self-centred,  it  will  be  no  longer  possible
for  reason  to  disguise  the  truth,  or  for  the  soul  to  shun  the
searching  insight  of  reason.  How  can  it  do  so  when  the
senses,  by  means  of  which,  as  we  know,  it  was  wont  to  sally
forth  to  gratify  its  curiosity,  and,  leaving  itself,  would  find
a  home  in  that  fashion  of  the  world  which  passeth  away,  are
sealed  up  in  the  slumber  of  death  ?  Do  you  see  that  nothing
is  wanting  to  complete  the  confusion  of  the  filthy  whet
they  shall  be  brought  forth  as  a  spectacle  to  God,  to  angel
to  men,  to  themselves  ?  How  lamentable  is  the  lot  of
bad  men,  who  must  undoubtedly  face  this  torrent  of  simj
equity,  and  stand  exposed  to  the  light  of  unveiled  truth
Is  not  this  to  be  for  ever  beaten,  and  to  be  for  ever  con-
1  Ps.  1.  21.  2  Job  vii.  20.


Book  V,  Chapter  xii  163

founded  ? '  Break  them  with  a  double  breach,  O  Lord  our
God',1  saith  the  prophet.


CHAPTER XIII

The  mystical  interpretation  of  the  length a) id
breadth,  and  height,  and  depth

27.  What  is  God?  Length,  breadth,  height,  and  depth.
'What?'  you  say.  'You  do,  after  all,  profess 'to  believe
in  the  fourfold  Godhead  which  was  an  abomination  to  you.'

Not  in  the  least.  I  abominated,  and  still  abominate  it.
I  may  have  seemed  to  express  a  number  of  things  :  I  really
indicated  one.  God  is  designated  One  to  suit  our  compre
hension,  not  to  describe  His  character ;  His  character  is
capable  of  division,  He  Himself  is  not.  The  words  are
different,  the  paths  are  many,  but  one  thing  is  signified ;  the
paths  lead  to  one  Person.  No  divisions  of  the  Substance  are
expressed  in  that  fourfold  enumeration  ;  no  dimensions,  such
as  we  contemplate  in  bodily  structures ;  no  distinction  of
Persons,  such  as  we  adore  in  the  Trinity ;  there  is  no
enumeration  of  '  properties '  such  as  we  confess  to  be  inherent
in  the  Persons,  though  they  are  no  way  distinguishable  from
the  Persons.  Moreover,  in  God  each  of  these  is  what  the
four  are  all  together ;  and  the  four  are  just  what  each  one
is.  We  cannot  attain  to  the  full  conception  of  the  simplicity
of  God  ;  hence  it  is  that  while  we  strive  to  apprehend  the
Unity,  it  \  -esents  itself  to  us  as  fourfold.  This  is  the
result  of  our  seeing  darkly  as  in  a  mirror,  the  only  way  for
the  present  of  seeing  God  at  all.  But  when  we  shall  see


1  Jcr.  xvii.  1 8.
I. 2


i  tf  4  On  Consideration

face  to  face,  \ve  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.1  When  that
blessed  time  shall  come,  the  poor,  weak  blade  of  our  in
tellect,  however  hard  it  may  strike,  will  not  recoil,  or  be
broken  to  shivers.  It  will  rather  concentrate  itself,  and
will  conform  itself  to  His  unity,  or  rather  to  that  Unity,  so
that  we  shall  have  one  face  corresponding  to  His  one  face.
For  'we  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He
is  '.  Blessed  Vision  !  well  might  he  sigh  for  it  who  said,
'  My  face  hath  sought  thee  :  thy  face,  O  Lord,  will  I
seek/ 2  And  as  our  business  is  still  to  seek  Him,  let  us
for  the  present,  inasmuch  as  we  are  weak  and  faint,  and
sorely  need  such  a  conveyance,  let  us  mount  this  four-horse
chariot,3  if  haply  we  may  thus  lay  hold  of  that  for  which
we  have  been  laid  hold  of,  that  is  to  say,  the  plan  and
working  of  the  vehicle  itself.  For  this  admonition  have
we  from  the  charioteer  himself,  who  was  the  first  to  show
us  the  chariot — that  we  strive  to  '  comprehend  with  all  saints
what  is  the  length,  and  breadth,  and  height,  and  depth  '.4
'  Comprehend ',  he  says,  not  '  know ' :  so  that,  not  content
with  the  curiosity  of  knowledge 6  we  may  with  all  eagerness
1  ook  for  the  fruit.  The  fruit  is  not  to  be  found  in  knowledge,
but  in  comprehension.6  Besides,  '  to  him  who  knoweth  to
do  good,  and  doeth  it  not/7  as  a  certain  one  tells  us,  'it
is  sin ' ;  Paul  also  elsewhere  says,  '  So  run  that  ye  may

1 i  Cor.  xiii.  12  ;  I  John  iii.  2.  2  Ps.  xxvii.  8.

3  That  is,  '  the  length,  breadth,  depth,  and  height.'

4  Eph.  iii.  18.

5  '  Some persons  study  to  know  only  to  know — that is curiosity.
— Burkitt.

6  Compare  Olshausen — '  That  comprehensive  knowledge  of  essentials
which  by  implication  knows  everything,  and  which  St.  John  describes  as
the  anointing  of  the  Spirit  which  teaches  everything.'

7  Jas.  iv.  17.


Book  V,  Chapter  xiii  165

comprehend/  * I  will  point  out  lower  down  the  meaning  of
comprehending.

28.  What  then  is  God? He  is  length,  I  say;  and  what
is  length  ? It  is  eternity. This  is  so  long  that  it  has  no  end
either  in  place  or  time. He is  also  breadth. And what
is  breadth  ? It  is  love. What  bounds  shall  we  set  to  the
love  of  God, who  hateth none  of  those things  which He
hath  made  ? In  fact,  *  He  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  upon  the
good  and  the  bad,  and  sendeth  rain  upon  the  just  and  unjust.' 2
So  then  there  is  room  in  the  Divine  bosom  for  God's  ene
mies  also. And  not  satisfied  with  this,  God's  love  compasses
the  infinite. It exceeds not  only  affection,  but  knowledge
as  well,  for  the  Apostle  goes  on  to  speak  of  *  knowing  the
love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge  '.3 What  more  shall
I  say  ? It  is  eternal ;  or,  to  go  a  step  further,  I  may  perhaps
say  that  it  is  eternity, You  see  that  the  breadth  is  as  great
as  the  length. Would  that  you  saw  not  only  that  they  are
equal,  but  that  they  are  identical ;  that  they  are  one  and  the
same  thing  ;  no  less  one  than  two,  no  more  two  than  one  !  God
is  eternity, God is  love ; He  is  length  without  extension,
breadth  without  distension. In  both  cases  alike  He  exceeds
the  narrow  limits  of  space  and  time, but  in virtue  of  His
unfettered  nature,  not  through  the  vastness  of  His  substance.
In  such  wise  He  is  immeasurable4  who  hath  made  all  things
by  measure; and  although He  be  immeasurable, His very
immensity  must  be  thus  *  measured  '.5

29.  Once more, what is God  ? He is height and
depth. In the  one He is  above all things,  in the other

1  I  Cor.  ix.  24. '  So  run  that  ye  may  fully  obtain* Vulg.  comfrehen-
datis.

2  St.  Matt.  v.  45.  s  Eph.  iii.  19.  *  Immensu$.
5  In  more  modern  language  conditioned.


1 66  On  Consideration

He  is  below  all  things.  It  is  clear  that  in  the  Godhead
there  is  no  halting  inequality;  the  Godhead  stands  firmly
fixed,  immovably  self-consistent.  Consider  'height'  as
corresponding  to  the  Divine  power,  '  depth '  to  the  Divine
wisdom.  There  is  a  correspondence  no  less  between  these
two  than  between  the  former  two,  if  we  perceive  that  this
'  height '  is  unapproachable,  this  k  depth  '  unsearchable.  Paul
marvelled  as  he  cried  aloud,  '  O  the  depth  of  the  riches  of
the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  !  how  unsearchable  are
his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past  finding  out !  ' ]  We  too,
as  we  contemplate  both  these  attributes  in  God,  and  their
perfect  unity  with  God;  may  with  Paul  exclaim,  '  O  powerful
wisdom,  reaching  from  one  end  of  the  world  to  the  other
with  full  strength  !  O  wise  power,  ordering  all  things
sweetly  !  ' 2  The  thing  is  one,  the  effect  is  manifold,  the
operations  are  diverse.  And  that  one  thing  is  '  length '
because  it  is  eternity  ;  '  breadth  '  because  it  is  love  ;  '  height '
because  it  is  majesty  ;  '  depth '  because  it  is  wisdom.


CHAPTER XIV

MS  hat  it  is  to  'comprehend*  God

30.  We  know  these  things.  We  surely  do  not  suppose
that  we  have  therefore  comprehended  them.  It  is  not
argument  that  comprehends  them,  but  holiness,  if  at  least
that  can  any  way  be  comprehended  which  is  incomprehensible.
But  unless  its  comprehension  were  possible,  the  Apostle
would  not  have  said,  '  That  we  may  comprehend  with  all

1  Rom.  xi.  33.  2  Wisd.  of  Sol.  viii.  I.


Booh /',  Chapter  xiv  167

Saints/1  The  Saints,  therefore,  comprehend.  Do  you  ask
how  ?  If  you  are  holy  you  have  comprehended,  and  know  ;
if  you  are  not,  be  holy  and  you  shall  know  by  your  own
experience.  Holy  affection  makes  a  man  holy,  and  that
a  twofold  affection  :  the  holy  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  holy
love.  When  the  soul  is  perfectly  possessed  by  these,  it
4  comprehends '  as  it  were  with  its  two  arms,  embraces,  draws
close,  holds  tight,  and  says,  '  I  have  held  Him  fast,  and  will
not  let  Him  go ;  '  *  Fear  corresponds  to  '  height '  and
'  depth  ',  love  to  '  breadth  '  and  '  length  '.  What  is  so  much
to  be  feared  as  irresistible  power  ?  as  wisdom  from  which
there  is  no  hiding  ?  God  might  have  been  feared  less  had
He  lacked  either.  But  as  things  are,  you  must  perfectly
fear  Him  who  neither  wants  an  all-seeing  eye,  nor  an  all-
powerful  hand.  Again,  what  is  so  lovable  as  love  itself,
whereby  you  love  and  are  beloved  ?  Yet  eternity  conjoined
with  love  makes  love  more  lovable  ;  eternal  love  never  fails,
and  it  banishes  the  suspicion  that  it  ever  will.  Love,  there
fore,  with  perseverance  and  long-suffering,  and  the  *  length  '
is  yours ;  extend  your  love  even  to  your  enemies,  the
'  breadth  '  is  yours.  Fear  God  with  utmost  care,  and  you
have  laid  hold  upon  the  '  height '  and  '  depth  '.

31.  If,  moreover,  you  prefer  to  respond  to  the  four  Divine
attributes  with  four  affections  of  your  own,  you  may  do  so
with  wonder,  fear,  zeal,  endurance.  Most  wonderful  is  the
*  height '  of  His  Majesty,  most  worthy  to  be  feared  the
abyss 3  of  His  judgements.  Divine  love 4  demands  your
zeal,  the  eternity  r>  of  God  portrays  your  constant  endurance.

1  Eph.  iii.  18. The  Revised  Version  translates  apprehend.

2  Cant.  iii.  4.

8,  4,  *  These  correspond  respectively  to  the  '  Jepth  ',  the  '  breadth  ',  the
length '. See  above.


id8  On  Consideration

Who  wonders,  but  he  who  contemplates  the  glory  of  God  ?
Who  fears,  but  he  who  searches  the  depth  of  His  wisdom  ?
Who  glows  with  zeal,  but  he  who  meditates  on  the  love  of
God  ?  Who  endures  and  perseveres  in  love,  but  he  who
aspires  to  copy  eternal  love  ?  In  truth,  perseverance  is  a
sort  of  likeness  here  to  eternity  hereafter.  In  fact  it  is
perseverance  alone  on  which  eternity  is  bestowed ;  or  rather,
it  is  perseverance  which  bestows  man  on  eternity;  as  the
Lord  says,  '  He  that  shall  persevere  unto  the  end,  the  same
shall  be  saved.'1

32.  And  now  observe  how  these  four  represent  four
kinds  of  contemplation.  The  first  and  highest  form  of  con
templation  is  the  admiration  of  the  Divine  Majesty.  If  the
heart  be  cleansed,  free  from  vice,  and  relieved  of  the  burden
of  its  sins,  it  may  hereby  be  easily  raised  to  things  above ;
the  admiring  soul  may  sometimes  also  for  brief  intervals  be
even  kept  entranced  with  wonder  and  amazement.  The
second  must  attend  the  first,  for  it  beholds  the  judgements  of
God.  It  may  violently  shock  the  beholder  with  the  fearful
vision,  but  it  puts  vice  to  flight,  firmly  bases  virtue,  initiates
in  wisdom,  preserves  humility.  For  humility  is  a  good  sound
foundation  of  the  virtues.  If  humility,  forsooth,  be  insecure,
the  whole  structure  of  the  virtues  is  nothing  but  a  ruin.
The  third  kind  of  contemplation  is  busy  with,  or  rather
leisurely  surveys,  past  benefits;  it  would  not  send  a  man
away  with  ingratitude  in  his  heart,  and  therefore  asks  for
such  an  one  as  is  mindful  of  the  love  of  the  benefactor.
Concerning  such  the  prophet  says  to  the  Lord,  '  They  shall
utter  the  memory  of  thy  great  goodness.'  *  The  fourth  kind,
forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind,3  rests  in  the  expectation
of  the  promises  alone;  inasmuch  as  it  is  meditation  on
1  St.  Matt.  xxiv.  13.  2  Ps.  cxlv.  7.  3  Phil.  iii.  13.


Book  T7,  Chapter  xiv  169

eternity,  for  the  things  promised  are  eternal,  it  fosters  a  spirit
of  long-suffering,  and  gives  strength  to  perseverance.  It  is
now  easy,  I  suppose,  to  adapt  these  four  to  the  four  in  the
Apostle's  list ;  meditation  on  the  promises  coincides  with  the
4  length  ',  the  remembrance  of  benefits  with  the  '  breadth  ',
the  contemplation  of  God's  Majesty  with  the  *  height ',  the
consideration  of  His  judgements  with  the  '  depth  '.  He  should
have  been  further  sought  who  is  not  yet  found  to  the  satisfy
ing  of  our  souls,  nor  can  be  sought  enough.  But  perhaps
He  is  more  worthily  sought  through  prayer  than  through
dialectics,  and  more  easily  found.  With  this  let  us  end  the
book — but  not  our  search  for  Him.


171


ADDITIONAL NOTES

ADDITION  TO  NOTE  2,  PAGE  104.

This  passage  of  St.  Bernard  respecting  the  two  swords  was
incorporated,  almost  literally,  by  Pope  Boniface  VIII  in  his
famous  Bull,  Unam  Sanctam,  A.D.  1302.  But  the  Pope  ad
vances  considerably  on  the  Saint  when  he  says,  *  One  sword
ought  to  be  inferior  to  the  other  sword,  and  the  temporal
authority  to  be  subject  to  the  spiritual  power'  (Oportet  autem
j Indium  esse  sub  gladio*  et  temporalem  spiritual!  subici  potts  t  at  t).
Bellarmin  (De  Romano  Pontifice,  Bk.  v,  c.  5)  finds  no  refer
ence  in  St.  Luke's  words  to  the  Pope's  having  the  two  swords
by  the  appointment  of  Christ.  He  adds:  'The  Blessed
Bernard  and  Pope  Boniface  mystically  interpreted  the  passage;
they  did  not  mean  to  say  that  the  Pope  had  both  swords  in  the
same  way,  but  in  different  ways,  as  we  shall  afterwards  explain/

ADDITION  TO  NOTE  i,  PAGE  107.

St.  Bernard's  protest  was  sadly  needed.  •  A  child  of  live
years  old  was  made  Archbishop  of  Rheims.  The  see  of  Nar-
bonne  was  purchased  for  another  at  the  age  of  ten.  It  was
almost  universal  to  have  bishops  under  twenty  years  old/  In
the  Eastern  Church  Theophylact.  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  became
Patriarch  of  Constantinople,  being  installed  in  his  office  by
legates  of  Pope  John  XI  (A.D.  933).


OXFORD
PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

BY HORACE HART, M.A.
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
