The Ancient Wisdom (Annie Besant, 1897)
==========================================================
Besant's 1897 Ancient Wisdom — the Theosophical outline of cosmology and human evolution; the society's standard primer. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 


Hhil 112 .CIS 


HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


i 


^ 


G 


THE 


CIENT WISDOM 


in Outline of XCbeosopbical ZcacbinQS 


BY 


5 


ANNIE BESANT 


LONDON 
THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY 

i8q7 . 

Eefrinted 1906. 


r 


V'- 


• - • . f '■ 


/ ■ • 


• / 

t 


Copyrighted 

BY 

THE THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING S 


i 


DeMcateD 

WITH GRATITUDE, REVERENCE, AND LOVB 

TO 

H. P. BLAVATSKY, 

WHO SHOWED ME THE LIGHT. 


CONTENTS. 


PAOB 

Preiaoe • • • vii 

introduction • . i 

I. The Physical Fl&am , . . • • • 40 

IL The Astral Plane 57 

III. K&maloka, .».•••.. 83 

rV. The Mental Plane, . • 107 

V. Devachan, .....••• 137 

VI. The Buddhic and Nirv^ic Planes, . . • > 163 

VII. Reincarnation, . . . • . • •179 

VIII. Reincarnation (continued), 208 

IX. Karma. 242 

X. The Law of Sacrifice 275 

XI. Man's Ascent, 291 

XII. Building a Kosmos, . • • • • • • ^i\ 


4 

i 


I 


PREFACE. 


This book ia intended to place in the hands of 
the general reader an epitome of theosophical teach- 
ings, sufficiently plain to serve the elementary stu- 
dent, and sufficiiently full to lay a sound foundation 
for further knowledge. It is hoped that it may 
serve as an introduction to the profounder works of 
H. P. Blavatsky, and be a convenient stepping- 
stone to their study. 

Those who have learned a little of the Ancient 

Wisdom know the illumination, the peace, the joy, 

the strength, its lessons have brought into their 

lives. That this book may win some to con its 

teachings, and to prove for themselves their value, 

is the prayer with which it is sent forth into the 

world. 

Anni£ Besant. 
August, i8«7. 


THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 


INTRODUCTION. 

THE UNITY UNDERLYING ALL RELIGIONS. 

Right thought is necessary to right conduct, right 
understanding to right living, and the Divine Wis- 
dom — whether called by its ancient Sanskrit name 
of Brahma Vidya, or its modem Greek name of 
Theosophia, Theosophy — comes to the worid as at 
once an adequate philosophy and an all-embracing 
religion and ethic. It was once said of the Christian 
Scriptures by a devotee that they contained shallows 
in which a child could wade and depths in which a 
giant must swim. A similar statement might be 
made of Theosophy, for some of its teachings are so 
simple and so practical that any person of average 
intelligence can understand and follow them, while 
others are so lofty, so profound, that the ablest 
strains his intellect to contain them and sinks ex- 
hausted in the effort. 

In the present volume an attempt will be made to 
place Theosophy before the reader simply and 
clearly, in a way which shall convey its general prin- 


2 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

ciples and truths as forming a coherent conception 
of the universe, and shall give such detail as is 
necessary for the understanding of their relations tc 
each other. An elementary text-book cannot pre 
tend to give the fulness of knowledge that may be 
obtained from abstruser works, but it should leave 
the student with clear fundamental ideas on his sub 
ject, with much indeed to add by future study bu 
with little to unlearn. Into the outline given b] 
such a book the student should be able to paint th< 
details of further research. 

It is admitted on all hands that a survey of th- 
great religions of the world shows that they hold h 
common many religious, ethical, and philosophica 
ideas. But while the fact is universally granted 
the explanation of the fact is a matter of dispute 
Some allege that religions have grown up on th 
soil of human ignorance tilled by imagination, ani 
have been gradually elaborated from crude forms c 
animism and f etichism ; their likenesses are ref erre 
to universal natural phenomena imperfectly observe 
and fancifully explained, solar and star worship be 
ing the universal key for one school, phallic worshi 
the equally universal key for another ; fear, desin 
ignorance, and wonder led the savage to personif 
the powers of nature, and priests played upon hi 
terrors and his hopes, his misty fancies, and his be 
wildered questionings; myths became scriptures an 
symbols facts, and as their basis was universal th 
likeness of the products was inevitable. Thus spea 


INTRODUCTION. 3 

the doctors of ** Comparative Mythology/' and plain 
people are silenced but not convinced under the rain 
of proofs; they cannot deny the likenesses, but they 
dimly feel: Are all man's dearest hopes and loftiest 
imaginings really nothing more than the outcome of 
savage fancies and of groping ignorance? Have the 
great leaders of the race, the martyrs and heroes of 
humanity, lived, wrought, suffered, and died de- 
luded, for the mere personifications of astronomi- 
cal facts and for the draped obscenities of bar- 
barians? 

The second explanation of the common property 
in the religions of the world asserts the existence of 
an original teaching in the custody of a Brotherhood 
of great spiritual Teachers, who — Themselves the 
outcome of past cycles of evolution — acted as the 
instructors and guides of the child-humanity of our 
planet, imparting to its races and nations in turn the 
fundamental truths of religion in the form most 
adapted to the idiosyncrasies of the recipients. Ac- 
cording to this view, the Founders of the great relig- 
ions are members of the one Brotherhood, and were 
aided in Their mission by many other members, 
lower in degree than Themselves, Initiates and dis- 
ciples of various grades, eminent in spiritual insight, 
in philosophic knowledge, or in purity of ethical 
wisdom. These guided the infant nations, gave 
them their polity, enacted their laws, ruled them as 
kings, taught them as philosophers, guided them as 
priests ; all the nations of antiquity looked back to 
such mighty men, demigods and heroes, and they 


A THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

left their traces in literature, in architecture, in 
legislation. 

That such men lived it seems difficult to deny in 
the face of universal tradition, of still existing Scrip- 
tures, and of prehistoric remains for the most part 
now in ruins, to say nothing of other testimony 
which the ignorant would reject. The sacred books 
of the East are the best evidence for the greatness 
of their authors, for who in later days or in modem 
times can even approach the spiritual sublimity of 
their religious thought, the intellectual splendor of 
their philosophy, the breadth and purity of their 
ethic? And when we find that these books contain 
teachings about God, man, and the universe identical 
in substance under much variety of outer appear- 
ance, it does not seem unreasonable to refer them to 
a central primary body of doctrine. To that body 
we give the name of the Divine Wisdom, in its Greek 
form: Theosophy. 

As the origin arid basis of all religions, it cannot 
be the antagonist of any ; it is indeed their purifier, 
revealing the valuable inner meaning of much that 
has become mischievous in its exterr ^1 presentation 
by the perverseness of ignorance and the accretions 
of superstition ; but it recognizes and defends itself 
in each, and seeks in each to unveil its hidden wis- 
dom. No man in becoming a Theosophist need 
cease to be a Christian, a Buddhist, a Hindu; he 
will but acquire a deeper insight into his own faith, 
a firmer hold on its spiritual truths, a broader un- 
derstanding of its sacred teachings. As Theosophy 


INTRODUCTION. 5 

of old gave birth to religions, so in modem times 
does it justify and defend them. It is the rock 
whence all of them were hewn, the hole of the pit 
whence all were digged. It justifies at the bar of 
intellectual criticism the deepest longings and emo- 
tions of the human heart ; it verifies our hopes for 
man ; it gives us back ennobled our faith in God. 

The truth of this statement becomes more and 
more apparent as we study the various world- Scrip- 
tures, and but a few selections from the wealth of 
material available will be sufiicient to establish the 
fact, and to guide the student in his search for 
further verification. The main spiritual verities of 
religion may be summarized thus : 

i. One eternal infinite incognizable real Existence. 

ii. From That the manifested God, unfolding 
from unity to duality, from duality to trinity. 

iii. From the manifested Trinity many spiritual 
Intelligences, guiding the kosmic order. 

iv. Man a reflection of the manifested God and 
therefore a trinity fundamentally, his inner and real 
Self being eternal, one with the Self of the universe. 

V. His evolution by repeated incarnations, into 
which he is drawn by desire, and from which he is 
set free by knowledge and sacrifice, becoming divine 
in potency as he had ever been divine in latency. 

China, with its now fossilized civilization, was 
peopled in old days by the Turanians, the fourth 
subdivision of the great Fourth Race, the race 
which inhabited the lost continent of Atlantis, and 


6 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

Spread its offshoots over the world. The Mon- 
golians, the last subdivision of that same race, later 
reinforced its population, so that in China we have 
traditions from ancient days, preceding the settle- 
ment of the Fifth, or Aryan race in India. In the 
Ching Chang Chingy or Classic of Purity^ we have a 
fragment of an ancient Scripture of singular beauty,, 
breathing out the spirit of restfulness and peace 
so characteristic of the "original teaching." Mr. 
Lcgge says in the introductory note to his transla- 
tion * that the treatise — 

Is attributed to Ko Yiian (or Hsiian). a T^oist of the W£i 
dynasty (a.d. 222-227), who is fabled to have attained to the 
state of an Immortal, and is generally so denominated. He is 
represented as a worker of miracles ; as addicted to intemper- 
ance, and very eccentric in his ways. When shipwrecked on 
one occasion, he emerged from beneath the water with his 
clothes unwet, and walked freely on its surface. Finally he 
ascended to the sky in bright day. All these accounts may 
safely be put down as the figments of a later time. 

Such stories are repeatedly told of Initiates oi 
various degrees, and are by no means necessarily 
" figments/' but we are more interested in Ko Yiian*s 
own account of the book : 

When I obtained the true T^o, I had recited this Chinj 
[book] ten thousand times. It is what the Spirits of Heavei 
practise and had not been communicated to scholars of thi 
lower world. I got it from the Divine Ruler of the Fasten 
Hwa; he received it from the Divine Ruler of the Golde: 
Gate ; he received it from the Royal-mother of the West. 

Now the " Divine Ruler of the Golden Gate" wa 

* The Sacred Books of the East, vol. xl. 


INTRODUCTION. 7 

the title held by the Initiate who ruled the Toltec 
empire in Atlantis, and its use suggests that the 
Classic of Purity was brought thence to China when 
the Turanians separated off from the Toltecs. The 
idea is strengthened by the contents of the brief 
treatise, which deals with Tao — literally " the Way" 
— ^the name by which the One Reality is indicated in 
the ancient Turanian and Mongolian religion. We 
read: 

The Great T^o has no bodily form, but It produced and 
nourishes heaven and earth. The Great Tio has no passions, 
but It causes the sun and moon to revolve as they do. The 
Great T^o has no name, but It effects the growth and main- 
tenance of all things (i. i). 

This is the manifested God as unity, but duality 
supervenes : 

Now the T^o (shows itself in two forms), the Pure and the 
Turbid, and has (the two conditions of) Motion and Rest. 
Heaven is pure and earth is turbid ; heaven moves and the 
earth is at rest. The masculine is pure and the feminine is 
turbid ; the masculine moves and the feminine is still.. The 
radical (Purity) descended, and the (turbid) issue flowed 
abroad, and thus all things were produced (i. 2). . 

This passage is particularly interesting from the 
allusion to the active and receptive sides of Nature, 
the distinction between Spirit, the generator, and 
Matter, the nourisher, so familiar in later writings. 

In the Tdo Teh Ching the teaching as to the Un- 
inanifested and the Manifested comes out very 
plainly: 

The T^o that can be trodden is not the enduring and un- 


8 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

changing TSo. The name that can be named is not the endur- 
ing and unchanging name. Having no name, it is the Origi- 
nator of heaven and earth ; having a name, it is the Mother of 
all things. . . . Under these two aspects it is really the same ; 
but as development takes place it receives the different names. 
Together we call them the Mystery (i. i. 2, 4). 

Students of the Kabalah will be reminded of one 
of the Divine Names, "the Concealed Mystery." 
Again : 

There was something undefined and complete, coming into 
existence before heaven and earth. How still it was and 
formless, standing alone and undergoing no change, reaching 
everywhere and in no danger (of being exhausted) . It may 
be regarded as the Mother of all things. I do not know its 
name, and I give it the designation of the T&o. Making an 
effort to give it a name, I call it the Great. Great, it passes on 
(in constant flow) . Passing on, it becomes remote. Having 
become remote, it returns (xxv. 1-3). 

Very interesting it is to see here the idea of the 
forthgoing and the returning of the One Life, so 
familiar to us in Hindu literature. Familiar also 
seems the verse : 

All things under heaven sprang from It as existent (and 
named) ; that existence sprang from It as non-existent (and 
not named) (xl. 2) . 

That a universe might become, the Unmanifest 
must give forth the One from whom duality and 
trinity proceed : 

The T^o produced One ; One produced Two ; Two produced 
Three ; Three produced all things. All things leave behind 
them the Obscurity (out of which they have come), and go 
forward to embrace the Brightness (into which they have 


INTRODUCTION. 9 

emerged), while they are harmonized by the Breath of Va- 
cancy (xlii. i). 

" Breath of Space" would be a happier translation. 
Since all is produced from It, It exists in all : 

All-pervading is the great T^o. It may be found on the left 
hand and on the right. ... It clothes all things as with a 
garment, and makes no assumption of being their lord;— It 
may be named in the smallest things. All things return (to 
their root and disappear) , and do not know that it is It which 
presides over their doing so ; — It may be named in the great- 
est things (xxxiv. i, 2). 

Chwang-ze (fourth century b.c.) in his presenta- 
tion of the ancient teachings, refers to the spiritual 
Intelligences coming from the Tao : 

It has Its root and ground (of existence) in Itself. Before 
there were heaven and earth, from of old, there It was securely 
existing. From It came the mysterious existence of spirit;^, 
from It the mysterious existence of God (Bk. vi., Pt. i., Sec. 
vi. 7). 

A number of the names of these Intelligences fol- 
low, but such beings are so well known to play a 
great part in the Chinese religion that we need not 
multiply quotations about them. 

Man is regarded as a trinity, Taoism, says Mr. 
Legge, recognizing in him the spirit, the mind, and 
the body. This division comes out clearly in the 
Classic of Purity, in the teaching that man must get 
rid of desire to reach union with the One : 

Now the spirit of man loves purity, but his mind disturbs it. 
The mind of man loves stillness, but his desires draw it away. 
If he could always send his desires away, his mind would of 
itself become still. Let his mind be made clean, and his spirit 
of itself becomes pure. . . . The reason why men are not able 


lO THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

to attain to this is because their minds have not been cleansed, 
and their desires have not been sent away. If one is able to 
send the desires away, when he then looks in at his mind it is 
no longer his ; when he looks out at his body it is no longer 
his ; and when he looks farther off at external things, they are 
things which he has nothing to do with (i. 3, 4). 

Then, after giving the stages of indrawing to 
"the condition of perfect stillness," it is asked: 

In that condition of rest independently of place, how can 
any desire arise? And when no desire any longer arises there 
is the true stillness and rest. That true (stillness) becomes 
(a) constant quality, and responds to external things (without 
error) ; yea, that true and constant quality holds possession of 
the nature. In such constant response and constant stillness 
there is the constant purity and rest. He who has this abso- 
lute purity enters gradually into the (inspiration of the) True 
Tao (i. 5). 

The supplied words " inspiration of" rather cloud 
than elucidate the meaning, for entering into the 
Tao is congruous with the whole idea and with other 
Scriptures. 

On putting away of desire is laid much stress in 
Taoism; a commentator on the Classic of Purity x^- 
marks that understanding the Tao depends on abso- 
lute purity, and 

The acquiring this Absolute Purity depends entirely on the 
Putting away of Desire, which is the urgent practical lesson 
of the Treatise. 

The Tdo Teh Ching says: 

Always without desire we must be found, 
If its deep mystery we would sound ; 
But if desire always within us be, 
Its outer fringe is all that we shall see (i. 3). 


INTRODUCTION, 1 1 

Reincarnation does not seem to be so distinctly 
taught as might have been expected, although pas- 
sages are found which imply that the main idea was 
taken for granted and that the entity was considered 
as ranging through animal as well as human births. 
Thus we have from Chwang-ze the quaint and wise 
story of a dying man, to whom his friend said : 

"Great indeed is the Creator ! What will He now make you 
to become ? Where will He take you to ? Will He make you 
the liver of a rat or the arm of an insect?" Szelai replied, 
••Wherever a parent tells a son to go, east, west, south, or 
north, he simply follows the command. . . . Here now is a 
great founder, casting his metal. If the metal were to leap 
up (in the pot) and say, ' I must be made into a (sword like 
the) Moysh, ' the great founder would be sure to regard it as 
uncanny. So, again, when a form is being fashioned in the 
mould of the womb, if it were to say, *I must become a man, 
I must become a man, * the Creator would be sure to regard it 
as uncanny. When we once understand that heaven and earth 
are a great melting-pot and the Creator a great founder, where 
can we have to go to that shall not be right for us ? We are 
bom as from a quiet sleep and we die to a calm awaking" (Bk. 
vi., Pt. i., Sec. vi.). 

Turning to the Fifth, the Aryan Race, we have 
the same teachings embodied in the oldest and 
greatest Aryan religion — the Brahmanical. The 
eternal Existence is proclaimed in the Chhdndogyo- 
panishad as "Oneonly, with out a second," and it is 
written : 

It willed, I shall multiply for the sake of the universe (vi. ii. 
I. 3)- 

The Supreme Logos, Brahman, is threefold — 
Being, Consciousness, Bliss, and it is said: 


12 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

Prom This arise life, mind, and all the senses, ether, air, fire, 
water, earth the support of all {Mundakopam'shad, ii. 3). 

No grander descriptions of Deity can be found 
an)rwhere than in the Hindu Scriptures, but they 
are becoming so familiar that brief quotation will 
suffice. Let the following serve as specimens of 
their wealth of gems: 

Manifest, near, moving in the secret place, the great abode, 
herein rests all that moves, breathes, and shuts the e3'es. 
Know That as to be worshipped, being and non-being, the 
best, beyond the knowledge of all creatures. Luminous, sub- 
tler than the subtle, in which the worlds and their denizens are 
infixed. That this imperishable Brahman ; That also life and 
voice and mind. ... In the golden highest sheath is spotless, 
partless Brahman ; That the pure Light of lights, known by 
the knowers of the Self. . . . That deathless Brahman is be- 
fore. Brahman behind, Brahman to the right and to the left, 
below, above, pervading ; this Brahman truly is the all. This 
the best {Mundakopam'shad, II. ii. i, 2, 9. 11). 

Beyond the universe. Brahman, the supreme, the great, hid- 
den in all beings according to their bodies, the one Breath of 
the whole universe, the Lord, whom knowing (men) become 
immortal. I know that mighty Spirit, the shining sun beyond 
the darkness. ... I know Him the unfading, the ancient, the 
Soul of all. omnipresent by His nature, whom the Brahman- 
knowers call unborn, whom they call eternal (Shvetdshva- 
taropanishad, iii. 7. 8, 21). 

When there is no darkness, no day nor night, no being nor 
non-being (there is) Shiva even alone ; That the indestructible. 
That is to be worshipped by Savitri, from That came forth the 
ancient wisdom. Not above nor below, nor in the midst, can 
He be comprehended. Nor is there any similitude for Him 
whose name is infinite glory. Not with the sight is established 
His form, none may by the eye behold Him ; they who know 


i\ 


INTRODUCTION. 1 3 

Hiih by the heart and by the mind, dwelling in the heart, be- 
come immortal (zbid.^ iv. 18-20). 

That man in his inner Self is one with the Self of 
the universe — " I am That** — is an idea that so thor- 
oughly pervades all Hindu thought that man is 
often referred to as the " divine town of Brahman/** 
the " town of nine gates, "f God dwelling in the cav- 
ity of his heart. J 

In one manner is to be seen (the Being) which cannot be 
proved, which is eternal, without spot, higher than the ether, 
unborn, the great eternal Soul. . . . This great unborn Soul 
is the same which abides as the intelligent (soul) in all living 
creatures, the same which abides as ether in the heart ; g in 
him it sleeps; it is the Subduerof all, the Kulerof all, the sov- 
ereign Lord of all ; it does not become greater by good works 
nor less by evil work. It is the Ruler of all, the sovereign 
Lord of all beings, the Preserver of all beings, the Bridge, the 
Upholder of the worlds, so that they fall not to ruin (Brihad- 
dranyakopanishad, IV. iv. 20, 22, Trs. by Dr. E. Roer) . 

When God is regarded as the evolver of the uni- 
verse, the three-fold character comes out very clear- 
ly as Shiva, Vishnu, and Brahma, or again as Vishnu 
sleeping under the waters, the Lotus springing from 
Him, and in the Lotus Brahma. Man is likewise 
threefold, and in the MdnMkyopanishad the Self is 
described as conditioned by the physical body, the 
subtle body, and the mental body, and then rising 

* Mundakopanishady II. ii. 7. 
f Shvetdshvataropanishad^ iii. 14. 
% Ibid., ii. 

§The "ether in the heart" is a mystical phrase used to indi- 
cate the One, who is said to dwell therein. 


14 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

out of all into the One "without duality." Fronc 
the Trimurti (Trinity) come many Gods, connecter 
with the administration of the universe, as to whon 
it is said in the BrihaddranyakopanisJiad : 

Adore Him, ye Gods, after whom the year by rolling day 
is completed, the Light of lights, as the immortal Life (IV 
iv. i6). 

It is hardly necessary to even mention the pres 
ence in Brahmanism of the teaching of reincama 
tion, since its whole philosophy of life turns on thi 
pilgrimage of the Soul through many births an« 
deaths, and not a book could be taken up in whic 
this truth is not taken for granted. By desires ma: 
is bound to this wheel of change, and therefore b 
knowledge, devotion, and the destruction of desires 
man must set himself free. When the Soul know 
God it is liberated.* The intellect purified b 
knowledge beholds Him.f Knowledge joined t 
devotion finds the abode of Brahman. J Whoevc 
knows Brahman becomes Brahman. § When desire 
cease the mortal becomes immortal and obtair 
Brahman. || 

Buddhism, as it exists in its northern form, 
quite at one with the more ancient faiths, but i 
the southern form it seems to have let slip the idc 
of the Logic Trinity as of the One Existence froi 
which They come forth. The Logos in His trip 
manifestation is: the First Logos, Amitabha, tt 

* Shvetdsh, i. 8. f Mund, III. i. 8. % Ibid., III. ii. 4. 
§ Ibid, III. ii. 9. I Kathop. vi. 14. 


INTRODUCTION. 1 5 

Boundless Light; the Second, Avalokiteshvara, or 
Padmapani (Chenresi) ; the Third, Mandjusri — " the 
representative of creative wisdom, corresponding to 
Brahma. " * Chinese Buddhism apparently does not 
contain the idea of a primordial Existence, beyond 
the Logos, but Nepaulese Buddhism postulates Adi- 
Buddha, from Whom Amitabha arises. Padmapani 
is said by Eitel to be the representative of compas- 
sionate Providence and to correspond partly with 
Shiva, but as the aspect of the Buddhist Trinity 
that sends forth incarnations He appears rather to 
represent the same idea as Vishnu, to whom He is 
allied by bearing the Lotus (fire and water, or Spirit 
and Matter as the primary constituents of the uni- 
verse) . Reincarnation and Karma are so much the 
fundamentals of Buddhism that it is hardly worth 
while to insist on them save to note the way of lib- 
eration, and to remark that as the Lord Buddha was 
a Hindu preaching to Hindus, Brahmanical doc- 
trines are taken for granted constantly in His teach- 
ing, as matters of course. He was a purifier and a 
reformer, not an iconoclast, and struck at the accre- 
tions due to ignorance, not at fundamental truths 
belonging to the Ancient Wisdom : 

Those beings who walk in the way of the law that has been 
well taught, reach the other shore of the great sea of birth and 
death, that is difficult to cross {Uddnavarga^ xxix. 37). 

Desire binds man, and must be gotten rid of: 

It is hard for one who is held by the fetters of desire to free 

* Eitel's Sanskrit Chinese Dictionary ^ sub voce. 


l6 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

himself of them, says the Blessed One. The steadfast, who 
care not for the happiness of desires, cast them off and do soon 
depart (to Nirvana). . . . Mankind has no lasting desires: 
they are impermanent in them who experience them; free 
yourselves then from what cannot last, and abide not in the 
sojourn of death {ibid, , ii. 6. 8) . 

He who has destroyed desires for (worldly) goods, sinful- 
ness, the bonds of the eye of the flesh, who has torn up desire 
by the very root, he, I declare, is a Br^mana (ibid,, xxxiii. 
68). 

And a Brahmana is a man " having his last body, ** * 
and is defined as one 

Who, knowing his former abodes (existences), perceives 
heaven and hell, the Muni, who has found the way to put an 
end to birth (Ibid., xxxiii. 55). 

In the exoteric Hebrew Scriptures, the idea of a 
Trinity does not come out strongly, though duality 
is apparent, and the God spoken of is obviously the 
Logos, not the One Unmanif est : 

I am the Lord and there is none else. I form the light and 
create darkness ; I make peace and create evil ; I am the Lord 
that doeth all these things {Is., xlvii. 7). 

Philo, however, has the doctrine of the Locos very 
clearly, and it is found in the Fourth Gospel : 

In the beginning was the Word [Logos] and the Word was 
with God and the Word was God. . . . All things were made 
by Him, and without Him was not anything made that was 
made {S.Johni. i, 3). 

In the Kabalah the doctrine of the One, the 
Three, the Seven, and then the many, is plainly 
taught : 

* Uddnavarga, xxxiii. 41. 


f 


IHTRODUCnON. 1 7 

The Ancient of the Ancieats, the Unknown of the Unknown, 
has a form, yet also has not any form. It has a form through 
which the universe is maintained. It also has not any form, 
as It cannot be comprehended. When It first took this form 
[Kether, the Crown, the First Logos] It permitted to proceed 
from It nine brilliant Lights [Wisdom and the Voice, forming 
with Kether the Triad, and then the seven lower Sephiroth] . 
... It is the Ancient of the Ancients, the Mystery of the 
Mysteries, the Unknown of the Unknown. It has a form 
M|bich appertains to It, since It appears (through it) to us, as 
the Ancient Man above all, as the Ancient of the Ancients, 
and as that which there is the Most Unknown among the Un- 
known. But under that form by which It makes Itself known. 
It however still remains the Unknown (Isaac Myer's Qabba- 
lah, from the Zohar^ pp. 274, 275) . 

Myer points out that the " form" is " not *the An- 
cient of ALL the Ancients,' who is the Ain Soph." 
Again : 

Three Lights are in the Holy Upper which Unite as One ; 
and they are the basis of the Thorah, and this opens the door 
to all. . . . Come, see ! the mystery of the word. These are 
three deg^rees and each exists by itself, and yet all are One 
and are knotted in One, nor are they separated one from an- 
other. . . . Three come out from One, One exists in Three, 
it is the force between Two, Two nourish One, One nourishes 
many sides, thus All is One {fbid., 373>375.376). 

Needless to say that the Hebrews held the doc- 
trine of many Grods — "Who is like unto Thee, O 
Lord, among the Gods?"* — and of multitudes of sub- 
ordinate ministrants, the "Sons of God," the "An- 
gels of the Lord," the "Ten Angelic Hosts." 

Of the commencement of the universe the Zohar 

'caches : 

♦ Ex, XV. ii. 


; \ 


\ 


1 8 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

In the beginning was the Will of the King, prior to any ex 
istence which came into being through emanation from thi 
Will. It sketched and engraved the forms of all things tha 
were to be manifested from concealment into view, in th* 
supreme and dazzling light of the Quadrant [the sacred Te 
tractys] (Myer's Qabbalah, pp. 194, 195). 

Nothing can exist in which the Deity is not im 
manent, and with regard to Reincarnation it i 
taught that the Soul is present in the divine Ide 
ere coming to earth; if the Soul remained quit 
pure during its trial it escaped rebirth, but thi 
seems to have been only a theoretical possibility, a 
it is said : 

All souls are subject to revolution (metempsychosis a' lee 
o'gilgoolah). but men do not know the ways of the Holy One 
blessed be It ! they are ignorant of the way they have bee 
judged in all time, and before they came into this world an 
when they have quitted it {z'btd., p. 198). 

Traces of this belief occur both in the Hebrew an 
Christian exoteric Scriptures, as in the belief ths 
Elijah would return, and later that he had retume 
in John the Baptist. 

Turning to glance at Egypt, we find there froi 
hoariest antiquity its famous Trinity, Ra, Osiris-Isi 
as the dual Second Logos, and Horus. The gres 
hymn to Amun-Ra will be remembered 

The Gods bow before Thy Majesty by exalting the Souls < 
That which produceth them . . . and say to Thee : Peace 1 
all emanations from the unconscious Father of the consciot 
Fathers of the Gods. . . . Thou Producer of beings, we adof 
the Souls which emanate from thee. Thou begettest us. 
Thou Unknown, and we gfreet Thee in worshipping each 


"/i 


INTRODUCTION. 1 9 

Soul which descendeth from Thee and liveth in us (quoted in 
Secret Doctrine^ iii. p. 486). 

The "conscious Fathers of the Gods" are the 
LoGOi, the " unconscious Father" is the One Exist- 
ence, unconscious not as being less but as being 
infinitely more than what we call consciousness, 
a limited thing. 

In the fragments of the Book of the Dead we can 
study the conceptions of the reincarnating of the 
human Soul, of its pilgrimage towards and its ulti- 
mate union with the Locos. The famous papyrus 
of "the scribe Ani, triumphant in peace," is full of 
touches that remind the reader of the Scriptures of 
other faiths ; his journey through the under- world, 
his expectation of rercntering his body (the form 
taken by reincarnation among the Egyptians), his 
identification with the Logos: 

Saith Osiris Ani : I am the great One, son o£ the great One ; 
I am Fire, the son of Fire. ... I have knit together my 
bones, 1 have made myself whole and sound ; I have become 
young once more; I am Osiris, the Lord of eternity (xliii. i, 

4). 

In Pierret's recension of the Book of the Dead we 
find the striking passage : 

I am the being of mysterious names who prepares for him- 
self dwellings for millions of years (p. 22). Heart, that com est 
to me from my mother, my heart necessary to my existence on 
earth. . . . Heart, thatcomestto me from my mother, heart 
that is necessary to me for my transformation (pp. 113, 114). 

In Zoroastrianism we find the conception of the 
One Existence, imaged as Boundless Space, whence 
arises the Logos, the creator Auharmazd: 


20 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

Supreme in omniscience and goodness, and unrivalled ii 
splendor ; the region of light is the place of A^armazd ( Th 
Bundahis^ Sacred Books of the East^ v. 3, 4, v. 2.) 

To him in the Yasna, the chief liturgy of the Za 
rathustrians, homage is first paid : 

I announce and I (will) complete (my Yasna [worship]) ti 
Ahura Mazda, the Creator, the radiant and glorious, the great 
est and the best, the most beautiful (?) (to our conceptions) 
the most firm, the wisest, and the one of all whose body i 
most perfect, who attains his ends the most infallibly, becatui 
of His righteous order, to Him who disposes our minds aright 
who sends His joy-creating grace afar ; who made us and ha 
fashioned us, and who has nourished and protected us, who J 
the most bounteous Spirit {Sacred Books of the East, xxzj 
pp. 195. 196). 

The worshipper then pays homage to the Ann 
shaspends and other Gods, but the supreme man 
fested God, the Logos, is not here presented as tr 
une. As with the Hebrews, there was a tendency 1 
the exoteric faith to lose sight of this fundament 
truth. . Fortunately we can trace the primitii 
teaching, though it disappeared in later times fro 
the popular belief. Dr. Haug, in his Essays on t 
Parsis (translated by Dr. West and forming vol. 
of Triibner's Oriental Series), states that Ahui 
mazda — Aiiharmazd or Hormazd — is the Suprec 
Being, and that from him were produced 

Two primeval causes, which, though different, were unil 
and produced the world of material things as well as that 
the spirit (p. 303). 

These were called twins and are everywhere pn 
ent, in Ahuramazda as well as in man. One pi 


INTRODUCTION. 21 

duces reality, the other non-reality, and it is these 
who in later Zoroastrianism became the opposing 
Spirits of good and evil. In the earlier teachings 
they evidently formed the Second Logos, duality 
being his characteristic mark. 

The " good" and " bad" are merely Light and Dark- 
ness, Spirit and Matter, the fundamental " twins" of 
the Universe, the Two from the One. 

Criticising the later idea. Dr. Haug says : 

Such is the original Zoroastriac notion of the two creative 
Spirits, who form only two parts of the Divine Being. But 
in the coarse of time this doctrine of the great founder was 
changed and corrupted, in consequence of misunderstandings 
and false interpretations. Spentdmainyush [the " good spirit**] 
was taken as a name of Ahuramazda Himself, and then of 
course Angr6mainyush [the "evil spirit"], by becoming entirely 
separated from Ahuramazda, was regarded as the constant 
adversary of Ahuramazda ; thus the Dualism of God and Devil 
arose (p. 205). 

Dr. Haug's view seems to be supported by the 
Gdtha Ahunavaitiy given with the other Gat has by 
"the archangels" to 2k)roaster or Zarathustra: 

In the beginning there was a pair of twins, two spirits, each 
of a peculiar activity ; these are the good and the base. . . . 
And these two spirits united created the first (the material 
things) ; one the reality, the other the non-reality. . . . And 
to succor this life (to increase it) Armaiti came with wealth, 
the good and true mind ; she, the everlasting one, created the 
material world. . . . All perfect things are garnered up in the 
splendid residence of the Good Mind, the Wise and the Right- 
eous, who are known as the best beings (Yas. xxx. 3, 4, 7. 10 : 
I>r. Haug's Trans., pp. 149-151). 


22 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

Here the three Logoi are seen, Ahuramazda the 
first, the supreme Life; in and from him the 
"twins," the Second Logos; then Armaiti the Mind, 
the Creator of the Universe, the Third Logos.* 
Later Mithra appears, and in the exoteric faith 
clouds the primitive truth to some extent ; of him it 
is said : 

Whom Ahura Mazda has established to maintain and look 
over all this moving world ; who. never sleeping. wakefuUy 
guards the creation of Mazda {Mihir Vast, , xxvii. 103 ; Sacred 
Books of the Eastt xviii.)* 

He was a subordinate God, the Light of Heaven, 
as Varuna was the Heaven itself, one of the great 
ruling Intelligences. The highest of these ruling 
Intelligences were the six Ameshaspends, headed 
by the Good Thought of Ahuramazda, Vohuman — 

Who have charge of the whole material creation {Sacred 
Books 0/ the East, v. p. 10, note). 

Reincarnation does not seem to be taught in the 
books which, so far, have been translated, and the 
belief is not current among modem Parsis. But we 
do find the idea of the Spirit in man as a spark that 
is to become a flame and to be reunited to the Su- 
preme Fire, and this must imply a development for 
which rebirth is a necessity. Nor will Zoroastrian- 
ism ever be understood until we recover the Chal- 
dcBun Oracles and allied writings, for there is its real 
root. 

♦Armaiti was at first Wisdom and the Goddess of Wisdom. 
Later, as the Creator. She became identified with the earth, 
and was worshipped as the Goddess of Earth. 


^ 


INTRODUCTION. 2$ 

Travelling westward to Greece, we meet with the 
Orphic system, described with such abundant learn- 
ing by Mr. G. R. S. Mead in his work Orpheus, The 
Ineflfable Thrice-unknown Darkness was the name 
given to the One Existence. 

According to the theology of Orpheus, all things originate 
from an immense principle, to which through the imbecility 
and poverty of human conception we give a name, though it is 
perfectly ineffable, and in the reverential language of the 
Egyptians is a thrice unknown darkness, in contemplation of 
which all knowledge is refunded into ignorance (Thomas 
Taylor, quoted in Orpheus ^ p. 93). 

From this the "Primordial Triad," Universal 
Grood, Universal Soul, Universal Mind, again the 
Logic Trinity. Of this Mr. Mead writes: 

The first Triad, which is manifestable to intellect, is but a 
reflection of, or substitute for the Unmanifestable, and its 
hypostases are : {a) the Good, which is super-essential ; {b) 
Soul (the World Soul), which is a self -motive essence; and 
(c) Intellect (or the Mind), which is an impartible, immovable 
essence {ibid,^ p. 94). 

After this, a series of ever- descending Triads, 
showing the characteristics of the first in diminish- 
ing splendor, until man is reached, who 

Has in him potentially the sum and substance of the uni- 
verse. ..." The race of men and gods is one" (Pindar, who 
was a Pythagorean, quoted by Clemens, Strom, v. 709). . . . 
Thus man was called the microcosm or little world, to distin- 
guish him from the universe or great world {z'bzd., p. 271). 

He has the Nous, or real mind, the Logos or ration- 
al part, the Alogos or irrational part, the two latter 
again forming a Triad, and thus presenting the more 


24 THE ANCIENT WISDON. 

elaborate septenary division. The man was also re- 
garded as having three vehicles, the physical and 
subtle bodies and the luciform body or augoeMes, 
that 

Is the ''causal body," or karmic vesture of the soul, in whicd 
its destiny, or rather all the seeds of past causation are stored 
This is the "thread-soul," as it is sometimes called, the "bod3r' 
that passes over from one incarnatibn to another (ibtd.^i^, 284). 

As to reincarnation : 

Together with all the adherents of the Mysteries in even 
land the Orphics believed in reincarnation {ibid,, p. 292). 

To this Mr. Mead brings abundant testimony, anc 
he shows that it was taught by Plato, Empedocles 
P)rthagoras, and others. Only by virtue could mei 
escape from the life-wheel. 

Taylor, in his notes to the Select Works of Plotinus 
quotes from Damascius as to the teachings of Plat 
on the One beyond the One, the unmanifest Exist 
ence: 

Perhaps, indeed. Plato leads us ineffably through the one a 
a medium to the ineffable beyond the one which is now th 
subject of discussion ; and this by an ablation of the one in th 
same manner as he leads to the one by an ablation of othe 
things. . . . That which is beyond the one is to be honored i 
the most perfect silence. . . . The one indeed wills to be b 
itself, but with no other ; but the unknown beyond the one \ 
perfectly ineffable, which we acknowledge we neither know 
nor are ignorant of, but which has about itself super-ignc 
ranee. Hence by proximity to this the one itself is darkened 
for being near to the immense principle, if it be lawful so t 
speak, it remains as it were in the adytum of the truly mysti 
silence. . . . The first is above the one and all things, bein] 
more simple than either of these (pp. 341-343). 


INTRODUCTION. 2$ 

The Pythagorean, Platonic, and Neo - Platonic 
schools have so many points of contact with Hindu 
and Buddhist thought that their issue from one 
fountain is obvious. R. Garbe in his work, Die 
Sdmkhya Philosophie (iii. pp. 85 to 105) presents 
many of these points, and his statement may be 
summarized as follows: 

The most striking is the resemblance — or more 
correctly the identity— of the doctrine of the One 
and Only in the Upanishads and the Bleatic school. 
Xenophanes' teaching of the unity of God and 
the Kosmos and of the changelessness of the 
One, and even more that of Parmenides, who held 
that reality is ascribable only to the One unborn, 
indestructible and omnipresent, while all that is 
manifold and subject to change is but an appear- 
ance, and further that Being and Thinking are the 
same — these doctrines are completely identical with 
the essential contents of the Upanishads and of the 
Vedantic philosophy which springs from them. But 
even earlier still the view of Thales, that all that 
exists has sprung from Water, is curiously like the 
Vaidik doctrine that the Universe arose from the 
waters. Later on Anaximander assumed as the 
basis (<l^/5^) of all things an eternal, infinite, and in- 
definite Substance, from which all definite sub- 
stances proceed and into which they return — an as- 
sumption identical with that which lies at the root 
of the Sankhya, viz,^ the Prakriti from which the 
whole material side of the universe evolved. And 
his famous saying ndvca ^el expresses the character- 


26 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

istic view of the Sankhya that all things are ever 
changing under the ceaseless activity of the three 
gunas. Empedocles again taught theories of trans- 
migration and evolution practically the same as those 
of the Sankhyas, while his theory that nothing can 
come into being which does not already exist is even 
more closely identical with a characteristically San- 
khyan doctrine. 

Both Anaxagoras and Democritus also present 
several points of close agreement, especially the lat- 
ter's view as to the nature and position of the Gods, 
and the same applies, notably in some curious mat- 
ters of detail, to Epicurus. But it is, however, in 
the teachings of Pythagoras that we find the closest 
and most frequent identities of teachings and argu- 
mentation, explained as due to Pythagoras himself 
having visited India and learnt his philosphy there, 
as tradition asserts. In later centuries we find some 
peculiarly Sankhyan and Buddhist ideas playing a 
prominent part in Gnostic thought. The following 
quotation from Lassen, cited by Garbe on p. 97, 
shows this very clearly: 

Buddhism in general distinguishes clearly between Spirit 
and Light, and does not regard the latter as immaterial ; but 
a view of Light is found among them which is closely related 
to that of the Gnostics. According to this, Light is the mani- 
festation of Spirit in matter ; the intelligence thus clothed in 
Light comes into relation with matter, in which the Light can 
be lessened and at last quite obscured, in which case the Intel- 
ligence falls finally into complete unconsciousness. Of the 
highest Intelligence it is maintained that it is neither Light 
nor Not-Light, neither Darkness nor Not-Darkness, since all 


■ ^ 

i 


INTRODUCTION. 2/ 

these expressions denote relations of the Intelligence to the 
Light, which indeed in the beginning was free from these con- 
nections, but later on encloses the Intelligence and mediates 
its connection with matter. It follows from this that the 
Buddhist view ascribes to the highest Intelligence the power 
to produce light from itself, and that in this respect also there 
is an agreement between Buddhism and Gnosticism. 

Garbe here points out that, as regards the features 
alluded to, the agreement between Gnosticism and 
the Saukhya is very much closer than that with 
Buddhism ; for while these views as to the relations 
between Light and Spirit pertain to the later phases 
of Buddhism, and are not at all fundamental to, or 
characteristic of it as such, the Sankhya teaches 
clearly and precisely that Spirit is Light. Later 
still the influence of the Sankhya thought is very 
plainly evident in the Neo-Platonic writers ; while 
the doctrine of the Logos or Word, though not of 
Sankhyan origin, shows even in its details that it 
has been derived from India, where the conception 
of Vach, the Divine Word, plays so prominent a 
part in the Brahmanical system. 

Coming to the Christian religion, contempora- 
neous with the Gnostic and Neo-Platonic systems, 
we shall find no difficulty in tracing most of the 
same fundamental teachings with which we have 
now become so familiar. The threefold Logos ap- 
pears as the Trinity; the First Logos, the fount of 
all life being the Father; the dual-natured Second 
Logos the Son, God-man; the Third, the creative 
Mind, the Holy Ghost, whose brooding over the 
waters of chaos brought forth the worlds. Then 


28 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

come " the seven Spirits of God"* and the hosts of 
archangels and angels. Of the One Existence from 
which all comes and into which all returns, but little 
is hinted, the Nature that by searching cannot be 
found out; but the great doctors of the Church 
Catholic always posit the unfathomable Deity, in- 
comprehensible, infinite, and therefore necessarily 
but One and partless. Man is made in the '* image 
of God,"f and is consequently triple in his nature^ — 
Spirit and Soul and body ; J he is a " habitation of 
God,"§ the "temple of God,"| the "temple of the 
Holy Ghost, "^ — ^phrases that exactly echo the Hindu 
teaching. The doctrine of reincamati n is rather 
taken for granted in the New Testament than dis- 
tinctly taught; '-.hus Jesus, speaking of John the 
Baptist, declares that he is Elias " which was for to 
come,"** referring to Lhr^ words of Malachi, "I will 
send you Elijah the pr phet" ; \\ and again, when 
asked as to Elijah coming before the Messiah, He an- 
swered that " Elias is come already and they knew 
him not. " JJ So again we find the disciples taking re- 
incarnation for granted in asking whether blindness 
from birth was a punishment for a man's sin, and 
Jesus in answer not rejecting the possibility of ante- 
natal sin, but only ex^1 tding it as causing the blind- 
ness in the special instance. §§ The remarkable 
phrase applied to "him that overcometh" in Rev. 

♦ Rev. iv. 5, t ^^*^* ^- 26, 27. % I Thess, v. 23. 

§ Eph. ii. 22. I I Cor, iii. 16. T i Cor. vi. 19. 

♦♦ Matt. xi. 14. ff Mat. iv. 5. %% Matt yvii. 12. 
3<^ John. ix. I- 13. 


INTRODUCTION. 29 

iii. 12, that he shall be "a pillar in the temple of 
my God, and he shall go no more out/' has been 
taken as signifpng escape from rebirth. From the 
writings of some of the Christian Fathers a good 
case may be made out for a current belief in reincar- 
nation ; some argue that only the pre-existence of 
the Soul is taught, but this view does not seem to 
me supported by the evidence. 

The unity of moral teaching is not less striking 
than the unity of the conceptions of the universe 
and of the experiences of those who rose out of the 
prison of the body into the freedom of the higher 
spheres. It is clear that this body of primeval 
teaching was in the hands of definite custodians, 
who had schools in which they taught, disciples who 
studied their doctrines. The identity of these 
schools and of their discipline stands out plainly 
when we study the moral teaching, the demands 
made on the pupils, and the mental and spiritual 
states to which they were raised. A caustic division 
is made in the Ttu) Teh Ching of the types of schol- 
ars: 

Scholars of the highest class, when they hear about the T&o. 
earnestly carry it into practice. Scholars of the middle class, 
when they have heard about it, seem now to keep it and now 
to lose it Scholars of the lowest class, when they have heard 
about it, laugh greatly at it {Sacred Books of the East, zzxix. , 
op, dt, zli. i). 

In the same book we read : 

The sage puts his own person last, and yet it is found in the 
foremost place ; he treats his person as if it were foreign to 
him, and yet that person is preserved. Is it not because he 


30 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

has no personal and private ends that therefore such ends are 
realized ? (vii. 2. ) He is free from self -display , and therefore 
he shines; from self-assertion, and therefore he is distin- 
guished; from self -boasting, and therefore his merit is ac- 
knowledged; from self-complacency, and therefore he ac- 
quires superiority. It is because he is thus free from striving 
that therefore no one in the world is able to strive with him 
(xxii. 2) . There is no guilt greater than to sanction ambition ; 
no calamity greater than to be discontented with one's lot ; no 
fault greater than the wish to be getting (xlvi. 2). To those 
who are good (to me) I am good ; and to those who are not 
good (to me) I am also good ; and thus (all) get to be good. 
To those who are sincere (with me) I am sincere ; and to those 
who are not sincere (with me) I am also sincere; and thus 
(all) get to be sincere (xlix. i) . He who has in himself abun- 
dantly the attributes (of the T^o) is like an infant. Poisonous 
insects will not sting him ; fierce beasts will not seize him ; 
birds of prey will not strike him (Iv. i) . I have three precious 
things which I prize and hold fast. The first is gentleness ; 
the second is economy; the third is shrinking from taking 
preceaence of others. . . . Gentleness is sure to be victorious, 
even in battle, and firmly to maintain its ground. Heaven 
will save its possessor, by his (very) gentleness protecting him 
(Ixvii. 2. 4). 

Among the Hindus there were selected scholars 
deemed worthy of special instruction to whom the 
Guru imparted the secret teachings, while the gen- 
eral rules of right living may be gathered from 
Manu's Ordinances y MiQUpaniskadSy t\ie Mahdbkdrata 
and many other treatises: 

Let him say what is true, let him say what is pleasing, let 
him utter no disagreeable truth, and let him utter no agreea- 
ble falsehood ; that is the eternal law (Manu. iv. 138) . Giv- 
ing no pain to any creature, let him slowly accumulate spirit- 
ual merit (iv. 238). For that twice-born man, by whom not 


INTRODUCTION. 3 1 

the smallest danger even is caused to created beings, there 
will be no danger from any (quarter) after he is freed from 
his body (vi. 40) . Let him patiently bear hard words, let him 
not insult anybody, and let him not become anybody's enemy 
for the sake of this (perishable) body. Against an angry man 
let him not in return show anger, let him bless when he is 
cursed (vi. 47. 48). Freed from passion, fear and anger, 
thinking on Me. taking refuge in Me, purified in the fire of 
wisdom, many have entered into My Being (Bhagavad GUd, 
iv. 10). Supreme joy is for this Yogi whose Manas is peace- 
ful, whose passion-nature is calmed, who is sinless and of the 
nature of Brahman (vi. 27) . He who beareth no ill-will to any 
being, friendly and compassionate, without attachment and 
egoism, balanced in pleasure and pain, and forgiving, ever 
content, harmonious, with the self controlled, resolute, with 
Manas and Buddhi dedicated to Me, he. My devotee, is dear 
to Me (xii. 13. 14) . 

If we turn to the Buddha, we find Him with His 
Arhats, to whom His secret teachings were given ; 
while published we have : 

The wise man through earnestness, virtue, and purity makes 
himself an island which no flood can submerge ( Udd,navarga, 
iv. 5) . The wise man in this world holds fast to faith and 
wisdom, these are his greatest treasures ; he casts aside all 
other riches (x. 9) . He who bears ill-will to those who bear 
ill-will can never become pure; but he who feels no ill-will 
pacifies those who hate ; as hatred brings misery to mankind, 
the sage knows no hatred (xiii. 12). Overcome anger by not 
being angered ; overcome evil by good ; overcome avarice by 
liberality; overcome falsehoods by truth (xx. 18). 

The Zoroastrian is taught to praise Ahuramazda, 
and then : 

What is fairest, what pure, what immortal, what brilliant, 
all that is good. The good spirit we honor, the good kingdom 
we honor, and the good law, and the good wisdom ( Yasna, 


32 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

zxxvii.)* May there come to this dwelling contentment, 
blessing, guilelessness, and wisdom of the pure (Yasna, lis.). 
Purity is the best good. Happiness, happiness is to him: 
namely, to the best pure in purity {Ashem-vohu), All good 
thoughts, words, and works are done with knowledge. AI 
evil thoughts, words, and works are not done with knowledgv 
{Misfia Kutnata), (Selected from the A vest a in Anciem 
Iranian and Zoroastrian Morals^ by Dhunjibhoy Jamset] 
Medhora). 

The Hebrew had his "schools of the prophets* 
and his Kabbalah, and in the exoteric books wv 
find the accepted moral teachings: 

Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord and who stand i 
His holy place? He that hath clean hands and a pure heart 
who haUi not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceit 
fully {^Ps, xxiv. 3, 4). What doth the Lord require of the 
but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly wit 
thy God? {Mtcah, vi. 8). The lip of truth shall be estal 
lished for ever; but a lying tongue is but for a moment (Prat 
xii. 19). Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose th 
bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to In 
the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is 
not to deal thy bread to the hungry and that thou bring tt 
poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the nakc 
that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thyself from thii 
own flesh? {Is, Iviii. 6, 7.) 

The Christian Teacher had His secret instructior 
for His disciples,* and He bade them: 

Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ] 
your pearls before swine {Matt, vii. 6) . 

For public teaching we may refer to the beat 
tudes in the Sermon on the Mount, and to such do4 
trines as: 

* Matt, xiii. 10-17. 


INTRODUCTION. 33 

I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, 
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which de- 
spitefully use you and persecute you. ... Be ye therefore 
perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect 
{Matt, V. 44, 48) . He that findeth his life shall lose it ; and 
he that losetii his life for my sake shall find it (x, 39) . Who- 
soever shall humble himself as this little child, the same is 
greatest in the kingdom of heaven (xviii. 4). The fruit of the 
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, 
faith, meekness, temperance; against such there is no law 
(Gai. V. 22, 23) . Let us love one another ; for love is of God ; 
and everyone that loveth is bom of God and knoweth God (i 
JoMnvr, i). 

The school of Pythagoras and those of the Neo- 
Platonists kept up the tradition for Greece, and we 
know that Pythagoras gained some of his learning 
in India, while Plato studied and was initiated in the 
schools of Egypt. More precise information ha/ 
been published of the Grecian schools than of others; 
the Pythagorean had pledged disciples as well as an 
outer discipline, the inner circle passing through 
three degrees during five years of probation. (For 
details see G. R. S. Mead's Orpheus^ pp. 263 et seq.) 
The outer discipline he describes as follows: 

We must first g^ve ourselves up entirely to God. When a 
man prays he should never ask for any particular benefit, fully 
convinced that that will be given which is right and proper, 
and according to the wisdom of God and not the subject of our 
own selfish desires (Diod. Sic. , ix. 41) . By virtue alone does 
man arrive at blessedness, and this is the exclusive privilege 
of a rational being (Hippodamus, De Felicitate, ii., Orelli, 
OpusCn GrcBcor, Sent, et Moral, , ii. 284) . In himself, of his 
own nature, man is neither good nor happy, but he may be- 
come so by the teaching of the true doctrine (jiad^io^ koi irpovoiaq 

3 


34 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

irorid^eroi)— (Hippo, ibid,). The most sacred duty is filial 
piety. "God showers his blessings on him who honors and 
reveres the author of his days," says Pampelus (De Paren- 
tibus^ Orelli. op, ctt,, ii. 345). Ingratitude towards one's 
parents is the blackest of all crimes, writes Perictione (ibid,^. 
p. 350) , who is supposed to have been the mother of Plato. 
The cleanliness and delicacy of all Pythagorean writings were 
remarkable (CElian. Hist, Var,, xiv. 19). In all that con- 
cerns chastity and marriage their principles are of the utmost 
purity. Everywhere the great teacher recommends chastity 
and temperance; but at the same time he directs that th« 
married should first become parents before living a life of ab- 
solute celibacy, in order that children might be bom undei 
favorable conditions for continuing the holy life and succes- 
sion of the Sacred Science (Jamblichus. Vtt, Pythag,^ an^ 
HierocL, ap. Stob. Serm,, xlv. 14). This is exceedingly in* 
teresting, for it is precisely the same regulation that is lai^ 
down in the Mdnava Dharma Shdstra^ the great Indiai 
Code. . . . Adultery was most sternly condemned (Jamb. 
ibid, ) . Moreover, the most gentle treatment of the wife b; 
the husband was enjoined, for had he not taken her as hi 
companion " before the Gods " ? (See Lascaulx, Zur Geschichi 
der Ehe beiden Griechen, in the Mim, de VAcad, de Baviin 
vii. 107, sq,). 

Marriage was not an animal union, but a spiritual tk 
Therefore, in her turn, the wife should love her husband eve 
more than herself, and in all things be devoted and obedient 
It is further interesting to remark that the finest charactei 
among women with which ancient Greece presents us wet 
formed in the school of Pythagoras, and the same is true of tb 
men. The authors of antiquity are agreed that this disciplis 
had succeeded in producing the highest examples not only < 
the purest chastity and sentiment, but also a simplicity < 
manners, a delicacy, and a taste for serious pursuits whic 
was unparalleled. This is admitted even by Christian writei 
(see Justin, xx. 4). . . . Among the members of the scho< 
the idea of justice directed all their acts, while they observe 


V 

A 


INTRODUCTION. 35 

the strictest tolerance and compassion in their mutual relation- 
ships. For justice is the principle of all virtue, as Polus (ap. 
Stob., Serm,, viii., ed. Schow, p. 232) teaches; 'tis justice 
which maintains peace and balance in the soul; she is the 
mother of good order in all communities, makes concord be- 
tween husband and wife, love between master and servant. 

The word of a Pythagorean was also his bond. And finally 
a man should live so as to be ever ready for death (Hippolytus, 
Philos., vi.). {Ibid,^ pp. 263-267.) 

The treatment of the virtues in the Neo-Platonic 
schools is interesting, and the distinction is clearly 
made between morality and spiritual development, 
or, as Plotinus put it, " The endeavor is not to be 
without sin, but to be a God. "* The lowest stage 
was the becoming without sin by acquiring the 
"political virtues*' which made a man perfect in 
conduct (the physical and ethical being below these), 
the reason controlling and adorning the irrational 
nature. Above these were the cathartic, pertaining 
to reason alone, and which liberated the Soul from 
the bonds of generation; the theoretic, lifting the 
Soul into touch with natures superior to itself; and 
the paradigmatic, giving it a knowledge of true 
being: 

Hence he who energizes according to the practical virtues is 
a worthy man ; but he who energizes according to the cathar- 
tic virtues is a « demoniacal man, or is also a (rood demon.\ 
He who energizes according to the intellectual virtues alone is 
a God, But he who energizes according to the paradigmatic 

* Select Works of Plotinus, trans, by Thomas Taylor, ed. 
1895, p. II. 
f A good spiritual intelligence, as the daimon of Socrates. 


36 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

virtties is the Father of the Gods, (Note on Intellecitial 
Prudence, pp. 325-332.) 

By various practices the disciples were taught to 
escape from the body, and to rise into higher re- 
gions. As grass is drawn from a sheath, the inner 
man was to draw himself from his bodily casing. * 
The " body of light" or " radiant body" of the Hin- 
dus is the " luciform body" of the Neo-Platonists, 
and in this the man rises to find the Self: 

Not grasped by the eye, nor by speech, nor by the other 
senses (//?., Gods) , nor by austerity, nor by religious rites ; by. 
serene wisdom, by the pure essence only, doth one see the 
partless One in meditation. This subtle Self is to be known 
by the mind in which the fivefold life is sleeping. The mind .; 
of all creatures is instinct with [these] lives ; in this, purified, 
manifests the Self (Mundakopanishad^ III. ii. 8, 9). 

Then alone can man enter the region where sepa- \ 
ration is not, where " the spheres have ceased. " In 
G. R. S. Mead's Introduction to Taylor's Plotinus 
he quotes from Plotinus a description of a sphere 
which is evidently the Turiya of the Hindus: 

They likewise see all things, not those with which genera- 
tion, but those with which essence is present. And they per- 
ceive themselves in others. For all things there are diapha- 
nous; and nothing is dark and resisting, but everything is 
apparent to every one internally and throughout. For light 
everywhere meets with light; since everything contains all 
things in itself and again sees all things in another. So that 
all things are everywhere and all is all. Each thing likewise 
is everything. And the splendor there is infinite. For every- 
thing there is great, since even that which is small is great. 

* Kathopanishad, vi. 17. 


INTRODUCTION. 37 

The sun too which is there is all the stars; and again each star 
is the sun and all the stars. In each, however, a different 
property predominates, but at the same time all things are 
visible in each. Motion likewise there is pure ; for the motion 
is not confounded by a mover different from it (p. Ixxiii.) . 

A description which is a failure, because the re- 
gion is one above describing by mortal language, 
but a description that could only have been written 
by one whose eyes had been opened. 

A whole volume might easily be filled with the 
similarities between the religions of the world, but 
the above imperfect statement must suffice as a pref- 
ace to the study of Theosophy, to that which is a 
fresh and fuller presentment to the world of the an- 
cient truths on which it has ever been fed. All these 
similarities point to a single source, and that is the 
Brotherhood of the White Lodge, the Hierarchy of 
Adepts who watch over and guide the evolution of 
humanity, and who have preserved these truths un- 
impaired; from time to time, as necessity arose, re- 
asserting them in the ears of men. From other 
worlds, from earlier humanities, They came to help 
our globe, evolved by a process comparable to that 
now going on with ourselves, and that will be more 
intelligible when we have completed our present 
study than it may now appear; and They have 
afEorded this help, reinforced by the flower of our 
own humanity, from the earliest times until to-day. 
Still They teach eager pupils, showing the path and 
guiding the disciple's steps; still They may be 
reached by all who seek Them, bearing in tiien 


38 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

hands the sacrificial fuel of love, of devotion, of un- 
selfish longing to know in order to serve ; still They 
carry out the ancient discipline, still unveil the an- 
cient Mysteries. The two pillars of Their Lodge 
gateway are Love and Wisdom, and through its 
strait portal can only pass those from whose shoul- 
ders has fallen the burden of desire and selfishness. 
A heavy task lies before us, and beginning on the 
physical plane we shall climb slowly upwards ; but a 
bird's-eye view of the great sweep of evolution and 
of its purpose may help us, ere we begin out detailed 
study in the world that surrounds us. A Logos, ere 
a system has begun to be, has in His mind the whole, 
existing as idea — all forces, all forms, all that in due 
process shall emerge into objective life. He draws 
the circle of manifestation within which He wills to 
energize, and circumscribes Himself to be the life of 
His universe. As we watch we see strata appearing 
of successive densities, till seven vast regions are 
apparent, and in these centres of energy appear 
whirlpools of matter that separate from each other, 
until when the processes of separation and of con- 
densation are over — so far as we are here concerned 
— we see a central sun, the physical symbol of the 
Logos, and seven great planetary chains, each chain 
consisting of seven globes. Narrowing down our 
view to the chain of which our globe is one, we see 
life-waves sweep round it, forming the kingdoms of 
nature, the three elemental, the mineral, vegetable, 
animal, human. Narrowing down our view still 
further to our own globe and its surroundings, we 


i 


INTRODUCTION. 39 

watch human evolution, and see man developing 
self -consciousness by a series of many life-periods ; 
then centring on a single man we trace his growth 
and see that each life-period has a threefold division, 
that each is linked to all life-periods behind it reap- 
ing their results, and to all life-periods before it 
sowing their harvests, by a law that cannot be bro- 
ken ; that thus man may climb upwards with each 
life-period adding to his experience, each life-period 
lifting him higher in purity, in devotion, in intellect, 
in power of usefulness, until at last he stands where 
They stand who are now the Teachers, fit to pay to 
his younger brothers the debt he owes to Them. 


CHAPTER I. 

THE PHYSICAL PLANE. 

We have just seen that the source from which a 
universe proceeds is a manifested Divine Being, to 
whom in the modern form of the Ancient Wisdom 
the name Logos, or Word, has been given. The 
name is drawn from Greek philosophy, but perfectly 
expresses the ancient idea, the Word which emerges 
from the Silence, the Voice, the Sound, by which 
the worlds come into being. We must now trace the 
evolution of spirit-matter, in order that we may un- 
derstand something of the nature of the materials 
with which we have to deal on the physical plane, 
or physical world. For it is in the potentialities 
wrapped up, involved, in the spirit-matter of the 
physical world that lies the possibility of evolution. 
The whole process is an unfolding, self -moved from 
within and aided by intelligent beings without, who 
can retard or quicken evolution, but cannot trans- ^ 
cend the capacities inherent in the materials. Some ■ 
idea of these earliest stages of the world's "becom- : 
ing" is therefore necessary, although any attempt to 
go into minute details would carry us far beyond the 
limits of such an elementary treatise as the present. 
A very cursory sketch must suffice. 


THE world's "becoming." 4 1 

Coming forth from the depths of the One Exist- 
ence, from the One beyond all thought and all 
speech, a Locos, by imposing on Himself a limit, 
circumscribing voluntarily the range of His own 
Being, becomes the manifested God, and tracing the 
limiting sphere of His activity thus outlines the area 
of His universe. Within that sphere the universe is 
bom, is evolved, and dies; it lives, it moves, it has 
its being in Him ; its matter is His emanation ; its 
forces and energies are currents of His life ; He is 
immanent in every atom, all-pervading, all-sustain- 
ing, all-evolving; He is its source and its end, its 
cause and its object, its centre and circumference; 
it is built on Him as its sure foundation, it breathes 
in Him as its encircling space ; He is in everything 
and everything in Him. Thus have the Sages of the 
Ancient Wisdom taught us of the beginning of the 
manifested worlds. 

Prom the same source we learn of the Self -un- 
folding of the Logos into a threefold form ; the First 
Logos, the Root of all Being; from Him the Sec- 
ond, manifesting the two aspects of Life and Form, 
the primal duality, making the two poles of nature 
between which the web of the universe is to be 
woven — Life-Form, Spirit-Matter, Positive-Nega- 
tive, Active-Receptive, Father- Mother of the worlds. 
Then the Third Logos, the Universal Mind, that in 
which all archetypically exists, the source of beings, 
the fount of fashioning energies, the treasure-house 
in which are stored up all the archetypal forms 
which are to be brought forth and elaborated in 


42 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

lower kinds of matter during the evolution of the 
universe. These are the fruits of past universes, 
brought over as seeds for the present. 

The phenomenal spirit and matter of any universe 
are finite in their extent and transitory in their du- 
ration, but the roots of spirit and matter are eter- 
nal. The root of matter * has been said by a pro- 
found writer to be visible to the Logos as a veil 
thrown over the One Existence, the supreme Brah- 
manf — to use the ancient name. 

It is this " veil*' which the Logos assumes for the 
purpose of manifestation, using it for the self-im- 
posed limit which makes activity possible. Prom 
this He elaborates the matter of His universe, being 
Himself its informing, guiding, and controlling life. J 

Of what occurs on the two higher planes of tht 
universe, the seventh and the sixth, we can form bul 
the haziest conception. The energy of the Logos ai 
whirling motion of inconceivable rapidity "digi 
holes in space" in this root of matter, and this vor 
tex of life encased in a film of the root of matter i 
the primary atom; these and their aggregations 
spread throughout the universe, form all the subdl 
visions of spirit-matter of the highest or sevent' 
plane. The sixth plane is formed by some of tb 

* Mftlaprakriti . t Parabrahman. 

I Hence He is called "The Lord of M^y^/' in some Eastei 
Scriptures, M^y&, or illusion, being the principle of forn 
form is regarded as illusory, from its transitory nature ai 
perpetual transformations, the life which expresses itself und 
the veil of form being the reality. 


MAKING OF THE UNIVERSE. 43 

countless myriads of these primary atoms setting up 
a vortex in the coarsest aggregations of their own 
plane, and this primary atom enwalled with spiral 
strands of the coarsest combinations of the seventh 
plane becomes the finest unit of spirit-matter, or 
atom, of the sixth plane. These sixth-plane-atoms 
and their endless combinations form the subdivi- 
sions of the spirit-matter of the sixth plane. The 
sixth-plane-atom, in its turn, sets up a vortex in the 
coarsest aggregations of its own plane, and, with 
these coarsest aggregations as a limiting wall, be- 
comes the finest unit of spirit-matter, or atom, of the 
fifth plane. Again, these fifth-plane-atoms and 
their combinations form the subdivisions of the 
spirit-matter of the fifth plane. The process is re- 
peated to form successively the spirit-matter of the 
fourth, the third, the second, and the first planes. 
These are the seven great regions of the universe, 
so far as their material constituents are concerned. 
A clearer idea of them will be gained by analogy 
when we come to master the modifications of the 
spirit-matter of our own physical world.* 

The word " spirit-matter** is used designedly. It 

*The student may find the conception clearer if he think 
of the fifth-plane-atoms as Atm^ ; those of the fourth plane as 
Atm^ enveloped in Buddhi-matter ; those of the third plane 
as ktmk enveloped in Buddhi- and Manas-matter ; those of 
the second as Atm^ enveloped in Buddhi-, Manas- and K^ma- 
matter ; those of the lowest as Atm^ enveloped in Buddhi-, 
Manas-, K^ma- and Sthtila-matter. Only the outermost is 
active in each case, but the inner are there, though latent, 
ready to come into activity on the upward arc of evolution. 


44 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

implies the fact that there is no such thing as ** d; 
matter; a^^matte^ is Jiving, the tiniest particl^ 
lives. Science speaks truly in affirmmgl " No t 
" without matter, no matter without force. " They 
wedded together in an indissoluble mart: 
throughout the ages of the life of a universe, 
none can wrench them apart. Matter is form, 
there is no form which does not express a ' 
spirit is life, and there is no life that is not lim 
by a form. Even the Logos, the supreme Lord, 
during manifestation the universe as His form, 
- so down to the atom. 

This involution of the life of the Logos as th« 
souling force in every particle, and its successive 
wrapping in the spirit-matter of every plane, so i 
the materials of each plane have within them i 
hidden, or latent condition, all the form- and £q 
possibilities of all the planes above them as w«i 
those of their own — these two facts make evolv 
certain and give to the very lowest particle the: 
den potentialities which will render it fit*— as i 
become active powers — to enter into the forms o| 
highest beings. In fact, evolution may be sun:^ 
ij up in a phrase: it is latent potentialities beccal 
Ji active powers. ' '" ' "^ 

The second great wave of evolution, the evolti 
of form, and the third great wave, the evolil 
of self-consciousness, will be dealt with later 
These three currents of evolution are distinguidi 
on our earth in connection with humanity : the Q 
ing of the materials, the building of the house, . 


THIffiE CONDITIONS OF MATTER* 45 

the growing of the tenant of the house, or, as said 
above, the evolution of spirit-matter, the evolution 
of form, the evolution of self-consciousness. If the 
reader can grasp and retain this idea, he will find it 
a helpful clue to guide him through the labyrinth of 
facts. 

We can now turn to the detailed examination of 
the physical plane, that on which our world exists 
and to which our bodies belong. 

Examining the materials belonging to this plane, 
we are struck by their immense variety, the innu- 
merable differences of constitution in the objects* 
aroimd us, minerals, vegetables, animals, all differ- 
ing in their constituents: matter hard and soft, 
transparent and opaque, brittle and ductile, bitter 
and sweet, pleasant and nauseous, colored and col- 
orless. Out of this confusion three subdivisions of 
matter emerge as a fundamental classification : mat- 
ter is solid, liquid, and gaseous. Further examina- 
tion shows that these solids, liquids, and gases are 
made up by combinations of much simpler bodies, 
called by chemists "elements,** and that these ele- 
ments may exist in a solid, liquid, or gaseous condi- 
tion without changing their respective natures. 
Thus the chemical element oxygen is a constituent 
of wood, and in combination with other elements 
forms the solid wood fibres ; it exists in the sap with 
another element, yielding a liquid combination as 
water ; and it exists also in it by itself as gas. Un- 
der these three conditions it is oxygen. Further, 
pure oxygen can be reduced from a gas to a liquid, 


4r. 


•4. 


and froir. n 'I. .-- -iit of these 

all tJK' ti!l;-. 

nhtaiti ;is i' M -uu reached a 

tcroiiilK ;. -v-.t'iid ^^^rcLit life- 

in.^- furl'iur, . . ;)uls>c to the evolu- 

miniuci* scar-^ - '^I'ijanizfncr force* 

coiulilions a. .. •> - entities, entitled 

and ^^as; ;•. i.. . -ing up of forms out 

may ])L' ivdi, •■■ • The life of the 

liquid a:i.: :. • *s central, control 

i;asec.a> • . ' *^ juilding of forms 

which (.«'.. ... . > c >e conveniently 

disinic,;: ..; ■ ^ -.* s.iy that all forms 

the {.;:. V l.ooos, and that in 
plane :/. ... ..uown outwards as 

shown i. ^. 'U the third and 

bet.:.' ....Lcr combinations 

cal ;:!•... '. assuming shapes 

the "v , .luiially to increase 

wlii-.''i ; • .. - 1 vn*i;anism. This 

the ... kI second planes, 

Co?::; .* . ciiicntal kingdoms, 

pc»> • . i:cvl therein being 

tht'' v>.\.cc/* and this es- 

is.- ...* '> ^i:4gi*eg-ation, the 

»vwu»u. aud therefore 
^.w Aiina-Buddhi as 


ih.. 


s> 

ti. 

C'i. 


.^* . *v... »».!. ihe came covers 
"u .. ♦ivvt :s deal: with ii: 


MEANING OF PLANE. 4/ 

hydrogen, nitrogen, chlorine, etc., and each newly 
discovered combination now receives its name; the 
second subdivision consists of combinations in the 
liquid condition, whether regarded as elements such 
as bromine, or as combinations such as water or al- 
cohol ; the first subdivision is composed of all solids, 
again whether regarded as elements, such as iodine, 
gold, lead, etc., or as compounds, such as wood, 
stone, chalk, and so on. 

The physical plane may serve the student as a 
model from which by analogy he may gain an idea 
of the subdivisions of the spirit-matter of other 
planes. When a Theosophist speaks of a plane, he 
means a region throughout which spirit-matter ex- 
ists, all whose combinations are derived from a par- 
ticular set of atoms ; these atoms, in turn, are units 
possessing similar organizations, whose life is the 
life of the Logos veiled in fewer or more coverings 
according to the plane, and whose form consists of 
the solid, or lowest subdivision of matter, of the 
plane immediately ab" ve. A plane is thus a division 
in nature, as well as a metaphysical idea. 

Thus far we have been studying the results in our 
own physical world of the evolution of spirit-matter 
in our division of the first or lowest plane of our 
system. For countless ages the fashioning of 
materials has been going on, the current of the 
evolution of spirit-matter, and in the materials 
of our globe we see the outcome at the present 
time. But when we begin to study the inhabitants 
of the physical plane, we come to the evolution 


48 THE ANCIENT WISDOH. 

of form, the building of organisms out of these 
materials. 

When the evolution of materials had reached a 
sufl&ciently advanced state, the second great life- 
wave from the Logos gave the impulse to the evolu- 
tion of form, and He became the organizing force* 
of His universe, countless hosts of entities, entitled 
Builders, f taking part in the building up of forms out 
of combinations of spirit-matter. The life of the 
Logos abiding in each form is its central, control 
ling, and directing energy. This building of forms 
on the higher planes cannot here be conveniently 
studied in detail ; it may suffice to say that all forms 
exist as Ideas in the mind of the Logos, and that in 
this second life-wave these were thrown outwards as 
models to guide the Builders. On the third and 
second planes the early spirit-matter combinations 
are designed to give it facility in assuming shapes 
organized to act as units, and gradually to increase 
its stability when shaped into an organism. This 
process went on upon the third and second planes, 
in what are termed the three elemental kingdoms, 
the combinations of matter formed therein being 
called generally "elemental essence," and this es- 
sence being moulded into forms by aggregation, the 

*As Atm&-Buddhi, indivisible in action, and therefore 
spoken of as the Monad. K\\ forms have Atm^-Buddhi as 
controlling life. 

f Some are lofty spiritual Intelligences, but the name coven 
even the building Nature-Spirits. The subject is dealt with is 
Chapter XIL 


EVOLUTION OF FORMS. 49 

forms enduring for a time and then disintegrating. 
The outpoured life, or Monad, evolved through 
these kingdoms and reached in due course the physi- 
cal plane, where it began to draw together the ethers 
and hold them in filmy shapes, in which life-currents 
played and into which the denser materials were 
biiilded, forming the first minerals. In these are 
beautifully shown^ — as may be seen by reference to 
any book on crystallurgy — the numerical and geo- 
metrical lines on which forms are constructed, and 
from them may be gathered plentiful evidence that 
life is working in all minerals, although much 
"cribbed, cabined, and confined." The fatigue to 
which metals are subject is another sign that they 
are living things, but it is here enough to say that 
the occult doctrine so regards them, knowing the 
already-mentioned processes by which life has been 
involved in them. Great stability of form having 
been gained in many of the minerals, the evolving 
Monad elaborated greater plasticity of form in the 
vegetable kingdom, combining this with stability of 
organization. These characteristics found a yet 
more balanced expression in the animal world, and 
reached their culmination of equilibrium in man, 
whose physical body is made up of constituents of 
most unstable equilibrium, thus giving great adap- 
tability, and yet which is held together by a combin- 
ing central force which resists general disintegra- 
tion even under the most varied conditions. 

Man's physical body has two main divisions: the 
dense body^ made of constituents from the three 
4 


50 TIIE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

tower levels of the physical plane, solids, liquidSi 
and gases; and the cthcrk double^ violet-gray or 
blue-gray in color, interjicnetrating the dense body 
and composed of materials drawn from the four 
higher levels. The general function of the physical 
body is to receive contacts from the physical world, 
and send the report of them inwards, to serve as 
materials from which the conscious entity inhabit- 
ing the body is to elaborate knowledge. Its etheric 
portion has also the duty of acting as a medium 
through which the life-currents poured out from the 
sun can be adapted to the uses of the denser particles. 
The sun is the great reservoir of the electrical, mag- 
netic, and vital forces for our system, and it pours 
out abundantly these streams of life-giving energy. 
They are taken in by the etheric doubles of all 
minerals, vegetables, animals, and men, and are bj 
them transmuted into the various life-energiej 
needed by each entity. -^ The etheric doubles draix 
in, specialize, and distribute them over their physica 
counterparts. It has been observed that in vigorous 
health much more of the life-energies are trans 
muted than the physical body requires for its owi 
support, and that the surplus is rayed out -and i 
taken up and utilized by the weaker. What is tech 
nically called the health aura is the part of tb 
etheric double that extends a few inches from th 

* When thus appropriated the life is called PrUna, and it b< 
comes the life-breath of every creature. Pr^na is but a nam 
for the universal life while it is taken in by an entity and j 
supporting its separated life. 


MAKING OF PHYSICAL BODY. 5 1 

whole surface of the body and shows radiating lines, 
like the radii of a sphere, going outwards in all di- 
rections. These lines droop when vitality is dimin- 
ished below the point of health, and resume their 
radiating character with renewed vigor. It is this 
vital energy, specialized by the etheric double, 
which is poured out by the mesmerizer for the res- 
toration of the weak and for the cure of disease, al- 
though he often mingles with it currents of a more 
rarefied kind. Hence the depletion of vital energy 
shown by the exhaustion of the mesmerizer who 
prolongs his work to excess. 

Man's body is fine or coarse in its texture accord- 
ing to the materials drawn from the physical plane 
for its composition. Each subdivision of matter 
yields finer or coarser materials ; compare the bodies 
of a butcher and of a refined student ; both have solids 
in them, but solids of such different qualities. Fur- 
ther, we know that a coarse body can be refined, a 
refined body coarsened. The body is constantly 
changing ; each particle is a life, and the lives come 
and go. They are drawn to a body consonant with 
themselves, they are repelled from one discordant 
with themselves. All things live in rhythmical vibra- 
tions, all seek the harmonious and are repelled by 
dissonance. A pure body repels coarse particles be- 
cause they vibrate at rates discordant with its own ; a 
coarse body attracts them because their vibrations 
accord with its own. Hence if the body changes its 
rates of vibration, it gradually drives out of it the con- 
stituents that cannot fall into the new rhythm, and 


52 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

fills Up their places by drawing in from external na- 
ture fresh constituents that are harmonious. Nature 
provides materials vibrating in all possible ways, 
and each body exercises its own selective action. 

In the earlier building of human bodies this selec- 
tive action was due to the Monad of form, but now 
that man is a self-conscious entity he presides over 
his own building. By his thoughts he strikes the 
keynote of his music, and sets up the rhythms that 
are the most powerful factors in the continual 
changes in his physical and other bodies. As his 
knowledge increases he learns how to build up his 
physical body with pure food, and so facilitates the 
tuning of it. He learns to live by the axiom of 
purification : " Pure food, a pure mind, and constant 
memory of Grod. " As the highest creature living on 
the physical plane, he is the vicegerent of the Locos . 
thereon, responsible, so far as his powers extend, for ? 
its order, peace, and good government; and this duty 
he cannot discharge without these three requi- : 
sites. * 

The physical body, thus composed of elements '? 
drawn from all the subdivisions of the physical J 
plane, is fitted to receive and to answer impressions 
from it of every kind. Its first contacts will be of 
the simplest and crudest sorts, and as the life within 
it thrills out in answer to the stimulus from with- j 
out, throwing its molecules into responsive vibra- ] 
tioDS, there is developed all over the body the sense 
of touch, the recognition of something coming into '| 
contact with it. As specialized sense-organs are de- 


SENSE ORGANS DEVELOP. 53 

veloped to receive special kinds of vibrations, the 
value of the body increases as a future vehicle for a 
conscious entity on the physical plane. The more 
impressions it can answer to, the more useful does 
it become ; for only those to which it can answer 
can reach the consciousness. Even now there are 
myriads of vibrations pulsing around us in physical 
nature from the knowledge of which we are shut out 
because of the inability of our physical vehicle to 
receive and vibrate in accord with them. Unimag- 
ined beauties, exquisite sounds, delicate subtleties, 
touch the walls of our prison house and pass on un- 
heeded. Not yet is developed the perfect body that 
shall thrill to every pulse in nature as the aeolian 
harp to the zephyr. 

The vibrations that the body is able to receive it 
transmits to physical centres, belonging to its highly 
complicated nervous system. The etheric vibrations 
which accompany all the vibrations of the denser 
physical constituents are similarly received by the 
etheric double, and transmitted to its corresponding 
centres. Most of the vibrations in the dense matter 
are changed into chemical, heat, and other forms of 
physical energy ; the etheric give rise to magnetic 
and electric action, and also pass on the vibrations 
to the astral body, whence, as we shall see later, 
they reach the mind. Thus information about the 
external world reaches the conscious entity en- 
throned in the body, the Lord of the body, as he 
is sometimes called. As the channels of informa- 
tion develop and are exercised, the conscious entity 


54 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

grows by the materials supplied to his thought by 
them, but so little is man yet developed that even 
the etheric double is not yet sufficiently harmonized 
to regularly convey to the man impressions received 
by it independently of its denser comrade, or to im- 
press them on his brain. Occasionally it succeeds 
in doing so, and then we have the lowest form of 
clairvoyance, the seeing of the etheric doubles of 
physical objects, and of things that have etheric 
bodies as their lowest vesture. 

Man dwells, as we shall see, in various vehicles, 
physical, astral, and mental, and it is important, to 
know and remember that as we are evolving upwards, 
the lowest of the vehicles, the dense physical, is that 
which consciousness first controls and rationalizes. 
The physical brain is the instrument of conscious- ; 
ness in waking life on the physical plane, and con- 
sciousness works in it — in the undeveloped man — ■ 
more effectively than in any other vehicle. Its po-_ } 
tentialities are less than those of the subtler vehicles,^ S 
but its actualities are greater, and the man knows J 
himself as "I" in the physical body ere he finds 
himself elsewhere. Even if he be more highly de- 
veloped than the average man, he can only show as 
much of himself down here as the physical organism 
permits, for consciousness can manifest on the physi- 
cal plane only so much as the physical vehicle can 
carry. 

The dense and etheric bodies are not normally 
separated during earth life; they normally function 
together, as the lower and higher strings of a single 


DREAM' CONSCIOUSNESS. 5 5 

instrument when a chord is struck, but they also 
carry on separate though co-ordinated activities. 
Under conditions of weak health or nervous excite- 
ment the etheric double may in great part be ab- 
normally extruded from its dense counterpart ; the 
latter then becomes very dully conscious, or en- 
tranced, according to the less or greater amount of 
the etheric matter extruded. Anaesthetics drive out 
the greater part of the etheric double, so that con- 
sciousness cannot affect or be affected by the dense 
body, its bridge of communication being broken. 
In the abnormally organized persons called medi- 
ums, dislocation of the etheric and dense bodies 
easily occurs, and the etheric double, when ex^ 
truded, largely supplies the physical basis for " ma- 
terializations." 

In sleep, when the consciousness leaves the phys- 
ical vehicle which it uses during waking life, the 
dense and etheric bodies remain together, but in the 
physical dream-life they function to soihe extent in- 
dependently. Impressions experienced during wak- 
ing life are reproduced by the automatic action of 
the body, and both the physical and etheric brains 
are filled with disjointed fragmentary pictures, the 
vibrations as it were, jostling each other, and caus- 
ing the most grotesque combinations. Vibrations 
from outside also affect both, and combinations often 
set up during waking life are easily called into ac- 
tivity by currents from the astral world of like na- 
ture with themselves. The purity or impurity of 
waking thoughts will largely govern the pictures 


56 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

arising in dreams, whether spontaneously set up or 
induced from without. 

At what is called death, the etheric double is 
drawn away from its dense counterpart by the es- 
caping consciousness ; the magnetic tie existing be- 
tween them during earth life is snapped asunder, 
and for some hours the consciousness remains en- 
veloped in this etheric garb. In this it sometimes 
appears to those with whom it is closely bound up, 
as a cloudy figure, very dully conscious and speech- 
less — the wraith. It may also be seen, after the 
conscious entity has deserted it, floating over the 
grave where its dense counterpart is buried, slowly 
disintegrating as time goes on. 

When the time comes for rebirth, the etheric 
double is built in advance of the dense body, the 
latter exactly following it in its ante-natal develop- 
ment. These bodies may be said to trace the limi- 
tations within which the conscious entity will have 
to live and work during his earth life, a subject that 
will be more fully explained in Chapter IX., on 
Karma. 


■ 


k 


CHAPTER II. 

THE ASTRAL PLANE. 

The astral plane is the region of the universe next 
to the physical, if the word "next" may be permitted 
in such a connection. Life there is more active 
than on the physical plane, and form is more plas- 
tic. The spirit-matter of that plane is more highly 
vitalized and finer than any grade of spirit-matter in 
the physical world. For, as we have seen, the ulti- 
mate phjrsical atom, the constituent of the rarest 
physical ether, has for its sphere-wall innumerable 
aggregations of the coarsest astral matter. The 
word ** next" is, however, inappropriate, as suggest- 
ing the idea that the planes of the universe are ar- 
ranged as concentric circles, one ending where the 
next begins. Rather are they concentric interpene- 
trating spheres, not separated from each other by 
distance but by difference of constitution. As air 
permeates water, as ether permeates the densest 
solid, so does astral matter permeate all physical. 
The astral world is above us, below us, on every 
side of us, through us ; we live and move in it, but 
it is intangible, invisible, inaudible, imperceptible, 
because the prison of the physical body shuts us 


58 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

away from it, the physical particles being too gross 
to be set in vibration by astral matter. 

In this chapter we shall study the plane in its 
general aspects, leaving on one side for separate 
consideration those special conditions of life on the 
astral plane surrounding the human entities who are 
passing through it on their way from earth to 
heaven.* 

The spirit-matter of the astral plane exists in 
seven subdivisions, as we have seen in the spirit- ' 
matter of the physical. There, as here, there are 
numberless combinations, forming the astral solids, 
liquids, gases, and ethers. But most material forms 
there have a brightness, a translucency, as compared 
to forms here, which have caused the epithet astral, 
or starry, to be applied to them — an epithet which 
is, on the whole, misleading, but is too firmly estab- 
lished by use to be changed. As there are no spe- 
cific names for the subdivisions of astral spirit-mat- ' 
ter, we may use the terrestrial designations. The > 
main idea to be grasped is that astral objects are ^ 
combinations of astral matter, as physical objects are | 
combinations of physical matter, and that the astral ^ 
world scenery much resembles that of earth in con- ^ 
sequence of its being largely made up of the astral ^ 
duplicates of physical objects. One peculiarity, » 
however, arrests and confuses the untrained ob- i 
server: partly because of the translucency of astral > 

*Devachan, the happy or bright state, is the Theosophical 
name for heaven. K&maloka, the place of desire, is the name 
given to the conditions of intermediate life on the astral plane. 


ASTRAL VISION. 59 

objects, and partly because of the nature of astral 
vision — consciousness being less hampered by the 
finer astral matter than when encased in the terres- 
trial — everything is transparent, its back is as visible 
as its front, its inside as its outside. Some experi- 
ence is needed, therefore, ere objects are correctly 
seen, and a person who has developed astral vision, 
but has not yet had much experience in its use, is 
apt to receive the most topsy-turvy impressions 
and to fall into the most astounding blunders. 

Another striking and at first bewildering charac- 
teristic of the astral world is the swiftness with 
which forms — especially when unconnected with 
any terrestrial matrix — change their outlines. 

An astral entity will change his whole appearance 
with the most startling rapidity, for astral matter 
takes form under every impulse of thought, the life 
swiftly remoulding the form to give itself new ex- 
pression. As the great life-wave of the evolution 
of form passed downwards through the astral plane, 
and constituted on that plane the third elemental 
kingdom, the Monad drew round itself combinations 
of astral matter, giving to these combinations — en- 
titled elemental essence — a peculiar vitality and the 
characteristic of responding to, and instantly taking 
shape under, the impulse of thought vibrations. 
This elemental essence exists in hundreds of varie- 
ties on every subdivision of the astral plane, as 
though the air became visible here — as indeed it 
may be seen in quivering waves under great heat — 
and were in constant undulatory motion with chang- 


60 THE ANCIENT WISDOlf. 

ing colors like mother-of-pearl. This vast atmos 
phere of elemental essence is ever answering to vi 
brations caused by thoughts, feelings, and desires 
and is thrown into commotion by a rush of any o 
these like bubbles in boiling water.* The duratioi 
of the form depends on the strength of the impula 
to which it owes its birth; the clearness of its out 
line depends on the precision of the thinking, anc 
the color depends on the quality — intellectual, devo 
tional, passional — of the thought. 

The vague loose thoughts which are so largely 
produced by undeveloped minds gather round them 
selves loose clouds of elemental essence when the] 
arrive in the astral world, and drift about, attractec 
hither and thither to other clouds of similar nature 
clinging round the astral bodies of persons whosi 
magnetism attracts them — either good or evil — anc 
after a while disintegrating, to again form part o; 
the general atmosphere of elemental essence. Whili 
they maintain a separate existence they are livin{ 
entities, with bodies of elemental essence anc 
thoughts as the ensouling lives, and they are thei 
called artificial elementals, or thought-forms. 

Clear, precise thoughts have each their own defi* 
nite shapes, with sharp clean outlines, and show an 
endless variety of designs. They are shaped by vi- 
brations set up by thought, just as on the physical 
plane we find figures which are shaped by vibrations 
set up by sound. "Voice-figures" offer a very fail 
analogy for "thought-figures," for nature, with all 

*C. W. Leadbeater, Astral Plane, p. 52. 


ARTIFICIAL ELEIKENTALS. 6 1 

her infinite variety, is very conservative of prin. 
ciples, and reproduces the same methods of Avorking 
on plane after plane in her reahns. These clearly 
defined artificial elementals have a longer and much 
more active life than their cloudy brethren, exercis- 
ing a far stronger influence on the astral bodies (and 
through them on the minds) of those to whom they 
are attracted. They set up in them vibrations simi- 
lar to their own, and thus thoughts spread from 
mind to mind without terrestrial expression. More 
than this : they can be directed by the thinker tow- 
ards any person he desires to reach, their potency 
depending on the strength of his will and the inten- 
sity of his mental power. 

Among average people the artificial elementals 
created by feeling or desire are more vigorous and 
more definite than those created by thought. Thus 
an outburst of anger will cause a very definitely out- 
lined and powerful flash of red, and sustained anger 
will make a dangerous elemental, red in color, and 
pointed, barbed, or otherwise qualified to injure. 
Love, according to its quality, will set 'up forms 
more or less beautiful in color and design, all shades 
of crimson to the most exquisite and soft hues of 
rose, like the palest blushes of the sunset or the 
dawn, clouds or tenderly strong protective shapes. 
Many a mother's loving prayers go to hover round 
her son as angel-forms, turning aside from him evil 
influences that perchance his own thoughts are 
attracting. 

It is characteristic of these artificial elemental. 


62 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

when they are directed by the will towards any par 
ticular person, that they are animated by the cm 
impulse of carrying out the will of their creator. P. 
protective elemental will hover round its object 
seeking any opportunity of warding off evil or at 
tracting good — not consciously, but by a blind im 
pulse, as finding there the line of least resistance. 
So, also, an elemental ensouled by a malignani 
thought will hover round its victim seeking oppor 
tunity to injure. But neither the one nor the othei 
can make any impression unless there be in the as- 
tral body of the object something akin to themselves, 
something that can answer accordantly to theii 
vibrations, and thus enable them to attach them- 
selves. If there be nothing in him of matter cog- 
nate to their own, then by a law of their nature thej 
rebound from him along the path they pursued in 
going to him — the magnetic trace they have left — 
and rush to their creator with a force proportionate 
to that of their projection. Thus a thought ol 
deadly hatred, failing to strike the object at which 
it was darted, has been known to slay its sender, 
while good thoughts sent to the unworthy return aa 
blessings to him that poured them forth. 

A very slight understanding of the astral world 
will thus act as a most powerful stimulus to right 
thinking, and will render heavy the sense of respon- 
sibility in regard to the thoughts, feelings, and de- 
sires that we let loose into this astral realm. Rav- 
ening beasts of prey, rending and devouring, are toO 
many of the thoughts with which men people the as- 


THOUGHTS ANGELS OR DEVILS. 63 

tral plane. But they err from ignorance ; they know 
not what they do. One of the objects of theosophi- 
cal teaching, partly lifting up the veil of the unseen 
world, is to give men a sounder basis for conduct, a 
more rational appreciation of the causes of which 
the effects only are seen in the terrestrial world. 
And few of its doctrines are more important in their 
ethical bearing than this of the creation and direc- 
tion of thought-forms, or artificial elementals, for 
through it man learns that his mind does not con- 
cern himself alone, that his thoughts do not affect 
himself alone, but that he is ever sending out angels 
and devils into the world of men, for whose creation 
he is responsible, and for whose influence he is held 
accountable. Let men, then, know the law, and 
guide their thoughts thereby. 

If, instead of taking artificial elementals sepa- 
rately, we take them in the mass, it is easy to realize 
the tremendous effect they have in producing 
national and race feelings, and thus in biassing 
and prejudicing the mind. We all grow up sur- 
rounded by an atmosphere crowded with elementals 
embodying certain ideas; national prejudices, na- 
tional ways of looking at all questions, national 
types of feelings and thoughts, all these play on us 
from our birth, ay, and before. We see everything 
through this atmosphere, every thought is more or 
less refracted by it, and our own astral bodies are 
vibrating in accord with it. Hence the same idea 
will look quite different to a Hindu, an Englishman, 
a Spaniard, and a Russian ; some conceptions easy to 


64 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

the one will be almost impossible to the other, cus- 
toms instinctively attractive to the one are instinc- 
tively odious to the other. We are all dominated by 
our national atmosphere, i.e.^ by that portion of the 
astral world immediately surrounding us. The 
thoughts of others, cast much in the same mould, 
play upon us and call out from us synchronous vi- 
brations; they intensify the points in which we ac- 
cord with our surroundings and flatten away the 
diflEerences, and this ceaseless action upon us through 
the astral body impresses on us the national hall- 
mark and traces channels for mental energies into 
which they readily flow. Sleeping and waking, these 
currents play upon us, and our very unconsciousness 
of their action makes it the more effective. As most 
people are receptive rather than initiative in their 
nature, they act almost as automatic reproducers 
of the thoughts which reach them, and thus the 
national atmosphere is continually intensified. 

When a person is beginning to be sensitive to as- 
tral influences, he will occasionally find himself sud- 
denly overpowered or assailed by a quite inexplica- 
ble and seemingly irrational dread, which swoops 
down upon him with even paralyzing force. Fight 
against it as he may, he yet feels it, and perhaps re- 
sents it. Probably there are few who have not ex- 
perienced this fear to some extent, the uneasy dread 
of an invisible something, the feeling of a presence, 
of " not being alone. " This arises partly from a ce'r- 
tain hostility which animates the natural elemental 
world against the human, on account of the various 


DREAD OF THE INVISIBLE. 6$ 

destructive agencies devised by mankind on the 
physical plane and reacting on the astral, but is also 
largely due to the presence of so many artificial 
elementals of an unfriendly kind, bred by human 
minds. Thoughts of hatred, jealousy, revenge, bit- 
terness, suspicion, discontent, go out by millions, 
crowding the astral plane with artificial elementals 
whose whole life is made of these feelings. How 
much also is there of vague distrust and suspicion 
poured out by the ignorant against all whose ways 
and appearance are alien and unfamiliar. The blind 
distrust of all foreigners, the surly contempt, extend- 
ing in many districts even towards inhabitants of 
another county — these things also contribute evil 
influences to the astral world. There being so much 
of these things among us, we create a blindly hostile 
army on the astral plane, and this is answered in our 
own astral bodies by a feeling of dread, set up by 
the antagonistic vibrations that are sensed, but not 
understood. 

Outside the class of artificial elementals, the astral 
world is thickly populated, even excluding, as we do 
for the present, all the human entities who have lost 
their physical bodies by death. There are great 
hosts of natural elementals, or nature-spirits, divided 
into five main classes — the elementals of the ether, 
the fire, the air, the water, and the earth; the last 
four groups have been termed, in mediaeval occult- 
ism, the Salamanders, Sylphs, Undines, and Gnomes 
(needless to say there are two other classes, com- 
pleting the seven, not concerning us here, as they are 
5 


66 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

Still unmanifested). These are the true elementals, 
or creatures of the elements, earth, water, air, fire, 
and ether, and they are severally concerned in the 
carrying on of the activities connected with their 
own element ; they are the channels through which 
work the divine energies in these several fields, the 
living expressions of the law in each. At the head 
of each division is a great Being, the captain of a 
mighty host,* the directing and guiding intelligence 
of the whole department of nature which is adminis- 
tered and energized by the class of elementals under 
his control. Thus Agni, the fire-God, is a great spir- 
itual entity concerned with the manifestation of fire 
on all the planes of the universe, and carries on his 
administration through the hosts of fire-elementals. 
By understanding the nature of these, or knowing 
the methods of their control, the so-called miracles 
or magical feats are worked, which from time to 
time are recorded in the public press, whether they 
are avowedly the results of magical arts, or are done 
by the aid of " spirits" — as in the case of the late Mr. 
Home, who could unconcernedly pick a red-hot coal 
out of a blazing fire with his fingers and hold it in 
his hand unhurt. Levitation (the suspension of a 
heavy body in the air without visible support) and 
walking on the water have been done by the aid re- 

* Called a Deva, or God, by the Hindus. The student may 
like to have the Sanskrit names of the five Gods of the mani- 
fested elements ; Indra, lord of the Ak^sha, or ether of space ; 
Agni, lord of fire ; Pavana, lord of air ; Varuna, lord of water; 
Kshiti, lord of earth. 


NATURE SPIRITS. 6j 

spectively of the elementals of the air and the water, 
although another method is more often employed. 

As the elements enter into the human body, one 
or another predominating according to the nature of 
the person, each human being has relations with 
these elementals, the most friendly to him being 
those whose element is preponderant in him. The 
eflEects of this fact are often noted, and are popularly 
ascribed to "luck." A person has "a lucky hand*' 
in making plants grow, in lighting fires, in finding 
underground water, etc., etc. Nature is ever jost- 
ling us with her occult forces, but we are slow to 
take her hints. Tradition sometimes hides a truth 
in a proverb or a fable, but we have grown beyond 
all such "superstitions." 

We find also on the astral plane, nature-spirits — 
less accurately termed elementals — who are con- 
cerned with the building of forms in the mineral, 
vegetable, animal, and human kingdoms. There are 
nature-spirits who build up minerals, who guide the 
vital energies in plants, and who molecule by mole- 
cule form the bodies of the animal kingdom ; they 
are concerned with the making of the astral bodies 
of minerals, plants, and animals, as well as with that 
of the physical. These are the fairies and elves of 
legends, the " little people" who play so large a part 
in the folk-lore of every nation, the charming irre- 
sponsible children of nature, whom science has cold- 
ly relegated to the nursery, but who will be replaced 
in their own grade of natural order by the wiser sci- 
entists of a later day. Only poets and occultists be- 


68 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

lieve in them just now, poets by the intuition of their 
genius, occultists by the vision of their trained inner 
senses. The multitude laugh at both, most of all at 
the occultists ; but it matters not — wisdom shall be 
justified of her children. 

The play of the life-currents in the etheric doubles 
of the forms in the mineral, vegetable, and animal 
kingdoms, awoke out of latency the astral matter in- 
volved in the structure of their atomic and molecular 
constituents. It began to thrill in a very limited 
way in the minerals, and the Monad of form, exer- 
cising his organizing power, drew in materials from 
the astral world, and these were built by the nature- 
spirits into a loosely constituted mass, the mineral 
astral body. In the vegetable world the astral bod- 
ies are a little more organized, and their special 
characteristic of " feeling" begins to appear. Dull 
and diffused sensations of well-being and discomfort 
are observable in most plants as the results of the 
increasing activity of the astral body. They dimly 
enjoy the air, the rain, and the sunshine, and grop- 
ingly seek them, while they shrink from noxious 
conditions. Some seek the light and some seek the 
darkness ; they answer to stimuli, and adapt them- 
selves to external conditions, some showing plainly 
a sense of touch. In the animal kingdom the astral 
body is more developed, reaching in the higher 
members of that kingdom a sufficiently definite or- 
ganization to cohere for some time after the death of 
the physical body, and to lead an independent exists 
ence on the astral plane. 


■•Sl 


DESIRE ELEMENTALS. 69 

The nattire-spirits concerned with the building of 
the animal and human astral bodies have been given 
the special name of desire-elementals,* because they 
are strongly animated by desires of all kinds, and 
constantly build themselves into the astral bodies of 
animals and men. They also use the varieties of 
elemental essence similar to that of which their own 
bodies are composed to construct the astral bodies of 
animals, those bodies thus acquiring, as interwoven 
parts, the centres of sensation and of the various 
passional activities. These centres are stimulated 
into functioning by impulses received by the dense 
physical organs, and transmitted by the etheric phys- 
ical organs to the astral body. Not until the astral 
centre is reached does the animal feel pleasure or 
pain. A stone may be struck, but it will feel no 
pain; it has dense and etheric physical molecules, 
but its astral body is unorganized ; the animal feels 
pain from a blow because he possesses the astral 
centres of sensation, and the desire-elementals have 
woven into him their own nature. 

As a new consideration enters into the work of 
these elementals with the human astral body, we will 
finish our survey of the inhabitants of the astral 
plane ere studying this more complicated astral 
form. 

The desire-bodies, t or astral bodies, of animals 
are found, as has just been stated, to lead an inde- 

*K&madevas, they are called, "desire-gods." 
t K&mar^pa is the technical name for the astral body, from 
klUna, desire, and ri^pa, form. 


70 THE ANCIENT WISDOM* 

pendent though fleeting existence on the astral plane 
after death has destroyed their physical counter- 
parts. In "civilized" countries these animal astral 
bodies add much to the general feeling of hostility 
which was spoken of above, for the organized 
butchery of animals in slaughter-houses and by sport 
sends millions upon millions of these annually into 
the astral world, full of horror, terror, and shrinking 
from men. The comparatively few creatures that 
are allowed to die in peace and quietness are lost in 
the vast hordes of the murdered, and from the cur- 
rents set up by these there rain down influences 
from the astral world on the human and animal 
races which drive them yet farther apart and en- 
gender "instinctive** distrust and fear on the one 
side and lust of inflicting cruelty on the other. 

These feelings have been much intensified of late 
years by the coldly devised methods of the scientific 
torture called vivisection, the unmentionable bar- 
barities of which have introduced new horrors into 
the astral world by their reaction on the culprits,* 
as well as having increased the gulf between man and 
his "poor relations." 

Apart from what we may call the normal popula- 
tion of the astral world, there are passing travellers 
in it, led there by their work, whom we cannot leave 
entirely without mention. Some of these come from 
our own terrestrial world, while others are visitors 
from loftier regions. 

Of the former, many are Initiates of various 

»See Chapter III., on "Kamaloka." 


ASTRAL WORLD VISITORS. 7 1 

grades, some belonging to the Great White Lodge — 
the Himalayan or Tibetian Brotherhood, as it is 
often called * — while others are members of different 
occult lodges throughout the world, ranging from 
white through all shades of gray to black, f All 
these are men living in physical bodies, who have 
learned to leave the physical encasement at will, and 
to function in full consciousness in the astral body. 
They are of all grades of knowledge and virtue, 
beneficent and maleficent, strong and weak, gentle 
and ferocious. There are also many younger aspi- 
rants, still uninitiated, who are learning to use the 
astral vehicle, and who are employed in works of 
benevolence or malevolence according to the path 
they are seeking to tread. 

After these, we have psychics of varying degrees 
of development, some fairly alert, others dreamy and 
•confused, wandering about while their physical 

• It is to some members of this Lodge that the Theosophical 
Society owes its inception. 

f Occultists who are unselfish and wholly devoted to the 
carrying out of the Divine Will, or who are aiming to attain 
these virtues, are called ** white " Those who are selfish and 
are working against the Divinj purpose in the universe are 
called " black. " Expanding selflessness, love, and devotion are 
the marks of the one class; contracting selfishness, hatred, 
and harsh arrogance are the signs of the other. Between these 
are the classes whose motives are mixed, and who have not 
yet realized that they must evolve towards the One Self or 
towards the separated selves ; these I have called gray. Their 
members gradually drift into, or deliberately join, one of the 
two great groups with clearly marked aims. 


72 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

bodies are asleep or entranced. Unconscious of 
their external surroundings, wrapped in their own 
thoughts, drawn as it were within their astral shell, 
are millions of drifting astral bodies inhabited by 
conscious entities, whose physical frames are sunk 
in sleep. As we shall see presently, the conscioas- 
ness in its astral vehicle escapes when the body sinks 
into sleep, and passes on to the astral plane ; but it 
is not conscious of its surroundings until the astral 
body is suflSciently developed to function indepen- 
dently of the physical. 

Occasionally is seen on this plane a disciple * who 
has passed through death and is awaiting an almost 
immediate reincarnation under the direction of his 
Master. He is, of course, in the enjoyment of full 
consciousness, and is working like other disciples 
who have merely slipped oflE their bodies in sleep. 
At a certain stage f a disciple is allowed to reincar- 
nate very quickly after death, and under these cir- 
cumstances he has to await on the astral plane a 
suitable opportunity for rebirth. 

Passing through the astral plane also are the hu- 
man beings who are on their way to reincarnation ; 
they will again be mentioned later on,t and they 
concern themselves in no way with the general life 
of the astral world. The desire-elementals, how- 
ever, who have affinity with them from their past 
passional and sensational activities, gather round 

* A chel&, the accepted pupil of an Adept, 
f See Chapter XL, on "Man's Ascent." 
X See Chapter VII. , on '* Reincarnation. " 


THE ASTRAL BODY. 73 

them, assisting in the building of the new astral body 
for the coming earth-life. 

We must now turn to the consideration of the hu- 
man astral body during the period of existence in 
this world, and study its nature and constitution as 
well as its relations with the astral realm. We will 
take the astral body of (a) an undeveloped man, (b) 
an average man, and (c) a spiritually developed man. 

(a) An undeveloped man's astral body is a cloudy, 
loosely organized, vaguely outlined mass of astral 
spirit-matter, containing materials — both astral mat- 
ter and elemental essence — drawn from all the sub- 
divisions of the astral plane, but with a great pre- 
dominance of substances from the lower, so that it is 
dense and coarse in texture, fit to respond to all the 
stimuli connected with the passions and appetites. 
The colors caused by the rates of vibration are dull, 
muddy, and dusky — browns, dull reds, dirty greens, 
are the predominant hues. There is no play of light 
or quickly changing flashing of colors through this 
astral body, but the various passions show themselves 
as heavy surges, or, when violent, as flashes; thus 
sexual passion will send a wave of muddy crimson, 
rage a flash of lurid red. 

The astral body is larger than the physical, extend- 
ing round it in all directions ten or twelve inches in 
such a case as we are considering. The centres of 
the organs of sense are definitely marked, and are 
active when worked on from without ; but in quies- 
cence the life-streams are sluggish, and the astral 
body, stimulated neither from the physical nor men- 


74 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

tal worlds, is drowsy and indifferent. * It is a con- 
stant characteristic of the undeveloped state that 
activity is prompted from without rather than from 
the inner consciousness. A stone to be moved must 
be pushed ; a plant moves under the attractions of 
light and moisture ; an animal becomes active when 
stirred by hunger ; a poorly developed man needs to 
be prompted in similar ways. Not till the mind is 
partly grown does it begin to initiate action. The 
centres of higher activities,! related to the indepen- 
dent functioning of the astral senses, are scarcely 
visible. A man at this stage requires for his evolu- 
tion violent sensations of every kind, to arouse the 
nature and stimulate it into activity. Heavy blows 
from the outer world, both of pleasure and pain, are 
wanted to awaken and spur to action. The more 
numerous and violent the sensations, the more he 
can be made to feel, the better for his growth. At 
this stage quality matters little, quantity and vigor 
are the main requisites. The beginnings of this 
man's morality will be in his passions; a slight im- 
pulse of unselfishness in his relations to wife or 
child or friend, will be the first step upwards, by .: 
causing vibrations in the finer matter of his astral 
body and attracting into it more elemental essence ! 
of an appropriate kind. The astral body is con- : 

* The student will recognize here the predominance of the 
t&masic guna, the quality of darkness or inertness in nature. 

f The seven chakras, or wheels, so named from the whirling 
appearance they present, like wheels of living fire when in 
activity. 

■** 

A 

i 


BUILDING THE BODY. 75 

stantly changing its materials under this play of the 
passions, appetites, desires, and emotions. All good 
ones strengthen the finer parts of the body, shake 
out some of the coarser constituents, draw into it 
the subtler materials, and attract round it elemen- 
tals of a beneficent kind who aid in the renovating 
process. All evil ones have diametrically opposite 
effects, strengthening the coarser, expelling the 
finer, drawing in more of the former, and attracting 
elementals who help in the deteriorating process. 
The man's moral and intellectual powers are so em- 
bryonic in the case we are considering that most of 
the building and changing of his astral body may 
be said to be done for him rather than by him. It 
depends more on his external circumstances than on 
his own will, for, as just said, it is characteristic of 
a low stage of development that a man is moved 
from without and through the body much more than 
from within and by the mind. It is a sign of con- 
siderable advance when a man begins to be moved 
by the will, by his own energy, self-determined, in- 
stead of being moved by desire, i.e,, by a response 
to an external attraction or repulsion. 

In sleep, the astral body, enveloping the con- 
sciousness, slips out of the physical vehicle, leaving 
the dense and etheric bodies to slumber. At this 
stage, however, the consciousness is not awake in 
the astral body, lacking the strong contacts that 
spur it while in the physical frame, and the only 
things that affect the astral body may be elementals 
of the coarser kinds, that may set up therein vibra- 


j6 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

tions which are reflected to the etheric and dense 
brains, and induce dreams of animal pleasures. The 
astral body floats just over the physical, held by • 
its strong attraction, and cr.nnot go far away 
from it. 

{p) In the average moral and intellectual man the 
astral body shows an immense advance on that just 
described. It is larger in size, its materials are 
more balanced in quality, the presence of the rarer 
kinds giving a certain luminous quality to the whole, 
while the expression of the higher emotions sends 
playing through it beautiful ripples of color. Its 
outline is clear and definite, instead of vague and 
shifting, as in the former case, and it assumes the 
likeness of its owner. It is obviously becoming a 
vehicle for the inner man, with definite organization 
and stability, a body fit and ready to function, and 
able to maintain itself, apart from the physical. 
While retaining great plasticity, it yet has a normal 
form, to which it continually recurs when any pres- . 
sure is removed that may have caused it to change 
its outline. Its activity is constant, and hence it is \ 
in perpetual vibration, showing endless varieties of 
changing hues ; also the " wheels" are clearly visible ^ 
though not yet functioning.* It responds quickly , 
to all the contacts coming to it through the physical ; 
body, and is stirred by the influences rained on it -j 
from the conscious entity within, memory and im- 
agination stimulating it to action, and causing it to 1 

* Here the student will note the predominance of the rdjasio J 
guna, the quality of activity in nature. 


SKLF-DISECTED CHtOWTH. 77 

become the prompter of the body to activity instead 
of only being moved by it. Its purification pro- 
ceeds along the same lines as in the former case — 
the expulsion of lower constituents by setting up 
vibrations antagonistic to them and the drawing in 
of finer materials in their place. But now the in- 
creased moral and intellectual development of the 
man puts the building almost entirely under his own 
control, for he is no longer driven hither and thither 
by stimuli from external nature, but reasons, judges, 
and resists or yields as he thinks well. By the 
exercise of well-directed thought he can rapidly 
affect the astral body, and hence its improvement 
can proceed apace. Nor is it necessary that he 
should understand the modus operandi in order 
to bring about the effect, any more than that a 
man should tmderstand the laws of light in order 
to see. 

In sleep, this well-developed astral body slips, as 
usual, from its physical encasement, but is by no 
means held captive by it, as in the former case. It 
roams about in the astral world, drifted hither and 
thither by the astral currents, while the conscious- 
ness within it, not yet able to direct its movements, 
is awake, engaged in the enjoyment of its own men- 
tal images and mental activities, and able also to re- 
ceive impressions through its astral covering, and to 
change them into mental pictures. In this way a 
man may gain knowledge when out of the body, 
and may subsequently impress it on the brain as 
a vivid dream or vision, or without this link of 


78 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

memory it may filter through into the brain-con- 
sciousness. 

(c) The astral body of a spiritually developed man 
is composed of the finest particles of each subdivi- 
sion of astral matter, the higher kinds largely pre- 
dominating in amount. It is therefore a beautiful 
object in luminosity and color, hues not known on 
earth showing themselves under the impulses thrown 
into it by the purified mind. The wheels of fire are 
now seen to deserve their names, and their whirling 
motion denotes the activity of the higher senses. 
Such a body is, in the full sense of the words, a 
vehicle of consciousness, for in the course of evolu- 
tion it has been vivified in every organ and brought 
under the complete control of its owner. When in 
it he leaves the physical body there is no break of 
consciousness ; he merely shakes off his heavier ves- 
ture, and finds himself unencumbered by its weight. 
He can move anjrwhere within the astral sphere 
with immense rapidity, and is no longer bound by 
the narrow terrestrial conditions. His body an- 
swers to his will, reflects and obeys his thought. 
His opportunities for serving humanity are thus 
enormously increased, and his powers are directed 
by his virtue and his beneficence. The absence of 
gross particles in his astral body renders it incapable 
of responding to the promptings of lower objects of 
desire, and they turn away from him as beyond their 
attraction. The whole body vibrates only in answer 
to the higher emotions, his love has grown into de- 
votion, his energy is curbed by patience. Gentle, 


.J 

1, 


THE BRIDGE FROM EARTH TO SOUL. 79 

calm, serene, full of power, but with no trace of 
restlessness, such a man " all the Siddhis stand ready 
to serve. " * 

The astral body forms the bridge over the gulf 
which separates consciousness from the physical 
brain. Impacts received by the sense-organs and 
transmitted, as we have seen, to the dense and ethe- 
ric centres, pass thence to the corresponding astral 
centres ; here they are worked on by the elemental 
essence and are transmuted into feelings, and are 
then presented to the inner man as objects of con- 
sciousness, the astral vibrations awakening corre- 
sponding vibrations in the materials of the mental 
body, t By these successive gradations in fineness 
of spirit-matter the heavy impacts of terrestrial ob- 
jects can be transmitted to the conscious entity ; and, 
in turn, the vibrations set up by his thoughts can 
pass along the same bridge to the physical brain and 
there induce physical vibrations corresponding to 
the mental. This is the regular normal way in 
which consciousness receives impressions from with- 
out, and in turn sends impressions outwards. By 
this constant passage of vibrations to and fro the 
astral body is chiefly developed ; this current plays 
upon it from within and from without, evolves its 
organization, and subserves its general growth. By 
this it becomes larger, finer in texture, more defi- 
nitely outlined, and more organized interiorly. 

♦ Here the stovic guna, the quality of bliss and purity in 
nature, is predominant. Siddhis are superphysical powers. 
t See Chapter IV.. on "The Mental Plane." 


80 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

Trained thus to respond to consciousness, it gradu- 
ally becomes fit to function as its separate vehicle, 
and to transmit to it clearly the vibrations received 
directly from the astral world. Most readers will 
have had some little experience of impressions com- 
ing into consciousness from without, that do not 
arise from any physical impact, and that are very 
quickly verified by some external occurrence. These 
are frequently impressions that reach the astral body 
directly, and are transmitted by it to the conscious- 
ness, and such impressions are often of the nature 
of previsions which very quickly prove themselves 
to be true. When the man is far progressed, though 
the stage varies much according to other circum- 
stances, links are set up between the physical and 
the astral, the astral and the mental, so that con- 
sciousness works unbrokenly from one state to the 
other, memory having in it none of the lapses which 
in the ordinary man interpose a period of uncon- 
sciousness in passing from one plane to another. 
The man can then also freely exercise the astral 
senses while the consciousness is working in the 
physical body, so that these enlarged avenues of 
knowledge become an appanage of his waking con- 
sciousness. Objects which were before matters of 
faith become matters of knowledge, and he can per- 
sonally verify the accuracy of much of the theo- 
sophical teaching as to the lower regions of the 
invisible world. 


When man is analyzed into "principles," t,e.^ into 


THE ONE SELF MANIFESTING. 8 1 

modes of manifesting life, his four lower principles, 
termed the "Lower Quaternary," are said to func- 
tion on the astral and physical planes. The fourth 
principle is Kama, desire, and it is the life manifest- 
ing in the astral body and conditioned by it ; it is 
characterized by the attribute of feeling, whether in 
the rudimentary form of sensation, or in the com- 
plex form of emotion, or in any of the grades that 
lie between. This is summed up as desire, that 
which is attracted or repelled by objects, according 
as they give pleasure or pain to the personal self. 
The third principle is Prana, the life specialized for 
the support of the physical organism. The second 
principle is the etheric double, and the first is the 
dense body. These three function on the physical 
plane. In H. P. Blavatsky's later classifications she 
removed both Prana and the dense physical body 
from the rank of principles, Prana as being univer- 
sal life, and the dense physical body as being the 
mere counterpart of the etheric, and made of con- 
stantly changing materials built into the etheric 
matrix. Taking this view, we have the grand phil- 
osophic conception of the One Life, the One Self, 
manifesting as man, and presenting varying and 
transitory differences according to the conditions 
imposed on it by the bodies which it vivifies; itself 
remaining the same in the centre, but showing dif- 
ferent aspects when looked at from outside, accord- 
ing to the kinds of matter in one body or another. 
In the physical body it is Prana, energizing, con- 
trolling, co-ordinating. In the astral body it is» 
6 


82 THE ANCrcNT WISDOM. 

Kama, feeling, enjoying, suffering. We shall find 
it in yet other aspects, as we pass to higher planes, 
but the fundamental idea is the same throughout, 
and it is another of those root-ideas of Theosophy, 
which, firmly grasped, serve as guiding clues in this 
most tangled world. 


CHAPTER III. - 
KAmaloka. 

KAmaloka, literally the place or habitat of desire, 
is, as has already been intimated, a part of the astral 
plane, not divided from it as a distinct locality, but 
separated off by the conditions of consciousness of 
the entities belonging to it. * These are human be- 
ings who have lost their physical bodies by the 
stroke of death, and have to undergo certain purify- 
ing changes before they can pass on to the happy 
and peaceful life which belongs to the man proper, 
to the human soul, f 

This region represents and includes the conditions 
described as existing in the various hells, purga- 
tories, and intermediate states, one or other of 
which is alleged by all the great religions to be the 

* The Hindus call this state Pretaloka, the habitat of Pretas. 
A Preta is the human being who has lost his physical body, 
but is still encumbered with the vesture of his animal nature. 
He cannot carry this on with him, and until it is disintegrated 
he is kept imprisoned by it. 

t The soul is the human intellect, the link between the Di- 
vine Spirit in man and his lower personality. It is the Ego, 
the individual, the "I," which develops by evolution. In the- 
osophical parlance it is Manas, the Thinker. The mind is the 
energy of this, working within the limitations of the physical 
brain, or the astral and mental bodies. 


84 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

temporary dwelling-place of man after lie leaves the 
body and before he reaches "heaven." It does not 
include any place of eternal torture, the endless hell 
still believed in by some narrow religionists being 
only a nightmare dream of ignorance, hate, and fear. 
But it does include conditions of suffering, tempo- 
rary and purificatory in their nature, the working 
out of causes set going in his earth-life by the man 
who experiences them. These are as natural and 
inevitable as any effects caused in this world by 
wrong-doing, for we live in a world of law and every 
seed must grow up after its own kind. Death makes 
no sort of difference in a man's moral and mental 
nature, and the change of state caused by passing 
from one world to another takes away his physical 
body, but leaves the man as he was. 

The kamalokic condition is found on each sub- 
division of the astral plane, so that we may speak ol 
it as having seven regions, calling them the first, 
second, third, up to the seventh, beginning from the 
lowest and counting upwards.* We have alread} 
seen that materials from each subdivision of the as- 
tral plane enter into the composition of the astra 
body, and it is a peculiar re-arrangement of thesi 
materials, to be explained in a moment, which sepa 
rates the people dwelling in one region from thos< 
dwelling in another, although those in the same re 

* Often these regfions are reckoned the other way, takin] 
the first as the highest and the seventh as the lowest. It doe 
not matter from which end we count, and I am reckoning tip 
wards to keep them in accord with the planes and the principles 


THE INDRAWING OF LIFE. 85 

gion are. able to intercommunicate. The regions, 
being each a subdivision of the astral plane, differ in 
density, and the density of the external form of the 
kamalokic entity determines the region to which he 
is limited; these differences of matter are the bar- 
riers that prevent passage from one region to an- 
other; people dwelling in one can no more come 
into touch with people dwelling in another than a 
deep-sea fish can hold a conversation with an eagle 
— the medium necessary to the life of the one would 
be destructive to the life of the other. 

When the physical body is struck down by death, 
the etheric body, carrying Prana with it and accom- 
panied by the remaining principles — that is, the 
whole man, except the dense body — withdraws from 
the "tabernacle of flesh," as the outer body is ap- 
propriately called. All the outgoing life-energies 
draw themselves inwards, and are " gathered up by 
Prana," their departure being manifested by the 
dulness that creeps over the physical organs of the 
senses. They are there, uninjured, physically com- 
plete, ready to act as they have always been ; but 
the " Inner Ruler" is going, he who through them 
saw, heard, felt, smelt, tasted, and by themselves 
they are mere aggregations of matter, living indeed 
but without power of perceptive action. Slowly the 
lord of the body draws himself away, enwrapped in 
the violet-grey etheric body, and absorbed in the 
contemplation of the panorama of his past life, 
which in the death-hour unrolls before him, com- 
plete in every detail. In that life-picture are all the 


86 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

events of his life, small and great; he sees his am- 
bitions with their success or frustration, his efforts, 
his triumphs, his failures, his loves, his hatreds ; the 
predominant tendency of the whole comes clearly 
out, the ruling thought of the life asserts itself, and 
stamps itself deeply into the soul, marking the re- 
gion in which the chief part of his post-mortem ex- 
istence will be spent. Solemn the moment when 
the man stands face to face with his life, and from 
the lips of his past hears the presage of his future. 
For a brief space he sees himself as he is, recognizes 
the purpose of life, knows that the Law is strong 
and just and good. Then the magnetic tie breaks 
between the dense and etheric bodies, the comrades 
of a lifetime are disjoined, and — save in exceptional 
cases — the man sinks into peaceful unconsciousness. 

Quietness and devotion should mark the conduct 
of all who are gathered round a dying body, in order 
that a solemn silence may leave uninterrupted this 
review of the past by the departing man. Clamor- 
ous weeping, loud lamentations, can but jar and dis- 
turb the concentrated attention of the soul, and to 
break with the grief of a personal loss into the still- 
ness which aids and soothes him is at once selfish 
and impertinent. Religion has wisely commanded 
prayers for the dying, for these preserve calm and 
stimulate unselfish aspirations directed to his help- 
ing, and these, like all loving thoughts, protect and 
shield. 

Some hours after death — generally not more than 
thirty-six, it is said — the man draws himself out of 


ETHERIC CORPSES. 8/ 

the etheric body, leaving it in turn as a senseless 
corpse, and the latter, remaining near its dense 
counterpart, shares its fate. If the dense body be 
buried, the etheric double floats over the grave, 
slowly disintegrating, and the unpleasant feelings 
many experience in a churchyard are largely due to 
the presence of these decaying etheric corpses. If 
the body be burnt, the etheric double breaks up very 
quickly, having lost its nidus, its physical centre of 
attraction, and this is one among many reasons why 
cremation is preferable to burial as a way of dispos- 
ing of corpses. 

The withdrawal of the man from the etheric 
double is accompanied by the withdrawal from it of 
Prana, which thereupon returns to the great reser- 
voir of life universal, while the man, ready now to 
pass into Kamaloka, undergoes a re-arrangement of 
his astral body, fitting it for submission to the purifi- 
catory changes which are necessary for the freeing 
of the man himself. * During earth-life the various 
kinds of astral matter intermingle in the formation 
of the body, as do the solids, liquids, gases, and 
ethers in the physical. The change in the arrange- 
ment of the astral body after death consists in the 
separation of these materials, according to their re- 
spective densities, into a series of concentric shells 
— the finest within, the densest without — each shell 

* These changes result in the formation of what is called by 
Hindus the Yitani, or suffering body, or in the case of very 
wicked men, in whose astral bodies there is a preponderance 
of the coarsest matter, the Dhruvam, or strong body. 


88 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

being made of the materials drawn from one sub- 
division only of the astral plane; the astral body 
thus becomes a set of seven superimposed layers, or 
a seven-shelled encasement of astral matter, in which 
the man may not inaptly be said to be imprisoned, 
as only the breaking of these can set him free. Now 
will be seen the immense importance of the purifica- 
tion of the astral body during earth -life ; the man is 
retained in each subdivision of Kamaloka so long as 
the shell of matter pertaining to that subdivision is 
not sufficiently disintegrated to allow of his escape 
into the next. Moreover, the extent to which his 
consciousness has worked in each kind of matter de- 
termines whether he will be awake and conscious in 
any given region, or will pass through it in uncon- 
sciousness, "wrapped in rosy dreams," and merely 
detained during the time necessary for the process 
of mechanical disintegration. 

A spiritually advanced man, who has so purified 
his astral body that its constituents are drawn only 
from the finest grade of each division of astral mat- 
ter, merely passes through Kamaloka without delay, 
the astral body disintegrating- with extreme swift- 
ness, and he goes on to whatever may be his bourne, 
according to the point he has reached in evolution. 
A less developed man, but one whose life has been 
pure and temperate and who has sat loosely on the 
things of earth, will wing a less rapid flight through 
Kamaloka, but will dream peacefully, unconscious 
of his surroundings, as his mental body disentangles 
itself from the astral shells, one after the other^ to 


SUDDEN DEATH. 89 

awaken only when he reaches the heavenly places. 
Others, less developed still, will awaken after pass- 
ing out of the lower regions, becoming conscious in 
the division which is connected with the active 
working of the consciousness during the earth-life, 
for this will be aroused on receiving familiar im- 
pacts, although these be received now directly 
through the astral body, without the help of the 
physical Those who have lived in the animal pas- 
sions will awake in their appropriate region, each 
man literally going " to his own place. " 

The case of men struck suddenly out of physical 
life by accident, suicide, murder, or sudden death in 
any form, differs from those of persons who pass 
away by the failure of the life-energies through dis- 
ease or old age. If they are pure and spiritually 
minded they are specially guarded, and sleep out 
happily the term of their natural life. But in other 
cases they remain conscious — often entangled in the 
final scene of earth-life for a time, and unaware that 
they have lost the physical body — held in whatever 
region they are related to by the outermost layer of 
the astral body; their normal kamalokic life does 
not begin until the natural web of earth-life is out- 
spun, and they are vividly conscious of both their 
astral and physical surroirndings. One man who 
/lad committed an assassination and had been exe- 
cuted for his crime was said, by one of H. P. Bla- 
vatsky's Teachers, to be living through the scenes 
of the murder and the subsequent events over and 
over again in Kamaloka, ever repeating his diaboli- 


go THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

cal act and going through the terrors of his arrest 
and execution. A suicide will repeat automatically 
the feelings of despair and fear which preceded his 
self-murder, and go through the act and the death- 
struggle time after time with ghastly persistence. 
A woman, who perished in the flames in a wild con- 
dition of terror and with frantic efforts to escape, 
created such a whirl of passions that, five days after- 
wards, she was still struggling desperately, fancying 
herself still in the fire and wildly repulsing all 
efforts to soothe her; while another woman who, 
with her baby on her breast, went down beneath the 
whirl of waters in a raging storm, with her heart 
calm and full of love, slept peacefully on the other 
side of death, dreaming of husband and children in 
happy lifelike visions. In more ordinary cases, 
death by accident is still a disadvantage, brought on 
a person by some serious fault,* for the possession 
of full consciousness in the lower kamalokic regions, 
which are closely related to the earth, is attended by 
many inconveniences and perils. The man is full 
of all the plans and interests that made up his life, 
and is conscious of the presence of the people and 
things connected with them ; he is almost irresist- 
ibly impelled by his longings to try and influence 
the affairs to which his passions and feelings still 
cling, and is bound to the earth while he has lost all 
his accustomed organs of activity ; his only hope of 

* Not necessarily a fault committed in the present life. The 
law of cause and effect will be explained in Chapter IX. . on 
"Karma.- 


:i 


CLINGING TO EARTH. 9 1 

peace lies in resolutely turning away from earth and 
fixing his mind on higher things, but comparatively 
few are strong enough to make this effort, even with 
the help always offered them by workers on the as- 
tral plane, whose sphere of duty lies in helping and 
gliding those who have left this world.* Too often 
such sufferers, impatient of their helpless inactivity, 
seek the assistance of sensitives, with whom they 
can communicate and so mix themselves up once 
more in terrestrial affairs; they sometimes seek 
even to obsess convenient mediums and thus to uti- 
lize the bodies of others for their own purposes, so 
incurring many responsibilities in the future. Not 
without occult reason have English churchmen been 
taught to pray: "From battle, murder, and from 
sudden deaths Good Lord, deliver us." 

We may now consider the divisions of Kamaloka 
one by one, and so gain some idea of the conditions 
which the man has made for himself in the interme- 
diate state by the desires which he has cultivated 
during physical life ; it being kept in mind that the 
amount of vitality in any given "shell" — and there- 
fore his imprisonment in that shell — depends on the 
amount of energy thrown during earth-life into the 
kind of matter of which that shell consists. If the 
lowest passions have been active, the coarsest mat- 
ter will be strongly vitalized and its amount will 
also be relatively large. This principle rules through 

* These workers are disciples of some of the great Teachers 
who guide and help humanity, and they are employed in this 
special duty of succoring souls in need of such assistance. 


92 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

all kamalokic regions, so that a man during earth- 
life can judge very fairly as to the future for himself 
that he is preparing immediately on the other side 
of death. 

The first, or lowest, division is the one that con- 
tains the conditions described in so many Hindu and 
Buddhist Scriptures under the name of " hells" of 
various kinds. It must be understood that a man, 
in passing into one of these states, is not getting rid 
of the passions and vile desires that have led him 
thither ; these remain, as part of his character, lying 
latent in the mind in a germinal state, to be thrown 
outwards again to form his passional nature when 
he is returning to birth in the physical world.* His 
presence in the lowest region of Kamaloka is due to 
the existence in his kamic body of matter belonging 
to that region, and he is held prisoner there until 
the greater part of that matter has dropped away, 
until the shell composed of it is sufficiently disinte- 
grated to allow the man to come into contact with 
the region next above. 

The atmosphere of this place is gloomy, heavy, 
dreary, depressing to an inconceivable extent. It 
seems to reek with all the influences most inimical 
to good, as in truth it does, being caused by the per- 
sons whose evil passions have led them to this dreary 
place. All the desires and feelings at which we 
shudder find here the materials for their expression;., 
it is, in fact, the lowest slum, with all the horrors 
veiled from physical sight parading in their naked 
* See Chapter VII., on "Reincarnation.** 


i 


SOULS AS THEY ARE. 93 

hideonsness. Its repulsiveness is much increased 
by the fact that in the astral world character ex- 
presses itself in form, and the man who is full of 
evil passions looks the whole of them ; bestial appe- 
tites shape the astral body into bestial forms, and 
repulsively human animal shapes are the appropri- 
ate clothing of brutalized human souls. No man can 
be a hypocrite in the astral world, and cloak foul 
thoughts with a veil of virtuous seeming; whatever 
a man is that he appears to be in outward form and 
semblance, radiant in beauty if his mind be noble, 
repulsive in hideousness if his nature be foul. Tt 
will readily be understood, then, how such Teachers 
as the Buddha — to whose unerring vision all worlds 
lay open — should describe what was seen in these 
hells in vivid language of terrible imagery, that seems 
incredible to modern readers only because people 
forget that, once escaped from the heavy and un- 
plastic matter of the physical world, all souls appear 
in their proper likenesses and look just what they 
are. Even in this world a degraded and besotted 
ruffian moulds his face into most repellent aspect; 
what then can be expected when the plastic astral 
matter takes shape with every impulse of his crimi- 
nal desires, but that such a man should wear a 
horrifying form, taking* on changing elements of 
hideousness? 

For it must be remembered that the population— 
if that word may be allowed — of this lowest region 
consists of the very scum of humanity, murderers, 
ruffians, violent criminals of all types, drunkards, 


94 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

profligates, the vilest of mankind. None is here, 
with consciousness awake to its surroundings, save 
those guilty of brutal crimes, or of deliberate per- 
sistent cruelty, or possessed by some vile appetite. 
The only persons who may be of a better general 
type, and yet for a while be held here, are suicides, 
men who have sought by self-murder to escape 
from the earthly penalties of crimes they had com- 
mitted, and who have but worsened their position 
by the exchange. Not all suicides, be it under- 
stood, for self-murder is committed from many 
motives, but only such as are led up to by crime 
and are then committed in order to avoid the con- 
sequences. 

Save for the gloomy surroundings and the loath- 
someness of a man's associates, every man here is 
the immediate creator of his own miseries. Un- 
changed, except for the loss of the bodily veil, men 
here show out their passions in all their native hide- 
ousness, their naked brutality ; full of fierce unsa- . 
tiated appetites, seething with revenge, hatred, long- 
ings after physical indulgences which the loss of 
physical organs incapacitates them from enjoying, 
they roam, raging and ravening, through this gloomy 
region, crowding round all foul resorts on earth, 
round brothels and gin-palaces, stimulating their 
occupants to deeds of shame and violence, seeking 
opportunities to obsess them, and so to drive them •: 
into worse excesses. The sickening atmosphere felt 
round such places comes largely from these earth- • 
bound astral entities, reeking with foul passions and ^ 

■■3 


THE VARIOUS HELLS. 95 

tinclean desires. Mediums — unless of very pure and 
noble character — are special objects of attack, and 
too often the weaker ones, weakened still further by 
the passive yielding of their bodies for the tempo- 
rary habitation of other excarnate souls, are ob- 
sessed by these creatures, and are driven into intem- 
perance or madness. Executed murderers, furious 
with terror and passionate revengeful hatred, acting 
over again, as we have said, their crime and re- 
creating mentally its terrible results, surround them- 
selves with an atmosphere of savage thought-forms, 
and, attracted to any one harboring revengeful and 
violent designs, they egg him on into the actual 
commission of the deed over which he broods. 
Sometimes a man may be seen constantly followed 
by his murdered victim, never able to escape from 
his haunting presence, which hunts him with a dull 
persistency, try he never so eagerly to escape. The 
murdered person, unless himself of a very base type, 
is wrapped in unconsciousness, and this very uncon- 
sciousness seems to add a new horror to its mechan- 
ical pursuit. 

Here also is the hell of the vivisector, for cruelty 
draws into the astral body the coarsest materials and 
the most repulsive combinations of the astral mat- 
ter, and he lives amid the crowding forms of his 
mutilated victims — moaning, quivering, howling 
(they are vivified, not by the animal souls but by ele- 
mental life) pulsing with hatred to the tormentor — 
rehearsing his worst experiments with automatic 
regularity, conscious of all the horror, and yet im- 


96 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

periously impelled to the self -torment by the habit 
set up during earth-life. 

It is well once again to remember, ere quitting 
this dreary region, that we have here no arbitrary 
punishments inflicted from outside, but only the in- 
evitable working out of the causes set going by each 
person. During physi'^al life they yielded to the 
vilest impulses and drew into, built into, their astral 
bodies the materials which alone could vibrate in 
answer to those impulses; this self -built body be- 
comes the prison-house of the soul, and must fall 
into ruins ere the soul can escape from it. As in- 
evitably as a drunkard must live in his repulsive 
soddened physical body here, so must he live in his 
equally repulsive astral body there. The harvest 
sown is reaped after its kind. Such is the law in 
all the worlds, and it may not be escaped. Nor in- 
deed is the astral body there more revolting and 
horrible than it was when the man was living upon 
earth and made the atmosphere around him fetid 
with his astral emanations. But people on earth do 
not generally recognize its ugliness, being astrally 
blind. 

Further, we may cheer ourselves in contemplating 
these unhappy brothers of ours by remembering 
that their sufferings are but temporary, and are giv- 
ing a much-needed lesson in the life of the soul. 
By the tremendous pressure ot Nature's disregarded 
laws they are learning the existence of those laws^ 
and the misery that accrues from ignoring them in 
life and conduct. The lesson they would not learn 


THE WORLD S ASTRAL DOUBLE. 9/ 

during earth-life, whirled away on the torrent of 
lusts and desires, is pressed on them here, and will 
be pressed on them in their succeeding lives, until 
the evils are eradicated and the man has risen into a 
better life. Nature's lessons are sharp, but in the 
long run they are merciful, for they lead to the evo- 
lution of the soul and guide it to the winning of its 
immortality. 

Let us pass to a more cheerful region. The sec- 
ond division of the astral world may be said to be 
the astral double of the physical, for the astral bod- 
ies of all things and of many people are largely com- 
posed of the matter belonging to this division of the 
astral plane, and it is therefore more closely in touch 
with the physical world than any other part of the 
astral. The great majority of people make some 
stay here, and a very large proportion of these are 
consciously awake in it. These latter are folk whose 
interests were bound up in the trivial and petty ob- 
jects of life, who set their hearts on trifles, as well 
as those who allowed their lower natures to rule 
them, and who died with the appetites still active 
and desirous of physical enjoyment. Having largely 
sent their life outwards in these directions, thus 
building their astral bodies largely of the materials 
that responded very readily to material impacts, 
they are held by these bodies in the neighborhood 
of their physical attractions. They are mostly dis- 
satisfied, uneasy, restless, with more or less of suf- 
fering according to the vigor of the wishes they 
cannot gratify; some even undergo positive pain 
7 


98 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

from this cause, and are long delayed ere these 
earthly longings are exhausted. Many unnecessa- 
rily lengthen their stay by seeking to communicate 
with the earth, in whose interests they are entan- 
gled, by means of mediums, who allow them to use 
their physical bodies for this purpose, thus supply- 
ing the loss of their own. From them comes most 
of the mere twaddle with which every one is familiar 
who has had experience of public spiritualistic 
stances, the gossip and trite morality of the petty 
lodging-house and small shop — feminine, for the 
most part. As these earth-bound souls are gener- 
ally of small intelligence, their communications are 
of no more interest (to those already convinced of 
the existence of the soul after death) than was their 
conversation when they were in the body, and — just 
as on earth — they are positive in proportion to their 
ignorance, representing the whole astral world as 
identical with their own very limited area. There, 
as here : 

They think the rustic cackle of their bui^g^h 
The murmur of the world. 

It is from this region that people who have died 
with some anxiety on their minds will sometimes 
seek to communicate with their friends in order to 
arrange the earthly matter that troubles them; if 
they cannot succeed in showing themselves, or in 
impressing their wishes by a dream on some friend, 
they will often cause much annoyance by knockinga 
and other noises, directly intended to draw atten- 


VIOLENT GRIEF. 99 

tion or caused unconsciously by their restless efforts. 
It is a charity in such cases for some competent per- 
son to communicate with the distressed entity and 
learn his wishes, as he may thus be freed from the 
anxiety which prevents him from passing onwards. 
Souls, while in this region, may also very easily 
have their attention drawn to the earth, even al- 
though they would not spontaneously have turned 
back to it, and this disservice is too often done to 
them by the passionate grief and craving for their 
beloved presence by friends left behind on earth. 
The thought-forms set up by these longings throng 
round them, beat against them, and oftentimes 
arouse them if they are peacefully sleeping, or vio- 
lently draw their thoughts to earth if they are al- 
ready conscious. It is especially in the former case 
that this unwitting selfishness on the part of friends 
on earth does mischief to their dear ones that they 
would themselves be the first to regret ; and it may 
be that the knowledge of the unnecessary suffering 
thus caused to those who have passed through death 
may, with some, strengthen the binding force of the 
religious precepts which enjoin submission to the 
divine law and the checking of excessive and rebel- 
lious grief. 

The third and fourth regions of the kamalokic 
world differ but little from the second, and might 
almost be described as etherealized copies of it, the 
fourth being more refined than the third, but the 
general characteristics of the three subdivisions 
being very similar. Souls of somewhat more pro- 


lOO THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

gressed types are found there, and although they 
are held there by the encasement built by the activ- 
ity of their earthly interests, their attention is for 
the most part directed onwards rather than back- 
wards, and, if they are not forcibly recalled to the 
concerns of earth-life, they will pass on without very 
much delay. Still, they are susceptible to earthly 
stimuli, and the weakening interest in terrestrial 
affairs may be reawakened by cries from below. 
Large numbers of educated and thoughtful people, 
who were chiefly occupied with worldly affairs dur- 
ing their physical lives, are conscious in these re- 
gions, and may be induced to communicate through 
mediums, and, more rarely, seek such communica- 
tion themselves. Their statements are naturally of 
a higher type than those spoken of as coming from 
the second division, but are not marked by any 
characteristics that render them more valuable than 
similar statements made by persons still in the body. 
Spiritual illumination does not come from Kama- 
loka. 

The fifth subdivision of Kamaloka ofifers many 
new characteristics. It presents a distinctly lumi- 
nous and radiant appearance, eminently attractive 
to those accustomed only to the dull hues of earth, 
and justifying the epithet astral, starry, given to th< 
whole plane. Here are situated all the materializec 
heavens which play so large a part in popular relig 
ions all the world over. The happy hunting-ground 
of the Red Indian, the Valhalla of the Norsemen 
the houri-fiUed paradise of the Muslim, the goldei 


MATERIALISTIC HEAVENS. lOI 

jewelled-gated New Jerusalem of the Christian, the 
lyceum-filled heaven of the materialistic reformer, 
all have here their places. Men and women who 
clung desperately to every " letter that killeth" have 
here the literal satisfaction of their cravings, uncon- 
sciously creating in astral matter by their powers of 
imagination, fed on the mere husks of the world's 
Scriptures, the cloud-built palaces whereof they 
dreamed. The crudest religious beliefs find here 
their temporary cloudland realization, and literalists 
of every faith, who were filled with selfish longings 
for their own salvation in the most materialistic of 
heavens, here find an appropriate, and to them en- 
joyable, home, surrounded by the very conditions in 
which they believed. The religious and philanthrop- 
ic busybodies, who cared more to carry out their 
own fads and impose their own ways on their neigh- 
bors than to work unselfishly for the increase of 
human virtue and happiness, are here much to the 
fore, carrying on reformatories, refuges, schools, to 
their own great satisfaction, and much delighted are 
they still to push an astral finger into an earthly pie 
with the help of a subservient medium whom they 
patronize with lofty condescension. They build as- 
tral churches and schools and houses, reproducing 
the materialistic heavens they coveted ; and though 
to keener vision their erections are imperfect, even 
pathetically grotesque, they find them all-sufficing. 
People of the same religions flock together and co- 
operate with each other in various ways, so that 
communities are formed, diflEering as widely from 


I02 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

each other as do similar communities on earth. 
When they are attracted to the earth they seek, for 
the most part, people of their own faith and coun- 
try, chiefly by natural aflSnity, doubtless, but also 
because barriers of language still exist in Kamaloka, 
as may be noticed occasionally in messages received 
in spiritualistic circles. Souls from this region often 
take the most vivid interest in attempts to establish 
communication between this and the next world, 
and the "spirit-guides" of average mediums come, 
for the most part, from this and from the region 
next above. They are generally aware that there 
are many possibilities of higher life before them, 
and that they will, sooner or later, pass away into 
worlds whence communication with this earth will 
not be possible. 

The sixth kamalokic region resembles the fifth, 
but is far more refined, and is largely inhabited by 
souls of a more advanced type, wearing out the as- 
tral vesture in which much of their mental energies 
had worked while they were in the physical body. 
Their delay here is due to the large part played by 
selfishness in their artistic and intellectual life, and 
to the prostitution of their talents to the gratifica- 
tion of the desire-nature in a refined and delicate 
way. Their surroundings are of the best that arc 
found in Kamaloka, as their creative thoughts fash- 
ion the luminous materials of their temporary home 
into fair landscapes and rippling oceans, snow-clac 
mountains and fertile plains, scenes that are of fairy- 
like beauty compared with even the most exquisite 


\ 


STUDENTS IN KAMALOKA. IO3 

that earth can show. Religionists also are found 
here, of a slightly more progressed kind than those 
in the division immediately below, and with more 
definite views of their own limitations. They look 
forward more clearly to passing out of their present 
sphere, and reaching a higher state. 

The seventh, the highest, subdivision of Kama- 
loka, is occupied almost entirely by intellectual men 
and women who were either pronouncedly material- 
istic while on earth, or who are so wedded to the 
ways in which knowledge is gained by the lower 
mind in the physical body that they continue its 
pursuit in the old ways, though with enlarged facul- 
ties. One recalls Charles Lamb's dislike of the idea 
that in heaven knowledge would have to be gained 
" by some awkward process of intuition" instead of 
through his beloved books. Many a student lives 
for long years, sometimes for centuries — according 
to H. P. Blavatsky — literally in an astral library, 
conning eagerly all books that deal with his favor- 
ite subject, and perfectly contented with his lot. 
Men who have been keenly set on some line of in- 
tellectual investigation, and have thrown off the 
physical body with their thirst for knowledge un- 
slaked, pursue their object still with unwearied per- 
sistence, fettered by their clinging to the physical 
modes of study. Often such men are still sceptical 
as to the higher possibilities that lie before them, 
and shrink from the prospect of what is practically a 
second death — the sinking into unconsciousness ere 
the soul is born into the higher life of heaven. Poll- 


: .'4 Till-: ANCIKNT WKSDOM. 

». -i". i, statesmen, men of science, dwell for a while 
•1 ti'is region, slowly disentangling themselves from 
•.'!o astr^il body, still held to the lower life by their 
';ov.!i and vivid interest in the movements in which 
il^cy huvo played so large a part, and in the effort to 
wurk out astrally some of the schemes from which 
IkMth snatched them ere yet they had reached 
'luition. 

To all, however, sooner or later — save to that 

<nM minority who during earth-life never felt one 

V'uch of unselfish love, cf intellectual aspiration, of 

• cco^juition of something or some one higher than 

•.■K-nisclves — there comes a time when the bonds of 

. !c a^icral body are finally shaken off, while the soul 

-. I'v-i iiito brief unconsciousness of its surroundings, 

• xc I'x* viuconsciousness that follows the dropping 

-.1 .'J i>.o physical body, to be awakened by a sense 

>.'.>>, iutouse, immense, fathomless, undreamed 

>c bliss of the heaven-world, of the world to 

^.' V*. \v i:s own nature it belongs. Low and vile 

.,.. v».c Xvu many of its passions, trivial and sor- 

. jv o: its longings, but it had gleams of a 

V. U....IC. broken lights now and then from a 

^5;,«vui, and these must ripen as seeds to the 

XM' tt^irvest, and however poor and few 
^ V v;. x^-: uiir return. The man passes on to 
^ a. *ttiv^^. and to eat and assimilate its 

...^^i!.* .tj'**^. as it is sometimes called, or the 
^^ . 3^x.^^Mrtcd entity, consists of the frag- 

V. , on ** Devachan." 


ASTRAL CORPSES. IO5 

metits of the seven concentric shells before de- 
scribed, held together by the remaining magnetism 
of the soul. Each shell in turn has disintegrated, 
until the point is reached when mere scattered frag- 
ments of it remain ; these cling by magnetic attrac- 
tion to the remaining shells, and when one after 
another has been reduced to this condition, until the 
seventh or innermost is reached and itself disinte- 
grates, the man himself escapes, leaving behind him 
these remains. The shell drifts vaguely about in 
the kamalokic world, automatically and feebly re- 
peating its accustomed vibrations, and as the re- 
maining magnetism gradually disperses, it falls into 
a more and more decayed condition, and finally dis- 
integrates completely, restoring its materials to the 
general mass of astral matter, exactly as does the 
physical body to the physical world. This shell 
drifts wherever the astral currents may carry it, and 
may be vitalized, if not too far gone, by the mag- 
netism of embodied souls on earth, and so restored 
to some amount of activity. It will suck up mag- 
netism as a sponge sucks up water, and will then 
take on an illusory appearance of vitality, repeating 
more vigorously any vibrations to which it was ac- 
customed; these are often set up by the stimulus of 
thoughts common to the departed soul and friends 
and relations on earth, and such a vitalized shell 
may play quite respectably the part of a communi- 
cating intelligence; it is, however, distinguishable 
— apart from the use of astral vision — by its auto- 
matic repetitions of familiar thoughts, and by the 


I06 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

total absence of all originality and of any traces of 
knowledge not possessed during physical life. 

Just as souls may be delayed in their progress by 
foolish and inconsiderate friends, so may they be 
aided in it by wise and well-directed efforts. Hence 
all religions, which retain any traces of the occult 
wisdom of their Founders, enjoin the use of " pray- 
ers for the dead. " These prayers with their accom- 
panying ceremonies are more or less useful accord- 
ing to the knowledge, the love, and the will-power 
by which they are ensouled. They rest on that uni- 
versal truth of vibration by which the universe is 
built, modified, and maintained. Vibrations are set 
up by the uttered sounds, arranging astral matter 
into definite forms, ensouled by the thought en- 
shrined in the words. These are directed towards 
the kamalokic entity, and, striking against the as- 
tral body, hasten its disintegration. With the decay 
of occult knowledge these ceremonies have become 
less and less potent, until their usefulness has almost 
reached a vanishing-point. Nevertheless they are 
still sometimes performed by a man of knowledge, 
and then exert their rightful influence. Moreover, 
every one can help his beloved departed by sending 
to them thoughts of love and peace and longing for 
their swift progress through the kamalokic world 
and their liberation from astral fetters. No one 
should leave his " dead" to go on a lonely way, un- 
attended by loving hosts of these guardian angel 
thought-forms, helping them forward to joy. 


CHAPTER IV. 

The Mental Plane. 

The mental plane, as its name implies, is that 
which belongs to consciousness working as thought ; 
not of the mind as it works through the brain, but 
as it works in its own world, unencumbered with 
physical spirit-matter. This world is the world of 
the real man. The word "man" comes from the 
Sanskrit root " man," and this is the root of the San- 
skrit verb "to think," so that man means thinker; 
he is named by his most characteristic attribute, in- 
telligence. In English the word "mind" has to 
stand for the intellectual consciousness itself, and 
also for the effects produced on the physical brain 
by the vibrations of that consciousness ; but we have 
now to conceive of the intellectual consciousness as 
an entity, an individual — a being, the vibrations of 
whose life are thoughts, thoughts which are im- 
ages, not words. This individual is Manas, or the 
Thinker ;* he is the Self, clothed in the matter, and 
working within the conditions, of the higher subdi- 

* Derived from Manas is the technical name, the m^nasic 
plane, Englished as "mental." We might call it the plane of 
the mind proper, to distinguish its activities from those of the 
mind working in the flesh. 


I08 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

visions of the mental plane. He reveals his pres- 
ence on the physical plane by the vibrations he sets 
up in the brain and nervous system ; these respond 
to the thrills of his life by sympathetic vibrations, 
but in consequence of the coarseness of their mate- 
rials they can reproduce only a small section of his 
vibrations, and even that very imperfectly. Just as 
science asserts the existence of a vast series of ethe- 
ric vibrations, of which the eye can only see a small 
fragment, the solar light-spectrum, because it can 
vibrate only within certain limits, so can the physi- 
cal thought-apparatus, the brain and nervous sys- 
tem, think only a small fragment of the vast series 
of mental vibrations set up by the Thinker in his 
own world. The most receptive brains respond up 
to the point of what we call great intellectual power; 
the exceptionally receptive brains respond up to the 
point of what we call genius ; the exceptionally un- 
receptive brains respond only up to the point we call 
idiocy ; but every one sends beating against his brain 
millions of thought-waves to which it cannot re- 
spond, owing to the density of its materials, and 
just in proportion to its sensitiveness are the so- 
called mental powers of each. But before studying 
the Thinker, it will be well to consider his world, 
the mental plane itself. 

The mental plane is that which is next to the as- 
tral, and is separated from it only by differences of 
materials, just as the astral is separated from the 
physical. In fact, we may repeat what was said as 
to the astral and the physical with regard to the 


MENTAL SPIRIT-MATTER. IO9 

mental and the astral. Life on the mental plane is 
more active than on the astral, and form is more 
plastic. The spirit-matter of that plane is more 
highly vitalized and finer than any grade of matter 
in the astral world. The ultimate atom of astral 
matter has innumerable aggregations of the coarsest 
mental matter for its encircling sphere-world, so 
that the disintegration of the astral atom yields a 
mass of mental matter of the coarsest kinds. Under 
these circumstances it will be understood that the 
play of the life-forces on this plane will be enor- 
mously increased in activity, there being so much 
less mass to be moved by them. The matter is in 
constant, ceaseless motion, taking form under every 
thrill of life, and adapting itself without hesitation 
to every changing motion. "Mind-stuff," as it has 
been called, makes astral spirit-matter seem clumsy, 
hea\'y, and lustreless, although compared with the 
physical spirit-matter it is so fairy-light and lumi- 
nous. But the law of analogy holds good, and gives 
us a clue to guide us through this superastral region, 
the region that is our birthplace and our home, al- 
though, imprisoned in a foreign land, we know it not, 
and gaze at descriptions of it with the eyes of aliens. 
Once again here, as on the two lower planes, the 
subdivisions of the spirit-matter of the plane are 
seven in number. Once again, these varieties enter 
into countless combinations, of every variety of com- 
plexity, yielding the solids, liquids, gases, and ethers 
of the mental plane. The word "solid" seems in- 
deed absurd, when speaking of even the most sub- 


no THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

stantial forms of mind-stuff; yet as they are dense 
in comparison with other kinds of mental materials, 
and as we have no descriptive words save such as 
are based on physical conditions, we must e'en use 
it for lack of a better. Enough if we understand 
that this plane follows the general law and order of 
Nature, which is, for our globe, the septenary basis, 
and that the seven subdivisions of matter are of less- 
ening densities, relatively to each other, as the phys- 
ical solids, liquids, gases, and ethers; the seventh, 
or highest, subdivision being composed exclusively 
of the ultimate mental atoms. 

These subdivisions are grouped under two head- 
ings, to which the somewhat inefi&cient and unintel- 
ligible epithets "formless" and "form" have been 
assigned.* The lower four — the first, second, third, 
and fourth subdivisions — are grouped together as 
" with form :" the higher three — the fifth, sixth, and 
seventh subdivisions — are grouped as "formless." 
The grouping is necessary, for the distinction is a 
real one, although one difficult to describe, and the 
regions are related in consciousness to the divisions 
in the mind itself — as will appear more plainly a lit- 
tle farther on. The distinction may perhaps be best 
expressed by saying that in the lower four subdivi- 
sions the vibrations of consciousness give rise to 
forms, to images or pictures, and every thought ap- 
pears as a living shape ; whereas in the higher three, 
consciousness, though still, of course, setting up vi- 

♦Arftpa, without form; rftpa, form. Rftpa is form, shape, 
body. 


ABSTRACT AND CONCRETE THOUGHTS. Ill 

brations, seems rather to send them out as a mighty 
stream of living energy, which does not body itself 
into distinct images while it remains in this higher 
region, but which sets up a variety of forms all linked 
by some common condition when it rushes into the 
lower worlds. The nearest analogy that I can find 
for the conception I am trying to express is that of 
abstract and concrete thoughts : an abstract idea of 
a triangle has no form, but connotes any plane fig- 
ure contained within three right lines, the angles of 
which make two right angles; such an idea, with 
conditions but without shape, thrown into the lower 
world, may give birth to a vast variety of figures, i 
right-angled, isosceles, scalene, of any color and 
size, but all fulfilling the conditions — concrete tri- 
angles, each one with a definite shape of its own. 
The impossibility of giving in words a lucid exposi- 
tion of the difference in the action of consciousness 
in the two regions is due to the fact that words are 
the symbols of images and belong to the workings 
of the lower mind in the brain, and are based wholly 
upon those workings ; while the "formless" region 
belongs to the Pure Reason, which never works 
within the narrow limits of language. 

The mental plane is that which reflects the Uni- 
versal Mind in Nature, the plane which in our little 
system corresponds with that of the Great Mind in 
the Kosmos.* In its higher regions exist all the 

* Mahat, the Third Logos, or Divine Creative Intelligence, 
the Brahm^ of the Hindus, the Mandjusri of the Northern 
Buddhists, the Holy Spirit of the Christians. 


112 THE ANCIENT WISDOIC 

archetypal ideas which are now in course of concrete 
evolution, and in its lower the working out of these 
into successive forms, to be duly reproduced in the 
astral and physical worlds. Its materials are capa- 
ble of combining under the impulse of thought vi- 
brations, and can give rise to any combination which 
thought can construct ; as iron can be made into a 
spade for digging or into a sword for slaying, so can 
mind-stuff be shaped into thought-forms that help 
or that injure; the vibrating life of the Thinker 
shapes the materials around him, and according to 
his volitions so is his work. In that region thought 
and action, will and deed, are one and the same 
thing — spirit-matter here becomes the obedient ser- 
vant of the life, adapting itself to every creative 
motion. 

These vibrations, which shape the matter of the 
plane into thought-forms, give rise also — from their 
swiftness and subtlety — to the most exquisite and 
constantly changing colors, waves of varying shades 
like the rainbow hues in mother-of-pearl, ethereal- 
ized and brightened to an indescribable extent, 
sweeping over and through every form, so that each 
presents a harmony of rippling, living, luminous, 
delicate colors, including many not ever known to 
earth. Words can give no idea of the exquisite 
beauty and radiance shown in combinations of this 
subtle matter, instinct with life and motion. Every 
seer who has witnessed it, Hindu, Buddhist, Chris- 
tian, speaks in rapturous terms of its glorious beauty, 
and ever confesses his utter inability to describe it ; 


BRILLIANT THOUGHT FORMS. 1 1 3 

words seem but to coarsen and deprave it, however 
deftly woven in its praise. 

Thought-forms naturally play a large part among 
the living creatures that function on the mental 
plane They resemble those with which we are al- 
ready familiar in the astral world, save that they are 
far more radiant and more brilliantly colored, are 
stronger, more lasting, and more fully vitalized. 
As the higher intellectual qualities become more 
clearly marked, these forms show very sharply 
defined outlines, and there is a tendency to a singu- 
lar perfection of geometrical figures accompanied 
by an equally singular purity of luminous color. 
But, needless to say at the present stage of human- 
ity, there is a vast preponderance of cloudy and 
irregularly shaped thoughts, the production of the 
ill-trained minds of the majority. Rarely beautiful 
artistic thoughts are also here encountered, and it 
is little wonder that painters who have caught, in 
dreamy vision, some glimpse of their ideal, oft fret 
against their incapacity to reproduce its glowing 
beauty in earth's dull pigments. These thought- 
forms are built out of the elemental essence of the 
plane, the vibrations of the thought throwing the 
elemental essence into a corresponding shape, and 
this shape having the thought as its informing life. 
Thus again we have '* artificial elementals" created 
in a way identical with that by which they come 
into being in the astral regions. All that is said in 
Chapter II. of their generation and of their impor- 
tance may be repeated of those of the mental plane, 
8 


y 


114 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

with here the additional responsibility on their cre- 
ators of the greater force and permanence belonging 
to those of this higher world. The elemental es- 
sence of the mental plane is formed by the Monad 
in the stage of its descent immediately preceding its 
entrance into the astral world, and it constitutes 
the second elemental kingdom, existing on the four 
lower subdivisions of the mental plane. The three 
higher subdivisions, the " formless," are occupied by 
the first elemental kingdom, the elemental essence 
there being thrown by thought into brilliant corus- 
cations, colored streams, and flashes of living fire, 
instead of into definite shapes, taking as it were its 
first lessons in combined action, but not yet assum- 
ing definite limitations of forms. 

On the mental plane, in both its great divisions, 
exist numberless Intelligences, whose lowest bodies 
are formed of the luminous matter and elemental 
essence of the plane — Shining Ones who guide the 
processes of natural order, overlooking the hosts of 
lower entities before spoken of, and yielding sub- 
mission in their several hierarchies to their great 
overlords of the seven Elements.* They are, as 
may readily be imagined, beings of vast knowledge, 
of great power, and most splendid in appearance, 
radiant, flashing creatures, myriad-hued, like rain- 
bows of changing supernal colors, of stateliest im- 

* These are the Arftpa and Rilpa Devas of the Hindus and 
the Buddhists, the " Lords of the heavenly and the earthly" of 
the Zoroastrians, the Archangels and Angels of the Christians 
and Mahommedans. 


"invisible helpers." 115 

perial mien, calm energy incarnate, embodiments of 
resistless strength. The description of the great 
Christian Seer leaps to the mind, when he wrote of 
a mighty angel : " A rainbow was upon his head, and 
his face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pil- 
lars of fire." * " As the sound of many waters" are 
their voices, as echoes from the music of the spheres. 
They guide natural order, and rule the vast compa- 
nies of the elementals of the astral world, so that 
their cohorts carry on ceaselessly the processes of 
Nature with undeviating regularity and accuracy. 

On the lower mental plane are seen many chelas 
at work in their mental bodies, f freed for the time 
from their physical vestures. When the body is 
wrapped in deep sleep the true man, the Thinker, 
may escape from it, and work untrammelled by its 
weight in these higher regions. From here he can 
aid and comfort his fellow-men by acting directly on 
their minds, suggesting helpful thoughts, putting 
before them noble ideas, more effectively and speed- 
ily than he can do when encased in the body. He 
can see their needs more clearly and therefore can 
supply them more perfectly, and it is his highest 
privilege and joy thus to minister to his struggling 
brothers, without their knowledge of his service or 
any idea of theirs as to the strong arm that lifts 
their burden, or the soft voice that whispers solace 
in their pain. Unseen, unrecognized, he works, 

* Rev elation t x. i. 

t Usually called the M^y^vl Riipa, or illusory body, when 
arranged for independent functioning in the mental world. 


Il6 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

serving his enemies as gladly and as freely as his 
friends, dispensing to individuals the stream of be- 
neficent forces that are poured down from the great 
Helpers in higher spheres. Here also are some- 
times seen the glorious figures of the Masters, 
though for the most part They reside on the highest 
level of the " formless" division of the mental plane ; 
and other Great Ones may also sometimes come 
hither oii some mission of compassion requiring such 
lower manifestation. 

Communication between intelligences functioning 
consciously on this plane, whether human or non- 
human, whether in or out of the body, is practically 
instantaneous, for it is with " the speed of thought. " 
Barriers of space have here no power to divide, and 
any soul can come into touch with any one by merely 
directing his attention to him. Not only is com- 
munication thus swift, but it is also complete, if the 
souls are at about the same stage of evolution ; no 
words fetter and obstruct the communion, but the 
whole thought flashes from the one to the other, or, 
perhaps more exactly, each sees the thought as con- 
ceived by the other. The real barriers between 
souls are the differences of evolution; the less 
evolved can know only as much of the more highly 
evolved as he is able to respond to ; the limitation 
can obviously be felt only by the higher one, as the 
lesser has all that he can contain. The more evolved 
a soul, the more does he know of all around him, the 
nearer does he approach to realities ; but the mental 
plane has also its veils of illusion, it must be remem- 


. A^-JiL 


ALL WORLDS ARE HERE. 11/ 

bered, though they be far fewer and thinner than 
those of the astral and the physical worlds. Each 
soul has its own mental atmosphere, and, as all im- 
pressions must come through this atmosphere, they 
are all distorted and colored. The clearer and purer 
the atmosphere, and the less it is colored by the per- 
sonality, the fewer are the illusions that can befall it. 
The three highest subdivisions of the mental 
plane are the habitat of the Thinker himself, and he 
dwells on one or other of these, according to the 
stage of his evolution. The vast majority live on 
the lowest level, in various stages of evolution; a 
comparatively few of the highly intellectual dwell 
on the second level, the Thinker ascending thither 
— to use a phrase more suitable to the physical than 
to the mental plane — when the subtler matter of 
that region preponderates in him, and thus necessi- 
tates the change; there is, of course, no "ascend- 
ing," no change of place, but he receives the vibra- 
tions of that subtler matter, being able to respond 
to them, and he himself is able to send out forces 
that throw its rare particles into vibration. The 
student should familiarize himself with the fact that 
rising in the scale of evolution does not move him 
from place to place, but renders him more and more 
able to receive impressions. Every sphere is around 
Jts^ the astral, the mental, the buddhic, the nirvanic, 
and worlds higher yet, the life of the supreme God ; 
we need not stir to find them, for they are here ; but 
our dull unreceptivity shuts them out more effec- 
tively than millions of miles of mere sx^ace. We are 


Il8 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

conscious only of that which affects us, which stirs 
us to responsive vibration, and as we become more 
and more receptive, as we draw into ourselves finer 
and finer matter, we come into contact with subtler 
and subtler worlds. Hence, rising from one level 
to another means that we are weaving our vestures 
of finer materials and can receive through them the 
contrasts of finer worlds ; and it means further that 
in the Self within these vestures diviner powers are 
waking from latency into activity, and are sending 
out their subtler thrills of life. 

At the stage now reached by the Thinker, he is 
fully conscious of his surroundings and is in posses- 
sion of the memory of his past. He knows the bod- 
ies he is wearing, through which he is contacting 
the lower planes, and he is able to influence and 
guide them to a great extent. He sees the difi&cul- 
ties, the obstacles, they are approaching — the results 
of past careless living — and he sets himself to pour 
into them energies by which they may be better 
equipped for their task. His direction is sometimes 
felt in the lower consciousness as an imperiously 
compelling force that will have its way, and that im- 
pels to a course of action for which all the reasons 
may not be clear to the dimmer vision caused by the 
mental and astral garments. Men who have done 
great deeds have occasionally left on record their 
consciousness of an inner uplifting and compelling 
power, which seemed to leave them no choice save 
to do as they had done. They were then acting as 
the real men ; the Thinkers, that are the inner men, 


"the idea came." 119 

were doing the work consciously through the bodies 
that then were fulfilling their proper functions as 
vehicles of the individual. To these high powers 
all will come as evolution proceeds. 

On the third level of the upper region of the men- 
tal plane dwell the Egos of the Masters, and of the 
Initiates who are Their chelas, the Thinkers having 
here a preponderance of the matter of this region 
in their bodies. From this world of subtlest mental 
forces the Masters carry on Their beneficent work 
for humanity, raining down noble ideals, inspiring 
thoughts, devotional aspirations, streams of spiritual 
and intellectual help for men. Every force there 
generated rays out in myriad directions, and the 
noblest, purest souls catch most readily these help- 
ful influences. A discovery flashes into the mind of 
the patient searcher into Nature's secrets; a new 
melody entrances the ear of a great musician ; the 
answer to a long-studied problem illumines the in- 
tellect of a lofty philosopher ; a new energy of hope 
and love suffuses the heart of an unwearied phil- 
anthropist. Yet men think that they are left un- 
cared for, although the very phrases they use : " the 
thought occurred to me," "the idea came to me," 
"the discovery flashed on me," unconsciously testify 
to the truth known to their inner selves though the 
outer eyes be blind. 

Let us now turn to the study of the Thinker and 
his vesture as they are found in men on earth. The 
body of the consciousness, conditioning it in the four 
lower subdivisions of the mental plane — the mental 


120 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

body, as we term it — is formed of combinations of 
the matter of these subdivisions. The Thinker, the 
individual, the Human Soul — formed in the way de- 
scribed in the latter part of this chapter — when he 
is coming into incarnation, first radiates forth some 
of his energy in vibrations that attract round him, 
and clothe him in, matter drawn from the four lower 
subdivisions of his own plane. According to the 
nature of the vibrations are the kinds of matter they 
attract ; the finer kinds answer the swifter vibrations 
and take form under their impulse; the coarser 
kinds similarly answer the slower ones ; just as a wire 
will sympathetically sound out a note — i.e,^ a given 
number of vibrations — coming from a wire similar 
in weight and tension to itself, but will remain dumb 
amid a chorus of notes from wires dissimilar to itself 
in these respects, so do the different kinds of matter 
assort themselves in answer to different kinds of vi- 
brations. Exactly according to the vibrations sent 
out by the Thinker will be the nature of the mental 
body that he thus draws around him, and this men- 
tal body is what is called the lower mind, the lower 
Manas, because it is the Thinker clothed in the mat- 
ter of the lower subdivisions of the mental plane 
and conditioned by it in his further working. None 
of his energies which are too subtle to move this 
matter, too swift for its response, can express them- 
selves through it ; he is therefore limited by it, con- 
ditioned by it, restricted by it in his expression of 
himself. It is the first of his prison-houses during 
his incarnate life, and while his energies are acting 


A 


MIND AND FEELING. 121 

within it he is largely shut off from his own higher 
world, for his attention is with the outgoing ener- 
gies and his life is thrown with them into the 
mental body, often spoken of as a vesture, or sheath, 
or vehicle — any expression will serve which con- 
notes the idea that the Thinker is not the mental 
body, but formed it and uses it in order to express 
as much of himself as he can in the lower mental 
region. It must not be forgotten that his energies, 
still pulsing outwards, draw round him also the 
coarser matter of the astral plane as his astral body ; 
and during his incarnate life the energies that ex- 
press themselves through the lower kinds of mental 
matter are so readily changed by it into the slower 
vibrations that are responded to by astral matter 
that the two bodies are continually vibrating to- 
gether, and become very closely interwoven; the 
coarser the kinds of matter built into the mental 
body, the more intimate becomes this union, so that 
the two bodies are sometimes classed together and 
even taken as one.* When we come to study Re- 
incarnation we shall find this fact assuming vital 
importance. 
According to the stage of evolution reached by 

* Thus the Theosophist will speak of K^ma-Manas, meaning 
the mind as working in and with the desire-nature, affecting 
and affected by the animal nature. The Ved^ntiu classes the 
two together, and speaks of the Self as working in the raano- 
mayakosha, the sheath composed of the lower mind, emotions, 
and passions. The European psychologist makes ** feelings" 
one section of his tripartite division of "mind," and includes 
under feelings both emotions and sensations. 


122 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

the man will be the type of mental body he forma 
on his way to become again incarnate, and we may 
study, as we did with the astral body, the respective 
mental bodies of three types of men — (a) an un- 
developed man; {6) an average man; (c) a spirit- 
ually advanced man. 

(a) In the undeveloped man the mental body is 
but little perceptible, a small amount of unorganized 
mental matter, chiefly from the lowest subdivision 
of the plane, being all that represents it. This is 
played on almost entirely from the lower bodies, 
being set vibrating feebly by the astral storms raised 
by the contacts with material objects through the 
sense-organs. Except when stimulated by these as- 
tral vibrations it remains almost quiescent, and even 
under their impulses its responses are sluggish. No 
definite activity is generated from within, these 
blows from the outer world being necessary to arouse 
any distinct response. The more violent the blows, 
the better for the progress of the man, for each re- 
sponsive vibration aids in the embryonic develop- 
ment of the mental body. Riotous pleasure, anger, 
rage, pain, terror, all these passions, causing whirl- 
winds in the astral body, awaken faint vibrations in 
the mental, and gradually these vibrations, stirring 
into commencing activity the mental consciousness, 
cause it to add something of its own to the impres- 
sions made on it from without. We have seen that 
the mental body is so closely mingled with the as- 
tral that they act as a single body, but the dawning 
mental faculties add to the astral passions a certain 


-.1 


SENSE AND MIND PICTURES. 123 

strength and quality not apparent in them when 
they work as purely animal qualities. The impres- 
sions made on the mental body are more permanent 
than those made on the astral, and they are con- 
sciously reproduced by it. Here memory and the 
organ of imagination begin, and the latter gradually 
moulds itself, the images from the outer world work- 
ing on the matter of the mental body and forming 
its materials into their own likeness. These images, 
bom of the contacts of the senses, draw round them- 
selves the coarsest mental matter; the dawning pow- 
ers of consciousness reproduce these images, and 
thus accumulate a store of pictures that begin to 
stimulate action initiated from within, from the 
wish to experience again through the outer organs 
the vibrations that were found pleasant, and to avoid 
those productive of pain. The mental body then 
begins to stimulate the astral, and to arouse in it the 
desires that, in the animal, slumber until awakened 
by a physical stimulus ; hence we see in the unde- 
veloped man a persistent pursuit of sense-gratifi- 
cation never found in the lower animals, a lust, a 
cruelty, a calculation to which they are strangers. 
The dawning powers of the mind, yoked to the ser- 
vice of the senses, make of man a far more danger- 
ous and savage brute than any animal, and the 
stronger and more subtle forces inherent in the 
mental spirit-matter lend to the passion-nature an 
energy and a keenness that we do not find in the 
animal-world. But these very excesses lead to their 
own correction by the sufferings which they cause. 


124 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

and these resultant experiences play upon the con- 
sciousness and set up new images on which the im- 
agination works. These stimulate the consciousness 
to resist many of the vibrations that reach it by way 
of the astral body from the external world, and to 
exercise its volition in holding the passions back in- 
stead of giving them free rein. Such resistant vi- 
brations are set up in, and attract towards, the men- 
tal body, finer combinations of mind-stuff, and tend 
also to expel from it the coarser combinations that 
vibrate responsively to the passional notes set up in 
the astral body ; by this struggle between the vibra- 
tions set up by passion-images and the vibrations 
set up by the imaginative reproduction of past ex- 
periences, the mental body grows, begins to develop 
a definite organization, and to exercise more and 
more initiative as regards external activities. While 
the earth-life is spent in gathering experiences, the 
intermediate life is spent in assimilating them, as 
we shall see in detail in the following chapter, so 
that in each return to earth the Thinker has an in* 
creased stock of faculties to take shape as his mental 
body. Thus the undeveloped man, whose mind is 
the slave of his passions, grows into the average 
man, whose mind is a battleground in which pas- 
sions and mental powers wage war with varying 
success, about balanced in their forces, but who is 
gradually gaining the mastery over his lower nature. 
(J?) In the average man, the mental body is much 
increased in size, shows a certain amount of orga- 
nization, and contains a fair proportion of matter 


EXERCISE AND DISUSE. 125 

drawn from the second, third, and fourth subdivi- 
sions of the mental plane. The general law which 
regulates all the building up and modifying of the 
mental body may here be fitly studied, though it is 
the same principle already seen working in the 
lower realms of the astral and physical worlds. Ex- 
ercise increases, disuse atrophies and finally de- 
stroys. Every vibration set up in the mental body 
causes a change in its constituents, throwing out of 
it, in the part affected, the matter that cannot vi- 
brate sympathetically, and replacing it by suitable 
materials drawn from the practically illimitable store 
around. The more a series of vibrations is repeated, 
the more does the part affected by them increase in 
development; hence, it may be noted in passing, 
the injury done to the mental body by over-special- 
ization of mental energies. Such mistaken direc- 
tion of these powers causes a lopsided development 
of the mental body ; it becomes proportionately over- 
developed in the region in which these forces are 
continually playing and proportionately undeveloped 
in other parts, perhaps equally important. A har- 
monious and proportionate all-round development 
is the object to be sought, and for this are needed a 
calm self-analysis and a definite direction of means 
to ends. A knowledge of this law further explains 
certain familiar experiences, and affords a sure hope 
of progress. When a new study is commenced, or 
a change in favor of high morality is initiated, the 
early stages are found to be fraught with difficulties ; 
sometimes the effort is even abandoned because the 


126 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

obstacles in the way of its success appear to be in- 
surmountable. At the beginning of any new men- 
tal imdertaking, the whole automatism of the mental 
body opposes ii ; the materials, habituated to vibrate 
in a particular way, cannot accommodate themselves 
to the new impulses, and the early stage consists 
chiefly of sending out thrills cf force which are frus- 
trated, so far as setting up vibrations in the mental 
body are concerned, but which are the necessary 
preliminary to any such sympathetic vibrations, as 
they shake out of the body the old refractory mate- 
rials and draw into it the sympathetic kinds. Dur- 
ing this process, the man is not conscious of any 
progress ; he is conscious only of the frustration of 
his efforts and of the dull resistance he encounters. 
Presently, if he persists, as the newly attracted 
materials begin to function, he succeeds better in 
his attempts, and at last, when all the old materials 
are expelled and the new are working, he finds him- 
self succeeding without an effort, and his object is 
accomplished. The critical time is during the first 
stage; but if he trust in the law, as sure in its work- 
ing as every other law in Nature, and persistently 
repeat his efforts, he miist succeed ; and a knowledge 
of this fact may cheer him when otherwise he would 
be sinking in despair. In this way, then, the aver- 
age man may work on, finding with joy that as he 
steadily resists the promptings of the lower nature 
he is conscious they are losing their power over him, 
for he is expelling from his mental body all the 
materials that are capable of being thrown by them 


A PERFECTED MENTAL BODY. 127 

into sympathetic vibrations. Thus the mental body 
gradually comes to be composed of the finer con- 
stituents of the four lower subdivisions of the men- 
tal plane, until it has become the radiant and ex- 
quisitely beautiful form which is the mental body 
of the 

(c) Spiritually developed man. From this body 
, all the coarser combinations have been eliminated, 
so that the objects of the senses no longer find in it, 
or in the astral body connected with it, materials 
that respond sympathetically to their vibrations. It 
contains only the finer combinations belonging to 
each of the four subdivisions of the lower mental 
world, and of these again the materials of the third 
and fourth subplanes very much predominate in its 
composition over the materials of the second and 
first, making it responsive to all the higher work- 
ings of the intellect, to the delicate contacts of the 
higher arts, to all the pure thrills of the loftier emo- 
tions. Such a body enables the Thinker who is 
clothed in it to express himself much more fully in 
the lower mental region and in the astral and physi- 
cal worlds; its materials are capable of a far wider 
range of responsive vibrations, and the impulses 
from a loftier realm mould it into nobler and subtler 
organization. Such a body is rapidly becoming 
ready to reproduce every impulse from the Thinker 
which is capable of expression on the lower sub- 
divisions of the mental plane; it is growing into a 
perfect instrument for activities in this lower men- 
tal world. 


128 THE ANCIENT WISDOH. 

A clear understanding of the nature of the mental 
body would much modify modem education, and 
would make it far more serviceable to the Thinker 
than it is at present. The general characteristics of 
this body depend on the past lives of the Thinker on 
earth, as will be thoroughly understood when we 
have studied Reincarnation and Karma. The body 
is constituted on the mental plane, and its materials 
depend on the qualities that the Thinker has gar- 
nered within himself as the results of his past ex- 
periences. All that education can do is to provide 
such external stimuli as shall arouse and encourage 
the growth of the useful faculties he already pos- 
sesses, and stunt and help in the eradication of those 
that are undesirable. The drawing out of these in- 
born faculties, and not the cramming of the mind 
with facts, is the object of true education. Nor 
need memory be cultivated as a separate faculty, 
for memory depends on attention — that is, on the 
steady concentration of the mind on the subject 
studied — and on the natural affinity between the 
subject and the mind. If the subject be liked — that 
is, if the mind has a capacity for it — memory will 
not fail, provided due attention be paid. Therefore 
education should cultivate the habit of steadv con- 
centration, of sustained attention, and should be 
directed according to the inborn faculties of the 
pupil. 

Let us now pass into the " formless" divisions of 
the mental plane, the region which is man's true 
home during the cycle of his reincarnations, into 


I 


THE AURIC EGG. 1 29 

which he is bom, a baby soul, an infant Ego, an 
embryonic individuality, when he begins his purely 
human evolution. * 

The outline of this Ego, tho Thinker, is oval in 
shape, and hence H- P. Blavatsky speaks of this 
body of Manas which endures throughout all his in- 
carnations as the Auric Egg. Formed of the matter 
of the three highest subdivisions of the mental 
plane, it is exquisitely fine, a film of rarest subtlety, 
even at its first inception ; and, as it develops, it be- 
comes a radiant object of supernal glory and beau- 
ty, the shining One, as it has been aptly named, f 
What is this Thinker? He is the divine Self, as al- 
ready said, limited, or individualized, by this subtle 
body drawn from the materials of the "formless" 
region of the mental plane. J This matter — drawn 
around a ray of the Self, a living beam of the one 
Light and Life of the universe — shuts off this ray 
from its Source, so far as the external world is con- 
cerned, encloses it within a filmy shell of itself, and 
so makes it " an individual." The life is the Life of 
the Logos, but all the powers of that Life are lying 
latent, concealed; everything is there potentially, 
germinally, as the tree is hidden within the tiny 
germ in the seed. This seed is dropped into the 

* See Chapters VII. and VIII., on "Reincarnation." 
f This is the Augoiedes of the Neo-Platonists. the " spiritual 
Dody" of S. Paul, 

i The Self, working in the Vigny^namayakosha, the sheath 
of discriminative knowledge, according to the Ved^ntic classifi- 
cation. 

9 


130 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

soil of human life that its latent forces may be 
quickened into activity by the sun of joy and the 
rain of tears, and be fed by the juices of the life-soii 
that we call experience, until the germ grows into a 
mighty tree, the image of its generating Sire. Hu- 
man evolution is the evolution of the Thinker; he 
takes on bodies on the lower mental, the astral, and 
the physical planes, wears them through earthly, 
astral, lower mental life, dropping them successively 
at the regular stages of this life-cycle as he passes 
from world to world, but ever storing up within 
himself the fruits he has gathered by their use on 
each plane. At first, as little conscious as a baby's 
earthly body, he almost slept through life after life, 
till the experiences playing on him from without 
awakened some of his latent forces into activity; 
but gradually he assumed more and more part in the 
direction of his life, until, with manhood reached, 
he took his life into his own hands, and an ever- 
increasing control over his future destiny. 

The growth of the permanent body which, with 
the divine consciousness, forms the Thinker is ex- 
tremely slow. Its technical name is the causal body, 
because he gathers up within it the results of all ex- 
periences, and these act as causes, moulding future 
lives. It is the only permanent one among the bod- 
ies used during incarnation, the mental, astral and 
physical bodies being reconstituted for each fresh 
life : as each perishes in turn, it hands on its harvest 
to the one above it, and thus all the harvests are 
finally stored in the permanent body; when th^ 


MATERIALS OF THE CAUSAL BODY. I3I 

Thinker returns to incarnation, he sends out his en- 
ergies, constituted of these harvests, on each succes- 
sive plane, and thus draws round him new body 
after body suitable to his past. The growth of the 
causal body itself, as said, is very slow, for it can 
vibrate only in answer to impulses that can be ex- 
pressed in the very subtle matter of which it is com- 
posed, thus weaving them into the texture of its 
being. Hence the passions, which play so large a 
part in the early stages of human evolution, cannot 
directly affect its growth The Thinker can work 
into himself only the experiences that can be repro- 
duced in the vibrations of the causal body, and these 
must belong to the mental region, and be highly in- 
tellectual or loftily moral in their character ; other- 
wise its subtle matter can give no sympathetic 
vibration in answer. A very little reflection will 
convince any one how little material, suitable for the 
growth of this lofty body, he affords by his daily 
life ; hence the slowness of evolution, the little prog- 
ress made. The Thinker should have more of him- 
self to put out in each successive life, and, when 
this is the case, evolution goes swiftly forward. 
Persistence in evil courses reacts in a kind of in- 
direct way on the causal body, and does more harm 
than the mere retardation of growth ; it seems after 
a long time to cause a certain incapacity to respond 
to the vibrations set up by the opposite good, and 
thus to delay growth for a considerable period after 
the evil has been renounced. Directly to injure 
the causal body evil of a highly intellectual and 


T32 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

refined kind is necessary, the " spiritual evil" men- 
tioned in the various Scriptures of the world. This 
is fortunately rare, rare as spiritual good, and found 
only among the highly progressed, whether they be 
following the Right-hand or the Left-hand Path.* 

The habitat of the Thinker, of the Eternal Man, is 
on the fifth subplane, the lowest level of the " form- 
less" region of the mental plane. The great masses 
of mankind are here, scarce yet awake, still in tne 
infancy of their life. The Thinker develops con- 
sciousness slowly, as his energies, playing on the 
lower planes, there gather experience, which is in- 
drawn with these energies as they return to him 
treasure-laden with the harvest of a life. This Eter- 
nal Man, the individualized Self, is the actor ^in 
every body that he wears; it is his presence that 
gives the feeling of " I" alike to body and mind, the 
"I" being that which is self-conscious and which, 
by illusion, identifies itself with that vehicle in which 
it is most actively energizing. To the man of the 
senses the ** I" is the physical body and the desire- 
nature ; he draws from these his enjoyment, and he 
thinks of these as himself, for his life is in them. 
To the scholar the " I" is the mind, for in its exer- 
cise lies his joy and therein his life is concentrated. 

* The Right-hand Path is that which leads to divine man- 
hood, to Adeptship used in the service of the worlds. The 
Left-hand Path is that which also leads to Adeptship, but to 
Adeptship that is used to frustrate the progress of evolution 
and is turned to selfish individual ends. They are sometimes 
called the WTiite and Black Paths respectively. 


THE PURE REASON. 1 33 

Few can rise to the abstract heights of spiritual 
philosophy, and feel this Eternal Man as "I," with 
memory ranging back over past lives and hopes 
ranging forward over future births. The physiolo- 
gists tell us that if we cut the finger we do not really 
feel the pain there where the blood is flowing, but that 
the pain is felt in the brain, and is by imagination 
thrown outwards to the place of injury ; the feeling of 
pain in the finger is, they say an illusion ; it is put by 
imagination at the point of contact with the object 
causing the injury ; so also will a man feel pain in 
an amputated limb, or rather in the space the limb 
used to occupy. Similarly does the one "I," the 
Inner Man, feel suffering and joy in the sheaths 
which enwrap him, at the points of contact with the 
external world, and feels the sheath to be himself, 
knowing not that this feeling is an illusion, and that 
he is the sole actor and experiencer in every sheath. 
Let us now consider, in this light, the relations 
between the higher and lower mind and their action 
on the brain. The mind, Manas, the Thinker, is 
one, and is the Self in the causal body; it is the 
source of innumerable energies, of vibrations of in- 
numerable kinds. These it sends out, raying out- 
wards from itself. The subtlest and finest of these 
are expressed in the matter of the causal body, 
which alone is fine enough to respond to them ; they 
form what we call the Pure Reason, whose thoughts 
are abstract, whose method of gaining knowledge is 
intuition; its very "nature is knowledge," and it 
recognizes truth at sight as congruous with itself. 


134 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

Less subtle vibrations pass outwards, attracting the 
matter of the lower mental region, and these are the 
Lower Manas, or lower mind — the coarser energies 
of the higher expressed in denser matter ; these we 
can the intellect, comprising reason, judgment, im- 
agination, comparison, and the other mental facul- 
ties; its thoughts are concrete, and its method is 
logic; it argues, it reasons, it infers. These vibra- 
tions, acting through astral matter on the etheric 
brain, and by that on the dense physical brain, set 
up vibrations therein, which are the heavy and slow 
reproductions of themselves — heavy and slow, be- 
cause the energies lose much of their swiftness in 
moving the heavier matter. This feebleness of re- 
sponse when a vibration is initiated in a rare me- 
dium and then passes into a dense one is familiar to 
every student of physics. Strike a bell in air and it 
sounds clearly; strike it in hydrogen, and let the 
hydrogen vibrations have to set up the atmospheric 
waves, and how faint the result. Equally feeble 
are the workings of the brain in response to the 
swift and subtle impacts of the mind ; yet that is all 
that the vast majority know as their " consciousness. " 
The immense importance of the mental workings 
of this "consciousness" is due to the fact that it is 
the only medium whereby the Thinker can gather 
the harvest of experience by which he grows. While 
it is dominated by the passions it runs riot, and he 
is left unnourished and therefore unable to develop; 
while it is occupied wholly in mental activities con- 
cerned with the outer world, it can arouse only his 


i 


THE THINKER AT WORK. 1 35 

lower energies ; only as he is able to impress on it 
the true object of its life, does it commence to fulfil 
its most valuable functions of gathering what will 
arouse and nourish his higher energies. As the 
Thinker develops he becomes more and more con- 
scious of his own inherent powers, and also of the 
workings of his energies on the lower planes, of the 
bodies which those energies have drawn around 
him. He at last begins to try to influence them, 
using lis memory of the past to guide his will, and 
these impressions we call "conscience" when they 
deal with morals, and "flashes of intuition" when 
they enlighten the intellect. When these impres- 
sions are continuous enough to be normal, we speak 
of theii aggregate as "genius." The higher evolu- 
tion of the Thinker is marked by his increasing 
control over his lower vehicles, by their increasing 
susceptibility to his influence, and their increasing 
contributions to his growth. Those who would de- 
libemtely aid in this evolution may do so by a care- 
ful training of the lower mind and of the moral 
chiracter, by steady and well-directed effort. The 
ha:)it of quiet, sustained, and sequential thought, 
di:'ected to non-worldly subjects, of meditation, of 
stidy, develops the mind-body and renders it a bet- 
ter instrument ; the effort to cultivate abstract think- 
tig is also useful, as this raises the lower mind to- 
wards the higher, and draws into it the subtlest 
materials of the lower mental plane. In these and 
cognate ways all may actively co-operate in their 
own higher evolution, each step forward making the 


136 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

succeeding steps more rapid. No effort, not even 
the smallest, is lost, but is followed by its full effect, 
and every contribution gathered and handed inwards 
is stored in the treasure-house of the causal body for 
future use. Thus evolution, however slow and halt- 
ing, is yet ever onwardc, and the divine Life, ever 
unfolding in every soul, slowly subdues all things to 
itself. 


V 


.«. 


CHAPTER V. 

Devachan. 

The word Devachan is the theosophical name for 
heaven, and, literally translated, means the Shining 
Land, or the Land of the Gods.* It is a specially 
guarded part of the mental plane, whence all sorrow 
and all evil are excluded by the action of the great 
spiritual Intelligences who superintend human evo- 
lution; and it is inhabited by human beings who 
have cast off their physical and astral l:odies, and 
who pass into it when their stay in Kamaloka is 
completed. The devachanic life consists of two 
stages, of which the first is passed in the four lower 
subdivisions of the mental plane, in which the 
Thinker still wears the mental body and is condi- 
tioned by it, being employed in assimilating the 
materials gathered by it during the earth-life from 
which he has just emerged. The second stage is 
spent in the " formless" world, the Thinker escaping 
from the mental body, and living his own unencum- 

* Devasthan. the place of the Gods, is the Sanscrit equiva- 
lent. It is the Svarga of the Hindus ; the Sukh^vati of the 
Buddhists; the Heaven of the Zoroastrians and Christians, 
and of the less materialized among the Mahommedans. 


138 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

bered life in the full measure of the self -conscious- 
ness and knowledge to which he has attained. 

The total length of time spent in Devachan depends 
upon the amount of material for the devachanic life 
which the soul has brought with it thither from its 
life on earth. The harvest of fruit for consumption 
and assimilation in Devachan consists of all the pure 
thoughts and emotions generated during earth-life, 
all the intellectual and moral efforts and aspirations, 
all the memories of useful work and plans for hu- 
man service — everything which is capable of being 
worked into mental and moral faculty, thus assist- 
ing in the evolution of the soul. Not one is lost, 
however feeble, however fleeting; but selfish animal 
passions cannot enter, there being no material in 
which they can be expressed. Nor does all the evil 
in the past life, though it may largely preponderate 
over the good, prevent the full reaping of whatever 
scant harvest of good there may have been; the 
scantiness of the harvest may render the devachanic 
life very brief, but the most depraved, if he has had 
any faint longings after the right, any stirrings of 
tenderness, must have a period of devachanic life in 
which the seed of good may put forth its tender 
shoots, in which the spark of good may be gently 
fanned into a tiny flame. 

In the past, when men lived with their hearts 
largely fixed on heaven and directed their lives with 
a view to enjoying its bliss, the period spent in 
Devachan was very long, lasting sometimes for 
many thousands of years; at the present time, 


LENGTH OF DEVACHANIC LIFE. 1 39 

men's minds being so much more centred on earth, 
and so few of their thoughts comparatively being 
directed towards the higher life, their devachanic 
periods are correspondingly shortened. Similarly, 
the time spent in the higher and lower regions of 
the mental plane* respectively is proportionate to 
the amount of thought generated severally in the 
mental and in the causal bodies; all the thoughts 
belonging to the personal self, to the life just closed 
— with all its ambitions, interests, loves, hopes and 
fears — all these have their fruition in the Devachan 
where forms are found ; while those belonging to the 
higher mind, to the regions of abstract, impersonal 
thinking, have to be worked out in the " formless" 
devachanic region. The majority of people only 
just enter that lofty region to pass swiftly out again ; 
some spend there a large portion of their devachanic 
existence ; a few spend there almost the whole. 

Ere entering into any details let us try to grasp 
some of the leading ideas which govern the deva- 
chanic life, for it is so different from physical life 
that any description of it is apt to mislead by its 
very strangeness. People realize so little of their 
mental life, even as led in the body, that when they 
are pi*esented with a picture of mental life out of the 
body they lose all sense of reality, and feel as though 
they had passed into a world of dream. 

The first thing to grasp is that mental life is far 
more intense, vivid, and nearer to reality than the 

♦CaUed technically the Arfipa and Rftpa Devachan — exist- 
ing on the arupa and riipa levels of the mental plane. 


I40 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

life of the senses. Everything we see and touch and 
hear and taste and handle down here is two removes 
farther from the reality than everything we contact 
in Devachan. We do not even there see things as 
they are, but the things that we see down here have 
two mere veils of illusion enveloping them. Our 
sense of reality here is an entire delusion; we know 
nothing of things, of people, as they are ; all that we 
know of them are the impressions they make on our 
senses, and the conclusions, often erroneous, which 
our reason deduces from the aggregate of these im- 
pressions. Get and put side by side the ideas of a 
man held by his father, his closest friend, the girl 
who adores him, his rival in business, his deadliest 
enemy, and a casual acquaintance, and see how in^ 
congruous the pictures. Each can only give the im- 
pressions made on his own mind, and how far are 
they from the reality of what the man is, seen by 
eyes that pierce all veils and behold the whole man. 
We know of each of our friends the impressions they 
make on us, and these are strictly limited by our 
capacity to receive ; a child may have as his father a 
great statesman of lofty purpose and imperial aims, 
but that guide of a nation's destinies is to him only 
his merriest playfellow, his most enticing story- 
teller. We live in the midst of illusions, but have 
the feeling of reality, and this yields us content. 
In Devachan we shall also be surrounded by illu- 
sions — though, as said, two removes nearer to real- 
ity — and there also we shall have a similar feeling 
of reality which will yield us content 


MUTUAL CRITICISM. I4I 

The illusions of earth, though lessened, are not 
escaped from in the lower heavens, though contact 
is more real and more immediate. For it must 
never be forgotten that these heavens are part of a 
great evolutionary scheme, and^ until man has found 
the real Self, his own unreality makes him subject 
to illasions. One thing, however, which produces 
the feeling of reality in earth-life and of unreality 
when we study Devachan, is that we look at earth- 
life from within, under the full sway of its illusions, 
while we contemplate Devachan from outside, free 
for the time from its veil of maya. 

In Devachan the process is reversed, and its in- 
habitants feel their own life to be the real one and 
look on the earth-life as full of the most patent illu- 
sions and misconceptions. On the whole, they are 
nearer the truth than the physical critics of their 
heaven-world. 

Next, the Thinker — being clad only in the mental 
body and being in the untrammelled exercise of its 
powers — manifests the creative nature of these 
powers in a way and to an extent that down here we 
can hardly realize. On earth a painter, a sculptor, 
a musician, dreams dreams of exqtiisite beauty, 
creating their visions by the powers of the mind ; 
but when they seek to embody them in the coarse 
materials of earth they fall far short of the mental 
creation. The marble is too resistant for perfect 
form, the pigments too muddy for perfect color. 
In heaven, all they think is at once reproduced in 
form, for the rare and subtle matter of the heaven- 


142 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

world is mind-stiiff , the medium in which the mind 
normally works when free from passion, and it takes 
shape with every mental impulse. Each man, there- 
fore, in a very real sense, makes his own heaven, 
and the beauty of his surroundings is indefinitely 
increased, according to the wealth and energy of his 
mind. As the soul develops his powers, his heaven 
grows more and more subtle and exquisite ; all the 
limitations in heaven are self -created, and heaven 
expands and deepens with the expansion and deep- 
ening of the soul. While the soul is weak and sel- 
fish, narrow and ill-developed, his heaven shares 
these pettinesses ; but it is always the best that is in 
the soul, however poor that best may be. As the 
man evolves, his devachanic lives become fuller, 
richer, more and more real, and advanced souls 
come into ever closer and closer contact with each 
other, enjoying wider and deeper intercourse. A 
life on earth, thin, feeble, vapid, and narrow, men- 
tally and morally, produces a comparatively thin, 
feeble, vapid and narrow life in Devachan, where 
only the mental and the moral survive. We canngt 
have more than we are^ and our harvest is according 
to our sowing. "Be not deceived; God is not 
mocked; for whatsoever a man soweth, that,*' and 
neither more nor less, "shall he also reap." Our 
indolence and greediness would fain reap where we 
have not sowed, but in this universe of law the Good 
Law, mercifully just, brings to each the exact wages 
of his work. 

The mental impressions, or mental pictures, we 


-J 


OUR FRIENDS IN HEAVEN. 1 43 

make of our friends will dominate us in Devachan. 
Round each soul throng those he loved in life, and 
every image of the loved ones that live in the heart 
becomes a living companion of the soul in heaven. 
And they are unchanged. They will be to us there 
as they were here, and no otherwise. The outer 
semblance of our friend as it affected our senses, we 
form out of mind-stuff in Devachan by the creative 
powers of the mind ; what was here a mental picture 
is there — as in truth it was here, although we knew 
it not — an objective shape in living mind-stuff, abid- 
ing in our own mental atmosphere; only what is 
dull and dreamy here is forcibly living and vivid 
there. And with regard to the true communion, 
that of soul with soul? That is closer, nearer, 
dearer than anything we know here, for, as we have 
seen, there is no barrier on the mental plane be- 
tween soul and soul; exactly in proportion to the 
reality of soul-life in us is the reality of soul-com- 
munion there ; the mental image of our friend is our 
own creation ; his form is as we knew and loved it ; 
and his soul breathes through that form to ours just 
to the extent that his soul and ours can throb in 
sympathetic vibration. But we can have no touch 
with those we knew on earth if the ties were only of 
the physical or astral body, or if they and we were 
discordant in the inner life; therefore into our 
Devachan no enemy can enter, for sympathetic ac- 
cord of minds and hearts can alone draw men to- 
gether there. Separateness of heart and mind 
means separation in the heavenly life, for all that is 


144 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

lower than the heart and mind can find no means of 
expression there. With those who are far beyond 
us in cvohition we come into contact just as far as 
we can respond to them ; great ranges of their being 
will stretch beyond our ken, but all that we can 
touch is ours. Further, these greater ones can and 
do aid us in the heavenly life, under conditions we 
shall study presently, helping us to grow towards 
them, and thus to be able to receive more and more. 
There is then no separation by space or time, but 
there is separation by absence of sympathy, by lack 
of accord between hearts and minds. 

In heaven we are with all whom we love and with 
all whom we admire, and we commune with them to 
the limit of our capacity, or, if we are the more ad- 
vanced, of theirs. We meet them in the forms we 
loved on earth, with perfect memory of our earthly 
relationships, for heaven is the flowering of all 
earth's buds, and the marred and feeble loves of 
earth expand into beauty and into power there. The 
communion being direct, no misunderstandings of 
words or thoughts can arise ; each sees the thought 
his friend creates, or as much of it as he can- re- 
spond to. 

Devachan, the heaven-world, is a world of bliss, 
of joy unspeakable. But it is much more than this, 
much more than a rest for the weary. In Devachan 
all that was valuable in the mental and moral ex^ 
periences of the Thinker during the life just ended 
is worked out, meditated over, and is gradually 
transmuted into definite mental and moral faculty. 


NOT MEMORY BUT FACULTY. I45 

into powers which he will take with him to his next 
rebirth. He does not work into the mental body 
the actual memory of the past, for the mental body 
will, in due course, disintegrate ; the memory of the 
past abides only in the Thinker himself, who has 
lived through it and who endures. But these facts 
of past experiences are worked into mental capacity, 
so that if a man has studied a subject deeply the 
effects of that study will be the creation of a special 
faculty to acquire and master that subject when it is 
first presented to him in another incarnation. He 
will be bom with a special aptitude for that line of 
study, and will pick it up with great facility. 
Everything thought upon earth is thus utilized in 
Devachan; every aspiration is worked up into 
power; all frustrated efforts become faculties and 
abilities; struggles and defeats re-appear as ma- 
terials to be wrought into instruments of victory; 
sorrows and errors shine luminous as precious 
metals to be worked up into wise and well-directed 
volitions. Schemes of beneficence, for which power 
and skill to accomplish were lacking in the past, are 
in Devachan worked out in thought, acted out, as it 
were, stage by stage, and the necessary power and 
skill are developed as faculties of the mind to be put 
into use in a future life on earth, when the clever 
and earnest student shall be reborn as a genius, 
when the devotee shall be reborn as a saint. Life 
then, in Devachan, is no mere dream, no lotus-land 
of purposeless idling; it is the land in which the 

mind and heart develop, unhindered by gross matter 
10 


146 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

and by trivial cares, where weapons are forged for 
earth's fierce battle-fields, and where the progress of 
the future is secured. 

When the Thinker has consumed in tlie mental 
body all the fruits belonging to it of his earthly life, 
he shakes it off and dwells unencumbered in his own 
place. All the mental faculties which express them- 
selves on the lower levels are drawn within the 
causal body — with the germs of the passional life 
that were drawn into the mental body when it left 
the astral shell to disintegrate in Kamaloka — ^and 
these become latent for a time, lying within the 
causal body, forces which remain concealed for lack 
of material in which to manifest.* The mental 
body, the last of the temporary vestures of the true 
man, disintegrates, and its materials return to the 
general matter of the mental plane, whence they 
were drawn when the Thinker last descended into 
incarnation. Thus the causal body alone remains, 
the receptacle and treasure-house of all that has 
been assimilated from the life that is over. The 
Thinker has Inished a round of his long pilgrimage 
and dwells for a while in his own native land. 

His condition as to consciousness depends entirely 

* The thoughtful student may here find a fruitful suggestion 
on the problem of continuing consciousness after the cycle of 
the universe is trodden. Let him place Ishvara in the place 
of the Thinker, and let the faculties that are the fruits of a 
life represent the human lives that are the fruits of a Universe. 
He may then catch some glimpse of what is necessary for con* 
sciousness, during the interval between universes. 


SELF-CONSCIOUS AT LAST. 1 4/ 

on the point he has reached in evolution. In his 
early stages of life he will merely sleep, wrapped in 
unconsciousness, when he has lost his vehicles on the 
lower planes. His life will pulse gently within him, 
assimilating any little results from his closed earth- 
existence that may be capable of entering into his 
substance ; but he will have no consciousness of his 
surroundings. But as he develops, this period of 
his life becomes more and more important, and oc- 
cupies a greater proportion of his devachanic exist- 
ence. He becomes self-conscious, and thereby con- 
scious of his surroundings — of the not-self — and his 
memory spreads before him the panorama of his life, 
stretching backwards into the ages of the past. He 
sees the causes that worked out their effects in the 
last of his life-experiences, and studies the causes 
he has set going in this latest incarnation. He as- 
similates and works into the texture of the causal 
body all that was noblest and loftiest in the closed 
chapter of his life, and by his inner activity he de- 
velops and co-ordinates the materials in his causal 
body. He comes into direct contact with great 
souls, whether in or out of the body at the time, en- 
joys communion with them, learns from their riper 
wisdom and longer experience. Each succeeding 
devachanic life is richer and deeper; with his ex- 
panding capacity to receive, knowledge flows into 
him in fuller tides ; more and more he learns to un- 
derstand the workings of the law, the conditions of 
evolutionary progress, and thus returns to earth- 
life each time with greater knowledge, more effec- 


148 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

tive power, his vision of the goal of life becoming 
ever clearer and the way to it more plain before 
his feet. 

To every Thinker, however unprogressed, there 
comes a moment of clear vision when the time ar- 
rives for his return to the life of the lower worlds. 
For a moment he sees his past and the causes work- 
ing from it into the future, and the general map of 
his next incarnation is also unrolled before him. 
Then the clouds of lower matter surge round him 
and obscure his vision, and the cycle of another in- 
carnation begins with the awakenings of the powers 
of the lower mind, and their drawing round them, 
by their vibrations, materials from the lower mental 
plane to form the new mental body for the opening 
chapter of his life-history. This part of our sub- 
ject, however, belongs in its detail to the chapters on 
reincarnation. 

We left the soul asleep,* having shaken off the 
last remains of his astral body, ready to pass out of 
Kamaloka into Devachan, out of purgatory into 
heaven. The sleeper awakens to a sense of joy un 
speakable, of bliss immeasurable, of peace that pass- 
eth understanding. Softest melodies are breathing 
round him, tenderest hues greet his opening eyes, 
the very air seems music and color, the whole being 
is suffused with light and harmony. Then through 
the golden haze dawn sweetly the faces loved on 
earth, etherealized into the beauty which expresses 
their noblest, loveliest emotions, unmarred by the 
* See Chapter III. , on Kamaloka, p. 83. 


THE LOWER HEAVENS. 1 49 

troubles and the passions of the lower worlds. Who 
may tell the bliss of that awakening, the glory of 
that first dawning of the heaven-world? 

We will now study the conditions in detail of the 
seven subdivisions of Devachan, remembering that 
in the four lower we are in a world of form, and a 
world, moreover, in which every thought presents 
itself at once as a form. This world of form be- 
longs to the personality, and every soul is therefore 
surrounded by as much of his past life as has entered 
into his mind and can be expressed in pure mind- 
stuff. 

The first, or lowest, region is the heaven of the 
least progressed souls, whose highest emotion on 
earth was a narrow, sincere, and sometimes unsel- 
fish love for family and friends. Or it may be that 
they felt some loving admiration for some one they 
met on earth who was purer and better than them- 
selves, or felt some wish to lead a higher life, or 
some passing aspiration towards mental and moral 
expansion. There is not much material here out of 
which faculty can be moulded, and their life is but 
very slightly progressive; their family affections 
will be nourished and a little widened, and they will 
be reborn after a while with a somewhat improved 
emotional nature, with more tendency to recognize 
and respond to a higher ideal. Meanwhile they are 
enjoying all the happiness they can receive; their 
cup is but a small one, but it is filled to the brim 
with bliss, and they enjoy all that they are able to 
conceive of heaven. Its purity, its harmony, play 


; .L.v> L. -.Ml !:..::iiuiiics fr- :ii higher spheres, and 

. ..1> . 'J.:: ..;:;1".:::^ :l:rough the heavenly places. 

■1c:l .l*.s^ .vv: :::id :::e masters of painting and of 

.-..; ■.•.:^, .jaiiiii:^ new hues of color, new curves 

':'..L..:.'.: ^cauLv. And here also are others 

. cv... :!'.oi:.;!i i^reatly aspiring, and who are 

•.:^ .■ .i:is::'.-.::i:ig longings into powers, and dreams 

:. ...w\;'.::v<, :hai shall be theirs in another life. 

S»...:\ :^.:> i:::o X:iture are here, and they are leam- 

.:^^ ■•... "lidc:! secrets; before their eyes are unroU- 

-^ >vs:o;iis oi worlds with all their hidden mech- 

. ::.>:!!, woven series of workings of unimaginable 

■^'^i'.Moy a:iJ complexity; they shall return to earth 

..- ^^Lv..: "discoverers," with unerring intuitions of 

. ;o .nysurious ways of Nature. In this heaven also 

.' :o .:::.'. ciLuJents of the deeper knowledge, the 

..L^^r. cvjrciit pupils who sought the Teachers of 

X • .ice, A ho longed to find a Teacher, and patiently 

.. ^ :. ';».d :.L «^1 that had been given out by some one of 

.^c ^;:x.»w spliltiud Masters who have taught hu- 

.. ;iiy. Here their longings find their fruition, and 

K.c 'hey sought, apparently in vain, are now 

'^.: "'\..l: actors; the eager souls drink in the 

^ . ^ '• -.. sJA»nu and swift their growth and prog- 

'i^\ :u Lheir Masters' feet. As teachers 

., . ui:i-vrs shall tliev be born a^ain on 

\ \ : .. . ':ii Lhc bii'chmark of the teacher's high 

_ . \ .-. .*icai. 

i. 

....J.cLiL <.'ii eoi'th, all unknowing of these 

. . ^O^* '•'^ mvparing for himself a place in 

.. . : v. ., L.. :ic beads with a real devotion 


HEAVENLY MUSIC. IJl 

Passing onwards to the third region, we come to 
those noble and earnest beings who were devoted 
servants of humanity while on earth, and largely 
jKHired out their love to God in the form of works 
for man. They are reaping the reward of their 
good deeds by developing larger powers of useful- 
ness and increased wisdom in their direction. Plans 
of wider beneficence unroll themselves before the 
mind of the philanthropist, and, like an architect, 
he designs the future edifice which he will build in 
a coming life on earth; he matures the schemes 
which he will then work out into actions, and like a 
creative God plans his universe of benevolence, 
which shall be manifested in gross matter when the 
time is ripe. These souls will appear as the great 
philanthropists of yet unborn centuries, who will 
incarnate on earth with innate dower of unselfish 
love and of power to achieve. 

Most varied in character, perhaps, of all the 
heavens is the fourth, for here the powers of the 
most advanced souls find their exercise, so far as 
they can be expressed in the world of form. Here 
the kings of art and of literature are found, exercis- 
ing all their powers of form, of color, of harmony, 
and building greater faculties with which to be re- 
bom when they return to earth. Noblest music, 
ravishing beyond description, peals forth from the 
mightiest monarchs of harmony that earth has 
known, as Beethoven, no longer deaf, pours out his 
imperial soul in strains of unexampled beauty, 
making even the heaven-world more melodious as 


152 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

he draws down harmonies from higher spheres, and 
sends them thrilling through the heavenly places. 
Here also we find the masters of painting and of 
sculpture, learning new hues of color, new curves 
of undreamed beauty. And here also are others 
who failed, though greatly aspiring, and who are 
here transmuting longings into powers, and dreams 
into faculties, that shall be theirs in another life. 
Searchers into Nature are here, and they are learn- 
ing her hidden secrets ; before their eyes are unroll- 
ing systems of worlds with all their hidden mech- 
anism, woven series of workings of unimaginable 
delicacy and complexity ; they shall return to earth 
as great "discoverers," with unerring intuitions of 
the mysterious ways of Nature. In this heaven also 
are found students of the deeper knowledge, the 
eager, reverent pupils who sought the Teachers of 
the race, who longed to find a Teacher, and patiently 
worked at all that had been given out by some one of 
the great spiritual Masters who have taught hu- 
manity. Here their longings find their fruition, and 
Those they sought, apparently in vain, are now 
their instructors; the eager souls drink in the 
heavenly wisdom, and swift their growth and prog- 
ress as they sit at their Masters' feet. As teachers 
and as light-bringers shall they be born again on 
earth, bom with the birthmark of the teacher's high 
office upon them. 

Many a student on earth, all unknowing of these 
subtler workings, is preparing for himself a place in 
this fourth heaven, as he bends with a real devotion 


■i^ 


SAFE HOME. 153 

over the pages of some teacher of genius, over the 
teachings of some advanced soul. He is forming a 
link between himself and the teacher he loves and 
reverences, and in the heaven-world that soul-tie 
will assert itself, and draw together into communion 
the souls it links. As the sun pours down its rays 
into many rooms, and each room has all it can con- 
tain of the solar beams, so in the heaven- world do 
these great souls shine into hundreds of mental 
images of themselves created by their pupils, fill 
them with life, with their own essence, so that each 
student has his master to teach him and yet shuts 
out none other from his aid. 

Thus, for periods long in proportion to the ma- 
terials gathered for consumption upon earth, dwell 
men in these heaven-worlds of form, where all of 
good that the last personal life had garnered finds 
its full fruition, its full working out into minutest 
detail. Then, as we have seen, when everything is 
exhausted, when the last drop has been drained from 
the cup of joy, the last crumb eaten of the heavenly 
feast, all that has been worked up into faculty, that 
is of permanent value, is drawn within the causal 
body, and the Thinker shakes off him the then dis- 
integrating body through which he has found ex- 
pression on the lower levels of the devachanic world. 
Rid of this mental body, he is in his own world, to 
work up whatever of his harvest can find material 
suitable for it in that high realm. 

A vast number of souls touch the lowest level of 
the formless world as it were but for a moment, 


154 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

taking brief refuge there, since all lower vehicles 
have fallen away. But so embryonic are they that 
they have as yet no active powers that there can 
function independently, and they become uncon- 
scious as the mental body slips away into disintegra- 
tion. Then, for a moment, they are aroused to con- 
sciousness, and a flash of memory illumines their 
past and they see its pregnant causes; and a flash of 
foreknowledge illumines their future, and they see 
such effects as will work out in the coming life. 
This is all that very many are as yet able to experi- 
ence of the formless world. For here again, as 
ever, the harvest is according to the sowing, aixd 
how should they who sowed nothing for that lofty 
region expect to reap any harvest therein? 

But many souls have during their earth-life, by 
deep thinking and noble living, sown much seed, the 
harvest of which belongs to this fifth devachanic 
region, the lowest of the three heavens of the form- 
less world. Great is now their reward for having so 
risen above the bondage of the flesh and of passion, 
and they begin to experience the real life of man, 
the lofty existence of the sou^ itself, unfettered by 
vestures belonging to the lower worlds. They learn 
truths by direct vision, and see the fundamental 
causes of which all concrete objects are the results ; 
they study the underlying unities, whose presence 
is masked in the lower worlds by the variety of ir- 
relevant details. Thus they gain a deep knowledge 
of law, and learn to recognize its changeless work- 
ings below results apparently the most incongruous. 


.#yi 


THE WORK OF THE STRONG. IJJ 

thus building into the body that endures firm un- 
shakable convictions, that will reveal themselves in 
earth-life as deep intuitive certainties of the soul, 
above and beyond all reasoning. Here also the 
man studies his own past, and carefully disentangles 
the causes he has set going; he marks their interac- 
tion, the resultants accruing from them, and sees 
something of their workin?f out in lives yet in the 
future. 

In the sixth heaven are more advanced souls, who 
during earth-life had felt but little attraction for its 
passing shows, and who had devoted all their ener- 
gies to the higher intellectual and moral life. For 
them there is no veil upon the past, their memory is 
perfect and unbroken, and they plan the infusion 
into their next life of energies that will neutralize 
many of the forces that are working for hindrance, 
and strengthen many of those that are working for 
good. This clear memory enables them to form 
definite and strong determinations as to actions 
which are to be done and actions which are to be 
avoided, and these volitions they will be able to im- 
press on their lower vehicles in their next birth, 
making certain classes of evils impossible, contrary 
to what is felt to be the deepest nature, and certain 
kinds of good inevitable, the irresistible demands of 
a voice that will not be denied. These souls are 
bom into the world with high and noble qualities 
which render a base life impossible, and stamp the 
babe from its cradle as one of the pioneers of hu- 
manity. The man who has attained to this sixth 


156 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

heaven sees unrolled before him the vast treasures 
of the Divine Mind in creative activity, and can 
study the archetypes of all the forms that are being 
gradually evolved in the lower worlds. There he 
may bathe himself in the fathomless ocean of the 
Divine Wisdom, and unravel the problems connected 
with the working out of those archetypes, the partial 
good that seems as evil to the limited vision of men 
encased in flesh. In this wider outlook, phenomena 
assume their due relative proportions, and he sees 
the justification of the divine ways, no longer to him 
"past finding out** so far as they are concerned with 
the evolution of the lower worlds. The questions 
over which on earth he pondered, and whose an- 
swers ever eluded his eager intellect, are here solved 
by an insight that pierces through phenomenal veils 
and sees the connecting links which make the chain 
complete. Here also the soul is in the immediate 
presence of, and in full communion with, the greater 
souls that have evolved in our humanity, and, es- 
caped from the bonds which make "the past" of 
earth, he enjoys "the ever-present** of an endless 
and unbroken life. Those we speak of here as " the 
mighty dead** are there the glorious living, and the 
soul enjoys the high rapture of their presence, and 
grows more like them as their strong harmony 
attunes his vibrant nature to their key. 

Yet higher, lovelier, gleams the seventh heaven, 
where Masters and Initiates have their intellectual 
home. No soul can dwell there ere yet it has passed 
while on earth through the narrow gateway of Ini- 


ONE WILL, ONE LIFE. IS/ 

tiation, the strait gate that "leadeth unto life" 
unending.* That world is the source of the strong- 
est intellectual and moral impulses that flow down to 
earth; thence are poured forth the invigorating 
streams of the loftiest energy. The intellectual life 
of the world has there its root ; thence genius re- 
ceives its purest inspirations. To the souls that 
dwell there it matters little whether, at the time, 
they be or be not connected with the lower vehicles ; 
they ever enjoy their lofty self-consciousness and 
their communion with those around them ; whether, 
when "embodied,'* they suffuse their lower vehicles 
with as much of this consciousness as they can con- 
tain is a matter for their own choice — they can give 
or withhold as they will. And more and more their 
volitions are guided by the will of the Great Ones, 
whose will is one with the will of the Logos, the will 
which seeks ever the good of the worlds. For here 
are being eliminated the last vestiges of separate- 
nessf in all who have not yet reached final emanci. 
pation — all, that is, who are not yet Masters — and, 
as these perish, the will becomes more and more 
harmonized with the will that guides the worlds. 

Such is an outline of the " seven heavens" into one 
or other of which men pass in due time after the 

♦See Chapter XI., on "Man's Ascent." The Initiate has 
stepped out of the ordinary line of evolution, and is treading 
a shorter and steeper road to human perfection. 

f Ahamk^ra, the "I" making principle, necessary in order 
that self -consciousness may be evolved, but transcended when 
its work is over. 


158 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

" change that men call death. *' For death is only a 
change that gives the soul a partial liberation, re- 
leasing him from the heaviest of his chains. It is 
but a birth into a wider life, a return after brief 
exile on earth to the soul's true home, a passing 
from a prison into the freedom of the upper air. 
Death is the greatest of earth's illusions; there is 
no death, but only changes in life-conditions. Life 
is continuous, unbroken, unbreakable; "unborn, 
eternal, ancient, constant," it perishes not with the 
perishing of the bodies that clothe it. We might as 
well think that the sky is falling when a pot is 
broken, as imagine that the soul perishes when the 
body falls to pieces.* 

The physical, astral, and mental planes are "the 
three worlds" through which lies the pilgrimage of 
the soul, again and again repeated. In these three 
worlds revolves the wheel of human life, and souls 
are bound to that wheel throughout their evolution, 
and are carried by it to each of these worlds in turn. 
We are now in a position to trace a complete life- 
period of the soul, the aggregate of these periods 
making up its life, and we can also distinguish 
clearly the difference between personality and indi- 
viduality. 

A soul, when its stay in the formless world of 
Devachan is over, begins a new life-period by put- 
ting forth the energies which function in the form- 
world of the mental plane, these energies being the 
* A simile used in the Bf^agavad Purdna, 


THE CYCLE OF LIFE. 1 59 

resultant of the preceding life-periods. These, 
passing outwards, gather round themselves, from 
the matter of the four lower mental levels, such ma- 
terials as are suitable for their expression, and thus 
the new mental body for the coming birth is formed. 
The vibration of these mental energies arouses the 
energies which belong to the desire-nature, and these 
begin to vibrate ; as they awake and throb, they at- 
tract to themselves suitable materials for their ex- 
pression from the matter of the astral world, and 
these form the new astral body for the approaching 
incarnation. Thus the Thinker becomes clothed 
with his mental and astral vestures, exactly express- 
ing the faculties evolved during the past stages of 
his life. He is drawn, by forces which will be ex- 
plained later,* to the family which is to provide him 
with a suitable physical encasement, and becomes 
connected with this encasement through his astral 
body. During pre-natal life the mental body be- 
comes involved with the lower vehicles, and this 
connection becomes closer and closer through the 
early years of childhood, until at the seventh year 
they are as completely in touch with the Thinker 
himself as the stage of evolution permits. He then 
begins to slightly control his vehicles, if sufficiently 
advanced, and what we call conscience is his moni- 
tory voice. In any case, he gathers experience 
through these vehicles, and, during the continuance 
of earth-life, stores the gathered experience in its 
own proper vehicle, in the body connected with the 
*See Chapter Vll.i on "Reincarnatiop," 


l60 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

plane to which the experience belongs. When the 
earth-life is over the physical body drops away, and 
with it his power of contacting the physical world, 
and his energies are therefore confined to the astral 
and mental planes. In due course, the astral body 
decays, and the outgoings of his life are confined to 
the mental plane, the astral faculties being gathered 
up and laid by within himself as latent energies. 
Once again, in due course, its assimilative work 
completed, the mental body disintegrates, its ener- 
gies in turn becoming latent in the Thinker, and he 
withdraws his life entirely into the formless de- 
vachanic world, his own native habitat. Thence, 
all the experiences of his life -period in the three 
worlds being transmuted into faculties and powers 
for future use, and contained within himself, he 
anew commences his pilgrimage and treads the 
cycle of another life-period with increased power 
and knowledge. 

The personality consists of the transitory vehicles 
through which the Thinker energizes in the physi- 
cal, astral, and lower mental worlds, and of all the 
activities connected with these. These are bound 
together by the links of memory caused by impres- 
sions made on the three lower bodies ; and, by the 
self-identification of the Thinker with his vehicles, 
the personal " I*' is set up. In the lower stages of 
evolution this " I" is in the physical and passional 
vehicles, in which the greatest activity is shown, 
later it is in the mental vehicle, which then assumes 
predominance. The personality, with its transient 


THE CONFLICT OF LIFE. l6l 

feelings, desires, passions, thus forms a quasi-inde- 
pendent entity, though drawing all its energies from 
the Thinker it enwraps, and as its qualifications, be- 
longing to the lower worlds, are often in direct an- 
tagonism to the permanent interests of the " Dweller 
in the body," conflict is set up in which victory in- 
clines sometimes to the temporary pleasure, some- 
times to the permanent gain. The life of a person- 
ality begins when the Thinker forms his new mental 
body, and it endures until that mental body disin- 
tegrates at the close of its life in the form-world of 
Devachan. 

The individuality consists of the Thinker himself, 
the immortal tree that puts out all these personalities 
as leaves, to last through the spring, summer, and 
autumn of human life All that the leaves take in 
and assimilate enriches the sap that courses through 
their veins, and in the autumn this is withdrawn 
into the parent trunk, and the dry leaf falls and 
perishes. The Thinker alone lives forever; he is 
the man for whom "the hour never strikes," the 
eternal youth who, as the Bhagavad Gttd has it, puts 
on and casts oflE bodies as a man puts on new gar- 
ments and throws off the old Each personality is a 
new part for the immortal Actor, and he treads the 
stage of life over and over again, only in the life- 
drama each character he assumes is the child of the 
preceding ones and the father of those to come, so 
that the life-drama is a continuous history, the his- 
tory of the Actor who plays the successive parts. 

To the three worlds that we have studied is con- 
II 


1 62 THE ANCIENT WISDOlf. 

fined lie life of the Thinker, while he is treading the 
earlier stages of human evolution. A time will 
come in the evolution of humanity when its feet will 
enter loftier realms, and reincarnation will be of the 
past. But while the wheel of birth and death is 
turning, and man is bound thereon by desires that 
I)ertain to the three worlds, his life is led in these 
three regions. 

To the realms that lie beyond we now may turn, 
albeit but little can be said of them that can be either 
useful or intelligible. Such little as may be said, 
however, is necessary for the outlining of the 
Ancient Wisdom. 


CHAPTER VI 
The Buddhic and NirvAnic Planes. 

We have seen that man is an inteiligent self -con < 
scions entity, the Thinker, clad in bodies belonging 
to the lower mental, astral, and physical planes; we 
have now to study the Spirit which is his innermost 
Self, the source whence he proceeds. 

This Divine Spirit, a ray from the Logos, partak- 
ing of His own essential Being, has the triple nature 
of the Logos Himself, and the evolution of man as 
man consists in the gradual manifestation of these 
three aspects, their development from latency into 
activity, man thus repeating in miniature the evolu- 
tion of the universe. Hence he is spoken of as the 
microcosm, the universe being the macrocosm : he is 
called the mirror of the universe, the image, or re- 
flection, of God ;* and hence also the ancient axiom, 
** As above, so below. ** It is this infolded Deity that 
is the guarantee of man's final triumph; this is the 
hidden motive power that makes evolution at once 
possible and inevitable, the upward-lifting force that 
slowly overcomes every obstacle and every difficulty. 
It was this Presence that Matthew Arnold dimly 

*"Let us make man in our image, after our likeness."— 
Gen, u 26. 


164 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

sensed when he wrote of the " Power, not ourselves, 
that makes for righteousness," but he erred in think- 
ing " not ourselves," for it is the very innermost Self 
of all — truly not our separated selves, but our Self. * 
This Self is the One, and hence is spoken of as the 
Monad, f and we siiall need co remember that this 
Monad is the outbreathed life of the Logos, contain- 
ing within itself germinally, or in a state of latency, 
all the divine powers and attributes. These powers 
are brought into manifestation by the impacts aris- 
ing from contact with the objects of the universe into 
which the Monad is thrown ; the friction caused by 
these gives rise to responsive thrills from the life sub- 
jected to their stimuli, and one by one the energies 
of the life pass from latency into activity. The hu- 
man Monad — as it is called for the sake of distinction 
— shows, as we have already said, the three aspects 
of Deity, being the perfect image of God, and in the 
human cycle these three aspects are developed one 
after the other. These aspects are the three great 
attributes of the Divine Life as manifested in the 
universe, existence, bliss, and intelligence,! the 
three Logoi severally showing these forth with all 

A 

* Atm&, the reflection of Param&tmft. 

f It is called the Monad, whether it be the Monad of spirit- 
matter, Atm^ ; or the Monad of form, Atm^-Buddhi ; or the 
human Monad, Atm^-Buddhi-Manas. In each case it is a unit 
and acts as a unit, whether the unit be one-faced, two-faced, 
or three-faced. 

X Satchit^anda is often used in the Hindu Scriptures as the 
abstract name of Brahman, the Trim^rti being the concrete 
manifestations of these. 


DUAL BUT INSEPARATE. l6$ 

the perfection possible within the limits of manifes- 
tation. In man, these aspects are developed in the 
reversed order — ^intelligence, bliss, existence — "ex- 
istence" implying the manifestation of the divine 
powers. In the evolution of man that we have so 
far studied we have been watching the development 
of the third aspect of the hidden Deity — the develop- 
ment of consciousness as intelligence. Manas, the 
Thinker, the human Soul, is the image of the Uni- 
versal Mind, of the Third Logos, and all his long 
pilgrimage on the three lower planes is devoted to 
the evolution of this third aspect, the intellectual 
side of the divine nature in man. While this is pro- 
ceeding, we may consider the other divine energies 
as rather brooding over the man, the hidden source 
of his life, than as actively developing their forces 
within him. They play within themselves, unmani- 
fest. Still, the preparation of these forces for mani- 
festation is slowly proceeding; they are being roused 
from that unmanifested life that we speak of as 
latency by the ever-increasing energy of the vibra- 
tions of the intelligence, and the bliss-aspect begins 
to send outwards its first vibrations — faint pulsings 
of its manifested life thrill forth. This bliss-aspect 
is named in the theosophical terminology Buddhi, a 
name derived from the Sanskrit word for wisdom, 
and it belongs to the fourth, or buddhic, plane of 
our universe, the plane in which there is still duality, 
but where there is no separation. Words fail me 
to convey the idea, for words belong to the lower 
planes where duality and separation are ever con- 


1 66 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

nected, yet some approach to the idea may be gained. 
It is a state in which each is himself, with a clear- 
ness and vivid intensity which cannot be approached 
on lower planes, and yet in which each feels himself 
to include all others, to be one with them, inseparate 
and inseparable.* Its nearest analogy on earth is 
the condition between two persons who are united 
by a pure, intense love, which makes them feel as 
one person, causing them to think, feel, act, live as 
one, recognizing no barrier, no difference, no mine 
and thine, no separation, f It is a faint echo from 
this plane which makes men seek happiness by union 
between themselves and the object of their desire, 
no matter what that object may be. Perfect isola- 
tion is perfect misery; to be stripped naked of 
everything, to be hanging in the void of space, in 
utter solitude, nothing anyivhere save the lone indi- 
vidual, shut out from all, shut into the separated self 
— imagination can conceive no horror more intense. 
The antithesis to this is union, and perfect union is 
perfect bliss. 
As this bliss-aspect of the Self begins to send out- 

* The reader should refer back to the Introduction, p. 36. and 
re-read the description given by Plotinus of this state, com- 
mencing : ** They likewise see all things. " And he should note 
the phrases, " Each thing likewise is everything," and "In each, 
however, a different quality predominates. " 

f It is for this reason that the bliss of divine love has in many 
Scriptures be^n imaged by the profound love of husband and 
wife, as in the Bkagavad Purdna of the Hindus, the Song 
of Solomon of the Hebrews and Christians. This also is the 
love of the Sufi mystics, and indeed of all mystics. 


LOVE BUILDS BLISS. 1 6/ 

wards its vibrations, these vibrations, as on the 
planes below, draw round themselves the matter of 
the plane on which they are functioning, and thus is 
formed gradually the buddhic body, or bliss-body, 
as it is appropriately termed.* The only way in 
which the man can contribute to the building of this 
glorious form is by cultivating pure, unselfish, all- 
embracing, beneficent love, love that "seeketh not 
its own" — that is, love that is neither partial, nor 
seeks any return for its outflowing. This sponta- 
neous outpouring of love is the most marked of 
the divine attributes, the love that gives everything, 
that asks nothing. Pure love brought the universe 
into being, pure love maintains it, pure love draws 
it upwards towards perfection, towards bliss. And 
wherever man pours out love on all who need it, 
making no difference, seeking no return, from pure 
spontaneous joy in the outpouring, there that man 
is developing the bliss-aspect of the Deity within him, 
and is preparing that body of beauty and joy inef- 
fable into which the Thinker will rise, casting away 
the limits of separateness, to find himself himself, 
and yet one with all that lives. This is " the house 
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens," 
whereof wrote St. Paul, the great Christian Initiate ; 
and he raised charity, pure love, above all other vir- 
tues, because by that alone can man on earth contrib- 
ute to that glorious dwelling. For a similar reason 

A 

*The Aoandamayakosha, or bliss-sheath, of the Ved^ntins. 
It is also the body of the sun, the solar body, of which a little 
is said in the Upanishads and elsewhere. 


l68 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

is separateness called "the great heresy" by the 
Buddhist, and "union** is the goal of the Hindu; 
liberation is the escape from the limitations that 
keep us apart, and selfishness is the root-evil, the 
destruction whereof is the destruction of all pain. 

The fifth plane, the nirvanic, is the plane of the 
highest human aspect of the God within us, and this 
aspect is named by Theosophists Atma, or the Self. 
It is the plane of pure existence, of divine powers in 
their fullest manifestation in our fivefold universe — 
what lies beyond on the sixth and seventh planes 
is hidden in the unimaginable light of God. This 
atmic, or nirvanic, consciousness, the consciousness 
belonging to life on the fifth plane, is the conscious- 
ness attained by those lofty Ones, the first fruits of 
humanity, who have already completed the cycle of 
human evolution, and who are called Masters.* 
They have solved in Themselves the problem of 
uniting the essence of individuality with non-sepa- 
rateness, and live, immortal Intelligences, perfect 
in wisdom, in bliss, in power. 

When the human Monad comes forth from the 
Logos, it is as though from the luminous ocean of 
Atma a tiny thread of light was separated off from 
the rest by a film of buddhic matter, and from this 
hung a spark which becomes enclosed in an egg-like 
casing of matter belonging to the formless levels of 

* Known also as MahS.tm§s, great Spirits, and Jivanmuktas, 
liberated souls, who remain connected with physical bodies for 
the helping forward of humanity. Many other great Beings 
also live on the nirv&nic plane. 


LIBERTY IS REACHED. 1 69 

the mental plane. "The spark hangs from the 
flame by the finest thread of Fohat."* As evolution 
proceeds, this luminous egg grows larger and more 
opalescent, and the tiny thread becomes a wider and 
wider channel through which more and more of the 
atmic life pours down. Finally, they merge — the 
third with the second, and the twain with the first, 
as flame merges with flame and no separation can be 
seen. 

The evolution on the fourth and fifth planes be- 
longs to a future period of our race, but those who 
choose the harder path of swifter progress may tread 
it even now, as will be explained later, f On that 
path the bliss-body is quickly evolved, and a man 
begins to enjoy the consciousness of that loftier 
region, and knows the bliss which comes from the 
absence of separative barriers, the wisdom which 
flows in when the limits of the intellect are trans- 
cended. Then is the wheel escaped from which 
binds the soul in the lower worlds, and then is the 
first foretaste of the liberty which is found perfected 
on the nirvanic plane. 

The nirvanic consciousness is the antithesis of 
annihilation ; it is existence raised to a vividness and 
intensity inconceivable to those who know only the 
life of the senses and the mind. As the farthing 
rushlight to the splendor of the sun at noon, so is 
the nirvanic to the earth-bound consciousness, and 
to regard it as annihilation because the limits of the 

^ Book of DzyaUt Stanza vii. 5 ; Secret Doctrine, vol. i. 
t See Chapter XI., on "Man's Ascent." 


I/O THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

earthly consciousness have vanished, is as though a 
man, knowing only the rushlight, should say that 
light could not exist without a wick immersed in 
tallow. That Nirvana is has been borne witness to 
in the past in the Scriptures of the world by Those 
who enjoy it and live its glorious life, and is still 
borne witness to by others of our race who have 
climbed that lofty ladder of perfected humanity^ and 
who remain in touch with earth that the feet of our 
ascending race may mount its rungs unfalteringly. 

In Nirvana dwell the mighty Beings who accom- 
plished Their own human evolution in past uni- 
verses, and who came forth with the Logos when He 
manifested Himself to bring this universe into exist- 
ence. They are His ministers in the administration 
of the worlds, the perfect agents of His will. The 
Lords of all the hierarchies of the Gods and lower 
ministrants that we have seen working on the lower 
planes have here Their abiding-place, for Nirvana 
is the heart of the universe, whence all its life- 
currents proceed. Hence the Great Breath comes 
forth, the life of all, and thither it is indrawn when 
the universe has reached its term. There is the 
Beatific Vision for which mystics long, there the 
unveiled Glory, the Supreme Goal. 


The Brotherhood of Humanity — nay, the Brother- 
hood of all things — has its sure foundation on the 
spiritual planes, the atmic and buddhic, for here 
alone is unity, and here alone perfect sympathy is 


-.•:. 


BROTHERHOOD. I7I 

found. The intellect is the separative principle in 
man, that marks off the "I" from the "not I,** that 
is conscious of itself, and sees all else as outside 
itself and alien. It is the combative, struggling, 
self-assertive principle, and from the plane of the 
intellect downwards the world presents a scene of 
conflict, bitter in proportion as the intellect mingles 
in it. Even the passion-nature is only spontaneously 
combative when it is stirred by the feeling of desire 
and finds anything standing between itself and the 
object of its desire ; it becomes more and more ag- 
gressive as the mind inspires its activity, for then it 
seeks to provide for the gratification of future de- 
sires, and tries to appropriate more and more from 
the stores of Nature. But the intellect is spontane- 
ously combative, its very nature being to assert it- 
self as different from others, and here we find the 
root of separateness, the ever-springing source of 
divisions among men. 

But unity is at once felt when the buddhic plane 
is reached, as though we stepped from a separate 
ray, diverging from all other rays, into the sun it- 
self, from which radiate all the rays alike. A being 
standing in the sun, suffused with its light, and 
pouring it forth, wpuld feel no difference between 
ray and ray, but would pour forth along one as 
readily and easily as along another. And so with 
the man who has once consciously attained the bud- 
dhic plane; he feels the brotherhood that others 
speak of as an ideal, and pours himself out into any 
one who wants assistance, giving mental, moral, 


172 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

astral, physical help exactly as it is needed. He 
sees all beings as himself, and feels that all he has is 
theirs as much as his ; nay, in many cases, as more 
theirs than his, because their need is greater, their 
strength being less. So do the elder brothers in a 
family bear the family burdens, and shield the little 
ones from suflEering and privation ; to the spirit of 
brotherhood weakness is a claim for help and loving 
protection, not an opportunity for oppression. Be- 
cause They had reached this level and mounted even 
higher, the great Pounders of religions have ever 
been marked by Their overwelling compassion and 
tenderness, ministering to the physical as well as to 
the inner wants of men, to every man according to 
his need. The consciousness of this inner unity, the 
recognition of the One Self dwelling equally in all, 
is the one sure foundation of Brotherhood ; all else 
save this is frangible. 

This recognition, moreover, is accompanied by the 
knowledge that the stage in evolution reached by 
dijfferent human and non-human beings depends 
chiefly on what we may call their age. Some began 
their journey in time very much later than others, 
and, though the powers in each be the same, some 
have unfolded far more of those powers than others, 
simply because they have had a longer time for the 
process than their younger brethren. As well blame 
and despise the seed because it is not yet the flower, 
the bud because it is not yet the fruit, the babe he- 
CAU»c it is not yet the man, as blame and despise the 
gtrininal or baby souls around us because they have 


^s 


IDENTITY AND DIFFERENCES. 1 73 

not yet developed to the stage we ourselves occupy. 
We do not blame ourselves because we are not yet 
as Gods; in time we shall stand where our elder 
Brothers are standing. Why should we blame the 
still younger souls who are not yet as we? The very 
word brotherhood connotes identity of blood and in- 
equality of development ; and it therefore represents 
exactly the link between all creatures in the uni- 
verse — identity of essential life, and differences in 
the stages reached in the manifestation of that life. 
We are one in our origin, one in the method of our 
evolution, one in our goal, and the differences of our 
age and stature but give opportunity for the growth 
of the tenderest and closest ties. All that a man 
would do for his brother of the flesh, dearer to him 
than himself, is the measure of what he owes to each 
who shares with him the one Life. Men are shut 
out from their brothers* hearts by differences of 
race, of class, of country; the man who is wise by 
love rises above all these petty differences, and sees 
all drawing their life from the one source, all as part 
of his family. 

The recognition of this Brotherhood intellect- 
ually, and the endeavor to live it practically, are so 
stimulative of the higher nature of man, that it was 
made the one obligatory object of the Theosophical 
Society, the single " article of belief '* that all who 
would enter its fellowship must accept. To live it, 
even to a small extent, cleanses the heart and puri- 
fies the vision ; to live it perfectly would be to eradi- 
cate all stain of separateness, and to let the pure 


174 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

shining of the Self irradiate us, as a light through 
flawless glass. 

Never let it be forgotten that this Brotherhood is, 
whether men ignore it or deny it. Man's ignorance 
does not change the laws of Nature, nor vary by one 
hair's-breadth her changeless, irresistible march. 
Her laws crush those who oppose them, and break 
into pieces everything which is not in harmony 
with them. Therefore can no nation endure that 
outrages Brotherhood, no civilization can last that 
is built on its antithesis. We have not to make 
Brotherhood ; it exists. We have to attune our lives 
into harmony with it, if we desire that we and our 
works shall not perish. 

It may seem strange to some that the buddhic 
plane — a thing to them misty and unreal — should 
thus influence all planes below it, and that its forces 
should ever break into pieces all that cannot har- 
monize itself with them in the lower worlds. Yet 
so it is, for this universe is an expression of spiritual 
forces, and they are the guiding, moulding energies 
pervading all things, and slowly, surel}^, subduing 
all things to themselves. Hence this Brotherhood, 
which is a spiritual unity, is a far more real thing* 
than any outward organization ; it is a life and not a 
form, " wisely and sweetly ordering all things. " T: 
may take innumerable forms, suitable to the times, 
but the life is one ; happy they who see its presence, 
and make themselves the channels of its living force. 


The student has now before him the constituents 


PRINCIPLES IN MAN. 1/5 

of the human constitution, and the regions to which 
these constituents respectively belong; so a brief 
summary should enable him to have a clear idea of 
this complicated whole. 

The human Monad is Atma-Buddhi-Manas, or, 
as sometimes translated, the Spirit, Spiritual Soul, 
and Soul, of man. The fact that these three are but 
aspects of the Self makes possible man's immortal 
existence, and though these three aspects are mani- 
fested separately and successively, their substantial 
tmity renders it possible for the Soul to merge itself 
in the Spiritual Soul, giving to the latter the pre- 
cious essence of individuality, and for this indi- 
vidualized Spiritual Soul to merge itself in the 
Spirit, coloring it — if the phrase may be permitted 
with the hues due to individuality, while leaving un- 
injured its essential unity with all other rays of the 
Logos and with the Logos Himself. These three 
form the seventh, sixth, and fifth principles of man, 
and the materials which limit or encase them, />., 
which make their manifestation and activity pos- 
sible, are drawn respectively from the fifth (nir- 
vanic), the fourth (buddhic), and the third (mental) 
planes of our universe. The fifth principle furthei 
takes to itself a lower body on the mental plane, in 
order to come into contact with the phenomenal 
worlds, and thus intertwines itself with the fourth 
principle, the desire-nature, or Kama, belonging to 
the second or astral plane. Descending to the first, 
the physical, plane, we have the third, second and 
first principles — the specialized life, or Prana; the 


176 


THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 


etheric double, its vehicle; the dense body, which 
contacts the coarser materials of the physical world. 
We have already seen that sometimes Prana is not 
regarded as a "principle," and then the interwoven 
desire and mental bodies take rank together as Kama- 
Manas; the pure intellect is called the Higher 
Manas, and the mind apart from desire Lower 
Manas. The most convenient conception of man is 
perhaps that which most closely represents the facts 
as to the one permanent life and the various forms 
in which it works and which condition its energies, 
causing the variety in manifestation. Then we see 
the Self as the one Life, the source of all energies, 
and the forms as the buddhic, causal, mental, astral, 
and phj^sical (etheric and dense) bodies. * 

Putting together the two ways of looking at the 
same thing, we may construct a table : 


Principles. Life. 

Atm&. Spirit Atm& 
Buddhi. Spiritual Soul 


Forms. 

Bliss-Body 

Causal Body- 
Mental Body 


* Those of our readers who are more familiar with the 
Ved^ntin classification may find the following table of the 
form -side useful : 


Buddhic body 

Causal body 

Mental body ) 
Astral body ) 


Anandamayakosha. 
Vigny S.nam ayakosha. 

Manomayakosha. 


Physical body { ^^ If^^^^^^^^; 


PRINCIPLES IN BODY. I77 

Principles. Porms. 

K&ma. Animal Soul Astral Body 

Linga Sharira * Etheric Double 

Sth^a Sharira Dense Body 

It will be seen that the diflEerence is merely a 
question of names, and that the sixth, fifth, fourth, 
and third " principles" are merely Atma working in 
the buddhic, causal, mental, and astral bodies, while 
the second and first " principles" are the two lowest 
bodies themselves. This sudden change in the 
method of naming is apt to cause confusion in the 
mind of the student, and as H. P. Blavatsky, our 
revered teacher, expressed much dissatisfaction with 
the then current nomenclature as confused and mis- 
leading, and desired others and myself to try and 
improve it, the above names, as descriptive, simple, 
and representing the facts, are here adopted. 

The various subtle bodies of man that we have 
now studied form in their aggregate what is usually 
called the " aura" of the human being. This aura 
has the appearance of an egg-shaped luminous cloud, 
in the midst of which is the dense physical body, and 
from its appearance it has often been spoken of as 
though it were nothing more than such a cloud. 
What is usually called the aura is merely such parts 
of the subtle bodies as extend beyond the periphery 
of the dense physical body ; each body is complete 

* Linga Sharira was the name originally given to the etheric 
body, and must not be confused with the Linga Sharira of 
Hindu philosophy. Sthiila Sharira is the Sanskrit name for 
the dense body. 
la 


y 


178 THE ANCIENT WISDOM- 

in itself, and interpenetrates those that are coarsei 
than itself; it is larger or smaller according to its 
development, and all that part of it that overlaps the 
surface of the dense physical body is termed the 
aura. The aura is thus composed of the overlapping 
portions of the etheric double, the desire body, the 
mental body, the causal body, and in rare cases the 
buddhic body, illuminated by the atmic radiance. 
It is sometimes dull, coarse, and dingy ; sometimes 
magnificently radiant in size, light, and color; it 
depends entirely on the stage of evolution reached 
by the man, on the development of his different 
bodies, on the moral and mental character he has 
evolved. All his varying passions, desires, and 
thoughts are herein written in form, in color, in 
light, so that " he that runs may read" if he have 
eyes for such script. Character is stamped thereon 
as well as fleeting changes, and no deception is there 
possible as in the mask we call the physical body. 
The increase in size and beauty of the aura is the 
unmistakable mark of the man's progress, and tells 
of the growth and purification of the Thinker and 
his vehicles. 


CHAPTER VII. 
Reincarnation. 

We are now in a position to study one of the pivo- 
tal doctrines of the Ancient Wisdom, the doctrine of 
reincarnation. Our view of it will be clearer and 
more in congruity with natural order, if we look at 
it as universal in principle, and then consider the 
special case of the reincarnation of the human soul. 
In studying it, this special case is generally wrenched 
from its place in natural order, and is considered as 
a dislocated fragment, greatly to its detriment. For 
all evolution consists of an evolving life, passing 
from form to form as it evolves, and storing up in 
itself the experience gained through the forms ; the 
reincarnation of the human soul is not the introduc- 
tion of a new principle into evolution, but the adap- 
tation of the universal principle to meet the condi- 
tions rendered necessary by the individualization of 
the continuously evolving life. 

Mr. Lafcadio Heam * has put this point well in 

* Mr. Hearn has lost bis way in expression— but not, I tbink, 
in his inner view — in part of bis exposition of the Buddbist 
statement of tbis doctrine, and bis use of tbe word " Ego** will 
mislead tbe reader of bis very interesting cbapter on tbis sub- 
ject, if tbe distinction between tbe real and tbe illusory ego is 
not steadily kept in mind. 


l80 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

considering the bearing of the idea of pre-existence 
on the scientific thought of the West. He says: 

"With the acceptance of the doctrine of evolution, old forms 
of thought crumbled ; new ideas everywhere arose to take the 
place of worn-out dogmas ; and we now have the spectacle of 
a general intellectual movement in directions strangely paral- 
lel with Oriental philosophy. The unprecedented rapidity 
and multiformity of scientific progress during the last fifty 
years could not have failed to provoke an equally unprece- 
dented intellectual quickening among the non-scientific 
That the highest and most complex organisms have been de- 
veloped from the lowest and simplest ; that a single physical 
basis of life is. the substance of the whole living world ; that 
no line of separation can be drawn between the animal and 
vegetable ; that the difference between life and non-life is only 
a difference of degree, not of kind ; that matter is not less in- 
comprehensible than mind, while both are but varying mani- 
festations of one and the same unknown reality — these have 
already become the commonplaces of the new philosophy. 
After the first recognition even by theology of physical evolu- 
tion, it was easy to predict that the recognition of psychical 
evolution could not be indefinitely delayed ; for the barrier 
erected by old dogma to keep men from looking backward had 
been broken down. And to-day for the student of scientific 
psychology the idea of pre-existence passes out of the realm of 
theory into the realm of fact, proving the Buddhist explana- 
tion of the universal mystery quite as plausible as any other. 
' None but very hasty thinkers, ' wrote the late Professor Hux- 
ley, * will reject it on the ground of inherent absurdity. Like 
the doctrine of evolution itself, that of transmigration has its 
roots in the world of reality ; and it may claim such support 
as the great argument from analogy is capable of supplying' 
{Evolution and Ethics, p. 6i, ed. 1894)."* 

* Kokoro ; Hints and Echoes of Japanese Inner Life. 
By Lafcadio Hearn, pp. 237-239 (London, 1896). 


THE SECRET OF EVOLUTION. l8l 

Let US consider the Monad of form, Atma-Buddhi. 
In this Monad, the outbreathed life of the Logos, lie 
hidden all the divine powers, but, as we have seen^ 
they are latent, not manifest and functioning. They 
are to be gradually aroused by external impacts, it 
being of the very nature of life to vibrate in answer 
to vibrations that play upon it. As all possibilities 
of vibrations exist in the Monad, any vibration 
touching it will arouse its corresponding vibratory 
power, and in this way one force after another will 
pass from the latent to the active * state. Herein 
lies the secret of evolution ; the environment acts on 
the form of the living creature — and all things, be 
it remembered, live — and this action, transmitted 
through the enveloping form to the life, the Monad, 
within it, arouses responsive vibrations which thrill 
outwards from the Monad through the form, throw- 
ing its particles, in turn, into vibration, and rear- 
ranging them into a shape corresponding, or adapted, 
to the initial impact. This is the action and reaction 
between the environment and the organism, which 
have been recognized by all biologists, and which 
are considered by some as giving a sufficient me- 
chanical explanation of evolution. Their patient 
and careful observation of these actions and re- 
actions yields, however, no explanation as to why 
the organism should thus react to stimuli, and the 
Ancient Wisdom is needed to unveil the secret of 
evolution, by pointing to the Self in the heart of all 

* Prom the static to the kinetic condition, the physicist would 
say. 


1 82 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

forms, the hidden mainspring of all the movements 
in nature. 

Having grasped this fundamental idea of a life 
containing the possibility of responding to every 
vibration that can reach it from the external uni- 
verse, the actual responses being gradually drawn 
forth by the play upon it of external forces, the next 
fundamental idea to be grasped is that of the con- 
tinuity of life and forms. Forms transmit their pe- 
culiarities to other forms that proceed from them, 
these other forms being part of their own substance, 
separated off to lead an independent existence. By 
fission, by budding, by extrusion of germs, by de- 
velopment of the offspring within the maternal 
womb, a physical continuity is preserved, every new 
fonn being derived from a preceding form and re- 
producing its characteristics. * Science groups these 
facts under the name of the law of heredity, and its 
observations on the transmission of form are worthy 
of attention, and are illuminative of the workings 
of Nature in the phenomenal world. But it must 
be remembered that it applies only to the building 
of the physical body, into which enter the materials 
provided by the parents. 

Her more hidden workings, those workings of life 
without which form could not be, have received no 
attention, not being susceptible of physical observa- 
tion, and this gap can only be filled by the teachings 
of the Ancient Wisdom, given by Those who of old 

* The student might wisely familiarize himself with the re- 
searches of Weissmaan on the continuity of germ-plasm. 


HEREDITY IN ACTION. 1 83 

used superphysical powers of observation, and veri- 
fiable gradually by every pupil who studies patiently 
in Their ?5chools. 

There is continuity of life as well as continuity of 
form, and it is the continuing life — with ever more 
and more of its latent energies rendered active by 
the stimuli received through successive forms — 
which resumes into itself the experiences obtained 
by its incasings in form ; for when the form perishes, 
the life has the record of those experiences in the 
increased energies aroused by them, and is ready to 
pour itself into the new forms derived from the old, 
carrying with it this accumulated store. While it 
was in the previous form, it played through it, adapt- 
ing it to express each newly awakened energy ; the 
form hands on these adaptations, inwrought into its 
substance, to the separated part of itself that we 
speak of as its offspring, which, being of its substance, 
must needs have the peculiarities of that substance ; 
the life pours itself into that offspring with all its 
awakened powers, and moulds it yet further ; and 
so on and on. Modem science is proving more and 
more clearly that heredity plays an ever-decreasing 
part in the evolution of the higher creatures, that 
mental and moral qualities are not transmitted from 
parents to offspring, and that the higher the quali- 
ties the more patent is this fact ; the child of a genius 
is of ttimes a dolt ; commonplace parents give birth 
to a genius. A continuing substratum there must 
be, in which mental and moral qualities inhere, in 
order that they may increase, else would Nature, in 


184 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

this most important department of her work, show 
erratic uncaused production instead of orderly con- 
tinuity. On this science is dumb, but the Ancient 
Wisdom teaches that this continuing substratum 
is the Monad, which is the receptacle of all results, 
the storehouse in which all experiences are garn- 
ered as increasingly active powers. 

These two principles firmly grasped — of the Monad 
with potentialities becoming powers, and of the con- 
tinuity of life and form — we can proceed to study 
their working out in detail, and we shall find that 
they solve many of the perplexing problems of 
modern science, as well as the yet more heart- 
searching problems confronted by the philanthropist 
and the sage. 

Let us start by considering the Monad as it is first 
subjected to the impacts from the formless levels of 
the mental plane, the very beginning of the evolu- 
tion of form. Its first faint responsive thrillings 
draw round it some of the matter of that plane, and 
we have the gradual evolution of the first elemental 
kingdom, already mentioned. * The great funda- 
mental types of the Monad are seven in number, 
sometimes imaged as like the seven colors of the 
solar spectrum, derived from the three primary, f 

» See Chapter IV., on "The Mental Plane. " 

t"As above, so below." We instinctively remember the 
three Logoi and the seven primaeval Sons of the Fire; in 
Christian symbolism, the Trinity and the "Seven Spirits that 
are before the throne;" or in Zoroastrian, Ahuramazd^ and 
the seven Ameshaspentas. 


SUBDIVISION OF MONAD. 18$ 

Each of these types has its own coloring of character- 
istics, and this coloring persists throughout the 
aeonian cycle of its evolution, affecting all the series 
of living things that are animated by it. Now be- 
gins the process of subdivision in each of these types, 
that will be carried on, subdividing and ever sub- 
dividing, until the individual is reached. The 
currents set up by the commencing outward-going 
energies of the Monad — to follow one line of evolu- 
tion will suffice; the other six are like unto it in 
principle — have but brief form-life, yet whatever 
experience can be gained through them is repre- 
sented by an increasedly responsive life in the Monad 
who is their source and cause ; and as this responsive 
life consists of vibrations that are often incongruous 
with each other, a tendency towards separation is 
set up within the Monad, the harmoniously vibra- 
ting forces grouping themselves together for, as it 
were, concerted action, until various sub- Monads, 
if the epithet may for a moment be allowed, are 
formed, alike in their main characteristics, but differ- 
ing in details, like shades of the same color. These 
become, by impacts from the lower levels of the 
mental plane, the Monads of the second elemental 
kingdom, belonging to the form-region of that plane, 
and the process continues, the Monad ever adding 
to its power to respond, each Monad being the in- 
spiring life of countless forms, through which it re- 
ceives vibrations, and, as the forms disintegrate, 
constantly vivifying new forms; the process of 
subdivision also continues from the cause already 


1 86 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

described. Each Monad thus continually incarnates 
itself in forms, and gamers within itself as awakened 
powers all the results obtained through the forms it 
animates. We may well regard these Monads as the 
souls of groups of forms ; and, as evolution proceeds, 
these forms show more and more attributes, the at- 
tributes being the powers of the monadic group-soul 
manifested through the forms in which it is incar- 
nated. The innumerable sub- Monads of this second 
elemental kingdom presently reach a stage of evolu- 
tion at which they begin to respond to the vibrations 
of astral matter, and they begin to act on the astral 
plane, becoming the Monads of the third elemental 
kingdom, and repeating in this grosser world all the 
processes already accomplished on the mental plane. 
They become more and more numerous as monadic 
group-souls, showing more and more diversity in 
detail, the number of forms animated by each be- 
coming less as the specialized characteristics become 
more and more marked. Meanwhile, it may be said 
in passing, the everflowing stream of life from the 
Logos supplies new Monads of form on the higher 
levels, so that the evolution proceeds continuously, 
and as the more-evolved Monads incarnate in the 
lower worlds their place is taken by the newly 
emerged Monads in the higher. 

By this ever-repeated process of the reincarnation 
of the Monads, or monadic group-souls, in the astral 
world, their evolution proceeds, until they are ready 
to respond to the impacts upon them from physical 
matter. When we remember that the ultimate 


« Ty.-w»e*^-wr,-^^^** 


DESCENT OF THE MONAD. 1 8/ 

atoms of each plane have their sphere- walls composed 
of the coarsest matter of the plane immediately above 
it, it is easy to see how the Monads become respon- 
sive to the impacts from one plane after another. 
When, in the first elemental kingdom, the Monad had 
become accustomed to thrill responsively to the im- 
pacts of the matter of that plane, it would soon begin 
to answer to vibrations received through the coarsest 
forms of that matter ixora the matter of the plane 
next below. So, in its coatings of matter that were 
the forms composed of the coarsest materials of the 
mental plane, it would become susceptible to vibra- 
tions of astral atomic matter ; and, when incarnated 
in forms of the coarsest astral matter, it would 
similarly became responsive to the impacts of atomic 
physical ether, the sphere-walls of which are consti- 
tuted of the grossest astral materials. Thus the 
Monad may be regarded as reaching the physical 
plane, and there it begins, or, more accurately, all 
these monadic group-souls begin, to incarnate them- 
selves in filmy physical forms, the etheric doubles of 
the future dense minerals of the physical world. 
Into these filmy forms the nature-spirits build the 
denser physical materials, and thus minerals of all 
kinds are formed, the most rigid vehicles in which 
the evolving life incloses itself, and through which 
the least of its powers can express themselves. Each 
monadic group-soul has its own mineral expressions, 
the mineral forms in which it is incarnated, and the 
specialization has now reached a high degree. These 
monadic group-souls are sometimes called in their 


I 


1 88 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

totality the mineral Monad, or the Monad incarna- 
ting in the mineral kingdom. 

From this time forward the awakened energies of 
the Monad play a less passive part in evolution. 
They begin to seek expression actively to some ex- 
tent when once aroused into functioning, and to 
exercise a distinctly moulding influence over the 
forms in which they are imprisoned. As they be- 
come too active for their mineral embodiment, the 
beginnings of the more plastic forms of the vegetable 
kingdom manifest themselves, the nature-spirits aid- 
ing this evolution throughout the physical kingdoms. 
In the mineral kingdom there had already been 
shown a tendency towards the definite organization 
of form, the laying down of certain lines* along 
which the growth proceeded. This tendency gov- 
erns henceforth all the building of forms, and is the 
cause of the exquisite symmetry of natural objects, 
with which every observer is familiar. The monadic 
group-souls in the vegetable kingdom undergo divi- 
sion and subdivision with increasing rapidity, in con- 
sequence of the still greater variety of impacts to 
which they are subjected, the evolution of families, 
genera, and species being due to this invisible subdi- 
vision. When any genus, with its generic monadic 
group-soul, is subjected to very varying conditions, 
e>., when the forms connected with it receive very 
different impacts, a fresh tendency to subdivide is 
set up in the Monad, and various species are evolved, 

* The axes of growth, which determine form. They appear 
definitely in crystals. 


ARTIFICIAL SELECTION. 1 89 

each having its own specific monadic group-soul. 
When Nature is left to her own working the process 
is slow, although the nature-spirits do much towards 
the differentiation of species; but when man has 
been evolved, and when he begins his artificial sys- 
tems of cultivation, encouraging the play of one set 
of forces, warding off another, then this differentia- 
tion can be brought about with considerable rapidity, 
and specific differences are readily evolved. So long 
as actual division has not taken place in the monadic 
group-soifl, the subjection of the forms to similar 
influences may again eradicate the separative ten- 
dency, but when that division is completed the new 
species are definitely and firmly established, and are 
ready to send out offshoots of their own. 

In some of the longer-lived members of the vege- 
table kingdom the element of personality begins to 
manifest itself, the stability of the organism render- 
ing possible this foreshadowing of individuality. 
With a tree, living for scores of years, the recur- 
rence of similar conditions causing similar impacts, 
the seasons ever returning year after year, the con- 
secutive internal motions caused by them, the rising 
of the sap, the putting forth of leaves, the touches 
of the wind, of the sunbeams, of the rain — all these 
outer influences with their rhythmical progression — 
set up responsive thrillings in the monadic group- 
soul, and, as the sequence impresses itself by contin- 
ual repetition, the recurrence of one leads to the dim 
expectation of its oft-repeated successor. Nature 
evolves no quality suddenly, and these are the first 


igO THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

faint adumbrations of what will later be m^ory and 
anticipation. 

In the vegetable kingdom also appear the fore- 
shadowings of sensation, evolving in its higher mem- 
bers to what the Western psychologist would term 
"massive" sensations of pleasure and discomfort.* 
It must be remembered that the Monad has drawn 
round itself materials of the planes through which it 
has descended, and hence is able to contact impacts 
from those planes, the strongest and those most 
nearly allied to the grossest forms of matter being 
the first to make themselves felt. Sunshine and the 
chill of its absence at last impress themselves on the 
monadic consciousness ; and its astral coating, thrown 
into faint vibrations, gives rise to the slight massive 
kind of sensation spoken of. Rain and drought 
affecting the mechanical constitution of the form, 
and its power to convey vibrations to the ensouling 
Monad — are another of the "pairs of opposites," the 
play of which arouses the recognition of difference, 
which is the root alike of all sensation, and later of 
all thought. Thus by their repeated plant-reincar- 
nations the monadic group-souls in the vegetable 
kingdom evolve, until those that ensoul the highest 
members of the kingdom are ready for the next step. 

This step carries them into the animal kingdom, 
and here they slowly evolve in their physical and 
astral vehicles a very distinct personality. The ani- 

* The " massive*' sensation is one that pervades the organism 
and is not felt especially in any one part more than in others. 
It is the antithesis of the "acute." 


EVOLUTION OF INSTINCTS. IQI 

mal, being free to move about, subjects itself to a 
greater variety of conditions than can be experienced 
by the plant, rooted to a single spot, and this vari- 
ety, as ever, promotes differentiation. The monadic 
group-soul, however, which animates a number of 
wild animals of the same species or sub-species, while 
it receives a great variety of impacts, since they are 
for the most part repeated continually and are shared 
by all the members of the group, differentiates but 
slowly. 

These impacts aid in the development of the phys- 
ical and astral bodies, and through them the mo- 
nadic group-soul gathers much experience. When 
the form of a member of the group perishes, the ex- 
perience gathered through that form is accumulated 
in the monadic group-soul, and may be said to color 
it; the slightly increased life of the monadic group- 
soul, poured into all the forms which compose its 
group, shares among all the experience of the per- 
ished form, and in this way continually repeated 
experiences, stored up in the monadic group-soul, 
appear as instincts, " accmnulated hereditary expe- 
riences*' in the new forms. Countless birds having 
fallen a prey to hawks, chicks just out of the egg will 
cower at the approach of one of the hereditary ene- 
mies, for the life that is incarnated in them knows 
the danger, and the innate instinct is the expression 
of its knowledge. In this way are formed the won- 
derful instincts that guard animals from innumera- 
ble hibitual perils, while a new danger finds them 
unprepared and only bewilders them. 


192 TnE ANCIENT WI5D01C. 

As animals come under the inflaence of nm, Ifce 
monadic group-soul evolves with greatly iiu 
rapidity, and, from causes similar to thos* ^ 
affect plants under domestication, suhdivisiowoiflie 
incarnating life is more readily brought . 
Personality evolves and becomes more aat 
strongly marked ; in the earlier stages it may; 
be said to be compound — a whole flock of w3A iffMl- 
tures will act as though moved by a single penooal- 
Ity, so completely are the forms dominated hf the 
common soul, it, in turn, being affected bf tiw 
impulses from the external world. Domesticated 
animals of the higher types, the elephant, the horse, 
the cat, the dog, show a more individualized person- 
ality — two dogs, for instance, may act very differ- 
ently under the impact of the same circumstances. 
The monadic group-soul incarnates in a decreasing ." 
number of forms as it gradually approaches the point j 
at which complete individualization will be reached f 
The desire-body, or kSmic vehicle, becomes cosaid- ^ 
erably developed, and persists for some time 'cfter *. 
the death of the physical body, leading an indoipea- , 
dent existence in kamaloka. At last the decreariog ' 
number of forms animated by a monadic group-sonl . 
comes down to unity, and it animates a succession of t 
single forms — a condition differing from human re- j 
incamation only by the absence of Manas, \ ' ' " 
causal and mental bodies. The mental 
brought down by the monadic group-soul begi 
be susceptible to impacts from the mental pland 
the animal is then ready to receive the third 


BIRTH OF THE SOUL. 


193 


DUtlX>1 

is readi 

The 

its m 

spectivc 

man Sol 

course 

Motiad 

g^ressii 

past, an] 

been thl 

ready 

planes 

itself isj 

aspect, 

the 

Manas 

bryonicj 

isthei 

it in f 01] 

is the 

his bii 

unborn 

ualis 

forms 
man 
certain 
men til 

*lfltti 


|ing of the life of the Logos — the tabernacle 
for the reception of the human Monad, 
luman Monad is, as we have seen, triple in 
*e, its three aspects being denominated, re- 
^ly, the Spirit, the spiritual Soul, and the hu- 
ll, Atma, Buddhi, Manas. Doubtless, in the 
>f aeons of evolution, the upwardly evolving 
>f form might have unfolded Manas by pro- 
growth, but both in the human race in the 
[d in the animals of the present, such has not 
course of Nature. When the house was 
le tenant was sent down; from the higher 
>f being the atmic life descended, veiling 
Buddhi, as a golden thread; and its third 
ianas, showing itself in the higher levels of 
iless world of the mental plane, germinal 
[dthin the form was fructified, and the em- 
i causal body was formed by the union. This 
Ldividualization of the spirit, the incasing of 
Im, and this spirit incased in the causal body 
pul, the individual, the real man. This is 
h-hour; for though his essence be eternal, 
'and undying, his birth in time as an individ- 
jfinite. 

ler, this outpoured life reaches the evolving 
LOt directly but by intermediaries. The hu- 
:e having attained the point of receptivity, 
great Ones, called Sons of Mind,* cast into 
le monadic spark of Atma- Buddhi- Manas, 

^sa-putra is the technical name, being merely the 
If or Sons of Mind. 
13 


Ik 11 


194 


THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 


sod 
iii 

leial 

wd 

ewh- 

the 


needed for the formation of the embryonij 
And some of these great Ones actually incai 
human forms, in order to become the guic 
teachers of the infant humanity. These 
Mind had completed Their own intellectual] 
tion in other worlds, and came to this youngei 
our earth, for the purpose of thus aiding in t] 
lution of the human race. They are, in ti 
spiritual fathers of the bulk of our humanity.] 

Other intelligences of much lower grade, 
had evolved in preceding cycles in another] 
incarnated among the descendants of the n 
received its infant souls in the way just defj 
As this race evolved, the human tabemac 
proved, and mjmads of souls that were 
the opportunity of incarnation, that the] 
continue their evolution, took birth among 
dren. These partially evolved souls are alsoj 
of in the ancient records as Sons of Mind, 
were possessed of mind, although comparaj 
was but little developed — childish souls we 
them, in distinguishment from the embryoi 
of the bulk of humanity, and the mature soufts of the 
great Teachers. These child-souls, by relason of 
their more evolved intelligence, formed the 3 leading 
types of the ancient world, the classes higherfiiii men- 
tality, and therefore in the power of aoj^qtiiring 
knowledge, that dominated the masses of lesfs devel- 
oped men in antiquity. And thus arose,/ i^ our 
world, the enormous differences in mental anp moral 
capacity which separate the most highly Jevolved 


leniiK) 

that 
ribed. 

iticg 
miglit 

fitschil- 

spoken 

for they 

ively it 

ly call 

fie souls 


THE WAYS OF NATURE EQUAL. 1 95 

from I he least evolved races, and which, even within 
the 111 aits of a single race, separate the lofty philo- 
sophic thinker from the well-nigh animal type of the 
most depraved of his own nation. These differences 
are but differences of the stage of evolution, of the 
age of the soul, and they have been found to exist 
throughout the whole history of humanity on this 
globe. 60 back as far as we may in historic records, 
and we may find lofty intelligence and debased igno- 
rance side by side, and the occult records, canying 
us backwards, tell a similar story of the early mil- 
lennia of humanity. Nor should this distress us, as 
though some had been unduly favored and others 
unduly burdened for the struggle of life. The lof- 
tiest soul had its childhood and its infancy, albeit in 
previous worlds, where other souls were as high 
above it as others are below it now; the lowest soul 
shall climb to where our highest are standing, and 
souls yet unborn shall occupy its" present place in 
evolution. Things seem unjust because we wrench 
our world out of its place in evolution, and set it 
apart in isolation, with no forerunners and no suc- 
cessors. It is our ignorance that sees the injustice ; 
the ways of Nature are equal, and she brings to all 
her children infancy, childhood, and manhood. Not 
hers the fault if our folly demands that all souls shall 
occupy the same stage of evolution at the same time, 
and cries " Unjust!" if the demand be not fulfilled. 

We shall best understand the evolution of the 
soul, if we take it up at the point where we left it, 
when animal-man was ready to receive, and did re 


196 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

ceive, the embryonic soul. To avoid a possibli mis- 
apprehension, it may be well to say that there} were 
not henceforth two Monads in man — the one that 
had built the human tabernacle, and the one that 
descended into that tabernacle, and whose lowest 
aspect was the human soul. To borrow a simile 
again from H. P. Blavatsky, as two rays of the son 
may pass through a hole in a shutter, and mingling 
together form but one ray though they had been 
twain, so is it with these rays from the supreme Sun, 
the divine Lord of our universe. The second ray, 
as it entered into the human tabernacle, blended 
with the first, merely adding to it fresh energy and 
brilliance, and the human Monad, as a unit^ began 
its mighty task of unfolding the higher powers in 
man of that divine Life whence it came. 

The embryonic soul, the Thinker, had at the be- 
ginning for its embryonic mental body the mind- 
stuff envelope that the Monad of form had brought 
with it, but had not yet organized into any possibil- 
ity of functioning. It was the mere germ of a men- 
tal body, attached to a mere germ of a causal body, 
and for many a life the strong desire-nature had its 
will with the soul, whirling it along the road of its 
own passions and appetites, and dashing up against 
it all the furious waves of its own uncontrolled ani- 
mality. Repulsive as this early life of the soul may 
at first seem to some when looked at from the higher 
stage that we have now attained, it was a necessary 
one for the germination of the seeds of mindj Re- 
co^^iitiou of difference, the perception that onef thing 


BEGINNING OF THOUGHT. 1 97 

is different from another, is a preliminary essential 
to thinking at all. And, in order to awaken this per- 
ception in the as yet unthinking soul, strong and 
violent contrasts had to strike upon it, so as to force 
their differences upon it — blow after blow of riotous 
pleasure, blow after blow of crushing pain. The 
external world hammered on the soul through the 
desire nature, till perceptions began to be slowly 
made, and, after countless repetitions, to be regis- 
tered. The little gains made in each life were 
stored up by the Thinker, as we have already seen, 
and thus slow progress was made. 

Slow progress, indeed, for scarcely anything was 
thought^ and hence scarcely anything was done in 
the way of organizing the mental body. Not until 
many perceptions had been registered in it as men- 
tal images was there any material on which mental 
action, initiated from within, could be based; this 
would begin when two or more of these mental im- 
ages were drawn together, and some inference, how- 
ever elementary, was made from them. That infer- 
ence was the beginning of reasoning, the germ of all 
the systems of logic which the intellect of man has 
since evolved or assimilated. These inferences 
would at first all be made in the service of the desire- 
nature, for the increasing of pleasure, the lessening 
of pain ; but each one would increase the activity of 
the mental body, and would stimulate it into more 
ready functioning. 

It will readily be seen that at this period of his 
infancy man had no knowledge of good or of evil ; 


198 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

right and wrong had for him no existence. The 
right is that which is in accordance with the divine 
will, which helps forward the progress of the soul, 
which tends to the strengthening of the higher na- 
ture of man and to the training and subjugation of 
the lower ; the wrong is that which retards evolution, 
which retains the soul in the lower stages after he 
has learned the lessons they have to teach, which 
tends to the mastery of the lower nature over the 
higher, and assimilates man to the brute he should 
be outgrowing instead of. to the God he should be 
evolving. Ere man could know what was right he 
had to learn the existence of law, and this he could 
only learn by following all that attracted him in the 
outer world, by grasping at every desirable object, 
and then by learning from experience, sweet or 
bitter, whether his delight was in harmony or in 
conflict with the law. Let us take an obvious ex- 
ample, the taking a pleasant food, and see how in- 
fant man might learn therefrom the presence of a 
natural law. At the first taking, his hunger was ap- 
peased, his taste was gratified, and only pleasure 
resulted from the experience, for his action was in 
harmony with law. On another occasion, desiring 
to increase pleasure, he ate overmuch and suffered 
in consequence, for he transgressed against the law. 
A confusing experience to the dawning intelligence, 
how the pleasurable became painful by excess. 
Over and over again he would be led by desire into 
excess, and each time he would experience the pain- 
ful consequences, until at last he learned moderaF 


SLOWLY GROWING. 1 99 

tion, i.e,y he learned to conform his bodily acts in 
this respect to physical law ; for he found that there 
were conditions which affected him and which he 
could not control, and that only by observing them 
could physical happiness be insured. Similar expe- 
riences flowed in upon him through all the bodily 
organs, with undeviating regularity ; his outrushing 
desires brought him pleasure or pain just as they 
worked with the laws of Nature or against them, 
and, as experience increased, it began to guide his 
steps, to influence his choice. It was not as though 
he had to begin his experience anew with every life, 
for on each new birth he brought with him mental 
faculties a little increased, an ever-accumulating 
store. 

I have said that the growth in these early days 
was very slow, for there was but the dawning of 
mental action, and when the man left his physical 
body at death he passed most of his time in Kama- 
ioka, sleeping through a brief devachanic period of 
unconscious assimilation of any minute mental expe- 
riences not yet sufficiently developed for the active 
heavenly life that lay before him after many days. 
Still, the enduring causal body was there, to be the 
receptacle of his qualities, and to carry them on for 
further development into his next life on earth. 
The part played by the monadic group-soul in the 
earlier stages of evolution is played in man by the 
causal body, and it is this continuing entity who, in 
all cases, makes evolution possible. Without him, 
the accumulation of mental and moral experiences, 


2CX> THE ANXIENT WISDOM. 

shown as faculties, would be as impossible as would 
be the accumulation of physical experiences, shown 
as racial and family characteristics, without the 
continuity of physical plasm. Souls without a past 
behind them, springing suddenly into existence, out 
of nothing, with marked mental and moral peculiar- 
ities, are a conception as monstrous as would be the 
corresponding conception of babies suddenly appear- 
ing from nowhere, unrelated to anybody, but show- 
ing marked racial and family types. Neither the 
man nor his physical vehicle is uncaused, or caused 
by the direct creative power of the Locos; here, as 
in so many other cases, the invisible things are 
clearly seen by their analogy with the visible, the 
visible being, in very truth, nothing more than the 
images, the reflections, of things unseen. Without 
a continuity in the physical plasm, there would be 
no means for the evolution of physical peculiaiities; 
without the continuity of the intelligence, there 
would be no means for the evolution of mental and 
moral qualities. In both cases, without continuity, 
evolution would be stopped at its first stage, and the 
world would be a chaos of infinite and isolated 
beginnings instead of a cosmos continually be- 
coming. 

We must not omit to notice that in these early 
days much variety is caused in the type and in the 
nature of individual progress by the environment 
which surrounds the individual. Ultimately all the 
souls have to develop all their powers, but the 
order in which these powers are developed depends 


HOW DIFFERENCES ARISE. 20I 

on the circumstances amid which the soul is placed. 
Climate, the fertility or sterility of nature, the life 
of the mountain or of the plain, of the inland forest 
or the ocean shore — these things and countless others 
will call into activity one set or another of the awak- 
ening mental energies. A life of extreme hardship, 
of ceaseless struggle with nature, will develop very 
different powers from those evolved amid the luxu- 
riant plenty of a tropical island ; both sets of pow- 
ers are needed, for the soul is to conquer every re- 
gion of nature, but striking differences may thus be 
evolved even in souls of the same age, and one may 
appear to be more advanced than the other, accord- 
ing as the observer estimates most highly the more 
" practical" or the more " contemplative** powers of 
the soul, the active outward-going energies, or the 
quiet inward-turned musing faculties. The per- 
fected soul possesses all, but the soul in the making 
must develop them successively, and thus arises 
another cause of the immense variety found among 
human beings. 

For again, it must be remembered that human 
evolution is individual. In a group informed by a 
single monadic group-soul the same instincts will be 
found in all, for the receptacle of the experiences is 
that monadic group-soul, and it pours its life into all 
the forms dependent upon it. But each man has his 
own physical vehicle and one only at a time, and the 
receptacle of all experiences is the causal body, 
which pours its life into its one physical vehicle, and 
can affect no other physical vehicle, being connected 


202 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

with none other. Hence we find differences sepa- 
rating individual men greater than ever separated 
closely allied animals, and hence also the evolution 
of qualities cannot be studied in men in the mass, 
but only in the continuing individual. The lack of 
power to make such a study leaves science unable to 
explain why some men tower above their fellows, 
intellectual and moral giants, unable to trace the in- 
tellectual evolution of a Shankaracharya or a Py- 
thagoras, the moral evolution of a Buddha or of a 
Christ. 

Let us now consider the factors in reincarnation, 
as a clear understanding of these is necessary for the 
explanation of some of the difficulties — such as the 
alleged loss of memory — which are felt by those un- 
familiar with the idea. We have seen that man, 
during his passage through physical death, Kamalo- 
ka and Devachan, loses, one after the other, his va- 
rious bodies, the physical, the astral, and the mental. 
These are all disintegrated, and their particles re- 
mix with the materials of their several planes. The 
connection of the man with the physical vehicle is 
entirely broken off and done with ; but the astral and 
mental bodies hand on to the man himself, to the 
Thinker, the germs of the faculties and qualities re- 
sulting from the activities of the earth-life, and 
these are stored within the causal body, the seeds of 
his next astral and mental bodies. At this stage, 
then, only the man himself is left, the laborer who 
has brought his harvest home, and has lived upon it 
till it is all worked up into himself. The dawn of a 


THE PROCESS OF CLOTHING. 203 

new life begins, and he must go forth again to his 
labor until the even. 

The new life begins by the vivifying of the men- 
tal germs, and they draw upon the materials of the 
lower mental levels, till a mental body has grown up 
from them that represents exactly the mental stage 
of the man, expressing all his mental faculties as 
organs ; the experiences of the past do not exist as 
mental images in this new body ; as mental images 
they perished when the old mind-body perished, and 
only their essence, their effects on faculty, remain ; 
they were the food of the mind, the materials which 
it wove into powers, and in the new body they reap- 
pear as powers, they determine its materials, and 
they form its organs. When the man, the Thinker, 
has thus clothed himself with a new body for his 
coming life on the lower mental levels, he proceeds, 
by vivifying the astral germs, to provide himself 
with an astral body for his life on the astral plane. 
This, again, exactly represents his desire-nature, 
faithfully reproducing the qualities he evolved in the 
past, as the seed reproduces its parent tree. Thus 
the man stands, fully equipped for his next incarna- 
tion, the only memory of the events of his past being 
in the causal body, in his own enduring form, the 
one body that passes on from life to life. 

Meanwhile, action external to himself is being 
taken to provide him with a physical body suitable 
for the expression of his qualities. In past lives he 
had made ties with, contracted liabilities towards, 
other human beings, and some of these will partly 


/ 


y 


204 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

determine his place of birth and his family.* He 
has been a source of happiness or of unhappiness to 
others ; this is a factor in determining the conditions 
of his coming life. His desire-nature is well disci- 
plined, or unregulated and riotous ; this will be taken 
into account in the physical heredity of the new 
body. He has cultivated certain mental powers, 
such as the artistic ; this must be considered, as here 
again physical heredity is an important factor where 
delicacy of nervous organization and tactile sensibil- 
ity are required. And so on, in endless variety. 
The man may, certainly will, have in him many in- 
congruous characteristics, so that only some can find 
expression in any one body that could be provided, 
and a group of his powers suitable for simultaneous 
expression must be selected. All this is done by 
certain mighty spiritual Intelligences, f often spoken 
of as the Lords of Karma, because it is their func- 
tion to superintend the working out of causes con- 
tinually set going by thoughts, desires, and actions. 
They hold the threads of destiny which each naan 
has woven, and guide the reincarnating man to the 
environment determined by his past, unconsciously 
self -chosen through his past life. 

* This and the following causes determining the outward 
circumstances of the new life will be fully explained in Chap- 
ter IX., on "Karma." 

t Spoken of by H. P. Blavatsky in the Secret Doctrine, 
They are the Lipika, the Keepers of the karmic Records, and 
the Mahllr^jas, who direct the practical working out of the de- 
crees of the Lipika. 


BUILDING THE BODY. 20$ 

The race, the nation, the family, being thus deter- 
mined, what may be called the mould of the physical 
body — suitable for the expression of the man's qual- 
ities, and for the working out of the causes he has 
set going — is given by these great Ones, and the 
new etheric double, a copy of this, is built within the 
mother's womb by the agency of an elemental, the 
thought of the Karmic Lords being its motive power. 
The dense body is built into the etheric double mole- 
cule by molecule, following it exactly, and here 
physical heredity has full sway in the materials 
provided. Further, the thoughts and passions of 
surrounding people, especially of the continually 
present father and mother, influence the building 
elemental in its work, the individuals with whom the 
incarnating man had formed ties in the past thus 
affecting the physical conditions growing up for his 
new life on earth. At a very early stage the new 
astral body comes into connection with the new 
etheric double, and exercises considerable influence 
over its formation, and through it the mental body 
works upon the nervous organization, preparing it 
to become a suitable instrument for its own expres- 
sion in the future. This influence, commenced in 
antenatal life — so that when a child is born its 
brain-formation reveals the extent and balance of 
its mental and moral qualities — is continued after 
birth, and this building of brain and nerves, and 
their correlation to the astral and mental bodies, go 
on till the seventh year of childhood, at which age 
the connection between the man and his physical 


206 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

vehicle is complete, and he may be said to work 
through it henceforth more than upon it. Up to 
this age, the consciousness of the Thinker is more 
upon the astral plane than upon the physical, and 
this is often evidenced by the play of psychic facul- 
ties in young children. They see invisible comrades 
and fairy landscapes, hear voices inaudible to their 
elders, catch charming and delicate fancies from the 
astral world. These phenomena generally vanish 
as the Thinker begins to work eflEectively through 
the physical vehicle, and the dreamy child becomes 
the commonplace boy or girl, oftentimes much to 
the relief of bewildered parents, ignorant of the 
cause of their child's "queemess.** Most children 
have at least a touch of this "queemess,** but they 
quickly learn to hide away their fancies and visions 
from their unsympathetic elders, fearful of blame 
for "telling stories," or of what the child dreads far 
more — ridicule. If parents could see their chil- 
dren's brains, vibrating under an inextricable ming- 
ling of physical and astral impacts, which the chil- 
dren themselves are quite incapable of separating, 
and receiving sometimes a thrill — so plastic are they 
— even from the higher regions, giving a vision of 
ethereal beauty, of heroic achievement, they would 
be more patient with, more responsive to, the con- 
fused prattlings of the little ones, trying to translate 
into the difficult medium of unaccustomed words 
the elusive touches of which they are conscious, and 
which they try to catch and retain. Reincarnation, 
believed in and understood, would relieve cl;ild-life 


THE child's difficulties. 20^ 

of its most pathetic aspect, the unaided struggle of ^ 
the soul to gain control over its new vehicles, and 
to connect itself fully with its densest body without 
losing the power to impress the rarer ones in a way 
that would enable them to convey to the denser their 
own more subtle vibrations. 


CHAPTER VTTF. 
Reincarnation (Continued). 

The ascending stages of consciousness through 
which the Thinker passes as he reincarnates during 
his long cycle of lives in the three lower worlds are 
clearly marked out, and the obvious necessity for 
many lives in which to experience them, if he is to 
evolve at all, may carry to the more thoughtful 
minds the clearest conviction of the truth of reincar- 
nation. 

The first of the stages is that in which all the ex- 
periences are sensational, the only contribution made 
by the mind consisting of the recognition that con- 
tact with some objects is followed by a sensation of 
pleasure, while contact with others is followed by a 
^nsiition of pain. These objects form mental pic- 
luiv», and the pictures soon begin to act as a stimu- 
iu* to seek the objects associated with pleasure, 
m^V^n those objects are not present, the germs of 
'«s^'ftVi>ry and of mental initiative thus making their 
^tji^t^Nirftnco. This first rough division of the exter- 
mu i«vvrU is followed by the more complex idea of 
4te>MffUISr^f quantity on pleasure and pain, already 

-4^^&ife ^ti^S^ of evolution memory is very short- 


THE NECESSITY FOR MANY LIVES. 209 

lived, or, in other words, mental images are very 
transitory. The idea of forecasting the future from 
the past, even to the most rudimentary extent, has 
not dawned on the infant Thinker, and his actions 
are guided from outside, by the impacts that reach 
him from the external world, or at furthest by the 
promptings of his appetites and passions, craving 
gratification. He will throw away anything for an 
immediate satisfaction, however necessary the thing 
may be for his future well-being; the need of the 
moment overpowers every other consideration. Of 
human souls in this embryonic condition, numerous 
examples can be found in books of travel, and the 
necessity for many lives will be impressed on the 
mind of any one who studies the mental condition of 
the least evolved savages, and compares it with the 
mental condition of even average humanity among 
ourselves. 

Needless to say that the moral capacity is no more 
evolved than the mental ; the idea of good and evil 
has not yet been conceived. Nor is it possible to 
convey to the quite undeveloped mind even an ele- 
mentary notion of either good or bad. Good and 
pleasant are to it interchangeable terms, as in the 
well-known case of the Australian savage mentioned 
by Charles Darwin. Pressed by hunger, the man 
speared the nearest living creature that could serve 
as food, and this happened to be his wife ; a Euro- 
pean remonstrated with him on the wickedness of 
his deed, but failed tc make any impression; for 

from the reproach that to eat his wife was very bad 
14 


2IO THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

he only deduced the inference that the stranger 
thought she had proved nasty or indigestible, and 
he put him right by smiling peacefully as he patted 
himself after his meal, and declaring in a satisfied 
way, " She is very good." Measure in thought the 
moral distance between that man and S. Francis of 
Assisi, and it will be seen that there must either be 
evolution of souls as there is evolution of bodies, or 
else in the realm of the soul there must be constant 
miracle, dislocated creations. 

There are two paths along either of which man 
may gradually emei:ge from this embryonic mental 
condition. He may be directly ruled and controlled 
by men far more evolved than himself, or he may 
be left slowly to grow unaided. The latter case 
would imply the passage of uncounted millennia,, for, 
without example and without discipline, left to the 
changing impacts of external objects, and to friction 
with other men as undeveloped as himself, the inner 
energies could be but very slowly aroused. As a 
matter of fact, man has evolved by the road of direct 
precept and example and of enforced discipline. 
We have already seen that when the bulk of average 
humanity received the spark which brought the 
Thinker into being, there were some of the greater 
Sons of Mind who incarnated as Teachers, and that 
there was also a long succession of lesser Sons of 
Mind, at various stages of evolution, who came into 
incarnation as the crest-wave of the advancing tide 
of humanity. These ruled llie less evolved, under 
the beneficent sway of the great Teachers, and the 


SENSATION AS RULER. 211 

compelled obedience to elementary rules of right 
living — very elementary at first, in truth — much 
hastened the development of mental and moral facul- 
ties in the embryonic souls. Apart from all other 
records the gigantic remains of civilizations that 
have long since disappeared — evidencing great engi- 
neering skill, and intellectual conceptions far beyond 
anything possible by the mass of the then infant hu- 
manity — sufiice to prove that there were present on 
earth men with minds that were capable of greatly 
planning and greatly executing. 

Let us continue the early stage of the evolution 
of consciousness. Sensation was wholly lord of the 
mind, and the earliest mental efforts were stimulated 
by desire. This led the man, slowly and clumsily, 
to forecast, to plan. He began to recognize a defi- 
nite association of certain mental images, and, when 
one appeared, to expect the appearance of the other 
that had invariably followed in its wake. He began 
to draw inferences, and even to initiate action on the 
faith of these inferences — a great advance. And he 
began also to hesitate now and again to follow the 
vehement promptings of desire, when he found, 
over and over again, that the gratification demanded 
was associated in his mind with the subsequent hap- 
pening of suffering. This action was much quick- 
ened by the pressure upon him of verbally expressed 
laws; he was forbidden to seize certain gratifica- 
tions, and was told that suflPering would follow dis- 
obedience. When he had seized the delight-giving 
object and found the suffering follow upon the pleas- 


212 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

ure, the fulfilled declaration made a far stronger im- 
pression on his mind than would have been made by 
the unexpected — and therefore to him fortuitous — 
happening of the same thing unforetold. Thus con- 
flict continually arose between memory and desire, 
and the mind grew more active by the conflict, and 
was stirred into livelier functioning. The conflict, 
in fact, marked the transition to the second great 
stage. 

Here began to show itself the germ of will. De- 
sire and will guide a man's actions, and will has even 
been defined as the desire which emerges triumphant 
from the contest of desires. But this is a crude and 
superficial view, explaining nothing. Desire is the 
outgoing energy of the Thinker, determined in its 
direction by the attraction of external objects. Will 
is the outgoing energy of the Thinker, determined 
in its direction by the conclusions drawn by the rea- 
son from past experiences, or by the direct intuition 
of the Thinker himself. Otherwise put: desire is 
guided from without, will from within. At the be- 
ginning of man's evolution, desire has complete sov- 
ereignty, and hurries him hither and thither; in the 
middle of his evolution, desire and will are in con- 
tinual conflict, and victory lies sometimes with the 
one, sometimes with the other; at the end of his 
evolution desire has died, and will rules with unop- 
posed, unchallenged sway. Until the Thinker is 
sufficiently developed to see directly, will is guided 
by him through the reason ; and as the reason can 
draw its conclusions only from its stock of mental 


CONFLICT THE RULE. 213 

images — its experience — and that stock is limited, 
the will constantly commands mistaken actions. 
The suffering which flows from these mistaken ac- 
tions increases the stock of mental images, and thus 
gives the reason an increased store from which to 
draw its conclusions. Thus progress is made and 
wisdom is bom. 

Desire often mixes itself up with will, so that what 
appears to be determined from within is really 
largely prompted by the cravings of the lower na- 
ture for objects which afford it gratification. In- 
stead of an open conflict between the two, the lower 
subtly insinuates itself into the current of the higher 
and turns its course aside. Defeated in the open 
field, the desires of the personality thus conspire 
against their conqueror, and often win by guile what 
they failed to win by force. During the whole of 
this second great stage, in which the faculties of the 
lower mind are in full course of evolution, conflict is 
the normal condition, conflict between the rule of 
sensations and the rule of reason. 

The problem to be solved in humanity is the put- 
ting an end to conflict while preserving the freedom 
of the will ; to determine the will inevitably to the 
best, while yet leaving that best as a matter of 
choice. The best is to be chosen, but by a self -ini- 
tiated volition, that shall come with all the certainty 
of a foreordained necessity. The certainty of a com- 
pelling law is to be obtained from countless wills, 
each one left free to determine its own course. The 
solution of that problem is simple when it is known, 


214 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

though the contradiction looks irreconcilable when 
first presented. Let man be left free to choose his 
own actions, but let every action bring about an in- 
evitable result ; let him run loose amid all objects of 
desire and seize whatever he will, but let him have 
all the results of his choice, be they delightful or 
grievous. Presently he will freely reject the ob- 
jects whose possession ultimately causes him pain; 
he will no longer desire them when he has experi- 
enced to the full that their possession ends in 
sorrow. Let him struggle to hold the pleasure and 
avoid the pain, he will none the less be ground be- 
tween the stones of law, and the lesson will be re- 
peated any number of times found necessary; rein- 
carnation offers as many lives as are needed by the 
most sluggish learner. Slowly desire for an object 
that brings suffering in its train will die, and when 
the thing offers itself in all its attractive glamour it 
will be rejected, not by compulsion but by free 
choice. It is no longer desirable, it has lost its 
power. Thus with thing after thing; choice more 
and more runs in harmony with law. " There are 
many roads of error; the road of truth is one;*' 
when all the paths of error have been trodden, 
when all have been found to end in suffering, the 
choice to walk in the way of truth is unswerving, 
because based on knowledge. The lower kingdoms 
work harmoniously, compelled by law ; man's king- 
dom is a chaos of conflicting wills, fighting against, 
rebelling against law; presently there evolves from 
it a nobler unity, a harmonious choice of voluntary 


KNOWING GOOD AND EVIL. 


21$ 


obedience, an obedience that, being voluntary, based 
on knowledge and on memory of the results of dis- 
obedience, is stable and can be drawn aside by no 
temptation. Ignorant, inexperienced, man would 
always have been in danger of falling; as a God, 
knowing good and evil by experience, his choice 
of the good is raised forever beyond possibility of 
change. 

Will in the domain of morality is generally entitled 
conscience, and it is subject to the same difficulties 
in this domain as in its other activities. So long as 
actions are in question which have been done over 
and over again, of which the consequences are famil- 
iar either to the reason or to the Thinker himself, the 
conscience speaks quickly and firmly. But when un- 
familiar problems arise, as to the working out of 
which experience is silent, conscience cannot speak 
with certainty ; it has but a hesitating answer from 
the reason, which can draw only a doubtful inference, 
and the Thinker cannot speak if his experience does 
not include the circumstances that have now arisen. 
Hence conscience often decides wrongly; that is, 
the will, failing clear direction from either the rea- 
son or the intuition, guides action amiss. Nor can 
we leave out of consideration the influences which 
play upon the mind from without, from the thought- 
forms of others, of friends, of the family, of the 
community, of the nation.* These all surround 
and penetrate the mind with their own atmosphere, 
distorting the appearance of everything, and throw- 
* Chapter II., on "The Astral Plane." 


2X6 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

ing all things out of proportion. Thus influenced, 
the reason often does not even judge calmly from 
its own experience, but draws false conclusions as it 
studies its materials through a distorting medium. 

The evolution of moral faculties is very largely 
stimulated by ^he affections, animal and selfish as 
these are during the infancy of the Thinker. The 
laws of morality are laid down by the enlightened 
reason, discerning the laws by which Nature moves, 
and bringing human conduct into consonance with 
the divine Will. But the impulse to obey these laws, 
when no outer force compels, has its root in love, in 
that hidd n divinity in man which seeks to pour 
itself ou , ':o give itself to others. Morality begins 
in the infant Thinker when h is first moved by love 
to wife, to child, to friend, to do some action that 
serves the loved one without any thought of gain to 
himself thereby. It is the first conquest over the 
lower nature, the complete subjugation of which is 
the achievement of moral perfection. Hence the im- 
portance of never killing ou*:, or striving to weaken, 
the affections, as is done in many of the lower kinds 
of occultism. However impure and gross the affec- 
tions may be, they offer possibilities of moral evo- 
lution from which the cold-hearted and self-isolated 
have shut themselves out. It is an easier task to 
purify than to create love, and this is why "the 
sinners" have been said by great Teachers to be 
nearer the kingdom of heaven than the Pharisees 
and scribes. 

The third great stage of consciousness sees the 


ABSTRACT IDEAS. 21/ 

development of the higher intellectual powers ; the 
mind no longer dwells entirely on mental images ob- 
tained from sensations, no longer reasons on purely 
concrete objects, nor is concerned with the attributes 
which differentiate one from another. The Thinker, 
having learned clearly to discriminate between ob- 
jects by dwelling upon their unlikenesses, now be- 
gins to group them together by some attribute 
which appears in a number of objects otherwise dis- 
similar and makes a link between them. He draws 
out, abstracts, "'his common attribute, and sets all 
objects that possess it apart from the rest which are 
without it ; and in this way he evolves the power of 
recognizing identity amid diversity, a step toward 
the much later recognition of the One underlying 
the many. He thus classifies all that is around him, 
developing the synthetic faculty, and learning to 
construct as well as to analyze. Presently he takes 
another step, and conceives of the common property 
as an idea, apart from all the objects in which it ap- 
pears, and thus constructs a higher kind of mental 
image than the image of a concrete object — the 
image of an idea that has no phenomenal exis- 
tence in the worlds of form, but which exists on 
the higher levels of the mental plane, and affords 
material on which the Thinker himself can work. 
The lower mind reaches the abstract idea by rea- 
son, and in thus doing accomplishes its loftiest 
flight, touching the threshold of the formless world, 
and dimly seeing that which lies beyond. The 
Thinker sees these ideas, and lives among them 


21 8 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

habitually, and when the power of abstract reasoning 
is developed and exercised the Thinker is becoming 
effective in his own v/orld, and is beginning his life 
of active functioning in hi^ own sphere. Such men 
care little for the life of th: senses, care little for 
external observation, or for mental application to 
images of external objects; their powers are in- 
drawn, and no longer rush outwards in the search 
for satisfaction. They dwell calmly within them- 
selves, engrossed with the problems of philosophy, 
with the deeper aspects of life an J thought, seeking 
to understand causes rather than troubling them- 
selves with eflE:cts, and approaching nearer and 
nearer to tho recognition of the One that underlies 
all the diversities ^ c external Nature. 

In the fourth stage of consciousness that One is 
seen, and with the transcending of the barriers set 
up by the intellect the consci usness spreads out to 
embrace the world, seeing all things in itself and as 
parts of itself, and seeing itseli as a ray of the Logos, 
and therefore as one with Him. Where is then the 
Thinker? Ho has becom Consciousness, and, while 
the spiritual Soul can at will use any of his lower 
vehicles, he is no longer limited to their use, nor 
needs them for this full and conscious life. Then is 
compulsory reincarnation over and the man has de- 
stroyed death ; he has verily achieved immortality. 
Then has he become *' a pillar in the temple of my 
God and shall go out no more." 

To complete this part of our study, we need to 
understand the successive quickcnings of the vehicles 


QUICKENING THE VEHICLES. 2ig 

of consciousness, the bringing them one by one into 
activity as the harmonious instruments of the human 
Soul. 

We have seen that from the very beginning of 
his separate life the Thinker has possessed coatings 
of mental, astral, etheric, and dense physical matter. 
These form the media by which his life vibrates out- 
wards, the bridge of consciousness, as we may call it, 
along which all impulses from the Thinker may reach 
the dense physical body, all impacts from the outer 
world may reach him. But this general use of the 
successive bodies as parts of a connected whole is 
a very different thing from the quickening of each 
in turn to serve as a distinct vehicle of conscious- 
ness, independently of those below it, and it is this 
quickening of the vehicles that we have now to con- 
sider. 

The lowest vehicle, the dense physical body, is the 
first one to be brought into harmonious working 
order ; the brain and the nervous system have to be 
elaborated and to be rendered delicately responsive 
to every thrill which is within their gamut of vibra- 
tory power. In the "arly stages, while the physi- 
cal dense body is composed of the grosser kinds of 
matter, this gamut is extremely limited, and the 
physical organ of mind can respond Only to the 
slowest vibrations sent down. It answers far more 
promptly, as is natural, to the impacts from the ex- 
ternal world caused by objects similar in materials 
to itself. Its quickening as a vehicle of conscious- 
ness consists in its being made responsive to the 


th« 


At«C 


ItS'f 


VfV 


Oaa^ 


at® 


y 

by 
ce 


tUiSi 


w»*^°-ro» "^ 


,*i»«*!fSte<=f 


ott- 


g^«^°^Tave^^^"lS.^^«^^!! and v»^«\^--ot 


^ "^"^ feel to ^^°^'tot1^s otv t^^ ^ a\s at^. - ^ vt- 


aregtad-^'? 


^ ^^d t^e coarsen 


biate 


lOtO?' 


coattt^g-rv.^atiotvs. 


itvct 


e^^'^^-aWab^etoi^ t\vo^igf.^^^te\y ^^^ 


oisutiaoe-- 


becoi 


aWve 


itietv^ 


as 


atv 


above. ^»^ 


t^ctv 


PERSONALITY AS SERVANT. 221 

forming this function sets in. The personality be- 
gins deliberately to discipline itself, and to set the 
permanent interests of the immortal individual above 
its own transient gratifications. It yields up the 
time that might be spent in the pursuit of lower 
pleasures to the evolution of mental powers; day by 
day time is set apart for serious study ; the brain is 
gladly surrendered to receive impacts from within 
instead of from without, is trained to answer to con- 
secutive thinking, and is taught to refrain from 
throwing up its own useless disjointed images, made 
by past impressions. It is taught to remain at rest 
when it is not wanted by its master; to answer, not 
to initiate vibrations.* Further, some discretion 
and discrimination will be used as to the food-stuffs 
which supply physical materials to the brain. The 
use of the coarser kinds will be discontinued, such 
as animal flesh and blood and alcohol, and pure food 
will build up a pure body. Gradually the lower 
vibrations will find no materials capable of respond- 
ing to them, and the physical body thus becomes 
more and more entirely a vehicle of consciousness, 
delicately responsive to all the thrills of thought and 
keenly sensitive to the vibrations sent outwards by 
the Thinker. The etheric double so closely follows 
the constitution of the dense body that it is not neces- 

* One of the signs that it is being accomplished is the cessa* 
tion of the confused jumble of fragmentary images which are 
set up during sleep by the independent activity of the physical 
brains. V^hen the brain is coming under control this kind of 
dream is very seldom experienced. 


222 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

sary to study separately its purification and quicken- 
ing; it does not normally serve as a separate vehicle 
of consciousness, but works synchronously with its 
dense partner, and when separated from it either by 
accident or by death, it responds very feebly to the 
vibrations initiated within. Its function in truth is 
not to serve as a vehicle of mental consciousness, 
but as a vehicle of Prana, of specialized life-force, 
and its dislocation from the denser particles to which 
it conveys the life-currents is therefore disturbing 
and mischievous. 

The astral body is the second vehicle of conscious- 
ness to be vivified, and we have already seen the 
changes through which it passes as it becomes or- 
ganized for its work. * When it is thoroughly organ- 
ized, the consciousness which has hitherto worked 
within it, imprisoned by it, when in sleep it has left 
the physical body and is drifting about in the astral 
world, begins not only to receive the impressions 
through it of astral objects that form the so-called 
dream-consciousness, but also to perceive astral ob- 
jects by its senses — that is, it begins to relate the 
impressions received to the objects which give rise 
to those impressions. These perceptions are at first 
confused, just as are the perceptions at first made 
by the mind through a new physical baby-body, and 
they have to be corrected by experience in the one 
case as in the other. The Thinker has gradually to 
discover the new powers which he can use through 
this subtler vehicle, and by which he can control the 
*See Chapter II., on "The Astral Plane." 


THE MENTAL VEHICLE. 223 

astral elements and defend himself against astral 
dangers. He is not left alone to face this new world 
unaided, but is taught and helped and — until he can 
guard himself — protected by those who are more ex- 
perienced than himself in the ways of the astral 
world. Gradually the new vehicle of consciousness 
comes completely under his control, and life on the 
astral plane is as natural and as familiar as life on 
the physical. 

The third vehicle of consciousness, the mental 
body, is rarely, if ever, vivified for independent ac- 
tion without the direct instruction of a teacher, and 
its functioning belongs to the life of the disciple at 
the present stage of human evolution. * As we have 
already seen, it is rearranged for separate function- 
ing f on the mental plane, and here again experience 
and training are needed ere it comes fully under its 
owner's control. A fact — common to all these three 
vehicles of consciousness, but more apt to mislead 
perhaps in the subtler than in the denser, because it 
is generally forgotten in their case, while it is so ob- 
vious that it is remembered in the denser — is that 
they are subject to evolution, and that with their 
higher evolution their powers to receive and to re- 
spond to vibrations increase. How many more 
shades of a color are seen by a trained eye than by 
an untrained. How many overtones ar^ heard by a 
trained ear, where the untrained hears only the sin- 
gle fundamental note. As the physical senses grow 

♦See Chapter XL, on "Man's Ascent." 
t See Chapter IV. , on "Tb© Mental Pla^e«- 


?24 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

more keen, the world becomes fuller and fuller, and 
where the peasant is conscious only of his furrow 
and his plough, the cultured mind is conscious of 
hedgerow flower and quivering aspen, of rapturous 
melody down-dropping from the skylark and the 
whirring of tiny wings through the adjoining wood, 
of the scudding of rabbits under the curled fronds 
of the bracken, and the squirrels playing with each 
other through the branches of the beeches, of all the 
gracious movements of wild things, of all the fra- 
grant odors of field and woodland, of all the chang- 
ing glories of the cloud-flecked sky, and of all the 
chasing lights and shadows on the hills. Both the 
peasant and the cultured have eyes, both have brains, 
but of what differing powers of observation, of what 
differing powers to receive impressions. Thus also 
in other worlds. As the astral and mental bodies 
begin to function as separate vehicles of conscious- 
ness, they are in, as it were, the peasant stage of re* 
ceptivity, and only fragments of the astral and 
mental worlds, with their strange and elusive phe- 
nomena, make their way into consciousness; but 
they evolve rapidly, embracing more and more, and 
conveying to consciousness a more and more accurate 
reflection of its environment. Here, as everywhere 
else, we have to remember that our knowledge is not 
the limit of Nature's powers, and that in the astral 
and mental worlds, as in the physical, we are still 
children, picking up a few shells cast up by the 
waves, while the treasures hid in the ocean are still 
unexplored. 


THE CAUSAL VEHICLE,. 225 

The quickening of the causal body as a vehicle of 
consciousness follows in due course the quickening 
of the mental body, and opens up to man a yet more 
marvellous state )f consciousness, stretching back- 
wards into an illimitable past, onwards into the 
reaches of the future. Then the Thinker not only 
possesses the memory of his own past and can trace 
his growth through the long succession of his incar- 
nate and excamate lives, but he can also roam at will 
through the stoned past of the earth, and learn the 
weighty lessons of world-experience, studying the 
hidden laws which guide evolution and the deep 
secrets of life hidden in the bosom of Nature. In 
that lofty vehicle of consciousness he can reach the 
veiled Isis, and lift a comer of her down-dropped 
veil ; for there he can face her eyes without being 
blinded by her lightning glances, and he can see in 
the radiance that flows from her the causes of the 
world's sorrow and its ending, with heart pitiful and 
compassionate, but no longer wrung with helpless 
pain. Strength and calm and wisdom come to those 
who are using the causal body as a vehicle of con- 
sciousness, and who behold with opened eyes the 
glory of the Good Law. 

When the buddhic body is quickened as a vehicle 
of consciousness the man enters into the bliss of 
non-separateness, and knows in full and vivid reali- 
zation his unity with all that is. As the predominant ,, 
element of consciousness in *:he causal body is know-"* 
ledge, and ultimately wisdom, so the predominant 
element of consciousness in the buddhic body is bliss 
IS 


226 TIIE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

and love. The serenity of wisdom chiefly marks the 
one, while tenderest compassion streams forth inex- 
haustibly from the other ; when to these is added the 
godlike and unruffled strength that marks the func- 
tioning of Atma, then humanity is crowned with 
divinity, and the God-man is manifest in all the 
plenitude of his power, of his wisdom, of his love. 

The handing down to the lower vehicles of such 
part of the consciousness belonging to the higher as 
they are able to receive does not immediately follow 
on the successive quickening of the vehicles. In 
this matter individuals differ very widely, according 
to their circumstances and their work, for this quick- 
ening of the vehicles above the physical rarely occurs 
till probationary discipleship * h reached, and then 
the duties to be discharged depend on the needs of 
the time. The disciple, and even the aspirant for 
discipleship, is taught to hold all his powers entirely 
for the service of the world, and the sharing of the 
lower consciousness in the knowledge of the higher 
is for the most part determined by the needs of the 
work in which the disciple is engaged. It is neces- 
sary that the disciple should have the full use of his 
vehicles of consciousness on the higher planes, as 
much of his work can be accomplished only in them ; 
but the conveying of a knowledge of that work to 
the physical vehicle, which is no way concerned in 
it, is a matter of no importance and the conveyance 
or non -conveyance is generally determined by the 
effect that the one course or the other would have 
*See Chapter XI., on "Man's Ascent." 


SHARING KNOWLEDGE. 22/ 

on the efficiency of his work on the physical plane. 
The strain on the physical body when the higher con- 
sciousness compels it to vibrate responsively is very 
great, at the present stage of evolution, and unless 
the external circumstances are very favorable this 
strain is apt to cause nervous disturbance, hyper- 
sensitiveness with its attendant evils. Hence most^ 
of those who are in full possession of the quickened 
higher vehicles of consciousness, and whose most 
important work is done out of the body, remain 
apart from the busy haunts of men, if the}'- desire to 
throw down into the physical consciousness the 
knowledge they use on the higher planes, thus pre- 
serving the sensitive physical vehicle from the rough 
usage and clamor of ordinary life. 

The main preparations to be made for receiving in 
the physical vehicle the vibrations of the higher con- 
sciousness are: its purification from grosser mate- 
rials by pure food and pure life ; the entire subjuga- 
tion of the passions, and the cultivation of an 
even, balanced temper and mind, unaffected by the 
turmoil and vicissitudes of external life ; the habit of 
quiet meditation on lofty topics, turning the mind 
away from the objects of the senses, and from the 
mental images arising from them, and fixing it on 
higher things ; the cessation of hurry, especially of 
that restless, excitable hurry of the mind, which 
keeps the brain continually at work and flying from 
one subject to another; the genuine love for the 
things of the higher world, that makes them more 
attractive than the objects of the lower, so that the 


228 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

mind rests contentedly in their companionship as in 
that of a well-loved friend. In fact, the preparations 
are much the same as those necessary for the con- 
scious separation of "soul" from "body," and those 
were elsewhere stated by me as follows: The student 

*' Must begin by practising extreme temperance in all things, 
cultivating an equable and serene state of mind : his life must 
be clean and his thoughts pure, his body held in strict subjec- 
tion to the soul, and his mind trained to occupy itself with noble 
and lofty themes; he must habitually practise compassion, 
sympathy, helpfulness to others, with indifference to troubles 
and pleasures affecting himself, and he must cultivate courage, 
steadfastness, and devotion. In fact, he must live the religion 
and ethics that other people for the most part only talk. Hav- 
ing by persevering practice learned to control his mind to some 
extent, so that he is able to keep it fixed on one line of thought 
for some little time, he must begin its more rig^d training by 
a daily practice of concentration on some difficult or abstract 
subject, or on some lofty object of devotion ; this concentration 
means the firm fixing of the mind on one single point, without 
wandering, and without yielding to any distractions caused by 
external objects, by the activity of the senses, or by that of 
the mind itself. It must be braced up to an unswerving stead- 
iness and fixity, until gradually it will learn so to withdraw 
its attention from the outer world and from the body that the 
senses will remain quiet and still, while the mind is intensely 
alive with all its energies drawn inwards to be launched at a 
single point of thought, the highest to which it can attain. 
When it is able to hold itself thus with comparative ease it is 
ready for a further step, and by a strong but calm effort of the 
will it can throw itself beyond the highest thought it can reach 
while working in the physical brain, and in that effort will 
rise to and unite itself with the higher consciousness and find 
itself free of the body. When this is done there is no sense of 
sleep or dream nor any loss of consciousness ; the man finds 


REINCARNATION OR CREATION. 229 

himself outside his body, but as .though he had merely slipped 
off a weighty encumbrance, not as though he had lost any part 
of himself ; he is not really * disembodied, ' but has risen out of 
his gross body * in a body of light, ' which obeys his slightest 
thought and serves as a beautiful and perfect instrument for 
carrying out his will. In this he is free of the subtle worlds, 
but will need to train his faculties long and carefully for relia- 
ble work under the new conditions. 

** Freedom from the body may be obtained in other ways : by 
the rapt intensity of devotion or by special methods that may 
be imparted by a great teacher to his disciple. Whatever the 
way. the end is the same — the setting free of the soul in full 
consciousness, able to examine its new surroundings in regions 
beyond the treading of the man of flesh. At will it can return 
to the body and re-enter it, and under these circumstances it 
can impress on the brain-mind, and thus retain while in the 
body, the memory of the experiences it has undergone. "* 

Those who have grasped the main ideas sketched 
in the foregoing pages will feel that these ideas are 
in themselves the strongest proof that reincarnation 
is a fact in nature. It is necessary, in order that the 
vast evolution implied in the phrase, " the evolution 
of the soul," may be accomplished. The only alter- 
native — putting aside for the moment the material- 
istic idea that the soul is only the aggregate of the 
vibrations of a particular kind of physical matter — is 
that each soul is a new creation, made when a babe 
is bom, and stamped with virtuous or with vicious 
tendencies, endowed with ability or with stupidity, 
by the arbitrary whim of the creative power. As the 
Mahommedan would say, his fate is hung round his 

•"Conditions of Life after Death," Nineteenth Century, 
November, i8g6. 


230 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

neck at birth, for a man's fate depends on his char- 
acter and his surroundings, and a newly created soul 
flung into the world must be doomed to happiness 
or misery according to the circumstances environing 
him and the character stamped upon him. Predes- 
tination in its most offensive form is the alternative 
of reincarnation. Instead of looking on men as 
slowly evolving, so that the brutal savage of to-day 
will in time evolve the noblest qualities of saint and 
hero, and thus seeing in the world a wisely planned 
and wisely directed process of growth, we shall be 
obliged to see in it a chaos of most unjustly treated 
sentient beings, awarded happiness or misery, 
knowledge or ignorance, virtue or vice, wealth or 
poverty, genius or idiocy, by an arbitrary external 
will, unguided by either justice or mercy — a veritable 
pandemonium, irrational and unmeaning. And this 
chaos is supposed to be the higher part of a cosmos, 
in the lower regions of which are manifested all the 
orderly and beautiful workings of a law that ever 
evolves higher and more complex forms from the 
lower and the simpler, that obviously " makes for 
righteousness," for harmony, and for beauty. 

If it be admitted that the soul of the savage is des- 
tined to live and to evolve, and that he is not doomed 
for eternity to his present infant state, but that his 
evolution will take place after death and in other 
worlds, then the principle of soul-evolution is con- 
ceded, and the question of the place of evolution 
alone remains. Were all souls on earth at the same 
stage of evolution, much might be said for the con- 


MANY WORLDS IN TURN. 23 1 

tention that further worlds are needed for the evolu- 
tion of souls beyond the infant stage. But we have 
around us souls that are far advanced, and that were 
bom with noble mental and moral qualities. By 
parity of reasoning, we must suppose them to have 
been evolved in other worlds ere their one birth in 
this, and we cannot but wonder why an earth that 
offers varied conditions, fit for little-developed and 
also for advanced souls, should be paid only one 
flying visit by souls at every stage of development, 
all the rest of their evolution being carried on in 
worlds similar to this, equally able to afford all the 
conditions needed to evolve the souls at different 
stages of evolution, as we find them to be when they 
are bom here. The Ancient Wisdom teaches, in- 
deed, that the soul progresses through many worlds, 
but it also teaches that he is bom in each of these 
worlds over and over again, until he has completed 
the evolution possible in that world. The worlds 
themselves, according to its teaching, form an evolu- 
tionary chain, and each plays its own part as a field 
for certain stages of evolution. Our own world 
offers a field suitable for the evolution of the min- 
eral, vegetable, animal and human kingdoms, and 
therefore collective or individual reincarnation goes 
on upon it in all these kingdoms. Truly, further 
evolution lies before us in other worlds, but in the 
divine order they are not open to us until we have 
learned and mastered the lessons our own world has 
to teach. 
There are many lines of thought that lead us to 


232 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

the same goal of reincarnation, as we study the 
world around us. The immense differences that 
separate man from man have been already noticed 
as implying an evolutionary past behind each soul ; 
and attention has been drawn to these as differen- 
tiating the individual reincarnation of men — ^all of 
whom belong to a single species — from the reincar- 
nation of monadic group-souls in the lower king- 
doms. The comparatively small differences that 
separate the physical bodies of men, all being ex- 
ternally recognizable as men, should be contrasted 
with the immense differences that separate the low- 
est savage and the noblest human type in mental and 
moral capacities. Savages are often splendid in 
physical development and with large cranial con- 
tents, but how different their minds from that of a 
philosopher or of a saint! 

If high mental and moral qualities are regarded as 
the accumulated results of civilized living, then we 
arc confronted by the fact that the ablest men of 
the present are overtopped by the intellectual giants 
of the past, and that none of our own day reaches 
the moral attitude of some historical saints. 
Further, we have to consider that genius has neither 
parent nor child ; that it appears suddenly and not 
as the apex of a gradually improving family, and is 
itself generally sterile, or, if a child be bom to it, it 
is a child of the body, not of the mind. Still more 
significantly, a musical genius is for the most part 
born in a musical family, because that form of gen- 
ius needs for its manifestation a nervous organiza- 


INFANT PRODIGIES. 233 

tion of a peculiar kind, and nervous organization 
fall^ under the law of heredity. But how often in 
such a family its object seems over when it has pro- 
vided a body for a genius, and it then flickers out 
and vanishes in a few generations into the obscurity 
of average humanity. Where are the descendants of 
Bach, of Beethoven, of Mozart, of Mendelssohn, 
equal to their sires? Truly genius does not descend 
from father to son, like the family physical types of 
the Stuart and the Bourbon. 

On what ground, save that of reincarnation, can 
the "infant prodigy*' be accounted for? Take as an 
instance the case of the child who became Dr. 
Young, the discoverer of the undulatory theory of 
light, a man whose greatness is scarcely yet suffi- 
ciently widely recognized. As a child of two he 
could read "with considerable fluency,*' and before 
he was four he had read through the Bible twice ; at 
seven he began arithmetic, and mastered Walking- 
ham's Tutor's Assistant before he had reached the 
middle of it under his tutor, and a few years later 
we find him mastering, while at school, Latin, Greek, 
Hebrew, mathematics, book-keeping, French, Ital- 
ian, turning and telescope-making, and delighting 
in Oriental literature. At fourteen he was to be 
placed under private tuition with a boy a year and 
a half younger, but, the tutor first engaged failing to 
arrive. Young taught the other boy. * Sir William 
Rowan Hamilton showed power even more preco- 
cious. He began to learn Hebrew when he was 
^Ltfeof Dr, Thotnas Young, hyG, Peacock. D.D. 


234 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

barely three, and " at the age of seven he was pro- 
nounced by one of the Fellows of Trinity College, 
Dublin, to have shown a greater knowledge of the 
language than many candidates for a fellowship. 
At the age of thirteen he had acquired considerable 
knowledge of at least thirteen languages. Among 
these, besides the classical and the modem European 
languages, were included Persian, Arabic, Sanscrit, 
Hindustani, and even Malay. . . . He wrote, at the 
age of fourteen, a complimentary letter to the Per- 
sian Ambassador, who happened to visit Dublin; 
and the latter said he had not thought there was a 
man in Britain who could have written such a docu- 
ment in the Persian language." A relative of his 
says : " I remember him a little boy of six, when he 
would answer a difficult mathematical question, and 
run off gaily to his little cart. At twelve he engaged 
Colburn, the American 'calculating boy,* who was 
then being exhibited as a curiosity in Dublin, and 
he had not always the worst of the encounter.'* 
When he was eighteen. Dr. Brinkley (Royal Astron- 
omer of Ireland) said of him in 1823: "This young 
man, I do not say will be^ but is^ the first mathe- 
matician of his age.*' "At college his career was 
perhaps unexampled. Among a number of com- 
petitors of more than ordinary merit, he was first in 
every subject, and at every examination." * 

Let the thoughtful student compare these boys 
with a semi-idiot, or even with an average lad, note 
how, starting with these advantages, they become 

* North British Review, September. 1866. 


LIKENESS AND UNLIKENESS. 235 

leaders of thought, and then ask himself whether 
such souls have no past behind them. 

Family likenesses are generally explained as being 
due to the " law of heredity," but differences in men- 
tal and in moral character are continually found 
within a family circle, and these are left unexplained. 
Reincarnation explains the likenesses by the fact 
that a soul in taking birth is directed to a family 
which provides by its physical heredity a body suit- 
able to express his characteristics; and it explains 
the unlikenesses by attaching the mental and moral 
character to the individual himself, while showing 
that ties set up in the past have led him to take birth 
in connection with some other individual of that 
family.* A "matter of significance in connection 
with twins is that during infancy they will often be 
indistinguishable from each other, even to the keen 
eye of mother and of nurse; whereas, later in life, 
when Manas has been working on his physical en- 
casement, he will have so modified it that the physi- 
cal likeness lessens, and the differences of character 
stamp themselves on the mobile features, "f Phy- 
sical likeness with mental and moral unlikeness 
seems to imply the meeting of two different lines of 
causation. 

The striking dissimilarity found to exist between 
people of about equal intellectual power in assimi- 
lating particular kinds of knowledge is another 
" pointer" to reincarnation. A truth is recognized 

♦See Chapter IX.. on "Karma." 

f Reincarnation, by Annie Besant, p. 64. 


236 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

at once by one, while the other fails to grasp it even 
after long and careful observation. Yet the very 
opposite may be the case when another truth is pre- 
sented to them, and it may be seen by the second 
and missed by the first. "Two students are at- 
tracted to Theosophy and begin to study it; at a 
year's end one is familiar with its main conceptions 
and can apply them, while the other is struggling in 
a maze. To the one each principle seemed familiar 
on presentation: to the other new, unintelligible, 
strange. The believer in reincarnation understands 
that the teaching is old to the one and new to the 
other ; one learns quickly because }ie remembers^ he 
is but recovering past knowledge ; the other learns 
slowly because his experience has not included these 
truths of nature, and he is acquiring them toilfuUy 
for the first time."* So also ordinary intuition is 
" merely recognition of a fact familiar in a past life, 
though met with for the first time in the present," f 
another sign of the road along which the individual 
has travelled in the past. 

The main difficulty with many people in the re- 
ception of the doctrine of reincarnation is their own 
absence of memory of their past. Yet they are 
every day familiar with the fact that they have for- 
gotten very much even of their lives in their present 
bodies, and that the early years of childhood are 
blurred and those of infancy a blank. They must 
also know that events of the past which have entirely 
slipped out of their normal consciousness are yet 

* Ibid. p. 67. f Ibid, p. 67. 


MEMORY OF PAST LIVES. 237 

hidden away in dark caves of memory, and can be 
brought out again vividly in some forms of disease 
or under the influence of mesmerism. A dying man 
has been known to speak a language heard only 
in infancy, and unknown to him during a long life ; 
in delirium, events long forgotten have presented 
themselves vividly to the consciousness. Nothing 
is really forgotten ; but much is hidden out of sight 
of the limited vision of our waking consciousness, 
the most limited form of our consciousness, although 
the only consciousness recognized by the vast ma- 
jority. Just as the memory of some of the present 
life is indrawn beyond the reach of this waking con- 
sciousness, and makes itself known again only when 
the brain is hypersensitive and thus able to respond 
to vibrations that usually beat against it unheeded, 
so is the memory of the past lives stored up out of 
reach of the physical consciousness. It is all with 
the Thinker, who alone persists from life to life; 
he has the whole book of memory within his reach, 
for he is the only " I" that has passed through all 
the experiences recorded therein. Moreover, he 
can impress his own memories of the past on his 
physical vehicle, as soon as it has been sufficiently 
purified to answer to his swift and subtle vibrations, 
and then the man of flesh can share his knowledge 
of the storied past. The difficulty of memory does 
not lie in forgetfulness, for the lower vehicle, the 
physical body, has never passed through the previ- 
ous lives of its owner ; it lies in the absorption of 
the present body in its present environment, in its 


238 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

coarse irresponsiveness to the delicate thrills in whicli 
alone the soul can speak. Those who would re- 
member the past must not have their interests cen- 
tred in the present, and they must purify and re- 
fine the body till it is able to receive impressions 
from the subtler spheres. 

Memory of their own past lives, however, is 
possessed by a considerable number of people who 
have achieved the necessary sensitiveness of the 
physical organism, and to these, of course, reincar- 
nation is no longer a theory, but has become a 
matter of personal knowledge. They have learned 
how much richer life becomes when memories of 
past lives pour into it, when the friends of this brief 
day are found to be the friends of the long-ago, and 
old remembrances strengthen the ties of the fleeting 
present. Life gains security and dignity when it is 
seen with a long vista behind it, and when the loves 
of old reappear in the loves of to-day. Death fades 
into its proper place as a mere incident in life, a 
change from one scene to another, like a journey 
that separates bodies but cannot sunder friend from 
friend. The links of the present are found to be 
part of a golden chain that stretches backwards, and 
the future can be faced with a glad security in the 
thought that these links will endure through days to 
come, and form part of that unbroken chain. 

Now and then we find children who have brought 
over a memory of their immediate past, for the 
most part when they have died in childhood and are 
reborn almost immediately. In the West such cases 


MEMORY AND FACULTY. 239 

are rarer than in the East, because in the West the 
first words of such a child would be met with dis- 
belief, and he would quickly lose faith in his own 
memories. In the East, where belief in reincarna- 
tion is almost universal, the child's remembrances 
are listened to, and where the opportunity serves 
they have been verified. 

There is another important point with respect to 
memory that will repay consideration. The memory 
of past events remains, as we have seen, with the 
Thinker only, but the results of those events em- 
bodied in faculties are at the service of the lower 
man. If the whole of these past events were thrown 
down into the physical brain, a vast mass of experi- 
ences in no classified order, without arrangement, 
the man could not be guided by the outcome of the 
past, nor utilize it for present help. Compelled to 
make a choice between two lines of action, he would 
have to pick, out of the unarranged facts of his past, 
events similar in character, trace out their results, 
and after long and weary study arrive at some con- 
clusion — a conclusion very likely to be vitiated by 
the overlooking of some important factor, and 
reached long after the need for decision had passed. 
All the events, trivial and important, of some hun- 
dreds of lives would form a rather unwieldy and 
chaotic mass for reference in an emergency that de- 
manded a swift decision. The far more effective 
plan of Nature leaves to the Thinker the memory 
of the events, provides a long period of excamate 
existence for the mental body, during which all the 


240 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

events are tabulated and compared and their results 
are classified; then these results are embodied as 
faculties, and these faculties form the next mental 
body of the Thinker. In this way, the enlarged and 
improved faculties are available for immediate use, 
and, the results of the past being in them, a decision 
can be come to in accordance with those results and 
without any delay. The clear quick insight and 
prompt judgment are nothing else than the outcome 
of past experiences, moulded into an effective form 
for use; they are surely more useful instruments 
than would be a mass of unassimilated experiences, 
out of which the relevant ones would have to be 
selected and compared, and from which inferences 
would have to be drawn, on each separate occasion 
on which a choice arises. 

From all these lines of thought, however, the 
mind turns back to rest on the fundamental neces- 
sity for reincarnation if life is to be made intelligi- 
ble, and if injustice and cruelty are not to mock the 
helplessness of man. With reincarnation man is a 
dignified, immortal being, evolving towards a di- 
vinely glorious end ; without it, he is a tossing straw 
on the stream of chance circumstances, irresponsible 
for his character, for his actions, for his destiny. 
With it, he may look forward with fearless hope, 
however low in the scale of evolution he may be to- 
day, for he is on the ladder to divinity, and the 
climbing to its summit is only a question of time ; 
without it, he has no reasonable ground of assurance 
as to progress in the future, nor indeed any reason- 


LAW OR CHANCE. 24 1 

able ground of assurance in a future at all. Why 
should a creature without a past look forward to a 
future? He may be a mere bubble on the ocean of 
time. Flung into the world from nonentity, with 
qualities, good or evil, attached to him without 
reason or desert, why should he strive to make the 
best of them? Will not his future, if he have one, 
be as isolated, as uncaused, as unrelated as his pres- 
ent? In dropping reincarnation from its beliefs, 
the modem world has deprived God of His justice 
and has bereft man of his security; he may be 
"lucky" or "unlucky," but the strength and dignity 
conferred by reliance on a changeless law are rent 
away from him, and he is left tossing helplessly on 
an unnavigable ocean of life. 
16 


CHAPTER IX. 
Karma. 

Having traced the evolution of the soul by the 
way of reincarnation, we are now in a position to 
study the great law of causation under which re- 
births are carried on, the law which is named Karma. 
Karma is a Sanskrit word, literally meaning " action ;" 
as all actions are effects flowing from preceding 
causes, and as each effect becomes a cause of future 
effects, this idea of cause and effect is an essential 
part of the idea of action, and the word action, or 
karma, is therefore used for causation, or for the 
unbroken linked series of causes and effects that 
make up all human activity. Hence the phrase is 
sometimes used of an event, "This is my karma," 
/.^., " This event is the effect of a cause set going by 
me in the past." No one life is isolated; it is the 
child of all the lives before it, the parent of all the 
lives that follow it, in the total aggregate of the lives 
that make up the continuing existence of the indi- 
vidual. There is no such thing as " chance" or as 
"accident;" every event is linked to a preceding 
cause, to a following effect; all thoughts, deeds, 
circumstances are causally related to the past and 
will causally influence the future ; as our ignorance 


LAW AND LIBERTY. 243 

shrouds from our vision alike the past and the 
future, events often appear to us to come suddenly 
from the void, to be "accidental," but this appear- 
ance is illusory and is due entirely to our lack of 
knowledge. Just as the savage, ignorant of the 
laws of the physical universe, regards physical 
events as uncaused, and the results of unknown 
physical laws as " miracles ;" so do many, ignorant 
of moral and mental laws, regard moral and mental 
events as uncaused, and the results of unknown 
moral and mental laws as good and bad " luck. *' 

When at first this idea of inviolable, immutable 
law in a realm hitherto vaguely ascribed to chance 
dawns upon the mind, it is apt to result in a sense 
of helplessness, almost of moral and mental paralysis. 
Man seems to be held in the grip of an iron destiny, 
and the resigned " kismet" of the Moslem appears to 
be the only philosophical utterance. Just so might 
the savage feel when the idea of physical law first 
dawns on his startled intelKgence, and he learns 
that every movement of his body, every movement 
in external nature, is carried on under immutable 
laws. Gradually he learns that natural laws only 
lay down conditions under which all workings must 
be carried on, but do not prescribe the workings; 
so that man remains ever free at the centre, while 
limited in his external activities by the conditions of 
the plane on which those activities are carried on. 
He learns further that while the conditions master 
him, constantly frustrating his strenuous efforts, so 
long as he is ignorant of them, or, knowing them, 


244 I'HB ANCIENT WISDOM. 

fights against them, he masters them and they be- 
come his servants and helpers when he understands 
them, knows their directions, and calculates their 
forces. 

In truth science is possible only on the physical 
plane because its laws are inviolable, immutable. 
Were there no such things as natural laws, there 
could be no sciences. An investigator makes a 
number of experiments, and from the results of 
these he learns how Nature works ; knowing this, he 
can calculate how to bring about a certain desired 
result, and if he fail in achieving that result he 
knows that he has omitted some necessary condition 
—either his knowledge is imperfect, or he has made 
a miscalculation. He reviews his knowledge, re- 
vises his methods, recasts his calculations, with a 
serene and complete certainty that if he ask his 
question rightly Nature will answer him with un- 
varying precision. Hydrogen and oxygen will not 
give him water to-day and prussic acid to-morrow ; 
fire will not bum him to-day and freeze him to- 
morrow. If water be a fluid to-day and a solid to- 
morrow, it is because the conditions surrounding it 
have been altered, and the reinstatement of the 
original conditions will bring about the original re- 
sult. Every new piece of information about the 
laws of Nature is not a fresh restriction but a fresh 
power, for all these energies of Nature become 
forces which he can use in proportion as he under- 
stands them. Hence the saying that " knowledge is 
power," for exactly in proportion to his knowledge 


MASTER BY KNOWLEDGE. 245 

can he utilize these forces; by selecting those with 
which he will work, by balancing one against an- 
other, by neutralizing opposing energies that would 
interfere with his object, he can calculate before- 
hand the result, and bring about what he prede- 
termines. Understanding and manipulating causes, 
he can predict effects, and thus the very rigidity of 
nature which seemed at first to paralyze human 
action can be used to produce an infinite variety of 
results. Perfect rigidity in each separate force 
makes possible perfect flexibility in their combina- 
tions. For the forces being of every kind, moving 
in every direction, and each being calculable, a 
selection can be made and the selected forces so 
combined as to yield any desired result. The object 
to be gained being determined, it can be infallibly 
obtained by a careful balancing of forces in the com- 
bination put together as a cause. But, be it remem- 
bered, knowledge is requisite thus to guide events, 
to bring about desired results. The ignorant man 
stumbles helplessly along, striking himself against 
the immutable laws and seeing his efforts fail, while 
the man of knowledge walks steadily forward, fore- 
seeing, causing, preventing, adjusting, and bringing 
about that at which he aims, not because he is 
lucky but because he understands. The one is 
the toy, the slave of Nature, whirled along by her 
forces; the other is her master, using her energies 
to carry him onwards in the direction chosen by his 
will. 

That which is true of the physical realm of law is 


24^ THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

true also of the moral and mental worlds, equally 
realms of law. Here also the ignorant is a slave, 
the sage is a monarch ; here also the inviolability, 
the immutability, that were regarded as paralyzing, 
arc found to be the necessary conditions of sure 
progress and of clear-sighted direction of the future. 
Man can become the master of his destiny only be- 
cause that destiny lies in a realm of law, where 
knowledge can build up the science of the soul and 
place in the hands of man the power of controlling 
his future — of choosing alike his future character 
and his future circumstances. The knowledge of 
karma, that threatened to paralyze, becomes an in- 
spiring, a supporting, an uplifting force. 

Karma is, then, the law of causation, the law of 
cause and effect. It was put pointedly by the 
Christian Initiate, S. Paul: "Be not deceived: God 
is not mocked : for whatsoever a man soweth that 
. shall- lie also reap."'"* Man is continually sending 
/" out forces on iaHfhe planes on which he functions; 
these forces — themselves in quantity and quality 
the effects of his past activities — are causes which 
he sets going in each world he inhabits ; they bring 
about certain definite effects both on himself and on 
others, and as these causes radiate forth from him- 
self as centre over the whole field of his activity, he 
is responsible for the results they bring about. As 
a magnet has its "magnetic field," an area within 
which all its forces play, larger or smaller according 
to its strength, so has every man a field of influence 

* Gal at tans ^ vi. 7. 


FORCES IN THREE WORLDS. 24/ 

within which play the forces he emits, and these 
forces work in curves that return to their forth- 
sender, that re-enter the centre whence they 
emerged. 

As the subject is a very complicated one, we will 
subdivide it, and then study the subdivisions one by 
one. 

Three classes of energies are sent forth by man 
in his ordinary life, belonging respectively to the 
three worlds that he inhabits : mental energies on 
the mental plane, giving rise to the causes we call 
thoughts ; desire energies on the astral plane, giving 
rise to those we call desires; physical energies 
aroused by these, and working on the physical 
plane, giving rise to the causes we call actions. 
We have to study each of these in its workings, and 
to understand the class of effects to which each gives 
rise, if we wish to trace intelligently the part that 
each plays in the perplexed and complicated com- 
binations we set up, called in their totality "our 
karma. *' When a man, advancing more swiftly than 
his fellows, gains the ability to function on higher 
planes, he then becomes the centre of higher forces, 
but for the present we may leave these out of ac- 
count and confine ourselves to ordinary humanity, 
treading the cycle of reincarnation in the three 
worlds. 

In studying these three classes of energies we 
shall have to distinguish between their effect on the 
man who generates them and their effect on others 
who come within the field of his influence ; for a lack 


V 


248 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

of understanding on this point often leaves the 
student in a slough of hopeless bewilderment. 

Then we must remember that every force works 
on its own plane and reacts on the planes below it 
in proportion to its intensity; the plane on which it 
is generated gives it its special characteristics, and 
in its reaction on lower planes it sets up vibrations 
in their finer or coarser materials according to its 
own original nature. The motive which generates 
the activity determines the plane to which the force 
belongs. 

Next, it will be necessary to distinguish between 
the ripe karma, ready to show itself as inevitable 
events in the present life ; the karma of character, 
showing itself in tendencies that are the outcome of 
accumulated experiences, and that are capable of 
being modified in the present life by the same power 
(the Ego) that created them in the past; the karma 
that is now making, and will give rise to future 
\ events and future character. • 

Futher, we have to realize that while a man makes 
his own individual karma he also connects himself 
thereby with others, thus becoming a member of 
various groups — family, national, racial — and as a 
member he shares in the collective karma of each of 
these groups. 

It will be seen that the study of karma is one of 

* These divisions are familiar to the student as Prilrabdha 
(commenced, to be worked out in the life) ; Sanchita (accumu- 
lated) , a part of which is seen in the tendencies ; Kriyam&na, 
in course of making. 


MAN SELF-CREATED. 249 

much complexity; however, by grasping the main 
principles of its working as set out above, a coherent 
idea of its general bearing may be obtained without 
much difficulty, and its details can be studied at 
leisure as opportunity offers. Above all, let it 
never be forgotten, whether details are understood 
or not, that each man makes his own karma, creat- 
ing alike his own capacities and his own limitations ; 
and that working at any time with these self-created 
capacities, and within these self -created limitations, 
he is still himself, the living soul, and can strengthen 
or weaken his capacities, enlarge or contract his 
limitations. 

The chains that bind him are of his own forging, 
and he can file them away or rivet them more 
strongly ; the house he lives in is of his own build- 
ing, and he can improve it, let it deteriorate, or 
rebuild it, as he will. We are ever working in 
plastic clay and can shape it to our fancy, but the 
clay hardens and becomes as iron, retaining the 
shape we gave it. A proverb from the Hitopadeslia 
runs, as translated by Sir Edwin Arnold : 

" Look ! the clay dries into iron, but the potter moulds the clay ; 
Destiny to-day is master — Man was master yesterday.'' 

Thus we are all masters of our to-morrows, how- 
ever much we are hampered to-day by the results of 
our yesterdays. 

Let us now take in order the divisions already set 
out under which karma may be studied. 

Three classes of causes^ with tlieir effects on t/ieir 


ery-r-yr^ 


250 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

creator and on those he influences. The first of these 
classes is composed of our thoughts. Thought is 
the most potent factor in the creation of human 
karma, for in thought the energies of the Self are 
working in mental matter, the matter which, in its 
finer kinds, forms the individual vehicle, and even 
in its coarser kinds responds swiftly to every vibra- 
tion of self-consciousness. The vibrations which 
we call thought, the immediate activity of the 
Thinker, give rise to forms of mind-stuff, or mental 
images, which shape and mould his mental body, as 
we have already seen ; every thought modifies this 
mental body, and the mental faculties in each suc- 
cessive life are made by the thinkings of the previ- 
ous lives. A man can have no thought-power, no 
mental ability, that he has not himself created by 
patiently repeated thinkings ; on the other hand, no 
mental image that he has thus created is lost, but re- 
mains as material for faculty, and the aggregate of 
any group of mental images is built into a faculty 
which grows stronger with every additional think- 
ing, or creation of a mental image, of the same kind. 
Knowing this law, the man can gradually make for 
himself the mental character he desires to possess, 
and he can do it as definitely and as certainly as a 
bricklayer can build a wall. Death does not stop 
his work, but by setting him free from the encum- 
brance of the body facilitates the process of working 
up his mental images into the definite organ we call 
a faculty, and he brings this back with him to his 
next birth on the physical plane, part of the brain 


EFFECTS ON OTHERS. 25 1 

of the new body being moulded so as to serve as the 
organ of this faculty, in a way to be explained pres- 
ently. All these faculties together form the mental 
body for his opening life on earth, and his brain and 
nervous system are shaped to give this mental body 
expression on the physical plane. Thus the mental 
images created in one life appear as mental char- 
acteristics and tendencies in another, and for this 
reason it is written in one of the Upanishads : " Man 
is a creature of reflection; that which he reflects on 
in this life he becomes the same hereafter. " * Such 
is the law, and it places the building of our mental 
character entirely in our own hands; if we build 
well, ours the advantage and the credit ; if we build 
badly, ours the loss and the blame. Mental char- 
acter, then, is a case of individual karma in its 
action on the individual who generates it. 

This same man that we are considering, however, 
affects others by his thoughts. For these mental 
images that form his own mental body set up vibra- 
tions, thus reproducing themselves in secondary 
forms. These generally, being mingled with desire, 
take up some astral matter, and I have therefore 
elsewhere f called these secondary thought-forms 
astro-mental images. Such forms leave their 
creator and lead a quasi-independent life — still 
keeping up a magnetic tie with their progenitor. 
They come into contact with and affect others, in 
this way setting up karmic links between these 

^ Chkdndogyopanishad, IV., xiv. i. 

\ Karma, p. 25. (Thcosophical Manual, No. IV.) 


252 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

others and himself; thus they largely influence his 
future environment. In such fashion are made 
the ties which draw people together for good or evil 
in later lives; which surround us with relatives, 
friends, and enemies; which bring across our path 
helpers and hinderers, people who benefit and who 
injure us, people who love us without our winning 
in this life, and who hate us though in this life we 
have done nothing to deserve their hatred. Study- 
ing these results, we grasp a great principle — that 
while our thoughts produce our mental and moral 
character in their action on ourselves, they help to 
determine our human associates in the future by 
their effects on others. 

The second great class of energies is composed of 
our desires — our outgoings after objects that attract 
us in the external world; as a mental element always 
enters into these in man, we may extend the term 
" mental images" to include them, although they ex- 
press themselves chiefly in astral matter. These in 
their action on their progenitor mould and form his 
body of desire, or astral body, shape his fate when 
he passes into Kamaloka after death, and determine 
the nature of his astral body in his next rebirth. 
When the desires are bestial, drunken, cruel, un- 
clean, they are the fruitful causes of congenital dis- 
eases, of weak and diseased brains, giving rise to 
epilepsy, catalepsy, and nervous diseases of all 
kinds, of physical malformations and deformities, 
and, in extreme cases, of monstrosities. Bestial ap- 
petites of an abnormal kind or intensity may set up 


EFFECTS OF DESIRES. 253 

links in the astral world which for a time chain the 
Egos, clothed in astral bodies shaped by these ap- 
petites, to the astral bodies of animals to which these 
appetites properly belong, thus delaying their rein- 
carnation ; where this fate is escaped, the bestially 
shaped astral body will sometimes impress its char- 
acteristics on the forming physical body of the babe 
during antenatal life, and produce the semihuman 
horrors that are occasionally bom. ^ 

Desires, — because they are outgoing energies that 
attach themselves to objects, — always attract the 
man towards an environment in which they may be 
gratified. Desires for earthly things, linking the 
soul to the outer world, draw him towards the place 
where the objects of desire are most readily obtain- 
able, and therefore it is said that a man is bom 
according to his desires.* They are one of the 
causes that determine the place of rebirth. 

The astro-mental images caused by desires affect 
others as do those generated by thoughts. They, 
therefore, also link us with other souls, and often by 
the strongest ties of love and hatred, for at the pres- 
ent stage of human evolution an ordinary man's de- 
sires are generally stronger and more sustained 
than his thoughts. They thus play a great part in 
determining his human surroundings in future lives, 
and may bring into those lives persons and influences 
of whose connection with himself he is totally un- 
conscious. Suppose a man by sending out a thought 
of bitter hatred and revenge has helped to form in 

•See Brihaddranyakopanishady IV., iv. 5-7, and context. 


254 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

another the impulse which results in a murder ; the 
creator of that thought is linked by his karma to the 
committer of the crime, although they have never 
met on the physical plane, and the wrong he has 
done to him, by helping to impel him to a crime, 
will come back as an injury in the infliction of which 
the whilom criminal will play his part. Many a 
"bolt from the blue*' that is felt as utterly unde- 
served is the effect of such a cause, and the soul 
thereby learns and registers a lesson while the lower 
consciousness is writhing under a sense of injustice. 
Nothing can strike a man that he has not deserved, 
but his absence of memory does not cause a failure 
in the working of the law. We thus learn that our 
desires in their action on ourselves produce our de- 
sire-nature, and through it largely affect our physical 
bodies in our next birth ; that they play a great part 
in determining the place of rebirth; and by their 
effect on others they help to draw around us our hu- 
man associates in future lives. 

The third great class of energies, appearing on 
the physical plane as actions, generate much karma 
by their effects on others, but only slightly affect 
directly the Inner Man. They are effects of his 
past thinkings and desires, and the karma they 
represent is for the most part exhausted in their hap- 
pening. Indirectly they affect him in proportion as 
he is moved by them to fresh thoughts and desires 
or emotions, but the generating force lies in these 
and not in the actions themselves. Again, if actions 
are often repeated, they set up a habit of the body 


.J 


EFFECTS OF ACTIONS. 255 

which acts as a limitation to the expression of the 
Ego in the outer world ; this, however, perishes with 
the bod)'-, thus limiting the karma of the action to a 
single life so far as its effect on the soul is con- 
cerned. But it is far otherwise when we come to 
study the effects of actions on others, the happiness 
or unhappiness caused by these, and the influence 
exercised by these as examples. They link us to 
others by this influence and are thus a third factor 
in determining our future human associates, while 
they are the chief factor in determining what may 
be called our non-human environment. Broadly 
speaking, the favorable or unfavorable nature of 
the physical surroundings into which we are bom 
depends on the effect of our previous actions in 
spreading happiness or unhappiness among other 
people. The physical results on others of actions 
on the physical plane work out karmically in repay- 
ing to the actor physical good or bad surroundings 
in a future life. If he has made people physically 
happy by sacrificing wealth or time or trouble, this 
action karmically brings him favorable physical 
circumstances conducive to physical happiness. If 
he has caused people widespread physical misery, 
he will reap karmically from his action wretched 
physical circumstances conducive to physical suffer- 
ing. And this is so, whatever may have been his 
motive in either case — a fact which leads us to con- 
sider the law that : j 
Every force works on its own plane. If a man \^J 
sows happiness for others on the physical plane, he 


I~r rtiTMi f I'lTi 


256 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

will reap conditions favorable to happiness for him- 
self on that plane, and his motive in sowing it does 
not aflfect the result. A man might sow wheat with 
the object of speculating with it to ruin his neigh- 
bor, but his bad motive would not make the wheat- 
grains grow up as dandelions. Motive is a mental 
or astral force, according as it arises from will or 
desire, and it reacts on moral and mental character 
or on the desire-nature severally. The causing of 
physical happiness by an action is a physical force 
and works on the physical plane. " By his actions 
man affects his neighbors on the physical plane ; he 
spreads happiness around him or he causes distress, 
increasing or diminishing the sum of human welfare. 
This increase or diminution of happiness may be due 
to very different motives— good, bad, or mixed. A 
man may do an act that gives widespread enjoyment 
from sheer benevolence, from a longing to give 
happiness to his fellow-creatures. Let us say that 
from such a motive he presents a park to a town for 
the free use of its inhabitants ; another may do a 
similar act from mere ostentation, from desire to 
attract attention from those who can bestow social 
honors (say, he might give it as purchase-money for 
a title) ; a third may give a park from mixed mo- 
tives, partly unselfish, partly selfish. The motives 
will severally affect these three men's characters 
in their future incarnations, for improvement, for 
degradation, for small results. But the effect of the 
action in causing happiness to large numbers of 
people does not depend on the motive of the giver; 


KARMA IS JUST. 257 

the people enjoy the park equally, no matter what 
may have prompted its gift, and this enjoyment, 
due to the action of the giver, establishes for him a 
karmic claim on Nature, a debt due to him that will 
be scrupulously paid. He will receive a physically 
comfortable or luxurious environment, as he has 
given widespread physical enjoyment, and his sacri- 
fice of physical wealth will bring him his due reward, 
the karmic fruit of his action. This is his right. 
But the use he makes of his position, the happiness 
he derives from his wealth and his surroundings, 
will depend chiefly on his character, and here again 
the just reward accrues to him, each seed bearing its 
appropriate harvest.''* Truly, the ways of karma 
are equal. It does not withhold from the bad man 
the result which justly follows from an action which 
spreads happiness, and it also deals out to him the 
deteriorated character earned by his bad motive, so 
that in the midst of wealth he will remain discon- 
tented and unhappy. Nor can the good man escape 
physical suflEering if he causes physical misery by 
mistaken actions done from a good motive; the 
misery he caused will bring him misery in his 
physical surroundings, but his good motive, improv- 
ing his character, will give him a source of perennial 
happiness within himself, and he will be patient and 
contented amid his troubles. Many a puzzle may 
be answered by applying these principles to the 
facts we see around us. 
These respective effects of motive and of the re- 

^ Karma, pp. 50, 51. 


258 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

suits (or fruits) of actions are due to the fact that 
each force has the characteristics of the plane on 
which it was generated, and the higher the plane 
the more jxjtent and the more persistent the force. 
Hence motive is far more important than action, 
and a mistaken action done with a good motive is 
productive of more good to the doer than a well- 
chosen action done with a bad motive. The motive, 
reacting on the character, gives rise to a long series 
of effects, for the future actions guided by that char- 
acter will all be influenced by its improvement or 
its deterioration; whereas the action, bringing on 
its doer physical happiness or unhappiness, accord- 
ing to its results on others, has in it no generating 
force, but is exhausted in its results. If bewildered 
as to the path of right action by a conflict of appar- 
ent duties, the knower of karma diligently tries to 
choose the best path, using his reason and his judg- 
ment to the utmost ; he is scrupulously careful about 
his motive, eliminating selfish considerations and 
purifying his heart ; then he acts fearlessly, and if 
his action turn out to be a blunder he willingly ac- 
cepts the suffering which results from his mistake 
as a lesson which will be useful in the future. 
Meanwhile, his high motive has ennobled his char- 
acter for all time to come. 

This general principle that the force belongs to 
the plane on which it is generated is one of far- 
reaching import. If it be liberated with the motive 
of gaining physical objects, it works on the physical 
plane and attaches the actor to that plane. If it 


THREE KINDS OF KARMA. 259 

aim at devachanic objects, it works on the deva- 
chanic plane and attaches the actor thereto. If it 
have no motive save the divine service, it is set free 
on the spiritual plane, and therefore cannot attach 
the individual, since the individual is asking for 
nothing. 

The three kinds of karma. Ripe karma is that 
which is ready for reaping and which is therefore 
inevitable. Out of all the karma of the past there 
is a certain amount which can be exhausted within 
the limits of a single life ; there are some kinds of 
karma that are so incongruous that they could not 
be worked out in a single physical body, but would 
require very different types of body for their expres- 
sion ; there are liabilities contracted towards other 
souls, and all these souls will not be in incarnation 
at the same time; there is karma that must be 
worked out in some particular nation or particular 
social position, while the same man has other karma 
that needs an entirely different environment. Part 
only, therefore, of his total karma can be worked 
out in a given life, and this part is selected by the 
great Lords of Karma — of whom something will 
presently be said — and the soul is guided to incarnate 
in a family, a nation, a place, a body, suitable for the 
exhaustion of that aggregate of causes which can be 
worked out together. This aggregate of causes fixes 
the length of that particular life ; gives to the body 
its characteristics, its powers, and its limitations; 
brings into contact with the man the souls incarnated 
within that life-period to whom he has contracted 


260 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

obligations, surrounding him with relatives, friends, 
and enemies; marks out the social conditions into 
which he is bom, with their accompanying advan- 
tages and disadvantages ; selects the mental energies 
he can show forth by moulding the organization of 
the brain and nervous system with which he has 
to work; puts together the causes that result in 
troubles and joys in his outer career and that can be 
brought into a single life. All this is the " ripe kar- 
ma," and this can be sketched out in a horoscope 
cast by a competent astrologer. In all this the man 
has no power of choice ; all is fixed by the choices he 
has made in the past, and he must discharge to the 
uttermost farthing the liabilities he has contracted. 

The physical, astral, and mental bodies which the 
soul takes on for a new life-period are, as we have 
seen, the direct result of his past, and they form a 
most important part of this ripe karma. They limit 
the soul on every side, and his past rises up in judg- 
ment against him, marking out the limitations which 
he has made for himself. Cheerfully to accept these, 
and diligently to work at their improvement, is the 
part of the wise man, for he cannot escape from 
them. 

There is another kind of ripe karma that is of 
very serious importance — that of inevitable actions. 
Every action is the final expression of a series of 
thoughts ; to borrow an illustration from chemistry, 
we obtain a saturated solution of thought by adding 
thought after thought of the same kind, until another 
thought — or even an impulse, a vibration, from with- 


DETERJOXED ACTIOKS. 36l 

out — will produce the solidification of thfc irboje. ibe 
action which expresses the thoughts. If ire pertisy' 
tently reiterate thoughts of the same Iriryl, serof rtr 
venge, we at last reach the point of satnratigaL aiiC 
any impulse will solidify these into action aad ;& 
crime results. Or we m^y have persistenly reij^rr- 
ated thoughts of help to another to the pocrrt <A 
saturation, and when the stimnlns of oppwrcnitr 
touches us they crystallize out as an act of berccKiL 
A man may bring over with him some ripe karm^ 
of this kind, and the first vibration that touches s^ch 
a mass of thoughts ready to solidify into action wi2 
hurry him without his renewed volition, nnconficiotLS- 
ly, into the commission of the act- He cann-yt tV>j/ 
to think; he is in the condition in irhich tbe Irvt 
vibration of the mind causes action : y/j^^ o:; trjft 
very point of balancing, the slightest ixnj/t:!*^ t^^:^>2ji 
him over. Under these circumstancei^ a r:*k;z* v:'; 
marvel at his own commission of some crin><;, ^-r *^, 
his own performance of some su1>l:nac avt '/ vj'/- 
devotion. He says: "I did it withotit thir;i:^;^/' 
unknowing that he had thought so often ^vasX b^? \/JS 
made that action inevitable. When a man li-stt w^^yj 
to do an act many times, he at last fize^hli^ iat;^- irr^^ 
vocably, and it is only a question of ^/pjx/rlwiJiy 
when he will act. So long as he can thfnk, hi* /;mj 
dom of choice remains, for he ';an vrt Ih^r ii^y/ 
thought against the old and gra/lualJy v/^j^ir il o«f 
by the reiteration of opposing th''/t3;{f;#U ; f/ui v/^< n 
the next thrill of the soul in resp^/nv; t// ^ MifiMilut) 
means action, the power of choice if» tcxS^an^XpA, 


26r» THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

^^ Herein lies the solution of the old problem of ne- 
cessity and free will ; man by the exercise of free will 
^rradually creates necessities for himself, and between 
th J two extremes lie all the combinations of free will 
and necessity which make the struggles within our- 
selves of which we are conscious. We are continu- 
ally making habits by the repetitions of purposive 
actions guided by the will ; then the habit becomes 
a limitation, and we perform the action automati- 
cally. Perhaps we are then driven to the conclusion 
that the habit is a bad one, and we begin laboriously 
to unmake it by thoughts of the opposite kind, and, 
after many an inevitable lapse into it, the new 
thought-current turns the stream, and we regain 
our full freedom, often again gradually to make 
another fetter. So old thought-forms persist and 
limit our thinking capacity, showing as individual 
and as national prejudices. The majority do not 
know that they are thus limited, and go on serenely 
in their chains, ignorant of their bondage; those 
who learn the truth about their own nature become 
free. The constitution of our brain and nervous 
system is one of the most marked necessities in life; 
these we have made inevitable by our past thinkings, 
and they now limit us and we often chafe against 
them. They can be improved slowly and gradually; 
the limits can be expanded, but they cannot be sud- 
denly transcended. 

Another form of this ripe karma is where some 
past evil-thinking has made a crust of evil habits 
around a man which imprisons him and makes an 


SUDDEN CONVERSIONS. 263 

evil life ; the actions are the inevitable outcome of 
his past, as just explained, and they have been held 
over, even through several lives, in consequence of 
those lives not offering opportunities for their mani- 
festation. Meanwhile the soul has been growing 
and has been developing noble qualities. In one 
life this crust of past evil is thrown out by oppor- 
tunity, and because of this the soul cannot show his 
later developments; like a chicken, ready to be 
hatched, he is hidden within the imprisoning shell, 
and only the shell is visible to the external eye. 
After a time that karma is exhausted, and some 
apparently fortuitous event — a word from a great 
Teacher, a book, a lecture — breaks the ghell and the 
soul comes forth free. These are the rare, sudden, 
but permanent "conversions," the "miracles of di- 
vine grace,'* of which we hear; all perfectly intelli- 
gible to the knower of karma, and falling within 
the realm of law. 

The accumulated karma that shows itself as charac- 
ter is, unlike the ripe, always subject to modifica- 
tions. It may be said to consist of tendencies, 
strong or weak, according to the thought-force that 
has gone to their making, and these can be further 
strengthened or weakened by fresh streams of 
thought-force sent to work with or against them. If 
we find in ourselves tendencies of which we disap- 
prove, we can set ourselves to work to eliminate 
them ; often we fail to withstand a temptation, over- 
borne by the strong outrushing stream of desire, 
but the longer we can hold out against it, even 


264 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

though we fail in the end, the nearer are we to over- 
coming it. Every such failure is a step towards suc- 
cess, for the resistance wears away part of the 
energy, and there is less of it available for the 
future. 

The karma which is in the course of making has 
been already studied. 

Collective kartna. When a group of people is con- 
sidered karmically, the play of karmic forces upon 
each as a member of the group introduces a new 
factor into the karma of the individual. We know 
that when a number of forces play on a point, the 
motion of the point is not in the direction of any one 
of these forces, but in the direction which is the re- 
sult of their combination. So the karma of a group 
is the resultant of the interacting forces of the indi- 
viduals composing it, and all the individuals are car- 
ried along in the direction of that resultant. An 
Ego is drawn by his individual karma into a family, 
having set up in previous lives ties which closely 
connect him with some of the other Egos composing 
it ; the family has inherited property from a grand- 
father and is wealthy ; an heir turns up, descended 
from the grandfather's elder brother, who had been 
supposed to have died childless, and the wealth 
passes to him and leaves the father of the family 
heavily indebted ; it is quite possible that our Ego 
had had no connection in the past with this heir, to 
whom in past lives the father had contracted some 
obligation which has resulted in this catastrophe, 
and yet he is threatened with suffering by his action. 


' / :■■■ "^^ I 


% p- 


"accidents." 265 

being involved in the family karma. If, in his own 
individual past, there was a wrong-doing which can 
be exhausted by suffering caused by the family kar- 
ma, he is left involved in it; if not, he is by some 
"unforeseen circumstances" lifted out of it, per- 
chance by some benevolent stranger who feels an 
impulse to adopt and educate him, the stranger be- 
ing one who in the past was his debtor. 

Yet more clearly does this come out in the working 
of such things as railway accidents, shipwrecks, 
floods, cyclones, etc. A train is wrecked, the catas- 
trophe being immediately due to the action of the 
drivers, the guards, the railway directors, the mak- 
ers or employees of that line, who, thinking them- 
selves wronged, send clustering thoughts of discon- 
tent and anger against it as a whole. Those who 
have in their accumulated karma — but not necessa- 
rily in their ripe karma — the debt of a life suddenly 
cut short, may be allowed to drift into this accident 
and pay their debt ; another, intending to go by the 
train, but with no such debt in his past, is " provi- 
dentially" saved by being late for it. 

Collective karma may throw a man into the 
troubles consequent on his nation going to war, and 
here again he may discharge debts of his past not 
necessarily within the ripe karma of his then life. 
In no case can a man suffer that which he has not 
deserved, but, if an unforeseen opportunity should 
arise to discharge a past obligation, it is well to pay 
it and be rid of it for evermore. 

The "Lords of Karma" are the great spiritual 


/ 


\ 

I 


266 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

Intelligences who keep the karmic Records and 
adjust the complicated workings of karmic law. 
They are described by H. P. Blavatsky in The Secret 
Doctrine as the Lipika, the Recorders of Karma, and 
the Maharajas * and Their hosts, who are " the agents 
of Karma upon earth." f The Lipika are They who 
know the karmic record of every man, and who with 
omniscient wisdom select and combine portions of 
that record to form the plan of a single life ; They 
give the " idea" of the physical body which is to be 
the garment of the reincarnating soul, expressing 
his capacities and his limitations ; this is taken by 
the Maharajas and worked into a detailed model, 
which is committed to one of Their inferior agents 
to be copied; this copy is the etherio double, the 
matrix of the dense body, the materials for these 
being drawn from the mother and subject to physi- 
cal heredity. The race, the country, the parents, are 
chosen for their capacity to provide suitable mate- 
rials for the physical body of the incoming Ego, and 
suitable surroundings for his early life. The physi- 
cal heredity of the family affords certain types and 
has evolved certain peculiarities of material combi- 
nations ; hereditary diseases, hereditary finenesses of 
nervous organization, imply definite combinations 
of physical matter, capable of transmission. An 
Ego who has evolved peculiarities in his mental and 
astral bodies, needing special physical peculiarities 
for their expression, is guided to parents whose 

* The Mahadevas, or Chaturdevas of the Hindus. 
\0p. ctt., pp. 153 ad i^y. 


THE GUIDANCE OF THE LORDS. 267 

physical heredity enables them to meet these re- 
quirements. Thus an Ego with high artistic facul- 
ties devoted to music would be guided to take his 
physical body in a musical family, in which the 
materials supplied for building the etheric double 
and the dense body would have been made ready to 
adapt themselves to his needs, and the hereditary 
type of nervous system would furnish the delicate 
apparatus necessary for the expression of his facul- 
ties. An Ego of very evil type would be guided to 
a coarse and vicious family, whose bodies were built 
of the coarsest combinations, such as would make a 
body able to respond to the impulses from his mental 
and astral bodies. An Ego who had allowed his as- 
tral body and lower mind to lead him into excesses, 
and had yielded to drunkenness, for instance, would 
be led to incarnate in a family whose nervous sys- 
tems were weakened by excess, and would be bom 
from drunken parents, who would supply diseased 
materials for his physical envelope. The guidance 
of the Lords of Karma thus adjusts means to ends, 
and insures the doing of justice; the Ego brings 
with him his karmic possessions of faculties and de- 
sires, and he receives a physical body suited to be 
their vehicle. 

As the soul must return to earth until he has dis- 
charged all his liabilities, thus exhausting all his 
individual karma, and as in each life thoughts and 
desires generate fresh karma, the question may arise 
in the mind: "How can this constantly renewing 
bond be put an end to? How can the soul attain his 


268 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

liberation?" Thus we come to the "ending of kar- 
ma," and have to investigate how this may be. 

The binding element in karma is the first thing to 
be clearly grasped. The outward-going energy of 
the soul attaches itself to some object, and the soul 
is drawn back by this tie to the place where that 
attachment may be realized by union with the object 
of desire ; so long as the soul attaches himself to any 
object, he must be drawn to the place where that ob- 
ject can be enjoyed. Good karma binds the soul as 
much as does bad, for any desire, whether for objects 
here or in Devachan, must draw the soul to the place 
of its gratification. 

Action is prompted by desire ; an act is done not 
for the sake of doing the act, but for the sake of ob- 
taining by the act something that is desired, of ac- 
quiring its results, or, as it is technically called, of 
enjoying its fruit. Men work, not because they 
want to dig, or build, or weave, but because they 
want the fruits of digging, building, and weaving, in 
the shape of money or of goods, A barrister pleads, 
not because he wants to set forth the dry details of 
a case, but because he wants wealth, fame, and rank. 
Men around us on every side are laboring for some- 
thing, and the spur to their activity lies in the fruit 
it brings them and not in the labor. Desire for 
the fruit of action moves them to activity, and en- 
joyment of that fruit rewards their exertions. 

Desire is, then, the binding element in karma, and 
when the soul no longer desires any object in earth 
or in heaven, his tie to the wheel of reincarnation 


DESIRES ARE BONDS. 269 

that turns in the three worlds is broken. Action 
itself has no power to hold the soul, for with the 
completion of the action it slips into the past. But 
the ever-renewed desire for fruit constantly spurs 
the soul into fresh activities, and thus new chains 
are continually being forged. 

Nor should we feel any regret when we see men 
constantly driven to action by the whip of desire, 
for desire overcomes sloth, laziness, inertia,* and 
prompts men to the activity that yields them experi- 
ence. Note the savage, idly dozing on the grass ; he 
is moved to activity by hunger, the desire for food, 
and is driven to exert patience, skill, and endurance 
to gratify his desire. Thus he develops mental 
qualities, but when his hunger is satisfied he sinks 
again into a dozing animal. How entirely have 
mental qualities been evolved by the promptings 
of desire, and how useful have proved desires for 
fame, for posthumous renown. Until man is ap- 
proaching divinity he needs the urgings of desires, 
and the desires simply grow purer and less selfish as 
he climbs upwards. But none the less desires bind 
him to rebirth, and if he would be free he must de- 
stroy them. u 

When a man begins to long for liberation, he is 
taught to practise " renunciation of the fruits of ac- 
tion;" that is, he gradually eradicates in himself the 
wish to possess any object ; he at first voluntarily and 

* The student will remember that these show the dominance 
on the ttoasic guna, and while it is dominant men do not 
emerge from the lowest of the three stages of their evolution. 


\ 


270 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

deliberately denies himself the object, and thus ha- 
bituates himself to do contentedly without it ; after 
a time he no longer misses it, and he finds the desire 
for it is disappearing from his mind. At this stage 
he is very careful not to neglect any work which 
is duty because he has become indifferent to the 
results it brings to him, and he trains himself in 
discharging every duty with earnest attention, 
while remaining entirely indifferent to the fruits it 
brings forth. When he attains perfection in this, 
and neither desires nor dislikes any object, he 
ceases to generate karma ; ceasing to ask anything 
from the earth or from Devachan, he is not drawn 
to either; he wants nothing that either can give 
him, and all links between himself and them are 
broken off. " This is the ceasing of individual 
karma, so far as the generation of new karma is 
concerned. 

But the soul has to get rid of old chains as well as 
to cease from the forging of new, and these old 
chains must either be allowed to wear out gradually 
or must be broken deliberately. For this breaking 
knowledge is necessary, a knowledge which can look 
back into the past, and see the causes there set go- 
ing, causes which are working out their effects in 
the present. Let us suppose that a person, thus look- 
ing backward over his past lives, sees certain causes 
which will bring about an event which is still in the 
future ; let us suppose further that these causes are 
thoughts of hatred for an injury inflicted on himself, 
and that they will cause suffering a year hence to 


BREAKING OLD CHAINS. 2/1 

the wrong-doer; such a person can introduce a new 
cause to intermingle with the causes working from 
the past, and he may counteract them with strong, 
thoughts of love and good-will that will exhaust 
them, and will thus prevent their bringing about 
the otherwise inevitable event, which would, in its 
turn, have generated new karmic trouble. Thus he 
may neutralize forces coming out of the past by 
sending against them forces equal and opposite, and 
may in this way " bum up his karma by knowledge. " ^ 
In similar fashion he may bring to an end karma 
generated in his present life that would normally 
work out in future lives. 

Again, he may be hampered by liabilities con- 
tracted to other souls in the past, wrongs he has 
done to them, duties he owes to them. By the use 
of his knowledge he can find those souls, whether in 
this world or in either of the other two, and seek 
opportunities of serving them. There may be a 
soul incarnated during his own life-period to whom 
he owes some karmic debt ; he may seek out that 
soul and pay his debt, thus setting himself free from 
a tie which, left to the course of events, would have 
necessitated his own reincarnation, or would have 
hampered him in a future life. Strange and puz- 
zling lines of action adopted by occultists have some- 
times this explanation — the man of knowledge en- 
ters into close relations with some person who is 
considered by the ignorant bystanders and critics to 
be quite outside the companionships that are fitting 
for him ; but that occultist is quietly working out a 


V 


27^ 1'HB ANCIENT WISDOM. 

karmic obligation which would otherwise hamper 
and retard his progress. 

Those who do not possess knowledge enough to 
review their past lives may yet exhaust many causes 
that they have set going in the present life ; they 
can carefully go over all that they can remember, 
and note where they have wronged any or where 
any has wronged them, exhausting the first cases by 
pouring out thoughts of love and service, and per- 
forming acts of service to the injured person, where 
possible on the physical plane also; and in the 
second cases sending forth thoughts of pardon and 
good-will. Thus they diminish their karmic liabili- 
ties and bring nearer the day of liberation. 

Unconsciously, pious people who obey the precept 
of all great Teachers of religion to return good for evil 
are exhausting karma generated in the present that 
would otherwise work out in the future. No one 
can weave with them a bond of hatred if they refuse 
to contribute any strands of hatred to the weaving, 
and persistently neutralize every force of hatred with 
one of love. Let a soul radiate in every direction 
love and compassion, and thoughts of hatred can 
find nothing to which they can attach themselves. 
" The Prince of this world cometh and hath nothing 
in me. " All great Teachers knew the law and based 
on it Their precepts, and those who through rever- 
ence and devotion to Them obey Their directions 
profit under the law, although they know nothing of 
the details of its working. An ignorant man who 
carries out faithfully the instructions given him by 


VALUE OF BELIEF. 2/3 

a scientist can obtain results by his working with 
the laws of Nature, despite his ignorance of them, 
and the same principle holds good in worlds beyond 
the physical. Many who have not time to study, 
and who perforce accept on the authority ot experts 
rules which guide their daily conduct in life, may 
thus unconsciously be discharging their karmic lia- 
bilities. 

In countries where reincarnation and karma are 
taken for granted by every peasant and laborer, 
the belief spreads a certain quiet acceptance of in- 
evitable troubles that conduces much to the calm 
and contentment of ordinary life. A man over- 
whelmed by misfortunes rails neither against God 
nor against his neighbors, but regards his troubles 
as the results of his own past mistakes and ill-do- 
ings. He accepts them resignedly and makes the 
best of them, and thus escapes much of the worry 
and anxiety with which those who know not the law 
aggravate troubles already siiflSciently heavy. He 
realizes that his future lives depend on his own ex- 
ertions, and that the law which brings him pain will 
bring him joy just as inevitably if he sows the seed 
of good. Hence a certain large patience and a phil- 
osophic view of life, tending directly to social stabil- 
ity and to general contentment. The poor and 
Ignorant do not study profound and detailed meta- 
physics, but they grasp thoroughly these simple 
principles — that every man is reborn on earth time 
after time, and that each successive life is moulded 

by those that precede it. To them rebirth is as sure 
i8 


274 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

and as inevitable as the rising and setting of the 
sun ; it is part of the course of nature, against which 
it is idle to repine or to rebel. When Theosophy 
has restored these ancient truths to their rightful 
place in western thought, they will gradually work 
their way among all classes of society in Christendom, 
spreading understanding of the nature of life and 
acceptance of the results of the past. Then too will 
vanish the restless discontent which arises chiefly 
from the impatient and hopeless feeling that life is 
unintelligible, unjust, and unmanageable, and it will 
be replaced by the quiet strength and patience which 
come from an illumined intellect and a knowledge of 
the law, and which characterize the reasoned and 
balanced activity of those who feel that they are 
building for eternity. 


CHAPTER X. 
The Law of Sacrifice. 

The study of the Law of Sacrifice follows naturally 
on the study of the Law of Karma, and the under- 
standing of the former, it was once remarked by a 
Master, is as necessary for the world as the under- 
standing of the latter. By an act of Self-sacrifice 
the Logos became manifest for the emanation of the 
universe, by sacrifice the universe is maintained, and 
by sacrifice man reaches perfection.* Hence every *-- 
religion that springs from the Ancient Wisdom has 
sacrifice as a central teaching, and some of the pro- 
foundest truths of occultism are rooted in the law of 
sacrifice. 

An attempt to grasp, however feebly, the nature 
of the sacrifice of the Logos may prevent us from 
falling into the very general mistake that sacrifice 
is an essentially painful thing; whereas the very 
essence of sacrifice is a voluntary and glad pouring 
forth of life that others may share in it ; and pain 

* The Hindu will remember the opening words of the Bri- 
haddranyakopanishad, that the dawn is in sacrifice; the 
Zoroastrian will recall how Ahura-Mazd^o came forth from an 
act of sacrifice; the Christian will think of the Lamb — the 
symbol of the Logos— slain from the foundation of the world. 


276 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

only arises when there is discord in the nature of the 
sacrificer, between the higher whose joy is in giving 
and the lower whose satisfaction lies in grasping 
and in holding. It is that discord alone that intro- 
duces the element of pain, and in the supreme Per- 
fection, in the Locos, no discord could arise; the 
One is the perfect chord of Being, of infinite melo- 
dious concords, all tuned to a single note, in which 
Life and Wisdom and Bliss are blended into one 
keynote of Existence. 

The sacrifice of the Locos lay in His voluntarily 
circumscribing His infinite life in order that He 
might manifest. Symbolically, in the infinite ocean 
of light, with centre everywhere and with circum- 
ference nowhere, there arises a full-orbed sphere of 
living light, a Locos, and the surface of that sphere 
is His will to limit Himself that He may become 
manifest. His veil * in which He incloses Himself 
that within it a universe may take form. That for 
which the sacrifice is made is not yet in existence ; 
its future being lies in the " thought" of the Locos 
alone ; to Him it owes its conception and will owe 
its manifold life. Diversity could not arise in the 
" partless Brahman" save for this voluntary sacrifice 
of Deity taking on Himself form in order to emanate 
myriad forms, each dowered with a spark of His life 
and therefore with the power of evolving into His 

t This is the Self -limiting power of the Logos, His M^yfi, 
the limiting principle by which all forms are brought forth. 
His Life appears as "Spirit," His Miy&as "Matter," and these 
are never disjoined during manifestation. 


THE SACRIFICE OF THE LOGOS. 277 

image. " The primal sacrifice that causes the birth 
of beings is named action (karma)," it is said; * and 
this coming forth into activity from the bliss of the 
perfect repose of self -existence has ever been recog- 
nized as the sacrifice of the Locos. That sacrifice 
continues throughout the term of the universe, for 
the life of the Locos is the sole support of every 
separated "life," and He limits His life in each of 
the myriad forms to which He gives birth, bearing 
all the restraints and limitations implied in each 
form. From any one of these He could burst forth 
at any ihoment, the infinite Lord, filling the uni- 
verse with His glory ; but only by sublime patience 
and slow and gradual expansion can each form be 
led upward until it becomes a self-dependent centre 
of boundless power like Himself. Therefore does 
He cabin Himself in forms, and bear all imperfec- 
tions till perfection is attained, and His creature is 
like unto Himself and one with Him, but with its 
own thread of memory. Thus this pouring out of 
His life into forms is part of the original sacrifice, 
and has in it the bliss of the eternal Father sending 
forth His offspring as separated lives, that each may 
evolve an identity that shall never perish, and yield 
its own note blended with all others to swell the 
eternal song of bliss, intelligence, and life. This 
marks the essential nature of sacrifice, whatever 
other elements may become mixed with the central 
idea; it is the voluntary pouring out of life that 
others may partake of it, to bring others into life and 

* Bhagavad Git&, viii. 3. 


2/8 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

to sustain them in it till they become self-dependent, 
and this is but one expression of divine joy. There 
is always joy in the exercise of activity which is the 
expression of the power of the actor ; the bird takes 
joy in the outpouring of song, and quivers with the 
mere rapture of the singing; the painter rejoices in 
the creation of his genius, in the putting into form 
of his idea; the essential activity of divine life must 
lie in giving, for there is nothing higher than itself 
from which it can receive ; if it is to be active at all — 
and manifested life is active motion — it must pour 
itself out. Hence the sign of the spirit is giving, 
for spirit is the active divine life in every form. 

But the essential activity of matter, on the other 
hand, lies in receiving ; by receiving life-impulses it 
is organized into forms ; by receiving them these are 
maintained ; on their withdrawal they fall to pieces. 
All its activity is of this nature of receiving, and 
only by receiving can it endure ^s a form. There- 
fore is it always grasping, clinging, seeking to hold 
for its own ; the persistence of the form depends on 
its grasping and retentive power, and it will there- 
fore seek to draw into itself all it can, and will grudge 
every fraction with which it parts. Its joy will be 
in seizing and holding; to it giving is like courting 
death. 

It is very easy, from this standpoint, to see how 
the notion arose that sacrifice was suffering. While 
the divine life found its delight in exercising its 
activity of giving, and even when embodied in form 
cared not if the form perished by the giving, know- 


SUFFERING CEASES WITH HARMONY. 3/9 

ing it to be only its passing expression and the 
means of its separated growth ; the form which felt 
its life-forces pouring away from it cried out in an- 
guish, and sought to exercise its activity in holding, 
thus resisting the outward flow. The sacrifice 
diminished the life-energies the form claimed as its 
own ; or even entirely drained them away, leaving 
the form to perish. In the lower world of form this 
was the only aspect of sacrifice cognizable, and the 
form found itself driven to the slaughter, and cried 
out in fear and agony. What wonder that men, 
blinded by form, identified sacrifice with the agoniz- 
ing form instead of with the free life that gave itself, 
crying gladly: " Lo! I come to do thy will, O God; I 
am content to do it. " Nay, what wonder that men — 
conscious of a higher and a lower nature, and oft 
identifying their self -consciousness more with the 
lower than with the higher — felt the struggle of the 
lower nature, the form, as their own struggles, and 
felt that they were accepting suffering in resignation 
to a higher will, and regarded sacrifice as that de- 
vout and resigned acceptance of pain. Not until 
man identifies himself with the life instead of with 
the form can the element, ol pain in sacrifice be got- 
ten rid of. In a perfectly harmonized entity, pain 
cannot be, for the form is then the perfect vehicle 
of the life, receiving or surrendering with ready 
accord. With the ceasing of struggle comes the^ 
ceasing of pain. For suffering arises from jar, 
from friction, from antagonistic movements, and 
where the whole nature works in perfect harmony 


28c THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

the conditions that give rise to suffering are not 
present. 

The law of sacrifice being thus the law of life- 
evolution in the universe, we find every step in the 
ladder is accomplished by sacrifice — the life pouring 
itself out to take birth in a higher form, while the 
form that contained it perishes. Those who look 
only at the perishing forms see Nature as a vast 
charnel-house; while those who see the deathless 
soul escaping to take new and higher form hear ever 
the joyous song of birth from the upward-springing 
life. 

The Monad in the mineral kingdom evolves by the 
breaking up of its forms for the production and 
support of plants. Minerals are disintegrated that 
plant-forms may be built out of their materials ; the 
plant draws from the soil its nutritive constituents, 
breaks them up, and incorporates them into its own 
substance. The mineral forms perish that the plant- 
forms may grow, and this law of sacrifice stamped 
on the mineral kingdom is the law of the evolution 
of life and form. The life passes onward and the 
Monad evolves to produce the vegetable kingdom, 
the perishing of the lower form being the condition 
for the appearing and the support of the higher. 

The story is repeated in the vegetable kingdom, 
for its forms in turn are sacrificed in order that ani- 
mal forms may be produced and may grow ; on every 
side grasses, grains, trees perish for the sustenance 
of animal bodies ; their tissues are disintegrated that 
the materials comprising them may be assimilated by 


SACRIFICES AND EVOLUTION. 28 1 

the animal and build up its body. Again the law of 
sacrifice is stamped on the world, this time on the 
vegetable kingdom ; its life evolves while its forms 
perish; the Monad evolves to produce the animal 
kingdom, and the vegetable is offered up that animal 
forms may be brought forth and maintained. 

So far the idea of pain has scarcely connected it- 
self with that of sacrifice, for, as we have seen in the 
course of our studies, the astral bodies of plants are 
not suflSciently organized to give rise to any acute 
sensations either of pleasure or of pain. But as we 
consider the law of sacrifice in its working in the 
animal kingdom, we cannot avoid the recognition 
of the pain there involved in the breaking up of 
forms. It is true that the amount of pain caused by 
the preying of one animal upon another in " the state 
of nature" is comparatively trivial in each case, but 
still some pain occurs. It is also true that man, in 
the part he has played in helping to evolve animals, 
has much aggravated the amount of pain, and has 
strengthened instead of diminishing the predatory 
instincts of carnivorous animals; still, he did not 
implant those instincts, though he took advantage of 
them fcr his own purposes, and innumerable varie- 
ties of animals, with the evolution of which man has 
had directly nothing to do, prey upon each other, 
the forms being sacrificed to the support of other 
forms, as in the mineral and vegetable kingdoms. 
The struggle for existence went on long before man 
appeared on the scene, and accelerated the evolution 
alike of life and of forms, while the pains accom- 


282 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

panying the destruction of forms began the long 
task of impressing on the evolving Monad the transi- 
tory nature of all forms, and the diflFerence between 
the forms that perished and the life that persisted. 

The lower nature of man was evolved under the 
same law of sacrifice as ruled in the lower kingdoms. 
But with the outpouiing of divine Life which gave 
the human Monad came a change in the way in 
which the law of sacrifice worked as the law of life. 
In man was to be developed the will, the self -mov- 
ing, self -initiated energy, and the compulsion which 
forced the lower kingdoms along the path of evolu- 
tion could not therefore be employed in his case, 
without paralyzing the growth of this new and essen- 
tial power. No mineral, no plant, no animal was 
asked to accept the law of sacrifice as a voluntarily 
chosen law of life. It was imposed upon them from 
without, and it forced their growth by a necessity 
from which they could not escape. Man was to 
have the freedom of choice necessary for the growth 
of a discriminative and self-conscious intelligence, 
and the question arose : " How can this creature be 
left free to choose, and yet learn to choose to follow 
the law of sacrifice, while yet he is a sensitive organ- 
ism, shrinking from pain, and pain is inevitable in 
the breaking up of sentient forms?" 

Doubtless aeons of experience, studied by a crea- 
ture becoming ever more intelligent, might have 
finally led man to discover that the law of sacrifice is 
the fundamental law of life; but in this, as in so 
much else, he was not left to his own unassisted 


SACRIFICES. 283 

efforts. Divine Teachers were there at the side of 
man in his infancy, and they authoritatively pro- 
claimed the law of sacrifice, and incorporated it in a 
most elementary form in the religions by which 
They trained the dawning intelligence of man. It 
would have been useless to have suddenly demanded 
from these child-souls that they should surrender 
without return what seemed to them to be the most 
desirable objects, the objects on the possession of 
which their life in form depended. They must be 
led along a path which would lead gradually to the 
heights of voluntary self-sacrifice. To this end they 
were first taught that they were not isolated units, 
but were parts of a larger whole, and that their lives 
were linked to other lives both above and below 
them. Their physical lives were supported by lower 
lives, by the earth, by plants ; they consumed these, 
and in thus doing they contracted a debt which they 
were bound to pay. Living on the sacrificed lives 
of others, they must sacrifice in turn something 
which should support other lives ; they must nourish 
even as they were nourished ; taking the fruits pro- 
duced by the activity of the astral entities that 
guide physical Nature, they must recruit the ex- 
pended forces by suitable offerings. Hence have 
arisen all the sacrifices to these forces — as science 
calls them — to these intelligences guiding physical 
order, as religions have always taught. As fire 
quickly disintegrated the dense physical, it quickly 
restored the etheric particles of the burnt offerings to 
the ethers ; thus the astral particles were easily set 


284 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

free to be assimilated by the astral entities concerned 
with the fertility of the earth and the growth of 
plants. Thus the wheel of production was kept 
turning, and man learned that he was constantly 
incurring debts to Nature which he must as con- 
stantly discharge. Thus the sense of obligation 
was implanted and nurtured in his mind, and the 
duty that he owed to the whole, to the nourishing 
mother Nature, became impressed on his thought. 
It is true that this sense of obligation was closely 
connected with the idea that its discharge was 
necessary for his own welfare, and that the wish to 
continue to prosper moved him to the payment of 
his debt. He was but a child-soul, learning his first 
lessons, and this lesson of the interdependence of 
lives, of the life of each depending on the sacrifice of 
others, was of vital importance to his growth. Not 
yet could he feel the divine joy of giving; the reluc- 
tance of the form to surrender aught that nourished 
it had first to be overcome, and sacrifice became 
identified with this surrender of something valued, 
a surrender made from a sense of obligation and the 
desire to continue prosperous. 

The next lesson removed the reward of sacrifice 
to a region beyond the physical world. First, by a 
sacrifice of material goods material welfare was to 
be secured. Then the sacrifice of material goods 
was to bring enjoyment in heaven, on the other side 
of death. The reward of the sacrificer was of a 
higher kind, and he learned that the relatively per- 
manent might be secured by the sacrifice of the 


TRAINING THE BODY. 285 

relatively transient — a lesson that was important as 
leading to discriminative knowledge. The clinging 
of the form to physical objects was exchanged for 
a clinging to heavenly joys. In all exoteric relig- 
ions we find this educative process resorted to by 
the Wise Ones — too wise to expect from child-souls 
the virtue of unrewarded heroism, and content, with 
a sublime patience^ to coax their wayward charges 
slowly along a pathway that was a thorny and a 
stony one to the lower nature. Gradually men 
were induced to subjugate the body, to overcome 
its sloth by the regular daily performance of relig- 
ious rites, often burdensome in their nature, and to 
regulate its activities by directing them into useful 
channels ; they were trained to conquer the form and 
to hold it in subjection to the life, and to accustom 
the body to yield itself to works of goodness and 
charity in obedience to the demands of the mind, 
even while that mind was chiefly stimulated by a 
desire to enjoy reward in heaven. We can see . 
among the Hindus, the Persians, the Chinese, how ^ 
men were taught to recognize their manifold obli- 
gations; to make the body yield dutiful sacrifice of 
obedience and reverence to ancestors, to parents, to 
elders; to bestow charity with courtesy; and to show 
kindness to all. Slowly men were helped to evolve 
both heroism and self-sacrifice to a high degree, as 
witness the martyrs who joyfully flung their bodies 
to torture and death rather than deny their faith or 
be false to their creed. They looked indeed for a 
" crown of glory" in heaven as a recompense for the 


286 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

sacrifice of the physical form, but it was much to 
have overcome the clinging to that physical form, 
and to have made the invisible world so real that it 
outweighed the visible. 

The next step was achieved when the sense of duty 
was definitely established; when the sacrifice of the 
lower to the higher was seen to be "right," apart 
from all question of a reward to be received in 
another world ; when the obligation owed by the part 
to the whole was recognized, and the yielding of ser- 
vice by the form that existed by the service of others 
was felt to be justly due without any claim to wages 
being established thereby. Then man began to per- 
ceive the law of sacrifice as the law of life, and 
voluntarily to associate himself with it ; and he began 
to learn to disjoin himself in idea from the form he 
dwelt in and to identify himself with the evolving 
life. This gradually led him to feel a certain in- 
difference to all the activities of form, save as they 
consisted in "duties that ought to be done," and to 
regard all of them as mere channels for the life- 
activities that were due to the world, and not as 
activities performed by him with any desire for their 
results. Thus he reached the point already noted, 
when karma attracting him to the three worlds 
ceased to be generated, and he turned the wheel of 
existence because it ought to be turned, and not be- 
cause its revolution brought any desirable object to 
himself. 

vi The full recognition of the law of sacrifice, how- 
ever, lifts man beyond the mental plane — whereon 


ACTIONS AS SACRIFICE. 28 ^ 

duty is recognized as duty, as "what ought to be 
done because it is owed" — to that higher plane of 
Buddhi where all selves are felt as one, and where 
all activities are poured out for the use of all, and 
not for the gain of a separated self. Only on that 
plane is the law of sacrifice /eU as a joyful privilege, 
instead of only recognized intellectually as true and 
just. On the buddhic plane man clearly sees that 
life is one, that it streams out perpetually as the free 
outpouring of the love of the Logos, that life holding 
itself separate is a poor and a mean thing at best, and 
an ungrateful one to boot. There the whole heart 
rushes upwards to the Logos in one strong surge of 
love and worship, and gives itself in joyfullest 
self-surrender to be a channel of His life and love 
to the world. To be a carrier of His light, a messen- 
ger of His compassion, a worker in His realm — that 
appears as the only life worth living ; to hasten hu- 
man evolution, to serve the Good Law, to lift part of 
the heavy burden of the world — that seems to be 
the very gladness of the Lord Himself. 

From this plane only can a man act as one of the 
Saviours of the world, because on it he is one with the 
selves of all. Identified with humanity where it is 
one, his strength, his love, his life, can flow down- 
wards into any or into every separated self. He has 
become a spiritual force, and the available spiritual 
energy of the world-system is increased by the pour- 
ing into it of his life. The forces he used to expend 
on the physical, astral, and mental planes, seeking 
things for his separated self, are now all gathered 


288 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

up in one act of sacrifice, and, transmuted thereby 
into spiritual energy, they pour down upon the 
world as spiritual life. This transmutation is 
wrought by the motive which determines the plane 
on which the energy is set free. If a man's motive 
be the gain of physical objects, the energy liberated 
works only on the physical plane ; if he desire astral 
objects, he liberates energy on the astral plane ; if 
he seek mental joys, his energy functions on the 
mental plane; but if he sacrifice himself to be a 
channel of the Locos, he liberates energy on the 
spiritual plane, and it works everywhere with the 
potency and keenness of a spiritual force. For such 
a man action and inaction are the same ; for he does 
ever)rthing while doing nothing, he does nothing 
while doing ever3rthing. For him, high and low, 
great and small are the same ; he fills any place that 
needs filling, and the Logos is alike in every place 
and in every action. He can flow into any form, 
he can work along any line, he knows not any longer 
choice or difference; his life by sacrifice has been 
made one with the life of the Logos— he sees God 
in everything and everj^hing in God. How then can 
place or form make to him any difference? He no 
longer identifies himself with form, but is self-con- 
scious Life. "Having nothing, he possesseth all 
things;" asking for nothing, everjrthing flows into 
him. His life is bliss, for he is one with his Lord, 
who is Beatitude ; and, using form for service with- 
out attachment to it, " he has put an end to pain. " 
Those who grasp something of the wonderful pos- 


w 


PRACTICE OF SACRIFICE. 289 

sibilities which open out before us as we voluntarily 
associate ourselves with the law of sacrifice will 
wish to begin that voluntary association long ere 
they can rise to the heights just dimly sketched. 
Like other deep spiritual truths, it is eminently prac- 
tical in its application to daily life, and none who 
feel its beauty need hesitate to begin to work with / 
it. When a man resolves to begin the practice of ^^ 
sacrifice, he will train himself to open every day 
with an act of sacrifice, the offering of himself, ere 
the day's work begins, to Him to whom he gives 
his life ; his first waking thought will be this dedica- 
tion of all his power to his Lord. Then each thought, 
each word, each action in daily life will be done as a 
sacrifice — not for its fruit, not even as duty, but as 
the way in which, at the moment, his Lord can be 
served. All that comes will be accepted as the ex- 
pression of His will; joys, troubles, anxieties, suc- 
cesses, failures, all to him are welcome as marking 
out his path of service ; he will take each happily 
as it comes and offer it as a sacrifice; he will loose 
each happily as it goes, since its going shows that 
his Lord has no longer need for it. Any powers he 
has he gladly uses for service ; when they fail him, 
he takes their failure with happy equanimity ; since 
they are no longer available he cannot give them. 
Even suffering that springs from past causes not yet 
exhausted can be changed into a voluntary sacrifice 
by welcoming it ; taking possession of it by willing 
it, a man may offer it as a gift, changing it by this 
motive into a spiritual force. Every human life 
19 


290 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

offers countless opportunities for this practice of the 
law of sacrifice, and every human life becomes a 
power as these opportunities are seized and utilized. 
Without any expansion of his waking consciousness, 
a man may thus become a worker on the spiritual 
planes, liberating energy there which pours down 
into the lower worlds. His self-surrender here in 
the lower consciousness, imprisoned as it is in the 
body, calls out responsive thrills of life from the 
buddhic aspect of the Monad which is his true Self, 
and hastens the time when that Monad shall become 
the spiritual Ego, self -moved and ruling all his 
vehicles, using each of them at will as needed for 
the work that is to be done. In no way can progress 
be made so rapidly, and the manifestation of all the 
powers latent in the Monad be brought about so 
quickly, as by the understanding and the practice of 
the law of sacrifice. Therefore was it called by a 
Master, "The law of evolution for the man." It 
has indeed prof ounder and more mystic aspects than 
any touched on here, but these will unveil them- 
selves without words to the patient and loving heart 
whose life is all a sacrificial offering. There are 
things that are heard only in stillness; there are 
teachings that can be uttered only by " the Voice of 
the Silence." Among these are the deeper truths 
rooted in the law of sacrifice. 


CHAPTER XI. 

Man's Ascent. 

So stupendotis is the ascent up which some men 
have climbed, and some are climbing, that when we 
scan it by an effort of the imagination we are apt to 
recoil, wearied in thought by the mere idea of that 
long journey. From the embryonic soul of the low- 
est savage to the liberated and triumphant perfected 
spiritual soul of the divine man — it seems scarcely 
credible that the one can contain in it all that is ex- 
pressed in the other, and that the difference is but a 
difference in evolution, that one is only at the begin- 
ning and the other at the end of man's ascent. Be- 
low the one stretch the long ranks of the sub-human 
— the animals, vegetables, minerals, elemental es- 
sences ; above the other stretch the infinite grada- 
tions of the superhuman — the Chohans, Manus, Bud- 
dhas. Builders, Lipikas ; who may name or number 
the hosts of the mighty Ones? Looked at thus, as a 
stage in a yet vaster life, the many steps within the 
human kingdom shrink into a narrower compass, 
and man's ascent is seen as comprising but one grade 
in evolution in the linked lives that stretch from the 
elemental essence onwards to the manifested God. 

We have traced man's ascent from the appearance 


292 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

of the embryonic soul to the state of the spiritually 
advanced, through the stages of evolving conscious- 
ness from the life of sensation to the life of thought. 
We have seen him re-tread the cycle of birth and 
death in the three worlds, each world yielding him 
its harvest and offering him opportunities for pro- 
gress. We are now in a position to follow him into 
the final stages of his human evolution, stages that 
lie in the future for the vast bulk of our humanity, 
but that have already been trodden by its eldest chil- 
dren, and that are being trodden by a slender num- 
ber of men and women in our own day. 

These stages have been classified under two head- 
ings — the first are spoken of as constituting "the 
probationary Path," while the later ones are included 
in " the Path proper" or " the Path of discipleship. " 
We will take them in their natural order. 

As a man's intellectual, moral, and spiritual nature 
develops, he becomes more and more conscious of 
the purpose of human life, and more and more eager 
to accomplish that purpose in his own person. Re- 
peated longings for earthly joys, followed by full 
possession and by subsequent weariness, have gradu- 
ally taught him the transient and unsatisfactory na- 
ture of earth's best gifts ; so often has he striven for, 
gained, enjoyed, been satiated, and finally nauseated, 
that he turns away discontented from all that earth 
can offer. "What doth it profit?" sighs the wearied 
soul. " All is vanity and vexation. Hundreds, yea, 
thousands of times have I possessed, and finally have 
found disappointment even in possession. These 


THE CRY FOR LIBERTY. 293 

joj s are illusions, as bubbles on the stream, fairy- 
colored, rainbow-hued, but bursting at a touch. I 
am athirst for realities ; I have had enough of shad- 
ows ; I pant for the eternal and the true, for free- 
dom from the limitations that hem me in, that keep 
me a prisoner amid these changing shows." 

This first cry of the soul for liberation is the re- 
sult of the realization that, were this earth all' that 
poets have dreamed it, were every evil swept away, 
every sorrow put an end to, every joy intensified, 
every beauty enhanced, were everything raised to 
its point of perfection, he would still be aweary of 
it, would turn from it void of desire. It has become 
to him a prison, and, let it be decorated as it may, he 
pants for the free and limitless air beyond its in- 
closing walls. Nor is heaven more attractive to him 
than earth ; of that too he is aweary ; its joys have 
lost their attractiveness, even its intellectual and 
emotional delights no longer satisfy. They also 
"come and go, impermanent," like the contacts of 
the senses; they are limited, transient, unsatisfying. 
He is tired of the changing ; from very weariness he 
cries out for liberty. 

Sometimes this realization of the worthlessness of 
earth and heaven is at first but as a flash in con- 
sciousness, and the external worlds reassert their em- 
pire and the glamour of their illusive joys again laps 
the soul into content. Some lives even may pass, 
full of noble work and unselfish achievement, of 
pure thoughts and lofty deeds, ere this realization of 
the emptiness of all that is phenomenal becomes the 


294 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

permanent attitude of the soul. But sooner or later 
the soul once and for ever breaks with earth and 
heaven as incompetent to satisfy his needs, and this 
definite turning away from the transitory, this defi- 
nite will to reach the eternal, is the gateway to the 
probationary Path. The soul steps off the highway 
of evolution to breast the steeper climb up the moun- 
tain side, resolute to escape from the bondage of 
earthly and heavenly lives, and to reach the freedom 
of the upper air. 

The work which has to be accomplished by the 
man who enters on the probationary Path is entirely 
mental and moral ; he has to bring himself up to the 
point at which he will be fit to " meet his Master face 
to face": but the very words "his Master" need ex- 
planation. There are certain great Beings belong- 
ing to our race who have completed Their human 
evolution, and to whom allusion has already been 
made as constituting a Brotherhood, and as guiding 
and forwarding the development of the race. These 
great Ones, the Masters, voluntarily incarnate in 
human bodies in order to form the connecting link 
between human and superhuman beings, and They 
permit those who fulfil certain conditions to become 
Their disciples, with the object of hastening their 
evolution and thus qualifying themselves to enter 
the great Brotherhood, and to assist in its glorious 
and beneficent work for man. 

The Masters ever watch the race, and mark any 
who by the practice of virtue, by unselfish labor for 
human good, by intellectual effort turned to the ser- 


A MAN IS OBSERVED. 255 

vice of man, by sincere devotion, piety, and purity, 
draw ahead of the mass of their fellows, and render 
themselves capable of receiving spiritual assistance 
beyond that shed down on mankind as a whole. If 
an individual is to receive special help he must show 
special receptivity. For the Masters are the distrib- 
utors of the spiritual energies that help on human 
evolution, and the use of these for the swifter 
growth of a single soul is only permitted when that 
soul shows a capacity for rapid progress and can 
thus be quickly fitted to become a helper of the race, 
returning to it the aid that had been afforded to 
himself. When a man by his own efforts, utilizing 
to the full all the general help coming to him 
through religion and philosophy, has struggled on- 
wards to the front of the advancing human wave, 
and when he shows a loving, selfless, helpful nature, 
then he becomes a special object of attention to the 
watchful Guardians of the race, and opportunities 
are put in his way to test his strength and call forth 
his intuition. In proportion as he successfully uses 
these, he is yet further helped, and glimpses are 
afforded to him of the true life, until the unsatis- 
factory and unreal nature of mundane existence 
presses more and more on the soul, with the result 
already mentioned — the weariness which makes him 
long for freedom and brings him to the gateway of 
the probationary Path. 

His entrance on this Path places him in the posi- 
tion of a disciple or chela, on probation, and some 
one Master takes him under His care, recognizing 


296 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

him as a man who has stepped out of the highway 
of evolution, and seeks the Teacher who shall guide 
his steps along the steep and narrow path which 
leads to liberation. That Teacher is awaiting him 
at the very entrance of the Path, and even though 
the neoph)rte knows not his Teacher, his Teacher 
knows him, sees his efforts, directs his steps, leads 
him into the conditions that best subserve his pro- 
gress, watching over him with the tender solicitude 
of a mother, and with the wisdom bom of perfect 
insight. The road may seem lonely and dark, and 
the young disciple may fancy himself deserted, but 
a " friend who sticketh closer than a brother" is ever 
at hand, and the help withheld from the senses is 
given to the soul. 

There are four definite "qualifications" that the 
probationary chela must set himself to acquire, that 
are by the wisdom of the great Brotherhood laid 
down as the conditions of full discipleship. They 
are not asked for in perfection, but they must be 
striven for and partially possessed ere Initiation is 
permitted. The first of these is the discrimination 
between the real and the unreal which has been 
already dawning on the mind of the pupil, and 
which drew him to the Path on which he has now 
entered; the distinction grows clear and sharply 
defined in his mind, and gradually frees him to a 
great extent from the fetters which bind him, for 
the second qualification, indifference to external 
things, comes naturally in the wake of discrimina- 
tion, from the clear perception of their worthless- 


THE REAL AND THE UNREAL. 297 

ness. He learns that the weariness which took all 
the savor out of life was due to the disappoint- 
ments constantly arising from his search for satis- 
faction in the unreal, when only the real can con- 
tent the soul ; that all forms are unreal and without 
stability, changing ever under the impulses of life, 
and that nothing is real but the one Life that we 
seek for and love unconsciously under its many veils. 
This discrimination is much stimulated by the rap- 
idly changing circumstances into which a disciple is 
generally thrown, with the view of pressing on him 
strongly the instability of all external things. The 
lives of a disciple are generally lives of storm and 
stress, in order that the qualities which are normally 
evolved in a long succession of lives in the three 
worlds may in him be forced into swift growth and 
quickly brought to perfection. As he alternates rap- 
idly from joy to sorrow, from peace to storm, from 
rest to toil, he learns to see in the changes the un- 
real forms, and to feel through all a steady un- 
changing life. He grows indifferent to the presence 
or the absence of things that thus come and go, and 
more and more he fixes his gaze on the changeless 
reality that is ever present. 

While he is thus gaining in insight and stability 
he works also at the development of the third quali- 
fication — the six mental attributes that are de- 
manded from him ere he may enter on the Path 
itself. He need not possess them all perfectly, but 
he must have them all partially present at least ere 
he will be permitted to pass onward. First he must 


298 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

gain control over his thoughts, the progeny of the 
restless, unruly mind, hard to curb as the wind.* 
Steady, daily practice in meditation, in concentra- 
tion, had begun to reduce this mental rebel to order 
ere he entered on the probationary Path, and the dis- 
ciple now works with concentrated energy to com- 
plete the task, knowing that the great increase in 
thought power that will accompany his rapid growth 
will prove a danger both to others and to himself un- 
less the developing force be thoroughly under his con- 
trol. Better give a child d3mamite as a plaything, 
than place the creative powers of thought in the 
hands of the selfish and the ambitious. Secondly, 
the young chela must add outward self-control to 
inner, and must rule his speech and his actions as 
rigidly as he rules his thoughts. As the mind obeys 
the soul, so must the lower nature obey the mind. 
The usefulness of the disciple in the outer world de- 
pends as much on the pure and noble example set 
by his visible life, as his usefulness in the inner 
world depends on the steadiness and strength of his 
thoughts. Often is good work marred by careless- 
ness in this lower part of human activity, and the 
aspirant is bidden strive towards an ideal perfect in 
every part, in order that he may not later, when 
treading the Path, stumble in his own walk and 
cause the enemy to blaspheme. 

As already said, perfection in anything is not de- 
manded at this stage, biit the wise pupil strives 
towards perfection, knowing that at his best he is 

* Bhagavad Gttd, vi. 34. 


EACH IN HIS PLACE. 299 

Still far away from his ideal. Thirdly, the candidate 
for full discipleship seeks to build into himself the 
sublime and far-reaching virtue of tolerance — the 
quiet acceptance of each man, each form of exist- 
ence, as it is, without demand that it should be some- 
thing other, shaped more to his own liking. Begin- 
ning to realize that the one Life takes on countless 
limitations, each right in its own place and time, he 
accepts each limited expression of that Life without 
wishing to transform it into something else; he 
learns to revere the wisdom which planned this world 
and which guides it, and to view with wide-eyed 
serenity the imperfect parts as they slowly work out 
their partial lives. The drunkard, learning his al- 
phabet of the suffering caused by the dominance of 
the lower nature, is doing as usefully in his own 
stage as is the saint in his, completing his last lesson 
in earth's school, and no more can justly be de- 
manded from either than he is able to perform. 
One is in the kindergarten stage, learning by object- 
lessons, while the other is graduating, ready to leave 
his university ; both are right for their age and their 
place, and should be helped and sympathized with 
in their place. This is one of the lessons of what is 
known in occultism as "tolerance." Fourthly must 
be developed endurance, the endurance that cheer- 
fully bears all and resents nothing, going straight 
onwards unswervingly to the goal. Nothing can 
come to him but by the Law, and he knows the 
Law is good. He understands that the rocky path- 
way that leads up the mountain-side straight to the 


irse^yw^::::.^^.!^^:;!^^ j.i-^WWi 


300 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

summit cannot be as easy to his feet as the well- 
beaten winding highway. He realizes that he is 
paying in a few short lives all the karmic obligations 
accumulated during his past, and that the payments 
must be correspondingly heavy. The very strug- 
gles into which he is plunged develop in him the fifth 
attribute, faith — faith in his Master and in himself, 
a serene strong confidence that is unshakable. He 
learns to trust in the wisdom, the love, the power 
of his Master, and he is beginning to realize — not 
only to say he believes in — the Divinity within his 
own heart, able to subdue all things to Himself. 
The last mental requisite, balance, equilibrium, 
grows up to some extent without conscious eflEort 
during the striving after the preceding five. The 
very setting of the will to tread the Path is a sign 
that the higher nature is opening out, and that the 
external world is definitely relegated to a lower 
place. The continuous efforts to lead the life of 
discipleship disentangle the soul from any remain- 
ing ties that may knit it to the world of sense, for 
the withdrawal of the soul's attention from lower 
objects gradually exhausts the attractive power of 
those objects. They " turn away from an abstemious 
dweller in the body," * and soon lose all power to 
disturb this balance. Thus he learns to move amid 
them undisturbed, neither seeking nor rejecting 
any. He also learns balance amid mental troubles 
of every kind, amid alternations of mental joy and 
mental pain, this balance being further taught by 

* Bhagavad Giidt ii. 59. 


READY FOR LIBERATION. 3OI 

the swift changes already spoken of through which 
his life is guided by the ever-watchful care of his 
Master. 

These six mental attributes being in some meas- 
ure attained, the probationary chela needs further 
but the fourth qualification, the deep intense long- 
ing for liberation, that yearning of the soul towards 
union with Deity that is the promise of its own ful- 
filment. This adds the last touch to his readiness 
to enter into full discipleship, for, once that longing 
has definitely asserted itself, it can never again be 
eradicated, and the soul that has felt it can never 
again quench his thirst at earthly fountains; their 
waters will ever taste flat and vapid when he sips 
them, so that he will turn away with ever-deepening 
longing for the true water of life. At this stage he 
is " the man ready for Initiation," ready to definitely 
"enter the stream" that cuts him off forever from 
the interests of earthly life save as he can serve his 
Master in them and help forward the evolution of 
the race. Henceforth his life is not to be the life of 
separateness ; it is to be offered up on the altar of 
humanity, a glad sacrifice of all he is, to be used for 
the common good.* 

During the years spent in evolving the four quali- 
fications, the probationary chela will have been ad- 
vancing in many other respects. He will have been 
receiving from his Master much teaching, teaching 
usually imparted during the deep sleep of the body ; 
the soul, clad in his well-organized astral body, will 

♦ The student will be glad to have the technical names of 


■ri^ 


302 


THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 


have become used to it as a vehicle of consciousness, 
and will have been drawn to his Master to receive 
instruction and spiritual illumination. He will fur- 
ther have been trained in meditation, and this effec- 
tive practice outside the physical body will have 
quickened and brought into active exercise many 
of the higher powers; during such meditation he 
will have reached higher regions of being, learning 
more of the life of the mental plane. He will have 
been taught to use his increasing powers in human 
service, and during many of the hours of sleep for 
the body he will have been working diligently on 
the astral plane, aiding the souls that have passed 
on to it by death, comforting the victims of acci- 
dents, teaching any less instructed than himself, and 
in countless ways helping those who need it, thus in 


these stages in Sanskrit and P^li, so that he may be able to 
follow them out in more advanced books : 


Sanskrit (used by Hindus). 

z. Viveka; discrimination be- 
tween the real and 
the unreal. 

a. Vairagya; indifference to the 
unreal, the tran- 
sitory. 

Skama; control of 

thought. 
Dama; control of 
conduct. 
Shatsam- Uparati: tolerance. 
PATTi. 1 Jttiksha: endur- 
ance. 
Skraddhd: faith. 
Samddhdna: bal- 
^ ance. 

4. MUMUKSHA; desire for libera- 
tion. 

The man is then the Adhikari. 


Pali (used 

X. MANODV&. 
RAVAJJANA; 


by Buddhists). 

the opening of the 
doors of the mind; 
a conviction of the 
impermanence of 
the earthly. 

2. Parikamma; preparation for ac- 

tion; indifference 
to the fruits of 
^ action. 

3. Upacharo; attention or con- 

duct; divided un- 
der the same 
headings as in 
the Hindu. 


4. ANULOMA; direct order or suc- 
cession, its attain- 
ment following 
on the other three. 

The man is then the Gotrabhu. 


SPECIAL REINCARNATION. 303 

humble fashion aiding the beneficent work of the 
Masters, and being associated with Their sublime 
Brotherhood as a co-laborer in a however modest 
and lowly degree. 

Either on the probationary Path or later, the chela 
is offered the privilege of performing one of those 
acts of renunciation which mark the swifter ascent 
of man. He is allowed "to renounce Devachan," 
that is, to resign the glorious life in the heavenly 
places that awaits him on his liberation from the 
physical world, the life which in his case would 
mostly be spent in the middle arupa world, in the 
company of the Masters, and in all the sublime joys 
of the purest wisdom and love. If he renounce this 
fruit of his noble and devoted life, the spiritual 
forces that would have been expended in his Deva- 
chan are set free for the general service of the world, 
and he himself remains in the astral region to await 
a speedy rebirth upon earth. His Master in this 
case selects and presides over his reincarnation, 
guiding him to take birth amid conditions conducive 
to his usefulness in the world, suitable for his own 
further progress and for the work required at his 
hands. He has reached the stage at which every 
individual interest is subordinated to the divine 
work, and in which his will is fixed to serve in what- 
ever place and in whatever way may be required of 
him. He therefore gladly surrenders himself into 
the hands he trusts, accepting willingly and joyfully 
the place in the world in which he can best render 
service, and perform his share of the glorious work 


304 THE ANCIENT WISDOM* 

of aiding the evolution of humanity. Blessed is the 
family into which a child is bom tenanted by such a 
soul, a soul that brings with him the benediction of 
the Master and is ever watched and guided, every 
possible assistance being given him to bring his 
lower vehicles quickly under control. Occasionally, 
but rarely, a chela may reincarnate in a body that 
has passed through infancy and extreme youth as 
the tabernacle of a less progressed Ego ; when an 
Ego comes to the earth for a very brief life-period, 
say for some fifteen or twenty years, he will be 
leaving his body at the time of dawning manhood, 
when it has passed through the time of early train- 
ing and is rapidly becoming an eflEective vehicle for 
the soul. If such a body be a very good one, and 
some chela be awaiting a suitable reincarnation, it 
will often be watched during its tenancy by the Ego 
for whom it was originally builded, with the view 
of utilizing it when he has done with it ; when the 
life-period of that Ego is completed, and he passes 
out of the body into Kamaloka on his way to Deva- 
chan, his cast-off body will be taken possession of 
by the waiting chela, a new tenant will enter the 
deserted house, and the apparently dead body will 
revive. Such cases are unusual, but are not un- 
known to occultists, and some references to them 
may be found in occult books. 

Whether the incarnation be normal or abnormal, 
the progress of the soul, of the chela himself, con- 
tinues, and the period already spoken of is reached 
when he is ** ready for Initiation"; through that 


THE KEY OF KNOWLEDGE. 305 

gateway of Initiation he enters, as a definitely ac- 
cepted chela, on the Path. This Path consists of 
four distinct stages, and the entrance into each is 
guarded by an Initiation. Each Initiation is accom- 
panied by an expansion of consciousness which 
gives what is called " the key of knowledge" belong- 
ing to the stage to which it admits, and this key of 
knowledge is also a key of power, for truly is knowl- 
edge power in all the realms of Nature. When the 
chela has entered the Path he becomes what has 
been called "the houseless man," * for he no longer 
looks on earth as his home, he has no abiding-place 
here, to him all places are welcome wherein he can 
serve his Master. While he is on this stage of the 
Path there are three hindrances to progress, techni- 
cally called "fetters," which he has to get rid of, 
and now — as he is rapidly to perfect himself — it is 
demanded from him that he shall entirely eradicate 
faults of character, and perform completely the 
tasks belonging to his condition. The three fetters 
that he must loose from his limbs ere he can pass 
the second Initiation are: the illusion of the per- 
sonal self, doubt, and superstition. The personal 
self must be felt in consciousness as an illusion, and 
must lose forever its power to impose itself on the 
soul as a reality. He must feel himself one with all, 
all must live and breathe in him and he in all. 

* The Hindu calls this stage that of the Parivrajaka, the 
wanderer ; the Buddhist calls it that of the Srot^patti. he who 
has reached the stream. The chel& is thus designated after 
bis first Initiation and before his second. 
20 


306 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

Doubt must be destroyed, but by knowledge, not by 
crushing out; he must know reincarnation and 
karma and the existence of the Masters as facts; not 
accepting them as intellectually necessary, but 
knowing them as facts in Nature that he has himself 
verified, so that no doubt on these heads can ever 
again rise in his mind. Superstition is escaped as 
the man rises into a knowledge of realities, and of 
the proper place of rites and ceremonies in the 
economy of Nature ; he learns to use every means 
and to be bound by none. When the chela has cast 
off these fetters — sometimes the task occupies several 
lives, sometimes it is achieved in part of a single life 
. — he finds the second Initiation open to him, with 
its new " key of knowledge" and its widened horizon. 
The chela now sees before him a swiftly shortening 
span of compulsory life on earth, for when he has 
reached this stage he must pass through his third 
and fourth Initiations in his present life or in the 
next.* 

In this stage he has to bring into full working 
order the inner faculties, those belonging to the 
subtle bodies, for he needs them for his service in 
the higher realms of being. If he have developed 
them previously, this stage may be a very brief one, 
but he may pass through the gateway of death once 
more ere he is ready to receive his third Initiation, 

* The chela on the second stage of the path is for the Hindu 
the Kutichaka, the man who builds a hut ; he has reached a 
place of peace. For the Buddhist he is the Sakrid^g^min, the 
man who receives birth but once more. 


THE FINAL STAGES. 307 

to become " the Swan," the individual who soars into 
the empyrean, that wondrous Bird of Life whereof 
so many legends are related.* On this third stage 
of the Path the chela casts off the fourth and fifth 
fetters, those of desire and aversion; he sees the 
One Self in all, and the outer veil can no longer 
blind him, whether it be fair or foul. He looks on 
all with an equal eye ; that fair bud of tolerance that 
he cherished on the probationary Path now flowers 
out into an all-embracing love that wraps everything 
within its tender embrace. He is "the friend of 
every creature," the "lover of all that lives" in a 
world where all things live. As a living embodi- 
ment of divine love, he passes swiftly onwards to 
the fourth Initiation, that admits him to the last 
stage of the Path, where he is " beyond the Individ- 
ual," the worthy, the venerable, f Here he remains 
at his will, casting off the last fine fetters that still 
bind him with threads however fragile, and keeo 
him back from liberation. He throws off all cling- 
ing to life in form, and then all longing for formless 
life ; these are chains and he must be chainless ; he 
may move through the three worlds, but not a shred 
of theirs must have power to hold him ; the splen- 
dors of the " formless world" must charm him no 
more than the concrete glories of the worlds of 

* The Hindu calls him the Paramahamsa, beyond the ** I* ; 
the Buddhist names him the Arhat, the worthy. 

f The Hamsa, he who realizes "I am That." in the Hindu 
terms ; the An&g&min, the man who receives birth no more, 
in the Buddhist. 


308 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

form.* Then — mightiest of all achievements — he 
casts oflE the last fetter of separateness, the ** I-mak- 
ing" f acuity t which realizes itself as apart from 
others, for he dwells ever on the plane of unity in his 
waking consciousness, on the buddhic plane where 
the Self of all is known and realized as one. This 
faculty was bom with the soul, is the essence of in- 
dividuality, and it persists till all that is valuable in 
it is worked into the Monad, and it can be dropped 
on the threshold of liberation, leaving its priceless 
result to the Monad, that sense of individual identity 
which is so pure and fine that it does not mar the 
consciousness of oneness. Easily then drops away 
aught that could respond to ruffling contacts, and 
the chela stands robed in that glorious vesture of 
unchanging peace that naught can mar. And the 
casting away of that same " I-making" faculty has 
cleared away from the spiritual vision the last 
clouds that could dim its piercing insight, and in 
the realization of unity, ignorancej — the limitation 
that gives birth to all separateness — falls away, and 
the man is perfect, is free. 

Then has come the ending of the Path, and the 
ending of the Path is the threshold of Nirvana. 
Into that* marvellous state of consciousness the 

* See Chapter IV. , on " The Mental Plane. " 

f Ahamk^a, generally given as M^na, pride, since pride is 
the subtlest manifestation of the " I " as distinct from others. 

X Avidy^, the first illusion and the last, that which makes 
the separated worlds— the first of the Nid^nas — and that which 
drops off when liberation is attained. 


IT IS FINISHED. 309 

chela has been wont to pass out of the body while he 
has been traversing the final stage of the Path; 
now, when he crosses the threshold, the nirvanic 
consciousness becomes his normal consciousness, for 
Nirvana is the home of the liberated Self.* He has 
completed man's ascent, he touches the limit of hu- 
manity; above him there stretch hosts of mighty 
Beings, but they are superhuman; the crucifixion 
in flesh is over, the hour of liberation has struck, 
and the triumphant " It is finished!" rings from the 
conqueror's lips. See ! he has crossed the threshold, 
he has vanished into the light nirvanic, another son 
of earth has conquered death. What mysteries are 
veiled by that light supernal we know not; dimly 
we feel that the Supreme Self is found, that lover 
and Beloved are one. The long search is over, the 
thirst of the heart is quenched forever, he has en- 
tered into the joy of his Lord. 

But has earth lost her child, is humanity bereft of 
her triumphant son? Nay! He has come forth 
from the bosom of the light, and He standeth again 
on the threshold of Nirvana, Himself seeming the 
very embodiment of thatalight, glorious beyond all 
telling, a manifested Son of God. But now His face 
is turned to earth. His eyes beam with divinest com- 
passion on the wandering sons of men. His brethren 
after the flesh ; He cannot leave them comfortless, 
scattered as sheep without a shepherd. Clothed in 
the majesty of a mighty renunciation, glorious with 

* The Jivanmukta. the liberated life, of the Hindu ; the 
Asekba, he who has no more to learn, of the Buddhist. 


3IO THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

the strength of perfect wisdom and ** the power of 
an endless life," He returns to earth to bless and 
guide humanity, Master of Wisdom, kingly Teacher, 
divine Man. 

Returning thus to earth, the Master devotes Him- 
self to the service of humanity with mightier forces 
at His command than He wielded while He trod the 
Path of discipleship ; He has dedicated Himself to 
the helping of man, and He bends all the sublime 
powers that He holds to the quickening of the evo- 
lution of the world. He pays to those who are ap- 
proaching the Path the debt He contracted in the 
days of His own chelaship, guiding, helping, teach- 
ing them as He was guided, helped, and taught 
before. 

Such are the stages of man's ascent, from the low- 
est savagery to the divine manhood. To such goal 
is humanity climbing, to such glory shall the race 
attain. 


CHAPTER XII. 
Building a Kosmos. 

It is not possible, at our present stage of evolu- 
tion, to do more than roughly indicate a few points 
in the vast outline of the kosmic scheme in which 
our globe plays its little part. By " a kosmos" is 
here meant a system which seems, from our stand- 
point, to be complete in itself, arising from a single 
Logos, and sustained by His Life. Such a system 
is our solar system, and the physical sun may be 
considered to be the lowest manifestation of the 
Logos when acting as the centre of His kosmos; 
every form is indeed one of His concrete manifesta- 
tions, but the sun is His lowest manifestation as the 
life-giving, invigorating, all-pervading, all-control- 
ling, regulative, co-ordinating, central power. 

Says an occult commentary: Surya (the sun), 

in its visible reflection, exhibits the first or lowest state of 
the seventh, the highest state of the universal Presence, the 
pure of the pure, the first manifested Breath of the ever un- 
manifested Sat (Be-ness). All the central physical or objec- 
tive Suns are in their substance the lowest state of the first 
Principle of the Breath,* 

are, in short, the lowest state of the " Physical Body" 
of the Logos. 

All physical forces and energies are but transmu- 
tations of the life poured forth by the sun, the Lord 

* Secret Doctrine , i. , p. 309. 


312 THE ANCIENT WISDOM, 

and Giver of life to his system. Hence in many 
ancient religions the sun has stood as the symbol of 
the Supreme God — the symbol, in truth, the least 
liable to misconstruction by the ignorant. 
Mr. Sinnett well says: 

The solar system is indeed an area of Nature including more 
than any but the very highest beings whom our humanity is 
capable of developing are in a position to investigate. The- 
oretically we may feel sure — as we look up into the heavens 
at night— that the whole solar system itself is but a drop in 
the ocean of the kosmos, but that drop is in its turn an ocean 
from the point of view of the consciousness of such half- 
developed beings within it as ourselves, and we can only hope 
at present to acquire vag^e and shadowy conceptions of its 
origin and constitution. Shadowy, however, though these 
may be, they enable us to assign the subordinate planetary 
series in which our own evolution is carried on, to its proper 
place in the system of which it is a part, or at all events to 
get a broad idea of the relative magnitude of the whole sys- 
tem, of our planetary chain, of the world in which we are at 
present functioning, and of the respective periods of evolution 
in which as human beings we are interested.* 

For in truth we cannot grasp our own position in- 
tellectually without some idea — however vague it 
may be — of our relation to the whole; and while 
some students are content to work within their own 
sphere of duty and to leave the wider reaches of life 
imtil they are called to function in them, others feel 
the need of a far-reaching scheme in which they 
have their place, and take an intellectual delight in 
soaring upwards to obtain a bird's-eye view of the 
whole field of evolution. This need has been recog- 

* The System to which we belongs p. 4. 


ORIGINS. 3 1 3 

nized and met by the spiritual Guardians of human- 
ity in the magnificent delineation of the kosmos 
from the standpoint of the occultist traced by their 
pupil and messenger, H. P. Blavatsky, in the Secret 
Doctrine^ a work that will become ever more and 
more enlightening as students of the Ancient Wis- 
dom themselves explore and master the lower levels 
of our evolving world. 

The appearance of the Locos, we are told, is the 
herald of the birth-hour of our kosmos. 

When He is manifest, all is manifested after Him ; by His 
manifestation this All becomes manifest. * 

With Himself He brings the fruits of a past kos- 
mos — the mighty spiritual Intelligences who are to 
be His co-workers and agents in the universe now to 
be built. Highest of these are "the Seven," often 
Themselves spoken of as Logoi, since each in His 
place is the centre of a distinct department in the 
kosmos, as the Logos is the centre of the whole. 
The commentary before quoted says: 

The seven Beings in the Sun are the Seven Holy Ones, Self- 
bom from the inherent power in the matrix of Mother-sub- 
stance. . . . The energy from which they sprang into con- 
scious existence in every Sun is what some people call Vishnu, 
which is the Breath of the Absoluteness. We call it the one 
manifested Life— itself a reflection of the Absolute. 

This "one manifested Life" is the Logos, the 
manifested God. 

From this primary division our Kosmos takes its 
sevenfold character, and all subsequent divisions in 

^ MuHdakopaniskad^ II. ii. lo. 


314 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

their descending order reproduce this seven-keyed 
scale. Under each of the seven secondary Logoi 
come the descending hierarchies of Intelligences 
that form the governing body of His kingdom: 
among These we hear of the Lipika, who are the 
Recorders of the karma of that kingdom and of all 
entities therein ; of the Maharajas or Devarajas, who 
superintend the working out of karmic law; and of 
the vast hosts of the Builders, who shape and fash- 
ion all forms after the Ideas that dwell in the 
treasure-house of the Locos, in the Universal Mind, 
and that pass from Him to the Seven, each of whom 
plans out His own realm under that supreme direc- 
tion and all-inspiring life, giving to it, at the same 
time, His own individual coloring. H. P. Blavatsky 
calls these Seven Realms that make up the solar 
system the seven Laya centres ; she says : 

The seven Laya centres are the seven Zero points, using the 
term 2^ro in the same sense that chemists do, to indicate a 
point at which, in Esotericism, the scale of reckoning of dif- 
ferentiation begins. From the Centres — beyond which Esoteric 
philosophy allows us to perceive the dim metaphysical outlines 
of the "Seven Sons'* of Life, and Light the seven Logoi of the 
Hermetic and all other philosophies— begins the differentiation 
of the elements which enter into the constitution of our Solar 
system.* 

This realm is a planetary evolution of a stupendous 
character, the field in which are lived out the stages 
of a life of which a physical planet, such as Venus, 
is but a transient embodiment. We may speak of 
the Evolver and Ruler of this realm as a planetary 

* Secret Doctrine^ i. . p. 162. 


THE SEVEN GLOBES. 315 

Logos, SO as to avoid confusion. He draws from 
the matter of the solar system, outpoured from the 
central Logos Himself, the crude materials He re- 
quires, and elaborates them by His own life-energies, 
each planetary Logos thus specializing the matter of 
His realm from a common stock.* The atomic state 
in each of the seven planes of His kingdom being 
identical with the matter of a sub-plane of the whole 
solar system, continuity is thus established through- 
out the whole. As H. P. Blavatsky remarks, atoms 
change "their combining equivalents on every 
planet," the atoms themselves being identical, but 
their combinations differing. She goes on : 

Not alone the elements of our planet, but even those of all 
its sisters in the solar system, differ as widely from each other 
in their combinations, as from the cosmic elements beyond our 
solar limits. . . • Each atom has seven planes of being, or 
existence, we are taught, f 

— the sub-planes, as we have been calling them, of 
each great plane. 

On the three lower planes of His evolving realm 
the planetary Logos establishes seven globes or 
worlds, which for convenience sake, following the 
received nomenclature, we will call globes A, B, C, 
D, E, F, G. These are the 

Seven small wheels revolving, one giving birth to the other, 
spoken of in Stanza vi. of the Book of Dzyan : 

He builds them in the likeness of older wheels, placing them 
on the imperishable centres. 

*See in Chapter I., on "The Physical Plane." the statement 
on the evolution of matter. 
\ Secret Doctrine^ i.. pp. 166 and 174. 


3l6 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

Imperishable, since each wheel not only gives 
birth to its successor, but is also itself reincarnated 
at the same centre, as we shall see. 

These globes may be figured as disposed in three 
pairs on the arc of an ellipse, with the middle globe 
at the midmost and lowest point ; for the most part 
globes A and G — the first and seventh — are on the 
arflpa levels of the mental plane ; globes B and F — 
the second and sixth — are on the rfipa levels; globes 
C and E — the third and fifth — are on the astral plane ; 
globe D — the fourth — is on the physical plane. 
These globes are spoken of by H. P. Blavatsky as 
" graduated on the four lower planes of the world of 
formation,"* i,e.y the physical and astral planes, and 
the two subdivisions of the mental (rupa and arupa). 
They may be figured : f 


ar^ipa ( A ) ( ^ i archetypal 


© 

rftpa ( ^y C^y 


creative or 
intellecttial 


0© 


astral ( C If E J formative 


physical V ^ J physical 


''' Secret Doctrine, i., p. 176. 

t See p. 221 of the Secret Doctrine ; the note is important, 
that the archetypal world is not the world as it existed in the 


THE PLANETARY CHAIN. 317 

This is the typical arrangement, but it is modified 
at certain stages of evolution. These seven globes 
form a planetary ring or chain, and — if for a mo- 
ment we regard the planetary chain as a whole, as, 
so to say, an entity, a planetary life or individual — 
that chain passes through seven distinct stages in its 
evolution; the seven globes as a whole form its 
planetary body, and this planetary body disinte- 
grates and is re-formed seven times during the plan- 
etary life. The planetary chain has seven incarna- 
tions, and the results obtained in one are handed on 
to the next. 

Every such chain of worlds is the progeny and creation of 
another lower and dead chain — its reincarnation, so to say.* 

These seven incarnations \ make up " the planetary 

evolution," the realm of a planetary Logos. As 

there are seven planetary Logoi, it will be seen that 

seven of these planetary evolutions, each distinct 

from the others, make up the solar system. { In an 

occult commentary this coming forth of the seven 

Logoi from the one, and of the seven successive 

chains of seven globes each, is described : 

From one light seven lights ; from each of the seven, seven 
times seven. g 

Taking up the incarnations of the chain, the man- 
mind of the planetary Logos, but the first model which was 
made. 

* Secret Doctrine, i., p 176. 

f Technically called "manvantaras." 

JMr. Sinnett calls these "seven schemes of evolution." 

^Secret Doctrine ^ !., p. 147. 


3l8 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

vantaras, we learn that these also are subdivisible 
into seven stages; a wave of life from the planetary 
Logos is sent round the chain, and seven of these 
great life-waves, each one technically spoken of as 
"a round," complete a single manvantara. Each 
globe has thus seven periods of activity during a 
manvantara, each in turn becoming the field of 
evolving life. 

Looking at a single globe we find that during the 
period of its activity seven root-races of a humanity 
evolve on it, together with six other non-human 
kingdoms interdependent on each other. As these 
seven kingdoms contain forms at all stages of evolu- 
tion, as all have higher reaches stretching before 
them, the evolving forms of one globe pass to an- 
other to carry on their growth when the period of 
activity of the former globe comes to an end, and go 
on from globe to globe to the end of that round ; 
they further pursue their course round after round 
to the close of the seven rounds or manvantaras; 
they once again climb onward through manvantara 
after manvantara till the end of the reincarnations 
of their planetary chain is reached, when the results 
of that planetary evolution are gathered up by the 
planetary Logos. Needless to say that scarcely any- 
thing of this evolution is known to us; only the 
salient points in the stupendous whole have been 
indicated by the Teachers. 

Even when we come to the planetary evolution in 
which our own world is a stage, we know nothing 
of the processes through which its seven globes 


ACTIVITY AND SLEEP. 3 10 

evolved during its first two manvantaras; and of its 
third, man vantara we only know that the globe which 
is no5,v our moon was globe D of that planetary 
chain. This fact, however, may help us to realize 
more clearly what is meant by these successive rein- 
carnations of a planetary chain. The seven globes 
which formed the lunar chain passed in due course 
through their sevenfold evolution ; seven times the 
life-wave, the Breath of the planetary Logos, swept 
round the chain, quickening in turn each globe into 
life. It is as though that Logos in guiding His 
kingdom turned His attention first to globe A, and 
thereon brought into successive existence the in- 
numerable forms that in their totality make up a 
world ; when evolution had been carried to a certain 
point. He turned His attention to globe B, and 
globe A slowly sank into a peaceful sleep. Thus 
the life-wave was carried from globe to globe, until 
one round of the circle was completed by globe G 
finishing its evolution; then there succeeded a 
period of rest,* during which the external evolution- 
ary activity ceased. At the close of this period, ex- 
ternal evolution recommenced, starting on its second 
round and beginning as before on globe A. The 
process is repeated six times, but when the sev- 
enth, the last round, is reached, there is a change. 
Globe A, having accomplished its seventh life- 
period, gradually disintegrates, and the imperisha- 
ble laya centre state supervenes; from that, at the 
dawn of the succeeding manvantara a new globe A 

•Technically called a pralaya. 


320 THE ANXIENT WISDOU, 

is evolved— like a new body — in which the "princi- 
ples" of the preceding planet A take up their abode. 
This phrase is only intended to convey the idea of a 
relation between globe A of the first manvantara 
and globe A of the second; the nature of that con- 
nection remains hidden. 

Of the connection between globe D of the lunar 
manvantara — our moon — and globe D of the terrene 
manvantara — our earth — we know a little more, and 
Mr. Sinnett has given a convenient summary of the 
slender knowledge we possess in The System to 
which we belong. He says: 

The new earth nebula was developed round a centre bear- 
ing pretty much the same relation to the dying planet that the 
centres of the earth and moon bear to one another at present. 
But in the nebulous condition this aggregation of matter occu- 
pied an enormously greater volume than the solid matter of 
the earth now occupies. It stretched out in all directions so 
as to include the old planet in its fiery embrace. The temper- 
ature of a new nebula appears to be considerably higher than 
any temperatures we are acquainted with, and by this means 
the old planet was superficially heated afresh in such a man- 
ner that all atmosphere, water, and volatilizable matter upon 
it was brought into the gaseous condition and so became 
amenable to the new centre of attraction set up at the centre of 
the new nebula. In this way the air and seas of the old planet 
were drawn over into the constitution of the new one, and thus 
it is that the moon in its present state is an arid, glaring 
mass, dry and cloudless, no longer habitable, and no longer 
required for the habitation of any physical beings. When 
the present manvantara is nearly over, during the seventh 
round, its disintegration will be completed, and the matter 
which it still holds together will resolve into meteoric dust,* 

*0p, cit.^ p. iQ. 


LUNAR AND SOLAR PITRIS. 32 1 

In the third volume of the Secret Doctrine^ in 
which are printed some of the oral teachings given 
by H. P. Blavatsky to her more advanced pupils, it 
is stated: 

At the beginning of the evolution of our globe, the moon 
was much nearer to the earth, and larger than it is now. It 
has retreated from us, and shrunk much in size. (The moon 
gave all her principles to the earth.) ... A new moon will 
appear during the seventh round, and our moon will finally 
disintegrate and disappear.* 

Evolution during the lunar manvantara produced 
seven classes of beings, technically called Fathers, 
or Pitris, since it was they who generated the beings 
of the terrene manvantara. These are the Lunar 
Pitris of the Secret Doctrine, More developed than 
these were two other classes — variously called Solar 
Pitris, Men, Lower Dhyanis — too far advanced to 
enter on the terrene evolution in its early stages, 
but requiring the aid of later physical conditions 
for their future growth. The higher of these 
two classes consisted of individualized animal-like 
beings, creatures with embryonic souls, /.^., they 
had developed the causal body; the second were 
approaching its formation. Lunar Pitris, the first 
class, were at the beginning of that approach, 
showing mentality, while the second and third had 
only developed the kamic principle. These seven 
classes of Lunar Pitris were the product the lunar 
chain handed on for further development to the ter- 
rene, the fourth reincarnation of the planetary 

* Op, cit, . p. 562. 

31 


322 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

chain. As Monads — ^with the mental principle pres- 
ent in the first, the kamic principle developed in 
the second and third classes, this germinal in the 
fourth, only approaching the germ stage in the still 
less developed fifth, and imperceptible in the sixth 
and seventh — these entities entered the earth-chain, 
to ensoul the elemental essence and the forms shaped 
by the Builders.* 

The nomenclature adopted by me is that of the 
Secret Doctrine, In the valuable paper by Mrs. Sin- 
nett and Mr. Scott-Elliot on the Lunar Pitris, H. P. 
B.'s "Lower Dhyanis," that incarnate in the third 
and fourth rounds, are taken as the first and second 
classes of Lunar Pitris; their third class is therefore 
H.P. B.'s first class, their fourth class her second, 
and so on. There is no diflEerence in the statement 
of facts, only in nomenclature, but this diflEerence of 
nomenclature may mislead the student if it be not 
explained. As I am using H. P. B. 's nomenclature, 
my fellow-students of the London Lodge and the 
readers of their " Transaction" will need to remem- 
ber that my first is their third, and so on sequen- 
tially. 

The " Builders" is a name including innumerable 
Intelligences, hierarchies of beings of graduated 
consciousness and power, who on each plane carry 
out the actual building of forms. The higher direct 

*H. P. Blavatsky, in the Secret Doctrine^ does not include 
those whom Mrs. Sinnett calls first- and second-class Pitris in 
the ** monads from the lunar chain" ; she takes them apart as 
•'men/ as "Dhyftn Chohans." Compare i., pp. 197, 207, 211. 


DESCENDING AND ASCENDING. 323 

and control, while the lower fashion the materials 
after the models provided. And now appears the 
use of the successive globes of the planetary chain. 
Globe A is the archetypal world, on which are built 
the models of the forms that are to be elaborated 
during the round ; from the mind of the planetary 
Logos the highest Builders take the archetypal 
Ideas, and guide the Builders on the arupa levels as 
they fashion the archetypal forms for the round. 
On globe B these forms are reproduced in varied 
shapes in mental matter by a lower rank of Builders, 
and are evolved slowly along different lines, until 
they are ready to receive an infiltration of denser 
matter ; then the Builders in astral matter take up the 
task, and on globe C fashion astral forms, with details 
more worked out ; when the forms have been evolved 
as far as the astral conditions permit, the Builders 
of globe D take up the task of form-shaping on the 
physical plane, and the lowest kinds of matter are 
thus fashioned into appropriate types, and the forms 
reach their densest and most complete condition. 

From this middle point onwards the nature of the 
evolution somewhat changes ; hitherto the greatest 
attention had been directed to the building of the 
form; on the ascending arc the chief attention is 
directed to using the form as a vehicle of the evolv- 
ing life and on the second half of the evolution on 
globe D, and on globes E and F the consciousness 
expresses itself first on the physical and then on the 
astral and lower mental planes through the equiva- 
lents of the forms elaborated on the descending arc. 


324 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

On the descending arc the Monad impresses itself as 
best it may on the evolving forms, and these impres- 
sions appear vaguely as impressions, intuitions, and 
so on; on the ascending arc the Monad expresses 
itself through the forms as their inner ruler. On 
globe G the perfection of the round is reached, the 
Monad inhabiting and using as its vehicles the 
archetypal forms of globe A. 

During all these stages the Lunar Pitris have 
acted as the souls of the forms, brooding over them, 
later inhabiting them. It is on the first-class Pitris 
that the heaviest burden of the work falls during 
the first three rounds. The second- and third-class 
Pitris flow into the forms worked up by the first ; 
the first prepare these forms by ensouling them for 
a time and then pass on, leaving them for the ten- 
ancy of the second and third classes. By the end of 
the first round the archetypal forms of the mineral 
world have been brought down, to be elaborated 
through the succeeding rounds, till they reach their 
densest state in the middle of the fourth round. 
" Fire" is the " element" of this first round. 

In the second round the first-class Pitris continue 
their human evolution, only touching the lower 
stages as the human foetus still touches them to-day, 
while the second class, at the close of the round, 
have reached the incipient human stage. The great 
work of the round is bringing down the archetypal 
forms of vegetable life, which will reach their per- 
fection in the fifth round. "Air" is the second 
round " element. " 


ARRIVAL OF SOLAR PITRIS. 325 

In the third round the first-clajs Pitri becomes 
definitely human in form ; though the body is jelly- 
like and gigantic, it is yet, on globe D, compact 
enough to begin to stand upright; he is ape-like 
and is covered with hairy bristles. The third-class 
Pitris reach the incipient human stage. Second- 
class solar Pitris make their first appearance on 
globe D in this round, and take the lead in human 
evolution. The archetypal forms of animals are 
brought down to be elaborated into perfection by 
the end of the sixth round, and " water" is the char- 
acteristic " element. " 

The fourth round, the middle one of the seven 
that make up the terrene manvantara, is distin- 
guished by bringing to globe A the archetypal forms 
of humanity, this, round being as distinctively hu- 
man as its predecessors were respectively animal, 
vegetable, and mineral. Not till the seventh round 
will these forms be all fully realized by humanity, 
but the possibilities of the human form are mani- 
fested in archetypes in the fourth. " Earth" is the 
" element" of this round, the densest, the most ma- 
terial. The first-class solar Pitris may be said to 
hover round globe D more or less in this round dur- 
ing its early stages of activity, but they do not defi- 
nitely incarnate until after the third great outpour- 
ing of life from the planetary Logos in the middle 
of the third race, and then only slowly, the number 
increasing as the race progresses, and multitudes 
incarnating in the early fourth race. 

The evolution of humanity on our earth, globe D, 


326 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

offers in a strqngly marked form the continual 
sevenfold diversity already often alluded to. Seven 
races of men had already shown themselves in the 
third round, and in the fourth these fundamental 
divisions became very clear on globe C, where seven 
races, each with sub-races, evolved. On globe D 
humanity begins with a First Race — usually called 
a Root- Race — at seven different points, " seven of 
them, each on his lot.** ♦ These seven types side by 
side, not successive — make up the first root-race, 
and each again has its own seven sub-races. From 
the first root-race — ^jelly-like amorphous creatures — 
evolves the second root-race with forms of more 
definite consistency, and from it the third, ape-like 
creatures that become clumsy gigantic men. In the 
middle of the evolution of this third root-race, called 
the Lemurian, there come to earth — from another 
planetary chain, that of Venus, much farther ad- 
vanced in its evolution — members of its highly 
evolved humanity, glorious Beings, often spoken of 
as Sons of the Fire, from Their radiant appearance, 
a lofty order among the Sons of Mind.f They take 
up Their abode on earth, as the Divine Teachers of 
the young humanity, some of them acting as chan- 
nels for the third out-pouring and projecting into 
animal man the spark of monadic life which forms 
the causal body. Thus the first, second, and third 
classes of Lunar Pitris become individualized — the 

* Book of Dzyan^ 13. Secret Doctrine^ ii. 
f M&nasaputra. This vast hierarchy of self-conscious Intelli- 
gences embraces many orders. 


THEN COMETH THE END. 32/ 

vast bulk of humanity. The two classes of solar 
Pitris, already individualized — the first ere leaving 
the lunar chain and the second later — form two low 
orders of the Sons of Mind ; the second incarnate in 
the third race at its middle point, and the first come 
in later, for the most part in the fourth race, the 
Atlantean. The fifth, or Aryan race, now leading 
human evolution, was evolved from the fifth sub- 
race of the Atlantean, the most promising families 
being segregated in Central Asia, and the new rage- 
type evolved, under the direct superintendence of a 
Great Being, technically called a Manu. Emerging 
from Central Asia the first sub-race settled in India, 
south of the Himalayas, and in their four orders of 
teachers, warriors, merchants, and workmen,* be- 
came the dominant race in the vast Indian peninsula, 
conquering the fourth-race and third-race nations 
who then inhabited it. 

At the end of the seventh race of the seventh 
round, /.^., at the close of our terrene manvantara, 
our chain will hand on to its successor the fruits of 
its life ; these fruits will be perfected divine men,. 
Buddhas, Manus, Chohans, Masters, ready to take 
up the work of guiding evolution under the direction 
of the planetary Logos, with hosts of less evolved 
entities of every grade of consciousness, who still 
need physical experience for the perfecting of their 
divine possibilities. The fifth, sixth, and seventh 
manvantaras of our chain are still in the womb of 
the future after this fourth one has closed, and then 
* Brfthmanas, Kshattryas, Vaishyas, and Shudras. 


T.ys's 


328 THE ANCIENT WISDOM. 

the planetary Logos will gather up into Himself all 
the fruits of evolution, and with his children enter 
on a period of rest and bliss. Of that high state we 
cannot speak; how at this stage of our evolution 
could we dream of its unimaginable glory ; only we 
dimly know that our glad spirits shall " enter into 
the joy of the Lord," and, resting in Him, shall see 
stretching before them boundless ranges of sublime 
life and love, heights and depths of power and joy, 
limitless as the One Existence, inexhaustible as the 
One that is. 


Peace to all Beings. 


INDEX. 


Abstract ideas ^ iii, 217 

Accidents 243, 265 

Adi-Buddha 15 

Affections the root of moral evolution 216 

Agni 66 

Ain Soph 17 

Ameshaspends 20, 22. 184 

Amitabha 14, 15 

Amun-Ra, hymn to 18 

Ancient of the Ancients 17 

Angels 17, 28, 114, 115 

Animal kingdom 49, 68» 190-193, 281 

Antenatal life 205 

Archangels 21, 28. 114 

Archetypes 316, 323, 324, 325 

Armaiti 22 

Aryan race 6, 11, 327 

Astral body. . . . 68-70, 72-81, 87, 89, 96. 97, 104, 122, 123, 161, 

176, 191, 202,203. 222-224, 252, 253, 260, 266. 

281, 287. 301, 323 

" energy 247, 252-254* 256 

plane, the 57~8o, 117, 186, 223, 247, 302 

vision 59 

Atlantis 5, 7 

Atoms 42. 43. 44. 57. 109. no, 187, 315 

A^armazd (Ahura-Mazda, Harmazd). 19, 20, 21, 22, 31, 184 

Aura, health 50, 51 

Auric egg 129, 168, 169 

Avalokiteshavra 15 


i« 
«« 


330 INDE3L 

Barribus bbtwbkn souls. 117 

Basis of religions, common 2, 4 

Body, leaying the 36, 228, 229 

Brahmi 13, 15. iii 

Brahman 11, 12, 13. i4f 42. 164, 276 

Br&hmanical religion ii» 14, 15. 27 

Brahma- Vidy& i 

Breath, the divine 9t 30. 3i3> 3^9 

Brotherhood of Man 170-174 

*• of Teachers... 3. 29. 37, 39. 7i. 89. 91. ii9. 152. 

156, z68. 194. 210, 272, 283, 294-296, 326 

Buddhas 327 

Buddha, the 15 

Buddhi 165 

Buddhic body 167, 169, 176, 225, 290 

" plane 36, 117, 165-168, 171, 175, 287 

•* state 36. 166 

Buddhism 14.15 

Buddhist, 4, iii. 112. 114. 137, 168, 179. 180. 302. 305, 306, 307 

Buddhist and Gnostic thought 26 

" Greek " 25 

Builders, the 48. 314, 322, 323 

Building a kosmos 31 1-328 

Causal BODY 131, 132. 133, 139. 146, 176, 193, 196. 201, 

203, 225, 326 

Chakras 74, 76, 78 

Chenresi 15 

Child-life 206, 207 

China 5 

Chinese Buddhism 15 

" religion 9 

Christian, 4. 18, 27, 32. loi, 112. 114. 115. 137, 160, 157, 184, 275 

Chwang-tze 9. 11 

Clairvoyance 54 

Colors 73, 76, 78. 102, 112. 114. 223 

Common basis of religions 2, 4 


INDEX. 331 

Concealed mystery, the 8 

Conscience 215 

Continuity of forms 182, 200 

** of life 182-184. 200 

Conversions 262, 263 

Crimes, inevitable 261 

Death 56. 85, 86, 87. 89, 158, 199, 25a 

Dense physical body 49-56, 85, 205, 219-221, 266, 267 

Desire-energies 247, 252-254 

Desires 2ii-2i5« 247, 251-254, 263. 268, 269 

Devachan 58, 137-162, 268 

" stay in 138, 139, 199 

Devas 66, 114, 137 

Dhruvam, the 87 

Disciple 72, 119, 156, 157. 223, 226, 294-308 

Discipleship, qualifications for 226, 296-301 

Divine Ruler of the Golden Gate 6 

Divine Wisdom, the i, 4 

Dreams : 55, 76, 77, 99, 221, 222, 228 

Effect of belief in Karma 273. 274 

** of environment 200, 201 

Egypt 18 

Elemental essence 48, 59, 60, 73, 113, 114 

" kingdoms . . ^ 48, 114, 184-186 

Elementals, artificial 60-65, 115 

building 275 

desire 69, 72. 73 

natural 65-69, 75, 95, 283, 284 

Elements 45. 46, 67, 114. 324, 325 

Etheric double 49-56, 68. 85, 87, 187, 205, 221, 266. 267 

Evolution and reincarnation 179. i8c 

*• in Devachan 145 

•• monadic 184-193, 280, 281 

'* why possible 40. 44* 163, 240, 241 

Factors in reincarnation 202-205 


«• 


332 INDEX. 

Fairies 67 

Family likeness 235 

Fetters, casting away 305-308 

Fifth race 6,11 

''Form* and "formless* levels of m&nasic plane no, iii, 

139. 153. 307 

•* Formless" levels 128, 133, 137, 154-157. 158, 184, 218 

Foorth race 5 

Freeing soul from body 36, 228, 229 

Freewill and necessity 262 

Friends in heaven, our 143, 144 

Fundamental truths of religion 5 

Gbnius 108, 232. 233 

God manifested as unity 5, 7, 8, 12, 17, 22, 41, 313 

duality 5. 7. 8, 15, 17. 20. 21, 22, 41 

•* trinity... 5, 8, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17. 18, 22, 41 

Gods of the elements 66 

Greek and Buddhist thought 25 

" Gnostic " 26 

Hindu " 25 


«( «( «« 


«« «« 


Hamilton, Sir Wiluam, as child 233, 234 

Heavens 100-102, 284, 285 

Hebrew 17, 18, 20, 32, 166 

Hells 83, 84, 92-97 

Heredity 183, 235, 266, 267 

Hindu 4. 12, 13, 15. 25. 30, 66, 83, 87, iii, 112. 114. 137, 

164, 166, 168, 275, 285, 302. 305, 306. 307. 327 

•* and Greek thought 25 

Holy Spirit 27, in 

Horus 18 

Hostility of elemental world 65, 66 

Illusion in Devachan 139-144 

Illusory " I"s 132, 133, 160 

Individuality 161, 192, 193, 308 

Indra 66 


INDEX. 333 

Infant prodigies 233, 234 

Initiates 3, 6, 7, 70, 71. 119, 156 

Initiations 304-307 

Instinct 192 

KAma = 69, 81, 82, 175 

Ktoadevas 69 

Ktoaloka 58, 83-106. 137, 146, 148 

" divisions of 91-103 

** stay in 83, 89, 199 

Kd.ma-Manas 121, 175, 176 

Ktoariipa 69 

Karma 15. 128. 243-274, 275, 277. 286, 306. 315 

collective 248, 264, 265 

ending of 268-273 

" individual 248, 251, 264, 267. 270 

*• Lords of 204, 205, 259, 265, 267 

" three kinds of 248, 259-263 

Karmic causes, three kinds of 247, 249-255 

Kosmos, building a 311-328 

** definition of 311 

KoYuan 6 

Kshiti 66 

Law inviolable 243-246 

Levitation 66 

Liberation, longing for 269, 292-294, 300 

Life-waves 38, 44, 48, 59. 318 

Linking of vehicles 226, 227 

Lipika, the 266, 314 

Logoi 19. 22. 164, 184, 313, 317 

Logos II, 15. 16, 20. 23, 27, 38.40, 41. 42, 44. 48, 52, 128, 

157. 163, 168. 170. 175, 181, 200, 218, 275-277, 287, 

288. 311, 314, 315 

** first 14. 17, 19. 22, 27, 41 

" planetary 315, 317. 318, 319. 323, 325, 327, 328 

•* second 18, 21, 22, 27, 41 

" third 15, 22, 27, 41. III. 165 


334 INDEX. 

Lotus 13. 15 

Lower Dhyftnis 321, 322, 325, 327 

•* QoAtemary 81 

Lunar Pitris 321, 322, 324-326 

Mahaeajas 266, 314 

Mahommedans 114, 137, 229 

Mftnasaputra 193, 326, 327 

Mandjusri 15,111 

Man's ascent 291-310 

Masters 3, 37, 39. 71, 72, 89. 106. 116, 119, 152, 156, 157, 168, 

183, 210. 2i6» 223. 263, 272, 283, 294-296, 300-306, 

309. 310, 327 

M&y& 42, 276 

M&y&vlrfipa 115 

Mediums 55, 66, 91, 98, 100, loi, 102 

Memory 123, 128, 145, 190, 208, 212, 225, 236-240, 254 

Mental atmosphere 63-65 

•* attributes, the six 297-301 

" bodies 122-127, 130, 137, 139, 153, 154, 160. 176, 196, 197, 

202, 203, 223-225, 251, 260-266 

" energies 247, 250-252, 256 

" images . 209, 211, 217, 227, 250-252 

'• plane, 107-136, 117, 158, 175. 217, 223, 247. 286. 287, 323 

Mesmeric energy 51 

Mineral kingdom 49, 68, 187, 188, 280, 281 

Mithra ^ 22 

Monad, the.... 48, 49, 52, 59,68, 114, 164, 168, 175, 181, 184- 

196, 280-282, 290, 308, 324 

Monads 322 

Monadic evolution 184-193, 280. 281 

Mongolian 6, 7 

Moon 319-321 

Motive 248, 256-258, 288 

Nature-spirits 65-69 

Necessity and freewill 262 

Neo-platonic schools. 33, 35, 36 


INDEX. 335 

Nepaulese Buddhism 15 

Nirv&na 16. 170, 308, 309 

Nirv&nic consciousness 169, 170, 309 

" plane 117, 168, 169, 170, 175 

Occultists, white and black 71 

One Existence, the 5, 11, 14, 19, 23, 28. 42, 328 

One Life, the 5, 8, 81, 176, 313 

One Reality, the 5, 7 

One, the 8, 9, 11, 14, 24, 25, 40, 164, 217, '218, 328 

Orphic system 23 

Osiris-Ani 19 

Osiris-Isis 18 

PadmapAni , 15 

Parsis, modem 22 

Path, probationary, the 296-303 

" the 291-310 

Pavana. .., 66 

Personality 160, 161, 190, 192, 213, 221 

Physical body. .. . 49-56, 68, 85, 87, 130, 161, 176, 191. 202, 

203, 204, 219-222, 226, 227, 260, 266, 267 

" energies 247. 254, 255 

Pitris, lunar 321, 322, 324-326 

" solar 321, 322, 325, 327 

Plane, astral 58-82, 117. 186, 223, 247, 302 

buddhic 36, 117, 165-168, 171, 175, 287 

definition of 47 

mental.... 107-136, 117, 158, 175, 217, 223, 247, 286, 

287. 323 

" nirv^nic 117,168,169,170,175 

" physical 40-56, 247, 251, 258. 287, 323 

Planes of universe 42, 43, 248, 255, 256, 258 

Planetary chain 315-318, 319. 323, 326, 327 

Prftna 50, 81, 85, 87, 175, 176, 222 

Prayers, protective 61, 106 

Predestination 230 

Pre-ezistence of the soul 38 


«« 

(i 


a^^friPP^"'"-^-^ — 


336 INDEX. 

Pretaloka 83 

Principles 81, 175-178 

Psychics 71, 72 

Purification by vibrations 51, 75, 77 

Pythagorean school 25, 33-35 

Qualifications for DisaPLBSHip 296-301 

Ra 18 

Real and unreal 269, 267 

Reality of devachanic life 139-144 

** the One 5,7 

Regions of Devachan 149-157 

•• ofKtoaloka 84,85 

Reincarnation 5, 11, 14, 15, 17, 19,22, 24, 28, 72, 128, 148, 

158-160, 162, 179-241, 186, 243, 268, 271, 273, 

303. 304. 306 

*• proofs of 229-240 

Root-races 318, 325, 326, 327 

Round, a 318, 327 

Sacrifice, definition of 275, 276 

law of 275-290 

lessons in .'.... 283-286 

Logos, of the 275-277 

practice of 288-290 

suffering and 278-280 

Sankhyan and Gnostic systems 27 

Savage, mental state of 209 

Self, the 5, 12. 13, 36, 71. 107, 129, 132, 133, 141, 163, 164, 

166, 168, 172, 176. 181, 250, 290, 309 

Shell 104-106 

Shells, concentric. . . j 87, 88. 91 

Shiva 12, 13. 15 

Sleep 55, 72, 75, 76, 77, 78 

Solar body, the 167 

" pitris 321.322,325,327 

Sons of Mind 193, 194. 210, 326 


4i 
«( 
t( 
«t 
«t 


INDEX. 337 

Sons of the Fire 326 

Soul 12, 13, 14, 17, 19, 23, 28, 83,96, 99, loo. I45» 148. 

153-156, 158, 165, 175, 176, 194, 196-202, 210, 219, 
228-231, 249, 260, 266, 268, 291, 301, 304 

Souls, earthbound 98 

Spiritual Intelligences.... 5, 9, 35, 48, 114, 170, 194, 204, 266, 

313, 314. 322. 323 

Stages of consciousness, intellectual 216-218 

" " •* sensational 20&-212 

•* of struggle 212-216 

" of unity 218 

Students in k^aloka 103 

Subdivisions of matter 45-47, 58, 109, no 

Suicide (sudden death) 89-91 

Sun, life-currents from the 50 

" the , 311, 312 

Tao 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 

Teachers.... 3, 37, 39, 71, 72, 89, 106, 116, 119. 152, 156, 157, 

168, 183, 210, 216, 223, 263, 272, 283, 294-296, 

300-306,309, 310, 326, 327 

Tendencies 263 

Theosophical Society 173 

Theosophy 1,4, 37, 82 

Thinker, growth of the 196-202, 208-213 

the ....107, 108, 112, H5, 117, 118-121, 124, 127, 
128-136, 137, 141, 144, 146-148, 153, 160-162, 
165, 167, 196, 197, 202, 203, 206, 208, 209, 210, 

215-223, 225. 239, 240 

Thought-forms 60-65, 99t 112-114, 250-252 

Three worlds, the 158, 160, 269, 286, 292 

Toltec empire 7 

Triad 33 

Trimftrti 13, 14, 164 

Trinity, man a 5, 9. 164, 175. 193 

'* the manifested God a.... 5, 8, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17. 18. 

22, 23. 27, 184 


338 INDEX. 

Triviality, resnitsof 97. 98 

Tttranian 5, 7 

Twins, the pair of 90, 31. 22 

** likeness and nnlikeness between ...335 

UnIVSKSAL mind Ill 

VAcH 37 

Varuna S2, 66 

Vegetable kingdom 49. 68, 188-190, 380, 381 

Vegetables, sensitive 68 

Vehicles of consciousness 218-239 

Vibrations.... 51, 52, 53. 60, 74, 75, 77, 79, 105. 108, no. 112, 

118, I30, 121, 122, 125-127, 133, 134, 181, 219- 

222, 227, 248, 250 

Virtues, classification of 35 

Vishnu 13, 15 

Vivisectors 95, 96 

Vohfiman 22 

White and black occultists 71 

Will 212-216, 262 

Wraith, the 56 

YAtanA, the 87 

Young, Dr. , as child 233 

Zoroaster. (Zarathustra) 21 

Zoroastrianism 19, 21, 22 

Zoroastrians 114, 137, 184. 275 


> 


The Iximiwcr must return this iicm on or tvlorc 

the lust date stamped below . 1 ' 

piaceii a recall for this item, th. 

be notified of the need for an curiict inum. 

Non-receipt cf overdue notices does mot exempt 
the borrower fnmi overdue fines. 


Hanard College Widener library 
Cambridge. MA 02138 617-495.2413 


Please handl*' with care.
