Esoteric Christianity (Annie Besant, 1901)
==========================================================
Besant's 1901 Esoteric Christianity — the hidden side of the gospels; Theosophy's reading of Christian origins. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY


OR


THE LESSER MYSTERIES.


ANNIU liHSANT


The Theosophical Piihiyhliij^ Society

London and Brnaksh


FOREWORD.

The object of this book is to suggest
certuin lines of thought as to the deep
truths undeTlying Christi:mity, truths gene-
ratfy averlooked, and only too often denied.

The generous wish to share with all what
is precious, to sf)read broadcast priceless
truths, to shut out none from the illumina-
tiott of true knowleilge, has resulted in a
zeal without discretion that lias vulgarised
Christianity, and has presented its'teacliln^
in a form that often repels the heart apd
alie nat es the intell ect. Tlie command to
“ preacITthe Gospel to every creature —
though admittedly of doubtful authenticity
—has been interjireted as forbidding the
teaching of the Gnosis to a few, and has
apparently erased the less popular saying
of the same Great Teacher: " Give not
that which is holy unto the dogs, neither
cast ye your pearls before swine."*

‘ S. Mark xvi. 15. * S. Matt, vil. 6 . y’


viii. ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

This spurious sentimentality — which
refuses to recognise djje-Gbvious inequali¬
ties^ of intelligence and mora.lity, and
thereb^y reduces the teaching of the highly
developed to the level attainable by the
least evolved, sacrificing the higher to
the lower in a way that injures both—
had no place in the virile common sense
of the early Christians. S. Clement of
Alexandria says quite bluntly, after alluding
to the Mysteries : “ Even now I fear, as it
is said, ‘ to cast the pearls before swine, lest
they tread them underfoot, and turn and
rend us.’ For it is difficult to exhibit the
really pure and transparent words respect¬
ing the true Light to swinish and untrained
hearers.”'

If true knowledge, the Gnosis, is again
to form a part of Christian teachings, it
can only be under the old restrictions, and
the idea of levelling down to th e edacities
of the least developed rnu st ^ Be" Sefini^ly
sui TCnd ered. Only by teaching above the
grasp of the little evolved can the way be
opened up for a restoration of arcane

'Clarke’s Ante-Nicene Christian Library, Vol. IV.
Clement of Alexandria. Stromata, bL I., chi xii.


IX.


knowledjfc, and the study of the Lesser
Mysteries must precede that of the
Greater. The (ireater will never be’
[>ubliHlied throuj^fli the printing-press ; they
can only Ik: p;iven by Teacher to pupils
“ from month to ear." But the I.e.sseti
Mysteries, (he partial unveilinvr of deep
truths, can even now be restored, and such
a volume as the present is intended to
outline th<*s<', ami to .show the nature of
the teachiuj^s vvhicli have to be mastered.
Where <mly liints are ^iven, «[uiet medita¬
tion on ih<' truths hintetl at will cause their
outlim's to b(s'om<' visibh-, and the clearer
light obtained l)y continued meditation
will gratlually show ihetn mure fully, h'ori
meditation tpiiets the lower mind, ever
engaged in thinking alxjut external objects,
and when the lower mind is tratiquil then
only can it be illuminated by the Spiriti
Knowledge of .spiritual truths must be
thus obtained, from within and not from
without, from tlte divine Spirit who.se
temple we are' and not from an external
Teacher. These things are “spiritually
discerned ” by that divine indwelling Spirit,

• I. Cor. lit. 16.


X. ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

that “mind of Christ,” whereof speaks the
great Apostle,’ and that inner light is shed
upon the lower mind.

This is the way of the Divine Wisdom,
the true Theosophy. It is not, as some
think, a diluted version of Hinduism, or
Buddhism, or Taoism, or of any special
I religion. It is Esoteric Christian
truly as it Is Esoteric Buddhism^

1 beIon^s~equalIy to aU religions, exclusivefy
I to none. This is'T^ source of the sug¬
gestions made in this little volume, for the
helping of those who seek the Light—
that “true Light which lighteth every
man that cometh into the world,”” though
most have not yet opened their eyes to it.
It does not bring the Light. It only
says: “Behold the Light!” For thus
have we heard. It appeals only to the few
who hunger for more than the exoteric,
teachings give them. For those who are
fully satisfied with the exoteric teachings,
it is not intended ; for why should bread
be forced on those who are not hungry ?
For those who hunger, may it prove bread,
and not a stone.



C O N 'I' 11 NTS.


FoREwrmi).vi.

Cmapter L

I'he IIu-iden Side or Religions . i
CuAnrn \h

The Iliobi N Hide or CnkisTiANitv . 36

Chaeteh IIL

The Hidden Side or (..j-nustiANiTY . 69

((‘am/udtd)

(.'iiafter IV;

l‘iiE Historical Jehus . . .iso

Chapter V. ’/.i' *^' 1 ^

^ t ' • / it ’f

THK MVTHIC *!' / !>' I4S

Chaptkr VL

This Mystic Christ . . . .170

Chapter VII.

The Atonement . . . -193

Chapter VIII.

Resurrection and Ascension . .331


XIL


CONTKKTS.


Chapter IX.

The Trinity.

Chapter X.

Prayer.

Chapter XI.

'The KoRtHVENEss ny Sins . . .

Chapter XIL

Sacraments . .

Chapter XIII.

Sacraments ((vniinued) . .

Chapter XIV.

Revki.ation ....
x\ETERWORI) . . .... ,VHfi

jg»H


Index


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


Chapter I.

THE HIDDEN SIDE OF RELIGIONS.

Many, perhaps most, who see the title
of this book will at once traverse it,
and will deny that there is anything
valuable which can be rightly described as
“Esoteric Christianity.” There is a wide¬
spread , and withal a popular, idea tha
there is no such thing as an occult teaching
in connection with Christianity, and that
“The Mysteries,” whether Lesser or
Greater, were a purely Pagan institution.
The very name of “ The Mysteries of
Jesus,” so familiar in the ears of the
Christians of the first centuries, would
come with a shock of surprise on those of
their modern successors, and, if spoken as


2


KSOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


denoting a special and definite institution
in the Early Churcli, would cause ;p .smile
of ..incredulity. It has actually bet-n made
a matter of boast that Christianity has no
secrets, thal whatever it has to say it says
to all, and whatever it has to teach it
teaches to all. Its truths are supposed to
be so simple, that “a way-faring man.
though a fool, may not err tlu'rein," and
the “ simple Gospel" has ijccome' a stock
phrase.

It is necessary, therefore, to prove ch’arly
that in the Early Church, at least. Chris¬
tianity was no wliit l)ehind otlu-r great
religions in possessing a hidden side, and
that it guarded, as a priccle.ss treasure, the
secrets revealed only to a select few in its
Mysteries. But ere doing this it will be
well to consider the whole question of this
hidden side of religion.s. and to sec why
syh a sid e must exi.st if a religion Fs to
stron g a.nd_staSIe7~Tor~ tHus its exFstence
in Christianity will appear as a foregone
conclusion, and the references to it in the
writings of the Christian Fathers will
appear simple and natural instead of
surprising and unintelligible. As a his-


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF RELIGIONS. 3


torical fact, t he exist enc e of this, es otericisrti
is demonst rable ; but it may also be showia
that intellectuallyJt is Bjec^ssity. ^

The firsTquestion we have to answer is :
What is the object of religj'io ns ? They are
given to the woHTbyii^n wiser than the
masses of the people on whom they are
bestowed, and are intended to quicken
human evolution. In order to do this
effectively they must reach individuals and
influence them. Now aJl men^ a re not at
the same lev el of evoluti on, but evolution
rmgIrr^*Sgured as a rising, gradient, with
men stationed on it at every point. The
most .highly evolved are far above the
least evolved, both in intelligence andiJ
character; t he capac ity...alike to understand
a nd to stap~e . It is,

therefore, useless to give to all the same
religious teaching; that which would help
the intellectual man would be .entirely
unintelligible to the stupid, while that
which would throw the saint into ecstasy
would leave the criminal untouched. If.i ■
on the other hand, the teaching be suitable
to help the unintelligent, it is intolerably
crude and jejune to the philosopher, while


4


ESOTERIC CHRlSTlANrrv.


khat which redeems the criminal is utterly
|useless to the saint. Yet ail the types
|neecl religion, so that each may reach
'upward to a life higher than tliat which
he is leading, and no typt! or grade should
be sacrificed to any other. Religion mus t
jbe a s graduate d as evolutiott, else it Jiiils
its


Next comes the fjuestion : In wh.tt way
do religions seek to (piiclien litimatt
evolution ? Religions seek t<» evolve the
moral and intellectual natures, and to aid
the spiritual natun; to unfold itself.
Regarding man as a complex Infing. tlu'y
seek to meet him at every point of
his constitution, and therefore to bring
messages suitable for each, teachings
adequate to the most . <liverse hutnitn
needs. I'eachings must therefore be
adapted to each mind untl heart to which
they are tiddressed. If^u rtdi gititi does
qg.t isash .and master the mteTi r ge nce. ifJi
30; putiJ^JJild tlilL-SlUiitjons.

iJiaidkilecL n its objec t, so far us Tfic
P5r§Qfl.,addrcsse^_^^^^

Not only does it thu.s direct itself to the
intelligence and the emotions, but it seeks.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF RELIGIONS. 5


as said, to stimulate the unfoldmeiit of the
spiritual nature. It answers to that inner
impul se which exists in humanity, and
which is (.‘vcr pushing the race onwards.
For deeply within the heart of all—often
overlaiii by transitory conditions, often
sulimerged under pressing interests and
anxietieS“ihcre exists a continual seeking
after God. “ As th<; hart panteth after the
water-brooks, .so panteth"' humanity after
God. The search is sometimt;s checked
for a sjmcc, and the yearning seems to
disajipear. Phases recur in civili.sation
and in thought, wherein this cry of the
human S(>irit for the divine—.seeking its
.sourct! as water seeks its level, to Imrrow
a simile from Giordano Bruno—this yearn¬
ing of the hurnqn S{)irit for that which is
akin to it in the universe, of the part for
the whole, seems to be stilled, to have
vani.shed ; none the lc.ss does that yearning
reappear, and once more the same cry
rings out from the Spirit. Trampled onl
for a time, apparently destroyed, thoughl
the tendency may be, it rises again andj
again with inextinguishable persistence, if
'Psalms, xlii. i.

B


6


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


repeats itself again and again, no matter
how often it is silenced ; and it thus proves
itself to be an inherent tendency in human
nature, an ineradicable constituent thereof.
Those who declare triumphantly, “ Lo! it
is dead! ” find it facing them again with
undiminished vitality. Those who build
without allowing for it find their well-
constructed edifices riven as by an earth¬
quake. Those who hold it to be outgrown
find the wildest superstitions succeed its
denial. So much is it an integral part of
humanity, that man will have some answer
to his questionings; rather an answer that
is false, than none. If he cannot find
religious truth, he will take religious error
rather than no religion, and will accept the
crudest and most incongruous ideals rather
than admit that the ideal is non-existent.

' R eligion, then, meets this cravin g, and
taking hold of the constituent in l iuma n
nature that gives rise to it, trains it,
Is ^ngthens it . jurifies i t and guides it
[towards its proper ending^—the union of
he htiman Spirit with the divine, so “ that

r may be all in all.”’'

' 1 Cor. XV. 28.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF RELIGIONS. 7

The next question which meets us in
our enquiry .is: What is the source of
religion s ? To this question itwo answers
have been given in modern times—that of
the Comparative, M and that of

the Co'iftparative Religionists. Both base
their answers' on a common basis of
admitted facts. Research has indisputably
proved that t he religion s of the w orld are
markedly simila r,in t heir ma in te aching s.
in th eir possession,.. o.f. Founders who
display superhuman powers and extra¬
ordinary moral elevation, in^thfih^ejhica
precep ts, in thei r use qF.means, tQ ,.qQm?
i ntQ.J:ouch .jgith invisible worlds, and in the
symbols by which they express theii
leading beliefs. This similarity, amounting
in many, cases to identity, proves —
according to both the above schools—a
commonprigin.

But on the natur e of this common origin
t he two schools"'a re at issue. The Com¬
parative Mythologists contend that the
common origin is the common ie^norance.

^ ..* *"'"**'*1

and that the loftiest religious doctrines are
simply refined expressions of the crude
and barbarous guesses of savages, of


8


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


primitive men, regarding themselves and
their surroundings. Animisjpn. fetishism,
nature-worship, sun-worship — these are
the constituents of the primeval mud out
of which has grown the s{)lendi«l lily of
religion. A Krishna, a Buddha, a I.ao*tre.
a Jesus, are the highly civilise<l hut lineal
descendants of the whirling medicine-man
of the savage. God is a composite photo¬
graph of the innumerable Gods who are
the personifications of the forces of nature.
And so forth. It is all summed Uj» in the
phrase: Religions are branches from a
common trunk—human ig^tiptantic.

, The Comparative Religionists consider.
Ion the other hand, that ail religions

loriginat&Jmm thei ■t;c,ac|]i ngs of,.IJivitii;

i Me'n, who give out to the different naiion.s
/oTuie world, from time to time, such parts
of the fundamental verities of religion as
the people are capable of receiving,
teaching ever the stime morality, inculcating
the use of similar means, employing the
'Same significant symbols. TJhe. savage
reli gio ns — a nimis m and the rest ~ are
de getjfiiat iQps. the results of decadence,
disf^ed and dwarfed descendants of true


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF RELIGIONS. 9


religious beliefs. Sun-worship and pure
forms of nature-worship were, in their
day, noble religions, highly allegorical but
full of profound truth and knowledge.
The great Teachers — it is alleged by
Hindus, Buddhists, and by some Com¬
parative Rcligionist.s, such as 'rheosophists
—form an enduring Brotherhood of men
who have risen beyond humanity, who
appear at certain period.s to enlighten the
world, and who an: the spiritual guardians
of the human race. This view may be
summed up in the phrase : “ Religions are
branches from a common trunk—Divine
Wisdom.”

This Divine Wisdom is spoken of as
the Wisdom, the Gnosis, the Theosophia,
and some, in different ages of the world,
have so desired to emphasise their belief
in this unity of rdigion.s, that they have
preferred the eclectic name of 7'heosophist
to any narrower designation.

The relative value of the contentions of
these two opposed schools must be judged
by the cogency of the evidence put forth
by each. The appearance of a degenerate
form of a noble idea may closely resemble


lO


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


that of a refined prmiuct of a coarse iilea.
and the only method of dcci<ling l«’tween
degeneration and evolution \v«>uld lie the
examination, if possible, of intermeciiate
and remote ancestors. *rinL„jo'iclence
brought forward by l>elicvers in the
Wisdom i.s of this kind. They allege :
that the Founders of religions. ju<igecl by
the records of their teachings, vv«’rc far
above the level of average htimaniiy ; ihai
the Scriptures of religions contain moral
precepts, sublime ideals, jmeiical aspira¬
tions, profound philosophical statements,
which are not even approached in lH:auty
and elevation by later writings in the s;ime
religions—that i.s, that the old is higher
t han the new> instead of the new being
higher than the old; that no case can be
shown of the refining and improving
process alleged to be the source of current
religions, whereas many cases of degen¬
eracy from pure teachings can bt; adduced ;
that even among savages, if their religions
be carefully studied, many traces of lofty
ideas can be found, ideas which are
obviously above the productive capacity
of the savages themselves.


THK itinriKN sipk ok religions, ii


This Iasi idea has been worked out by
M r. Andrew Lanir. who—^judging by his
liook on The Making of Religion —should
b«; classed as a Coinparative Religionist
rather than as a Cloinj)arative Mythologist.
Me points to the existence of a common
tradition, which, he alleges, cannot have
beta! evolved by the savayc.s. . for them¬
selves, being men whose ordinary beliefs
are of the crtulest kind and whose minds
are little developed. He shows, under'
crude; lieliefs anti degraded views, loftjr
tniditions of :i sublime character, touching
the nature of the I^ivine Being and Hil
relations with men. 'riic deities who are,
worshippctl are. for the most part, thq
veriest devils, but behind, b(;yond all thesei
there is a dim but gloriou-s ovcr-archingi
Presence, seldom or never named, but
whispered of tis source of all, as powen
and love and goodness, too tender to’
awaken terror, too good to require suppli¬
cation. Such ideas manifestly cannot have f
been conceived by the savages among
whom they are found, and they remain as
eloquent witnesses of the revelations made!
by HOpie great Teacher—dim tradition of


12


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


whom is generally also discoverable—who
was a Son of the Wisdom, and itnijarieii
some of its teachings in a long bye-gotu* age.

The reason, and, indeed, the justifi¬
cation, of the view taken by the t om-
parative Mythologists is patent. I hey
found in every direction low forms of
religious belief, e.'cisting atnong savage
tribes. These were seen to ,ircomj>.iny
general lack of civilisation. Rergartlitig
civilised men as evolving from uncivilised,
what more natural than to regard civiliseti
religion as evolving from uncivilised.^ It
is the first obvious idea. Only lalttr and
deeper study can show th.it the s;iv;igcs
of to-day are not our ancestral types, but


are the degenerated offsprings oif great
civiliseT s toc ks of the pa.st, and that man
in his infancy was not left to grow Ujj
untrained, but was nursed and educated


by his elders, from whom he received his
first guidance alike in religion and civi¬
lisation. This view is being substantiated
by such facts as those dwelt on by Lang,
and will presently raise the question,
" Who were these elders, of whom tra.-
ditions are everywhere found ?*’


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF RELIGIONS. 13

Still pur.sHinj:^ our enquiry, we come next
to the qiK’stion : To what people were
religions given ? And here we come at
once to the difficulty with which every
Founder of a religion must deal, that
already spoken of as bearing on the
primary oliject of religion it.self, the
quickening of human evolution, with its
corollary that all graiics of evolving
humanity must be considered by Him.

Men are at every stage of evolution, from ||
the most liarbarous to tluj most developed;
men are found of lofty intelligence, buti t
also of the most unevolved mentality; in 1
one place there is a highly developed and i
complex civilisation, in another a crude
and .simple polity. Even within any given
civilLsation we find the most varied types*

—the most ignorant and the nio.st educated,!
the most thoughtful and the most careless,! ^
the most spiritual and the most brutal; yetw
each ong_jof. these types must .bg-Xfianhgd.ft-

.ea6h__must..„be helped in..

whe re he Is. If evolution be true, thi^^
difficulty is inevitable, and must be faced
and overcome by the divine Teacher, else
will HLs work be a failure. If man is


14


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


evolving as all around him is evolving,
• these differences of development, these
'varied grades of intelligence, must be
a characteristic oi humanity everywhere,
and must be provided for Tn” each of the

relimo^ns of the world’..

^We are thus brought face to face with
the position that we ca nnot have one and
the same religious teaching even for , a
single nat ionT stnrle ss for a single civilisa-
ton, or for the wh ole world. If there be
but one teaching, a large number of those
to whom it is addressed will entirely escape
its influence. If it be made suitable for
those whose intelligence is limited, whose
morality is elementary, whose perceptions
are obtuse, so that it may help and train
them, and thus enable them to evolve, it
will be a religion utterly unsuitable for
those men, living in the same nation, form-
ing part of the same civilisation, who have
keen and delicate moral perceptions, bright
and subde intelligence, . and evolving
spirituality. But if, on the other hand,
this latter class is to be helped, if intelli¬
gence is to be given a philosophy that it
can regard as admirable, if delicate moral


THF, HHinKN SIDE OK RKLKUONS. 1 5


perceptions are to be still further refined,
if the dawninj,r spiritual nature is to be
enabled to develojH' into the perfect day,
then the reli}i;ion will be so spiritual, so
intellectual, and so moral, that when it is
preached to the former class it will not
touch their minds or their hearts, it will be
to them a string of meaningless phrases,
incapable of arousing their latent intelli¬
gence, or of giving them any motive for
conduct which will hel() them to grow into
a purer morality.

Looking, then, at these f:icts concerning
religion, considering its object, its means,
its origin, the nature and varying needs of
the people to whom it is addressed,
recognising the evolution of spiritual,
intellectual, and moral faculties in man, and
the need of ettch man for such training as
is suitable for the sttige of evolution at
which he has arrived, we are led to tha /,
absolute necessity of a vari ed and trraduate cl
reli gious teachin g, such as will meet thesel 4 . }
d t3ercii^ne^d s"^nd~Teip_e ^^ man in h i.4

' I

There is yet another reason why esotericl
teaching is tlcsirable with respect to a|


certain class of triiihs. Ii is cmiticnily


** knowledge is power
mulgation of a ph


highly developed intellect


or it does not attract the ignorarii* who


deal with the constitution of nalurci


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF RELIGIONS. 17


intellect, but of unregulated desires, men
moved by separative instincts, seeking the
gain of their separate selves and careless
of the common good. They would be
attracted by the idea of gaining powers
which would raise them above the general
level, and place ordinary humanity at their
mercy, and would rush to acquire the
knowledge which exalts its possessors to a
superhuman rank. They would, by its
possession, become yet more selfish and
confirmed in their separateness, their pride
would be nourished and their sense of
aloofness intensified, and thus they would
inevitably be driven along the road which
leads to diabolism, the Left Hand Path
whose goal is isolation and not unioit
And they would not only themselves suffer
in their inner nature, but they would also
become a menace to Society, already
suffering sufficiently at the hands of men
whose intellect is more evolved than their
conscience. Hence arises t he necessity q|
withholding certain teacEmgs from ffio^
v ^p . i m^llv. as yet unfitted to receiy q
them ; and this necessity presses on ever#
Teacher who is able to impart such knowi


i8


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


ledge. He desires to give it to those who
will use the powers it confers for the
general good, for quickening human evolu¬
tion ; but he equally desires to be no party
to giving it to those who would use it for
their own aggrandisement at the cost of
others.

Nor is this a matter of theory only,
according to the Occult Records, which
give the details of the events alluded to in
Genesis vi. et seq. TTiis knowledge wa s,
i n those ancient time s and on the continent
of Atlantis, g iven without any ri^id con ¬
ditions as to the moral elevation, purity,
I'and unselfishness of the candidates. Those
who were intellectually qualified were
j taught, just as men are taught ordinary
f science in modern days. The publicity
I now so imperiously demanded was then
iven, with the result that men berarg e
iants in knowledge but also giants in evil,
till the earth groaned under her oppresfo^
nd the cry of a trampled humanity rang
iirough the worlds. Theji . came the des-

i tmction of Atla^tg the whelming of that
i^ast continent‘fceneath die waters of the
some particulars'of which are given


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF RELIGIONS.


in the Hebrew Scriptures in the story of
the Noachian cleiujje, and in the Hindu
Scriptures of the further East in the story
of Vuiva-svata Manu. ^

SJnce,_that oxpetience of. the

unpurifeh hands. to grasiTS^^
knowledge which is power, the grea
Te achers h ave / igid co nditi on s a ;

regards purity, ^ uiiseirishness,„ .an(rZseil


control on all candidates for such instrnc

. 1 ■' . . ■

Upn. They distinctly refuse to impart
loKJwledge of this kind to any who will
not consent to a rigid discipline, intended
to eliminate separateness of feeling and
interest. They measure the moral strength
of the candidate even more than his
intellectual development, for the teaching
itself will develope the intellect while it
puts a strain on the moral nature. Far
better that the Great Ones should be
^sailed by the ignorant for Their supposed


Bl


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF RELIGIONS. 21


tlxft.,uni verse, but only to conteinjilate and
comprehend nature and things.” ‘

This po.s!tion cannot be controverted
as reg ards the_ancjeot rel i gio ns. The
Mysteries of Egypt^ere the glory of that
ancient land, li.n3 the noble.st sons of
Greece, such as Plato, we nt to^ Sai’s and to
Thebe.s to be_ in itiated bv Eg yptian
Tea chers of Wisdo m. The Mithraic
Mysteries of the Persian s, the Orphic
and Bacchic Mysteries and the later
E ileusinia n semi-Mysteries of the Greeks,
the Mysteries of Samothrace, Scyth k.!
Chaldea, are familiar in name, at least, as|
houieHold words. P>en in the extremely
diluted form of the Eleusinian Mysteries,
their value is most highly praised by the
most eminent men of Greece, as Pindar.
Soph ocles, Isocrates, Plutarc h, an d Plato .
Plspecially were they regarded as useful
with regard to post-mortem existence, as
the Initiated learned that which ensured
his future happiness. Sopater further,
alleged that |ni£ikte^^
of the s oul wftlh the divineNature,_and t«

•Ante-Nicene Library, V6l. XIL Cteawftt on
Ai^cwacitia. Sirmaia^ bL V.,

C


22


E.SOTEKK- CHRISTIANITY.


the exoteric Hymn to Demetcr covert
references are made to the holy child,
lacchus, and to his death and resurrection,
as dealt with in the Mysteries.'

From lamblichu s. the j.jrcat theurgist of
the third and fourth centuries a.h., much
may be learned as to the object of the
Mysteries. Theurgy was magic, "the last
part of the sacerdotal science,"’ and was
practised in the Greater Mysteries, to
evoke the appearance of superior lieings.
The theory d»n which these Mysteries were
based may be very briefly thus stated :
There is One, prior to all htJings, immov¬
able, abiding in the solitude of His own
unity. From That arises the Supreme
God, the Self-begotten, the Good, the
Source of all things, the Root, the (»od of
Gods, the First Cause, unfolding Himself
into Light* From Him springs the
Intelligible World, or ideal universe, the
Universal Mind,4he Nous, and the incor-

K '"''

• See Article on Sn^. Britanmim,

ninth edition.

‘Psellus, quoted in tm iht

% Tsykff, p. 343, note m js ij, seoxiid edidmi.

* /amtiieAus, at attU, |s |oi.


TUK HtlinKN SIDK Ot- REI.JOIDNS. 23


poreal or intelligible Gods belong to this.
From this the World-Soul, to which belong
the "divine intellectual forms which are
present with the visible bodies of the
Gods."' 'fhcti come variou s hiera r chies o f

Archangels, Archons
:>re.s, Angels, Daimons,
&c. Man i.s a l>eing of a lower order,
allied to the.se in his nature, and is capable
of knowing them; this knowledge wasl
achieved in the Mysterie.s, and it led to/
union with Gtxl.' In the Mysteries the.se]


(Kulers) or Cosmocra


' //>/</, p. 73.

' T\w urlirlc* cm “ Mysticism ” in the KntyeIop(Fdia
Briiannka has the following on the teaching of
IMmijjyg (304 306 A.u.); “TheOgjg[the Suprem^W^^

(loci spciken t»f above] is e yilteH ftb ove
th^c jjiisiif ’; it UftpitCfinds/^xTMence alto^^

cog n isable Ijy rc^n. Remaining itself in rapos«wr
it rays ou t, as It were, f rom its own M aess, iJUiBftgC'
jSjSwlf. whicl)„i8 .taiUed an^ wMchuSBlMtote* '

the system of ideas of t he inteUm ialfiJiKOrtd. The ^

‘ ‘ ■ #,

The
from n

which it Bprings, and towards the material lifi^ which •
ia its own product. Ethicd cndwv our consiitj in ttJ
repudiation of th<j "" matemT eidatjjaa^ J #

. To r^


24


ESOTKRir rilRISTIANfTV.


doctrines are expounded. " the progression
from, and the regression of all things to.
the One, and the entire domination of the
One,”' and, further, these different Beings
were evoked, and appeareti, sometimes to
teach, sometimes, by Their mert! presence,
to elevate and purify. " 'Fhc Gods," says
lamblichus, "!)eing benevolent and pro-
* impart their light to theurgists in

*• unenvying abundance, calling upwards
their souls to them.selve.s. procuring them a
*' union with themselves, and accustoming
' them, while they are yet in bmly, to lie
separated from bodies, and to be led round
'‘to their eternal and intelligible principle."*

the ultimate goal, thought itself must be left itchind :
for thought k a form of motion, and the desire of the
soul is for the motionless rest which belongs to the
One. The union with transcendent deity is n*rt so
much knowledge or vision as ecstasy, c»»Je««:encc,
contact!' Neo-Platonism is thus firf^of ^i a system
of complete rationalui m 5''Tn!r assum«^,‘"lfr oERer
words, that » capable of mapping out the

whole system of thinp. But, inasmuch as a God is
affirmed beyond nmson, Ae mystidsm bec«mt» in a
sense the necessary complement d* the would-be
aB-embracing rationalism. The i^stem eolminitMsi in
a mystical act.”

p. 73. * Ihii^ pffc 55, |d.


T!tK niI>r>EN SIDE OF RKI.IGIONS. 25


For '■ the soul having a twofold life, one
being in conjunction with body, but the
other being separate from all body,”' it is
most m^cessary to learn to separate it from
the hotly, that thus it may unite itself with
the Gods by its intellectual and divine
part, and learn iht; genuine princijdes of
knowledge, and the truths of the intelligible
world.* " 'rhe presence of the Gtxl.s,
indcctl, imparls to us health of body, virtue
of soul, ptirity of intellect, and, in one
word, elevates everything in tts to it.s
proper nature. It exhibits that which i.s
not body as boily to th(^ eyes of the .soul,
through those of the body.”’ When the
Gods appear, the soul receives “a liberation
from the {wissions, a transcendent {>erfection,
and an energy entirely more excellent, and
participates of divine love and an immense
joy."* By this we gain a divine life, and
are rendered in reality divine.*


The culmlnati iy point of the Myster ies
wa8^‘1 vKeiirTBi""m a j5a d,*

whether by union with aidivineBeing
outside himself, or by the realisation of the


' pp. 118, 119. *IMdt p. 118, 119.

^ pp. 95, too. p, tot, * 1144 , p. 330.


26


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


divine Self within him. This was termed
ecstasy, and was a state of what the
t^^an~^ogi would term high Samddhi,
the gro" Dody being entranced and the
freed soul eifecting its own union with the
Great One. This “ ecstasy is not a faculty
V properly so called, it is a state of the soul,
which transforms it in such a way that it
V. then perceives what was previously hidden
from it. The state will not be permanent
until our union with God is irrevocable;
here, in earth life, ecstasy is but a flash.

%r.Man can cease to become

Vs man, and become God ; but man cannot
be God and man at the same time.”'
Plotinu§_ ^tes_.that_Ji£L.had reached this
yv s^e “ but three times as yet.”

So also £roc^ taught that the one
salvation of tn^^ul was to return to her
intellectual form, and thus escape from the
“ circle of generatio n, from abundant
wanderings,” and reach true Being, “to
the uniform and simple energy of the
period of sameness, instead of the abun-
dandy wandering motion of the period
which Is characterised by difference.” This

R. S. Mead. FlofinuSy p. 42.


THE JIIDDKN SIDE OF RELIGIONS. 2 ^

is the life sought, by those initiated by
Orpheus into the Mysteries of Bacchus
and Proserpine, and this is the result of
the practice of the purificatory, or cathartic,
virtues.'

These virtues were necessary for the
Greater Mysteries, as they concerned the
puntyirig gllh e subtlc_badv. in,jyhichjhe

soul wolfed.w hen out of the gro.ss body .

The political or practical virtues belonged
to man’s ordinary life, and were required -
to some extent before he could be a
candidate even for such a School as is
described below. Hieo came the cathartic 7
virtues, by which the subtle body, that of
the emotions and lower mind, was purified ;
thirdly the intellectual, belonging to the
Augbeides, or the light-form’ of the
intellect; fq^jhly the contemplative, or
paradigmatic, by which union with God
was realised. Porphy ry writes : " He who %
energises accorJingl^the practical virtues
is a worthy man ; but he who energises •s
according to the purifying virtues is an«
angelic man, or is also a good daimon.^
He who energises according to the intel-t
‘ lan^lickm, p. 364, note on p. 134.


28


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


lectual virtues alone is a God ; but he who
energises according to the paradigmatic
virtues is the Father of the Gods.” *

Much instruction Was also given in the
Mysteries by t hp archangelic and oth er

and Pythagoras , the gr eat

was in.itiat£d.„in I nd^ , and

who gave “the knowledge of things that
are” to his pledged disciples, is said to
have possesse d such a know ledp-e of music
t hat he co uld use it for the cont rolling, of
men’s wildest passion s, and the illuminating
of their minds. Of this, instances are

given by lamblichus in his Life of Pytha¬
goras. It seems probable that the title of
Theodidaktos, given to Ammonius Saccas,
the master of Plotinus, referred less to
the sublimity of his teachings than to this
divine instruction received by him in the
Mysteries.

Some of the symbols used are explained
by lamblichus, ’’ who bids Porphyry remove
from his thought the’ image of the thing
symbolised and reach its intellectual
meaning. Thus “ mire ” meant everything

’’’ ^G. R. S. Mead. pp. 285, 286.

' lambUckus, p. 564, note on p. 134.


THK Un»I)EN KIDK OK KKI.KUON.S. 29

that was bocUly and material; the “ God
sitting above the lotus " signified that God
transcended l)oth the mire and the intellect,
symbolised by the lotus, and was established
in Himself, Ixung seated. If “sailing in a
ship,” His rule over the world was pictured.
And so on.' On this use of symbols
Froclus remarks that “ the Orphic method
aimed at revealing divine things by means
of symlwls, a method common to all
writers of divine lore."'’

T he Pythagorean Schoo l i n Magna
Gracia was closed at the end of the si^ th
century n.e .. owing to the persecution of!
the civiV power, but_Dtlip cpmt^unitie s
exigjed, keeuinLy up thd^ '^ ^red tra^ on.^
Mead .states that ITato Intellectuali.^d it,
in order to protect it from an incre^ing
profanation, and the pleuswan rites pre¬
served some of its formsThavlng lost its
substance, Tt^e Neo-Platonists inherited
from Pythagom and, Plato, and their
wbrics smou^ by those who

would reidise something of the grandeur

' lamNiekuSt p. 385, tt
• G. R. S.>Meiid. Orpktus, p. S9>

* 3id, p. $ 0 ,


30


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


and the beauty preserved for the world in
the Mysteries.

The^P^^bhagore^ itself may

serve as enforced.

lOn this_Mead. gives many interesting
|detailsy and^emarks: “ The authors of
|antiquity are agreed that this discipline
lad succeeded in producing t he highes t
examples, not only of the purest chastity
[ nd s e ntime nt, bm j.lso a simplicity of
tanne rs, a del icacy, and a taste for serious
pursui ts which was unparalleled. This i§
I dmtoed e ven by Christian writers. ” The'
'School had outer disciples, leading the
family and social life, and the above
quotation refers to these. In the inner
School were three degrees—the first of


Hearers, who studied for two years in
silence, doing their best to master the
teachings; the second degree was of
Mathematici, wherein were taught geometry
and music, the nature of number, form,
colour, and sound ; the third degree was of
Physici, who mastered cosmogony and
metaphysics. This led up to the true
Mysteries. Candidates for the School


^ Ibid^ pp. 263, 271.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF RELIGIONS. 31

must be “of an unblemished reputation ^
and of a contented disposition.”

The close identity between the methodsi
and aim s pursued in these van ous
Mysteries and those of Yoga in Ind ia is
patent to__the most superfi cial obseiy er.

It is not, however, necessary to suppose*
that the nations of antiquity drew from
India; all alike drew from the one source,
the* Grand Lodge of Central^ Asia, which
sent out its Initiates to every land. They
all taught the same doctrines, and pursued
the same methods, leading to the same
ends. But t here^was j nuch in^tercpmmmii-
cation between the Initia tes of all na tion s,
and there was a_comm on la nguage^ajid^a
com inon h ^mbolism. Thus Pythag oras
journeyed among "the Indians, and fecmved
in India a high Initiation, and Apollonius
of Tyana later followed in his st^s.
Quite Indian in phrase as well as thought;'
were the dying words of Plotinus : “ Nowi
I seek to lead back the Self within me to I
the All-self.”^

Among the Hindus the duty of teaching
the supreme knowledge only to the worthy


’ G. R. S. Mead. Plotinus, p. 20.


32 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

u was Strictly insisted on. “ The deepest
f mystery of the end of knowledge .... is
not to be declared to one who is not
a son or a pupil, and who is not tran-
Y quil in mind.”" So again, after a sketch
of Yoga we read: “Stand up! awake!
having found the Great Ones, listen!
^ The road is as difficult to tread as the
S' sharp edge of a razor. Thus say the
s wise.”“ The Teacher is needed, ‘for
written teaching alone does not suffice.
The “ end of knowledge ” is to know God
—not only to believe ; to become one with
God—not only to worship afar off. Man
must know the reality of the divine
Existence, and then know—not only
vaguely believe and hope—that his own
innermost Self is one with God, and that
the aim of life is to realise that unity.
Unless religion can guide a man to that
realisation, it is but “as sounding brass
or a tinkling cymbal.”^

Sjp also it was assert ed that man should
^€arn to leave J:he gross body .: “ Let a
man with“Ttrmness separate it [the soul]

^ Shveidshvaiaropanishat, vi., 22.

Kathopanishatj iii., 14. ^ I. Cor, xiii. i.


TtiK irinnKN siok of RKLTcaoNS. 33


from his own body, as a j^rats-stalk from*"
its sheath.”' And it was written! “In'
the golden highest sheath dwells the
stainless, changeless Brahman; U is the'
r adian t white Light of. .lights, kgp^vn to ■

“When the "■

seer secs the golden-coloured Creator, the *
Lord, the Spirit, whose womb is Brahman, *
then, having thrown away merit and *
demerit, stainless, the wise one reaches ^
the highest union.”'

Nor were the Hebrews ^without their
secret l<nowTc3’gc a!i^''**tl leir Schools of
Imtiation. The company of prophets at
Naioth presided over by Samuel * formed
such a School, and the oral teaching was
handed down by them. Similar Schools
existed at Bethel and Jericho,* and in
Cruden’.s Concordance^ there is the follow¬
ing interesting note: “ The Schools or
Colleges of the prophets are the first
[.schools] of which we have any account in
Scripture; where the children of the
prophets, that is, their disciples, lived in

Kathopanishat^vx. 17. Mundakopanishat^ IL, il 9.

^ IMd.^ IILj i. 3. t Sam, xix, 20.

Kings ii. 2, 5. ® Under ** School’'


34


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


the exercises* of a retired and austere life,
*' in study and meditation, and reading of
“ the law of God. . . These Schools, or

' Societies, of the prophets were succeeded
by the Synagogues.” T he Kabbal a, which
contains the semi-public teaching, is, as it
now stands, a modern compilation, part of
it being the work of Rabbi Moses de
Leon, who died A.p. It consists

of five books, Sahi'r 7 Zohar, Sepher
Sephiroth, Sepher Yetzirah, and Asch
Metzareth, and is asserted to have been
transmitted orally from very ancient times
—as antiquity is reckoned historically. Dr.
Wynn Westco tt says that “ Hebrew tra-
dition assigns the oldest parts of the Zohar
to a date antecedent to the building of
•"the second Temple;” and Rabbi Simeon
ben Jochai is said to have written down
some of it in the first century a.d. The
'*■ Sepher Yetzirah is spoken of by Saadjah
Gaon, who died a.d. 940, as “yery
ancient.”' Some portions of the ancient
oral teaching have been incorporated in
the Kabbala as it now stands, but the
true ■ ar chaic wisdom of the. . Hebrews

^ Dr. Wynn Westcott Sepher Yetzirah^ p. 9.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF RELIGIONS. 35


remains in the guardianship lof a few of
the true sons of Israel

- as r jg' jg sufficiont to

show the existence of a hidden side in the


religions of the world outside Christianity,
and we may now examine the question


whether Christianity was an exception to
this universal rule.


Chapter II.

THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY'.


(rt) The Testimony oe the Scru'TUres.

I Havino .seen that the rcHj^ions of the
past claimed wkh pm: v<Hce to htivc a
^ hidden side, to he custodian.s of
“ Mysterie.s,” and that this claim wa.s
endorsed by the seckin”' of initiation by
the <rreate.st men, wt; must now ascertain
Iwhether Chri.stianity stands outside this
icircle of reh'j^dhlirand alone Is wlthpuLiii,
ICxn.Q^, oHerln^to the world only a isiniple
and , not a profound knowledge.
Were it so, it wdiild indeed be a sad and
lamentable fact, proving Christianity to be
intended for a class only, and not for all
types of human beings. But that it i.s not
so, we shall be able to prove beyond the
possibility of rational doubt

And that proof is the thin g whid h-
i«' .


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 37


Christendom at this time most sorely'
needs, for the very flower of Christendom i
is^perishina;' tor lack of knowledg e. If
fhe ' esoteric teaching can be re-established*
and win patient and earnest students, it
will not be long before the occult is
also restored. Disciples of the Lesser
Mysteries will become candidates for the
Greater, and with the regaining of know¬
ledge will come again the authority of
teaching. And truly the need is great.
For, looking at the world around us, we
find that ^religion in the West is suffering |
from _the ve^][^S^lty*Hmtth^reticany ^
we shoT^~ expect to fmd. "C firiiti ainty, %
havinp- lost its mystic and esoteric teac^ g. ’
is josin^ts fiold on alargenim^^
rn^ highly educated,, and the._Eartia r
f^ival " during ^5e ^t,^ •’

coHncidenF'^F^^ the^ re-introductbn „ ,o j
some mystic tea c hing . It is patent tc
eve^student of the closing forty years of
the last century, that crowds of thoughtful
and moral people have slipped away frornj
the c hurche s, because the t ^chings they!
received ther e, outraged thdf inteUbe^ eV
and shocked their moral sense. It is idlej


D


38 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

to pretend that the wide-spread agnosticism
of this period had its root either in lack of
morality or in deliberate crookedness of
mind. Everyone who carefully studies
the phenomena presented will admit that
men ^f strong intellect have been driv^
out of Christianity by the crudity ojTThe
r eligiou s ideas set before them, the con-
trad^ictions in the authoritative teach ings ,
the views_as to_^od, man, and the un iverse
; that no trained intelligence could possibly
■ adm it. Nor can it be said that any kind
I of moral degradation lay at the root of the
revolt against the dogmas of the Church.
The rebels were not too bad for their
religion; on the contrary, it was the
religion that was too bad for them. The
rebellion against popular Christianity” was
diTe^ to_ the awakening and .tbue-growth^gf
consc ieDce; it was the conscience that
. revolted, as well as the intelligence, against
tea ehtn gs d ishon ouring to God and nian
that j^r^s ented God as~ tyran t,
and man as e^entially evil, gainin g salva -
^on b y slavish submission.

The reason for this revolt lay in the
gradual descent of Christian teaching into


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 39

so- call ed simplicity, so that the mo.st
ignorant might be able to grasp it.
Protestant religionists a.sserted loudly that
nothing ought to be preached .save that
which every one could grasp, that the
glory of the Gp-spel lay in its simplicity, .
and that the child and the unlearned ought
to be able to understand and apply it to
life. True enough, if by this it were
meant that there are some religious truths
that all can grasp, and that a religion fails
if it leaves the lowest, the mo.st ignorant,
the most dull, outside the pale of its
elevating influence. But false, utterly false, |
if by this it be meant tliat rt;ligi.on no j
truths that the ignorant cannot understand , i
thatTt is so poor and limited a thing that*
it has nothing to teach which is above the/
thought of the unintelligent or above tht|
moral purview of the degraded. P'alse,
fatally false, if .such be the meaning; for
as that view spreads, occupying the pulpits
and being .sounded in the churches, many .
noble men and women, whose hearts are/
half-broken as they sever the links that (
bind them to their early faith, withdraw ;
from the churches, and leave their places


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


to be filled by the hypocritical and the
ignorant. They pass either into a state of
passive agnosticism, or—if they be young
and enthusiastic—into a condition of active
aggression, not believing that that can be
the highest which outrages alike intellect
nd conscience, and preferring the honesty
bf ooen unbelief to the drugging of the


iitellect and the conscience at the bidding
If an authority in which th ey .r ec ognise
fcothing trmt is divine.

In thus studying the thought of our
time we see that the question of a hidden
teaching in connection with Christianity
becomes of vital importance. Js Ch risti-
anity to survive as the religion of the
W,g§t ? Is it to live through the centuries
of the future, and to continue to play a
part in moulding the thought of the
evolving western races ? If it is to livje,
it must regain.the knowledge it' has lost.


( and again have its mystic and its occult

'~ r— m i t? . . . . . 111 1

teaching s; it must again stand forth as an
authoritative teacher of spiritual verities,
clothed with the only authority worth any¬
thing, the authority of knowledge. If
these teachings be regained, their influence


99953


THE MIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 41

* will soon be seen in wider and deeper
views of truth ; domnas, which now seem
like mere

geeiTtcnie partial presentments of .fuiida-
mental realities. First, Esoteric Christianity
will reappear in the “ Holy Place," in the
Temple, so that all who are capable of
receivin.t^ it may follow its lines of pub¬
lished thought ; and secondly. Occult
Christianity will again descend into the
Adytum, dwelling behind the Veil which
guards the “ Holy of Holies,” into which
only the Initiate may enter. Then yg^io
will occult teaching be within the reach of
tHose^'htr^uaftfy thernselves to receive it,
according to the ancient rules, those who
are willing in modern days to meet the
ancient demands, made on all those who
would fain know the reality and truth of
spiritual things.

Once again we turn our .eyes to h,igprv.
to see whether Christianity was unique
among religions in having no inner teach¬
ing, or whether it resembled all others in
possessing this hidden treasure. Such
a question is a matter of evidence, not
of theory, and must be decided by the


42


KSOT KR If • f' H RI ST IA NIT Y.


authority of the existin,!^ fiocumcnts and '
not by the mere ipse dixii f)f inodt-rn
Christians.

As a matter of fact l)oth the “ N gw
Testament ” and the writings ()f the cafly
CKur^i inake the same cUxIarations as to
tKe posse.ssion by the Church of such
teachings, and we learn from these the
fact of the existence of M ysteries -
called the Mysteruts of Jesus, or the
Mystery of the Kingdom the conditions
imposed on candidates, soim^thing of thc^
general nature of the teachings givim,
»and other details. Certain pas.sagfjs in
khe “New 're.stament" wtaild remain
Icntirely obscure, if it were not for the
flight thrown on thenn by the definite
l.sfatements of the b'athcTS and Bishops
iof the Church, but in that light they
became clear and intelligilile.

It would indeed have been .strange had
it been otherwise when we consider the
lines of relitrious thought which influenced

I . J.. .. ....

primitive Christianity . Allied to the
Hebrews, the FerSTan-s, and the Greeks,
tinged by the older faiths of India,
deeply coloured by Syrian and Egyptian


-ST


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 43

thought, this later branch of the great
religious .stem could not do other thanj
again re-afifirm the ancient traditions, and
place in theerasp of western races the full
trea-sure of the ancient teaching “ The
faith once delivered to the saints would
indeed have been .shorn of its chief value
if, when delivered to the West, the pearl
of esoteric teaching had been withheld.

The first evidence to be examined is
that of the “New Tc.stament.” For ourf
purpose we may jmt aside iill the yexedl
questions of different readings and different
authors, that can only be decided by
scholars. Critical scholarship has mucW
to say on the age.of M,SS., on the authen-j
city of docujiients, and .so on. But w«^
nee5 not concern ourselves with these.
We may accept the canonical Scriptures,
a s sho wnig what was believed m th e early
Church as to the teaching of the Christ
and of His immediate followers, and see
what they say as to th^^isJsnce of
secret teaching given only ’to’mS'^w.

. n i in iiiii nwmr-y r*-—1- I'liiiiii ,, .

Having seen the words put into the mouth
of Jesus Himself, and regarded by the
Church as of supreme authority, we will


44 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

look at the writings of the great apostle
then we will consider the state¬
ments made by those who inherited the
apostolic tradition and guided the Church
during: the first centuries a.d. Along
this unbroken line of tradition and written
testimony the proposition that Chris tianity.
had a hidden side can be estaSIislieil. We
sfi^l further fihd’tKat the H'ess’ef B^ysteries
of mystic^ interpretation can be traced
through the centuries to the beginning of
the iQth century, and that though there
were no Schools of Mysticism recognised
as preparatory to Initiation, after the
disappearance of the Mysteries, yet grea t
Myistic^j^ from time to time, re ached
the lower stages of exsta^j’, by their
own sustained efforts, aided doubtless by
invigible Teachers .

' " TKe ^oT the Master Himself are

clear and definite, and were, as we shall
see, quoted by Origgg^ as referring to the
secret teaching preserved in the Church.
“ And when he was alone, they that were
about Him with the twelve asked of Him
the parable. And He said unto them,
‘ Unto you it is given to know the mystery


THE HIDDEN SIDE OK CHRISTIANITY. 45

of the kingdom of God, but unto them"
t hat are wit^ put. all these things arc done'
in parablesT^' And later: “ With many
.such parablc.s spake He the word unto"
them, as they were able to hear it. But
without a [laralile spake He not unto!'
them; and wh en they were al ^y Hel''
expounded all things to His 3iscij2je.s.’’|"
IVTark Ahe .sighlHcaht wordls,' when they*
were alone," aiul the phrase, “ them that
arc without." So also in the version of
S. Matthew: “jesus .sent the multitude -
away, ancl went into the house; and His*
disciples came unto Him." 'rhe.se teach-**
ings given “in the house,” the inner-*"
most meanings of His instruction.s, were
alleged to be . h«tnde d on frcyn_ .tether
to teache r. The Gospel gives, it willf
be noted, the allegorical mystic cxplana-f
tion, that which we have called The(
Lesser My.sterie.s, but the deeper mean-i.
ing was said to be given only to th e I
Initiates.

Again, Jesus tells even His apostles : I ‘

have yet many things to say to you, but ^

'S. Mark iv. 10, ii, 33, 34. .See also S. Matt. xiii.
iij 34) 3^’i And .S. lAikc viii. 10.


46


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


ye cannot bear them now.”' Some of
them were probably said after His death,
when He was seen of His disciples,
“ speaking of the things pertaining to the
I kingdom of God.”“ None of these have
I been_ publicly recorded, but who can
I believe that they were neglected or for-
I gotten, and were not handed down as _a
f priceless possession ? There was a tra-
* dition in the Church that He visited His
apostles for a considerable period after
His death, for the sake of giving them
instruction—a fact that will be referred to
later—and in t he famou s G nostic treat ise.

we read ; “ It came_to
pass, when Jesus had risen from the dead,
that „He passed eleven years speaking
with His disciples and instructing theni.”^
Then there is the phrase, which many
would fain soften and explain away:
“ Give not that which is holy to the dogs,
^ neither cast ye your pearls before swine
—a precept which is of general application
indeed, but was considered by the early


^ S. John xvi. 12. “Acts i 3.
cit. Trans, by G. R. S. Mead. 1 . i.\,
^S. Matt vii. 6.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 47

Church to refer to the secret teachings. It
should be remembered that the words had
not the same harshness of sound in the
ancient days as they have now; for the
words “ dogs ”—like “ the vulgar,” “ the ^
profane”—was applied by those within a
certain circle to all who were outside its *
pale, whether by a society or association, .
or by a nation—as by the Jews to all '
Gentiles." It was sometimes used to
designate those who were outside the
circle of Initiates, and we find it employed
in that sense in the early Church; those
who, not having been initiated into the
Mysteries, were regarded as being outside
“the kingdom of God,” or “the spiritual
Israel,” had this name applied to them.

There were several names, exclusive of
the term “ The Mystery,” or “ The^
Mysteries,” used to designate the sacred/
circle of the Initiates or connected with s
Initiation : “ The Kingdom,” “ The King- ^
dom of God,” “ The Kingdom of Heaven,”/
“The Narrow Path,” “The Strait Gate,”'

xfr *.N %i,

* As to the Greek woman: It is not t&ai to toke the I
children's bread, and to cast it unto — P

S. Mark vii. 27. ■ .. ..


48 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

“ The Perfect,” “ The Saved,” “ Life
Eternal,” “ Life,” “ The Second Birth,”
“A Little One,” “A Little Child.” The
meaning is made plain by the use of these
words in early Christian writings, and in
some cases even outside the Christian pale.
Thus the term, “The Perfect,” was used
by the-, ffsce nes, who had three orders in
their communities; the Neophytes, the
Brethren, and the Perfect—the latter being
Initiates; and it is employed generally in
that sense in old writings. “ The Little
' Child ” was the ordinary name for a can¬
didate just initiated, i.e., who had just
taken his “second birth.”

When we know this use, many obscure
and otherwise harsh passages become
intelligible. “ Then said one unto Him :
Lord, are there few that be saved ? And
He said unto them: Strive to enter in at
th e strait gate ; for many, I say unto you,
will seek* to enter in and shall not be
able.”^ If this be applied in the ordinary
Protestant way to salvation from ever¬
lasting hell-fire, the statement becomes
incredible, shocking. No Saviour of the
' S. Luke xiii. 23, 24.


TUK HIDDKN SIDK OF CHRISTIANITY. 49

world am be suppo.sed to a.ssert that many
will .seek to avoid hell and enter heaven,
but will not be able to do so. But as
applied to the narrow gateway of Initia¬
tion and to .salvation from rebirth, it is
perfectly true and natural. So again:

“ Enter ye in at the .strait gate; for wide-
is the gate and broad i.s the way that''*
leadeth to de.struction, and many there be''
which go in thereat; because strait is ther
gate and narrow is the way which leadeth*
unto life; and few there be that find it.”''
The warning which immediately follows
against the false prophets, the teachers
of the dark Mysteries, is most ajjposite
in this connection. No student can
miss the familiar ring of these words
used in this same sense in other writings.
The “ ancient narrow way ” i.s familiar to
all; the” p^th “ diflicult to tread as the
s harp edge of a raz or," “already mentioned;
the going death to death’* of those

who follow the flower - strewn path of
desires, who do not know God; for those
men only become immortal and escape

*S. Matt. vii. 13, 14.

' ‘ Kat/ioJ>a}tisJiai 11 . \v. 10, it.


50


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


from the wide mouth of death, from ever
repeated destruction, who have quitted all
desires.' The allusion to death is, of
course, to the repeated births of the soul
into gross material existence, regarded
always as “death” compared to the “life”
of the higher and subtler worlds,
s This “ Strait Gate” was the gateway of
Initiation, and through it a candidate
sntered “ The Kingdom.” And it ever
has been, and must be, true that only
a few can enter that gateway, though
myriads—an exceedingly “ great multitude,
which no man could nuniber,”'' not a few
—enter into the happiness of the heaven-
world. So also spoke ano ther ,great
Teacher, nearly three thousand yeajis
earlier f “ Among thousands of men scarce
one striveth for perfection ; of the success¬
ful strivers scarce one knoweth me in
'essence.”3 For t he Initiates are few in
each generation, the 'flower of "hum^ifyj
butno''^^ of everlasting woe

is pronounced in this statement on the
vast majority of the human race. The

Brihaddranyakopaniskai. IV. iv. 7.

Rev. vii. 9- ^ Bahgmad Gttd^ vii. 3.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 51


saved are, as Procjus taught,' those who
escape from the circle of generation, within
which humanity is bound.

In this connection we may recall the
story of the young man who came to Jesus,
and, addressing Him as “ Good Master,”
asked how he might win eternal life—the
well-recognised liberation from rebirth by
knowledge of God.' His first answer was
the regular exoteric precept: “ Keep the
commandments.” But when the young
man answered: “All these things have I
kept from my youth up; ” then, to that
conscience free from all knowledge of
transgression, came the answer of the true
Teacher: “If thou wilt be perfect, go and'“
sell that thou hast, and give to the poor,*'
and thou shalt have treasure in heaven
and come and follow me.” “ If thou wiltH
be perfect,” be a member of the Kingdom,
pove^ and obedience m ust be embrace d-
Ana then to His own disciples Jesus
explains that a rich man can hardly efiter
the Kingdom of Heaven, such entrance ■

Ante^ p. 26.

'"It must be remembered that the Jews believed
that all imperfect souls returned to live again on earth.

\J tn f’J*- * .■ '


52 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

being more difficult than for a camel to
pass through the eye of a needle; with
men such entrance could not be, with God
all things were possible.^ Only God in
man can pass that barrier.

This text has been variously explained
away, it being obviously impossible to take
it in its surface meaning, that a rich man
cannot enter a post-mortem state of happi¬
ness. Into that state the rich man may
enter as well as the poor, and the universal
practice of Christians shows that they do
not for one moment believe that riches
imperil their happiness after death. But
if the real meaning of the Kingdom of
Heaven be taken, we have the expression
of a simple and direct fact For that
knowledee of God which is Eternal Life.®

‘ wj-I■■ II i m

gannot be gained till everyt hing earthly is
^rrend eredTc aimotbe lea rngd until every-
thincf 'h' ^ been ^criU ced. The man must
give up not only fearthly wealth, which
henceforth may only pass through his
hands as steward, but he must give up his
inner wealth as well, so far as he holds it


“ S. Matt. six. 16—26.


“ S. John xvii. 3.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OK CHRISTIANITY. 53


as his own against the world; until he is
stripped naked he cannot pass the narrow
gatewa,y. Such ha.s ever been a condition
of Initiation, and “poverty, obedience,
chastity,” has been the vow of the
candidate.

The “ second birth ” is another well-i


1 he “ secoiK i ^ birth is another weiw
recognised^erm for Initiation; even novJ
in India the higher castes are called “ twice-^
born,” and the ceremony that makes thern
twice-born is a ceremony of Initiation—('
mere husk truly, in these modern days, butl
the “pattern of things in the heavens.
When Jesus is speaking to Nicodemus,)
He states that “Except a man be born/
again, he, cannot.§ee the kmgdpm o.LGcid,’'
ann this birth is spoken of as that “ol
water and the Spirit;”" this is the first
Initiation; a later one is that of “the
Holy Ghost and fire,”^ the baptism of the
Initiate in his manhood, as the first is that
of birth, which welcomes him as “the
Little Child” entering the Kingdom.''
How thoroughly this imagery was familiar
among the mystic of the Jews is shown

* Heb. IK. 23, ®S. John, iil 3, 5* ^ S, Matt, iil ii,
xviii. 3.

E


54


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY


• . ♦


the surprise {-.vinced by Jesus when
Nicodemus stumbled over His mystic
phraseology ; “Art thou a master of Israel,
and knowest not these things?"'

Another precept of Jesus which remains
as “a hard saying" to his followers is:
“Be ye therefore perf ect , even as your
♦ bbvtJi't ^wIncr^^ heave n nTf^'IectT'"'

'file.(Hilary (Christian luiows tnat he

cannot possibly obey this command ; full
of ordinary human frailties and weaknesses,

, how can he become perfect as (»<kI is
j, perfect ? Seeing the impossibility of the
■ achievement set before him, he quietly
puts it aside, and thinks no more about it.
^ But seen as the crowning effort of many
, lives of steady improvement, as the
’ triumph of the God within us over the
lower nature, it comes within calculable
distance, and we recall the words of
Porphyry, how the man who achieves
“ the paradigmatic virtues is the Father
of the Gods,’’^ and that in the Mysteries
these virtues were acquired.


^AhU, p. * 8 .


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 55

Master, and speaks in exactly the same
sense, but, as might be expected from
his organising work in the Church, with
greater, explicitness and clearness. .Xhe i
student should read with attention chapters!
ii. and iii., and verse i of chapter iv. of]

the.First , JEpistle,.j£Q._.the .C orinthians, 1

remembering, as he reads, that the words !
are addressed to baptised and communicant!
members of the Church, full members from \
the modern standpoint, although described!
as babes and carnal by the Apostle. Theyi
were not catechumens or neophytes, but'
men and women who were in complete
possession of all the privileges and respon¬
sibilities of Church membership, recognised
by the Apostle as being separate from the
world, and expected not to behave as
men of the world. They were, in fact,
in possession of all that the modern
Church gives to its members.
sumniarise the Apostle’s words :

“ I came to you bearing the divine
testimony, not alluring you with human
wisdom but with the power of the Spirit.
Truly ‘ we jpfi§.k wisdo m among th em
that are.jgerfect/ but It is no huma n


56 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

wisdom. ‘ We .speak the wisdom of God
in a my.stery, even the hidden wi.sdom,
which God ordained before the world ’.
began, and which none even of the
princes of thi.s world know. The things
of that wisdom are beyond men’s thinking,
‘hiit God hath revealed them unto us by
his Spirit .... the deep things of
God,’ ‘ which the Holy Ghost teacheth.’'
These are .spiritual things, to be discerned
only by the spiritual man, in whom is
the mind of Chri.st. ‘And I, brethren,
could not speak unto you as unto spiritual,
but as unto carnal, even as unto babes
in Christ. . . . Ye were not able to

bear it, neither yet now arc ye able.
For ye are yet carnal.’ ‘ As a wise
master-builder'* I have laid the foundation,’
and ‘ ye are the temple of God, and the
Spirit of God dwelleth in you.’ ‘ Let a man

' Note how this chimes in with the promi.se of
Jesu.s in S. John xvi. 13—14: “ 1 hay gjgt jiany
things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now. Howbeit when He, the Spirit of Truth, is

come. He will guide you into all truth.

He ■will show you things to come. ... He
shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you,"

’ Another technical name in the Mysteries.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 57

SO account of us, as of the ministers of Christ,
and stewards of the Mysteries of God.’ ”

Can any one read this passage—and all
that has been done in the summary is to
bring out the salient points — without
recognising the fact that th^e . j^ostle
possessed a., cji^yine wisdom givSp in the
Mysteries, that his Corinthian followers
were not yet able to receive ? And note
the recurring technical terms: the
“ wisdom,” the “ wisdoirv of God in^jL
mystery ,” the “hid3en_ wisdom,” known
ofrty lo the “.spiritual” man, spoken of
only among the “ perfect,” wisdom from
which the non-“spiritual,” the “babes in
Christ," the “ carnal,” were excluded,
known to the “wise master-builder,” the
“ steward o f the Myst erie s of God .”

'A gain and again he refers to th ese
Mysteries. Writing to the Eohesian /
Ofedans he s'ayr dia'r-'nBy^
by the unveiling, had been “made /
known unto me the Mvs^ v.” and hence ‘
his “knowledge in the Mystery of Christ”;
all might know of the “fellowship of the
Mystery.”' Of this Mystery, he repeated

'Eph. iii. 3. 4, 9.


sH


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


to the Colo.ssian.s, he was “ made a
minister,” “the My.stery which hath been
hid from a^es and from {rcnerations, but
now is made manife.st to Mis sain ts " ; not
to the world, nor even to Christians, but
only to the Holy Ones. 'Fo them was
yOnveiled “ tltc. glory of this Mystery ” ; and
r what was it } “ a signifi¬

cant phra.se, which we snail see, in a
moment, belonged to the life of the
Initiate ; thus ultimately must <!very man
learn the wi.sdom, and become “perfect in
Christ Jesus."' These Colo.ssians he bids
pray “ that God would open to us a door
of utterance, to speak the mystery of
Christ,"'' a pa.ssage to which S. Clem ent
refers as one in which the apostle “ clearly
reveals that knowledge belongs not tciall."^


* Col. i. 23, 25—28. But S. Clement, in his
Stromata, translates “every man," as “the whole
man." See Bk. V., ch. x. ’Col. iv. 3.

’Ante-Nicene Library, Vol, Xll. Clement of
Alexandria. Stromata, bk. V. ch. x. Some
additional sayings of the Apostles will be found in
the quotations from Clement, showing wliat mtaining
they bore in the minds of those who succeeded the
apostles, and were living in the same atmosphere of
thought.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 59

So also he writes to his loved Timothy,
bidding him select his deacons frohTthose
who hold “the Mystery., of the faith in. a
# pure conscience,” that great “Mystery,of
Godliness,” that he had learned," knowledge
of which was necessary for the teachers of
the Church.

Now: ,S. Timothy holds an important
position, as representing: the next eenera-
tion of Christian .teachers. He was a
HP.yiiiLaiLS<.,J^til, and was appointed by
him to guide and rule a portion of the
Church. He had been, we learn, initiated
into the My.steries by S. Paul himself, and
reference is made to this, the technical
phrases once more serving as a clue.
“ This charge I commit unto thee, son
Timothy, according to the prophecies
which went before on thee,”* the solemn
benediction of the Initiltor, who admitted
the candidate; but not alone was the
Initiator present: “ Neglect not the gift
that is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy, by the laving on of the,Jia jads
of the Presbytery,” ^ of the Elder Brothers.

* L Tim. iii. 9, 16. “1. Tim. i. 18.

^ Ibid, ^ iv. 14.


6o


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


And he reminds him to lay hold of that
“eternal life, whereunto thou art also
called, and hast pro fessed a good pro-
ftfe^io n be fore many witnes ses ”'—the voi#
I of the new Initiate, pledged in "the
presence of the Elder Brothers, and of the
assembly of Initiates. The knowledge
\ then given was the sacred charge of which
, 1 S. Paul cries out so forcibly : “ O Timothy,


keep that which is committed t o thy


trus t ”""—not the knowledge commonly
possessed by Christians, as to which no
special obligation lay upon S. Timothy,
but the sacred deposit committed to his
trust as an Initiate, and essential to the
welfare of the Church. Si Paul later


recurs again to this, laying stress on the
supreme importance of the matter in a
way that would-be exaggerated had the


knowledge been the common property of
Christian men: “ Hold fast the form of
sound words which thou Hast heard of
me .... That good thing which
Was committed unto thee, keep by the
Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us”^—as


^ Ibid., -vi. 12. ^ Ibid., 20.

’ II. Tim. i. 13, 14.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 61

serious an adjuration as human lips could
frame. Further, it was his duty to provide
for the due transmission of this sacred
^deposit, that it mij^ht be handed on to the
future, and the Church might never be left
without teachers : “ The things that thou
hast heard of me among many witnesses ”
—the sacred oral teachings given in the
assembly of Initiates, who bore witness to
the accuracy of the transmission—“ the ff
same commit thou to faithful men, whof
.shall be able to teach others also.” ‘ *

The knowledge—or, if the phrase be
preferred, the supposition—that the Church
possessed these hidden teachings throws a
flood of light on the scattered remarks
made by S. Paul about himself, and wheny
they are gathered together, we-Jiave an i
outline of t he evoiuti onfc. QL.JtheJbk (
S. Paul asserts that though he was alre^y
among the perfect, the initiated—for he
says : “ Let us, therefore, as many as be!
perfect, be thus minded”—he had not yet
“ attained,” was indeed not yet whollyl
“perfect,” for h e,.Jbiad not yet won Chris t; f
he had. jjot yet rea ched the “ high calling \


* ii, 2.


62


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


of God in Christ,” “ the power of His
resurrection, and the fellowship of His
sufferings, being made conformable unto
His death; ” and he was striving, he says,

“ if by any means I might attain unto the
^r esurrection ^pf the dead.”' For this was
the Initiation that liberated, that made the
Initiate the Perfect Master, the Risen
! Christ, freeing Him finally from the
«'! “dead,” from the humanity within the
■ circle of generati on, from the bonds tha.t
fettered the soul to gross matter. Here
j again we have a number of technical
i terms, and even the surface reader should
' realise that t he “resurrection of the dead
here spoken of cannot be th e ordinar y
r esurrectio n _ of "the modern Chxistiaja,
fsupposed to be inevitable for all men, arid
Itherefore obviously not requiring any
Ispecial struggle on the part of any one to
mttain to It. In fact the very word “ attain ”
would be out of place in referring to a
universal and inevitable human experience.
S. Paul could not avoid /Aa/ resurrection,
according to the modern Christian vie^w.
What then was the resurrection to attain


'Phil. iii. 8, 10-12, 14, 15.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 63

which he was making such strenuous
efforts ? Once more the only answer
comes from the Mysteries. In them the
Initiate approaching the Initiation that
liberated from the cycle gf,_rebirth, the
circle of generation, was called “ the
■ suffering .Chria t; ” he shared the sufferings
of the Saviour of the world, was crucified
mystically, “ made conformable to His
death,” and then attained the resurrection,
the fellow.ship of the glorified Christ, and,
after that, death had over him no power.'
This was “the prize” towards which the
great Apostle was pressing, and he urged
“as many as be perfect,” not the ordinary
believer, thus also to strive. Let them not
be content with what they had gained, but
still press onwards.

T his resembl ance of the Initiate to t he|
Christ is, indeed, tFe very groundwork of|
>the Grea ter Mysterie s, as we shall see|
^more""'in^Tletail when we study “Thei
^ Mystical Ch rist.” The Ini tiate was n o|

long er Jto.lopk on "Cht^ as outside

himse lf: “ Though we have known Christ

‘Rev. i. 18. “I am He that liveth, and was dead;
and behold, I am alive for evermore. Amen.”


64


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


( after the fle sh, yet now henceforth know
we Him no niore.”'

The ordinary believer had “ put on
Christ;” “as many of you as have been
baptised into Christ have put on Christ.”®
Then they were the “babes in Christ” to
whom reference has already been made,
and Christ was the Saviour to whom they
looked for help, knowing Him “after the
flesh.” But when they had conquered the
fiower nature and were no longer “carnal,”
jt hen they were to ent er o n a higher pat h,

■ k nd were tH^mselves t o Eecpme... Christ .

This which he himself had alffiS^n^Sied,
jtwas the longing of the Apostle for his
followers ; “My little children, of whom I
travail in birth again until Chri st be
formeJ** in you.”^ Already he was their
spiritual having “begotten you

through the gospel.But now “again”
he was as a parent, as their mother to
bring them to the second birth. Then the
infant Christ, the Holy Child, was born in
the soul, “the hidden man of the heart

’II. Cor. V. i6. “Gal. iii. 27.

^Gal. iv. 19. * 1 . Cor. iv. 15. ^I. S. Pet. iii. 4.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 65

the Initiate thus became that “ Little ..
Child”; henceforth he was to live out in i
his own person the life of the Christ, f
until he became the “ perfect man,” grow-t\
ing “unto the measure of the stature ofjl
the fulness of Christ.”" Then he, as S. '
Paul was doing, filled up the sufferings of
Christ in his own flesh,“ and always bore
“ about in the body the dying of the Lord I
Jesus ,”3 so that he could truly say : “ I am }
c rucified with Christ neve rtheless I ,.liye
yet not j, b ut Christ live th in me.”'* Thus
was the Apostle himselF suffering ; thus
he describes himself. And when the
struggle is over, how different is the calm
tone of triumph from the strained effort
of the earlier years : “ I am now ready to
be offered, and the time of my departure
is at hand. I have fought a good fight,
I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith : henceforth there is laid up for me
a cro'wn of righteousness.”® This was the
crown given to “him that overcometh,”
of whom it is said by the ascended
Christ: “ I will make him a pillar in the

" Eph. iv. 13. = Col. i. 24. ® II. Cor. hr. 10.

Gal. S. 20. ® IL Hm. hr.


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


66

I temple of my God ; and he s^haJ[j;o^g,
l For after the “ Re.surrcctbn "

thelnitiate has become the I’erfect Man. the
Master, and He goes out no more from
; the Temple, but from it serv’es and guides
• the worlds.

it may be well to {xiint out. ere dosing
[.this chapter, that S. Paul himself sancUons
ahe use of the theoretical mystic teaching
lin~ c.x plaining the historical events n’Cf»rdcd
nn the Scriptures. 'I'he history therein
written is not rcgardetl by liim as a mere
record of facts, which occurred on the
physical plane. A true; mystic, he .saw
in the physical events the shadows of
the universal truths ever unfokling in
higher and inner worlds, and knew that
the events .selected for prestTvntion in
occult writings were such as were typical,
the explanation of which would subserve
human in-struction. Thus he take.s the
story of Abraham, Sarai, Hagar, I.shmael,
and Isaac, and saying, " wjikb tji^^
an a ^go ry,” he proceed.^ to give the
mysti^TTnterpretation.’ Referring to the
escape of the Israelites from Egypt, he

‘Rev. iil 13 , 'Oal iv. 33-31.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 67


speaks ,jo£ ,the Red Sea as a baptism, of
the manna and the water as spiritual meat
and spiritual drink, of the rock from which
the water flowed as Christ.^ He sees the
great mystery of the u nion of Christ and
His Church in the human relation. of
husbandTand wife, and speaks of Christians
aT^t^e ffesh*~’and the bones of the body
of Christ."' The writer ^f the J^ijtl^„to
the Hebrew:s allegori ses the wi^e Jewish
systehr^oT worship. In the Temple he^
sees a pattern of the heavenly Temple, p
in the High Priest he sees Christ, in|
the sacrifices the ofiering of the spotless!
Son; the priests of the Temple are but|
“the example and shadow of heavenly!
things,” of the heavenly priesthood serving !
in “ the true tabernacle.” A
^borate^-allfi^efVr^ts thus, worked ~^ t I
uT chapters ih-x .. and the writer alleges |
that the Holy Ghost thus signified the >
deeper meaning; all was “ a figure for
the time.”

In this view of the sacred writings, it
i.s nnt„_all£g£d„.daa^ ..e.vfin ts _ -cacnrdpd
^d but only that their

* I Cor. X. 1-4. ® Eph. V- 23-32.


68


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


physical happening was a matter of minor
importance. And such explanation is the
unveiling of the Lesser Mysteries, the
mystic teaching which is permitted to be
given to the world. It is not, as many
think, a mere play of the imagination, but
is~tEe‘oiifcdihe of a true intuition, seeing
the patterns in the heavens, and not only
the shadows cast by them on the screen of
earthly time.


Chapter III.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY

( concluded),

(b) Tim Testimony of the Church.

While it may be that some would be
willing to admit the possession by the
Apostles and their immediate successors
of a deeper knowledge of spiritual tilings
than was current among the masses of the
believers around them, few will probably
be willing to take the next .step, and,
leaving that charmed circle, accept as the
depository of their sacred learning the
Mysteries of the Early Church. Yet we
have S. Paul provimn^Tor the transmission
of the unwritten teaching, himself initiating
S. Timothy, and instructing S. Timothy to
initiate others in his turn, who should again
hand it on to yet others. We thus see the
provision of four successive generations of

F 69


70


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


teachers, spoken of in the Scriptures them¬
selves, and thest: would far more than
overlap the writers of the Early Church,
who bear witness to tin; existence of the
Mysteries, h'or amonj^ these are pupils of
the Apostles themselves, though the most
definite statements belong to those removed
from the Apostles by one intermediate
teacher. Now, as soon as we begin to
study the writings of the Early Cdiurch,
we are m^ Tjy the fiiets that there are
allusions which are only intelligible bjjJiie
existence of the My.s|yries, and then
.statements that the Mysteries are existing.
This might, of course, have l)een expected,
.seeing the point at which the New Testa¬
ment leaves tin; matter, l)ut it is satisfactory
to find the facts answer to the expectation.

The first witnesses are those called the
Apostolic Fathers, the disciples of th e
Apostle s; but very little of their writings,
and that disputed, remains. Not being
written controversially, the statements are
not as categorical as those of the later
writers. Their letters are for the
encouragement of the believers. P olyca rp,
Bishop of Smyrna, and fellow-disciplewith


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 71


I gnatius of S.,John,' expresses a hope that
his correspondents are “ well versed in the
sacred Scriptures and that nothing is hid
from you; but to me this privilege is not
yet granted ” “—writing, apparently, before
reaching full Initiation. B arna bas speaks
of communicating “some portion of what
I have myself received,” ^ and after
expounding the Law mystically, declares
that “we then, rightly understanding His
commandments, explain them as the Lord
intended.” Ignatius, Bi.shop of Antioch,
a disciple of S. John,® speaks of himself as
“not yet perfect in Jesus Chri.st. For I
now begin to be a disciple, and I speak to
you as my fellow-disciples,”® and he speaks
of them as “initiated into the mysteries of
the Gospel with Paul, the holy, the

' Vol. I. The Martyrdom of Ignatius^ ch. iii. ,

The translations used are those of Clarke’s Ante-
Nicene Library, a most useful compendium of
Christian antiquity. The number of the volume
which stands first in the references is the nuipber of
the volume in that Series.

" Ibid. The Epistle of Tolycarp, ch. xii.

’ Ibid. The Epistle of Barnabas, ch. i. Ibid, ch. x.

® Ibid. The Martyrdom of Ignatius, ch. i.

‘ Ibid. Epistle of Ignatius to the Ephesians, ch. iii.


72 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

martyred.”* Again he says: “Might I
not write to you things more full of
V mystery ? But I fear to do so, lest I should
inflict injury on you who are but babes.
Pardon me in this respect, lest, as not
■- being able to receive their weighty import,
_ ye should be strangled by them. For even
. I, though I am bound [for Christ] and am

- able to understand heavenly things, the

- angelic orders, and the different sorts of

■ angels and hosts, the distinction between

- powers and dominions, and the diversities

• between thrones and authorities, the

• mightiness of the aeons, and . the pre-
' eminence of the cherubim and seraphim,

• the sublimity of the Spirit, the kingdom of

■ the Lord, and above all the incomparable

• majesty of Almighty God—though I am

• acquainted with these things, yet am I not
therefore by any means perfect, nor am I

- such a disciple ais Paul or Peter.” ® This
passage is interesting, as indicating that the
organisation of the celestial hierarchies was
one of the subjects in which instruction
was given in the Mysteries. Again he

^ Ibid. ch. xii.

* Ibid, to the Trallians, ch. v.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 73


speaks of the High Priest, the Hierophant,
“to whom the holy of holies has been
committed, and who alone ha.s been
entrusted with the secrets of God.” *

We come next to S._ ffem ent qf^Alex-^
%ndri a and his pupil. O rig en, the twoi
writers of ttie second and third centuriesl
who tell us most about the My.sterie.s iii
the Early Church ; though the general ^
atmosphere is full of mystic allusionsi
these two are clear and categorical in theij

st atements^ ~that the Mystf-wis_

recognis ed in stitut ion. *

Now ~S. Clement" was a disciple ol
Pantsenus, and he speaks of him and of
two others, said to be probably 'Patian and
Theodotus, as “.preserving the tradition
of the blessed doctrine derived directly
from the holy Apostles, Peter, James,
John, and Paul,”® his link with the Apostles
themselves consisting thus of only one
intermediary. He was the head of th^te /
Catechetical School of Alexandria in a-ix/
j: 89, and died about a.d. 220. Origeij^

* Ibid, to the Pkiladelphians^ ch. ix.

“Vol IV. Clement of Alexandria Stromata^
bk. L ch. i.


74 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

born about a.I). 185, was his pupil, and he
is, perhaps, the most learned of the Fathers,
and a man of the rarest moral beauty.
These are the witnesses from whom we
receive the most important testimony as
to the existence of definite Mysteries in
the Early Church.

The Stromata, or Mi scel hinies, of S.
Clern e nt ar e our source of informa tion

about th e_^Mysteries in hi s time . He

himself speaks of these writings a.s a
“ n pscellan y o f G nostic notes, according to
the true philosbpfiyf^ alid also de.scribc.s
them as memoranda of the teachings he
had himself received from Pantrenus. The
passaj;-e is instructive : “ 'fhe I.ord . . .

allowed us to communicate of those tlivine
Mysteries, and of that holy light, to those

V who are able to receive them. Me did not
>•' certainly disclose to the many what did not

belong to the many; but to the few to

V whom He knew that they belonged, who
were capable of receiving and being
moulded according to them. But .secret

entrusted to speech, , to
writing, as is the case vvith' t^. And if
*Vol. IV. Stromata, bk. I. ch. xxviii.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 75


Xi


one say' that it is written, ‘ There is
nothing secret which shall not be revealed,
nor hidden which shall not be disclosed,’
let him also hear from us, that to him who >-
hears secretly, even what is secret shall be -
manifested. This is what was predicted •
by this oracle. And to him who is able '■
secretly to observe what is delivered tp •
him, that which is veiled shall be disclosed ‘
as truth ; and wha.t is hidden to the many ■
shall appear manifest to the few. . . . ■

The Mysteries are delivered mystically, ‘
that what is spoken may be in the mouth
of the speaker; rather not in his voice, -
but in his understanding . . . The *-

writing of these memoranda of mine, I ‘
well know, is weak.when compared with '
that spirit, full of grace, which I was ♦
privileged to hear. But it will be an image '
to recall the archetype to him who was '•
struck with the Thyrsus.”f The Thyrsus, we -■
may here interject, was the w^jid borne by ^
Initiates, and candidates were ^touched *•
with it during the ceremony of Initiation. *
It had a mystic significance, symbolisjng "

' It appears that even in those days there were some
who objected to any truth being taught secretly 1


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


76


w

's/N


the spinal cord and the pineal gland in the
Lesser Mysteries, and a Rod, known to
Occultists, in the Greater. To say, there
fore, “to him who was struck with the
Thyrsus ” was exactly the same as to say^,_
“to him who was initiated in the Mysteries .’* j
Clement proce eds : “We profess not'to
explain secret things sufficiently—far from
it—but only to recall them to memory,
whether we have forgot aught, or whether
for the purpose of not forgetting. Many
things, I well know, have escaped us,
through length of time, that have dropped
away unwritten. . . . There are then

some things of which we have no recollec¬
tion ; for the power that was in the blessed
men was great.” frequent experience
of those taught by the Great Ones, for
Their presence stimulates and renders
active powers which are normally latent,
and which the pupil, unassisted, cannot
evoke. ^ “ There are also some things
which rSnained unnoted long, which have
now escaped ; and others which are effaced,
having faded away in the mind itself, since
such - a task is not easy to those not
experienced ; these I revive in my com-


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 77


mentaries. Some things I purposely omit,
intlie^exercise of a wise selection, afraid
to write what I guarded against speaking;
not grudging—for that were wrong—but
fearing for my readers, lest they should
stumble by taking them in a wrong sense ;
and, as the proverb says, we should be
found ‘ reaching a sword to a child. ’ For
it is impossible that what has been written
should not escape [become known],
although remaining unpublished by me.
But being always revolved, using the one
only voice, that of writing, they answer
nothing to him that makes enquiries beyond
what is written ; for they require of neces¬
sity the aid of some one, either of him who
wrote, or of some one else who has walked
in his footsteps. Some things my treatise
will hint; on some it will linger; some it
will merely mention. It will try to speak
imperceptibly, to exhibit secretly, and to
demonstrate silently.”'

This passage, if it stood alone, would
suffice to establish the existence of a
secret teachinjr in the Early Church. But
it stands by no means albnei In Chapter
bk. L, ch. i


78 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

xit. of this same Book I., headed, “ The
Mysteries of the Faith not to be divulged
Clement declares that, since others
than the'l^Se may .sec his work, “it.is
requisite, therefore, to hide in a Mystery

fthejdsdom.spoken, which. the,„.Spn_of

^ i God tau ght." Purified tongue of the
jspeaker, purified cans of the hearer, these
I were necessary. “Such were the impedi-
Alments in the way of my writing. And
v' even now I fear, as it is said, ‘ to cast
the pearls before swine, lest they tread
them under foot and turn and rend us.'
Fof it is d i ffi cult to exhibit th e re ally
' a nd t r ansp arent words respecting

' t he true light, to swinish an d u ntramed
'■ hear ers. For scarcely could anything
which they could hear be more ludicrous
■^than these to the multitude ; nor any
V subjects on the other hand more admir¬
er able or more inspiring to those of noble
•j' nature. But the . wise do^iot utter with
*■ their mou t h what they rcas olf'i n counci l.
*' ‘ But what ye hear in the ear,’ said the
Lord, ‘ proclaim upon the houses ’; bidding
them receive the secret traditions of the
'^true knowledge, and expound them aloft


THE HIDDEN SItME OF CHRISTIANITY. 79 '''"

and conspicuously; and as we have heard *
in the ear, so to deliver them to whom^
it is requisite ; but enjoining- us to**

to. , all without7distjn5ion, s--

what i s said.to them ip parables.’ But

there is only a delineation in the menio-^*
randa, which have the truth sown sparse**
and broadcast, that it may escape the *•
notice of those who pick up seeds like
jackdaws ; but when they find a good i
husbandman, each one of them will •
germinate and will produce corn.”

Clement might have added that to “ pro¬
claim upon the houses ” was to proclaim or
expound in the assembly of the Perfect,
the Initiated, and by no means to shout
aloud to the man in ttggjT"’" ' '"’'

Again he says IKat those who are
“still blind and dumb, not having under-
standing, or the undazzled and keen vision
of the contemplative soul . . . must*}

stand outside of the divine choir. . . . q

Wherefore, in accordance with the method
of concealment, the truly sacred Word, ^
truly divine and most necessary for us, ^
deposited in the shrine of truth, was by the
Egypt ians indicated by what were called **


8o ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

v' am ong xhx&vsx adyta, and by the H ebrews
■I by the veil. Only the consecrated . . .

■/ were allowed access to them. F or Plato
f also thousfht it not lawful for ‘ the impure
to touch the £ure.’ Thence the prophecies
.} and oracles are s poken in enigmas , and the
'■ Mysteries are not exhibited incontinently
to all and sundry, but only after certain
■♦purifications and previous instructions.”'
He then descants at great length on Sym-r.
bols. expounding Pythagorean, Hebrew,
Egyptian,® and then remarks that the
ignorant and unlearned man fails in under-
> standing them. “ But the Gnosti c appre -
hends. Now then it is not wishedthatall

V things should be exposed indiscriminately
» to all and sundry, or the benefits of wisdom

V communicated to those who have not even
»- in a dream been purified in soul (for it

is not allowed to hand to every chance
.r comer what has been procured with such
laborious efforts) ; no£_a. re th e_ Mvsferip.q
o f the Word to be exp ounded to th e
prof^ e.” Th e Pytha£ Q£eans_a nd Platp ,
and Aristotle had exoteric and


^ Ibid. bk. V.. ch. iv.


^ Ibid, ch. v.-viii.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY 81

esoteri c teachings. The philosophers^''"""'^
e'SfeBTished the Mysteries, for “was it not
more beneficial for the holy and blessed
contemplation of realities to be con-
cealed?”’' Th e Apostle s also approved
of “veiling the M*ystenes of the Faith,”

“ for there is an instruction to the perfect,”
alluded to in Colossians i. q-ii and 25-27.

“So that, on the one hand, then, there”'
are the Mysteries which were hid till the"
time of the Apostles, and were delivered*'
by them as they received from the Lord,
and, concealed in the Old Testament, were*’
manifested to the saints. And, on the*
other hand, there is ‘the riches of then
glory of the mystery in the Gentiles,
which is faith and hope in Christ; which
in another place he has called the
‘ foundation.’ ” He quotes S. Pau l to
show that this “knowledge belongs nol to
^alL^’ and says, referring to Heb. v.
and vi., that “ t here were certainly amon g
the Hebrews, some things ddix ££gd
viKwTitteny^ and then refers to S.
Barnabas, who speaks of God, “who
has~^t into our hearts wisdom and the

* Ibid. ch. ix.


82 ESOTERIC rilRISTIANITY.

understanding of His secrets ," and says
' that " it is but for few to comprehend
these things,” as showing a "trace of
Gnostic tradition." “ Wherefore instruc-
'' tion, which reveals hidden things, is called
' illumination, as it is the teacher only who
^ uncovers the lid of the ark." * Further
referring to S. Paul, he comments on his
remark to the Romans that he will " come
in the fulness of the blessing of Christ," *
and says that he thus designates “ the
spiritual gift and the Gnostic interjiretation,

'I while being present he desires to impart
>* to them present as ' the fulness of Christ,
according to the revelation of th e My &terv
^ sjs a lled i n the ages of eternity, but now
" manifested by the prophetic Scriptures’’
. . . . But only to a few of them is

* shown what those things are which are

V contained in the Mystery. Rightly, then,
-r Pl^. in the epistles, treating of God,

V says: ' W e must speak in en igm as; that
should the tablet come by any mischance

’ bk V., ch. X. • Loc. Cit. x%'. aq.

* 3 id. xvi. as, a6; the version quoted differs in
words, but not in meaning, from the English
Authorised Version.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 83 J^/ ’ 4 -,'

on its leaves either by sea or land, he who *
reads may remain ignorant.’ ” ’

After . much examination.of Greeki

writers, and an investigation , into, ,philo-A
so p hy, S . Clement declares that the Gjc^sisj \
“imparted and revealed by the Son of God,I
is wisdom. . . . And the Gnosis itself isv

that which has descended by transmission
to a few, having been imparted unwritten
by the Apostles. A very long exposition
o f the life of the Gnostic, the Initiate, is
give n, and S. Clement concludes it by
sayin g: “ Let the specimen suffice to those
who have ears. For it is not required to
unfold the mystery, but only to indicate
what is sufficient for those who are ”
partakers in knowledge to bring it to *
mind. ”3

Regarding Scripture as consisting of
allegories and symbols, and as hiding the
sense in order to stimulate enquiry and
to preserve the ignorant from danger.**

S. Clement naturally confined the highe r
i nst ructioiT to the learn ed. “ Our Gnostic


* Stromata, bk. V., ch. x. " Ibid. bk. VI., ch. vii.
■^Ibid. bk. VII., ch. xiv. " Rid. bk. VI. ch. xv.


84


KSOTKRIi ( IIKISTIAN! I V.


will be deeply ic.inied,"' he says. '* Now
the Gnostic must be erudite."’ Those
who had uccjuir<*d readiness by jirevioiis
training could master the dee{)er know-
^ ledge, for though " a man can lie a
•r believer without learning, .so also we
.^assert that it is impossilile for a man

- without learning to comjirehetul the th ing s
" winch are ileclaretl in the faith."' " Some

who think themselves naturally gifted, do
'• not wi.sh to touch either philosophy or
' logic ; nay more, they do not wish to

- learn natural .science. 'They dernaiul bare
>• faith alone . . . So .also 1 call him
'' truly learned who brings everything to

bear on the truth so that, from geometry,
and mu.sic, and grammar, tintl (ihilosophy
itself, culling what is useful, he guards
'' the faith against assault . . How

necessary is it for him who ticsires to be

- partaker of the power of God. to treat
* of intellectual subjects by philosophising."^

“ The Gnostic avails himself of branches
of learning as auxiliary {irejiiiralory


' md. bk. VI. X.

* Ibid bk. I. ch. vi.


• md bk. VI. vii.
* Ibid, ch. IX.


THK ninmcN side of Christianity. 85

exercises.”' So far was S. Clement from
thinking that the teaching of Christianity
.should be mea.sured by the ignorance of
the unlearned. “He who is conversant
with all kinds of wisdom will be pre¬
eminently a Gnostic.Thus while he
welcomed the ignorant and the sinner,
and found in the Go.spel what was suited
to their needs, he considered that onl y

the learned and.the^ PH.?, w e re. fit

c andida tes for the ^ Mysteries. “ The
Apostle, in contradistinction to Gnostic
perfection, calls the common faith the
foundation, and sometimes but on

that foundation the edifice of the Gnosis
was to be raised, and the food of men
was to succeed that of babes. There is
nothing of harshness nor of contempt in
the distinction he draws, but only a calm
and wi.se recognition of the facts.

Even the well-prepared candidate, the
learned and trained pupil, could only hope
to advance step by step in the profound
truths unveiled in the Mysteries. This
appears clearly in his comments on the

• IMd. bk. VI. ch. x, 'Ibid. bk. I. ch. xiii,

> Vol Xn. Stromata, bk. V, ch. iv.

G


86


EsuTKRJ* rUHlsTI\KirV.


vision of Hcrmas. in which h<' alH<» throws
out some hints on mcthtwls rcadinjr
occult Wf>rks. ■■ Hill not thr Powrr also,
that ap|warr<l to Hennas in the Vision, in
the form of the Church, y^ive for transcrip¬
tion iht! IwHik which she wislusl to Iw made
known to the elect i* Anil this, he say^,
he transcrilKsI to the letter, without tinclinp
how to complete the syllables, .\ml this
sij^jnfied that the Scripture is clear to all,
when taken accordhij^ to Uise reading;
and that this is ihi^ faith which occupies
the place of the rudiments. Wherefore
also the figurative exj»ression is employct',
* reading according to the jelier,’ while we
understand that the gnostic unfolding ol
Scriptures, when faith has already reached
an advanced state, is likened to rending
according to the syllables. . . , Now

t hat t he Saviou r has taught the Apogde>
tJbfi^unmiUmLJ^enderh^ of the' w ritten
(scriptures ) has been handed down also to
us, inscribed by the power of Grid on
hearts new. according to the renovation
I of the book. Thus those of highest
f repute among the Greeks dedicate the
^ fruit of the pomegranate to Hermes, who


THE TIIDDKN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY.


87


they say is .speech, on account of its inter¬
pretation. For speech conceals much. .

. . That it is therefore not only to those

who read simply that the acquisition of the
truth is .so difficult, but that not even to
those whose prerogative the knowledge of
the truth is, is the contemplation of it
vouchsafed all at once, the history of
Moses teaches ; until accustomed to
gaze, as the Hebrews on the glory of
Moses, and the prophets of Israel on
the visions of angels, so we also become
able to look the splendours of truth in
the face.”’

Yet more references might be given,
but these should suffice to establish the
fact that S. Clement knew of, had been
initiated into, and wrote for the benefit of
those who had also been initiated into, the
Mysteries in the Church.

T he next witnes s is, his nuoi l On, gpt.
that most shining light of leaEfnmg,
courage, sanctity, devotion, meekness, and
zeal, whos e works remain as mines of gold
whereuT the student Tmay dig for the
treasures of wLsdom.


'J6id. bk. VI. ch. xv.


86


E^<»TI RI< « HKIsTI \NITV.


vision of ! li;rm;is, in which Ik- .iIh<» throws
out some hints on inctluKls t>f reading
occult works. ” Dill not the IN>wrr also,
that appeared to Hennas in the V'isifin, in
the form of th<* C'hurrh. ^ive for transcrip
tion the h(H*k which shi- wisheil to Im* made
known to the elect ? And this, he sjty.*,
he trun.scrihed to the lelt«'r. without lindit)}^
how to complete the syllahles. Anti this
sij^nified that the Scrijtture is clear to all.
when taken acc«»r<linj.f to Kise reatlinjf;
and that this is iht; faith which occupies
the place of the rutlimenis. Wherefore
also the figurative expressioti is empltiyct’,
‘ reatling accttrding to the letter.' while wt
understand that the gimstic unfolding ol
Scriptures, when faith has alreatly rcachct!
an advanced .state, is likened to readinj^
according to the syllables. . . . Novt

t hat th e Savio ur has taught the A{ K>stie ;
the unwritten ren dering t»f ilie w ritter
(scripture s) has been handetl rlown also u
us, in.scril>ed by the {K>wer of (icKl <»r
hearts new, according to the renovatior
I of the book. Thus those of highes
I repute anmng the Grtxjks dedicate tht
^ fruit of the pomegranate to Hermes, wht


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 87


i It*'


they say is speech, on account of its inter¬
pretation. For speech conceals much.

. . That it is therefore not only to those

who read simply that the acquisition of the
truth is so difficult, but that not even to
those whose prerogative the knowledge of
the truth is, is the contemplation of it
vouchsafed all at once, the history of
Moses teaches ; until accustomed to
gaze, as the Hebrews on the glory of
Moses, and the prophets of Israel on
the visions of angels, so we also become
able to look the splendours of truth in
the face.”'

Yet more references might be given,
but these should suffice to establish the
fact that S. Clement knew of, had been
initiated into, and wrote for the benefit of
those who had also been initiated into, the
Mysteries in the Church.

T he next witness is his p uoi l On|r en.
that most shining light of leafmng,
courage, sanctity, devotion, meekness, and
zeal, whose works remai n as mines of gold
wherein the student may dig for the
treasures of wisdom.


'7/^. bk. VL ch. XV.


88


ESOTERIC' CIIRISTIANtTY.


In his famous controversy with Cc^lsus
attacks were made on Christianity which
drew out a defence of the Christian
position in whicli frequcmt references were
made to the secret teachings.*

Celsus had alleged, as a matter of
attack, that Christianity wa.s a .sc-cret
system, and Origcm traverses this by
.saying that while certain doctrines were
secre t, many others were {utblic, and that
thi^ system of exoteric an<l csol^lic
teachings, adoptecl'In Chrisuanity, was
filso in general use among philnsoph^i^.
The reader should note, in the foliowing
pa.s.sage, the distinction drawn between the
resurrection of Jesus, regarded in a his¬
torical light, and the. "mystery of the
resurrection."

“ Moreover, since he [Celsus] frequently
calls the Christian doctrine a secret system
[of belief], we must confute him on this
point also, since almost the entire world is
better acquainted with what Christians
preach than with the favourite opinions of

’ Book I. of A^inst Ctlsus is found in Vol. X, of
the AnW'Niccne library. The rernsining books »re
in Vol XXni.


thp: mnoKN side of Christianity. 89

philosophers. For who is ignorant of the^”
•Statement that Jesus was born of a virgin,'*
and that He was crucified, and that His
resurrection is an article of faith among*
many, and that a general judgment is *
announced to come, in which the wicked'
are to be punished according to their*
deserts, and the righteous to be duly*
rewarded ? And yet^he Mystery of jhe'
re su rrection, not being understood, is made*'
a subject of ridicule among, unbelievers.

In these circumstances, to speak of the*'
Christian doctrine as a secret system, is '*
altogether absurd. But that there should**
be certain doctrines, not made known to"
the multitude, which are [revealed] after the
exoteric ones havd been taught, i^^jjQt~aM
peculiarity of Christianity. byt-also-r

or*phiT6sbphrc .systems, in which certain«
tniths^ire exoteric and others esote ric. 1
Some of the hearers of Pvthap-ora s were
content with his ipse ij^m-fTwhile others
were taught in secret those doctrines which >*
were not deemed fit to be communicated h
to profane and insufficiently prepared ears. *■
Moreover, all the Mysteries that are cele- *
brated everywhere throughout Greec e and **


90


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITV.


barbarous countries, although held in
iT secret, have no discredit thrown upon
them, so that it is in vain he endeavours
w to calumniate the secret doctrines of
’• Christianity, seeing that he does not
correctly understand its nature.”^

It is impossible to deny that, in this
important passage, Origen distinctl y places,
the Christian Mysteries in the same
category as those of the Pagan world , and
claims that what is not regarded as a dis¬
credit to other religions should not form a.
subject of attack when found in Christianity.

Still writing against Celsus, he declares
that the secret teachings of Jesus were
preseryed in the Church, and refers specifi¬
cally to the explanations that He gave to
His disciples of His parables, in answering
Celsus’ comparison of “ the inner Mysteries
of the Church of God ” with the Egyptian
M worship of animals. “ I have not yet
V spoken of the observance of all that is
v written in the Gospels, each one of which
♦ c ontains much doctrine difficult to be
fN understood , not merely by the multitude,
but even by certain of t he more intelligent.

' VoL X. Origen against Celsus, bk. I. ch. vii.


liti


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. gi , }^

including a very profound explanation of
the parables which Jesus delivered to
‘those without,’ while reserving the*
exhibition of their full meaning for those
who had passed beyond the stage of“
exoteric teaching, and who came to Him '•
privately in the house. And when he '
comes to understand it, he will admire the -
reason why some are said to. be ‘ wii-hn ut,’ *•
and~b thers ‘in the h ouse.’"*

And he refers guardedly to the “ moun¬
tain” which Jesus ascended, from which
he came down again to help “ those who
were unable to follow Him whither His
disciples went.”’- The l,llusion is to “the
Mountain of Initiation,” a well-known
mystical phrase, as Moses also made the
Tabernacle after the pattern “showed thee
in the mount.”” Origen refers to it again
liter, saying that Jesus showed himself to
be very different in his real appearance
when on the “ Mountain,” from what those
saw who could not “follow Him on high.”^

'Ibid.

•Ex. XXV. 40, xxvi. 30, and compare with Heb.
viii. 5, and ix. 23.

s Origen againsi Celsus, bk. IV. ch. xvi.


92


KSOTKkIC CHRISTI ANn V.


So also, in his commentary on the
Gospe l of Matthew, ('hap. xv.. ilealing
with the episode of the Syro-Plnenician
womfin, Grigen remarks : " Ami perhaps,
also, of the words f>f Jesus therre are some
loaves which it is possible to give to the
more rational, as to chiklren, tmly ; and
others as it were crumbs from tlte great
house and table of the well-borti, which
may be used l>y some souls like thjgs."

(-elsuK complaining that sinners were
brought into the ('hurch, Origen answers
that the Church hat! medicine for those
that were sick, but alstt the study ami tlte
knowledge of divine things for those who
were in health. Sinm:rs were taught not
to sin, and only when it was seen that
progre.ss had Ijeeit made, and men were
“purified by the Word." "then and not
before do we invite them to piirticipation
in our Mysterie.s. For we speak wi.sdoni
among th ent that a re perfe ct."* Sinners
came to be healed : “ For there are in the
divinity of the Word some he!p.H towards
'■ the cure of those who are sick . . .
Others, again, which to the pure in soul

' Mid. bk. ni. ch. lix.


Tlie HIDDEN SIDE OE CHRISTIANITY. $3 ■

and body exhibit the ‘revelation of the
Mystery, which was kept secret since the*
world began, but now is made manifest by
the Scriptures of the prophets,’ and ‘ by*-
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ,’►
which ‘appearing’ is manifested to each*
one of those who are perfect, and which*'
enlightens the reason in the true know-*'
ledge of things.”' Such appearances of
divine Beings took place, we have seen,
in the Pagan Mysteries, and those of the
Church had equally glorious visitants.

“ God the Word,” he says, “ was sent as
a physician to sinners, but as a Teacher
of Divine Mysteries to those who are
already pure, and who sin no more.”*

" Wisdom will n ot enter in to the soul o f ''
a base man , nor dwell in a body th^^, is

i nvolved in _gin;” hence tHese Kigher

teachings are given only to those who
are “ athletes in piety and in every
virtue.”

Christians did not admit the impure to
this knowledge, but said : “ Whoever hasl*’'
clean hands, and, therefore, lifts up holy^
hands to God ... let him come tofc


' ch. Ixi.


‘MW. ch. Ixii.


94


KSOT i: k t (• <'! IR l ST 1A XI TV,


f s . . . whoever is pure not only from

11 defilement, but from what are reg,irde<!
as lesser transjfressions. let him be bol<lly
initiated in the Mysteries of Jesus, which
pro{)erly are made known otdy to tlie holy
and the pure." Hence also, ere the cere¬
mony of Initiatioji be^^ui. he who acts as
Initiator, accordinjjj to the precepts of
Jesus, the HitTophaiU, made the
cant proclamation " Uj those wh»> have
''been purified in heart: He, whose s(miI
has, for a Ion},!; time, been ciinscious of no
evil, especially .since he yielded himself
to the healin|;( of the; Word, let su ch a
one hear the doctrines wltich were spuktnt
'in private by Jesus to His j^enyiae
ci isc iples." 'rhis was the ojx'ninjjj nf the
" initiating those who were already purifieti
into the sacred Mysterie.s."' .Such only
might learn the realities of the unseett
worlds, and ntight enter into the sacred
precincts where, as of old, angels were
the teachers, and where knowledge was

( given by sight and not only hy words.
lUiiLJai^A^bie not to, be...,sA«wk j
the different tone of these Christiansjfi^.

' /h'd, ch. be.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 95 .. /

that of their modern successors. With
tHem "perfect purity of life, the practice
of virtue, the fulfilling of the divine Law-
in every detail of outer conduct, the per¬
fection of righteousness, were—as with
the Pagans—only the beginning of the
way instead of the end. Nowadays
religion is considered to have gloriously
accomplished its object when it has made
the Saint ; then, it was to the Saints
that it devoted its highest energies, and.
taking the pure in heart, it led them' to
the Beatific Vision.

The same fact of secret teaching comes t
out again, when Origen is discussing the
arguments of Celsus as to th e wisdom
o f retaining ancestral customs , based on
the belief that “ t he various quarters i rf
the ea rth were from t he beginning allotted
t o different superintending Spiri t and
were th us distrib uted among certa in
got^ni ng !^we rs, and in this way the
£[3ministration of the world is carried'
on.

Origen having animadverted pn the
deductions of Celsus, proceeds: “ But as

* Vol. XXIII. Origen against CeJsus, bk. Y. ch. xxv.


96


KSOTKRir fHUlSTlANlTV.


we think it likely that sntne of those
who are accustotned to detjper investiga¬
tion will fall in with this treatise, let us
venture to lay down some consideraiiotis
of a prufounder kind, conveying a mystical
and secret view res{>ecting the original
distribution of the various quarters of the
earth among different superintending
Spirits."' He says that Celsus has mis¬
understood the deeper reasons relating to
the arrangement of terrestrial affairs, some
of tvhich are eveti touched upon in Cirecian
history. Then he qu otes I^eut, xx^i.
8-9: " When the Most High divided
the nations, wlum he dispersed the sons
of Adam, He set the bounds of the {»eople
according to the number of the Angels
of God ; and the Lord's {)oriion was his
people Jacob, and Israel the cord of his
inheritance." 'I’his is the wording of the
Septuagint, not that of the English
authorised ver.sion, but it is very sug-
ge.stive of the title the " J^ord " being
regarded us that of tj^^Eylirtg. .Aiiigel jjjL
the lews onl y, and not of the "Most High,"
i,e. God. This view has disappeared , from


' Ibid. ch. xxviu.


Till-, HIDDEN SITIE OF CHRISTIANITY. 97

ijrnorance, and hence the impropriety of
many of the statements referring to the
“ when they are transferred to the

“ Mo.st High,” Judges^ i. 19.

Origen then relates the history of the
Tpwer of Babel, and continues : “ But on
these subjects much, and that of a mystical
kind, might be said; in keeping with
which is the following : ‘ It is good to keep*'’
close the secret of a king,’ Tobit xii. 7, in’*
order that the doctrine of the entrance of‘
souls into bodies (not, however, that of"
the transmigration from one body into'-
another) may not be thrown before the-
common understanding, nor what is holy'
given to the dogs, nor pearls b e cast before *■’
swine. For suc h a procedure .. wauid. be
impiou s.'^inef equivalent to .a bet rayal ..of
the myst erious ^ckrations^___pf Go d’s ^
wis.dorQ . . ' r' . it_bL.Su fficient, ho w-*

ever, tp_rcpresent in the styl e of a histor ic
narrative what is inten ded to convey a
se^sTmeaning in the garb_of_hi^ory, that*
tlmsiTwho have the capacity may work out*^
for themselves all that relates ‘ to the
subject.”' He then expounds more fully
*//’'/>/, ch« xxix.


98 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

the T ower of Babel story, and writes;
“ Now, in the next place, if any one has
v the capacity let him understand that in
V what assumes the form of history, and
which contains some things that are literally
true, while yet it conveys a deeper
meaning . . . *

After endeavouring to show that the
“ Lord ” was more powerful than the other
superintending Spirits of the different
quarters of the earth, and that he sent his
people forth to be punished by living
under the dominion of the other powers,
and afterwards reclaimed them with all of
the less favoured nations who could be
drawn in, Origen concludes by saying:
“ As we have previously observed, these
" remarks are to be understood as being
made by us with a concealed meaning,
' by way of pointing out the mistakes of
those who assert . . . “ as did

Celsus.

After remarking that “the object of
Christianity is that we should become
wise,” 3 Origen proceeds : “If you come to

^Ibid. ch. XX xi. ’‘Ibid. ch. xxxii.

^ Ibid. ch. xlv.


/ 0 „,.

Tin; HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 99

the books written after the time of Jesus, **■
you will find that those multitudes of'
believers who hear the parables are, as it -
were, ‘without,’ and worthy only of-
exote ric doctrines, while the disciples learn
in private the explanation of the parables.

For, privately, to His own disciples did"
Jesus open up all things, esteeming above '
the multitudes those who desired to know”
His wisdom. And He promises to those '
who believe on Him to send them wise *
men and scribe.s. . . . And also •

in the catalogue of ‘Charismata’ bestowed
by God, placed finst ‘ the Word of wisdom,’ ■
and second, as being inferior to it, ‘the *
word of knowledge,’ but third, and lower
down, ‘ faith.’ And because he regarded
‘the Word’ as higher than miraculous ••
powers, he for that reason places ‘ work-"
ings of miracles ’ and ‘ gifts of healings ’ in
a lower place than gifts of the Word.” '

The Gospel truly helped the ignorant,
“but it is no hindrance to the knowledge
of God, but an assistance, to have been
educated, and to have studied the best
opinions, and to be wise."’ As for the
■ J[bid, ch. xlvi. ■ Ibid. chs. xlvii.-liv


lOO


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


unintelligent, “ I endeavour to improve
such also to the best of my ability, although
I would not desire to build up the Christian
community out of such materials. For I
seek in preference those who are more
clever and acute, because they are able to
comprehend the meaning of the hard
sayings.”' Here we have plainly stated
the ancient Christian idea, entirely at
one with the considerations submitted in
Chapter I. of this book. There is room
for the ignorant in Christianity, but it is
not intended only for them, and has deep
teachings for the “clever and acute.”

It is for these that he takes much pains
to show that t he Jewish and__Christian
Scriptures have hidden meanings, veile d
under stories the outer, meaning of which
repels them as absur d, alluding to the
serpent and the tree of life, and “ the
pther statements which follow, which
[mi^t of themselves lead a candid reader
to see that all these things had, not
inappropriately, an allegorical meaning.
^any chapters are devotfed to these alle¬
gorical and mystical meanings, hidden

'Ibid. ch. Ixxiv. 'Jbii. bk, IV., cb. xxxix.


TIIK HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY.

beneath the words of the Old and New
Testaments, and he a lleges that Moses
like the Egypti|ins, gave,, histor^s^^th
^cealecl m^inings.' “He who dealsi
candidly with histc
general canoii of

woi33 wish toHEc^

impo.sed on by them, will exercise his
judgment a.s to what statements he will
give his assent to, and what he will
accept figuratively, seeking to discover j
the meaning of the authors of such inven-j
tions, and from what statements he will!
withhold his beliefs, as having been written
for the gratification of certain individuals.
And we have said this by way of antici¬
pation respecting the whole history related
in the Gospels concerning Jesus.A
great part of his Fourth Book is taken up
with illustrations of the mystical explana¬
tions of the Scripture stories, and a^jj^one
who wishes to pursue the subject can read
through it.

In the De Pringipiis, Origen gives it as
the received teaching of the Church ‘that

* ¥oL X. Origen against Celsus^ bk. L, ch. xvii.
and others. Ibid, ch. xlii.


ries’^—this is Origen's
nimseli also from bein^


the Scriptures were writu.ii hy the Spirit
of Gotl. aiui have a meaning, not only
'' such as is apparmt at first siijht. but also
another, which esrapi s the lunire of most.
For those (words | which are written are
- the forms of certain Mysteries, and the
s ima^ns of divine thing's. Rcsjieclin}; which
^ there is one opinion thr«>uj»hinu the whole
' Church, that the whole law is indeed
•^spiritual; but that the spirityiil meaning

* ‘^“•ivcys is not known to all.
’ hpt to tho.se only on wh»)m the grace of

* Spirit is bt:stowetl in the wtjrd of

* wistlom and knuwletlge.*'• 'I'liose who
remember what has already lieen «pioied
will sec in th«< ’■Word of wisdom*’ and
"the word of knowledge" the two typiad
my.stical mstruciions. the spiritual and the
intellectual.

In the Fourth Book of Ih Prittcipiu,
9 S^ explains at length h!i.,Hkwa ua.thj^
"lISTpretation of Scripljjrc. It has a
'body, which ts the "common and
historical sen.se”; a “loul." a figurative
meaning to be discovered by the exercise
of the intellect; and a "spirit," m inner
' Vol. X, ,De PrimipUf Preface, p 8.


Till': IIIDPKK SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 105

o

and divine sense, to be known only by
those who have “the mind of Christ.”
He considers that i ncong ruous and im¬
possible things are TntroouceT'lnto^fhe
history to arouse an intelligent reader, and
(fonipHliiin to search for a deeper expkn-l
affon, while simple people would read onl
wtKdut aiipreciating the difficulties.

Cardinal.Is[e?«Spi,gy)y in his Arians of

the Fourth Century, has some interesting
remarks on the Disciplina Arcani, but, with
the deeply-rooted ingrainecl_scepticism _of
the nineteenth century, he cannot^believe
to the full in the “ riches of the .^Ipry^pf
the Mystery," or probably never for a
moment conceived the possibility of the
existence of such splendid realities. Yet
he was a believer in Jesus, and the words
of the promise of Jesus were clear and
definite ; “1 will not leave you comfort¬
less ; 1 will come to you. Yet a..Ettle
while, and the world seeth me no more ;
but ye see me : because I live, ye shall
live also. At that day ye shall know
that I am in my Father, and ye in me,
and I in you."" The promise was amply
‘ Ibid, ch, i. • s. John xiv. 18-20.


104


r‘iOTHtU MIKI^iTlAMTV.


rctleemwi. for Hr cunir i*i ihrm and
taught them in His My<4trrirs: therein
they saw Him. thmigh the world saw
Him no more, and they knew the Christ
as in them, .uul their life as Christ’s.

Carthnal Newman rerogniHeH a secret
tradition, haiuled down from the Apostles,
but he consiilers that it rottsi.stt’d of
Christian dcMirines, later divulged, for-
(getting that llmse who were lokl that
' they were not yet tit to receive it were
j not heathen, nor even catechumerns umler
i instruction, but full comimmicating mt;m-
hers of the Christian Church. rinis he
states that this secret tradition was later
" authoritatively tlivulgeil and }M’rjK"tuated
in the form of symbids," and wtts €!mb«Ktled
*' in the crectls of the early f ’ouncils.”*
But as the d(x:trines in the creeds are
to be found clearly stated in the Gospels
and i'lpistles, this position is wholly un¬
tenable, ail these having been idready
divulged to the world at large ; and in
all of them the members of the Church
were certainly thoroughly instructed. The
repeated .statements as to secrecy become

* Zw. di, ch. t. tec. til. p. 55.


THE HinnEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. 105 V

meaning’les.s if thus explained. The
Cardinal, however, says that whatever
“ has not been thus authenticated, whether
it was prophetical information or comment
on the past dispensations, is, from the
circum.stances of the case, lost to the
Church,” ‘ That is very probably, in fact/
certainly, true, so far as the Church is;
concerned, but it is none the less recover¬
able.

Commenting on Irenmus, who in his
work Againsi Heresies lays much stress
on the existence of an Apostolic Tradition
in the Church, the_Cardinal writes : “ He'"
then proceeds to speali of the clearne.ss and/
cogency of the traditions preserved in the"
Church, as containing that true wisdom of
the perfect, of which S. Paul speaks, and*'
to which the Gnostics pretended. And,^
indeed, without formal proofs of the^
existence and the authority in primitiveA
times of an Apostolic Tradition, it is plaint
that theiijnuaU^

granting that the Apostles conversed, and^
their friends had memories, like other men. a
I t is quite inconceivable that they should a
' Ibid. ch. 1 . sec. III. pp. 55, 56.


)<y> l-SOtKfllr |MR|STI\MTV.

' not have been led t»> arrange the series of
^ reveab’d dm trinrs more Hysicrmatirally than
' they reeonl them in Seripiure, as s«»on as

- their converts liecaine ex|>osf'd to the
' attacks awl tnisrrpresentations of heretics;

» unless they were forbid«l<'n to tlo so. a
v* supposition which cannot l»e tnainlained.

•- Their statements thus <K:casi<me<l would lx;

- preserved as a matter of course : together
with those «»iher secret Inii less imjKirtant

“ truths, to which S. Paul seems to allude,
• and which the early writers iw>rc or less
acknowledge, whether concerning the
n types of the Jewish t 'hurrh, or the
pro8pt:ctivc fortunes of the Christian.
^ And such recollections of a|)ostolical

* teaching would evitlenily be binding on

* the faith of those who were instructed
' in them; unless it can lie sup|wiscd that,
•^though coming from inspired teachers, they
"were not of divine origin."' In a j>art of

the section dealing with the allegorising
method, he writes in reference to the
sacrifice of Isaac, &c, as " typical of the
I'fewTestamiartt revelation": " In corrobo-
mtion of this remark, let it be observed,

pp. 54, 5S.


THE HinDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. I07 y'

that there seem s to have been" in the"
Church a traditionary explanation of these *
historical types, derived from the Apostles,
but kept among the secret doctrines, as*
being dangerous to the majority of
hearens; and certainly S. Paul, in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, affords us an«»
instance of such a tradition, both as'*'
existing and as secret (even though it be^
shown to be of Jewish origin), when, first**
checking himself and questioning his'*
brethren’s faith, he communicates, not"
without hesitation, the evangelical scope of ^
the account of Melchisedec, as introduced^
into the book of Genesis.” ®

The social and political convulsions that
accompanied its dying now began to torture
the vast frame of the Roman !^ , pipi re. and
even the Christians were caught up in the
whirlpool of selfish warring interests. We
still find scattered references to special
knowledge imparted to the leaders and
teachers of the Church, knowledge of the

' “ Seem s to have been ” is a somewhat weak
expression, after what is said by Clement and Origen,
of which some specimens are given in the text.

'‘Jiid., p. 62.


I lO


ISOTl-Rir rJlRIStlAMTV.


wholly devoid of myslerics, ■' It was
probably aliout the end of th e 5th cen tury,
Just as ancient philos«»phy was dying out
in the SchcK)ls of Athens, that the specula-
*'live philosophy of jico-Platonism made a
*^d^nite lodgment in I'hrlstian thought
Jt*. ll’ H'. *' lin'mry forgeries of the

M *' * pio»vsit^s - riie doctrines of

Christianity were by that time so firmly
* established that the Church could look
upon a symbolical or mystical inierpreta-
** tion of them without anxiety. The author
of the Timologka Mysika and the other
** works ascribed to the Areojxigite proceeds, *
therefore, to deyelgp the doctrines of
'* Procius witli^ very little modification into
a system of esoteric Christianity. God
is the nameless and supra-essential One,

^ elevated al>ove goodness itself. Hence

*' ' negative theolog y.' which ascends from
the creature to God by dropping one
after another every determinate predicate,

•» leads us nearest to the truth. The return
to God is the consummation of all things
H and the goal indicated by Christian
•' teaching. The same doctrines were
. 4 fpeached with more bf churchly fervour


THE IIinnKN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. Ill


by Max imu s the Confessor (580-622).“^
Maximu.s represents almo.st the last specu-
lative activity of the Greek Church but ''
the influence of the Pseudo-Dionysian ^
writing was transmitted to the West in *
the ninth century by Erigena, in whose ”
speculative spirit both "the scholasticism ^
and the mysticism of the Middle Ages **
have their rise. Erigena translated Dio- *
nysius into Latin along with the com-*
mentaries of Maximus, and his system is
essentially based upon theirs. The “
negative theology is adopted, and God *"
is stated to be predicateless Being, above ^
all categorie.s, and therefore not improperly
called Nothing \<jucry, No-Thing]. Outl**
of this Nothing or incomprehensible "
essence the world of ideas or primordial •
causes is eternally created. This is jj be **
Word or Son of God, in whom all thingSM
exTSt, so far as they have substantial *
existence. All existence is a theophany,
and as God is the beginning of all **
things, so also is He the end. Erigena*^
teaches the restitution of all things under
the form of the Dionysian adunaiio or*^'
deificatio. These are the permanent out-*^


112 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

'' lines of what may be called the philosophy
«of mysticism in Christian times, and it
is remarkable with how little variation
•.A they are repeated from age to age.”*

In the eleventh century^JBer nard of
Clairvaux (a.d. 1091-1153) and JHugp

of S. Victor carry on the mystic tradition,
with Richard of S. Victor in the following
century, and S. B o n a ventura the Seraphic
Doctor, and the great S. Thom as. Aquina s
{a.d. 1227-1274) in the thirteenth.

Thomas Aquinas dominates the ^ u^pe.of
t he~Middle ^^ es, by his lorce of character
no less than by his learning and piety.
He asserts “ Revelation ” as one source of
knowledge, Scripture and tradition being
the two channels in which it runs, and the
influence, seen in his writings, of the .
Pseudo-Dionysius links him to t he Neo-.
Platonists. The second source is Reason,
andTTiere the channels are the Plato nic
philosophy and the method s of Aristotle —

I the latter an alliance that did Christianj ty
1 no good, for Aristotle becam e an obsta ^
^^tothe advan^'^^of~the Tngher thought,
jas was made manifest in the struggles
^ Article on “ Mysticism.”— Encyc, Britan^


THE mnPEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. II3

'll

of Qord aDft.. Brun6, the Pythagorean.
Thomas Ag[uinas was canonised in a.d.

I §2 ^and the great Dominican remains
as a type of the .u nion of theology and
p hil osoph y—the aim of his lifer These
beloiig to the great Church of western
Europe, vindicating her claim “"to be
regarded as the transmitter of the holy
torch of mystic learning. Afound her
there also" sprang up many sects, deemed
heretical, yet containing true traditions of
the sacred secret learning, the Cathari and
many other-s, persecuted by a Church
jealous of her authority, and fearing lest
the holy pearls should pass into profane
custody. In this century also S. Elizabeth
of Hungary shines out with sweetness and
purity, while Eckharj : (a.d. 1260-1329)
proves himself‘aTwwthy inheritor of the
Alexandrian Schools. Eckhart taught
that “The Godhead is the absolute
Essence (Wesen), unknowable not only by
man but also by Itself; It is darkness and
absolute indeterminateness, Nicki in con¬
trast to Icki, or definite and knowable
existence. Yet It is the potentiality of all
things, and Its nature is, in a triadic


114


RSOTI-Kl'- I inUSTlANfTV.


process, to come fo consciousness of Itself
as the triune (ukI. Oeaiion is not a
temporal act. hut ati eternal necessity, of
the divine nature. I am as tu’ccs8,iry to
(fod. Eckhart is fond of sayinj{. as G<h1 is
necessary to me. In my kncnvh-dge and
love ('iral knows and loves Mimself,"'

Eckhart is followed, in the fuurteenih
century, bv John Tauier. an<l Nieola .4 of
Basel, “the I'riend of Gtal in the Obt^r
land.” From these sprang; up tin; Sr)c.ieiy
of the b'ricnds of Gwl. true mystics and
followers of the old tradition, Mead *
iiemarks that 'rht)mas Aquinas, rutdcr, and
Eckhart followed the I’seuilo I botiysius,
who followeti Plotinus, hujiblichus. and
Froclus, who in turn billowed Plato and
Pythagoras.’ So linked together are the «
followers of the Wisdtim in all ages. It
was probably a " Friend" who was the
author of Dit Dtnisdtte a book

of mystical devotion, which had the curious
fortune of being approved by Staupitz, the
Vicar-GcnentI of the Augustinian Order,
who recofnnteiuled it to Luther, and by

* Artkitj Myilkism.” Mmyikpmim Hriimmm,

*Otfktut, pp. S3, 54.


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITV. U 5

Luther himself, who published it a.d. 1516.
as a book which should rank immediately
after the Bible and the writings of S.
Augustine of Hippo. Another “ Friend ”
was Ruysbroeck, to whose influence with
Groot was due the founding of the
Brethren of the Common Lot or Common
Life—a Society that must remain ever
memorable, as it numbered among its
members that prince of mystics, Thomag,
h Kegipis (a.d. 1380-1471), the author of
the immortal Imitation of Christ.

* In the two following centuries the more
purely intellectual side of mysticism comes
out more strongly than the exstatic—^so
dominant in these societies of the four¬
teenth—and we have

, Cusa, with Gi ordano

knight-brrantoFphilosophy, an d Paiagslga B>
the much slandered scientisC^WlfCT di«w
his knowledge directly from the original
eastern fountain, instead of thrwigh Greek
channels.

The sixteenth century saw the liirlh
of Jacob Bi^me (a-ix *575 " i624)»
the *^nspired cobbler,” an Inithile in
obscuration truly, sorely p^sccattid by


Cardin^ Nic olas ol
Brano, th^ martyred


♦


Il6 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

unenlightened men; and then too came
S. _^,Xer .csa^ the much - oppressed and
suffering Spanish mystic; and S. J ohn of
the Cross, a burning flame of intense
devotion; and S. Francois de-Sales. Wise
was Rome in canonising these, wiser than
the Reformation that persecuted Bohme,
ibut the spirit of the ■ ^form ati^ wa s evg -
Intensely anti-mystical, an 3 ***wherever *its
preath has passed the fair flowers of
Imysticism have withered as under the
isirocco.

Rome, however, who, though she *
canonised Teresa dead, had sorely harried
her while living—-did ill with Mme. de
Guyon (a.d. 1648-1717), a true mystic,
and with Miguel de Molinos {1627-1696),
worthy to sit near S. John of the Cross,
who carried on in the seventeenth century
the high devotion of the mystic, turned into
* a peculiarly passive form—the Quietist.

In this same century arose the school
of Platonists in Cambridge, of whom
Henry More. (a.d. 1614-1687) may

serve as salient example ; also T homas
Vaughan , and Rpbert_FJu 44 .. 5.1^1 ig^i-
crucisLji ; and there is formed also the


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY, II7

Philadelphian Society, and we see William
Law (a.d. 1686-1761) active in the

eighteenth century, and overlapping S.
Martin (a.d. 1743-1803), whose writings!
iiavelascinated so many nineteenth century *
students.'

Nor should we omit Christian Rosep-
kreutz (d. a.d. 1484), whose mystic ^oaety
'^Itlie Rosy Cross, appearing in 1614, held!
true knowledge, and whose spirit was
reborn in the “ Comte de S. Germain,”|
the mysterious figure that appears and
disappears through the gloom, lit by lurid
flashes, of the closing eighteenth century.
Mystics too were some of the Quakers,
the much - persecuted sect of Friends,
seeking the illumination of the Inner
Light, and listening ever for the Inner
Voice. And many another mvs tic was
there, “ of whom the world was not
worthy,” like the wholly delightful and
wise Mother Juliana of Norwich, of the
fourteenth century, jewels of Christendoin,

* Obligation must be here acknowledged to the
Article “Mysticism,” in the Encyc. Brit., though
that publication is by no means responsible for the,
opinions expressed.

I


S;S(rrKRIt » HRISTIAMTV.


too little known. Init justifyinj^ (^hristiunity
to the work!.

Yet, as we salnu* reverenily these
Children of the Lijfht. scattered over the
centuries, we are forceil to recognise in
them the absence «*f that union of acute
intellect and high cU:vution wltieh were
welded together by the training of the
Mysteries, ami while we in.u vel that they
soared so high, wt: eaniuu Init wish that
their rare gifts had bia-n dt-veloped sinder
that magnificent iitsdpHint anatii,

Alphojise laniis Constant, better known
under his pseudonym, Eliphas Ldvi. has
|)ut rather well the loss of the Mysteries,
and the need for tlteir re-institution. " A
^ great misforiiuie Itefell Christianity. The
'* betrayal of the Mysteries by the false
f (jTnostics- for the Gnostics, that is. fXou
'* who knim, were the Initiates of primitive
Christianity causetl the C#nasis to be
rejected, and aliena ted the Church from
**-t he s upreme truftts of, iho l^iihbala, which
«e' contain all thii.jecr£ts of trausccadfiisJai
t heolog y. . . . Let the most absolute

science. let the highest reason, become
once more the (wtrimony of the leaders


THE HIDDEN SIDE OF CHRISTIANITY. II9

of the people ; let the sacerdotal art and
the royal art take the double sceptre of
antique initiations, and the social world
will once more issue from its chaos. Burn
the holy images no longer ; demolish the
temples no more; temples ancTlmages are
necessary for men ; but drive the hirelings
from the house of prayer ; let the blind
be no longer leaders of the blind, reco n -
struct the hierarchy of intelligence and
holiness, and recognise only those who
know as the teachers of those who
believe.”'

Will the Churches of to-day again take
up the mystic teaching, the Lesser
Mysteries, and so prepare their children
for the re-establishment of the Greater
Mysteries, again drawing down the Angels
as Teachers, and having as Hierophant
the Divine Master, Jesus? On the;
answer to that question depends the future|
of Christianity.

* m

' The Mysteries of Magic. Trans, by A. E. Waite,
pp, 58 and 60.


Chapter IV.

THE HISTORICAL CHRIST.


We have already spoken, jin the first
chapter, on the identities existing~ in all
the religions of the world, and we have
seenTEaTouToT^ stud^Tof these identities
in beliefs, symbolisms, rites, ceremonies,
histories, and commemorative festivals, has
arisen a modern school which relates the
whole of these to a common source in
human ignorance, and in a primitive
explanation of natural phenomena. From
these identities have been drawn weapons
for the stabbing of each religion in turn,
and the most effective attacks on Christian¬
ity and on the historical existence of its
Founder have been armed from this
/ source. On entering now on the study of

the life of the Christ, of the rites of
Christianity, its sacraments, its doctrines.


120


THE HISTORICAL CHRIST. 12 I

would be fatal to ignore the facts’^
marshalled by Comparative Mvtholoeists.i
R^llt|y understood^.,.mey may be made/|
serviceable instead of mischievous. 'W&I
have seen that the Apostles and their
successors dealt very freely with the Old
Testament as having an allegorical and
mystic sense far more important than the
historical, though by no means negating it,
and that they did not scruple to teach the
instructed believer that some of the stories
that were apparently historical were really
purely allegorical. Nowhere, perhaps, is
it more necessary to understand this
than when we are studying the story of
Jesus, surnamed the Christ, for wh en w e
do not disentangle the intertwisted threadfi,

events .'' allegories as histories, we lose
most of the instructiveness of the narrative
and much of its rarest beauty. We cannot
too much insist on the fact that Christianity
gains, it does not lose, when knowledge is
added to faith and virtue, according to the
apostolic injunction. ‘ .M£ n---iisar that
Christianity will be wegkSpeTwhen reason


t


123 I.S<tTFK»< I MUlsTIANITV.

Studies it, am! that it is ” tian^i’r<His" to
admit that t-vrois thcnij»ht to In* historical
have the «lc’t’|Hrr Hij'iiifuatuf u( the
mythical f»r mystical mraoinj^. It is. on
the ccmtrary, siren^ihc nctl, ami th«' student
linds. with joy. that the pearl of >4;reat
price shines with a purer, clearer lustre
when the coatinjf of ij^noram e is O’lnoved
and its many colours are seen.

There are iwp schuuLs of thought .at the
present time. Tiiiierly op|»ose<l to each
other, who dispute over the story «»f the
great Hebrew 'I'eacher. According to tme
school there is nothing at all in the
accounts of His life siive myths and
legends - myths jind legends that were
given as explanations of certain natural
phenomena, survivals of a pictorial way
of teaching certain facts of nature, of
impressing on the minds of the uneducated
certain grand classifications of natural
events that were important in themselves,
and that lent themselves to moral
' instruction. Those who endorse this view
form a well-defined school to which belong
many men of high education and strong
intel%ence, and round them gather crowds


the historical CHRIST. 12$

of the less instructed, who emphasise with
crude vehemence the more destructive
elements in their pronouncements, ihis
school is opposed by that of the beljes^rs
in orthodox Christianity, who declare that

the whole .story-lT jesus is. hpry^pn-

adulterated by legend or mytk i y„^

maintain that this history is nothing more j
than the history of the life of a man born
some nineteen centuries ago m I alestme,^
who passed’through all
set down in the Gospels, “d they deny

that the story has any signihcance

that of a divine and human life, i ne.se,
two schoob

:granion Snwally labelled ■■freethinking,
rerard the life - story,..as^J^Oly
teteada^ arf oartlFR^Slsal, but offer
aV/^fe utethod of
pretation, no adequate explanauon of the
Complex whole. And we also
the Lits of the Christtan Ch^ a large

and ever-increasing number of “

devout Christians of refined mtelligenc ,


124


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


men and women who are earnest in their
faith and religious in their aspirations, but
who see in the Gospel story m ore than th e
history of a single divine Man. They
I allege—defending their position from the
:'received'Seriptures—that the story of the
; Christ has a deeper and niore,.sigiii£ Lcani,
n'eaning*'' than”'iiS on the surface: wiiile


;Sey^^mhfain the historical character of
; Jesus, they at the same time declare that
T he Christ is more than th e man Jesus .

; a nd^has' a irnysSc^^ In support of

1 this contention they point to such phrases
as that used by S. Paul: “ My little
children, of whom I travail in birth again
again until Christ be forme d in y ou”;* here
S. Paul oEvTously cannot refer to a
historical Jesus, but to some forthputting
from the human soul which is to him the
s haping of Christ ther ein. Again the
same teacher declares that though he had
known Christ after the flesh yet from
henceforth he would know him thus no
more obviously implying that while he
recognised the Christ of the flesh—Jesus
—there was^^ajngher jie^^

'GaL iv. 19. ’II. Cor. v. 16.


THE HISTORICAL CHRIST.


125


had attained which threw into the _siiade
tEe~"’BTstorical Christ. This is the view
which many are seeking in our own days,,|
and—faced by the facts of Comparative V
Relig ign, pulled by the contradictions of|
th e Gospels, confused by proSld^ tTReyl
cannj^ solve so long as they are tied downl
to tbe mere surface meanings of their |
Scripture—they;,, gey despairingly that„the |
letter killeth while the spirit giveth .life, i
and seek to trace some deep and wide
significance in a story which is as old as
the religions of the world, and has always
served as the very centre and life of every
religion in which it has reappeared. These
struggling thinkers, too unrelated and
indefinite to be spoken of as forming a
school, seem to stretch out a hand on one
side to those who think that all is legend,
asking them to accept a historical basis;
on the other side they say to their fellow
Christians that there is a growing danger f
lest, in clinging to a literal and unique/
meaning, which cannot be defended before ’
the increasing knowledge of the day, the/'
spiritual meaning should be entirely lost.\
There is a danger of losing “ the story of


I SOTI RIi < IIRIST! VMTV.


I 2(>


, I'-

I '.*V-


V,'#


A


the Christ." with that iIkhi^^Iu of the
Christ which has ln’cn the Hup|Kirt and
inspiration of millions of noldr lives in
East and West, thouj'h thr Christ l>e
called l)y oth(’r names and worship{>ed
y* jiinder other forms ; a dan>t<'r lest the
■ i i>earl of great price should escape from
,| our hold, and man Iw left the piwirer for
, * i eyerniore.

' What is needed, in order that this
danger may Ik- averted, is t o discntanirle
the different threads in tin- si«»ry of the
Christ, and to lay them side l»y sale

the- ^l^read ii^^le^j^

the thread of mystic ism. 1 hc’s«« havebeen
intertwined int«> a single strand, to the
great loss of the thcnightful, and in dis¬
entangling them we shall find that the
story becomes mt>re, not less, valualile as
knowletlge is added to it. ami that here,
as in ail that is bisically of the truth,

We will .study first the historical Christ;
secondly, the mythic Christ: thirdly, the
mystic Christ. And we shi^l find that


THK HISTORICAL CHRIST,

They

an enter into the composition of the
grandiose and pathetic Figure which
dominates the thoughts and the emotions
of Christendom, the Man of Sorrows, the
Saviour, the Lover and Lord of Men.'


Tmk Historical Christ,

OR Jesus the Healer and Teacher.

The thread of the life-story of Jesus
is one which may be disentangled from
those with which it is intertwined without
any great difficulty. We may fairly here
aid our study by reference to those records
of the past which experts can reverify for
themselves, and from which certain details
regarding the Hebrew Teacher have been
given to the world by
and by others who are experts in occult
investigation. Now in the minds of many
there is apt to arise a challenge when this
word “ expert " is used in connection with
occultism. Yet it only means a person
who by special study, by special training,
has accumulated a special kind of know¬
ledge, and has ...de veloped powe rs..Ltha.t


I2.S


KsoTl': kI( ritniHTUMTV.


enable him to j»ive an oj>ininn founded
on his own individual knovilidj^e of the
subject with which he is tlealinj^. just
;is we speak of Huxley as an (Xpert in
biolojiy, as we speak of a Setiior Wranj^der
.xs an exjK’ft in malbem.ities. nr of I.ydl as
an ex{w rt iti ^n-oln^y. so we may fairly call
! a man ati exjK ri in oeculiisjn wlu> ha s fir st
mastere il jtitelk't tually certain fund i nu;n .ia{
theoru's of the constitution of ma n and th e
universe, and secondly has dcvcloimdLjadith-
m him self ilu’ janvers that arc latent in
everyone and are capable iif being
developed by those who give ibeinhelves
Jto appropriate stutlies- lapacities which
oxiuiimc iui-.hiinsclf the
JUfjwxr sses o f nature. As
a man may tx* born with a mathematical
faculty, and by trainitig that faculty year
after year may immensely iitcreitse his
, mathematical capacity, so may a man be
1 born with ceruiin faculties within him,

I faculties belonging to the Soul, which he
I can develop by training and by discipline.
\ When, having devcIojicU those faculties,

, \ he applies them to t he study of the
'''vtnvisible world, such a man becomes an


THE HISTORICAL CHRIST.


129


expert in Occult Science, and such a
man can at his will reygrif^ the records
to which I have referred "§uch' reveri¬
fication is as niuch out of the re ach o f
t he ordinary person as a mathematical
book written in the symbols of the higher
mathematics is out of the reach of those
who are untrained in mathematical science.
There is nothing exclusive in the know¬
ledge save as every science is exclusive ;
those who are born with a faculty, and
train the faculty, can master its appropriate
science, while those who start in life with¬
out any faculty, or those who do not
develop it if they have it, must be content
to remain in ignorance. These are the’
rules everywhere of the obtaining of I
knowledge, in Occultism as in every
other science.

The o^lijrgi:prd&.paj3Jx_ejido^
storyTold in the G ospels, and_j^tr% do
nor*endorse^; they show us the life,
"afi'd thus*"enable us to disentangle it from
the myths which are intertwined there¬
with.

The child whose Jewish name has b^n
turned into that of Jesus was bom in


r 1 r 1 .-


11^ f I wI I’l


*hr.n,^:h n,nr .,.-4 vr4f. „f

lilr, »r-»tn ^-r.i. *■ to ^»r.UT

IIk. --.mi-- rh.sm.*n

tnrr.i ,U. ‘T

dic -.1 ,, |..itia' j^rr. t,f *

ni),;ht%, !n4'.w4:-,n,; Pir--.r-n..- 1'hctL.

U„ th< !.< I|..n, ,.l ruKn.MUlv. whr« «

,msm!-.< ,. I,. . I. I spiritual

..< rn.u‘.l..n4. %vhrn .| I»»-w civiUsa.

U..S1 r. t . ihr i»ori»| «f

U «-if w.i ; sh-!, ready

I..5 «|k l.,rih 4a.! it,. IrMt..ni. wl^race
H4i t., ,h. «.j,Srr ,.|

fr..in thr_ l4iun^ Smu-!-; .4 Kniijr, Hrr it
■4.4flr,| u, j.,Mn»rv \Vof MHavitMlT


.J us.! Ill beakto

jhr .r4»llr »»([ jhr int.uit iirrritlrn,

* A Null >4 (»«m| ' tt-iin |0

. fl''%|i riifih, 4 •ui|irrittt* ' TTeaidlCTi

lull ..f |^fr4ir 4 mi iriiih * Om* in whom
I ihr i hvtitr \\ l•Mi(|||| 4l«t»i((:> in fulloit

|it»<r4«irr %*h„ %rrily ”ihc Word**

I0i4irn4!r, l,i{*hi 4itd l.tfr in outfmuHtmi^

rii'hnrM. a very I'tumiain «jf the Wmm»

'• J.rfiw I 14.


THE HISTORICAL CHRIST.


133


of Life. Lord of Compassion and of
Wisdom—such was His name—and from
His dwelling in the Secret Places He
came forth into the world of men.

For Him was needed an earthly
tabernacle, a human forni, the body of a
man, and who so^ to yield his body in
glad and willing service to One before
whom Angels and men bow down in
lowliest reverence, as this Hebrew of the
Hebrews, thi^p^irgst^n^^ ..pf
P erfec t,” whose spotless body and stainles^
mind offered the best that humanity coulca.
bring? The man Jesus yielded himself a*
willing sacrifice, “offered himself without
spot ” to the Lord of Love, who took unto
Himself that pure form as tabernacle, and
dwelt therein for th^e years of mortal life. t

This epoch is marked in the traditions
embodied in the Gospels as that of the
Baptism of Tesus. when the Spirit was
.seen “ descending from heaven like a dove,
and it abode upon Him,”' and a celestial
voice proclaimed Him as the beloved Son,
to whom men should give ear. Truly was
He the beloved Son in whom the Father

‘ S. John i. 32.

K


KSOTFlUi < UKISTIAMTV.


through niiK’-ainl-iwcnty years «»f mortal
life, growing from grace- to grace.

I'liis su|X’rhunian juirity and deyotuia

to

bcc9iB,t;JUlClai}plc «’( a loftier J’ijwer. of a
mighty, indwelling IVesenre. I’JjSLiime
had come for erne of those Di vine in ani-
! f^taiic>ns which frotn age to age arc- made
jfortlu; heljiing of hnm.mity. wlu-f» a new
! impulse is needed to <juirke»v the spiritual
evolution of mankind, when ;i new eivilisii-
jtion is ahout to dawn. I’he wjirkl «>f the
' West was ihett in the wi»ml» of time, ready
for the birth, ami the Ti’inornc sub-race
wa.s t<» catch the sceptre of empire falling
from the fniliftg jinntljs of Koi^^^ l'>e it
started on its journey a World-Saviour
mu.st ajipear. to staml in blessing Ijc.side
the cradle of the infant Hercules.

1 A mig hty “Son «»f fiod" was to take
flesh u{x> n earth, a supreme "Teacher,
“ full of grace and iniih ■*— ' One in whom
the Divine Wisdom aiKKic in fullest
measure, who was verily “ t he Word “
incafnate, Light and Life in outpouring
rtcEness, a very Fountain of the Watere
' S. John i. 14.


4


THE HISTORICAL CHRIST.


133


Life. Lord of Compassion and of
'^^^isdom—such was His name—and from *

I^is dwelling in the Secret Places He
forth into the world of men.

For Him was needed an earthly
"ta-loernacle, a human form , the body of a
rn.an, and who so fit to yield his body in
g'lad and willing service to One before
"vvliom Angels and men bow down in
lowliest reverence, as this Hebrew of the
ebrews, tb^urest..a.ni..mklest
F*erfec t,” whose spotless body and stainless
rnind offered the best that humanity coul(^"
t>ring? The man Jesus yielded himself a*
tv-illing sacrifice, “offered himself without
Spot ” to the Lord of Love, who took unto
Hlimself that pure form as tabernacle, and
dwelt therein for th^e years of mortal life. t

This epoch is marked in the traditions '
embodied in the Gospels as that of the
Baptism of Tesus. when the Spirit was
seen “ descending from heaven like a dove,

ELnd it abode upon Him,” ’ and a celestial
voice proclaimed Him as the beloved Son,||
to whom men should give ear. Truly was||
tde the beloved Son in whom the Father ;

' S. John i. 32. •

K


134


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


was well-pleased/ and from that tii
forward “Jesus began to preach,”* a
was that wondrous mystery, “ God ma:
fest in the flesh ” ^—not unique in that I
was God, for: “ Is it not written in yo
law, I said. Ye are Gods? If he call
them Gods, unto whom the word of Gr'
came, and the scripture cannot be broke
say ye of Him, whom the Father ha
sanctified and sent into the world, Thi
blasphemest; because I said, I am t:
I Son of God?”"^ TjTily.,.aU._men are Goc
/ in respect to the _ Spirit_wi©p~tEem, b
I not in all is the Godhead rnanifested, as
y that well-beloved Son of the Most High.

To that manifested Presence the nan
of “the C hrist mav rightly be g iven, ai
it was He who lived and moved in tl
form of the man Jesus over the hills ai
plains of Palestine, teaching, healii;
diseases, and gathering round Him ;
disciples a few of the more advanced soul
Th e rar£ _ .charm of His royal love, ou
pouring from Him as fayslrbm a su
( hew round H im t KJsu^ ir ^. the wear

‘S. Matt. iii. 17. '‘Ibid. iv. 17. !

3 L Tim. iii. i6. ^S. John x. 34-36. j


m

%


THE HISTORICAL CHRIST.


135


and the oppressed, and the subtly tender
magic of His gentle wisdom purified,
ennobled, and sweetened the lives that
came into contact with His own. By
parable and luminous imagery He taught
the uninstructed crowds who pressed
around Him, and, using the powers of the^
free Spirit, He ligajed many a disease by |
word or touch, reinforcing the m agnetic |
energie s belonging to H is p ure b o dy w ith I
the compelling force of His inner life
Rejected by His Essene brethren amon:
whom He first laboured—whose arguments
against His purposed life of loving labour
are summarised in the story of the
temptation—because he carried to the
people the spiritual wisdom that they
regarded as their proudest and most secret
treasure, and because His all-embracing
love drew within its circle the outcast and |
the degraded—ever loving in the lowest f
as in the highest the Divine Self—He saw
gathering round Him all too quickly the|
dark clouds of hatred and suspicion. The
teacher s and rulers of His nation soon
came to eye Him with iealou&v and ang er ;


ESOTKUIC fllRlSTIANITY.


* 4 :'


their materialism. His power a constant,
though silent, exposure <jf their weakness.
I'hrce years had scarcely passt^d since His
^baptism when the gathering storm out-
iibroke. and the huntan body of Jesus paid
|thc penalty for enslirining the glorious
;|^rescnce of a Teacher more than man.

'I'he little band of c hosen disci ples
whom He h.ad selected .is refnisitorics of
His teachings werre thus depriy^ed of their
M aster's phy sical PKseiice ere they^^ifi
assimilated H is-lnstructio ns. Inil they were
souls of high and advaiuanl tyj>c, ready to
le.irn the Wisdom, and lit to hand it on to
lesser men. Most receptive^of all was j
that '• disciple whi^n lesus JovetT'^ 1

eager, ail’d Tervid, profoundly devoted to
his Master, and sharing His spirit ofj
all-embracing love. He represented,
through the century that followed the
physical dejsirture of the Christ, the spirit
of mystic devotion that sought the exstasis,
ihe vision of and the union with the
Ipivine, while the later great Apostle,
^ Fuul, re pr esented t h e, wisdom aide
bf the Mysteries .

^rKe Master tfid not forget H is promise


THE HISTORICAL CHRIST.


137


to come to them after the world had lost
sight of Him/ and for something ove
fj^fty years.. He visited theminHis subtle l
spiritual body , continuing the teachings!
ffTTaT^T^un while with them, andi
training them in a knowledge of occyltl
^ths . They lived together, for the mostif
part, in a retired spot on the outskirts of
Judaea, attracting no attention among the
many apparently similar communities of
the time, studying the profound truths He
taught them and acquiring “the gifts of
the Spirit.”

These inner instructions, coamieneed'
duri ng H is "physical life among them and
carried„pn,„after_,„,HeJaad^lef^^

formed the basis of the „ .Mysteries off

Tesug^” whicn*weTK^e seen in "early*^
Church History, and gave the inner life
which was the nucleus round which
gathered the hetero gen epii s-.ma terials

In the remarkable fragment called the
Pistis^So^k^, we have a document of the
greatest interest bearing on the hidden
teaching, written by the famous Valen-

‘S, John xiv. 18, 19.


138 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

tinus. In this it is said that during the
eleven years immediately after His death
Jesus instructed His disciples so far as
“ the regions of the first statutes only, and
up to the regions of the first mystery, the
\ mystery within the veil.” ^ They had not
so far learned the distribution of the
angelic orders, of part whereof Ignatius
'speaks.*

r eceived His ...myst y^ V^Sfure, the know-
ieSgemall the regions and the Words of
fPower which unlocked them, taught His
iiisciples further, promising: “I will
Iperfect you in every perfection, from the
Imysteries of the interior to the mysteries
|of the exterior: I will fill you with the
I Spirit, so that ye shall be called spiritual,
^rfect in all perfections.” ^ And He
taught them of Sophia, the Wisdom , and
of her fall into matte r in her attempt to
rise unto the Highest, and of her crie s to
the Light in whi ch she had trusted,~and of
the sending of Jesus to redeem, her from

"Valentinus. Trans, by G. R. S. Mead. jPzsfzs

S^Moy bik. i., I.

“ Ante, p. 72.


%


^ Ibid, 60,


THE HISTORICAL CHRIST.


139


chaos, and of her crowning with His light,
and leading forth from bondage. And He
told them further of tho^ ^hest Myster yt
the ineffable, the simples.t' and clearest of
all, though the highe stf-'to be known by !
him alone who utterly renounced the
worl^‘ by that knowledge men became
^!1msts, for such “men are myself, and I
am these men,” for Christ is that highest
Mystery.’ Knowing that, men are “ trans¬
formed into pure light and are brought
into the light.” ^ And He performed foi\
them the great ceremony of Initiation, the
baptism “which leadeth to the region of
truth and into the region of light,” and
bade them celebrate it for others who were
worthy : “ But j iidg^ye t his myste ry, gwi
Hian. Bu t unto him [only
who shall do a lT lEmgs which I have sai
uata4zmi]i my^^. cpmmandme n ” “

Thereafter, being fully instructed, the
apostles went forth to preach, ever aided
by their Master.

Moreover these same disciples and their
earliest colleagues wrote down from

bk. ii., 218. " Ibid. 22)0.

^ Ibid. *• Ibid. 2 ,Ti-


140


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


.,merriQ):y all the public sayings and parables
lof^e Master that they had heard, and
icollpcted with great eagerness any reports
'^hey could find, writing down these
^so, and circulating them all among
ihose who gradually attached themselves
|o their small community. Various collec¬
tions were made, any member writing
jdown what he himself remembered, and
pdding selections from the accounts of
‘Ethers. The.4ap^Jteadiin^^
he .ChriaLJto^ ^^Ei£a^.gs,,wa a^^
writteiL^dgjgi, to«ie^^t^|ght^^

[students who formed small communities
for leadingf a retired life, and remained in
touch with the central body.

The_historical Christ, t hen, is a glorious
1 eing belon gTng~~'f 6~" the great spirij ^al
lier archy that guid^ lhe spiri t ual evolu "
tion of humanity, who ijsed. for s ome thre e
iTe^ the huma n b ody of
[esus: who spent the last ofi theSethree
years m public teaching throughout Judaea
and Samaria; who was a healer of diseases
and performed other remarkable occult
works; who gathered round Him a small


/■


THE HISTORICAL CHRIST.


"t

I4I

band of disciples .whom He instructed in
the deeper truths of the spiritual life ; who j

drew men to Him by the singular love j

and tenderness and the rich wisdom that I

breathed from His Person ; and who was |

finally put to death for blasphemy, fob' i

teaching the inherent Divinity of Himself! / ' |

aijd of all He came to give a newj'* i

Tfhpulse of spiritual life to the world ; to
re-issue the inner teachings affecting
spiritual life ; to mark out again the j

narrow ancient way; to proclaim the i

existence of the “ Kingdom of Heaven,” !

of the Initiation which admits to that.
knowledge of God which is eternal life ;
and to admit a few to that Kingdom who
should be able to teach others. Round
this elorious Fisfure erathered the myths
WjHchumted Him to the long array o f
His„jBre4£C£§sors,„ the_ myths telling in
ailegecy !ihe_story_of lill such_ live s, as j

tKejjr's ymbolis e the work o f the !

in the Kosnips and the higher evoluti^ ) j

of the,, ictfhv^al hunian sopl. * i

But it must not be supposed that the I

work of the Christ for His followers j

was over after He had established the I


142


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


Mysteries, or was confined to rare appear¬
ances therein. That M2g ;hty..^„QB e who
had used the body of Jesus as His vehicle,
and whose guardian care extea dg the
(whole _^§piritual evolution of the fi@~1rac e
jo f"Sumanit v. gave into the strong hands
<of the holy disciple who had surrendered
ito Him his body the care of the infant
iChurch. Perfecting his human evolution,

■Tesus became one ""o^.fhV'**MStersrjof

g Wisdo m, a nd took Christianity linderTiis.

larg e, ever seemi^ to guide it


Jo the right lines, to protect, to guard
iind nourish it. He was the Hierophant
in the Christian Mysteries, the direct
Teacher of the Initiates. His the inspira¬
tion that Jcept^idight. the Gnpsis,^ii)_the,
v / Church , until the superincumbent mass
1^ of ignorance became so great that even
I' His breath could not fan the flame
sufficiently to prevent its extinguishment.
His the patient labour which strengthened
soul after soul to endure# through the
darkness, and cherish within itself the
spark of mystic longing, the thirst to
find the Hidden God. His the steady
inpouring of truth into every brain ready


THE HISTORICAL CHRIST.


H 3

to receive it, so that hand stretched out to
hand across the centuries and passed on
the torch of knowledge, which thus was
never extinguished. His the Form
which stood. be.side the rack and in the
flames of the burning pile, cheering His
confessors and His martyrs, soothing
the anguish of their pains, and filling
their hearts with His peace. His theU
impulse which spoke in the thunder o^
Sav onaro la, which guided th^ calm wis,4oni''
of EFasmus, which inspired the deep efijicsl
of the Cod-into xicat ed Spinoza. His the!
energy which impelled Roger __jE> apD n, I
Qalilen. and Paracelsus in their searchings -I
into nature. R is the beauty that allurecr/
Fra^JyjgsUca and Raph ael and Leonajoio
da Vinci, that inspired the genius of
Michelange lo, that shone before the eyes
of Murillo, and that gave the power that
raised the marvels of the world, the
DupiAp of Milan, the San I^area.-of
Venice, the Cathedral of Florence. His
the melody that breathed in the masses
of Mozart, the sonatas of B eeth oven, the
oratorios of Handel, the fugues of Ba^h,
the austere splendour of Brahm s. His


144


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


the Presence that cheered the

t%.-i«lit^d_occujtis th^...patieot
s eekers after truth. By persuasion and by
menace,'by the eloquence of a S. Francis
and by the gibes of a Voltaire, by the
sweet submission of a Thomas a Kempis,
and the rough virility of a Luther, He
sought to instruct and awaken, to win into
holiness or to scourge from evil. Through
the long centuries He has striven and
laboured, and, w^La jl the m ighty burden
of tjie.... Qhurc hes to c^ry. He has never
left uncared fo r or unsolaced one human
fTeart that "cried to H im for~h^ And

oT Christerradm 'part oif the great flood of
the Wisdom poured out for the refreshing
of the world, and He is seeking through
the Churches for some who have ears to
hear the Wisdom, and who will answer to
His appeal for messengers to carry it to
His flock; “ Here am I; send me.”


Chapter V.


THE MYTHIC CHRIST. ^ '

We have already seen the use that is
made of Comparative Mythology against
Religion, and some of its most destructive
attacks have been levelled against the
Christ. His birth of a Virgin , at “ Christ^
mas,” t he slaughter of the Innoc ents, His
wonder-working and His teachings, Hist
cr^cifcagn. resurrec tion., . and., .ascension— i
all tEeie eventsTh the story of His life axel
pointed to in the stories of other lives, and(
His historical existen c e is challenged on |
the strength of these identities. So fe^r as^
the wonderworking and the teachings are
concerned, we may briefly dismiss these
first with the acknowledgment that most
greatJE endiens-have wxou ght works which,
on the physical plane, appear as miracles
in the sight of their contemporanesr~But


146


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


are known by occultists to be done by the
exercise of powers possessed by all Initiates
above a certain grade. The te achings Rp
gaye_ may also be acknowiSfgra to Jie
n^n-_^i^nal ; but where the student of
'femparatrve Mythology thinks that he


has proved that none is divinely inspired,
when he shows that similar moral teachings
,fell from the lips of Manu, from the lips
■’ the Buddha, from the lips of J esus, the
jpccultist says that certainly J esus must
h ave r epeated the teachin gs of His pre^
-■ decessor s, since He m essenger from .

fh£_same Lodge. The profound verities
^■jVTOuching'tlie divine and the human Spirit
i>^ ,-were as much truths twenty thousand
^ years before Jesus was born in Palestine
^ as after He was born ; and to say that the
world was left without such teaching, and
that man was left in moral darkness from
his beginnings to twenty centuries ago, is
i to say that there was a humanity without
1 ia Teacher, children without a Father,
4 Jiuman souls crying for light into a dark-


t pess that gave them no answer
|fconeeption as blasphemous of God as it is
desperate for man, a conception contra-


THE MYTHIC CHRIST.


H7

dieted by the appearance of every Sage,
by the mighty literature, by the noble
lives, in the thousands of ages ere the
Christ came forth.

Recognising then in Jesus the great
Master of the West, the leading Messenger
of the Lodge to the western world, we
must face the difficulty which has made
havoc of this belief in the minds of many :
Why are the festivals that commemorate f
events in the life of Jesus found in
pre- Christian religions, and in them com-
memoi'ate identical events in the lives of ;
other I'eachers ?

Comparativt: Mythology, which has
drawn public attention to this question
in modern times, may be said to be about
a century old, dating from the appearance
of Dulaure’s Hisloire Ab7'igde de differens
Culies, of Dupuis’ Origine de tous les
Cultes, of Moor’s Hindu Pantheon, and of
Godfrey Higgins’ Anacalypsis. These
works were followed by a shoal of others,
growing more scientific and rigid in
their collection and comparison of facts,
until it has become impossible for any
educated person to even challenge the


148 r.SOTKRlf crlRtSriANlTV.


identities and similarities existing in every
direction, (iiristians are twt
in these days, wlitj arc |jrc;]>iired to cojitend
that Christian syinljols, rit«!s. and £<;rc;
r honles ar e uhkme exeejjt. iiuh'ctl, among
the ignorant. 'I'here we still Inrhold

simplicity of helii-f hand in-haiul with
ignorance of facts: Imt outsiiie this class
^we do not find even the most devout
^Christians alleging that idiristianiiy ha.s
pot very much in common wiiii faiths tdder
than itself. Hut it is well kmiwn that in
the__first centuries "after 1‘hrist" these
likenesses were on at! hands admitted, and
iltat modern Comjjitrative Mylholtjgy is
only repeating with great precision that
which was univer sally rectigijjsed igi jbe
Early Ch urch, justin Martyr, for mstunce,
crowds his pages with references to the
religions of his time, and if a mtKlern
assailant of Christianity would cite a
number of cases in which Christian teach¬
ings are identictil with those of elder
religions, he can find no belter guides
than theJiJM^jpgisi8.J?^be secomjjxptury.
They quote Pagan* teaching.s, stories, and
symbols, pleading that the very identity of


r /f. I


.. * f*


>• i': ■*


A


f ■ ,-' 1 * / ‘

■■ '/l-Si-


'■ a / »


THE MYTHIC CHRIST.


149


the Christian with these should prevent ^
the off-hand rejection of the latter as in
themselves incredible. A curious reason
is, indeed, given for this identity, one
that will scarcely find many adherents in
modern days. Says Justin Martyr : M“'

“ Those who hand down tKe "^myt'Es*"^^!ch
the poets have.made adduce no proof to*
the youths who learn them ; and we pro-*'
ceed to demonstrate that they have been*'
uttered by the in flue nce of the wiched* j

derqpns , to deceive and lead astray the*' •"

tiuman race. For having heard it pro-*
claimed through the prophets that the*’
Christ was to come, and that the ungodly*'
among men were to be punished by fire,"
they put forward many to be called sons*’
of Jupiter, under the impression that they*?
would be able to produce in men the idea’
that the things which were said with regard**
to Christ were mere marvellous tales, like*'"
the things which were said by the poets.”

“ And t he devil s, indeed, having heard *t
this washing published by the prophet,^ /
instigated those who enter their temples,
and are about to approach them with**^
libations and burnt offerings, also tg *

L


»50


KSOTKKH < IIKINTJAMTV.

■ sprinkle lli«*mseives ; anti they cause them
also to wpsh themselves entirely as they
depart, " •* Which jlhe Lord’s Supper]

the wicked tltwils liave iinilaletl in the
mysteries «>{ Mithras, coininantlin^ the
> samt- ihiiiff to he dotu’."‘ ” lotr 1 my.self,
when I tliscfivered the wickeil tlisjruisp
‘ which the evil sjjiriis hail, thrown around
'• the divine doctrines oj the ( hristians. to
j ' turn asitie others from joininj^ them.

' laughed."’

'fhese identities were thus rej.tartled as
the work of dt'vils. copies of the fhri.siian
(triiiinals, larjiely circulated in the pre-
('hristian workl with the object of pre¬
judicing; the reception of the truth when
< fit came. There is a certain tlifliculty in
^ , jacceptinj; the earlier statcmcmls as copies

^ ,i 'wttd the later as originals, hut without
(li.sputing with Justin Martyr whether the
L copies preceded the original or tht; original

the copies, we may Ijc cottieni to accept
|his testimony as to the existence of these
(identities between the faith Hou

' Vol. II. Justin Martyr. Fin( Af>e>(ogy, % liv., Ixii.,
and Ixvi.

*Vol. 11. Justin Martyr. Sg€»Hd % nin.


THE MYTHIC CHRIST. I5I

the Roman empire of his time and the
new religion he was engaged in defending.

Tertul|ip,n speaks equally plainly, stating
the df^^tion made in his days also to
Christianity, that “the nations who are^
strangers to all understanding of spiritual?
powers, ascribe to their idols the imbuing*’
of waters with the self-same efficacy.” “ So *<
they do," he answers quite frankly, “but^
these cheat themselves with waters that^
are widowed. For washing is the channel*?
through which they are initiated into some^

sacred rites of some notorious ,I sis.or*

Mithra; and the Gods themselves they*'’’
honour by washings .... At the*?
Appollinarian and Eleusinian games theyt^
are baptised ; and they presume that th.e*t
effect of their doing that is the regenera-**
tion and the remission of the penalties due**
to their perjuries. Which fact, being^
acknowledged^ we recognise here also the **
zeal of the d^^,, rivalling the things of-?
God, while we find him too practising*'
baptism in his subjects.”^

To solve the difficulty of these identities
we must study the Mythic Chr ist, the
' Vol. VIL Tertullian, On SapHsm, ch. v.


152


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


Christ of the solar myths or lesrends, these
myths being the pictorial forms in which
certain profound truths were given to the
world.

Now a “ myth ” is by no means what
most people imagine it to be—a mere
fanciful story erected on a basis of fact,
or even altogether apart from fact. A


^yth is far truer than a his^ry, for a
^listory only gives a story of the shadows,
i^Eereas a myth gives a storv""of t he
k^^es,.lbai_,£ast^he_g^ As

‘ above so below ; and^jrj^ above, and ^Aen
beLow. There are certain great principles


according to which our system is built;
there are certain laws by which these
principles are worked out in detail; there
are certain Beings who embody the
principles and whose activities are the
laws ; there are hosts of inferior beings
who act as.. yehicle s._ for these activities .


as agents, as instruments ; there are the
Egos of men intermingled with all these,
performing their share of the great kosmic
^drama. These multifarious workers in
{t he invisible world s c^t Sar ' shadows
jn phys ical matter, and th^e shadows


THE MYTHIC CHRIST.


153

are “things” — the bodies, the objects,
that make up the physical universe.
These shadows give but a poor idea of
the objects that cast them, just as what
we call shadows down here give but a
poor idea of the objects that cast them ;
they are mere outlines, with blank dark-i
ness in lieu of details, and have only
lengthy and ,breadth, _no depth. §

History is an account, very imperfect
and often distorted, of the dance of these
shadows in the shadow-world of physical
matter. Anyone who has seen a clever
Shadow-Play, and has compared what
goes on behind the screen on which the
shadows are cast with the movements of
the shadows on the screen, may have a
vivid idea of t h^e illusory nature of th e
shadow-a ction s, and may draw therefrom
sevaraTnot misleading analogies.^

Myih is an account of the mpyemfint s I
of th^t;e wljip cast shadows ; and the I
Ismguage in which the account is given |
is what is called the language of symbo ls. \

' The student might read Plato’s account of the
“ Cajjg ” and its inhabitants, remembering that Plato /
was an Initiate. Republic, Bk. vii.


i.sdtfkk < iruisn.vNn V.


Just as here we have wortls whicli stand
for thinjjH ,\s the worti “ table is a
symlxil for a rec<ij;nised article of a
certain kind so do symbols stand for

S ibjects on hip;her planes. ' I'hey are a
dclorial alphabet, used by all myth-
» wrtter s. ami each has tis recoj^tvised
Imeaninif. A symbol is usj;d to signify
a certain oljject just as words are used
down here to <listinguish <>tu' thing from
another, and so a ktiowlcdge^g f sym bols
Is necessary for the reading < >f a tn^ .
Fctr the onginaf teflers <if great myths are
ever Initiates, who are actnisomied u» use
the symbolic language, and who. of course,
u.sc symbols in their fixed ami accepted
meanings.

A symbol has a chief meaning, and then
various subsidiary meanings related to
, that chief meaning. i'‘or instance, the
Sun is the svmlwl of the Lotros: that is


ire chief or primary significance. But it
stands also for an,^ii}cactiatm.j[£^
Logo s, or for any of the great Messengers
who represent Him for the time, as an


THE mythic: CHRIST.


155


to incgxRir.t'? among men and live with
them for a time as Rulers or Teachers,
would be deiignated by, the symbol.,Qf the
SuiA ; for thbugh it is not their symbol in
an individual sense, it is theirs in virtue of
their office.

All those who are signified by this
symbol have certain characteristics, pass
through certain situations, perform certain
activities, during their lives on earth. Xfee
Sun is the .physical shadow, or body, as it
IS call^cC ’bf the Logos ; hence*’ it.s x eArly j
course in nature reilects His activity," in
the partial way in which a shadow repre¬
sents the activity of the object that casts
it. The Logos, “the Son of God,”
descending into matter, has as shadow the
annual course of the Sun, and the Sun-
Myth tells it. Hence, again, an incarna¬
tion of the Logos, or one of His high
ambassadors, will also represent that
activity, shadow-like, in His body as a
man. Thus will necessarily arise identities
in the life-histories of these ambassadors.
In fact, the absence of such identities
would at once point out that thfe person
concerned was not a full ambassador.


156 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


and that his mission was of a lower
order.

The Solar Myth, then, is a story which
primarily representing the activity of the
Logos, or ^^rd, in the kosmos, secQjid-
arily embodies the life of one who is an

? incarnation of _xhe.Logos, or is one of

r, His ambassadors. The Hero of the
myth is usually represented as a God,
or Demi-God, and his life, as will be
understood by what has been .said above,
must be outlined by the course of the
Sun, as the shadow of the Logos. The
part of the course lived out during the
human life is that which falls between


the winter solstice and the reaching of
|the zenith in summer. The Hero is
fborn at t^ wint er s olstice , dies at th e
p spring equinox, and, conquering death,

I rLe s into mid-heav en.

The following remarks are interesting
in this connection, though looking at myth
in a more general way, as an allegory,
picturing inner truths : “ AJ^eddeVigm^
-mas said that legend is fr^uenttv' mom '
, true than history , because legend recounts
^ liot acts which are often incomplete and


THK MYTHIC CHRIST.


157


abortive, but the genius itself of great men |
and great nation.s. It is pre-eminently to I
the Gospel that this beautiful thought is! ’
applicable, for the Gospel is not merelyl „
the *narration of what has been"; it is ther
sublime narration of wh^ is a nd wha tl’
dways will ^ ) ie. Ever will the Saviour^”
5f~the*worla be adored by the kings off’''
intelligence, represented by the Magi ;f'
evgL. will He multiply the eucharisticl
bread, to nourish and comfort our souls ;|^
even when we invoke Him in the nighr*’
and the tempest, will He come to us *>
walking on the waters, ever will He
stretch forth His hand and make us pass >
over the crests of the billows ; ever will(|’*
He cure our distempers and give back"
light to our eyes ; ever will He appearr
to His faithful, lumiiTous and transfiguredr
upon Tabor, interpreting the law of Mose^*'
and moderating the zeal of Elias.”’

We shall find that myths are.y^r y
c losely related to the Mysterie si'Tor'"^rt
of the M ysteries consisted :n showing
living pictures of the occurrences in the
higher worlds that became embodied in

‘ Eliphas L 4 vi Tke Mysteries of Magic, p. 48.


158 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


myths. In fact in the Pseudo-Mysteries,
mutilated fragments of the living pictures
of the true Mysteries were represented
by actors who acted out a drama, and
many secondary myths are these drdmas
put into words.

Theb^d-. outlines of th e_storv of the.

of the Sun-GodDeing spanned within the
first six months of the solar year, the other
six being employed in the general protect¬
ing and preserving. He is always bo rn at


j the winter solstice, after the shortest day
1 in the year, at the midnight of the 24 .th
j of__De c em b sr, when the sip-n Vi|-g o is
I rising a bove the ho rizon ; born as thiTsign
f is rising, he is born always of a v iroin. and
she remains a virgin after she has given
birth to her Sun-Child, as the celestial


Virgo remains unchanged and unsullied
when the Sun comes forth from her in the


heavens. Weak, feeble as an infant is he,
bom when the days are shortest and the
nights are longest—we are on the north of


the equatorial line—surrounded with perils
in his infancy, and t he reign' of the
^fe mss far longer his in his early


TUli MYTHIC CHklST.


^59


days. But he lives through all the
threatening dangers, and the day lengthens
towards the spring equinox, tiH^the time
comes for the crossing over, th e crucifixion ,
the’ date varying with each year. The
Sun-God is sometimes found sculptured
within the circle of the horizon, with the
head and feet touching the circle at north
and south, and the out.stretched hands at
east and west—■“ He was crucified.” After;,
this he rises triumphantly andjascend.s into i
heaven, anTripens the corn and t^e grape,,
giving his very lj|e to them to make their
substance and through them to"” his
wdrsRIppers. The God who i s borq at i
the dawning of December 25 th is eve r |
c rucified at tke ^ring'equlhox ; and^ ^er;

these are among the most salient marks of
the Sun-God. The fixity of the birth-date
and the variableness of the death-date are
full of significance, when we remember
that the one is a fixed and the other a
variable .solar position. “Easter” is a
movable event, calculated by the relative
positions of sun and moon, an impossible
way of fixing year by year the anniversary


l6o ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

of a historical event, but a very natural
and indeed inevitable way of calculating a
solar festival. These changing dates do
not point to the history of a man, but to
, th% Hero of a solar myth.

These events are reproduced in the
lives of the various Solar Gods, and
{^ntiquity teems with illustrations of them,
illsis of Earvpt like Mary Qf,3ethlehem
j|was our Immaculate Lady, Star oi the
feea. Queen of Heaven, Mother of God.
We see her in pictures standing on the
crescent moon, star-crowned; she nurses
her child Horus , and the cross appears
on the back of the seat in which he
sits on his mother’s knee. The Virgo
of the Zodiac is represented in ancient
drawings as a woman suckling a child
—the type of all future Madonnas with
their divine Babes, showing the origin
of the symbol. Devald is likewise
figured with the dmne Krishna in her
arms, as is Mylitta,_orJjgr;,^o(_Ba^ji.
also with the recurrent crown of stars, and
with her child Tammuz on her knee.

M ercury and.ZEsculapius, Bagchus.and

Hercu l e s, Perseus and the Dioscuri,


THE MYTHIC CHRIST. l 6 l

Mithras and Zarathustra, were all of
divine and human birth.

The relati on of the winter solstice to
Jesj^^s^so^^sjgi^ifijgant. The’ birth of
Mithras was celebrated in the winter sol-
stice with great rejoicings, and Horus was
also then born; “His birth is one of the'?
greatest mysteries of the ^Egyptian] reli-'*
gion. Pictures representing it appeared on-'
the walls of temples. . . .He was the^’

child of Deity. At Christmas time, or"
that answering to our festival, his image-';
was brought out of the sanctuary with*^
peculiar ceremonies, as the image of the“
infant Bambino is still brought out and
exhibited at Rome.”'

On the fi xing of the 3.5th December as

Wjnrams'on has

the following : “ All Christians know that *
the 25th December is now the recognised-7
festival of the birth of Jesus, but few are-^
aware that this has not always been so.«
There have been, it is said, one hundred
and thirty-six different dates fixed on by”
different Christian sects. Lightfoot gives

'Bonwick. Egyptian Belief, p. 157. Quoted in
■Williamson’s Great Law, p. 26.


i62


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


^ it as 15th September, others as in
'^‘February or August. Epiphanius men-
^ tions two sects, one celebrating*it ih June,
v- the other in July. The matter was^fijj^aJJy
“ settled>^,0£ejul^jr:;^^^^^^ and

S . Chrysostom , writing in 390, says : ‘ On
'■'this day [z.e. 2^th December] also the
birth of Christ was lately fixed at Rome,
•'■ in order that while the heathen were busy
with their ceremonies [the Brumalia, in
“ honour of Bacchus] the Christians might
- perform their rites undisturbed.’ Gibb on
' in his Decline and Fall of the TZoniah
•f Empire, writes : ‘ The [Christian] Romans,
V. as ignorant as their brethren of the real
<• date of his [Christ’s birth] fixed the .solemn
A festival to the 25th December, the
'*^£rumalia or winter sols tice, when the
1?;”^ Pagans annuaily"*''cdeb^ed the birth of
I the Su n? “"’'‘King, in his Gnostur~and their
^*1 ^Remains, also says ; ‘ The ancient festival
n held on the 25th December in honour of
r- the birthday of the Invincible One,' and
•-'Celebrated by the great games at the
JN Circus, was afterwards transferred to the

" The festival “ Natalis Solis Invicti/^ the birthday
of the Invincible Sun»


THE MYTHIC CHRIST.


i6-


commemoration of the birth of Christ, the ’’
precise date of which many of the Fathers
confess was then unknown ; ’ while at the
present day Canon Farra r writes that ‘ all *
attempts to discover the month and day of“
the nativity are useless. No data what-'
ever exist to enable us to determine them *
with even approximate accuracy.’ Froi^
tho foregoing it is apparent that the gre^ •’
festival of the winter solstice "has beel'’
celebrat^ during j)ast ages, and in^wTSelJ
separated^Iands, in honour of the birt^c| ^
a God , who is almost invariably alluded^4 *
as a J .^a5gur, ’ ~' and who §g_mpther is re-l -
ferredjto as ~ a pure virgin . The striking '
resembl ajices , too, which,, have " Beeri ‘
i nstanced nbt only in the birth but in t he ^
life._of so n aaiUL_..of these Sa viour-Gods
axe far too numerous to be acco unted fp :
b y any mere co inci dence .”*

In the case of the Lord Buddha we
may see how a myth attaches its9f to a

' Williamson. The Great Law, pp. 40 - 42.
Those who wish to study this matter as one of
Comparative Religion cannot do better than read
The Great Law, whose author is a, profound ly
religious man and a Christian.


164


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


historical personage. The story of His
life is well known, and in the current
Indian accounts the birth-story is simple

J and human. But in the Chine se account
He is bo rn ,..o£.a virgin, Mdyadevi, the
archaic myth finding in Him a new
Hero.

Williamson also tells us tha t fires were
Wd are lighted o n the 2sth Decernber
Ion the hills amongf Keltic peoples, and
I these are still known among the Irish and
the Scotch Highlanders as Bheil or Baal-
tinne, the fires thus bearing the name of
Bel, B al, or. Baal, their_ap£ien£ D-eity , the
Su n-Go d, t hough jiow lighted-in , honou r
of Christ .*

Rightly considered, the * Christmas
festival should take on new elements of
•rejoicing and of sacredness, when the
lovers of Christ see in it the repetition of
an an cie nt solem nity, see i t stretching all
the woHd over, fair j^ okJntoAi

antiquity ; so that the Christmas bells are
ringing throughout human history, and
sound musically out of the far-off night of
time. Not in exclusive possession, but in
^IMd. pp. 36, 37.


THE MYTHIC CHRIST.


165


universal acceptance, is found the hall¬
mark of truth.

The death-date, as said above, is not a
fixed one, like the birth-date. The date of
the death is calculated by the relative
positions of Sun and Moon at the spring
equinox, varying with each year, and the
death-date of each Solar Hero is found
to be celebrated in this connection. The


animal adopted as the symbol of the iTero
is the sign of the Zodiac'In whi’Hi th
Sun Is "at the yemal equinox of his a ge,
and this varies with the precession of the
equinoxes. Cannes of Assyria had the sign
of Pisce.s, the Fi.sh, and is thus figured.
Mithra is in Taurus, and, therefore, rides
on a Bull, and Osiris was worshipped as
Osiris-Apis, or Serapis, the Bull. Mero-
dach of Babylon was worshipped as a
Bull, as was Astarte of Syria. When the
Sun is in the sign of Aries, the Ram or


Lamb, we have Osiris again as Ram, and
so also Astarte, and Jupiter Ammon, and
it is this same animal that became the*,


symbol of Jesus—the LamJ^ of Go d. The
use of the Lamb aajHis symbol, often
leaning on a cross, is common in the


1 66 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

sculptures of the catacombs. On this
^hbaTTison say s: “ In the course of time
tKe Xamb was represented on the cross,
w but it was not until the sixth synod of
Constantinople, held about the year 680,
that it was ordained that instead of the
’* ancient symbol, the figure of a man
fastened to a cross should be represented.
This canon was confirmed by Pope Adrian
I.”' The very ancient Pj^s is also
assigned to J,e§us, and He is thus pictured
in the catacombs.

1 The death and resurrection of the fiolar
ftiero a t or about the vernal equinox is as
E EsRTgad as his birth at;
^olstux jQ sins was then slain by Typhon,
Rnd He is pictured on the circle of the
horizon, with outstretched arms, as if
crucified—a posture originally of bene¬
diction, not of suffering. The death of
Tammuz was annually bewailed at the
spring equinox in Babylon ia and Syria.
as were Adonis in Syria apd Greece ,
and Attis in Phrygia , pictured “as a
man fasteneffXmEalamb at the foot.”*

" The Great La-lit), p. ri6.

“ Ibid. p. 58.


THE MYTHIC CHRIST.


167


Mithras’ death was similarly celebrated
in Persia, and that of Bacchus and
Dionysius—one and the same—in Greece.
In Mexico the same idea re-appears, as
usual accompanied with the cross.

In all these cases the mourning for the
death is immediately followed by the
rejoicing over th e resurr ection, and on,
this it is interesting to notice that the
name of Easter has been traced to the
virgin-mother of the slain Tammuz,
Ishtar.’


It is interesting also to notice that the!
fagj, prec edin g the death at th e verna l
eq^hox,—the modern Lent—is found in
Mexico, Egypt, Persia, Babylon, Assyria,
Asia_„MinQr, in some cases definitely for
fortj^ji^yays.“

^Tn the Pseudo-Mysteries, the Sun-God
story was dramatised, and in the ancient
Mysteries it was lived by the Initiate,
and hence the solar “ myths ” and the
great facts of Initiation became inter -1
woven together. Hence when the Mast er


Uhnst bee

t Eele^ds of ^tb 5 .. 4 aldfix.llei^ ^ t hose.
’ Ibid. p. 56. " Ibid. pp. 120-123.


1 68 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

Mysteries gathered round Him, and the
stories were again recited with the latest
divine Teacher as the rep r esentative of
the Logfos in the Sun. Then the festival
of His nativity became the immemorial
date when the Sun was born of the Virgin,
when the midnight sky was filled with the
rejoicing hosts of the celestials, and

Very early, very early, Christ was born.

As the great legend of the Sun gathered
round Him, the sign of the Lamb became
that of His crucifixion as the sign of
the Virgin had become that of His birth.
We have seen that the Bull was sacred to
Mithras and the Fish to Oannes, and that
the Lamb was sacred to Christ, and for
the same reason ; it was the sign of the
spring equinox, at the period of history in
which He crossed the great circle of the
horizon, was “crucified in space.”
i These Sun myths, ever recurring
.‘throughout the ages, with a different name
for their Hero in each new recension,
cannot pass unrecognised by the §tudent,
though they may naturally an d rightly be
ignored by the devotee; and when they


THE MYTHIC CHRIST.


169


are used as a weapon to mutilate or"
destroy the majestic figure of the Christ, ,
they must be met, not by denying the facts,
but by understanding the deeper meaning
of the stories, the spiritual truths that the?
legends expressed under a veil.

Why have these legends mingled with'
the history or Jesus, and crystallised round!
Him, as a hi storical personasr e ? These;
are really ,th 9 ., stories ngt of a particuiRri

individual.but of the!

universal Christ ; of a Mag_who|'

s ymbolised a Divine Bei ng. ^ and who!
rep^ented a f undame n tal truth in pflpy e
a "Man "v^o "Slfed a certain office an3 held
a certain characteristic position towards
humanity; standing towards humanity in
a special relationship, renewed age after
age, as generation succeeded generation,
as race gave way to race. Hence He
was, as are all such, the “ Son of Man/’ |
a peculiar and distinctive titleT ttie titl e
of an office, i mt of an indiy^ual. The
Christ'oT the ooiar Myth was the Christ
of the Mysteries, and we find t he secc a.t of)
the mythic in thgjgyEtic Christ.


/ i


Chapter VI.


THE MYSTIC CHRIST.

We now approach that deeper side of the
Christ story that gives it its real hold upon
the heart# of men. We approach that
perennial life which bubbles up from an
unseen source, and so baptises its repre¬
sentative with its lucent flood that human
hearts cling round the Christ, and feel that
they could almost more readily reject the
apparent facts of history than deny that
which they intuitively feel to be a vital, an
essential truth of the higher life. We
draw near the sacred portal of the
Mysteries, and lift a comer of the veil that
hides the sanctuary.

We have seen that, go back as far as we
may into antiquity, we find everywhere

r«x)gnised t he existence of a hidden
170


THE MYSTIC CHRIST.


t eaching, a secret doctrine, given under
strict and exacting conditions to approved
candidates by the Masters of Wisdom.
Such candidates were initiated into “The;||
Mysteries ” — a name that covers in ||
antiquity, as we have seen, alT that wasM
most spiritual in religion, all that was mosfcf |
profound in philosophy, all that was mos^tl
valuable in science,_ E very great T e achei:*|f
orantiquity. passed through
and the greatest were the Hierophants of
the Mysteries ; each who came forth into
the world to speak of the invisible worlds
had passed through the portal of Initiation
and had learned the secret of the Holy
Ones from Their own lips : each who came
forth came forth with the same story, and
the solar myths are all versions of this
story, identical in their essen tial features,
varyi ng‘only in tKeu: To cal colour.

This story is primarily that of the
d escent of the Logos into niatter, and. tfaje
Sun-Go(i ' is apuy His “symbol, since the
SiTnlsTlis body, and He is often described
as “He that dwelleth in the Sun.” In
one aspect, the Christ of the Mysteries is
the Logos descending into matter, and the


172


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


As in previous cases,
the Divine Teacher, who brought the
Ancient Wisdom and republished it in the
world, was regarded as a special manifesta¬
tion of the Logos, and the Jesus of the
Churches was gradually draped with the
.stories which belonged to this great One ;
thus He became identified, in Christian
nomenclature, with the^.Sec^94=^^oijjn
the Trinit y, the Logos, or Word of God,'
and the salient events recounted in the
mytb of the Sun-God became the salient
events of the story of Jesus, regarded as
the incarnate Deity, the “mythic Christ.”


jAs in the macrocosm, the kosmos, the
‘ C hrist oTjh^ Mysteries.., represents _^he
Seco ijd., PersQn JoJ^, Trinity,
so in^^ Ae mjcrpcosm, man, does He
represent“j^i^ond aspect of the Divine
SpiriLin man —Whence called in man “the

* See on this the opening of the Johannine Gospel,
i 1-5. The name Legos, ascribed to the mani-
feted God, shaping matter—'‘all things were made
Him ”—^is Platonic, and is hence directly derived


mmi the Mysteries; ages, before Plato, V4 k, ^Q^c e,
drived from the same soerce, was used among


THE MYSTIC CHRIST.


173


Christ”' The second aspect of the Christ
of the Mysteries is then the life ^f thej;,’
I nitiat e, the life which is enter^”on at the|;
fi rst g reat Initiation, at which the Christ
born in nian, and after which He develops!
in nian. To' make this quite infeuigible,
^ must consider the conditions imposed
on the candidate for Initiation, and the
nature of the Spirit in man.

Only those could be recognised as candi¬
dates for Initiation who were already good
as men count goodness, according to the
strict measure of the law. Pure, -holy,
without defilement, clean froin~smi liyiii^
Wrffioul:"'"'fFansgression — such were some
oT't'Ke''" 3 ’e'scnp'tive^ phrases used of them.”
Intelligent also must they be, of well-
developed and well-trained minds.^ The
evolution carried on in the world life
after life, developing and mastering the
powers 01 the mind, the emotions, and
the moral sense, learning through exoteric
religions, practising the discharge of duties,
seeking to help and lift others—all this
belongs to the ordinary life of an evolving

See Ante, pp. 124. ®See Ante, pp, 93’'94*

•’ See Ante, p, 85.


t


174


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


man. When all this is done, the man
ES* become "^an,” th^Chrestos

of the Greeks,‘“an^’this he mip't^^^

He can become the Christos, the Anointed.
Having accomplished the exoteric good
life, he becomes a candidate for the
esoteric life, and enters pu the preparation
for Initiation, which consists in the f^ulfil-
meht oTcertain conditions.

These conditions mark out the attri¬


butes he is to acquire, and while he is
labouring to create these, he is sometimes
/said to be treading the Probationa iX-Eadk
f the Path which leads up to the “ Strait
IjGate,” beyond which is the llliaoxw
^’ Way,” o r the “Pat h of Holiness ," the
1 “ Way of the Cross. ” He is not expected
to devSop these attributes perfectly, but he
must have made some progress in all of

, -..-..-WS'**-'.

hem, ere the Glinst


pure nome tor tnat
ivine Child who is to develop within


The first of these attributes—they are
all mental and moral—is Discrimination ;
this means that the aspirant must T&^n to
separate in his mind the Eternal from the


THE MYSTIC CHRIST.


175


Temporary, the Real from the Unreal thei
True from„.the Raise, the Heavenly from
t Ee~E^ hly. “ Th^thlhgs, which are seen
are temporal,” says the Apostle ; “ but the’
things which a.re not seen are eternal
Men are constantly living under the
glamour of the seen, and are blinded by
it to the unseen. The aspirant must learn |
to discriminate between them, so that whatf
is unreal to the world may become real toi
him, and that which is real to the world]
may to him become unreal, for thus only
is it possible to “ walk by faith, not by
sight.”’ And thus also must a man
become one of those of whom the Apostle
says that they “ are of full age, even those
who by reason of bse have their senses
exercised to discern both good and evil.”^
Next, t his sense o f u nreality^ must buesd
in him Disgust wi di'IH^^un re.aL.j tnd t he
flying, the mere husks of life, unfit to
satisfy hunger, save the hunger of swine.'*
This stage is described in the emphatic
language of Jesus : “If anv rnan ccj^me to
me, and hate not his lather, ancl,mother,

* IL Cor. iv. 18. * 11 . Cor. v. 7.

•'’Heb. V. 14. Luke xv, 16,


1/6 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


and wife, and children, and brethren, and
sistersj’^ yea, ~ahd his owii . life also, he
cannot be rny disciple.”^ Truly a “hard
saying,” and yet out of this hatred will
spring a deeper, truer, love, and the stage
may not be escaped on the way to the
Strait Gate. Then the aspirant must learn
\ Cofiirol Q£j}k^£:h ts, and this will lead to
\ Omtrol actons, the thought being, to
toe inner eye, the same as the action :
“ Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust
after her, hath committed adultery with her
already in his heart.He must acquire
I Endurame. for they who aspire to tread
I “ the Way of the Cross ” will have to
brave long and bitter sufferings, and they
must be able to endure, “as seeing Him
who is.invisible.”^ He must add to these
I ^^ 2 ^* if would be the child of
I Him wEd “maketh His sun to rise on
the evil, and on the good, and sendeth
rain on the just and on the unjust,the
disciple of Him who bade His apostles
not to forbid a man to use His name
because he did not follow with them.^

'■Ibid. xiv. 26. *S. Matt. v. 28.

*Hebi. sL 27. ■‘S. Matt v.-45. ix. 49, 50.


THE MYSTIC CHRIST.


177


Further, he must acquire th e Faith to
which nothing is impossible,' and the
which is described by the Apostle.’
Lastly, he must seek only “ those things
which are above,”^ and long to reach the
the vision of and union witb
When a man has wrought thesei
P to his character he is re^aided

SL4i2-M>li§JaS.es him .„{h<

but thus only, he
becomes the prepared candidate.

Now, the Sp ^t..in man is the. ^hL-of|k
the Supreme "Co dTand contains within
itself th e thre e aspects of th e DivW f ,
Life -
Imac


1 _ “ . jT


As It evolves, it fir
develops the aspect of Intelligence
devel ops , the ,^,, i nte ||,ect> and this evolu¬
tion is effected in the ordinary life in
the world. To have done this to a Mgh
point,, accompanying it with moral devdlop -
ment, brings the evolving mao to the
condition of the candidate The second


^ S. Matt xvii 20. * II. Cor. ¥i S-i<x

3 CoL iii. I.

♦ S, Matt V. 8, and S. Jolm xra. 21


t


178 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


aspect of the Spirit is that of Love, and
the evolution of that is the evolution of
the Christ In the true Mysteries this
evolution is undergone—the disciple’s life
is the Mystery Drama, and the Great
Initiations mark its stages. In the
Mysteries performed on the physical plane
these used to be dramatically represented,
and the ceremonies followed in many
respects “ the pattern ” ever shown forth
“ on the J^Qun t.” for they were the
shadows in a^deteriorating age of the
mighty Realities in the spiritual world.

T he Mystic Christ, then, is twofold—
the 'ihe^econd'” Kfson^'"'of '' the

Trinityfdescending into matter, and the


Lpve, or second, aspect of the unfolding
Divine Spirit in man. The one represents
kosmk -process es carried on in the past
and is the root of the Solar Myth; the


other represents ^proces s, .carried on m.
the^individ^, the concluding stagp^
his human evolution, and added many
^details in the .Myth, goth of these have
Icontributed to the Gosn^lstorv, and~


THE MYSTIC CHRIST.


179


Let us consider first the kosmic Christ,
Deity becoming enveloped in matter, the
becoming incarnate of the Logos, the
clothing of God in “ flesh.”

When the matter which is to form our


solar system is separated off from the
infinite ocean of matter which fills space, i;
the XlLitd—of the Trinity — the/i , ’

Holy ^ S^pirit — pours His Life into this\ - .. L
if!tffefTo''’'vivify it, that it may presently/ ^

take form. It is then drawn together,’ .•
and form is given to it by the life of ' ■ ' ‘ v
the Logos, ^the Second Person of the
Trinity, whc^'^rj^es Him^^ by putting 'hh

on the limit atiQng^.Qf.^.matter, becoming
t fiF'‘"~Heaveniv Ma n.” in whose Body all y.

forms exist, of whose Body all forms are ‘
part. This was the, kosmic story, drama- ^

tically sKp^ in the Mysteries — in the- .

true Mysteries seen as it occurred in

space, in the physical plane Mysteries .

represented by magical or other means,

and in some parts by actors.

Thege.,JBmJ^&^s are v ery distinctly
stated i n the Bib le: when the “Spirit ofl
God moved upon the face of the waters”)
in the darkness that was “upon the face


i8o


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


of the deep,”' the great deep of matter
showed no forms, it was void, inchoate.

( Form was given by the Logo s, t he Word ,
ofl^m it is w ritten things 3^

m^e by Hi m; and without Him was not
anything made that was made.”“ C. W.
- Leadbeater has well put it: “ The result
of this first great outpouring [the ‘ moving ’
■^of the Spirit] is the quickening of that
wonderful and glorious vitality which
* pervades all matter (inert though it may
seem to our dim physical eyes), so that the
j^atoms of the various planes develop, when
■^electrified by it, all sorts of previously
latent attractions and repulsions, and enter
into combinations of all kinds.” ^

Only when this work of the Spirit has
been done can the Logos, the kosmic

I Mystic Christ, take on Himself the
clothing of matter, entering in very truth
t^e^^^Virgjg^s^^^^^, the^ womb of Matter
as vet virgin , unproductive This matter
ha 3 '’"^en vivified by the Holy Spirit,


' Gen. i. 2. ” S. John i. 3.

v/ ' The Christian Creed, p. 29. This is a most
valuable and fascinating little book, on the mystical
meaning of the creeds.


THE MYSTIC CHRIST.


l8l

who, overshadowing the Virgin, poured
into it His life, thus preparing it to
receive the life of the Second Logos,
who took this matter as the vehicle for
His energies. This is the becoming ;
ii3£aEiiate of the Christ, the taking flesh— ,
“ Thou did’st not despise the Virgin’s
womb.”

In the Latin and English translations of
the original Greek text of the Nicene
Creed, the phrase which describes this
phase of the descent has changed the
prepositions and so changed the sense.
The original ran: “ and was incarnate of
the Holy Ghost and the Virgin Mary,”
whereas the translation reads: “ and was
incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin
Mary.” ‘ The Christ “ takes form not of
the ‘ Virgin ’ matter alone, but of matter
which is already instinct and pulsating
with the life of the Third Logos,“ so that
both the life and the matter surround Him
as a vesture.” ^

This is the dgac^ent of the Logos,jatoi
njatteic descriibed as the birthi~oT the Christf

* Ibid. p. 42.

* A name of the Holy Ghost ^ Ibid. p. 4:5,

N


i82


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


I of a Virgin, and this, in the Solar Ivlyth ?

I becomes the birth of the^umGgd as tine
I sign Virgo rises.

Then come the early workings of the
Logos in matter, aptly typified by the
infancy of the myth. To all the feeble¬
ness of infancy His majestic powers boW
themselves, letting but little play forth
yon the tender forms they ensoul.
i mprisons , se ems as thgugh.,. threat ep i iQgf
to slay, its infant^ King, whose^ glorx.«=,i^
veiled by theiimiti.tlpi)iS,T>..g. Jia&. 3 -asj^^
^Slowly He shapes it towards high endls,

|. lilt

land lifts it into manhood, and then
ktretches Himself on the cross of rnatmf
ItharTTe may pour fortn from that cross
fell thej^wers of His surrendered Hfe.

J This is the Logos of whom said

that He was in the figure of a'^oss on
the universe; this is the Heavenly IVEan,
standing in space, with arms outstretched
in blessing ; thisisdi^
whose death on the crooo \ji
all matter with His life. Dead He s*
ancCEneJ ouT™^* sighh-^t He


In clothed in the tefy matter in

^ to, and cames up


se^rxi s,,
ri»es
whuSploL


U 3


■'


C f'^■^S sLy


THE MYSTIC CHRIST.


183

body of now radiant matter into heaven,
where it receives the downpouring life
of the Father, and becomes the vehicle
of man’s immortal life. For it is the life
drlhe Logos which forms the garment
of the Soul in man, and He gives it,:
that men may live through the ages and^-
grow to the measure of His own stature.

o

Truly are we clothed in Him, first mate¬
rially and then spiritually. He_ sacrificed t
Flimself to bring many sons into , glory, ||
an(f He is with us always, even to,the end |
of .ifee age. ?

The gwatoiiLof Christ,_ then, is part
of the great kosmic sacrifice, and the
allegorical representation of this in the
physical Mysteries, and the sacred symbol
of the crucified man in space, became

materialised, into.,a,n,.^ actual _ d^th_by|

crucl^xipn, and a crucifix bearmg^
human form; then' this story, now the
story of a man, was attached to the
Divine Teacher, Jesus, and became the
story of His physical death, while, the'
birth from a Virgin, the danger-encircled 1
infancy, the resurrection and ascension, \
became also incidents in His human life. |


*


t

184 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

The Mysteries disappeared, but their
grandiose and graphic representations of
the kosmic work of the Logos encircled
and uplifted the beloved figure of the
Teacher of Judaea, and the kosmic Christ
of the Mysteries, with the lineaments of
the Jesus of history, thus became the
central Figure of the Christian Church.

But even this was not.all; the last touch
^of fascination is a 3 ded to the Christ-story
) -j. fby the fact that there is another Chris t of
; ■';the Mysteries, close aim "cJear.to the


The life-story of every Initiate into the
true, the heavenly Mysteries, is told in its
’ -i salient features in the Gospel biography,

i'■ For this reason. S,, Pau l speaks as we have

^ seen' of the hirtlTo f^the _Christ in the

V ♦ disciple , and of His evolution and His full


^Anfe,p, 124.


steture therein. man is a potenf^al

Chn^ ^ and the unloldingortne Christ-life


'human heart—the Christ of the human.-
spiri t, the Christ who is in every one ofj
IS born and lives, is crucified, rises from
the dead, and ascends into heaven, in
every sufifering and triumphant “Son of
Man.”


THE MYSTIC CHRIST.


in a man follows the outline of the Gospel
story in its striking incidents, which we

have seen to be univ^sa l. and not parti-

.

There are ^fiye great Initiations in the
life of a Christ, each one marking a stag-e
in the unfolding of the Life of .Love.
They are given now, as of old, and the
last marks the final triumph of the Man
who has developed into Divinity, who has
transcended humanity, and has become a
Saviour of the world.

Let us trace this life-story, ever newly
repeated m spiritual experience, and see
the Initiate. living out the life of the
Christ.

At the first great Initiation the Christ
is born in the disciple ; it is then that he
realises for the first time in himself the
outpouring of the divine Love, and
experiences that marvellous change whichk

and at that birth the heavenly ones rejoice,
for he is born into “the kingdom of
heaven,” as one of the “little ones,” as “a
little child ”—the names ever given to the


■X

1 86 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

new Initiates. Such is the meaninp" of the

o

words of Jesus, that a man must become a
little child^ to enter into the Kingdom.* It
. is significantly saidXn ,some of the early
Christiam writers that Jesus was “ bor n in
^ “stableof the gospel

; the “"CaYe of Initiation” is a
well-known ancient phrase, and the Initiate
ever born therein; over that cave
{^j_“ where the young child” is burns the
!“S^_of Initiation,” the Star that ever
shines forth ii\.jthe JEast when a Child-
- Every such child is sur-

founded by perils and menaces, strange
dangers that befall not other babes ; for
anointed with the chrism of the
second birth and the . Dark, Jowers o f
' seek his undoing .

P / Despite all trials, however, he grows into
manhood, for th e ^ jphrist pnrf? born can
never peri sh, the Christ once beginning to
develop Xan never fail in his evolution;
his fair life expands and grows, ever-
increasing in wisdom and in spiritual
stattire, until the time comes for the second
great Initiation , th e Raptkp nf IKa C^ st

' S. Matt xmi 3.


THE MYSTIC CHRIST.


187


Wat^r .a nd the Spirit, that eives him
the powers necessary for the 1 eacher, who
is to go forth and labour in the world as
“the beloved Son.”


of the unseen Father pours down
radiance on nim ; but from that
blessTng is "Tie led by the Spirit
wilderness and is once more exposed to
the ordeal of fierce temptations. For now
the powers of the Spirit are unfolding
themselves in him, and the Dark Ones
strive to lure him from his path by these
very powers, bidding him use them for his
own helping in.stead of resting on his
Father in patient trust. In the swift,
sudden transitions which test his strength
and faith, the whisper of the embodied
Tempter follows the voice of the Father,
and the burning sands of the wilderness
scorch the feet erstwhile laved in the cool


I m jdchf'J
fie glpryl
Tts pure|
scene of
into the*


waters of the holy river. Conc [ uerpr ove r
these temptations he passes into the worl d

he would not out forth for his own^eeds,
and he who would not turn one stone to'


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


188


^ bread for the stilling of his own cravings
feeds “five thousand men, besides women
and children,” with a few loaves.

Into his life of ceaseless service comes
another brief period of glory, A yhen _h e
ascends “ a h i g h mount ain ap art ^he
sacred Mount of Initiation. There he is
transfigured and" there meets some of his
greaTTormmners, the Mighty Ones of old
who trod where he now is treading. He
thus the t hirf^gat InM i-tion, and
thgij the shadow of his com ing Passio n
Sis on him, and' 'he' sl:eadfastly’'"^tshis


face to go to Jerusalem—repelling the
tempting "words of one of his disciples—
Jerusalem, where awaits him the baptisni
of the Holy Ghos t and of Fire. After the
Birth, the attack by Herod; after the
Baptism, the temptation in the wilderness;
after the Transfiguration, the setting forth
towards the last stage of the Way of the
Cross. Thus is triumph ever followed bv

_ 1 t 1 . 1 1, 11 . . . I P , ,

ever fuller
an shining

ftwth more dearly as the Son of God,
»»ta the time draws near for his final


, :v


THE MYSTIC CHRIST.


battle, and the

leads him in, iriumpfi iSo Jerusalei^^^

Sight of Gethsemane and Calvary. He
IS now the Christ ready to be offered!
ready for the sa crifice on the cross. Hd
is how to face The bitter agony in the
Garden, where even his chosen ones sleep
while he wrestles with his mortal anguish,
and for a moment prays that the cup may
pass from his lips; but the strong will
triumphs and he stretches out his hand t4
take and drink, and in his loneliness ai^
angel comes to him and strengthens hijn,
as angels are wont to do when they see a
Son of Man bending beneath his lQ!.ad,.of.


agony. The drinking of the bitter cup o f
betrayal, .of_desertipn,^of denial^meet^Jiim
as he goes forth, and alone amid his
jeenng”Ibes He p^^s^j^o^._his^Jas^ fierce*
trial. Scourged physical pain, pierced
by cruel thorns of suspicion, stripped of
his fair garments of purity in the eyes of
the world, left in the hands of his foes,
deserted .^.ppayentljr by God and ^jnan,^ he
epdures patiently all that befalls him, wisti
fuilyTookihg'iH Hls'lasH aid

Left stjJI.to_suffe^r, crucified, to die to th(


190


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


life of form , to .surrender all ^ life that
b^Ton^ fotiie lower world, surrounded by
triumphant foes who mock him, the last
horror of great darkness envelopes him,
and in the dctrkness he meets all the forces
of evil; his inner vision is blinded, he
■finds himself alone, utterly alone, till the
.strong heart, .sinking in despair, cries out
Uo the Father who seems to have
{abandoned him, and the human soul faces,
j'in uttermost loneliness, the crushing agony
'; 0 f apparent defeat. Yet, summoning all
' the^gpjrth of the “ unconquerable spirit,"

B lifg is yielded up, its death is
aiibraccjd, the body of desire is
, and the Initiate * ‘ desc e nd s
that no region of the universe
,elp may remain untrodden by
lone may be too outcast to be
reached by his all-embracing love. -Adwl

Bless, he sees the lig ]aL.,once more, feels
B hiroseli again as the Son , inseparable from
ithe Father whose he is, rises to the life
■that knows no ending, radiant in the
■consciousness of death faced and over-
icome, strong to help to the uttermost


THE MYSTIC CHRIST.


I9I


every child of man, able to pour out his
life into every struggling soul. Among
his disciples he remains awhile to teach,
unveiling to them the mysteries of the
spiritual worlds, preparing them also to
tread the path he has trodden, until, the
earth-life over, he ascends to the Father,!
and, in thejfth^eatjmt^tp becomes]
t he Master triumphant. riicJ^jolc -between!
God and^m,an.

Such was the story lived through in the


true Mysteries of old and now, and
dramatically pourtrayed in sx 5 lhplj?.„isuthe
physical plan^ M^stenes^ JlS-l^^
sKovm'!'*‘”**^ uch is the Chri st ..pf^,^jjie|
Mysteries in' TTis"^ai aspect" Lbiros an di^
manT^smic and individual. Is it an^
wonder that this story, dimly felt, eveii
when unknown, by the mystic, has woven


itself into the heart, and served.^ an

ins£irjtd:Qp , noble .. Hying? The

Christ of the human heart is, for the '
most part, Jesus seen as the mystic human
Christ, struggling, suffering, dying, finally:
triumphant, the Man in whom humanity is1|
seen cruci fied and riy n, whose victory is
tTTr*promise of victory to every one who.


192 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

like Him, is faithful through death and
beyond—the Christ who can never be
forgotten while Hje _ is born again and
again in humanity, while the world needs
Saviours, and Saviours give themselves
for men.


Chapter VII.


THE ATONEMENT.


We will now proceed to study certain
aspects of the Christ-Life, as they appear
among the dgctrines of Christianity. In
the exioteric tea chings they appear as
attacfieif^ly to the Person of the Christ;
in thfi-JS SQ t eric they are seen as belonging
indeed to Him, since in their primary,
their fullest and deepest meaning they
form part of the activities of the Logos,
but as being only secondarily reflected in
the Christ, and therefore also in every
Christ-Soul that treads the way of the


Cross. Thus studied t hey will be seen t o
be profound kArue, ^

and jar t I .eleniQtiQns.


193


194


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


Among these stands prominently for¬
ward the doctrine of the j\j onemen t; not
only has It'" been a point “briMtter attack
from those outside the pale of Christianity,
but it has wrung many sensitive con¬
sciences within that pale. Some of the
niqst deeply Christian thiiil-vers of the last
half of the nineteenth century have been
t ortured with., doubts as to the teaching
of the churches on this matter, and have
striven to see, and to present it, in a way
that softens or explains away the cruder
notions based on an u nintellitrent read ¬
ing, of a few profoundly mystj ci ^tgp ^.
Nwlier^r perhaps, more than in cohri^-
tion with these should the warning of
S. Peter be borne in mind ; “ Our’beloved
brother Paul also, according to tbe wisHom
gfven*”unto him, hath written unto you
^ —as also in all his epistles—speaking in
^•^them of these things; in which are some
^ 'things hard to be understood, which they
l^'that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as
they do also the other scriptures, unto
I own destruction.' For the texts that tell
j/of the identity of the Christ with His
* 2 S. Peter iii. 15, 16,


THE ATONEMENT.


195


brother-men have been wrested into a
legal substitution of Himself for them,
and have thus been used as an escape
from the results of sin, instead of as an
inspiration to righteousness.

The general teaching in the Early
Church on the doctrine of the Atonement
was that Christ, as the Representative of
Humanity, faced and conquered Satan,
the representative of the Dark Powers,
who held humanity in bondage, wrested
his captive from him, and set him free.

Slowly, as Christian teachers lost touch

with spiritual truths, and they reflected? Jj./.

their own increasing intolerance and harsh- '

ness on the pure and loving Father of the ^

teaching^ of the Christ, they represented f

Him as migcy with man , and the C hristTi

w as maci e-lQ save man from the wmthjjfi ^

Then legal phrases intruded, still further
materialising the once spiritual idea, and
the “ scheme of redemption ” was foren-
sically outlined. “ Th_^ seal w as set on f
th e ‘ r edemption scheme ’ By Ajiaelm in \
his great work. Cur Deus Homo, and the |
doctrine which had been slowly growing |


196 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


into the theology of Christendom was
thenceforward stamped with the signet
■feof the Church. Roman (^atholk s .and
iProt es^t^nt s. at the time of the Reforma¬
tion, alike believed, jn,, the, . vicarious and
feubstitutionafy'character of the atonement
■*. iwrou2:ht bv Christ. There is no dispute
^Jbetween them on this point. I prefer to
^allow the Christian divines to speak for
themselves as to the character of the
atonement. . . . L utl^r teaches that
‘ Christ did truly and raectu^y feel for
all mankind the wrath of God, maledic¬
tion, and death.’ Flayel says that ‘to
wrath, to the wrath ' of an infinite ^od
without mixture, to the very torments of
hell, was Christ delivered, and thht by the


hand of his own father.’ The Anglica n
homily preaches that ‘sin did pluck God
out of heaven to make him feel the
horrors and pains of death,’ and that man,
being a firebrand of hell and a bondsman
of the devil, ‘ was ransomed by the death
of his only and well-beloved son ’; the
‘ heat of his wrath .’ ‘ his burning vgrath, ’
could only be ‘ pacified ’ by Jesus, ‘ so
pleasant was the sacrifice and oblation of


THE ATONEMENT.


197


his son’s death.’ Edwards , bein g logi cal,
saw that there was a gross injustice in sin
being twice punished, and in the pains
of hell, the penalty of sin, being twice
inflicted, first on Jesus, the substitute of
mankind, and then on the lost, a portion
of mankind ; so .^h e, in ^.common ^^^with
most Calvinists , finds himself compelled
to restrfcirtEe atonement to the elect, and
declared that Christ bore the sins, not of
the world, but of the chosen out of the
world; he suffers ‘ not for the world, but
for them whom thou hast given me.’ But
Edwards adheres firmly to the belief in
substitution, and rejects the universal
atonement for the very reason that ‘ to
believe Christ died for all is the surest
way of proving that he died for none in
the sense Christians have hitherto believed.’
He declares that ‘ Christ suffered the wrath
of God for men’s sins ’; that ‘ God imposed
his wrath due unto, and Christ underwent
the pains of hell for,’ sin. Owen regards
Christ’s sufferings as ‘ a Tull valuable
compensation to the justice of God for
all the sins’ of the elect, and says that
he underwent ‘ that same punishment


o


198 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


which . . . they themselves were bound
to undergo.’

H To show that these views wer e stiji
li uthoritatively uught in the church es, I
Pvrote turtlier: ‘ ^trou3 m h rist

drink ‘the cup of the wrath of God.’
Jenkyn says ‘ He suffered as one disowned
and reprobated and forsaken of God.’

endured God’s

tells us that ‘ after man had done his
worst, worse remained for Christ to
bear. He had fallen into his father’s
hands.’ Archbishop Thomso n preaches
that ‘ the cloudis^r God’s wrath gathered
thick over the whole human race:


Dwight considers that he
‘ hatred and contempt.’


they discharged themselves on Jesus
only.’ He ‘ becomes a curse for us
and a vessel of wrath.’ Liddop echoes
the same sentiment ; ‘ THe"aLpostles

teach that mankind are slaves, and
that Christ on the cross is paying
their ransom. Christ crucified is volun¬
tarily devoted and accursed ’; he even
speaks of ‘ the precise amount of ignominy
£md pain needed for the redemption,' and
' A. Besant. Essay on the Atonement.


t


^ f ^ f / , ,;


I i ^ ^

/d. hjyr J tv ^


l£


THE ATONEMENT. 199


says that the ‘ divine victim ’ paid more
than was absolutely necessary.”'

These are the view^ against which th^
l^r^d and deeply religious Dr. McLeod
Campbell wrote his well-known work]
On the Atonement, a volume containing^
rhany true and beautiful thoughts; F. D.l
Mauric e and many other Christian men|
have also striven to lift from Christianjtjf
the burden of a doctrine so destructive oil
ajr true ideas as to the relations betweei^
God and man.

None the less, as we look backwards
over the effects produced by this doctrine,
we find that belief in it, even in its legal—
and to us crude exoteric—form, is con¬
nected with some of the very^hi§’Le$t
d evelop ments of Christian conduct, and]
that some of the noblest examples of
Christian manhood and womanhood have
drawn from it their strength, their inspira¬
tion, and their comfort. It would be!
i:^ijust not to recognise this fact. And'
whenever we come upon a fact that seems
to us startling and incongruous, we do well
to pause upon that fact, and to endeavour
^Ibid.


200


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


to understand it. For if this doctrine
contained nothing more than is .seen in it
by its assailants inside and outside the
I churches, if it were in its true me aning as
r epell ent to the conscience and the intellect
IS it is" l^nd to Xt* by many tKougbitful
i^hristians, then it coulc^ not pos sibly have
ifxercised over the minds and hearts of
jeh''T~cbnmelTmgnrasm could

f iTave "Been"*tEe root of heroic self-
i surrenders , of touching and piSlietTc
I ixamples "of self-sacrifice in the service

>f man. Something,, n-jpre.there must be

n it than lie s grL.th6.surface. some hidden
cernei of lif e which has nourished those
who have drawn from it their inspiration.
In studying it as one of the Lesser
Mysteries we shall find the hidden life
which these noble ones have unconsciously
absorbed, these souls which were so at one
with that life that the form in which it was
veiled could not repel them.

When we come to study it as one of the
Lesser Mysteries, we shall feel that for ilL
^derst^id injf some sp.irija jalj£3gflbpment
■ sd, some opening,pi,.

lat its spirit shottld


THE ATONEMENT.


201


be partly evolved in the life, and only/
those who know practically; something ofi ' ,

abS y.;.,

to catch a glimpse of what is implied ini , ■
the esoteric teaching on this doctrine, as!
the typical manifestation of the Law of j
We can only understajid it a^
applied to the Christ, when we see it as a
special manifestation of the universal law,
a reflection below of the Pattern above,
showing us in a concrete human life what
sacrifice means.

^he Law of Samfice junderlies ouif

systeS . and .altjy^tejjis, a“nd.on.it al

universes are'“Builded. It^lies,at ,tl^g^ ra,oJ
of gy-olutij^ , and alone makes it inteiligi-
ble. In the doctrine of the Atonemeni
it takes a concrete form in connection with
men who have reached a certain stage
in spiritual development, the stage that
enables them to realise their oneness w^JjJj
hujQajiity,. and to become, in very deed
apd truth. Saviours of men.

declared that the universe begfins by aJ

have incorporatecl
the idea of sacrifice into their most solemnl


202


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


rites. In H indu ism^ the dawn of mani¬
festation is* said to be by sacrifice,’ man¬
kind is emanated with sacrifice,® and it is
Deity who sacrifices Himself the object
of the sacrifice is manifestation ; He
cannot become manifest unless an act of
sacrifice be performed, and inasmuch as
nothing can be manifest until He mani¬
fests,'* the act of sacrifice is called " the
dawn” of creation.

In the Zoroastrian religion it was taught
that in the Exl^nce tKat is boundless,
unknowable, unnameable, sacrifice was
performed and manifest Deity appeared;
Ahura-mazd4o was born of an act of
sacrifice.’

In the Christian rel igion the .same idea is
indicated in the phrase: “ the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world,”* slain
at the origin of things. These words can
but refer to the important truth that there
can be no founding . of a world until the
* Bnhadaranyahopamsmt^ 1 . i, i.

^ Bkagamd Gitd^ iii. lo.

^ Brihaddranyakopanishat^ L ii. 7.

^ Mundakapanishai^ IL ii. 10.

Haug. Essays on the Parsts^ pp. 12-14,

** Rev, xiiL 8,


THE ATONEMENT.


203


Deity has made an act of sa crifice. This,;.
acFTs explained as lirnffing ‘ H inf

,,.... . .- -..W-^

order to become mamf^st “Xhe


Sacrifice might perhaps more truly be
called The Law of Manifestation, or the
Law of Love and of Life, for throughou|
the universe, from the highest to th^^
lowest, it is the cause of manifestatior^
and life.”'

“Now, if we study this physical world,
as being the most available material, we
find that all life in it, all growth, all pro¬
gress, alike for units and for aggregates,
depend on continual sacrifice and thei
endurance of pain. Mineral is sacrificec
to vegetable, vegetable to animal, both tc
man, men to men, and all the higher form^
again break up, and reinforce again with
their separated constituents the lowest
kingdom. It is a continual seauepcj^^ o:
sacrifices from the lowest to the highest .^
and the very mark of progress is that
the sacrifice from being involuntary and
imposed becomes voluntary and self-
chosen, and those who are recognised as
greatest by man’s intellect and loved most
‘ W. Williamson. TAe Great Law, p. 406.


204


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITV.


by man’s heart are t he suprem e

an£^4 that^the^ejm^^
their pa,i n. If the world be the^vv^^^l^
the Logos, and the law of the Wo*'’
progress in the whole and the pa.rt*’
sacrifice, then the Law of Sacrifice
point to something in the very na.ttar<^
the Logos ; it must have ks. u:QQt it-. I
Divine Nature itself . A little fu.i'-tl
thought shows us that if there is to
a world, a universe at all, this can. ol

fe by tl^n,e.Exis^ence,^.s;^^^^;y^^

fltself and thus making manifestati
possible, and that jbejoULe^

Self-limited Cio d ; limited to become rrtii
jfest; manifested to bring a universe i*
jeing; such self-limitation and manijfe55
;ion can only be a supreme act of sacrifii
md what wonder that on every hancl t
vorld should show its birth-mark, and th
;he Law of Sacrifice should be tine Is
3f being, the law of the derived lives. i
“ Further, as it is an act of sacrifice: j
order that individuals may come into cscij
ence to share the Divine bliss, it is vcj
t ruly a vicarious ac t—-a n act .^ jatxe. fe tj


THE ATONEMENT.


205

of. Others ; hence the fact already

noted, that progress is marked by sacrifice
becoming voluntary and self-chosen, and^
we realise that humanity reaches its per¬
fection in the man who gives himself for,
men, and by his own suffering purchases
for the race some lofty good.

“ Here, in the highest regions, is the
inmost verity of vicarious sacrifice, and
however it may be degraded and distorted,
this inner spiritual truth makes it indes¬
tructible, eternal, and the fount whence
flows the spiritual energy which, in
manifold forms and ways, redeems _^the
worl d from evil and draws.„it, horne tp
God;”"'....

When the Logos comes forth from “ th^
bosom of the Father ” in that “ Day ’|
when He is said to be “begotten,”” thq
dawn of the Day of Creation, of Manii
festation, when by Him God “ made th^
worlds,”^ Fie by His own will limits
Himself, making as it were a sphere en-|

closing the Divine Life, coming forth as|

I

'A, Besant Nineteenth Century^ June, 1895, “The
Atonement”

*Heb. i. 5. ^ Ibid., 2,


2o6


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


|a radiant orb of Deity, the Divine Sub-
Istance, Spirit within and limitation, or
^Matter, without. This is the veil of matter
which makes possible the birth of the
Logos, Mary, the World-Mother, neces¬
sary for the manifestation in time of the
lEternal, that Deity may manifest for the
■building of the worlds.

That circumscription, that s el f-limitation,
is the act of sacrifice, a voluntary action
done for love’s sake, that other lives may
fbe born from Him. Such a m anjfestation
I has been regard ed aT~^Z^^y^, ^or',”"'^n
I comparison wTfH^'tKe unima^Tmible life of
I God in Himself, sucf^-^lrcum^cription,^

I matter may truly be called dea th. It has
'ibeen regarded, as we have seen, as a
JOTacifodor^^^rjjggjjJ^ and has been thus
m^red, the true origin of thet symbol of
the cross, whether in its so-called Greek
form, wherein the vivifying of matter by
the Holy Ghost is signified, or in its so-
called Latin, whereby the Heavenly Man
is figured, the supernal Christ'

“ In tracing the symbolism of the Latin
cross, or rather of the crucifix, back into
’ C. W. Leadbeater. Ths Christian Creeds pp. 54-56.


THE ATONEMENT.


207

the night of time, the investigators had **
expected to find the figure disappear,^-
leaving behind what they supposed to be*^
the earlier cross-emblem. As a matter of^
fact exactly the reverse took place, and*
they were startled to find that eventually
the. cross drops away, leaving only the'^
figure with uplifted arms. No longer is *
there any thought of pain or sorrow
connected with that figure, though still*
it tells of sacrifice; rather is it now the‘
symbol of the purest joy the world can**
hold—the joy of freely giving—for ii^'*
typifies the ‘Divine Man standing in space!*
with arms upraised in blessing, casting
abroad His gifts to all humanity, pouring|^
forth freely of Himself in all directions^
descending into that ‘dense sea’ of matterr
to be cribbed, cabined, and confined thereink
in order that through that descent we mayff
come into being.”'

T his sacrifiic e is. pggg.e|^l. for in every
form in this uni versg 01 intinite diver^ ty
tKTsnife is "enfolded, and is its veryTie^,
the “Heart of Silence” of the Egyptian
ritual, the “ Hidden God.” This sacrifice
^Ibid. pp. 56, 57.,


2o8


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


The Divine
ever presses
: form may
^pand, but presses gently, lest the form
should break ere yet it had reached its
|utmost limit of expansion. With infinite
Ipatience and tact and discretion, the
Idivine One keeps up the constant
pressure that expands, without loosing a
Torce that would disrupt. In every form,

.nimal, in man.,

is the evolu-
fe within the
forms, the rising energy that science
glimpses, but knows not whence it comes.
The botanist tells of an energy within the
plant, that pulls ever upwards; he knows
not how, he knows not why, but he gives
it a name—the vis a fronte —because he
finds it there, or rather finds its results.
Just as it is in , plant life, so is it in other


In mine ral, in vegeta ble, in

ceaselessly worlcing . That
tionary force, the ‘lifting 1


i s the secret of evol utp
Cfe, cabinet within a fbrm,
outwards in order that th


forms as well, malcing them .
njarc^^exprejsiye of 1&4iCe...within.thepi.


wjlfiii the limit of any form is reached
a nd it, can g^ ^^ no furthe r, so that notKmg
more can be gairi'eT'Oirbugh it by the soul


THE ATONEMENT.


2C^


of it—that germ of Himself, which thd!
Logos is brooding over—then He draw^!
^■. ^y His energ y, and jthe form dit jjnteJ
.9.# . it ie%^.^.(|ecay' Butli
the soul is with Him, and He shape s for


i t a new ^pn , a nd the.death'^brthe^ rn is
the-5IFth!5f the soul into |Lfe Tf web
saw with the eyes of the "Spirit instead of 5
with the eyes of the flesh, we should not
weep over a form, which is a corpse giv ing
back the materials out of which it was
builded, but we should joy over the life
P^i^_.onwaiais..,iQtP_.noU^^ to
expand u nder the unch an gi n g process the
po:?Siiilliatent^withi^^

Through^]aat_.perpetual.. sacdfi£^.Q£,.Jhe
Logos all lives exist ; it is the life by which
the universe is ever becoming. This life^
is One , but it emb(wies itself in tnyriaid:
form s, ever drawing them together and^
gently overcoming their resistance,
it is an At-one-ment, a unifyiny-fora


Thus-

__ ____b]^

which thd^eparated lives are graduai}]|
made conscious of their unity, labouring t^
develop in each a self-consciousness, whi
shall at last know itself to be one with a|l
others, and its root One and divine.


210


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


.This is the primary and ever-continued
sacrifice, and it will be seen that it is an

outpouring of.I rife_^e^cted3y.v.Xiffi^ ^

voluntery^and^ glad,

for„the..makmg..Qf other.Se This is

“the joy of thy Lord”' into which the
faithful servant enters, significantly followed
by the statement that He was hungry,
thirsty, naked, sick, a stranger and in
prison, in the helped or neglected children
of men. To the free Spirit to give itself
is joy, and it feels its life the more keenly,
the more it pours itself forth. And the
more it gives, the* more it grows, for the
law of the growth of life is that it increases
by pouring itself forth and not by drawing
jfrom without—by giving, not by taking.
ISjtcrificf, then, in its pri mary ...meaning, i§
the_£agoa.^iQU£sJii^

is.satiafied.’'

But the word hets come to b e associated
yrith suffe^g, ano in 31 rHigious rites of
sacrincesome suffering, if only that of a
trivial loss to the sacrificer, is present. It

' S. Matt. XXV. 21, 23, 31-45.

“Is. laL II.


THE ATONEMENT.


2II


is well to understand how this change has
come about, so that when the word “ sacri¬
fice ’’ is used the instinctive connotation is
one of pain.

The explanation is seen when we turn
from the manifesting Life to the forms in
which it is embodied, and look at the,

I q u^estjon. of sacrjto Tro.m..thgL .gidfi«flLjh4l/

! While the life of Life is in givin g,fl

t^life, or persistence, of form is in U^ing,
for the farm L wasted as it is exercised, it ;
is diinmShed as it is exerted. If the form'
is td continue, it must draw fresh material
from outside itself in order to repaij;,, its
losses, else will it waste and vanisK'away.
The form must grasp, keep, build into
itself what it has grasped, else it cannot
persist; and the law of growth of the form
is to take and assimilate that which the
wider universe supplies.
sciousness identifies itself with the fonn l
regarding the form as itself, sacrifice take^
on a painful aspect; to give, to surrender,ti
to lose what has been acquired, is felt to!
undermine the persistence of the %an, and!
thus the Law of Sacrifice becomes a lawl
of pain instead of a law of joy.


212


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


I Man had to learn by the constant
Ibreaking up of forms, and the pain
Involved in the breaking, that he must not
Identify himself with the wasting and
jchanging forms, but with the growing
ipersistent life, and he was taught his
lesson not only by external nature, but by
Ihe deliberate lessons of the Teachers who
gave him religions.

We can trace in the religions of the
world fpur great stag es of i nstru c tion in
the Law of Sacrifice. ?*irst, man was
taught to s acrifice p art of his material

posse ssion in order to gain..jncceaspd

mater i al prospe rity, and sacrifices were
made" in charity to men and in offerings to
Deities, as we may read in the scriptures
of the Hindus, the Zoroastrians, the
Hebrews, indeed all the w orld ove r. The
man gave up something he valued to
insure future prosperity to himself, his
family, his community, his nation.
sacrificed in th e.present to ..gain in Ae

. .wafer

future. Secondly, came a lesson aTittle
harder to learn; instead of physical
prosperity and worldly good, the fruit to
be gained by sacrifice was bliss.


THE ATONEMENT.


213


Heaven was to be won, happiness was to
be enjoyed on the other side of death—
such was the reward for sacrifices made
during the life led on earth.

A considerable step forward was made
when a man learned to give up the things
for which his body craved for the sake of a
distant good which he could not see nor
demonstrate. He learned to surrender^the
visible for the, invisible, and in'so doing
rose in the scale of being; for so great
is the fascination of the visible and the
tangible, that if a man be able to surrender
them for the sake of an unseen world in
which he believes, he has acquired much
strength and has made a long step towards
the realisation of that unseen world. Over
and over again martyrdo m has been
endured, obloqu y has been faced, man
has learnedto stand alone, bearing all that
• his race could pour upon him of pain,
m jserV r- and ..shame, looking to that which
is beyo nd the grave. True, there still
remains in this a longing for celestial
glory, but it is no small thing to be able
to stand alone on earth and rest on
spiritual companionship, to cling firmly


214 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

to the inner life when the outer is all
torture.

The third.'lesso n can\e when a jriaxu
seeing himself as part of a greater life, was
willing to sacr ifice himself for the g'ood of
the whole, and so became strong enough
to recognise that sacrifice was right, that a
part, a fragment, a unit in the sum total of
life, should subordinate the part to the
whole, the fragment to the totality. Then
he learned to do right, without being
affected by the outcome to his own person,
to do duty, without wishing for result to
himself , t o endure bec a use end jirance was
ngKT'^ L. because it would be crowne d, to
give H^ause gifts were due to humanity
not because they would be repaid by the
Lord. The hero-soul thus trained was
ready for the fourth lesson : that sacrifice
of all the separated fragment possesses
is to be offered because the Spirit is not
really separate but is part of the divine
Life, and kimwing, .p,Q..diJ[^
nojeparatjon, the man. PD u rs Jilmself forth
^ part of the Life Tfniv^.pal. and in the,
expression of that Life he shares the iov
of his Lord.


THE ATONEMENT.


215


It is in the three earlier stages that the
pain-aspect of sacrifice is seen. The first
meets but small sufferings; in the second
the physical life and all that earth has
to give may be sacrificed ; the third isi
the great time of testing, of trying, of the#;
growth and evolution of the human soul, f
For in that stage duty may demand all in
which life seems to consist, and the man,
still identified in feeling with the form,
though knowing himself theoretically to
transcend it, finds that all he feels as life
is demanded of him, and questions : “If
I let this go, what then will remain ? ” It
seems as though consciousness itself would
cease with this surrender, for it must loose
its hold on all it realises, and it sees
nothing to grasp on the other side. An/
over-mastering conviction, an imperious \
voice, call on him to surrender his very ;
life. If he shrinks back, he must go on '
in the life of sensation, the life of the
intellect, the life of the world, and as he
has the joys he dared not resign, he
finds a constant dissatisfaction, a constant
craving, a constant regret and lack of
pleasure in the world, and he realises the


2i6


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


truth of the saying of the Christ, that
“ hejthat wiU..say.e^W^^ s hall 'lo se it,”'
and that the life that was loved an3'clung
to is only lost at last. Whereas if he
risks all in obedience to the voice that
^summons, if he throws away his life, then
«n losing it, he finds k u nto life eterna l,^
fcnd he di scov ers that the li fe he sur -
rendered was only death in life, that all
he gave up was illusion , a nd mat he found
realky. In that* choice the metal of the
soul is proved, and only the pure gold
comes forth from the fiery furnace, where
life seemed to be surrendered but where
life was won. And then follows the


joyous discovery that the life thus won
is won_Jbr all, not for the separated self,
that the abandoning of the separated self
has meant the realising of the Self in
man, and that the resignation of the limit
which alone seemed to make life possible
has meant the pouring out into myriad
forms, an undreamed vividness and fulness,
“ the powg; of an endless life .” ^

S uch^is an outline of the Law of

'S. Matt xvL 25. “g. John xiL 25.

^ Heb. vii. 16.


A


THE ATONEMENT.


217


, Sacrifi ce, based on the primary Sacrifice
ofj^e Logics, 'that Sacrifice of which all
other sacrifices are reflexions.

We have seen how the manjesus, the
Hebrew disciple, laid down His body in
glad surrender that a higher Life might
descend and become embodied in the
form He thus willingly sacrificed, and how
by that act He became a Christ of full
stature, to be thejG uard ian of Christianity,
and to pour out^His life into the gr^
r eUgi op fb'unSed by the Mighty One
with whom the sacrifice had identified


Him. We have seen the Chris p- Soul
passing through the great Initiations—
born as a little child, stepping down into
the river of the world’s sorrows, with the
waters of which he must be baptised into
his active ministry, transfigured on the
Mount, led to the scene of his last combat,
and triumphing _pver death. ^^^JsJSiVep
now to see in what sense he_ is an atone-i'
men|^ h ow m me Christ-life t he L aw oft
Sac rific e finds a perfec.t expressi on. *

The beginning of what may be called
the ministry of the Christ come to man¬
hood is in that intense and permanent


2i8


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


sympathy with the world’s sorrows which
is typified by the stepping’ down into the
river. From that time forward the life


must be summed up in the phrase, “He
went about doing goodfor those who
sacrifice the separated life to be a channel
of the divine Life, can have no interest in
this world save the helping of others. He
learns to identify himself with the con¬
sciousness of those around him, to feel as
they feel, think as they think, enjoy as they
enjoy, suffer as they suffer, and thus he
brings into his daily waking life that sense
of unity with others which he experiences
in the higher realms of being. . He must
pevelpp a sympathy which vibrates in per-
[fect harmony with the many-toned chord
o,f_ hurnan life, so that he may link in
himself the human and the divine lives,
and become a jnediatpr between heaven
and earth.


t PpKer is now manifested for the

spirit is resting on jiim, and he begins to
tand out in the eyes of men as one of
hose who are able to help their younger
srethfen to tread the path of life. A s they
gathe r round him, they feel the power that


THE ATONEMENT.


219


out from hun, the divine Life in ,the!
a ccredited So n of th e Highes t. The souls
that are hungry come to him and he feeds
them with the bread of life ; the diseased
with sin approach him, and he heals them
with the living word which cures the sick¬
ness and makes whole the soul; the blind
with ignorance draw nigh him, and he
opens their eyes by the light of his
wisdom. It is the chief mark in his
ministry that the lowest and the poorest,
the most desperate and the most degraded,
feel in approaching him no wall of separa¬
tion, feel as they throng around him
welcome and not repulsion; for ^jJae.r.e|
radiates fi xuxLji im a love that understand s ||
a^^tl^i ^ can th erefore never wish to repe l. |
However low the soul may be, he never
feels the Christ-Soul as standing above
him but rather as standing beside him,
treading with human feet the ground he
also treads ; yet as filled with some strange
uplifting power that raises him upwards
and fills him also with new impulse and
fresh inspiration.

Thus he lives and labours, a true S aviour
of meiC"untfl time comes "^^^en^^e


220


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


must learn another lesson, losing for awhile
his consciousness of that divine Life of
which his own has been becoming ever
more and more the expression. And this
: Mlesson is that the true cent re of divine
' i^Life lies w|thiir’'and' not, witKp^^^
iSelf has its centre within each human soul
I—truly is “the centre everywhere,” for
, ^Christ is in all, and God in Christ—and
'■Mho embodied life, nothing “out of the
y^Eternal”' can help him in his direst need.
He has to learn that the true unity of
F a.the r and Son is to be found wjmi n and
not without, and this lesson can dmy com e

5 in uttermost isolation, when he feels for-
sakenby the ^God outside himself. As
aches, "he cries out to those
who are nearest to him to watch with him
through his hour of darkness; and then,
by the breaking of every human sympathy,
;the failing of every human love, he finds
Ihimself thrown back on the life of the
pivine Spirit, and cries out to his Father,
feeling himself in conscious union with
Him, that the cup may pass away.
Having stood alone, save for that divine
‘ Light on the Path, § 8 .


THE ATONEMENT.


221


Helper, he is worthy to face the last
ordeal, where the God without him
vanishes, and only the God within is left.

“ My God, my God, why hast Thou for ilj
saken me ? ” rings out the bitter cry of
startled love and fear. The last lonelines^l
descends on him, and he feels himself foHi
saken and alone. Yet never is the Fathei|.|
nearer to the Son than at the moment!
when the Christ-Soul feels himself for¬
saken, for a s he thus to uch es . . the lowest|
depth of sorro w, the hour |

begins to dawn. For now he learns tha|
he miStTums^ become the . God to whor
he c ries, and by feeling the last pang o|
separation he fads the_g |:, j;^T'nal -u-n3-ty hej
feels the founLi jf life'is ^ ]^.‘"an3 knows
himself eterna l.

None can become fully a Saviour of menMi
nor sympathise perfectly with all humanl
suffering, unless he has faced and con-1
quered pain and fear and death una ided,!
save by the aid he draws from the GoJ
wifan him. It is easy to suffer when
iSere' is unbroken consciousness between
the higher and the lower; nay, suffering
is not, while that consciousness remains


222


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


unbroken, for the light of the higher
makes darkness in the lower iinjwssible,
and pain is not pain when borne in the
smile of God. There is a suffering that
men have to face, that every Saviour of
man mu.st face, where darkness is on the
human consciousness, and never a glimmer
of light comes through ; he must know the
pang of the despair felt by the human .soul
when there is darkness on e very sid e, and
the groping consciousness cannot find a
hand to clasp. Into that darkne.ss every
Son of Man goes down, ere he rises
tflumphant; that bitterest experience is
tasted by every Christ, ere he is “ able to
save them to the uttermost"' who seek
the Divine through him.

Such a one has become truly divine, a
Saviour of men, and he takes ^j^^
which-

^^*rn must pour all the
forces that make against man, in order
^that in him they may be changed into
forces that help. Thus he ^becomes one
^L.the _ Peace^S^S^of w^

transmute the forces of combat that would


' Heb. vii. 25.


THE ATONEMENT.


223


Otherwise crush man. For the Christs of
the world are these Peace - centres into
which pour all warring forces, to be
changed within them and then poured out
as forces that work for harmony.

Part of the sufferings of the Christ not
yet perfect lies in this harmonising of
the discord - making forces in the world.
Although a Son, he yet learns by suffering f
and is thus “made perfect.”' Humanity;.?
would be far more full of combat and
rent with strife were it not for the Chri.st-11
disciples living in its midst, and harmo-1!
nising many of .the warring forces into If
peace.

When it is said that the Christ suffers
“ for men,” that His strength replaces
their weakness. His purity their sin. His
wisdom their ignorance, a tru th is spok en ;
for the Christ so becomes one with men
that they share with Him and He with
them. There is no substitution of Him^
for them, but the taking of their liyeainto g
andj;he^puring of HisJfe I

Tor^havmg risen to the plane of unity, He|
is able to share all He has gained, to giyef

Heb. V. 8, 9.


224


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


i all .He has won. Standing above the
plane of separateness and looking down
at the souls immersed in separateness, He
can reach each while they cannot reach
each other. Water can flow from above
into mahy pipes, open to the reservoir
|though closed as regards each other, and
'so He can send His life into each soul.
Only gjni!e,cP|iciiti<?n is needed in order that
a Christ may sh^re His strength with a
younger brother: I that in the s eparated life
the hunianjcpnsciousness will j)pen itself to
tl?eJlrj4e^,,win sSlIti^^c^dysJSlihe

ami.take the freely outpour ed
gift. For so reverent is God to that Spirit
which is Himself in man, that He will not
even pour into the human soul a flood of
strength and life unless that soul is willing
to receive it. There must be an openiner

-Y5 ’ receptiveness of the lower
nature as well as the willingness of the
higher to give. TJ^at.|s .the link between
and th^nian; that is what the
churches have called the outpouring of
‘•^vine grace ”; that is what is meant by
the “ faith ” necessary to make the grace


THE ATONEMENT.


225


effective,
it—the humaif sou


As Gio:


'JBruno once put ,
as windows, and can\


shut those windows'"close. The sun out- i
side is shining, the light is unchanging; ^
let the windows be opened and the )

sunlig ht must stream.in. The light of;

God is beating against the wiiidows of|
every human soul, and when the window^
are thrown open, the soul_becpmes, illu4
minated. There is no change in God, but
there is a change in man; and man’s will
may not be forced, else were the divine
Life in him blocked in its due evolution.

Thus in every Christ that rises, all

... .iiiMllllllllflllTr 'll I I ..

hum9.n ity is lifted a ste p highe r, and by
His wisdom the ignorance of the whole '
world is lessened. Each man is less weak
because of His strength, which pours out
over all humanity and enters the separated
soul. Out of that doctrine, seen narrowly,
and therefore mis-seen, grew the idea of
the vicarious Atonement as a legal transac¬


tion between God and man, in 'whichi
Jesus took the place of the sinner. It!
was not understood that One who had
touched that height was verily one with
all His brethren ; identity of nature was


226 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

‘ mistaken for a personal substitution, and
thus the spiritual truth was lost in the
: harshness of a judicial exchange.

“ Then he comes to a knowledge of his
place in the world, of his function in
nature—to be a Saviour and to make
atonement for the sins of the people. He
stands in the inner Heart of the world,
the Holy of Holies, as aJHighJPxiesLiif
I Humanity. He is one with all his brethren.

Is any sinful? he
Sis sinful in them, that his purity may purge
{them. Is any sorrowful ? in them he is
>|the man of sorrows; every broken heart
|breaks his, in every pierced heart his heart
|s pierced. Is any glad ? in them he is
I'oyous, and pours out his bliss. Is any
graving ? in them he is feeling want that
lie may fill them with his utter satisfaction.

I He has everything, and _becap§S*itis hji§wit
is, thei rs.- He is perfect; then they are
: perfect with him. He is strong ; who then
; Ian be weak, since he is in them? He
’ climbed to his high place that he might
pour out to all below him, and he lives in
order that all may share his life. He lifts


THE ATONEMENT.


227


the whole world with him as he rises, the
path is easier for all men, because he has
trodden it.

“ Every son of man.jrnay become such a:
m anii jS|ted^b^ Q*

^e worl d. In each such Son is ‘ God
manifest in the flesh,’” the atonement that
aids all mankind, the living power that
makes all things new. Only one thing is
needed to bring that power into manifested*
activity in any individual soul; the soul
nmst open the door ^^ a^ H im in. Even|

He, all-permeating, cannot force His way?
against His brother’s will; the human will
can hold its own alike against God and
man, and by the law of evolution it must
voluntarily associate itself with divine
action, and not be broken into sullen
submission. Let the will throw open jhe
doop Ipe’’’will flood the , jpjal.

While the door is closed it will only gently
breathe through it its unutterable fragrance,
that the sweetness of that fragrance may
win, where the barrier may not be forced
by strength.

“ This it is, in part, to be a, Christ; but


228


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


how can mortal pen mirror the immortal,
or mortal words tell of that which is beyond
the power of speech ? Tongue may not
utter, the unillumined mind may not grasp,
that mystery of the Son who has become
one with the Father, carrying in His
bosom the sons of men.”"

Those who would prepare to rise to
such a life in the future must begin even
|now to tread in the lower life the path
|of the Shadow of the Cross. Nor ^ ould
j they doubt their power to ris e, for to do so
is to doubuhe God within them . “ Have
faith in yourself,” is one of the lessons that
comes from the higher view of man, for
that faith is really in the God within.
There is a way by which the shadow of
the Christ-life may fall on the common
life of man, and that is by doing every act
as a sacrifice, not for what it will bring to
the doer but for what it will bring to
ot hers , and, in the daily common life of
small duties, petty actions, narrow interests,
by changing the motive and thus changing
ali Not one thing in the outer life need

"Anrne Besant Theosophical Review, Dec., 1898,
344 , 345 -


THE ATONEMENT.


229


necessarily be varied ; in any life sacrifice
may be offered, amid any surroundings
God may be served. Evolving spirituality
is marked not by what a man does, but
by he does it; not in the circum¬
stances, but in the atwude of a man
towards them, lies the opportunity of
growth. “And indeed this symbol of the
cross may be to us as a touchstone to
distinguish the good from the evil in many
of the difficulties of life. ‘ Only those
actions through which shines the light of
the cross are worthy of the life of the
disciple,’ says one of the verses in a book
of occult maxims ; and it is interpreted
to mean that all that the aspirant does
should be prompted by the fervour of
self-sacrificing love. The same thought
appears in a later verse; ‘ When one
enters the path, he lays his heart upon the
cross ; when the cross and the heart have
become one, then hath he reached the
goal.’ So, perchance, we may measure
our progress by watching whether selfish¬
ness or self-sacrifice is dominant in our'
lives.” f

' C. W. Leadbeater. The Christian Creed, pp. 61, 62.

Q


230


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


Every life which begins thus to shape
itself is pxeparing_ the„.£a'^ in which the

Child-Christ.shall be.bornraha t^

become a constant at-one-ment, bringing
%-.,4iyine more and more into the human.
Every such life shall grow into the life of
a “ beloved Son,” and shall have in it the
glory of the Christ. Every man may work
in that direction by making every act and
power a sacrifice, until the gold is purged
from the dross, and only the pure ore
remains.


Chapter VIII.


RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION.

The doctrines of the Resurrection and
Ascension of Christ also form part of the
Lesser Myste ries, being integral portions
of ‘‘ TTe'SoIar Myth,” and of the life-story
of the C hrist in ro an.

As regards Christ Himself they have
their historical basis in the facts of His
continuing to teach His apostles after His
physical death, and of His appearance in
the Greater Mysteries as Hierophant after
His direct instructions had ceased, until
Jesus took His place. In the mythic tales
the resurrection of the hero and his
glorification invariably formed the con¬
clusion of his death-story; and in the
Mysteries, the body of the candidate was
always thrown into a death-like trance,
during which he, as a liberated soul,

231


232 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

travelled through the invisible world,
returning and reviving the body after
three days. And in the life-story of the
individual, who is becoming a Christ, we
shall find, as we study it, that the dramas
of the Resurrection and Ascension are
repeated.

But before we can intelligently follow
that story, we must master the outlines of
the human constitution, and u nder stand
the natural and^ spiritual bodies of rnan.
“There is a natufaT'Body, and there is a
spiritual body.”'

There are still some uninstructed people
who regard man as a mere duality, made
up of “soul” and “body.” Such people
use the words “soul” and “spirit” as
synonyms, and speak indifferently of “soul
and body,” or “ spirit and body,” meaning
that man is composed of two constituents,
one of which perishes at death, while the
.other survives. For the very simple and
i gnorant this rough divisioi^s sufficien t
but it will not^^ejabk. . us understan d
di e mysterie s of the Resurrection and
iCscension.


RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION. 233


Every Christian who has made even a
superficial study of the human constitution
reiognises in it three distinct constituents
—Spirit, Soul, and Body. This division is
sound, though needing lurther subdivision
for more profound study, and it has been
used by S. Paul in his prayer that “your
whole spirit and soul and body be pre¬
served blameless,”’ Th 9 .t . thre efold divi¬
sion i s acce pted i n Christian Theology.

The Snirit i tself is really a Trinity, the
reflex ion" and image o£ _ the Supreme
Trinity, and this we shall study in the
following chapter. “ The^^true rnan, the
immortal, who is the Spirit, is, the Trinity
in ipap, This is life, consciousness, and
to this the spiritual body belongs, each
a , s p ect of the Trini ty ha vi ng i ts own
Body. The SouL is dual, and comprises
the mind and the emotional nature, with
its appropriate garments. And th e Body,.
is the material instrument of Spirit and
Soul. In one Christian view of man
he is a twelve-fold being, six modifica¬
tions forming the spiritual man, and six
the natural man; according to another, he
' I Thess. V. 23. “ See Chapter IX., “ The Trinity.”


is divisible into fourteen, seven modifica¬
tions of consciousness and seven corres¬
ponding types of form. This latter view
is practically identical with that studied by
Mystics, and it is usually spoken of as
^v en-fold , because there are really seven
dmsions, each being two-fold, having a
life-side and a form-side.

These divisions and sub-divisions are
somewhat confusing and perplexing to the
and hence Orjgen. and Cl ern ,ent, as
we have seen,^ laid great stress on the
need for intelligence on the part of all who
to become Gimstics . After all,
dMJse who find them tfSublesome can leave
*1^® one side, without grudging them
to the earnest student, who finds them not
wny iliiBninative, but absolutely necessary
to my dear understanding of the Mysteries
of Life and Man.

The woed Bod - - -

or


234 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION. 235

Or, we may liken it to a vessel, in which
consciousness is held, as a jar holds liquid.

It is a form used by a life, and we know
nothing of consciousness save as connected
with such forms. The form may be of
rarest, subtlest, materials, may be so
diaphanous that we are only conscious of
the indwelling life; still it is there, and it
is composed of Matter. It may be so
dense, that it hides the indwelling life, and
we are conscious only of the form ; still the
life is there, and it is composed of the
opposite of Matter—Spirit. The student!
must study and re-study this fundamental!
fact — the duality of all manifested i
exista^e, the _in§§j^ablg^_cp-gsi^^^ j
o f Spirit and-Matt er in a graiin. of,dust, I
in the Logos, the God manifested. The#
idea must become part of him; else must
he give up the study of the Lesser
Mysteries. The Christ, as God and Man,
only shows out on the kosmic scale the
same fact of duality that is repeated
everywhere in nature. On that original '
duality everything in the umvS'se is .
formed .

Man has a “ natural body,” and this is


236 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

made up of four different and separable
portions, and is subject to death. Two of
these are composed of physical matter,
and are never completely separated from
each other until death, though a partial
separation may be caused by anaesthetics,
or by disease. These two may be classed
together as th e Physical Bo dy. In this
j;h^man carries on his conscious activities
while Jje is awake; speaking technically,
it is his vehicle of consciousness in the
|)hysical world.

The third portion is the
SO called because man’s
passional nature finds in this its special
vehicle. In sleep , the man leaves the
physical body, and carries on his conscious
activities in this, which functions in the
invisible world closest to our visible earth.
It is therefore his vehicle of co nsciousnf= ‘^c:
in the ]^t of Aj^up^r^hysi^L^wo^
which.,1s. .. also the firs t world^ in to which
men pass at d ^ th.

The fourth portion is t he Mental Body,
so called because man’s int5!e3i3’Surer
so far as it deals with the concrete,
functions in this. It is his vehicle of


esire Body,
eelmg and


RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION. 237

consciousness in the second of the super¬
physical worlds, which is also the second,
or lower heavenly world, into which
men pass after death, when freed from
the world alluded to in the preceding
paragraph.

These four portions of his encircling
form, made up of the dual physical body,
the desire body, and the mental body, form
the n atural bod y of . w hich S. Paul speajcs^
TTliis scientific analysis has fallen out
of the ordinary Christian teaching, which
is vague and confused on this matter.
It is not that the churches have never
possessed it; on the contrary, this
knowledge of the constitution of man
formed part of the teachings in the Lesser
Mysteries ; the simple division into Spirit,
Soul, and Body was exoteric, the first
rough and ready division given as a
foundation. The subdivision as regards
the*“Body” was made in the course of
later instruction, as a preliminary to the
training by which the instructor enabled
his pupil to separate one vehicle from
another, and to use each as a vehicle of
consciousness in its appropriate region.


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


This conception should be readily
enough grasped. If a man wants to
travel on the solid earth, he uses as his
vehicle a carriage or a train. If he wants
.to travel on the liquid seas, he changes
his vehicle, and takes a ship. If he
wants to travel in the air, he changes
^his vehicle again and uses a balloon.
lIHe is the same man throughout, but
lhq7 is using “Three dif ferent vehicles.


wants to travel, in. The analogy is rough
ana inadequate, but it is not misleading.
When a man is busy in the physical world,
his vehicle is the physic al body , and his
consciousness works in and through that
body. When he passes into the world
beyond the physical, in sleep and at deat h,
his vehicle is th e desire bod y, and he may
learn to use thisTCB^ou^, as he uses the
physical consciously. He already uses it
unconsciously every day of his life when
he is feeling and desiring, as well as every
night of his life. When he goes on into
the heavenly world after dea th, his vehicle
is the mental^body, and this also’ he is


RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION. 239

would be no thought in the brain were
there none in the mental body.

Man has further “a s piritua l t>odv.”
This is made up of ■t^^eseparabTe
portions, each portion belonging to one,
of, and separating off, the three Persons
in the Trinity of the human Spiirit.

of .being.. “,Q 9 .ught up ...to
the ^hjird heaven,” and of there hearipg .
‘Tinspeakable. words which it is .not.lawful ■
for "a nicui to „pj.ter.”’ These different'
regions of the invisible supernal worlds are
known to Initiates, and they are well
aware that those who pass beyond the
first heaven need the truly spiritual body
as their vehicle, and that according to the
development of its three divisions is the
heaven into which they can penetrate.

The lowest of these three divisions is
usually called the Causal Body , for a
reason that will be dniy fully"" "Similable
by those who have studied the teaching of
Reincarnation — taught in the Early
Church—and who understand that human
evolution needs very many successive lives
^,eaS~ere„,fc

* 2 Cor. xii. 2, 4.


240


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


i savage can become the perfected soul of
jthe Christ, and then, becoming perfect as
•^the Father in Heaven,' can realise the
union of the Son with* the Father.® It is

1 ^ tfaaU ^S§jfe8inJife,^Jfe.

\ the ^ pas t^, is^ sta ^pgl-'''^rom

IiTcome^forth"the causes that build up the
i lower bodies. It is the recgpj^Ie_of
j human ^ ea^aeidaBce, thejt£ga§uri^ouse in
I which all we gather in our lives is stored
‘'up, t he seat- .Q£,,Conscience. ,the..melder of
|the.,,Will.

The secppd of the three divisions of the
spirituarbody is spoken of by.S^JElauLin
the significant words : “We have a building
of God, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens.”^ That is the

the__,gi2dfei .bQdy:„.,.S.f„jbe

it is

not a body which is “made with hands,”
by the working of consciousness in the
the lower vehicles; it is not formed by
experience, not builded out of the materials
gathered by man in his long pilgrimage.
It is a body which belongs to the Christ¬
'S. Matt. V. 48. 'S. John xvii. 22, 23.

^2 Cor. V. I.


RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION. 241


life, the life of Initiation ; to th e diyin g
unfoldment in man ; it is builded of Gpd,
by the activity .of the Spirit, and ffrows
ouring the whole life or lives of the
Initiate, only reaching its, perfection at
“ the Resurrection .”

The third division of the spiritual body
is the fine film of subtle matter that
separates off the individual Spirit as a’
Being, and yet permits the interpenetration
of all by all, and is thus the^^^^exgresgipjj^p/';
the ..fund ameataJ..upjjty. In'the day when'
the Son Himself shall “ be subject unto
Him that put all things under Him, th,.9Jt;
G^niayj,^jyn^all,”' this film wilf be
transcended, but for us it remains the
highest division of the spiritual body^jj.
which we as cend to the Father,„ and ^e |
u nited with Him .

Christianity has always rec ognised th e
existence of three worlds, or regions,
t ^ugh .which a man passes; first, the
physical world ; secondly, an intermediate
state*"into which he passes~^t "^^c[S!^;


thirdly, the heavenly w orld. These three
worlds are universally believed in by
I Cor. XV, 28.


242


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


educated Christians ; only the uninstructed
imagine that a man passes from his death¬
bed into the final state of beatitude. But

t

there is some difference of ppinion as to

the natur^ of tlie.i nterm ediate world .

The"I^^iLi^.oiic names
and, believes that every soul
save that of the Saint, the man who has
reached perfection, or that of a man who
has died in “mortal sin.” The great mass
of humanity pass into a purifying region,
! wherein a man remains for a period vary-
- ing in length according to the sins he
has committed, only passing out of it
into the heavenly world when he has
become p^e. The various communities
that are called Protestant vary in their
teachings as to details, and mostl y


It Purgatory.
passes into it.


re^udi^e the idea morte m puri¬

fication ; but they agree Troadly that there


is an intermediate state, sometimes spoken
“ ParMbse/’ or as a “ waiting .net^iod.”
The h eavenly world is am^t universally,
in modern Christendom, regarded as a
final s tate, with no very definite or general
idea as to its nature, or as to the progress
or stationary condition of’ those attaining


RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION. 243


to it. In__ early- Christianity this heaven
was considered to be, as it really is, a stage
in the progress of the soul, re-incarnation
in one form or another, t he pre-existence I
of the soul, be in g then very generall y!
taugh t. The result was, of course, thaW
the heavenly state was a temporary con¬
dition, though often a very prolonged one,
lasting for “an age”—as stated in the
Greek of the New Testament, the age
being ended by the return of the man
for the next stage of his continuing life
and progress—and not “everlasting,” as
in the mistranslation of the English
authorised version.'

In order to complete the outline
necessary for the understanding of the
Resurrection and Ascension, we must see
ybodies are developedJjj
th e hjgj i]^£^y,Qlj^n.

jTne ph^ical body is in a constant


“This mistranslation was a very natural one, as
the translation was made in the seventeenth century,
and all idea of the pre-existence of the soul and
of its evolution had long faded out of Christendom,
save in the teachings of a few sects regarded as
heretical and persecuted by the Roman Catholic
Church.


244 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

State of flux, its minute particles being
continually renewed, so that it is ever
building; and as it is composed of the
food we eat, the liquids we drink, the
air we breathe, and particles drawn from
our physical surroundings, both people
and things, we can steadily purify it, by
choosing its materials well, and thus make
it an ever purer vehicle through which
to act, receptive of subtler vibrations,
responsive to purer desires, to nobler and
more elevated thoughts. For this reason
all who aspired to attain to the Mysteries
were subjected to rules of diet, ablution,
&c., and were desired to be very careful
as to the people with whom they associated,
and the places to which they went.

The desire bo dy also changes, in similar
fashion, but the materials for it are ex¬
pelled and drawn in by the play of the
desires, arising from the feelings, passions,
and emotions. If these are coarse, the
materials built into the desire body are
also coarse, while as these are purified,
the desire body grows subtle and becomes
very sensitive to the higher influences.
In proportion as a man dominates his


RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION. 245

lower nature, and becomes unselfish in
his wishes, feelings, and emotions, as he
makes his love for those around him less
selfish and grasping, he is purifying this
higher vehicle of consciousness ; the result
is that when out of the body in sleep he
has higher, purer, and more instructive
experiences, and when he leaves the
physical body at death, he passes swiftly
through the intermediate state, the desire
body disintegrating with great rapidity,
and not delaying him in his onward
journey.

The mental body is similarly being
built now, in this case by thoughts. It
will be the vehicle of consciousness in the
heavenly world, but is being built now
by aspirations, by imagination, reason,
judgment, artistic faculties, by the use
of all the mental powers. Such as the
man makes it, so must he wear it, and
the length and richness of his heavenly
state depend on the kind of mental body
he has built during his life on earth.

As a man enters the higher evolution,
this body comes into _independent_.activ:ity
on this side of death, and he gradually
R


246 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

becomes conscious of his heavenly life,
even amid the whirl of mundane existence.
Then he becomes “ the Son of man which
is in heaven,”' who can speak with the
authority of knowledge on heavenly things.
When the man begins to live the life of
the Son, having passed on to the Path
of Holiness, he lives in heaven while
remaining on earth, coming into conscious
possession and use of this heavenly body.
And inasmuch as heaven is not far away
from us, but surrounds us on every side,
and we are only shut out from it by our
incapacity to feel its vibrations, not by
their absence; inasmuch as those vibra¬
tions are playing upon us at every moment
of our lives; all that is needed to be in
Heaven is to become conscious of those
vibrations. We become conscious of them
with the vitalising, the organising, the
evolution of this heavenly body, which,
being builded out of the heavenly
materials, answers to the vibrations • of
the matter of the heavenly world. Hence
the '• Son of man ” is ever in heaven.
But we know that the “ Son of man ” is a
*S. John iii. 13.


RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION. 247

term applied to the Initiate, not to the
Christ risen and glorified but to the Son
while he is yet “being made perfect.”'

During the stages of evolution that lead
up to and include the Probationary Path,
the first division of the spiritual body—
the Causal Body—develops rapidly, and
enables the man, after death, to rise into
the second heaven. After the Second
Birth, the birth of the Christ in man,
begins the building of the Bliss Body “ in
the heavens.” This is the body of the
Christ, developing during the days of His
service on earth, and, as it develops,
the consciousness of the “ Son of God ”
becomes more and more marked, and the
coming union with the Father illuminates
the unfolding Spirit.

I n the C hristian Mysteries—as _in__thej
ancient Egyptian^”Chaldaeah, and othe rs—
tEer^ was a n outer symbolism which
expressed the s'Sge¥~^hfdugfr”which the
pan was passing. He was brought into
the chamber, of Initiation, and was
stretcEed on the ground with his arms
extended, sometimes on a cross of wood,

' Heb. V. 9.


248 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

, 'sometimes merely on the stone floor, in

' the posture of a crucified man. He was
then touched with t he thyrsus on the heart
—t^ he “spear” of the crucifixion —and,
leaving the body, he passed into the
worlds beyond, the body falling into a
deep trance, the death of the crucified.
The body was placed in a sarcophagus
of stone, and there left, carefully guarded.
Meanwhile the man himself was treading
first the strange obscure regions called
“the heart of the earth,” and thereafter
the heavenly mount, where he put on
the perfected bliss body, now fully
organised as a vehicle of consciousness.
In that he returned^to the bod y of fl esh,
to re^^imate it The cross bearing that
body, or the entranced and rigid body,
if no cross had been used, ’ was lifted out
of the sarcophagus and placed on a
sloping surface, facing the east, ready
'for the rising of the sun on the third
At the moment that the rays ©f
pie sun touched the face, the Christ, the
perfected Initiate or Master, re-entered
^ the body, glorifying it by the bliss body
He was wearing, cha nging the body of


RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION. 249


by contact with the body _ of bliss,!''
giving it new p r oper ties, ngjy powers, newf
capa cities, transmuting' it into His own|
likeness. Thj,t»^g^„„the, Resurrection^ ofu
the Christ, and thereaft^HlTray of |
flesh itself was changed, and took on aw'
D^j^nature. ■

'This is why the sun has ever been taken
as the symbol of the rising Christ, and
why, in Easter hymns, there is constant
reference to the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness. So also is it written of
the triumphant Christ: “I am He that*^
liveth and was dead ; and behold, I am
alive for evermore. Amen; and have the h
keys of hell and of death.”' All the/®*
powers of the lower worlds have been
taken under the dominion of the Son, who
has triumphed gloriously ; over Him death
no more has power, “He holdeth life and
death in His strong hand.”* He i s th e |
nsenOmst,

. The AscgT^fjiipa of the Christ was the
Mystery of the third part of the spiritual

' Rev. i. 18.

* H. P. Blavatsky. The Voice of the Siience, p. 90,

5th Edition.


250


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


body, the putting on. of the Vesture , of


t^Spirit re-entered the glory it had
[“before the world was.”' Then the triple
Spirit becomes one, knows itself eternal,
and the Hidden God is found. That is


7^


imaged in the doctrine of the Ascension,
so far as the individual is concerned.

T he js when

the wjnple race has attained the C.bri.§,t
co ndition , tl ^ sta te of the_ Son, and that
Son becomes one with the Father, and
God is__all in a^ That is the goal, pre¬
figured in lEe^triumph of the Initiate, but
reached only when the hurnan race is
perfected, and when “ the great orphan
Humanity ” is no longer an orphan, but
consciously recognises itself as the Son of


God.


T hus st udying the doctrines of th e
Atonement 7ubic ~~~R6surr ectio n, and the
Ascensm^ we rea^ the truths~unioI3^d
concerning them in the Lesser Mysteries,
an d we begin to understand the full truth
of the apc^tohc T eaSurS^hat Cl^^

* S. John. xvii. 5.


RESURRECTION AND ASCENSION.


not a unique personality, but “ the first!}
jh at„s lepfi ' and ^that eve ry
man was to become a. C hrist. Not then
wasmeChrist regarded as an 'external
Saviour . by_ whose imputed righteousness
men were to be saved from divine wrath.
There was current in the Church the
glorious and inspiring teaching that He
was but the first fruits of humanity, the

HT^imself, the life that all should share. I
The Initiates have ever been regarded as ^
these first fruits, the promise of a race
made perfect. To the early Christian,
CbxLs t was the living symbol of his own
aivinity, the Plorious fruit of the seed he

|irrr~-.^

Dorein his own heart. Not to be saved |
by an external Christ, but to be glorified |
into an inner Christ, was the teaching j
of esoteric Christianity, of the Lesser
Mysteries. The stage of discipleship was
to pass into that of Sonship. The life^
of the Son was to be lived among men I
till it was closed by the Resurrection, and!
the glorified Christ became one of thef
perfected Saviours of the world. *

* I Cor. XV. 20.


252 ESOTERIC CHRISTIAN'iTY.

How far greater a Gospel than the
one of modern days! Placed beside that
grandiose ideal of esoteric Christianity, the
exoteric teaching of the churches seenis
narrow and poor indeed. «


Chapter IX.


THE TRINITY.


All fruitful study of the Divine Existence
must start from the affirmation that it is
X )a£. All the Sages have thus proclaimed
It; every religion has thus affirmed It;’
every philosophy thus posits It—“One
only without a second.”" “Hear, O Israel!”
cried Moses, “ The Lord our God is one
Lord.”“ “To us there is but one God,'”^
declares S. Paul. “ There is no God but
God,” affirms the founder of Islim, and
makes the phrase the symbol of his faith.
One Exi stence unbounded^ kn ow n in Its
fulness only to Itself—the word It seems

-ft -.- .A* P

more reverent and inclusive than He, and
is therefore used. That is the Eterna l
Darknes s, out ^f w hich is “Som the Light .

ChMndogy Omanis hat, VI. ii., i. ®Deut. vi, 4.

31 Qor, viii. 6.

253 ■


\ •


254


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


But as the Manifeg ted God, ... the. Ona.
aoDears~'li^Thre'e. A' Trinity of Divine
Beings, One as God, Three as manifested
Po)yei:§. This also has ever been declared,
and the truth is so vital in its relation to
man and his evolution that it is one which
ever forms an essential part of the Lesser
Mysteries.

Among the Hebrews, in consequence of
their ajijixfipaES^^ the

doctrine was kept secret, but the Rabbis
studied and worshipped the Ancient of
Days, from whom came forth the Wi.sdom,
from whom the Understanding—K^the^r,
Chochmah, Binah , these formed the
Supreme Trinity, the shining forth in time
of the One beyond time. The^ Book
of the Wisdom of Solomon refers to
this teaching, making Wi.sdom a Being.
“ According to Maurice, ‘ The first
Sephira, who is denominated Kether
the Crown, Kadmon the pure Light,
and En Soph the Infinite,' is the omni-

'An error: En, or Ain, Soph is not one of the
Trinity, but the One Existence, manifested in the
Three; nor is Kadmon, or Adjim Kadmon, one
Sephira, but their totality.


THE TRINITY.


255


potent Father of the universe. . . .

The second is the Chochmah, whom we
have sufficiently proved, both from sacred
and Rabbinical writings, to be the creative
Wisdom. The third is the Binah, or||
heavenly Intelligence, whence the Egyp-K
tians had their Cneph, and Plato hisl
Notts Demiurgos. He is the Holy Spiriff
who . . . pervades, animates, and governs
this boundless universe.’

The bearing of this doctrine on Christian i
teaching is indicated by Dean Milman in t
his History of Christianity. He says : *
“This Being [the Word or the Wisdom]^
was more or less distinctly impersonated,^
according to the more popular or more'’
philosophic, the more material or the'^
more abstract, notions of the age or''
people. This was the doctrine from the >'

h

h
It.

if" was "I Ke Platonic,., «

'Quoted in Williamson’s The Great Law, pp. 201,


Ganges, o r of the^^eljpw^

S^, to the Ilissu s ; ft was the fu ndament al
principle of the In ^anreliS ^ and th e
Indian ^ t he basis , of

Zoroastrianism: it was pure Platonis m;


202.


256 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


Alexandrian school. Many fine passages
might be quoted from I31I0 on the
impossibility that the first self-existing
Being should become cognisable to the
sense of man; and even in „_P.ales t ine .
doubt, John the Baptist and opr Lor d

? spoke n o new.doctri ne, but

the common * sentiment of the

f iore enlightened, when they declared
that no man had seen God at any
iime.’ In conformity with this principle
ths»«te^, interpretation of the older

Scrimures, instead of direct and sensible
communication from the one great Deity,
had, iilterposed either
ing^te-he^s as, .the, channels Qf..£om-
munipatipn. According to one accredited
tradition alluded to by S. Stephen, the
law was delivered ‘ by the disposition of
angels ’; according to another this office
was delegated to a single angel, sometimes
called the Angel of the Law (see Gal. iii.
19) ; at others the Metatron. But the
[igi:e_prdina^_representady as jtj^re,
if God, to the sense and mind of man,
as the Memra, or the Divine,.»Word ; and
it IS remarkable that the same appellation


THE TRINITY.


257


is found in the Indian , the Persian, the
Plaj^ic, and the Ale3g.ndrian systems.
By the Targumists, the earliest Jewish
commentators on the Scriptures, this term
had been already applied to the Messiah;
nor is it necessary to observe the manner "
in which it has been sanctified by its *■
introduction into the Christian scheme.”'

As above said by the learned Dean, the
idea of the Word, the Logos, was
universal, and it formed part of the idea
of a Trinity. Among the Hi jjdus . the
philosophers speak of the liianifested


Brahman as Sat-Chi t-Ananda , Existence,
Intelligence, and Bliss. Popula rly. the|

Manifested God is a Trinity.; Shiva, thel
Beginning and the End; Vishnu, the!
Preserver; Brahmi, the Creator of thel
U niverse. The Zoroastrian faith presents ®
a similar ^ Trinity; Ahuramazdao, the
Great One, the First; then “ the twins,”
the dual Second Person—for the._ Second!
Perso n in a T rinity is ever dual , I
detemrated in modern days into an|
opposing God and Devil—and the]


' H. H. Milman. Tke Bistory of Christianity, 1867,


pp. 70-72.


258 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

Universal Wisdom, Armaiti. In North ern
Buddhism we find Amitdbha, the bound-
lesTnCipit; Avalokiteshvara, the source
of incarnations, and the Universal Mind,
Mandjusri. In Southe rn _^Buddhis m the
idea of God has faded away, but with
significant tenacity the triplicity re-appears
as that in which the Southern Buddhist
takes his refuge—the Buddha, the Dharma
(the Doctrine), the Sangha (the Order).
But the Buddha Himself is sornetimes
worshipped a Tfiiiity : on a stone in
!lSuddha Gaya is inscribed a salutation to
Him as an incarnation of the Eternal One,
and it is said : “ Om! Thou art Brahmd,
.Vishnu, and Mahesha (Shiva) ....

I adore Thee, who art celebrated by a
thousand names and under various forms,
in the shape of Buddha, the God of
Mercy.”'

I n extinct religions the pame idea of a
foun d. In Egjgg|^it dominateS
us worship. “We have a
hieoroglyphical inscription in the British
Museum as early as the reign of Senechus
of the eighth century before the Christian
^ Asiatic Researches, i. 285.


Trinity is
all relign


THE TRINITY.


259


era, showing that the doct rine of Trinity
in Unity already formed part~T>T~their
religion.”' This is true of a far earlier
^te. Ri, Osiris, and Horus formed one
widely worshipped Trinity; Osiris, Isis,
and H orus were worshipped at^Ab^ ;
other names are given in different cities,

the triangle is the fre quently use d
s ymbol of the Triu n e Go d. The idea
which underlay these Trinities, however
named, is shown in a passage quoted from
Marutho, in which an oracle, rebuking the
pride of Alexander the Great, speaks of:
“ First God, then the Word, and with
Them the Spirit.”’

I n Chaldaea , Anu, Ea, and Bel were the
Supreme Trinity, Anu being the Origin of
all, Ea the Wisdom, and Bel the creative
Spirit. Of (^ina Williamson remarks :
“In ancient China the emperors used to
sacrifice every third year to ‘ Him who is
one and- . There was a Chinese 1

saying, ‘Fo is one person but has three
forms.’ . . . . In the lofty philo-

' S. Sharpe. Egyptian Mythology and Egyptian
Chris to logy ^ p. 14,

“See Williamson’s The Great Law ^ p. 196,


26 o esoteric CHRISTIANITY.

sophical system known in China as
Ta .p i sm. a tr ini ty also figures : ' Eternal
R^on produced One, One produced Two,
Two produced Three, and Three pro¬
duced all things,’ which, as Le Compte
goes on to say, ‘ seems to show as if they
had some knowledge of the Trinity.’ ”*

In tl^g^ Christian doctrine of the Trinit y
we find a^c dmplete a_g iaSnmtL:w i5rp^ r
faiths as t o the functions of the three
Divine Persons, the word Person coming
from persona, a mask, that which covers
something, the mask of the One Existence,
Its Self-revelation under a form. The
Father is the Origin and End of all; the
Son is dual in His nature, and is the
Word, or the Wisdom; the Holy Spirit is
the creative Intelligence, that brooding
over the chaos of primeval matter
organises it into the materials out of
which forms can be constructed.

It is this identity of functions under
so many varying names which shows that
we have here not a mere outer likeness,
an _exBres_sion of an inner trut h.
There is something of which t^ tnplidty

* Loc. pp. 208, 209.


THE TRINITY.


261


is a manifestation, something that can be
traced in nature and in evolution, and
which, being recognised, will render intelli¬
gible the growth of man, the stages of
his evolving life. Further, we find that
in the universal language of symbolism;
the ^Persons are distinguished by^certairf
embl ems, and may be recognised by these)
under diversity of forms and names.

But there is one other point that must
be remembered ere we leave the exoteric
statement of the Trinity—that in con¬
nection with all these Trinities there is
a fourth fundam ental manifestation, the
Power of the God, and this has always
a feminine form. In Hinduism each
Person in the Trinity has His manifested
Power, the One and these six aspects
making up l;)ie sacred Seven. With many
of the Trinities one feminine form appears,'
then ever specially connected with the
Second Person,' and then there is the
sacred Quaternary.

L et us now see the inner truth .

The One becomes manifest as the First
Being, the Self-Existent Lord, the Root
of all, the Supreme Father; the word
s


262 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

Will, or Power, seems best to express this
primary Self-revealing, since until there is
Will to manifest there can be no manifesta¬
tion, and until there is Will manifested,
.impulse is lacking for further unfoldment.
The u niverse may be said to be roo ted in
Then follows the second
aspect of the One— Wisdom ; Power is
guided by Wisdom, and therefore it is
written that “ without Him was not
anything made that is made;”’ "Vyjg^m
is. dual icuits natu re, as will presently be
seen. When the aspects of Will and
Wisdom are revealed, a third aspect must
follow to make them effective—Creative
Intelligence, the divine mind in Actiorr.*"
A Jewish prophet writes : “He hath made
the earth by His Power, He hath
established the world by His Wisdom;
and hath stretched out the heaven by
His Understanding,”’' the reference to the
three functions being very clear. ^ These
in separable, indivisible ^ thre^ e

^P^Qtg.of Their functions may be

thought of separately, for the sake of

’S. Johni. 3. “Jer. li. 15.

^SeeAnie, pp. 179-180.


THE TRINITY.


263

clearness, but cannot be disjoined. Each
is necessary to each, and each is present
in each. In the First Being, Will, Power,
is seen as predominant, as characteristic,
but Wisdom and Creative Action are also
present; in the Second Being, Wisdom
is seen as predominant, but Power and
Creative Action are none the less inherent
in Him; in the Third Being, Creative
Action is seen as predominant, but Power
and Wisdom are ever also to be seen.
And though the words First, Second,
Third are used, because the Beings are
thus manifested in Time, in the order of
Self-unfolding, yet in Eternity they are
known as interdependent and co-equal,
“ None is greater or less than Another.”’

This Trinity is the divine Self, the
divine Spirit, the Manifested God, He
that “ was and is and is to come,”“ and
He is the root of the fundamental
triplicity in life, in consciousness.

But we saw that there was a Fourth
Person, or in some religions a second
Trinity, feminine, the Mother. This is
That which''rnalces manifestation possible,
" Athanasian Creed. Rev. iv. 8.


264 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

That which eternally in the One is the
.root of limitation and division, and which,
[when manifested, is called Master. This
jis the divine Not-Self, the divine Matter,
Ithe manifested Nature. Regarded as
lOne, She is the Fourth, making possible
the activity of the Three, the Field of
Their operations by virtue of Her infinite
divisibility, at once the “ Handmaid of the
Lord,”' and also His Mother, yielding of
Her substance to form His Body, the uni¬
verse, when overshadowed by His power.*
Regarded carefully She is seen to be triple
also, existing in three inseparable aspects,
without which She could not be. These
are Stability—Inertia or Resistance—
Motion, and Rhythm ; the fundamental or
essential qualities of Matter, these are
called. They alone render Spirit effective,
and have therefore been regarded as
the manifested Powers of the Trinity.
Stability or Inertia affords a basis, the
fulcrum for the lever; Motion is then
rendered manifest, but could make only
chaos; then Rhythm is imposed, and there
is Matter in vibration, capable of being
' S. Luke. i. 38.


THE TRINITY.


265

shaped and moulded. When the three
qualities are in equilibrium, there is the
One, the Virgin Matter, unproductive.
When the power of the Highest over¬
shadows Her, and the breath of the Spirit
comes upon Her, the qualities are thrown
out of equilibrium, and She becomes the
divine Mother of the worlds.

The first interaction is between Her
and the Third Person of the Trinity;
by His action She becomes capable of
giving birth to form. Then is revealed
the Second Person, who clothes Himself
in the material thus provided, and thus
becomes the Mediator, linking in His
own Person Spirit and Matter, the Arche¬
type of all forms. Only through Him
does the First Person become revealed,
as the Father of all Spirits.

It is now possible to see why the
Second Person of the Trinity of Spirit
is ever dual ; He is the One who clothes
Himself in Matter, in whom the twin-
halves of Deity appear in union, not as
one. Hence also is He Wisdom; for
Wisdom on the side of Spirit is the Pure
Reason that knows itself as the One Self


266 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

and knows all things in that Self, and on
the side of Matter it is Love, drawing
the infinite diversity of forms together,
and making each form a unit, not a mere
heap of particles—the principle of attrac¬
tion which holds the worlds and all in
them in a perfect order and balance.
This is the Wisdom which is spoken of
as “mightily and sweetly ordering all
things,”^ which sustains and preserves
the universe.

In the world-symbo ls, found in every
religion, the ^<^t —that which has position
only—^has feen taken as a symbol of
the First Person in the Trinity. On
this symbol St. Clement of Alexandria
remarks that we abstract from a body its
properties, then depth, then breadth, then
length; “ the point which remains is a
unit, so to speak, having position ; from
which if we abstract position, there is the
conception of unity.”* He shines out, as it
were, from the infinite Darkness, a Point
of Light, the centre of a future universe,

* Book of Wisdom, viii. i.

*VoL IV. Ante-Nicene Library. S. Clement of
Alexandria, ^romata^ bk, V., ch. ii.


THE TRINITY.


267

a Unit, in whom all exists inseparate ; the
matter which is to form the universe, the
field of His work, is marked out by the
backward and forward vibration of the
Point in every direction, a vast sphere,
limited by His Will, His Power. This
is the making of “ the earth by His
Power,” spoken of by Jeremiah.' Thus
the full symbol is a Point within a sphere,
represented usually as a Point within a
circle. Th e Se c ond Person is represented
by a Line, a diameter of this circle, a
siri^e complete vibration of the Point,
and this Line is equally in every direction
within the sphere ; this Line dividing the
circle in twain signifies also His duality,
that in Him Matter and Spirit—a unity in
the First Person—are visibly two, though
in union. The Third^Person is repre¬
sented by a Cross formed bv t wo diameter s
at right angles to each other within the
circle, the second line of the Cross
separating the upper part of the circle
from the lower. This is the Greek Cross.*
When the Trinity is represented as
a Unity, the Triangle is used, either

"See Ante, p. 262. ®See Anfe^ p. 207.


inscribed within a circle, or free ^

!^2iX|rse is symbolised by . two triaj

the Trinity of SpirlF'^
a^x of the triangle upward, the Tr
of Matter with the apex of the tria
downward, and if colours are used !
first IS white, yellow, golden or flj
coloured, and the second black, or s
dark shade.

r i?'fr~a:ii£_a 2 SS.£» now be rea
f^ed The One has becSmei
and the Two Three, and the Trinit

Spmt This ts the -in the beginni.
of Genesis, when “God created ;

further r“a n statem

ea^b” ; foundations of

here the marking :
of the matenal, but a mere chaos, “wi
out form and void.”3

On this begins tlm.,.^Qtioii of 1
Creative .intelligence, the Holy SpT
who ‘‘moved upon the , face

-‘Gen. I. I. njob ^^

^Geai. 2. ^ ■


THE TRINITY.


269


•^ters,”' the vast ocean of matter. Thus
His was the first activity, though He
was the Third Person—a point of great
importance.

In the Mysteries this work was shown
in its detail as the preparation of the
matter of the universe, the formaiion
of a tpm s. the drawing of these together
intO'ag^egates, and the grouping of these
together into elements, and of these again
into gaseous, liquid, and solid..compounds.
This work includes not only the kind of
matter called physical, but also all the
subtle states of matter in the invisible
worlds. He further as the “ Spirit of
Understanding” conceived the forms into
which the prepared matter should be
shaped, not building the forms, but by
the action of the Creative Intelligence
producing the Ideas of them, the heavenly
prototypes, as they are often called. This
is the work referred to when it is written.
He “stretched out the heaven by His
Understanding.”®

The work of the Second Person follows
that of the Third. He by virtue of His
"Gen. i. 2. “See Ante, p. 262.


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


270

Wisdom “established the world,”' building
all globes and all things upon them, “ all
things were made by Him.”“ He is the
organising Life of the worlds, and all
beings are rooted in Him.^ The life of
the Son thus manifested in the matter
prepared by the Holy Spirit—again the
great “Myth” of the Incarnation—is the
life that builds up, preserves, and maintains
all forms, for He is the Love, the
attracting power, that gives cohesion to
forms, enabling them to grow without
falling apart, the Preserver, the Supporter,
fthe Saviour. That is why all must be
((Object to the Son,"* all must be gathered
iup in Him, and why “ no man cometh
Uunto the Father but by ” Him.'’

For the work of the First Person follows
that of the Second, as that of the Second
follows that of the Third. He is spoken
of as “the Father of Spirits,”® the “God
of the Spirits of all flesh,and His is the

"See Ante, p. 262. "S. John i. 3.

^Bhagavad Gii& ix. 4. *1 Cor. xv. 27, a 8.

^ S. John xiv. 6. See also the further meaning of
this text on p. 272.

“ Heb. xii. 9.


'Numb, xvi, 22.


THE TRINITY.


271


gift of t he dmrie„.Spirit, the. true Self in
m ^n. The human Spirit is^routpoured
divine Life of the Father, poured into the
vessel prepared by the Son, out of the
materials vivified by the Spirit. And this
Spirit in man, being from the Father—1
from whom came forth the Son and thel
Holy Spirit—is a Unity like Himself, with)
the three aspects in One, and man is thus'
truly made “ in our image, after our
likeness,”’' and is able to become “perfect,
even as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect””

Such i^J^e kosm i c proces s, and in
human evolution it is repeated; “as above,
so below.”

T he Trinity of the Spirit in man , being
in the divine likeness, must show out the
divine characteristics, and thus we find in
him Power, which, whether in its higher
form of or its lower form of Desire,
gives the impulse to his evolution. We
find also in him Wisdom, the Pure Reason ,
which has Love as its expression in the
world of forms, and lastly Intelligence , or
Mind, the acti v e shaping energ y. And in


* Gen. i. 26.


®S. Matt. V. 48.


2 72 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

man also we find that the manifestation of
these in his evolution is from the third to
the second, and from the second to the
first. The mass of humanity is unfolding
the mind, evolving the intelligence, and
we can see its separative action every¬
where, isolating, as it were, the human
atoms and developing each severally, so
that they may be fit materials for building
up a divine Humanity. To this point
only has the race arrived, and here it is
still working.

As we study a small minority of our
race, we see that the second aspect of the
divine Spirit in man is appearing, and
we speak of it in Christendom as the
Christ in man. Its evolution lies, as we
have seen, beyond the first of the Great
Initiations, and Wisdom and Love are
the marks of the Initiate, shining out
more and more as he develops this aspect
of the Spirit. Here again is it true that
^no man cometh to the Father but by
Me,” for only when the life of the Son
is touching on completion can He pray :
“ Now, O Father, glorify Thou Me with
Thine own Self, with the glory which I


THE TRINITY.


273


had with Thee before the world was.”'
Then the Son ascends to the Father and
becomes one with Him in the divine
glory; He manifests self-existence, the
existence inherent in his divine nature,
unfolded from seed to flower, for “as the
Father hath life in Himself, so hath He
given to the Son to have life in Himself.”*
He becomes a living self-conscious Centre
in the Life of God, a Centre able to exist \
as such, no longer bound by the limitations
of his earlier life, expanding to divine
consciousness, while keeping the identity
of his life unshaken, a living, fiery Centre
in the divine Flame.

In this evolution now lies t he possibilit y
of divine Incaraa^oas in the future, as
this evolution in the past has rendered
possible divine Incarnations in our own
world. These living Centres do not Igse
Their identity , noTTKe'Irn emory of Thei r
past, of aught thatTTlie^rKave experienced
in the long' climb upwards; and such a
Self-conscious Being can come forth from
the Bosom of the Father, and reveal
Himself for the helping of the world. He

'S. John xvii. 5. “ S. John v. 26.


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


274

has maintained the union in Himself of
Spirit and Matter, the duality of the
Second Person—all divine Incarnations in
all religions are therefore connected with
tEe 'Second Person in the Trinity—and
hence can readily re-clothe Himself for
physical manifestation, and again become
Man. This nature of the Me diator He
has retained, and is thus a li nk b etwaep
the celestial.4Ud Tri nitie s. “ God

with us He has ever been called.

I Such a Being, the glorious fruit of a
(past universe, can come into the present
(world with all the perfection of His divine
(Wisdom and Love, with all the memory of
:;His past, able by virtue of that memory to
.be the perfect Helper of every living
IBeing, knowing every stage because He
jhas lived it, able to help at every point
Ibecause He has experienced all. “In that
jHe Himself hath suffered being tempted,
|He is able to succour them that are
|empted.”“

It is in the humanity behind Him that
lies this possibility of divine Incarnation;
He comes down, having climbed up, in

‘ S. Matt. i. 22. " Heb, ii. 18.


THE TRINITY.


275


order to help others to climb the ladder.
And as we understand these truths, and
something of the meaning of the Trinity,
above and below, what was once a mere
hard unintelligible dogma becomes a living
and vivifying truth. Only by the existence I
of the Trinity in man is human evolution!
intelligible, and we see how man evolves!
the life of the intellect, and then the life of]
the Christ. On that fact mysticism is
based, and our sure hope that we shall!
know G od. Thus have the Sages taughtl
and as we tread the Path they show, wq
find that their testimony is true.


Chapter X.
PRAYER/


What is sometimes called “the modern
spirit ” is exceedingly antagonistic to
prayer, failing to see any causal nexus
between the uttering of a petition and
the happening of an event, whereas the
r eligious sgi ri t is as strongly attache iL.to
it, and finds its very life in praye r. Yet
even the religious man sometimes feels
uneasy as to the rationale-^ jaL-praYer: is
he teaching the All-wise, is he urging
beneficence on the All-Good, is he altering
the will of Him in “ whom is no variable¬
ness, neither shadow of turning ? ” “ Yet
.he finds in his own experience and in that •
of others “a nswers to praye r,” a definite
sequence of a requ e st and a f ulfilment. ^
Many of these do not refer to subjective *

Much of this chapter has already appeared in an
^ earlier work by the author, entitled, Some Frohlems.
of life.

® S. James i. 17.

276

f


PRAYER.


277


experiences, but to hard facts of the so-
called objective world. A man has prayed
for money, and the post has brought him
the required amount; a woman has prayed
for food, and food has been brought to her
door. In connection with charitable under-,
takings,* especially, there is plenty of
evidence of help prayed for in urgent need,;',
and of speedy and liberal response. 0'n‘\
the .Qtl^er hand, there |s also plenty"" of
evidence of prayers feft unanswered ; of
Ih^ hungry starving to death, of the child
snatched from its mother’s arms by disease,
despite the most passionate appeals to
God. Any true view of prayer must take
into account all these facts.

Nor is this all. There are many facts
in “tos experience which are strange and
puzzling. A prayer that perhaps is trivial
meets with an answer, while another on
an important matter fails ; a passing
trouble is relieved, while a prayer poured
odt to save a passionately beloved life
finds no response. It seem s almost im-j

p_ ps 9 ible for t he o rdin ary student.toi

di^qyer t he, law accordi ng t o which a
prayerir^or igno. t producti ve.


4//"" /


2/8 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


The first thing necessary in seeking to
understand this law is to ^nalys e pr ayer
itself, for the word is usST to cover
various activities of the consciousness,
and prayers cannot be dealt with as
though they formed a simple whole. There
are prayers which are getiti^s^fg^^efim^
wo):ldly adva n tag es, fbrtITe~*'su^Iyof
physical necessities—prayers for food,
clothing, money, employment, success in
business, recovery from illness, &c. These
may be grouped together as class. A.,
Then we have prayers for help iji
moral and intel lectual difficultie s and ^Jor
spiritual, .growth—for the overcoming of
temptations, for strength, for insight, for
enlightenment. These may be grouped


as Class B. Lastly , there are the
prayers that' ask for nothing, that consist
in_J3neaitation on and adoration of the
divine Feriection, m intense a.spiration
tor union with God—the ecstasy of the
mystic, the meditation of the sage, the


soaring rapture of the saint. This is the
t aiue “ communion. between _t he Divine and
jihe hu nian,” when the man pours himself
but in love and veneration for that


PRAYER.


279


which is inherently attractive, that compels
the love of the heart. These we will call
Class C.

In the invisible worlds there exist many
kinds of Intellisrences, which come inio
relationship With man, a veritable Jacph’s
ladder, on which the Angels of God ascend
and descend, and abovev^cG stands the
Lord Himself." Some of these Intelli¬
gences are mighty spiritual Powers, others
are exceedingly limited beings, inferior in
consciousness to man. This occult side of


Nature—of which more will presently be
said “—is a fact, j:ecog^^^y:jt]l.r4igipn
All the world is filled vdth livjn ' g things , I
isSi£i.ble."tg^^ e^s. Tlie invisible!
wbrI3s interpenetrate the visible, and
crowds of intelligent beings throng round
us on every side. Some of^ these _are


accessible to human r eques ts, and_ .Qth.ers
are amenabl e to the human-will- ChristL
anity recognises the existence of .the
h-SeT'aisses'of lnteiriiences‘'m^^^^
general name of An^gis^and teaches that
they are “ ministering spirits, sent forth to


' Gen. xxviii, 12, 13.

* See Chapter xii. Q ^


28o esoteric CHRISTIANITY.

minister; but what is their ministry,
what the nature of their work, what their
relationship to human beings, all that was
part of the instruction given in the Lesser
Mysteries, as the actual communication
with them was enjoyed in the Greater
but in mod ern days these truths have sunk
into the bac kgroun d, except the little
that is taught in the Greek and Roman
jCommunions. For the Pr oteston t. “the
'ministry of angels” is little more thauii
phras e. In addition to all these, mac
is himself a constant creator of invIsMe
beings , for the vibrations of his thoughts
and desires create forms of subtle matter
the only life of which is the thought or
the desire which ensouls them ; he thus
creates an army of invisible servants,
who range through the invisible worlds
s eeking , to do his will . Yet, again, there

are .ia.these worlds human hel^ rs. who

work _th,?re in their subtle bodies w hite

thdir physical bodies are sleepi ng,

whose attentive ear may catch a
cry for help. And to crown all, there js^
the .e v er-present, *“ever-cbhscious Life of

"Heb i. 14.


PRAYER.


281


God Him sel f, potent and responsiv^_^jit
every poin t of His realm, of Him without
whose knowledge not a sparrow falleth
to the ground,’ not a dumb creature thrills
in joy or pain, not a child laughs or sobs
—that .fill-pervading, all-emb racing, all-
sustaining^ Life and ,Loye, in wliicK~we
liv e and mo ve.” As noughit that' can give
pleasure or pain can touch the human
body without the sensory nerves carrying
the message of its impact to the brain-
centres, and as there thrills down from
those centres through the motor nerves
the answer that welcomes or repels, so
does every vibration in the universe,
which is H is body, touch the consci ousn ess
of God, and draw thence re sponsive
a ction. Nerve-cells, nerve-threads, and
muscular fibres may be the agents of:
feeling and moving, but it is the man\
that feels and acts ; so may myriads of
Intelligences be the agents, but it is Godf
who knows and answers. Nothing can!
be so small as not to affect that delicate
omnipresent consciousness, nothing so vast
as to transcend it. We are so limited that
‘ S. Matt. X. 29. ’Acts xvii. 28.


282


ESOTERIC CHRlSTIANITV.


the very idea pf such an all-embracii'ig
consciousness staggers and con founds us ;
yet perhaps a gnat might be as hard
bestead if he tried to measure the
consciousness of Pythagoras. Professor

R n a remarkable passage, has
the possibility of the exi.stence
rising higher and higher in
e, the consciousness ever ex-
md the reaching of a stage as
ve the human as the human
that of the blackbeetle.* That
’IS not a night of the scientific imagination,
but a description of a fact. There is a
Being whose consciousness is present at
every point of His universe, and there¬
fore can be affected from any point.
That consciousness is not only vast in
its field, but inconceivably acute, not
diminished in delicate capacity to respond
because it stretches its vast area in every
1 direction, but is more responsive than a
more limited consciousness, more perfect
•in understanding than the more restricted.
So far from it being the case that the

' T. H. Huxley. on some Controverted

Questions^ p. 36.


PRAYER.


283


more exalted the Being- the more difficult
would it be to reach His consciousness,

the very reverse is true. The.more

ejcalted the. Bejng t^ more~eiSlY^

Now this all-pervading Life is every¬
where utilising as channels all the embodied
lives to which He has given birth, and
any one of them may be used as an agent
of that all-conscious Will. In order that
that Will may express itself in the outer
world, a means of expression must be
found, and these beings, in proportion to
their receptivity, offer the necessary
channels, and become th e int ermedig,!::^
work ers between one p oin t of the kosmo s
and another . They act as the motor
nerves of His body, and bring about the
required action.

Let us now take the classes into which
we have divided prayers, and see the
methods by wh ich they will be ans were d.

When a man utters "a grayer of Class A
there are several means by which his
prayer may be answered. Such a man
is simple in his nature, with a conception
of God natural, inevitable, at the stage


284 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

of evolution in which he is ; he regards
Him as the supplier of his own needs,
in close and immediate touch with his
daily necessities, and he turns to Him for
his daily bread as naturally as a child
turns to his father or mother. A typical
instance of this is the case of George
j/Muller, of Bristol, before he was known
to the world as a philanthropist, when he
was beginning his charitable work, and
was without friends or money. He prayed
for food for the children who had no
resource save his bounty, and money
always came sufficient for the immediate
jneeds. What had happen ed ? His prayer
was a strong, energetic desire, and that
desire creates a form, of which it is the
life and directing energy. That vibrating,';,
jliving creature has but one idea, the ideak
/that ensouls it—help is wanted, food is/ |
Iwanted; and it ranges the subtle world, /
peeking. A charitable man desires to
I give help to the needy, is seeking oppor¬
tunity to give. As the magn et to soft

fpnn, andTt is attrac ted to him . It rouses
in his brain vibrations identical with its


PRAYER.


285


own—George Muller, his orphanage, its
needs—and he sees the outlet for his
charitable impulse, draws a cheque, and
sends it. Quite naturally, George Muller
would say that God put it into the heart
of such a one to give the needed help.
In the deepest sense of the words that
is true, since there is no life, no energy,
in His universe that does not come from


God ; but th e interm ediate agency, accord-j
ins: to the drvTne ' SwST^'^tfie' I

created,_bv the praye r, ■

" Th ^resuTr'^ oiM be obtained equally
well by a deliberate exercise of th e ,willi
without any__piaa gr, By “a persorT wBc
understoootEemechanism concerned, and
the way to put it in motion. Such a
man would think clearly of what he
needed, would draw to him the kind of
subtle matter best suited to his purpose i
to clothe the thought, and by a deliberate
exercise of his will would either send it
to a definite person to represent his need,,
or to range his neighbourhood and be
attracted by a charitably disposed person. |
There is here no prayer, but a cohsciousl
exercise of will and knowledge. ®


286


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


In the case of most people, however,
ignorant of the forces of the invisible
; worlds and unaccustomed to exercise
itheir wills, th,£.,isoncentration of mi nd a nd
jthe earliest desire which are necessarj^
/for successful^ are faj: more..„Qasily

reached by prayer than by a deliberate
...fiffort to put forth their own
; Strength. They would doubt their own
power, even if they understood the theory,
and doubt is fatal to the exerci.se of the


will. That the ^person who prays dpej

not.underitand,. .the_.maqhine.ry.he_. set§,

going m ,np.„ wise__^affe(;ts the jesu lt. A
child who stretches out his hand and
grasps an object need not understand
anything of the working of the muscles,
nor of the electrical and chemical changes
set up by the movement in muscles and
nerves, nor need he elaborately calculate
the distance of the object by measuring
.the angle made by the optic axes; he
wills to take hold of the thing he wants,
4nd the apparatus of his body obeys his
Ivill though he does not even know of
nts existence. So is it with the man
who prays, unknowing of the creative.


PRAYER.


287


fprce of his thoug ht, of the living creature
he has sent out to do his bidding. He
acts as unconsciously as the child, and^
like the child grasps what he wants.

In both cases God is equally the primal j
Agent, all power being from Him; in |
both cases the actual work is done by ]
the apparatus provided by His laws.

But this is not the only way in which
prayers of this class are answered. Some
one temporarily out of the physical body
and at work in the invisible worlds, or a
passing A ngel, may hear the c r y for help , 1
and may then put the thought of sending
the required aid into the brain of some:
charitable person. “The thought of so-
and-so came into my head this morning,” **
such a person will say. “ I daresay a "j
cheque would be useful to him.” Very «»
many prayers are answered in this way.


the link between .the need and the supply
being some invisible Intelligence. Herein
is"*^rt of tKe ministry of the lower
Angels, and they will thus supply personal
necessities, as well as bring aid to chari¬
table undertakings.

The failure of prayers of this clasfi is


288


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


d ue to another hidden cause . Every man
contracted defets wEch have to be
paid; his wrong thoughts, wrong desires,
and wrong actions have built up ob.stacles
in his way, and sometimes even hem him
in as the walls of a prison-house. A debt
of wrong is discharged by a payment of
suffering; a man must bear the conse-

I K man condemned to die of starvation by
I his own wrong-doing in the past may hurl
I his prayers against that destiny in vain.


The desire-form he creates will, se ek h u t
wiir not nnd ; it will be met and thrown
back By the current of past wrong. Here,
as everywhere, wej,re liyin^.iD,3Jr.ea^^
law, and forces may be modified or entirely
f rustrated by the, play of other f orces with
whic h they co me int o contact. I'wo
exactly similar forces might be applied to
two exactly similar , balls ; in one case, no
Other force might be applied to the ball,
and it might strike the mark aimed at; in
the other, a second force might strike the
ball and send it entirely out of its course.
(|And so with two similar prayers; one may
po on its way unopposed and effect its


PRAYER.


289


object; the other may be hung aside by
the far stronger force of a past wrong.
One prayer is answered, the other un-
answered; but in both cases the result is
by law.

us consider Class .B. Prayers for
help in moral“ah3~"intellectual difficulties
have a double result; they act directly to
attract help, and they react on the person
who prays. They draw the attention of
the - Angel s, of the disciples working
outside the body, who are ever seeking
to help the bewildered mind, and counsel,
encouragement, illumination, are thrown
into the brain-consciousness, thus giving
the answer to prayer in the most direct
way. “ And he kneeled down and prayed*'
. . . . and there appeared an Angel*

unto Him from heaven, strengthening

iwav an intellectiT^ diffi culty , or thro\
light on an obscure moral problem, o^
the sweetest comfort is poured into the
distressed heart, soothing its perturbations|
and calming its anxieties. And truly if
no Angel were passing that way, the cry’

■ S. Luke xxii. 41, 43.


2 go


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


of the distressed would reach the “ Hidden
Heart of Heaven,” and a messenger would
be sent to carry comfort, some Angel, ever
ready to fly swiftly on feeling the impulse,
bearing the divine will to help.


There is also what is somet irne s called
a suj EfecSv ^ an ^er to such prayers, the
re-action of the prayer oiTTEe utterer.

. ““-rTn-iim.il HI..,-... llHiiitr--^

^ His prayer places his heart and mind in
T the receptive attitude, and this stills the
I lower nature, and thus allows the strength
and illuminative power of the higher to
• stream into it unchecked. The currents


of energy which normally flow downwards,
or outwards, from the Inner Man, are, as a
rule, directed to the external world, and
are utilised in the ordinary affairs of life
by the brain-consciousness, for the carrying
on of its daily activities. But when this
brain-consciousness turns away from the
outer world, and shutting its outward*
going doors, directs its gaze inwards;
when it deliberately closes itself to the
outer and opens itself to the inner ; then
it becomes a vessel able to receive and to
hold, instead of a mere conduit-pipe
between the interior and exterior worlds.


PRAYER.


291


In the silence obtained by the cessation of '
the noises of external activities, the ' 'sti]l f

heard, and the conce ntrate d a ttention of
th^ xpectant mind enables iL lo catch th e
soft whisper of the In i^r_Se1f.

Even more markedly does ‘help comej,
from without and from within, when tkd

s piritu al growtB r TNot only do all helpers!
angelic and human, most eagerly seek to'
forward spiritual progress, seizing on every
opportunity oifered by the upward-aspiring
soul; but the longing for such growth
liberates energy of a high kind, the
spiritual longing calling forth an answer
from the spiritual realm. Once more the
law of svmpathetic vibrat.iQns asserts, itself.’


and the note of lofty aspiration is answered
by a note of its own order, by a liberation
of energy of its own kind, by a vibration
synchronous with itself. The divine Life?
is ever pressing from above against theV
limits that bind it, and when the upward-J
rising force strikes against those limits|
from below, the separating wall is broken#
through, and the divine Life flpods the’


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


292

Soul. When a man feels that inflow of
spiritual life, he cries; “My prayer has
been answered, and God has sent down
His Spirit into my heart.” Truly so ; yet
he rarely understands that that Spirit is
ever seeking entrance, but that coming to
His own, His own receive Him not.'
“ Behold, I stand at the door, and knock :
if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him.””

! The g eneral principle with regard to all
prayerTbf this class is that just in propc^ :-
t ion to th e su bm ergfence of the personality
and_th e_. inj^ g^y of the uawardLjLspi ration
will be the^a nswer from th§..J^dsx~Jiife
, i within a,iid without us. We separate
llourseTves. Ijf we cease the separation
and m ake Q m;selve.s one with the greater,
we find that light and life and strength
flow into us. When the separate will is
turned away from its own objects and set
to serve the divine purpose, then the
strength of the Divine pours into it. As
/a man swims against the stream, he makes
‘ slow progress; but with it, he is carried
I on by all the force of the current. In
'S. John i. ti. "Rev. iii. 20.


PRAYER.


293


every department of Nature the divine
energies are working, and everything that
a man does he does by means of the
energies that are working in the line along
which he desires to do; his greatest
achievements are wrought, not by his own
energies, but by the skill with which he
selects and combines the forces that aid
him, and neutralises those that oppose him
by those that are favourable. Forces that
would whirl us away as straws in the wind
become our most effective servants when
we work with them. Is it then an
wonder that in prayer, as in everythin-
else, the divine energies become associatedj
with the man who, by his prayer, seeks ti
work as part of the Divine ?

This highest form of prayer in Class B
merges almost imperceptibly into Class C,
where prayer loses its peti tionary c haract er,
and becomes eith^ a meditation on.^Qi'.,^
wot^i p Qf. God . Meditation is the stead)
quiet fixing of the mind on God, whereb)
the lower mind is stilled and presently lef |
vacant, so that the Spirit, escaping from it I
rises into contemplation of the divine f
Perfection, and reflects within himself th|l


L-


V


294


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


divine Imaffe. “Meditation is,..silent or
unuitered.-^xzj^'s:, or as Plato expressed it:
\ tne ardent turning of the Soul towards
the Divine ; not to ask any particular good
{as in the common meaning of prayer), but
for good itself, for the Universal Supreme
'Good.’


This is the prayer that, by thus liberating
the Spirit, is the means of union between
‘ working of tfc

,-4.ws of thought a man becomes that ..which
he thinks, and wH^en ne the

divine perfections he gradually reproduces
in himself that on which his mind is fixed.
Such a mind, shaped to the higher and not
the lower, cannot bind the Spirit, and the
I freed Spirit leaping upward to his source,
pi^e)C.Xs. .lost in unio n and_sep aratenes s i^
left behind .

' also, the rapt adoration from

which all petition is absent, and which
seeks to pour itself forth in sheer love of

the Perfect, dimly sensed, is a means_the

e asiest mea ns— of unio n with ~G^.
this the consciousnes^Timted by the
brain, contemplates in mute exstasy the
■H. P. Blavatsky. Key to Theosophy, p. io.


PRAYER.


295

Image it creates of Him whom it knows
to be beyond imagining, and oft, rapt by
the intensity of his love beyond the limits
of the intellect, the man as a free Spirit
s oars upw ards into realms where theself
l imits are transc ended, and feels and know^
far more than onTTiis return he can tell irm
words or clothe in form. *

Thus the Mystic gazes on the Beatific
Vision; thus the Sage rests in the calm
of the Wisdom that is beyond knowledge
thus the^ Saim reaches the purity wherei
God is seen. S^uch prayer irradiates the
worsHTpper, and from the mount of such
high communion descending to the plains
of earth, t he ve ry face of flesh shines with
supernal glory, translucent to the flame
that burns withi n. Happy they who
know the reality which no words may
convey to those who know it not. Those
whose eyes have seen “ the King in
His beauty”’' will remember, and they will
understand.

When prayer is thus understood, its
perennial necessity for all who bel ieve in
religion w ill be paten t, and we see why its


‘Is. xxxiii. 17.


296 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

practice has been so much advocated by
all who study the higher life. For the
student of the Lesser Mysteries prayer
should be of the kinds grouped under
Class B, and he should ende avour to rise
to the pure rn editation and wors hip of the
la st cla ss, esche wing altoget her the lowe r
kinds . For him the teaching of lamblichus
on this subject is useful. lamblic hujS says
■^.that prayers “produce an mdiSumte an(F
sacred communion with the Gods,” and then
proceeds to give some interesting details
on prayer, as considered by the practical
Occultist. “For this is of itself a thing
worthy to be known, and renders more
w perfect the science concerning the Gods.

I say, therefore, that the first .species of
•/' prayer is Collective; and that it is also
v the leader of contact with, and a know-
>. ledge of, divinity. The .second .species
is the bond of concordant Communion,
w calling forth, prior to the energy of speech,
Kthe gifts imparted by the Gods, and per-
’^.fecting the whole of our operations prior
v to our intellectual conceptions. And the
third and ..jnost perfect specie s of prayer
^ is the seal oriiiSSaBIe Union with the


PRAYER.


297


divinities, in whom it establishes all the*
power and authority of prayer; and thus *•
cajAses the so ul to rep ose in the Gods, asi,
in la ., never f kili nz. por t. ' Butlrom*’ these;,
three terms, in which all the divine u
measures are contained, suppliant adora-**
tion not only conciliates to us the friendship*-;
of the Gods, but supernally extends to-’.'
us three fruits, being as it were three •'
Hesperian apples of gold. The first of^’j;
these pertains to illpipinatio n : the second
to a communion of operation ; but througfh aI
the energy of the third we receive a ‘^1
perfect plenitude of divine foe . . . . >

No operation, however, in sacred concerns, '
can succeed without the intervention of
prayer. Lastly, the continual exercise ofl“T!*
prayer nourishes the vig-our of our intellect, |»i
a nd renders ‘

the Gods. It likewise is the divine key, n
which opens to men the penetralia of the h
G ods ; accustoms us to the splendid rivers a
of supernal light; in a short time perfects s4
our inmost recesses, and disposes them for
the ineffable embrace and contact of the
Gods; and does not desist till it raises us /)


298


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


- to the suni,m iLJiC.^.gi|L It also gradually
and silently draws upward the manners of
» our soul, by divesting them of everything
foreign to a divine nature, and clothes us
< with the perfections of the Gods. Besides
-- this, it produces an indissoluble commun ion
•' and friendship with divinit y, nouri shes a
^ {^ijjejove, and inflames the divine part of.
' tfie s oul. Whatever is of an opposing and
contrary nature in the soul, it expiates and
t purifies; expels whatever is prone to
$ generation and retains anything of the
^ dregs of mortality in its ethereal and
si splendid spirit; perfects a good hope and
f faith concerning the reception of divine
*' light; and in one word, renders those by
VI whom it is employed the familiars and
w domestics of the Gods.”^


Out of such study and practice one
inevitable result arises, as a man begins l o
u nderstand, and as the ^wid e r range p f
hu man, .life un fold s befi)re.,.him . He sees
tim by knowledge his strength is much
increased, that there are force^around him
that he ca n un de rst and and control, "and
tfiaFi n"prop ortionTolus "Snowt^^e is his


* On the Mysteries^ sec. v. ch. 26,


PRAYER.


299


power. Then he learns^th^ Divinity lies

.^^seih and that* nothing

that is fleeting can satisfy that God

within; that o^y_unipn.with th e One ,

t he Pe rfect, can s till his craving^ Then
there gradually arises within him the will
to set himself at one with the Divine; he
ceases to vehemently seek to change pj
circumstances, and to throw fresh causes
into the stream of effects. He recognises „
himself as an a ge nt rather than an actor, /“t-
a channel rather than a source, a servant
rather than a master, and seeks to discover
the divine purposes and tc v work in,i iar-
mony'tliSrew ith.

”"*When a man has reached that point, he
has risen above all prayer, save that which 1
is meditation and worship ; he has nothin ^ \
to ask fo r, in this world or in any other; \
he remains in a steadfast serenity, seeking
but to serve God. That is the state of
Sonship, where the will of the Son is one
wi th the will of t he Fathe r, where the one
calm surrender is made, “ Lo, I come to *'f
do Thy will, O God. I am content to do
it; yea. Thy law is within my heart.”' #

' Ps. xl. 7, 8, Prayer Book version.


300 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

Then all prayer is seen to be unneces¬
sary ; all asking is felt as an impertinence ;
nothing can be longed for that is not
already in the purposes of that Will, and
all will be brought .into active manifesta¬
tion as the agents of that Will perfect
themselves in the work.


Chapter XI.

THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS. •

“ I BELIEVE in . . . the forgiveness of

sins.” “I acknowledge one baptism for
the remission of sins.” The words fall
facilely from the lips of worshippers in
every Christian church throughout the
world, as they repeat the familiar creeds
called those of the Apostles and the
Nicene. Among the sayings of Jesus
the words frequently recur: “Thy sins
are forgiven thee,” and it is noteworthy
that this phrase constantly accompanies
the exercise of His healing powers, the
release from physical and moral disease
being thus marked as simultaneous. In
fact, on one occasion He pointed to the
healing of a palsy-stricken man as a sign
that he had a right to declare to a man


302


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


«


that his sins were forgiven." So also of
one woman it was said : “Her sins, which
are many, are forgiven, for she loved
much.”" In the famous. Gnostic treatise,

of


he Pistis Sophia , t he yer
lysteries is said to be tHe'* 1^m iss ion o f
“ Should^thef been sinners,

r’should they have been in all the sins and
o" all the iniquities of the world, of which I
have spoken unto you, nevertheless Jf the y
t urn . themss ksa,. md_ra2eat, and have


^ made the renunciation which I have just
described unto you, give ye unto them the
mysteries of the kingdom of light; hide
them not from them at all. It is because
A of sin that I have brought these mysteries
*>, into the world, for the remission of all

• the sins which they have committed from

w the beginning. Wherefore have I said
V unto you aforetime, ‘ I came^ call

the jQghtequs.’ Now, therefore, I have
,, brought the mysteries,

* pto th^ . king dom__of li^t . For these
^ mysteries are the boon of the first mystery


^S. Luke, V. 18-26.
Ibid, vii. 47.


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS. 303


of the destruction of the sins and iniquities'*
of all sinners.”'

In these Mysteries, the remission of sin

acknowledgment
in the Nicene Creed. Jesus says :

“ Hearken, again, that I may tell you the
word in truth, of what type is the mystery *'
of baptism which remitteth sins. . . .m

When a man receiveth the mysteries of the
baptisms, those mysteries become a mighty "
fire, exceedingly fierce, wise, which burneth
they enter into the soul ''
occultly, and devour all the sins which the
spiritual counterfeit^hath implanted in it .”''
And after describing further the process
of purification, Jesus adds: “This is the
way in which the mysteries of the baptisms «
remit sins and every iniquity.”'' *•

In one form or another the “ forgiveness
of sins” app ears in most, if not in ..a ll
r^fi'gions gmov^reve^ this consensus of
opinion is found, we may safely conclude,
according to the, principle already laid
down, that som^Ji^iiLa^^


r X '


*G. R. S. Mead, translated. Loc. cit, bk. ii.,
§§ 260, 261.

^ Jbid , §§ 299, 300.


304


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


Moreover, t^erej^re^^se^

we notice that people suffer under a
consciousness of wrong-doing, and that
when they shake themselves clear of
their past, and free themselves from the
shackling fetters of remorse, they go
^forward with glad heart and sunlit eyes,
though erstwhile enclouded by darkness.
iThey feel as though,a burden we re lifted
f30hem, a clog removed. I he “sense


’of sin has disappeared, and with it the
gnawing pain. They know the spring¬
time of the soul, the word of power which
makes all things new. A song of gratitude
wells up as the natural outburst of the
heart, the time for the singing of birds is
come, there is “joy among the Angels.”
iThis not uncommon experience is one
Ithat becomes puzzling, when the person
experiencing it, or seeing it in another,
begins to ask himself what has really taken
place, what has brought about the change
in consciousness, the effects of which are
so manifest.

Modern thinkers , who have thoroughly
assimilated the idea of changeless laws


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS.


305

underlying all phenomena, and who have
studied the workings of these laws, are at
first apt to reject any and every theory of
the forgiveness of sins as being incon¬
sistent with that fundamental truth, just
as the scientist, penetrated with the idea
of the inviolability of law, repels all
thought which is inconsistent with it.

And both are right in founding themselves
on the unfaltering working of law, for law
is but the expression of the divine Nature,’*^'^’'-^^^"'
in which there is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning. Any view of they
forgiveness of sins that we may adopt must I
not clash with this fundamental idea, as I
necessary to ethical as to physical science. |

“The bottom would fall out of everything”'
if we could not rest securely in the ever¬
lasting arms of the Good Law.

■ But in pursuing our investigations, weM
are struck with the fact that the verv ^f
Teachers who ar£ most
cfiangeTess worki nsL-ja£.Jiaw .ar£_ai§o|

forgiveness of sins. At one time Jesus is i-
saying ; “ I hat every idle word that men ( ’

shall speak, they shall give account dCT?


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


thereof in the day of judgment,”" and at
another ; “ Son, be of good cheer, thy sins
be forgiven thee.” “ So in the Bhagravad
Gtta we read constantly of the ' bonds of
action, that “the world is bound by
action,” ^ and that a man “ recovereth
the characteristics of his former body ; ”■>
.-and yet it is said that “ev m-jf the

JtoOr. - mmL,,be__ac^imted
irjgteiOWS.”^ It would seem, then, that
whatever may have been intended in the
.world’s Scriptures by the phrase, “ the
W^ness of dn s,” it was .ng^jEhoyght,

clash with the inviolable sequence of .cause


f

« v'/ •
0 ' -
WJ-


If we examine even the crudest idea of
the forgiveness of sins prevalent in our
own day, we find that the believer in it
does not mean that the forgiven sinner is
to escape from the consequences of his sin
in this w orld ; the drunkard, whose sins
are forgiven on his repentance, is still seen
to suffer from shaken nerves, impaired

r “S. Matt xii. 36. ""Idid. ix. 2. ^ Lac-cit. iii. 9.

^Ibid. vL 43. ^IHd, ix. 30.


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS. 307

digestion, and the lack of confidence
shown towards him by his fellow-men.
The statements made as to forsh/snessi ..
when they/are examined, are ultimately {
found to,i?fefer to the rels,tions between tha^.
repentant sinner and God, and to the
mortem pena lfies attached to unforgiven
sin in the creed of the speaker, and not tc t,
any escape from the mundane conse-| 1|

reincarnation, and of a sane view as to
the continuity of life, whether it were spent
in this or in the next two worlds,' brought
with it various incongruities and indefen¬
sible assertions, among them the blas¬
phemous and terrible idea of the eternal
torture of the human soul for sm^ com¬
mitted during the brief span of one life
spent on earth. In order to escape from
this nightmare, theologians posited a for¬
giveness which should release the sinner
from this dread imprisonment in an eternal
hell. It did not, and was never sujjpo^ed
to, set ''fiim" free in tb ls jy nyldtl ^
naturaT^Shnsequences of his ill-doing s, nor
—excepTuTTmodern Protestant communi-

' See ante, Chap. VIII.


3 o8


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


ties—was it held to deliver him from
prol^Hgied jgurgatorial^ suffe the direct
results of sin, after the death of the
physical body. The law had its course,
both in this world and in purgatory, and
in each world sorrow followed on the heels


of sin, even as the wheels follow the ox.
It was but eternal torture—which existed
only in the clouded imagination of the
believer—^that was escaped by the forgive-
jness of sins ; and we may perhaps go so
|far as to suggest that the dogmatist,
jhaving postulated an eternal hell as tlie
I monstrous result of transient errors, felt
I compelled to provide a way of escape from
‘an incredible and unjust fate, and therefore
’further postulated an incredible and unjust
forgiveness.. Schemes th at ye ...ela borated
I by human speculation,..Avithout re gard t o
tthe facts of life* are apt to land the
Ispeculator m thought-morasses, whence he
.i can only extricate himself by blundering
I through the mire in an opposite direction.
A ^perfluous eternal hell was balanced
by a su perfluous f orgiveness , and thus the
uneven scales of justice were again ren-


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS. * 309

the unenlightened, let us return into theL*
realm of fact and ria^ht reason?*'”™*’ " \

When a man has committed an wil
action„ he has attached himself to a*sorrow,
lor sorrow is ever the plant that spring
from the seed of sin. It may be said,
even more accurately, that sin and sorrow
are but the two sides of one act, not two
separate events. As every object has
two sides, one of which is behind, out of
sight, when the other is in front, in sight,
so every act has two sides, which cannot
both be seen at once in the physical world.
In other worlds, good and happines s, evil
and sorrow, ar e seen as the two sides .of
t he same thing . This is what is called^
kaggijijp-a convenient and now widely-used
terrn, originally Samskrit, expressing this
connection or identity, literally meaning ,
“action”—and the suffering is therefore
called the karmic result of the wrong.
The result, the “other side,” may not
follow immediately, may not even accrue
during the present incarnation, but sooner
or later it will appear and clasp the sinner
with its arms of pain. Now a result in
the physical world, an effect experienced


310


• ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


through our physical consciousness, is the
final outcome of a cause set going in the
past; it is the ripened fruit ; in it a parti¬
cular force becomes manifest and exhausts
itself. That force has been working
outwards, and its effects are already over
in the mind ere it appears in the body.


' Its bodily manifes tation , its appearance,
irTTfie phy sical world, is tlie^ig n of th e
cpnipietion3^_^^^^ such a

pmoment the sinner, having exhausted the
karma of his sin, comes into contact with a


Sage who can see the past and the present,
the invisible and the visible, such a Sage


may discern the ending of the particular


karma, and, the sentence being completed,
'may declare the captive free. Such an


instance seems to be given in the story of
thejBaxi,..sick9.Ltke.£^. already alluded
to, a case typical of many. A physical


ailment is the last expression of a past
ill-doing; the mental and moral outwork-


'This is the cause of the sweetness and patience
often noticed in the sick who are of very pure nature.
They have learned the lesson of suffering, and they
do not make fresh evil karma by impatience under
the result of past bad karma, then exhausting itself.


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS.


ing is completed, and the sufferer is
brought—by the agency of some Angel,
as an administrator of the law—into the
presence of One able to relieve physical
disease by the exertion of a higher energy.
First, the Initiate declares that the man’s
sins are forgiven, and then justifies his
insight by the authoritative word, “Arise,
take up thy bed, and go unto thine ‘‘
house.” Had no such enlightened ^
One been there, the disease would have
passed away under the restoring touch of
nature, under a force applied by the
invisible angelic Intelligences, who carry
out in this world the workings of karmic
law; when a greater One is acting, this
force is of more swiftly compelling power,
and the physical vibrations are at once
attuned to the harmony that is health. Alli.
such forgiveness of sins may be termed!
declaratory ; the karma is exhausted, and||
a “lElaower of karma” declares the fact. |
The assurance brings a relief to the mind |
that is akin to the relief experienced by||
a prisoner when the order for his release i'
is given, that order being as much a part
of the law as the original sentence ; but


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


^jthe relief of man of

ftli^exHaukion of an evil karma is keener,

|because„.h£_.ca^ tell.tjie,, term

I qjtjts-Action.

It is noticeable that these declarations
of forgiveness are constantly coupled with
the statement that the sufferer showed
” without this nothing

/^wid be done; the real a^e nt in the
-%ndin^ of this k arma is**lhe sinner hii'p’^el f.
Tn tbe case " of "the “ woman that was a
sinner,” the two declarations arc coupled :
“Thy sins are forgiven . . . 'Fhy

faith hath saved thee; go in jicace.”'
This “faith” is the up-welling in man of
his own divine essence, seeking the divine
ocean of like essence, and when this breaks
through the lower nature that holds it in
—as the water-spring breaks through the
encumbering earth-clods—the power thus
liberated works on the whole nature,
^bringing it into harmony with itself. The
;man only becomes conscious of this as the
I karmic crust of evil is broken up' by its
I force, and that glad consciousness of a
■ power within himself hitherto unknown,

' S. Luke, vii. 48, 50.


THE FORGIVENESS OF SiNS. 313

asserting itself as soon as the evil karma
is exhausted, is a large factor in the joy,
relief, and new strength that follow on the
feeling that sin is “ forgiven,” that its
results are past.

And this brings us to the heart of the

subject—the changes that g.o„.QD.J.n a man’s
^

inner nature, unrecognised., bv that part of
his consciousness which works witnia the
limits of his Dram, until they suddenly

~n in]lj.:iif iHnii I Iiniiwiirn-rifn^pirr*‘^|^^ ^ ^ ^ ^

assert themselves within those limits,
coming apparently from nowhere, bursting
forth “from the blue,” pouring from an
unknown source. What wonder that a 1 1
man, bewildered by their downrush— I
knowing nothing of the mysteries of I
his own nature, nothing of “ the inner (
God”,that is verily hjmadf—iinagiags.that /\
t o be fro m wjjthfl^ which.is really^^_^^ I
within, and, " unconsciou s of... his ow n I
DivThity , t hinks only of Divi nities iiLjdie
world extern al to hims elf. And this mis-^^f
conception is tKe more easy, because the
final touch, the vibration that breaks the
imprisoning shell, is often the answer from
the Divinity within another man, or within
some superhuman being, responding to


314 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

the insistent cry from the imprisoned
Divinity within himself; he oft-times
{recognises the brotherly aid, while not
y recognising that he himself, the cry
ifrom his inner nature, called it forth. As
an explanation from a wiser than ourselves
may make an intellectual difficulty clear
to our mind, though it is our own mind
that, thus aided, grasps the solution ; as
an encouraging word from one purer than
ourselves may nerve 'us to a moral
effort that we should have thought beyond i
our power, though it is our own strength;
that makes it; so may a loftier Spirit than i
our own, one more conscious of its Divinity, i
aid us to put forth our own divine energy, ;
though it is that very putting forth that i
, lifts US to a higher plane. VVe are all |
: bound by ties of brotherly help to those
above us as to those below us, and why
should we, who so constantly find our-
^ selves able to help in their development
!: souls less advanced than ourselves, hesitate
to admit that we can receive similar help

i froiA Those far above us, and that our
progress may fee rendered much swifter
by Their aid?


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS.


315


Now among th e changfg s that go on
in a man’s inner nature, unknown to his
l ower coi isdQlisness. are thosr"tKafTave
to do with the putting fo rth ., of his wlL
1 he hgo, glancing backward over Ins’
past, balancing up its results, suffering
under its mistakes, determines on a change
of attitude, on a chan ge:_ of act iv ity. While
his lower vehicle is still, under his former
impulses, plunging along lines of action
that bring it into sharp collisions with the
law, the Ego determines on an. opposite
course m conduct. Hitherto he has turned


his” face longingly to the animal, the '
pleasures of the lower world have held,
him fast enchained. Npyi?,., h.a^^^

determine s to work for lo ftier jo ys . He)
sees that the whole world is evolving, and
that if he sets himself against that mighty
current it dashes him aside, bruising
him sorely in the process; he sees that
if he sets himself with it, it will bear him
onwards on its bosom and land him in the


desired haven.

He then resolves to change his lif e, he
turns determinedly onnissteps, he faces


ESOTERIC qjIRISTIANITY.


the other way. The first result , of the
Effort to. turn his lower n ature into th e
l-T^ed course^is and dis-

turbance. The ha bj^ . foriu^ under the
impacts of the 'HdTviews resist stubbornly
the impulses flowing from the new, and a
bitter conflict arises. Gradually the con¬
sciousness working in the brain accepts
the decision made on higher planes, and
then “ becomes co nscious, of sin” by this

g recognition of the law. T^

Tor deepens, remorse preys on the
.; spasmodic efforts are made towards
oveo 5 !pnt,*^d, frustrated by old habits,
repeatedly fail, till the man, overwhelmed
by grief for the past, despair of the pre¬
sent, is plunged i nto hopeless gloom . At
%...S.Y£™;ea§ing^

from the limeiT^IKF^^^^Ss^wn nature,
from the God within as well as around
him, the Life of his life. He turns from
the lower nature that is thwarting him to
the higher which is his innermost being,
from the separated self that tortures him
to the One Self that is the Heart of all.
But this chang-e of front means that he.


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS. 317

turns his face from the darkness, th at he
t urns his face to the The light was

always there, but his back was towards
it; now he _sees the sun , and its radiance
cheers his eyes, and overfloods his being
with delight. His hea rt was closed ; it is

^ .Hld_th.^.,^an^J^e

flbvTO in , ,ia.. full t ide, suffusing him with
joy. Wave after wave of new life uplifts
him, and the gladness of the dawn sur¬
rounds him. He sees his .past as past,
because his will is set to follow a higher
path, and he recks little of the suffering
that the past may bequeath to him, since
he knows he will not hand on such bitter
legacy from his present. This se nse o ff
p eac e, of joy , of freedom, is~ thOeelingj
spoken of as the result of..
o f-siq s. The obstacles set up by thef
lower nature between the God within andi
the God without are swept away, and tha^
nature scarce recognises that the change
is in itself and not in the Oversoul. As
a child, having thrust away the mother’s
guiding hand and hidden its face against
the wall, may fancy itself alone and for¬
gotten, until, turning with a cry, it finds


2|i5WB5!


318 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


.around it the protecting mother-arms that
i were never but a handsbrcadth away, so
idoes man in his wilfulness push away the
/shielding arms of the divine Mother of
' the worlds, only to find, when he turns
iback his face, that he has never been
outside their protecting shelter, and that
.wherever he may wander that guarding
dove is round him still.


The key to th is change in th g...man,
that 'Brmgs~'a5out “forgiveness,” is given
in the verse of the Bh agav ad-Gttd already
partly quoted : “ Even if tire most sinful
worship me, with undivided heart, he too
must be accounted righteous, fo7' he hath
rightly resolved." On that right resolution
follows the inevitable result ; “ Speedily
e becometh dutiful and goeth to peace."'
he , essence of^ n I j^-s

t hg

he human ag-ainst t he Divin e. When this
s changed, when the Ego puts his separate
will into union with the will that works
for evolution, then, where to

in^_world ^

are seen, a s. Jn... causes, the man


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS. 319

is “accounted righteous;” the effects on
the lower planes must inevitably follow;
“speedily he becometh dutiful” in action,
having already become dutiful in will.
Here we judge by actions, the dead
leaves of the past; there they judge by^
wills, the germinating seeds of the future.
Hence the Christ ever .says to men in _
the lower world: “ j udge no t.”* ’

Even after the new direction has been
definitely followed, and has become the
normal habit of the life, there come times
of failure, alluded to in the Pistis Sophia, '
when Jesus is asked whether a man may j
be again admitted to the Mysteries, after |
he has fallen away, if he again r epe ats, i
The answer of Jesus is in the affirmative,
but" he states that a time comes when j
re-admission is beyond the power of any \
save of the highest Mystery, who pardons /
ever. “Amen, amen, I say unto you, W
whosoever shall receive the mysteries of ^
the first mystery, and then shall turn back
and transgress twelve times [even], and *»
then should again repent twelve times, •
offering prayer in the mystery of the first
‘S. Matt. vii. i.*


320


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


mystery, he shall be forgiven. But if
he should transgress after twelve times,
should he turn back and transgress,
V it shall not be remitted unto him for
'» ever, so that he may turn again unto his
mystery, whatever it be. For_ hi m there
» is no means of repentance unjess he ,^ve
1, received the mysitenes of that ...iti.effable,
'v-wduclT'lTatK ’ compassion at all times and
remitteth sins for ever and ever.”" These
rest ora t i ons after failure, in which “sin is
re mit ted,” meet us in human life, especially
in the higher phases of evolution. A man
is oHered an opportunity, which, taken,
would open up to him new possibilities of
growth. He fails to grasp it, and falls
away from the position he had gained that
made the further opportunity possible.
For him, for the time, further progress is
blocked; he must turn all his efforts wearily
to retread the ground he had already
trodden, and to regain and make sure his
footing on the place from which he had
slipped. Only when - this is accomplished
will he hear the gentle Voice that tells him
t hat th e past j£"put^worn, the ^weakness

* 'Zo*. aV., bk. ii. § 305.


THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS.


321


turned to strength, and that the gateway
is again open for his passage. Here again|
the “forgiveness” is but the declaratip.ru,
by a proper authority of the true state of
affairs, the opening of the gate to the
competent, its closure to the incompetent.
Where there had been failure, with its
accompanying suffering, this declaration

would be felt as a bap tism Jpr..the /

remissio n of sins,” re-admitting the aspirant
to”a privilege lost by his own act; this
would certainly give rise to feelm^
and peace, to a relief from the burden of
sorrow, to a feeling that the clog of the
past had at last fallen from the feet.

Remains one truth that, should ney.£L-be i


forgotten : that we^ar^ liv ing in an ocea .n/
o f light,...of love7""oriE ^t]i^urrw us'
at all times, the Life of God. As the sun
floods the earth with his radiance so does
that Life enlighten all, only that Sun of thei
world never sets to any part of it.

by

i mpurity, our intolerance, but it shines on
us ever the same, bathing us on every
side, pressing against our, self-built walls


322


ESOTERIC ClIRISTIANITV.


with gentle, strong persistence. Wh§n
the_.spul th_rows_down
walls, t he ligh t tlow.s in , and the .soul finds
itself flooded with sunshine, breathing the
blissful air of heaven. “ For the vSon of
man is in heaven,” though he know it not,
and its breexes fan his brow if he bares it
to their breaths. God ever respects man’s
individuality, and will not enter his con¬
sciousness until that con.sciousness opens
to give welcome; “ Behold I stand a t the
door and knock is the attrfud'e of every
spiritual Intelligence towards the evolving
human soul; not in lack of sympathy is
rooted that waiting for the optni door, but
in deepest wisdom.

I ^ n is .to bc ^: comnelled : lie is to be

free. FTe is not a .slave, but a God in the
making, and the growth cannot be forced,
but r^ st be yvjlled from Only

when the will co'nsent.s. as GioSlano^Bcuno
teaches, will God influence tlTough

He be “ everywhere present, and ready to
« come to the aid of whosoever turns to
Him through the act of the intelligence,
and who unreservedly pre.sents himself
' Rev. iii. 20.


THE FORGIVENESS -OF SINS.


with the affection of the will.”’ “The
divine potency which is all in all dose
not proffer or withhold, except through
assimilation or rejection by oneself.“It
is taken in quickly, as the solar light,
without hesitation, and makes itself present
to whoever turns himself to it and opens
himself to it ... the windows are
opened, but the sun enters in a moment,
so does it happen similarly in this case.”^
The sense of “ forgiveness,”, the{i,,^is tha|
feelm^wTiirch"ffffs’ t 1 ie heart with joy wherfi
the will is tuned to harmony with thJ
Divine, when, the soul having opened itl
window s, the_3in^shme^9XJ^^
a nd bliss ^'o ursJn, whenjhe jgart^fe^jg^jtl

Oil ^fss‘wi_^ J^e.whole"

thriTTs eac n yein. This is the noble trutl®
that gives vitality to even the crudest
presentation of the “forgiveness of sins,”
and that makes it often, despite its intel¬
lectual incompleteness,
and spirituaji l ivi^ And this is the truth,
as seen in the Lesser Mysteries.


*G. Bruno, trans. by L. Williams. The Heroic
Enthusiasts^ voL i*, p. 133.

^ Ihid.^yoV ii., pp. 27, 28, Ibid.^ pp, 102, 103,


SACRAMENTS.


In all religions there exist certain cere¬
monials, or rites, which are fegarHecT as of
^aninportance by the believers in the
religion, and which are held to confer
certain benefits on those taking part in
them. The word Sacrament, or some
equivalent term, has been applied to these
ceremonials, and they all have; the same
character. Little exact exposition has
been given as to their nature and
meaning, but this is another of the
subjects explained of old in the Lesser
Mysteries.

The peculiar characteristic of a Sacra¬
ment resides in _two of its properties .
Tirst, there is the exoteric ceremony,
which is a pic tori al allegor y,, a representa¬
tion of som^mg'^ylictions and materials


SACRAMENTS.


3^5


—not a verbal allegory, a teaching given
in words, conveying a truth; but an acted
representation, certain definite material
things .used in a particular way. The
object in choosing these materials, and
aimed at in the ceremonies by which
their manipulation is accompanied, is to
represent, as in a picture, some truth which
it is desired to impress upbT tKe' mmds of
t he p eople present. That is the first and
obvious property of a Sacrament, differen¬
tiating it from other forms of worship and
meditation. It appeals to those who
without this i mage ry would fail to catch
a subtlgL-tcuth, and shows-to . .them „in, a
vivi d and graphic form the truth , w hich
otEe^se_wpuTd es^pe them. Every
Sacrament, when it is studied, should be
taken first from this standpoint, that it is a
pictorial allego ry; the essential things tc
be ""studied'" wlT therefore be : the materia
objects which enter into the allegory, th(
method in which they are employed, anc;
the meaning which the whole is intendec,
to convey.

The second characteristic property of a
Sacrament belongs to the facts of the
X’


326 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


invisible worlds, and is studied by occult
\sci enc e. The person who officiates in the


iSacrament should possess this knowledge,
|ls much, though not all, of the operative
Power of the Sacrament depends on the
. cnowledgfe of the officiator. A Sacrament
unics the niaterial world with the, subtk
ind invisible regions to which that world
i TrSated ; it is a link between the visit^
l and..the invisible. And it is not only a
link between this world and other worlds,
but it is also a method.by which_ the


energies of the_J nyi sl bre wo rld a ^ tran s¬
muted into "action in the phy sical; an
actual method of c hanging energies of on e
kind into energies of another, as literally
as in the galvanic cell chemical energies
are changed into electrical. Thejessen^e
of all energies is one and the sam e.
wKefKe r in bhe visible . _Qr in visible worlds ;
but the energies differ according to the
grades of matter through which they
njtanifest. A Sacrament serves as a kind
j6f crucible in which spiritual alchemy
(takes place. An energy placed in this
crucible and subjected to certain manipula¬
tions comes forth different in expression.


SACRAMENTS.


327


Thus an energy of a subtle kind, belonging
to one of the higher regions of the
universe, may be brought into direct
relation with people living in the physical
world, and may be made to affect them in
the physical world as well as in its own ,
realm ; the Sacrament forms the last bridge •,
from the invisible to the visible, and''
enables the energies to be directly applied
to those who fulfil the necessary conditions
and who take part in the Sacrament.


T he Sacram ents of the Christen Chu^^^
lost much of their'*“ 3 ignity and of the!
recognition 01 their occult poisjer among;
those who separated from th^'l^oman
Catholic Church at the time of the
formation^ The previous separation,
oeWeOT the East and the West, leaving
the Greek Orthodox Church on the one
side and the Roman Church on the other,,
in no way affected belief in the Sacra¬
ments. They remained in both great
communities as the recognised links
between the seen and the unseen, and
sanctified the life of the believer from
cradle to grave. The Seven Sacraments


oev en oac r ameat s
■ the -y ^plje' onife, from


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


{28


the welcome of Baptism to the farewell of
Extreme Unction. They were established
by Occultists, by men who knew the
invisible worlds ; and the materials used,
the words spoken, the signs made, were
all deliberately chosen and arranged with
a view to bringing about certain results.

At the time of th e ..I nformatio n, the
b ecedm^CEurd ies, whiefTthrew o ff th e
oke ,pf Rom e, were not led by Oc c ultists ,
ut^ by^^ordinary jnen^f the,_wprld, som e
pod and some bad , but all profoundly

;noya nt of the.feet? of the, invisib le

orlds, and cona.ci.QUS . pidy,^ pf jho^^
IhelLof Christi anity, its literal, dogmas and
ixoteric worsh ip. The consequence of
his was that the Sacraments lost their
supreme place in Christian worship, and in
most Protes t antx gcpjai unit ies were reduce d
to two. Baptism and the Eucharist. The
sacrameiitaT'nature of the others was not
explicitly denied in the most important of
the seceding Churches, but the two were
set apart from the five, as of universal
obligation„of which every member of the
Church must partake in order to be recog¬
nised as a full member.


SACRAMENTS.


329


The gene ral definition of a Sacrament
is given quite accurately, save for the
superfluous words, “ordained by Christ
Himself,” in the,Catechisn]i of th.e Chufch
of England , and even these words might
be retained i
t o th e word “C hrist.” A Sacrament is
there*said to be: “An outward and visible
sign of an inward and spiritual grace given
unto us, ordained by Christ Himself, as a
means whereby we receive the same tind a
pledge to assure us thereof.”

In this definition we find laid down the
two distinguishing characteristics of a
Sacrament as given above. The “outward
and visible sign” is the pictorial allegory,
and the phrase, the “means whereby we
receive the” “inward and spiritual grace”
covers the second property. This last
phrase should be carefully noted by those
members of Protestant Churches who
regard Sacraments as mere external forms


and outer ceremonies. For it distinctly
alleges that the Sacrament is really a
means whereby the grace is conveyed, and.
thus implies that without it the grace does®
not pass in the same fashion from the


I


330


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


Spiritual to the physical world. It is the
distinct recognition of a Sacrament in its
second aspect, as a means whereby
spiritual powers are brought into activity
on earth.


In order to understand a Sacrament, it
I is necessary that we shj 3 ukl_ definitely
r ecogn ise j he e xistence of an occul t, or
h idde n, side of Nature :~this is spoken of
as the life-side of Nature, the consciousness-
side, more accurately the mind in Nature.
lU nder lying all sacra ment al actio n there is
khe belief that tTie Invisible world exercises


potent mnuence over the visible, and to


1

lunderstand a Sacrament we must under-
Istand something of the invisible Intelli¬
gences who administer Nature. We have
peen in studying the doctrine of the Trinity
that Spirit is manifested as the triple Self,
and that as the Field for His manifestation
there is Matt er, the fogpfc side of Nature,
often regarded, and rigMy, as Nature her¬
self. We have to study both these aspects,
the side of life and that of form, in order
to understand a Sacrament.

Stretching between the Trinity and
humanity are many g rades and hierarc hies


SACRAMENTS.


331


of invisible b eings; the highest of these
are the seven Spirits of God, the seven
Fires, or Flames, that are before the
throne of God.' Each of these stands at
the head of a vast host of Intelligences,
all of whom share His nature and act
under His direction ; these are themselves
graded, and are the Thrones, Powers,
Princes, Dominations, Archangels,
Angels, of whom mention is found in the
writings of the Christian Fathers, who
were versed in the Mysteries. Thus
there are seven great hosts of these
Beings, and they represent in their
intelligence ^ divine M ind, in Nature .
They are found in all regions, and
they ensoul the energies of Nature.
From the standpoint of occultism t here is
noj^(ifprce~^d'hdae^m^er. Force!
and matter alike are living and active, anal
an energy or a group of energies is the]
veil of an Intelligence, of a Conscious-*
ness, who has that energy as his outerl
expression, and the matter in which that
energy moves yields a form which he
guides or ensouls. Unless a man can thus
‘ Rev. iv. 5.


332 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

look at Nature all esoteric teaching must

remain for him a sealed book. Without
these angelic Lives, these countless
invisible Intelligences, these Conscious-
."^nesses which ensoul the force and matter^
which is Nature, Nature herself would

J not only remain unintelligible, but she.
iwould be out of relation alike to the

idivine Life that moves within and
laround her, and to the human lives
khat are developing in her midst.
These innumerable Angels link the worlds
together; they are themselves evolving
while helping the evolution of beings lower
than themselves, and a new light is shed
on evolution when we see that men form
grades in these hierarchies of intelligent
beings. T hese angels are the “sons of
God” of an earlier birth than ours, who

of

the earth were laid amid the choiring of
the Morning Stars.

' The phrase “ force and matter ” is used as it is so
well-known in science. But force is one of the
properties of matter, the one mentioned as Motion.
See AnU, p. 264. ,

’ Job xxxviii. 7.


SACRAMENTS.


3 '> 'y

OO

Others beings are below us in evolution—
animals, plants, minerals, and elemental
lives—as the Angels are above us ; and as
we thus study, a conception dawns upon
us of a ^vast Whe el o f XiliST- of numberless
existences, inter-related and necessary each
to each, man as a living Intelligence, as a
self-conscious being, having his own place
in this Wheel. The Wheel is ever turning
by the divine Will, and the living Intelli¬
gences who form it learn to co-operate
with that Will, and if in the action of
those Intelligences there is any break or
gap due to neglect or opposition, then the
Wheel drags, turning slowly, and the
chariot of the evolution of the worlds goes
but heavily upon its way.

These numberless Live^_abave__and
below^]S^h7“cpmejinto touchjwith,,huniaji
consciousness in very definite, ways, and
among these ways are jjgypda
Each sound has a form in the invisible
world, and combinations of sounds create
complicated shapes.' In the subtle matter

^ See on forms created by musical notes any
scientific book on Sound, and also Mrs. Watts-Hughes’
illustrated book on Iigures.


334


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


of those worlds aU_sQimdS-a.re.. acco mpanied
!by colour s, s o tha t th ey give rise to ma ny-
ftiued sjJapgg) in many cases exceedingly
fceautiful. The vibrations set up in the
visible world when a note is sounded set up
vibrations in the worlds invisible, each one


with its own specific character, and capable
of producing certain effects. In communi¬


cating with the sub-human Intelligences
connected with the lower invisible world


and with the physical, and in controlling
1 and directing these, sounds m ust be used
fi tted to bring ab out _the^e§ired .re5ul ts. as
language made up of definite sounds is
i used here. And in communicating wi th
the highe r Intelligences c ertain sounds are
usgliiirto^re^e a

suitable for their activitTesT^^d to make
our own subtle bodies receptive of their
influences.


\ T his effect on the s ubtle bodies is a
piost important part orThe occuft use of
pounds. These bodies, like the physical,
kre in constant vibratory motion, the vibra¬
tions changing with every thought or


desire. These changing irregular vibra¬
tions offer an obstacle to any fresh vibration


sacraments.


335

coming from outside, and, in order to
render the bodies susceptible to the higher
influences, sounds are used which reduce
the irregular vibrations to a steady rhythm,
like in its nature to the rhythm of the
Intelligence sought to be reached. Th^v
qbj^ pf^ll often-rep^^^^^^
meet this, as a musician sounds the samel
note over and over again, until all the]
instruments are in tune. The subtle!
bodies must be tuned to the note of the
Being sought, if his influence is to find
free way through the nature of the wor¬
shipper, and this was ever done of old by .
the use of sounds. Hence, musi c has eva r

.m.in ^ra l ....p a£L -Oi^^^,”^d

Certain definite cadences have been pre¬
served with care, handed on from age to
age.

In every religion there exist sounds
of a peculiar character, called “Words
of Power,” consisting of sentences in
a particular language chanted in a
particular way; each religion possesses a
stock of such sentences, special successions
of sounds, now very generally called
“mantras,” that being the name given tb


336 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

them in the East, where the science of
mantras has been much studied and
elaborated. It is not necessary that a
mantra—a succession of sounds arranged
in a particular manner to bring about a
definite result—should be in any one
particular language. Any language can
be used for the purpose, though some are
more suitable than others, pr ovid ed that the

person w ho makes the mantra.possfiSSfis

t he requ isit e occult knowled ge. There
are hundreds of mantras in the Samskrit
tongue, made by Occultists of the past,
who were familiar with the laws of the
invisible worlds. These have been
handed down from generation to genera¬
tion, definite words in a definite order
chanted in a definite way. The effect of
the chanting is to create vibrations, hence
forms, in the physical and super-physical
worlds, and according to the knowledge
and purity of the singer will be the worlds
his song is able to afifect. If his know¬
ledge be wide and deep, if his will be
strong and his heart pure, there is scarcely
any limit to the powers he may exercise in
•using some of these ancient mantras.


SACRAMENTS.


337


As said, it is not necessary that any one
particular language should be used. They
may be in Samskrit, or in any one of the
languages of the world, in which men of
knowledge have put them together.

This is the reason why, in the Roman. .

alway s used in important^ acts j^f wo£^

It is not used as a dead language here, a
tongue “ not understanded of the people,”
but as _ a^^iuidng forc e in the invisible
worlds. It is not used to hide knowledge
from the people, but in order that certain
vibrations may be set up in the invisible
worlds which cannot be set up in the
ordinary languages of Europe, unless a
great Occultist should compose in them the
necessary successions of sounds. To
t ranslate a ^mantra is tp change, it from a,
“ Word of __Power” into aii __ ordmaryj
sentence ; the sounds being changed, other
sound-forms are created.

Some of the arrangements of Latin
words, with the music wedded to them
in Christian worship, cause the most
marked effects in the supr a-physic al
^rlds ,~ and any one who is at all sensi*


338 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


tive will be conscious of peculiar effects
caused by the chanting of some of the
most sacred sentences, especially in the
M|i^s,, Vibratory effects may be felt by
any one who will sit quiet and receptive
as some of these sentences are uttered
by priest or choristers. And at the same
time effects are caused in the higher
worlds directly affecting the subtle bodies
of the worshippers in the way above
described, and also appealing to the
Intelligences in those worlds with a
meaning as definite as the words addressed
by one person to another on the physical
plane, whether as prayer or, in some cases,
as command. The sounds, causing active
flashing forms, rise through the worlds,
affecting the consciousness of the Intelli¬


gences residing in them, and bringing
some of them to render the definite
services required by those who are taking
part in the church office.

S uch mantras form an essential part
of every Sacrament. .

next" essential part of the Sacra¬
ment, in its outward and visible form,
are c ertain g;es|]j|;^^ These are called


SACRAMENTS.


339

Signs, or Seals, or Sigils—the three words
meaning the same thing in a Sacrament.
Each sign has its own particular meaning,
and marks the direction imposed on the
invisible forces with which the celebrant
is dealing, whether those forces be his
own or poured through him. In any case,
they are needed to bring about the desired
result, and they are an essential portion
of the sacramental rite, ^cb a sign is
called ^S iga_i 3 f_Pfi!.w-er, ” ^as .™the_maijtra
i s a “ Word of Power .’’

It is interesting to read in occult works
of the past references to these facts, true
then as now, il^^ggS^jhep. In the
Egyptiaii^^gO'^ 'of the Dead is described
the^wP^wWd^journey of the Soul, and
we read how he is stopped and challenged
at various stages of that journey. He is
stopped and challenged by the Guardians
of the Gate of each successive world, and
the Soul cannot pass through the Gate
and go on his way unless he knows twoj
things : he must pronounce a word, the!
Word of Power : he must make a sign,|
the Sign of Power. When that Word is*
spoken, when that Sign is given, the bars


340 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

of the Gate fall clown, and the Guardians
stand aside to let the Soul pas.s through.
A similar account is given _jn the great
inv.s£irT^rt^um‘Tro.sr)(X the Sofi/iia,

Cefore menticmed.' Here * the paK.sage
through the worlds is not of a Soul set
free from the body by death, but of one
who has voluntarily left it in the course of
Initiation. There are great I’ower.s, the
Powers of Nature, that bar his way, and
till the Initiate give.s the Word and the
Sign, they will not allow him to pass
through the portals of their realms. 'Phis
double knowledge, then, was neccs.sary - -
to speak the Word of Power, to make the
Sign of Power. Without these progress
was blocked, and without these a
Sacrament is no Sacrament.

Further, in all Sacraments
material is^used gjiAu^d. be, ...
is' ever a symbol of that wham i.s to be
gained by the Sacrament, and points to
the nature of the “ inward and spiritual

‘ See ante, p. 138 and p. 302.

’In the Sacrament of Penance the ashes are now
usually omitted, except on special ocosKonsTbut none
the less they form part of the rite.


SACRAMENTS.


341


grace” received through it. This is also,
the material means of conveying the grace,
not symbolically, but actually, and a subtle
change in this material adapts it for high
ends.

Now a physical object consists of the
solid, liquid, and gaseous particles into
which a chemist would resolve it by
analysis, and further of ether, which inter¬
penetrates the grosser stuffs. In this |
ether play the magnetic ene rgies . It is
further connects with counterparts of
subtle matter, in which play energies
subtler than the magnetic, but like them^
in nature and more powerful.

When such an object is magnetised a
change is effected in the ethereal portion,
the wave-motions are altered and systema¬
tised, and made to follow the wave-motions
of the ether of the magnetiser; it thus
comes to share his nature, and the denser
particles of the object, played on by the
ether, slowly change their rates of vibra¬
tion. If the magnetiser has the power of
affecting the subtler counterparts also he
makes them similarly vibrate in assonance
with his own.
y ’


esoteric CHRISTIANITY.


342

Thj.s is the secret of
the'*lrregular vibrations of the diseased
person are so worked on as to accord with
the regular vibrations of the healthy
operator, as definitely as an irregularly
swinging object may be made to swing
regularly by repeated and timed blows.
A doctor, w ill magnetise water and cu re
< h is ^ p atient therewith. He will magDed.s e
I a cloth, and the cloth, laid on the seat of
painT^will heal. He will use a powerful
magnet, or a current from a galvanic cell,
and restore energy to a nerve. In all
cases the ether is thrown into mention, and
by this the denser physical particles arc
affected.

A similar result accrues when the
materials used in a Sacrament are acted
on by the Word of Power and the Sign
of Power. Magnetic changes are cau.sed

ln_jhe_^ ethgrof

and the subtle counterparts are affected
according to the knowledge, purity, and
devotion of the celebrant who magneti.se.s
—or, in the religious term, consecrates—
it. Further, the Word and the Sign of
Power summon to the celebration the


SACRAMENTS.


343


Angels specially concerned with the
materials used and the nature of the act
performed, and they lend their powerful
aid, pouring their own magnetic energies
into the subtle counterparts, and even
into the physical ether, thus reinforcing
the energies of the celebrant. No one
who knows anything of the powers of
magnetism can doubt the possibility of
the changes in material objects thus
indicated. And if a mag of scienc e.i?
who may have no faith in the unseen ,!

K^ the.power to so impregnate w^te rf

wjth his o wn vital energy that. it .cujxsl
a phy.si cal disease, w hy sho uld power ,.£)f
a loftier , though nature be derxied

t o thos e of saintly.life, of noble charac ter,
of knowledge of , the . in^^^ Those

who are able to sense the higher forms
of magnetism know very well that con -,
secrated objects vary much in their ppM5er,j
tmd that the magnetic dijfference is duel
to the varying knowledge, purity, and'
spirituality of the priest who consecr ates
the_m. Some deny all vital magnetism,
and would reject alike the holy water of
religion and the magnetised water of


344


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


medical science. They are consistent,
/but ignorant. But those who admit the
utility of the one, and laugh at the other,

• show themselves to be not wise but
;! prejudiced, not learned but one-sided,
land prove that their want of belief in
I religion biases their intelligence, predis-
I posing them to reject from the hand of
i religion that which they accept from the
^ihand of science. A little will be added
to this with regard to “sacred objects”
generally in Chapter XIV.

We thus see that the oute r p^» 't of the;
Sacrament is of very great importance.
Real changes are made in the materials
used. They arc made the vehicles of
energies higher than those which naturally
belong to them ; persons approaching
them, touching them, will have their own
etheric and subtle bodies affected by their
potent magnetism, and will be brought
into a condition very receptive of higher
influences, being tuned into accord with
the lofty Beings connected with the Word
and the Sign used in consecration ; Beings
belonging to the invisible world will be
present during the sacramental rite, pouring


SACRAMENTS.


345


out their benign and gracious influences;
and thus all who are worthy participants
in the ceremony—sufficiently pure _ anc^
devoted to^ be tune3~l)y the vibrations
caused—will find their'"’emotions pur ij ed
and stimulated, their spirituality quickened,]
and their hearts filled with peace, b
coming into such close touch with th'
unseen realities.


Chapter XIII.


SACRAMENTS {continued).

We have ipw to apply th ese genera l
principles to concrete exa mp les, and to see
how they explain and justify the sacra¬
mental rites found in all religions.

It will be sufficient if we take as
exarnples three out of the Seven Sacra¬
ments used in the Church Catholic.
Two are recognised as obligatory by all
Christians, although extreme Protestants
deprive them of their sacramental character,
giving them a declaratory and remem¬
brance value only instead of a sacramental;
yet even among them the heart of Jrue
d evotion wins sQmeth i n ^ f'" ^mHhe sacra-
mental .blessing the head denies. The
tlurd is not recognised as even nominally a
Sacrament by Protestant Churches, though
ifshows the essential signs of a Sacrament,
346


SACRAMENTS.


347


as given in the definition in the Catechism
of the Church of England already quoted.’'
The first is that of Baptism ; the second
that of the Eucharist; the third that of
Marriage. The putting of Mai^iage out'
of the rank of a Sacrament has much
degraded its lofty ideal, and has led to
much of that loosening of its tie that
thinking men deplore.

The Sacrament of Baptism., is found in
all religions, not only at the entrance into
earth-life, but more generally as a cere¬
mony of purification. The ceremony
which admits the new-born—or adult—
incomer into a religion has a sprinkling
with water as an essential part of the rite,
and thi.s was as universal in ancient days
as it is now. The R ev. Dr. Gule s remarks :
“The idea of using water as ^emblem aticd
o f spiritual wa shing is too obvious to allow **
surprise at the antiquity of this rite. Dr.
Hyde... in his treatise on the Religion of'^
the Anci ent Pjrdans , xxxiv. 406, tells us
that k'^revSed among that people.
‘They do not use circumcision for their«
children, but only baptism, or washing for'’?

' See ante^ p. 329.


348 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

the purification of the .soul. They bring

• the child to the prie.st into the church, and
v place him in front of the sun and fire,

• which ceremony being completed, they
look upon him as more sacred than before.

r Lord says that they bring the water for
« this purpose in bark of the Holm-tree;

that tree is in truth th e Haum of the Magi,
. of which we spoke before on another
V occasion. Sometimes also it is otherwise
‘ done by immersing him in a large ve-ssel
of water, as Tavernier tells us. After
such washing, or baptism, the priest
imposes on the child the name given by
■* the parents.’”’ A few weeks after the
birth of a Hin du c hild a ceremony is
performed, a part of which consi.sts in
sprinkling the child with water—such
sprinkling entering into all Hindu worship.
Williamson gives authorities for the
practise of Ba^dsmj^^

exicOj Peru. Greece ,
and among _the
. e prav.er.s quoted are

verVSne: ‘‘T'prayiKat ttocS^ti^^

* Ckristian Records^ p. 129*

* The Great Law, pp. i6i---x66.


Thibet, Mongolia, M

..

Kome, bcandmavia,


Druids.® Some of th


SACRAMENTS.


349


blue and light blue, may enter into thy**
body and there live. I pray that it may **
destroy in thee, and put away from thee, ^
all the things evil and adverse that were
given to thee before the beginning of the *
world.” “O child! receive the water of
the Lord of the world who is our life : it is
to wa.sh and to purify; may these drops
remove the sin which was given to thee
before the creation of the world, since all ^
of us are under its power.”

Tert ullian mentions the very general
use of Baptism among non-Christian -
nations in a passage already quoted,' and
others of the Fathers refer to it.

In most religious communities a mino r
form of Baptism accompanies all religifius
ceremonies, water being used as a symbol
of purilication, and the idea being that
no man should enter upon" worship until
he has pufij^ed his heart a,nd conscience,
the outer washing symbolising the inner
lustration. In the Greek and Roman \
Churches a small rec^.tg,Qlj,^J^^ i

water" ‘^"’paceT 'near e ver v ^ .. ^jdftQ r, and |
every mcorning^"”'^Snipper touches it, f
‘See ante, p. 151.


350


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


making with it on himself the. sign of
the cross ere he goes onward towards
the altar. On this Robert Taylor remarks :
“ The baptismal fonts in our Protestant
churches, and we need hardly say more


'' especially t he little cis terns ^£the entrance
* ofour Catholic chapels, are not imitations,
^ but an unbroken~and never interrupted
continuation of the .same a^ua minaria,
^ or amula, which the learned Montfaucon,
<* in his Antiquities, shows to have been
► vases of holy water, which were placed
*^by the heathens at the entrance of their
•* temples, to sprinkle themselves with upon
’►entering those sacred edifices.”’

Whether in the Baptism of initial
reception into the Church, or in these
minor lustration.s, water is the material
agent employed, the great cleansing fluid
in Nature, and therefore the best symbol
for purification. Over this water a mantr a
is pronounced, in the P2nglish~ritiia !-^re|^-
sented by the prayer, “ Sanctjfy tl^ water
to the mystical w ashing^wav' of sin ."
concluding with the formula, “In the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and


* Dkgesu^ p, 219.


SACRAMENTS.


351


the Holy Ghost. Amen.” This is the
ord- Power, and it is accompanied by
s Sign of Power, the Sign of the Cross '
tde over the surface of the water. -
TT Pie Word and the Sign give j;p jhei

its before explained,, a^ prOLpar ty it i Z
eviousjy had not, and it is rightjy^ riaffiedj
nojy w ^ter. ’ The dark powers will noti
ipirdach it; sprinkled on the body it gives'
sen.i»c of peace, and conveys new spiritual
e. When a child is baptised, the spiritual
Lergfy given to the water by the Word
id the Sign reinforc es the spiritual life in
e cbj kl, and tlien tlie Word o 7 ”PowTr is ;
ravim spoken, this time over the child, and
e Sign is traced on his forehead, and in
s hdyy bod ies the vibrat iQ,ias„are. .£elt.i

id die stinimon.s_ tg^_guard the__jifg,.„thu|
JrictOi'ed goes forth through the invi_sibl|
orlcTl^Tbr thik_^Sign js at'oii ce'purifvina
id protect ive—purifying by the life tha^
poured forth through it, protective bJ
le vibrations it sets up in the subtl®
odios. Those vibrations form a miaxdiahn
against the stacks ofJh<jstik,bto3,pgs j
1 the invisible world s, and every time |
isLt holy water is touched, the Word pro- \|


352


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


nounced, and the Sign made, the energy
is renewed, the vibrations are reinforced,
both being recognised as potent in the
invisible worlds, and bringing aid to the
operator.

In the early Church, Baptism was
preceaea by a very careful preparation^
those admitted to the Church being
mostly converts from surrounding faiths.
A convert passed through three definite
stages of instruction, remaining in each
grade till he had mastered its teachings,
and he was then admitted to the Church by
iBaptism. Only after that was he taught
(the Creed, which was not committed to
writing, nor .ever repeated in the presence
of an unbeliever; it thus served as a sign
of recognition, and a proof of the position
of the man who was able to recite it,
showing that he was a baptised member of
the Church. How trul y in those days ibe
grace cpjiyeyed. by J 3 aptisrn was believ^
in is shown, ■■by the custom of
Bapgsm th at grgw up. Believing in
tirTSitf'of Baptism, men and women
of the world, unwilling to resign its
pleasures or to keep their lives pure


SACRAMENTS.


353


from stain, would put off the rite of /
Baptism until Death’s hand was upon ^
them, so that they might benefit by
the sacramental g'race, and pass throug'h
Death’s portal pure and clean, full of
spiritual energy. Against that abuse some
of the great Fathers of the Church
struggled, and struggled effectively. There
is cj^uaint story told by one of them, I
think by S. Athanasius, who was.a man .
of caustic wit, not averse to the use of
humour in the attempt to make his hearers
understand at times the folly or perversity
of their Ijehaviour. He told his congre¬
gation that he had had a vision, and had
gone up to the gateway of heaven, where
S. rioter stood as Warder. No pleased
smile had he for the visitant, but a frown ^
of stern displeasure. “Athanasius,” saidf./ f
he, “ why arc you continually sending me,|^
these empty bags, carefully sealed u{//
with nothing inside?” It was one of the^'
piercing sayings we meet with in Christian
antiquity, when these things were real to


Christian men, and not mere forms, as
they too_^ten are to -day.

'nrel:ustom"orinfant Baptism gradually


354


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


grew up in the Church, and hence the
instruction which in the early days pre¬
ceded Baptism came to be the preparation
ffor Confirmatio n, when the awakened mind
|ind intelligence take up and re-arfirm the
baptismal promises. The reception of the
unfant into the Church is seen to be rightly
done, when man’s life is recognised as
being lived in the three worlds, and when
the Spirit and Soul who have come to
inhabit the new-born body are known to
be not unconscious and unintelligent, but
conscious, intelligent, and potent in the
invisible worlds. It is right and just that
the “Hidden Man of the heart”' should
be welcomed to the' new stage of his
pilgrimage, and that the most helpful
influences should be brought to bear upon
the vehicle in which he is to dwell, and
which he has to mould to his service. If
the eyes of men were opened, as were
of old those of the servant of Elisha, they
would still see the horses and chariots of
•fire gathered round the mountain where is
the prophet of the Lord.'

We come to the second of the Sacra-
' I Pet. iii. -4. ’2 Kings vi. 17.


SACRAMENTS.


355


ments selected for study, that of the
Sacrifice of the ^ symbol of

the eternal Sacrifi^ already explained,
the daily .sacrifice of the Church Catholic
throughout the world imaging that eternal
Sacrifice by which the worlds were made,
and by which they are evermore sustained.
It is to l)e daily offered, as its archetype
is perpetually existent, and men in that
act take part in the working of the Law
of Sacrifice, identify themselves witb it,
recognise its landing nature, and volun¬
tarily as.sociate them.selves with it in its
working in the worlds ; in such identifica¬
tion, to partake of the material part of
the Sacrament is necessary, if the identi¬
fication is to be complete, but many of
the l)cnefits may be shared, and the
influenct! going forth to the worlds may
be increased, by devout worshippers, who
a.s.sociate themselve.s mentally, but not


physically, with the act.

I'his great func tion of Christian worship |
loserits nfo rcx 'lmd meanin g^ when it i s I
reg arde d as n otlimg more than a n^el
coni!ns,moration of a pa st sacrlfic e7~as a|
pictorial allegory without a deep ensouling|


356


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


truth, as a breaking of brea(J....,ji|nd ,a
poising out oT*wine without a sharing in
the eternal Sacrifice. So to see it is to
make it a mere shell, a dead picture
instead of a living reality. “The cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion [the communication of the
sharing in] of the blood of Christ ? ” asks
the apostle. “ The bread which we break,
is it not the communion of the body of
Christ ? ”' And he goes on to point out
that all who eat of a sacrifice become
partakers of a common nature, and are
joined into a single body, which is united
to, shares the nature of that Being who is
j present in the sacrifice. A fact of the
! invisible world is here concerned, and he
! speaks with the authority of knowledge.
N invisible Beings pour of their es sence into
the materials used in any sa cramental rite,
and_£ hose who partake of those material s
I —which become assimilated in the body
I and enter into its ingredients—are thereby
uLnited tQ_t hQ se whose essence is in it, a nd
r . heyLa J L ^,]hare a common na ture. Thjs is
true when we take even ordinaryTfood
. * I Cor. x. i6.


SACRAMENTS.


357

from the hand of another—part of his
nature, his vital magnetism, mingles with
our own ; how much more true then when
the food has been solemnly and purposely
impregnated with higher magnetisms,
which affect the subtle bodies as well as
the physical. If we would understand the
meaning and use of the Eucharist we
must realis(^ these facts of the invisibld
worlds, and we ^ must s ee in it ,^„.link
between the earthly and. the heayenly, as
as an act of the universal worship, a'
co-op(;ration, an a.ssociation, with the Lawj
of Sacrifice!, else it loses the greater partj
of its signilicance.

'rile employment of bread and wine as
the materials for this Sacrament—like the
use of water in the Sacrament of Baptism
—is of ver y ancient and general usage ,
'rile Ikmiaans'offered bread and wine to
Mithra, and similar offerings were made in
Tibet and I'artary. Jeremiah speaks oi
the cakes and the drink offered to the
yueen of Heaven by the Jews in Egypt,
they taking part in the Egyptian worship. *
In Genesis we read that Melchisedek, the
*Jer. xliv.


2


358 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


King-Initiate, used bread and wine in the
blessing of A^abam.' In the various
Mysteries bread and wine were
used, and Williamson mentions their use
also among the Mexicans, Peruvians,,,and
Dru ids. “

The bread stands as the general s ymbo l
for the food that build s up the bod y, and
the wine as symbol of the, blo^d. regarde d
“ forjheJifejjf jche fle^
i n the blood .” ^ Hence members of a
family are said to share the same blood,
and to be of the blood of a person is to be
of his kin. Hence, also, the old cere¬
monies of the “ bl ood-cov enant ” : when a
stranger was made one of a family or of a
tribe, some drops of blood from a member
were transfused into his veins, or he drank
them—^usually mingled with water—and
was thenceforth considered as being a born
member of the family or tribe, as being of
|its blood. Similgxly, ii ^ the. Eucharis t, the
|worshippers_jaa r,take o f the bread, svmbol -
l ysing body, the nature, of the Chris t.

^ Gen. xiv. 18, 19.

• The Gnat Law, pp. 177—181, 185. ^Lev. xvif. ii.


SACRAMENTS.


359

life of the Christ, and become of His kin,
one with Him.

The Word of Power is the formula'
“ This is_My Body,” “This is My.,.BlQQd.”
'Fhis it is which works the change which
we shall consider in a moment, and
transforms the materials into of

s piritual ..energies. The Sign of Power is
the hand extended over the bread and the
wine, and the Sign of the Cross should
be made upon them, though this is not j
always done among Protestants. These
are the outer essentials of the Sacrament
of the Eucharist.

It is important to understand the change
which takes place in this Sacrament, for it
is more than the magnetisation previously
explained, though this also is wrought.
We_ have , here a sp.eciaLJnstaace;..j3L.a
genjecalTaw.

By the occultist, a visible thing is;
regarded as the last, the physical,
expression of an invisible truth. Every¬
thing is the physical expression of a
thought. All__o^Ct-_.i5^_biit_^^a^
externaliaad and dfiogihed. Ah the objects!
in the world are Divine ideas expressed]


360 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

in physical matter. That being so, the
reality of the object does not lie in the
^ outer form but in the inner life, in the
jidea that has shaped an 3 ^“moulded the
matter into an expression of itself In
the higher worlds, the matter being very
subtle and plastic, shapes itself very
swiftly to the idea, and changes form as
the thought changes. As matter becomes
denser, heavier, it changes form less
readily, more slowly, until, in the physical
world, the changes are at their slowest
in consequence of the resistance of the
dense matter of which the physical world
^is composed. Let suflScient time be given,
I however, and even this heavy matter
I changes under the pressure of the ensoul-
|ing idea, as may be seen by the graving
I on the face of the expressions of habitual
thoughts and emotions.

This is the truth whi ch underlies what
i s called the doctrine of Transubstantia -
tiqn, so extraordinarily misunderstood ■ by
' t he ordinary Protesta nt." But such is the
fate of occult truths when they are
presented to the ignorant. The “sub¬
stance ” that is changed is the idea which


SACRAMENTS.


makes a thing to be what it is; “bread”
is not mere flour and water; the idea
which governs the mixing, the manipula¬
tion, of the flour and water, that is the
“ substance” which makes it “bread,” and
the flour and the water are what are techni¬
cally called the “ accidents,” the arrange¬
ments of matter that give form to the idea.
With a different idea, or substance, flour '
and water would take a different form, as i
indeed they do when assimilated by the
body. So also chemists have discovered
that the same kind and the same number -
of chemical atoms may be arranged in,
different ways and thus become entirely j
different things in their properties, though |
the materials are unchanged; such i

“isomeric c ompoun ds” are among theg-
mosTlnt^e^ing of modem chemical
coveries; the arrangement ^

atoms under^j j^gttf

_^(n-i[-r-itiiw4iimiTlTiii'^..

bodies.

^‘’^ ^hen, is this change of gubgt^
i n ffiTWiSriak used in the __ £i 3 ^^
'Il^^~idSrthat^^ the objectTiasb^n
changed; in their normal condition bread
and wine are food-stuffs, expressive of the


362


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


divine ideas of nutritive objects, objects
fitted for the building up of bodies. The
Inew idea is that of the Christ nature and
jlife, fitted for the building up of the
fspiritual nature and life of man. That
’is the change of substance; the o bjec t
|rei:nai|i§ jjpijdia^ed in its “ accidents,” its
|pKysicai material, tml_lhe subtle m^ter
Konnected^Ma,i^h_it ch anged under the
|pire ^ur£ --o£-th£ ^ id^aT’hQd.^^new

pr operties are imparted bj^ this change.
They affect the subtle bodies of the
participants, and attune them to the
nature and life of the Christ. On the
“ worthiness ” of the participant depends
the extent to which he can be thus
attuned.

The unwor thy participan t, subjected to
the same process, is injuriously affected by
it, for his nature, resisting the pressure, is
bruised and rent by the forces to which it
is unable to respond, as an object may be
broken into pieces by vibrations which it
is unable to reproduce.

i with:.. the ^^ ^ Sacrifi ce, with the Christ, and
so becomes at one with also, united to,


SACRAMENTS.


363


the divine Life, which is the Father of
the Christ. Inasmuch as the act of Sacri¬
fice on the side of form is the yielding up
of the life it separates from others to be
part of the common Life, the offering of
the separated channel to be a channel of
the one Life, so by that surrender the
sucrificer becomes one with God. It is the
giving itself of the lower to be a part of


the higher, the yielding of the body as an
instrument of the .separated will to be an
instrument of the divine Will, the present¬
ing of men’s " bodies as a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable unto God.” ’ Thus it has
been truly taught in the Ch urch that thc jse
who rightly take part i n t he Euchar isi
enjoy a partaking of jiie C^
out .for mem * The transmuting of the?
lower into the higher is the object of this,
as of all, Sacraments. The changing of
the lower force by its union with the loftier
is what is sought by those who participate
in it; and t hose wh o kno w the inner trut h,
and

iiiTany religTon, by means of its sacraments,
come into fuller* completer touch with the


»Rom. Jtii. I.


364 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


divine Life that upholds the worlds, if they
bring to the rite the receptive nature, the
act of faith, the opened heart, which are
necessary for the possibilities of the
Sacrament to be realised.

The Sacrament of Marriag e shows out
the marks of a Sacrament as clearly and
as definitely as do Baptism and the
Eucharist. Both the outer sign and the
inward grace are there. The material
»is the circle which is the symbol

of the ■“et^iastihgr"'T^Ee^ Word of Bower
is the ancient formula, “In the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the
I Holy Ghost.” The Sign of Power is the
Ijoining of hands, symbolising the joining
I of the lives. Thes^e make up the outer
s essentials of the Sacrament.

The inn ^r gra ce is the , union pf mind
with ipin 3 ^ o f heart with hear t, which
makes possible the realisation of the unity
of spirit, without which Marriage is no
Marriage, but a mere temporary con¬
junction of bodies. The giving and
receiving of the ring, the pronouncing
of the formula, the joining of hands, these
form the pictorial allegory; if the inner


SACRAMENTS.


365

jrrace be not received, if the participants!
do not open themselves to it by their wisM
for the union of their whole natures, thl
Sacrament for them loses its beneficeri
propertie.s, and becomes a mere form. *|

B ut N'l arria^e ha s a ye t d eepe r meaning ’;
relij^ions with one voice have proclaimed it
to be the image on earth of th e unio n
between the earthly and the heavenly,
union between Clod and jnan. And even
then its significance is not exhausted, for
it is the image of the relation between
Spirit and Matter , between the Trinity
and the IJmverse. S o deep , so .Jar-

rcachiitg. i.s the nieanii^_..ftC.,J;bfi4^ing
f)f inan .and woman.in„JVis.riiage.

Herein the man stands as representing
the .Spirit, the 'Frinity of Life, and the
woman as representing the Matter, the
'Frinity of formative material. One gives
life, the other receives and nourishes it.
'Fhey are complementary to each other,
two insenarablc halves of..j?.pe whol e,|
neither existing apart from the otlier. Am
S pirit implies Matter and Matter Spirit,l
so husband implies wife and wife husband.N
As the ab.siract Existence manifests in


366 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

•

two aspects, as a duality of Spirit and
Matter, neither independent of the other,
but each coming into manifestation with
the other, so is humanity manifested in
two aspects—^husband and wife, neither
able to exist apart, and appearing together.
They are not twain but one, a dual-faced
unity. God and the Universe are imaged
in Mar^ge; thus c losely umEecTare

TTIs said above that Marriage is also
an image of the union between God and
man, between the universal and the
individualised Spirits. This symbolism is
used in all the great scriptures of the
world—Hindu, Hebrew, Christian. And
it has been -extended by taking the
individualised Spirit as a Nation or a
Church, a collection of such Spirits knit
into a unity. So Isaiah declared to Israel;
“Thy Maker is thine Husband; the
Lord of hosts is His name ... As
the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride,
I so shall thy God rejpice over thee.”' So
j S. Paul wrote that the mystery of Marriage

.j represented Christ and the Church.'

I * Isaiah liv. 5 ; Ixii. 5. ’ Eph. v. 23-32.


SACRAMENTS.


367


If we think of Spirit and Matter as
latent, unmanifested, then we see no pro¬
duction ; manifested together, there is
evolution. And so when the halves of
humanity are not manifested as husband
and wife, there is no production of fresh
life. Moreover, they should be united!
in order that there may be a growth|
of life in each, a swifter evolution, a rnore’^:
rapid progress, by the half that each can *
give to each, each supplying what the
other lacks. The twain should be blended
into one, setting forth the spiritual possi¬
bilities of man. And they show forth
also the perfect Man, in whose nature
Spirit and Matter are both completely
developed and perfectly balanced, the
divine Man who unites in his own person
husband and wife, the male and female
elements in nature, as “God and Man
are one Christ.”'

T hose who ^us st udy the SacrameaL oi'l
Marriage will understand why religio^
liave'^ewr" regarded Marriage^jg^^-
^SI^IeTand have thougKt It’better that a
fe^bmatched pairs should suffer for a few

'Athanasian Creed,


368 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

m

years than that the ideal of true Marriage
should be permanently lowered for all.
A nation must choose whether it will
adopt as its national ideal a spiritual or an
earthly bond in Marriage, the seeking in it
of a spiritual unity, or the regarding it as
merely a physical union. The one is the
religious idea of Marriage as a Sacra¬
ment ; the other the materialistic idea of

it as an ordinary ter minable _contract.

The student of the Lesser Mysteries must
ever see in it a sacramental rite.


Chapter XIV.

REVELATION.

All the religions known to us are the
custodians of Sacred Books, and appeal
to these books for the settlement of
disputed questions. They always contain
the teachings given by the Founder of the
religion, or by later teachers regarded as
possessing super-human knowledge. Even
when a religion gives birth to many
discordant sects, each sect will cling to the
Sacred Canon, and will put upon its word
the interpretation which best fits in with
its own peculiar doctrines. However
widely may be separated in belief the
extreme Roman Catholic and the extreme
Protestant, t hey both aapea l tq the same
However far apart may be the
philosophic Vedintin and the most illiterate
Vallabhachirya, they both regard t he sajp e
Vedas as supreme. However bitterly
oppos^^'to'eaSi other may be the SWas
369


370


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


and the Sunnis, they b^h_regax^^

«sacred the same Kurdn. Controversies
and quarrels may arise as to the meaning
of texts,- but theJBook teelf,, in e^
i s looked o n with the iitrno^r;gj,tei:gjl^
iAhd rightly so ; for all such books contai n
l^.|JTnCTts of The^Kevelatio n. sd^cted by ,
the great Ones who hold it in trust;
such a fragment is embodied in what down
here we call a Revelation, or a Scripture,
and some part of the world rejoices in it as
in a treasure of vast value. The fragmen t
is chosen accor ^g t o^ the needs of the
^ tmiejTKe^^^Lcity of the people to whom
it is given, the type of the race whoiTj.kia-.
inten ded to instruct. It is generally given
*in a peculiar form, in which the outer
history, or story, or song, or psalm, or
prophecy, appears to the superficial or


ignorant reader to be the whole book ; but
i n these deeper meanin gs l ie concealed. ,
sorneHmes iii,.n um]^ ersTsometime s in words
constructed on a hidden jglan—a cypher,’^
in fact—sometim es m^symbolsX/fecog-
nisable by‘The instructed, sometimes in
all^ori es writte n as h istories, and” * in
many other ways. These Books, indeed,


REVELATION.


371

have something of a sacramental character
about them, an outer , g.n

inner life, an outer’ svrnboT’ anT" an
inner truth. Those only can explai/j
the hidden meaning who have been I
trained by tho.se instructed in it; hencei
the dictum of S. Peter that “no prophecyj
of the Scripture is of any private inter- !
prctation.”’ I'he elaborate explanations |
of texts of the Bible, with which the volumes

abound, seem fanciful
and overstrained to the prosaic modern
mind. 1 he play upon numbers, uponf
let^s, the apparently fantastic interpre¬
tations of paragraphs that, on the face of
them, are ordinary historical statements of
a .simple character, exasperate t he modern i
reader, who demands to have his fact^
presented clearly and coherently, anci
above all, requires what he feels to ba
solid ground under his feet. He d ecli nes
ab solu tely to follpw, tho-light-foot^^jjiyi^c
over what seem to him to be quaking
morasses, in a wild chase after dancing
will-o’-the-wisps, which appear and dis¬
appear with bewildering and irrational

' 3 P*t. i. 30 .


372


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


i,caprice. th e meii ^h o wro t e these

.lexa^e ratin^ treatises were iii,en o^ rilliant
JiritOTect and c^m rudsanent, the master-
R bmider s ,Qi the^CmjjEeh. And to those who
I read them aright they are still full of hints
and suggestions, and indicate many an
obscure pathway that leads to the goal of
knowledge, and that might otherwise be
missed.

We have already seen that Ogfigp. oii®
of the sanest of men, and verse?3*Tn occuR
knowledge, teaches that the Scriptures are
|tKfee^d, consisting of Body, Soul, and
^irit." He says that the of the

Scriptures is made up of the outer
words of the histories and the stories, and
he does not hesitate to say that these are
|not literally true, but are only stories for
the instruction of the ignorant. He even


ip^^Jigoes so far as to remark that statements
fi*'' are made in those stories that are obviously
untrue, in order that the glaring;^ contra¬
dictions tEanie on the surface maj_stir
p eople u p to inq ui re as to the real meaning
of these impossjble_ relatfphs. He says
tfSTsoTong as men are ignorant, the Body
' See ante, p. 102.


REVELATION.


373

is enough for them ; it conveys teaching,
it gives instruction, and they do not see
the self-contradictions and impossibilities
involved in the literal statements, and
therefore are not disturbed by them.

As the mi nd gro ws, as the: in tell ect
develops , these contradictions and im¬
possibilities - sit)*ike the attention, and
bewilder the studenttheti, he is stirred up '
to seek for a deeper"" meaning, and he
begins to find the Soul of the Scriptmes.
That Soul is the reward of the intelligent*
seeker, and he escapes from the bonds of
the letter that killeth.' The ^irit of the j
Scriptures may only be se en by the
spiritually enlightened man ; only those ip
whorn'the'Spirft is evolved can understancP^
the spiritual meaning : “ the things of God
knoweth no man but the Spirit of God
. which things also we speak,
not in the words which man’s wisdom
teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost
teacheth.” “

The reason for this_mediod ,oL^Ji^-
tion is

way in which one teaching can be made

2 Cor. iii. 6 . * i Cor. il ii, i 3 *

AA


374


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


available for minds at different stages of
evolution, and thus tram not only those to
wfiom it is immediately given, but also
those who, later in time, shall have
progressed beyond those to whom the
Revelation was first made. Man is
progressive ; the outer meaning given
long ago to unevolved men must needs be


very limited, and unless something deeper
and luller, than this outer mea ning., we re
hidden w ithin i|, t he value of the Scripture
would peris h when a few mill ennia TS xl
passed aw av. Whereas by this method of
successive meanings it is given a perennial
^ value, and evolved men may find in it
1 hidde n treasures, until the day when,
{possessing the whole, they no longer need
,*the part.

The world-Bible s, then, are fragments—
fragments of Revelation, and therefore are
rightly described as Revelation.

The next deeper sen se of the word
describes the massoTteaching held by the

trustforjnen ; this teaching is embodiedjn
bo^, wntfcgixj n symb ols, and'mlhese is
contained an account of kosmic laws, of


REVELATION.


375


the principles on which the kosmos is
founded of the methods by which it is
evolvcxl. of all the beings that compose it,
of it.s past, its present, its future; this is


RevelaUpn. This is the priceless
treasure which the Guardians of humanity
hold in c;harge, and from which they select,
front time to time, fragn>en1;.5,.,ta.£Qr»n.the
n 11)1 es of.Ihp..tyorkl
' Thirdly, th£,I<eysl4tiQn, highest, J
best, is thp Self-unveiling of Deity in the
kusinos* trui revealing of , attribute after
Htinbute. power after power,, .h^eauty .after
beauty, in all the various forms which in
their totality compose the universe. He (
shows Hi.s splendour in the sun, His;
infinity in the star-flecked fields of space, j
Mi.s .strength in mountains, His purity inj
snow-dud peuk.s and translucent air, Hisl


e


/m


energy in rolling ocean-billows, His beauty'
in tumbling mountain-torrent, in smooth,
clear lake, in cool, deep forest and in
sunlit plain, His fearlessness in the hero,
His patience in the saint. His tenderness
in mother-love, His protecting care in
father and in king, His wisdom in the
philosopher, H is knowledge in the scientist,


376


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


I His healing power in the physician, His
; justice in the judge, His wealth in the
i merchant. His teaching power in the priest,

' His industry in the artisan. He whispers
to us in the breeze, He smiles on us in the
sunshine. He chides us in disease. He
Stimulates us, now by success and now by
pailure. Everywhere and in everything
HHe gives us glimpses of Himself to lure
mis on to love Him, and He hides Him^f


we may learn to stand alon^ To
^now Him everywhere is the true Wisdom ;
to love Him everywhere is the true Desire ;
to serve Him everywhere is the true
Action. This Self-revealing of God is the
highest Revelation; all others are sub¬
sidiary and partial.

The inspired man is the man to whom
1 some of this Revelation has come by the
direct action of the universal Spirit on the
separated Spirit that is His offspring, who
has felt the illuminating influence of Spirit
bn Spirit. No man krlows the truth so
that he can never lose it, no man knows
the truth so that he can never doubt it,
until the Revelation has come to him as
though he stood alone on earth, until


REVELATION.


377


^ m^ir

Divine wjtjun . in the temple of the human} ^ ■
heart, and the man thus knows Dy nimselfl
and not by another.

loRHer d e cr ee a man is inspixed.j^«-^ i <*-
when mie greater than he stimulates! 4^'

within him powers which as yet are*
normally inactive, or even takes possession
of Itini, temporarily using his body as a
vehie.le. Such an illuminated man, at
the time of his inspiration, can speak
that which is beyond his knowledge, and
utter truths till then unguessed. Truths
are sometimes thus_ poured pjJt jhrough
a^um au chaunel , for the
mirjd. and .some One greater than the
s”peaker sends down his life into the
human vehicle, and they rush forth from
human lijis; then a great teacher speaks
yet mtire greatly than he knows, the
Angel of the Lord having touched his
lips with ftre.' Such are t he Prophets^
of the race , who at some period? have
spofcenvmh overwhelming conviction,
with clear insight, with complete under¬
standing of the spiritual needs of man.

• I«. ■n. 6,


ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.

/

'^Then the words live with a life immortal,
and the speaker .is truly a messeng-er from
God. The man who has thus known can
never again quite lose the memory of the
knowledge, and he carries within his heart
a certainty which can never quite dis¬
appear. The light may vanish and the
darkness come down upon him ; the gleam
from heaven may fade and clouds may
surround him; threat, question, challenge,

i may assail him; but within his heart there
nestles the Secret o f.. F*eac e-~Ke knows,
or knows that he has known .

That remembrance of true inspiration,
that reality of the hidden life, has been put
into beautiful and true words by Frederick
Myers, in his well-known poem, S.^jPauL
\ The apostle is speaking of his own experi-
' ence, and is trying to give articulate
1 expression to that which he remembers ;
' he is figured as unable to thoroughly
reproduce his knowledge, although he
knows and his certainty does not waver :

So, even I, athirst for His inspiring,

. 1 , who have talked with Him, forget again ;

Yes, many days with sobs and with desiring,

Offer to God a patience and a pain.


REVELATION.


379

Then through the mid complaint of my confession,
Then through the pang and passion of my prayer,

Leaps with a start the shock of His possession,
Thrills me and touches, and the Lord is there.

Lo, if some pen should write upon your rafter
Mene and Mene in the folds of flam^

Think ye could any memories thereafter
Wholly retrace the couplet as it came ?

Lo, if some strange intelligible thunder
Sang to the earth the secret of a star,

Scarce should ye catch, for terror and for wonder.
Shreds of the story that was pealed so far 1

Scarcely I catch the words of His revealing,

Hardly I hear Him, dimly understand.

Only the power that is within me pealing
Lives on my lips, and beckons to my hand.

Whoso hath felt the Spirit of the Highest

Cannot confound, nor doubt Him, nor deny;

Yea, with one voice, 0 world, though thou deniest,
Stand thou on that side, for on this am I.

Rather the world shall doubt when her retrieving
Pours in the rain and rushes from the sod ;

Rather than he in whom the great conceiving
Stirs in his soul to quicken into God

Nay, though thou then shouldst strike him from
his glory,

Blind and tormented, maddened and alon^

E’en on the cross would he maintain his s^eiy.

Yes, and in Hell would whisper, ^ I have known.^


380 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


Those who have in any sense realised
that God is around them, in them, and in
everything, will be able to understand how
h place or an object may become “ sacred ”
Dv a slight obiectivisation of this perennial
iniversa!' Presence, so that those become
ible to sense Him who do not normally
hel His omnipresence. This is generally
effected by some highly advanced, man,
in whom the inner Di vinity is la rgely

( infolded, andT'"whose subtle, .bodies are
herefore responsive to the subtler
dbrations of consciousness. Through
su ch . a jman. or by such. .a.,.ina.n,
spiritual energies may be poure d fo rth,
anomie "will”* unite themselves with his
pure vital ma^etism. He can then
pour the m forth on a ny obj ect, and its
ether andl>o3ies of suTtler matter will
become attuned to his vibrations, as
before explained, and further, the Divinity
within^ it. can more easily manife st, ^uch
Ian object becomes “magnetised,” and, if
I this be'strongly done, the object will itself
[fcecome a magnetic centre, capable in turn
|p magnetising _^thos^who ap proach i t.
Irhus a body electrified by an electric


REVELATION.


machine will affect other bodies near which
it may be placed.

An object thus rendered “ sacred ” is4
^ juijun aL.K .

meditation . The subtle bodies of thei
worshipper are attuned to its high vibra-l
tions, and he Jinds himself qmeted, soQthedj |
pacified, without effort on his~own part!|
He is thrown into a condition in whichf
prayer and meditation are easy and fruitful
instead of difficult and barren, and anl
irksome exercise becomes insensibly de-|
lightful. If the object be a representations
of some sacred Pejs^on—a _Cruci fix,
M ad onna and.J^y, a n Ang el, a Saint H
—there is a yet further gain. The Being!
represented, if his magnetism has been
thrown into the image by the appropriate
Word and Sign of Power, can re-inforce
that magnetism with a very slight expendi¬
ture of spiritual energy, and may thus
influence the devotee, or even show hmaself
through the image, when otherwise he would
not have done so. For in the spiritual r
world econ omy of forces is observed, andl
a small amount of energy will be expended [,
where a larger would be withheld.


382 ESOTERIC CttRlSTlANiXY.

An application of these same occult laws
may be made to explain th e use of a.11
CQnsecrated _objpcts—relics, amulets, &c.
They are all magnetised *oBjects, more or
less powerful, or useless, according to the
knowledge, purity, and spirituality of the
person who magnetises them.

a iaj, simil^fly. be made sacred , by
in them of sa i nts^ whose pure
, radiating; from them, attunes
atmosp here to peace^giying
Sometimes holy men, or
^ -om the higher worlds, will
directly magnetise a certain place, as' in
the case mentioned in the Fourth Gospel,
where an Angel came at a certain season
and touched the water, giving it healing
qualities.' In such places eve n careless
worldly menj^^m someti mes; feel, th e
Blessed inTfuence, and w ill be temooraril v
so^ed an d inclineC £ftmi:d..hkhfir.tbi^
The divine Life in each man is ever trying
to subdue the form, and mould it
into an expression of itself; and it is
easy to see how that Life will be aided
by the form being thrown intQ,..yibjatiQn3
Johnv. 4.


REVELATION.


sympathetic with those of a more highly\
evolved lleing, its own, efforts being reiri-j
forced by a stronger power. The outer*
recogniiif)!! of this effect is a sense ofi
quii;t, culm, and peace; the mind loses its
restlessness, the heart its anxiety. Any\
one whf) observes himself will find tiiat \
soine iiliccs arc more conducive to calm.^

worshifi. than others, in a room, a bmldingl
where there has been a great deal ofi
worldly thought, of frivolous conversation,!
of mere rush of ordinary worldly life,
it is far harder to quiet the mind
and to concentrate the thought, than
in a place where religious thought hasl
been carried on year after year, century
after century ; there the mind becomes
calm aiui tranquillised insensibly, and that
which would have demanded serious effort
in the first place is done without effort
in the second.

Thk is the r ationale of placesj ofEilg^

. the man turns

wjSaJusn.

create d by thousands oi Others , whQ before


384 ESOTERIC CHRISTIANITY.


him have sought the same in the same
place. For in such a place there is not only
the magnetisation produced by a single
saint, or by the visit of some great Being
of the invisible world; each jperson, who
-visits the spot with a heart.full of rever-
^^ence and devotion, and is attuned to its
/vihrations, reinforces those vibrations wi^
Ihis own life, . leaves the sppt better,
jthan it was when hejcaigg^jp^^lL Magnetic
-energy slowly disperses, and a sacred
object or place becomes graduaHy^eip^g:-
netised iF put aside or deserted. It
Incomes mdfe magnetised as it is used


tor frequented. But the presence of the
gnorgnP inures such objects and

jlaces, by^tlins; up antag-onistic vibra-
ions which weaken those already existing
here. As a wave of sound may be met
'>y another which extinguishes it, and
he result is silence, so do the vibrations
pf the scoffing thought weaken or
.Extinguish the vibrations of the reverent
and loving one. The effect produced
jwill, of course, vary with the relative
Btrengths of the vibrations, but the mis¬
chievous one cannot be without result.


REVELATION.


385

for the laws of vibration are the same in
the higher worltl.s as in the physical, and
thoujjht vibrations arc the expression of
real energies.

I’he reason and the effect of the con¬
secration of churches, chapels, cemeL^ies,
will now be apparent. The act of conse¬
cration is not the mere puldic setting aside’
of a place for a jjarticular purpo.se; it is
the magnetisation of the place for the
benelit of all those who frequent it. For
the visible and the invisible worlds are^'
inter-relaietl, interwoven, each with each,!
and lliose can best serve the visilde by'f
whom the ctiergies of the invisible can|
be wielded.


AFTERWORD.


We have reached the end of a small book
on a great subject, and have only lifted a
comer of the Veil that hides the Virgin of
Eternal Truth from the careless eyes of
men. The hem of her garment only has
been seen, heavy with gold, richly dight
with pearls. Yet even this, as it waves
slowly, breathes out celestial fragrances—
the sandal and rose-attar of fairer worlds
than ours. What should be the unimagin¬
able glory, if the Veil were lifted, and we
saw the splendour of the Face of the
divine Mother, and in Her arms the
Child who is the very Trath ? Before
that Child the Seraphim ever veil their
faces ; who then of mortal birth may look
on Him and live?


Yet since in man abides His very Self,
ho shall forbid him to pass within the
eil, and to see with “ open face the
386


AFTERWORD.


387

^lory nf the Lord”? From the Cave to
higlu’st such was the pathway

(if tin’ W'urd made Flesh, and known as
tht^ of the Cross, 'rhose who share
the manhood share also the Divinity, and
may ti‘<’ad where He has trodden. “What
'rhou art. I’hat am h"


i’KAf;F. TO ALT BeINGS.


INDEX.


A as of the Apostles referred to

A Kempis, Thomas.

Afterword .

Allegory .

Allegories, Old Testament ...

Alhwide Consciousness .

Ammonius Saccas .

Animal Symbols of Zodiac ...

Anselm and Redemption

Answers to Prayer .

,, Subjective Prayer

Apollonius of Tyana.

Apostolic Fathers .

Appearances of Divine Beings
Aquinas, Thomas

Arians of the Feurik Century^ quoted
Aristotle, Effect on Mediaeval Christianity

Ascension, The .

,, and Solar Myth ...

,, of t he Ch rist .

Asiatic Researches, quoted ...

Aspects of the One.

Athanasius, Story of.

Athanasian Creed, quoted ...

Atlantis, Continent of

At-one-ment.

Atonement as one of Lesser Mysteries
,, Early Church on the

,, Calvinistic View of

,, Edwards on the ...

,, Flavel on the

,, Luther’s Views on the ...

,, Dr. McLeod Campbell on the

„ F. D. Maurice on the ...

„ Vicariems and Substitutionary


PAGE

... 281
... II5
376

... 66
... 121

281 et seq.

28

... 165
•• 195

... 277
... 290
... 31

... 70

••• 93

... 112

103
... 112

231, 250

... 231

... 249-:50

... 258
... 262

••• 353
263, 367
... 18

... 209
... 200
... 195
... 197

... 197

... 196

... 196

... 199

... 199

... 196


;U(^'


/■i\vi .j'V'' ' ^ f •.!' , i- >•-'-, ''-s-» * ■■ 2 / ^'. •'•'f' -^3 ^..-. “

Atinement-Views of Dwight, Jeme, Jenkyn, L.ddoo.

Owen, Stroud, and Thomson
,j ^’^<^erlymg the Doctrine of

j> Pamphlet on, quoted

,, ^zmjteentA Century quoted on

Augdeides .

Barnabas .

Baptism, A Mantram in .'

„ A Minor Form of ...


jj Belief in Death-bed...

,5 Infant .

,, In the Early Church

,, ofTnitiate ...

5, of Holy Ghost and Fire

3 ) of Jesus .

j, of the Christ

33 Tertullian on

Beatifik: Vision, The ...

Bernard of Qairvaux ...

Bel-fires

Bhagcevad Gttd referred to ...


Bible Account of Creation .


... 179

Birth, Second.


... 247

Blavatsky, H- P., referred to


... IJ 7

Blood of Christ symbolised in

Eucharist


3m

Bbhme, Jacob.


.. 11$

Body, Causal.


... 2^

33 33

.


... mf

„ Desire, Changes in


am

„ Meaning of a


... m

,, Mental


... *0

„ „ Building of

...


... m$

„ Natural or Physical .

.


...

„ Natural, of St. Paul .

.


... m

„ of Bliss ^

.

...

...

,, of Desire

.

.

... 90

,, Phyacal, Changes in

...


„ Resurrectkm ...

.

...


- loS

-

. 19S

■ 205

■ n
71

• 3^

- 349

• m

■ 353

J5»

.. 34S

53

ihi

^33

. m

■ m

95i m

III

... m


* i - ■

.BO


390 INDEX.

PAGE

Body, Spiritual .

. •• 239

Book of Job^ quoted .

. 268, 332

,, of the Dead, referred to

. 339

,, of Wisdom, quoted

.266

Bread, General Symbol in Sacraments

. 358

Brihad&ranyakojianishat, quoted ...

. 5O3 202

Brotherhood of Great Teachers

. 9

Bruno, Giordano, referred to

5, 113, 115, 225, 322

Buddha, Birth Story of .

. 164

Buddhist Trinity .

. 258

Calvinistic Doctrine.

. 197

Cardinal Nicolas of Cusa .

. 115

Cathari, The, referred to .

. 113

Cave of Initiation .

. ... 186

Celsus—Controversy with Origen ...

. 88

Ckhdndogyopanishat, quoted...

.253

ChrSstos and Christos.

. 174

<^^t as Hierophant of Mysteries ...

.231

,, Baptism of .

. ... 186

„ Crucifixion of.

. 1S3

„ Disciples of .

.223

„ in the Spiritual Body.

. 137

,, life of the .

.217

,, of the Mysteries .

. 191

» The .

. 132, 134

,, the Crucified.

. 182

,, the Historical.

. 120, 140

„ the Kosmic .

. 179

„ the Mystic .

. 170

,, the Mythic .

. 145

„ Sufferings of the .

.223

Christian Creed, referred to.

. 180

j, ,,

. 181

„ quoted .

206, 207, 229

Christian Disciples—their work

.223

Christkm Records, quoted ...

.348

C 3 iristian Symbols, &c., not unique...

. 148

Christianity has the Gnosis.

. 36

Qbrfetmas Day.

. 159, 161


INDEX.


Christmas Ffslival, ii|^htly regarded . i5^

CMrig*^ i.i}iraT>% tjuoted, viiL, 21, 58, 71, 72,

7 j. 74 * 77 » 7 ^» htJ e/r*/., 87, 88, 9oe/jr<?//., 103, 150,

Classes i 4 Fr.'iyer^ ,,, ...

Cletiiriit Mf Alr^andria, qunftMl .. 20

** M rrfrjfed to ... ...

IK <»ti the (iiiosis ...

M M oti .Srnptufc AllcgoricH . 83

*> K» oti SyrnlKtls,.. . gQ

»* »» ami Catrrhetiral School. 73

«' t* a I’ujnl of l’rtn!;enus ...

/{f iihV re, iTferrrt} lo . 58^ ^yy

( 4 *m|mrativr Mythologj*t.f% ,, ... * 7

*♦ »* Thrnirv of ... ... «


.. 283

viii., 20

73
83, 84
... 83


II iC-llgjMtosH

M 5 l>iho|ogy


. 80

. 73

. 73

S8. (>S, 8t, 177

. 7

. 8

. 7.8

. 147

.,— 38a

. 38s

. 118

... 313

3 a. SS. 64 . 67 , 184 .


Con»enratiui> .4 Ctiurclic. .v.- . . 3 ^^

Constant, Alfiliorisr Louis ... ug

Cofivefsion, ,|»|irnomenii« oC ... ... ...

Hf^nfks f§, r|irotril, ix., x,, 0, 32, 55, 64, 67, 124,
* 75 * * 77 * 240, tit, 351, 253, 270, 356, 373

CferiL taught after in Early Church ... ' 352

Crw#/r«*i-t|Uigrd .

Cm*^’/h$ii/htm* ui Anm^lm . . ...

Dangers to Christianiiy . J25

Dark Lowers in Nitfurr ,,, ... 186,187

Mitnmn, r|iiotetl 2^5 #/

i>gi,lJb tif Sokf iirrori ...

■ffTPrtmifih nt (hlgrn ... ... ... lOJ, I02

flitaieit.,. ,., ... 253

/iikjw# nl M. Taytnr* c|Uoied ... ... 350

/Jm ...

DkniysiM.s the Arn^ntgiic ...no

Dliii|i|jrttran« Ilf ihc Myslerlffi .. ...

Disciples, The... ... ... ... 13^

,* Work of the ... 223

I, Writings of the ... .. ... 140


392


INDEX.


ft^1


Divine Beings, Appearance in Mysteries

PACK

. 93

‘‘ Divine Grace,” What it is

.224

„ Ideation .

. 359

,, Illumination .

. 377

„ Incarnations .

. 273, 274

Duality of Manifested Existence

.235

„ of Second Person of Trinity

.265

Easter Festival .

. 159

Eckhart, Teachings of .

. 113

Edwards on the Atonement

.. 197

Eg3rpt and the Mysteries .

. 131

Encydoptzdia Britannica, referred to

.22, 23, 117

„ „ quoted ...

. 110 et seq.

Ephesians^ Epistle to^ quoted

57.65,67,366

Epistle of JameSy quoted .

.276

,, of Petery quoted .

$4, lai, 194, 354, 371


Esoteric Christianity, Popular Denial of ..

„ Teaching in Early Church
Essentials of Religion ..v.,.

Eucharist, Bread and Wine of
,, Change of Substance in

„ connected with Law of Sacrifice

,, Meaning and Use of

„ ‘ Sacrifice of .

,, Unworthy Participants in

r, Book ofj quoted .

xtasy .

Faith Needed for Forgiveness
Fathers, The Christian, on Scriptures

Festivals .

Fish Symbol in Religions
Fkvel on Atonement...

Fludd, Robert.

Forgiven ess of Sins ...

,, in Lesser Mysteries

,, in most Religions

„ ultimately refers to Post-Mortem Penalt;

Fourth Manifestation Feminine
„ Per^m.


357

361

357

357

355

362

91

295

312

371

147

166
196
116
301

323

303

307

261

263


INDEX.


393


Frrc“lhinkin|» in Christmnity...
/•‘wWi/f 0f (fthi iti the Ohcrland
S<<rirly nf

Fulurr «»{ Thrisf iruiity...

Ffntk h\ qnotctd...


PAGE

123
II4
II7

41

64, 65, 66, 124


vm., 9,


cjttulnl

GefUinin* Gmnlr dc S.

GrstutfH in SarritunnUH

idblinidH and Fait of A*. Empire, quoted.

Urv. Dr., tjUntrd
Gmv.vsThv

,, ,, in i'hrisdanity ...

Citnislie, Thr, nf S. Clrment...

(imnfin and ikeir A^emain t, quoted
, GniK in llir My.trrieH
Cfrinlr*! fd i liriinrhinH
Grand F*»d}»r uf l‘cntrul Asia
Greek Crnfi»4,. The
Guyoii, Mme. de

Haugi Dr.t /*i«rjr, cited

ffdrrtos, Bphik io^ quoted* 53* 67, 8x, 91, X7S» ^ 7 ^^ 205, 216.
aia, 323 * ^47# 270* a74» 280

Hebrew Trinity .

Helld'ire The .

thnm FniAniiadSt, 7 *A^, quoted

llkitkn Gml, The .

„ Meaning! in Jewish nnd Christian Scriptures
„ Side of Chriitianity ...

„ Tcaddng in all Keligioni ...

IIItnirchici of Divine Being! ..

I, of Superhuman Beingt ...

Hindu, Trinity, The ... .

H lit«iry mr$MS Myth ...

Holy Spirit as Creator .

Holy Water ..-

liumin Evoluibn repeats Kosmic Process

Huxley* T. H., quoted .

PIyde, Dr., quoted ..

i0 Ikmiir ..


18* 180, 268, 269, 271, 279, 358
117
338

162

347
, 108
... 36

84 ei seq.
... 162

... 25

- 331
... 31

... 267

... II6
... 202


254

48

323

207

100

36

20

331

23

257

153

269

351

271

282

347

22


343 » 349 ,


lamblichus, On the Mysteries, quoted, 22, 23, 24, 25,
296 et seg.


VKGK

27, 29,


lamblichus, Life of Pythagoras, referred to


... 28

Ignatius .


... 71

Incarnation of Logos ... .


... 179

Initiation and Rebirth .


5 L 53

^ „ Cave of .


... 186

,, Ceremonies of .


247 et seq.

,, Conditions of .


••• 173

,, Mount of.


... 91

Inspiration, True .


- 378

Intelligences in Invisible Worlds .


... 279

Inviolability of Law.


... 305

Invisible Helpers .


... 280

Invisible Worlds interpenetrate the Visible...


... 279

Irenseus, Against Heresies, referred to


... 105

Isaiah, quoted.

210, 295, 366, 377

Isomeric Compounds.


... 361

Jeremiah, 3 ook of, quoted .


262, 357

Jesus at Mount Serbal .


... 130

,, Baptism of .


... 133

„ Date and Place of Birth .


... 130

,, His Work in Christendom


- 143

„ in Egypt .


... 130

„ Inner Instructions of.


... 137

„ Master of the West .


... 147

'Sacrifice of


... 133

„ the Divine Teacher .


... 183

,, the Healer and Teacher .


... 127

,, training in Essene Community


... 130

^ ,, the Master .


... 142

Judges, Book of quoted .


... 97

Juliana Mother .


... 117

Justin Martyr.


... 148

„ „ quoted.


149 et seq.

Kahhala, Five Books of, referred to.


... 34

Karma.. .


288, 309

Hatkopaniskaiy quoted .

...

32, 33 , 49

Key to Theosophy, ..

...

... 294


■i


INDEX.

395


I'Af-a

Kingdcimfif If raven rral mranitij;

52

Aypt^U qmUml

. 11 * .154

Kr>%mir C"hri*%l. I’hr ,,.

. I 7 n

,, l’rofr?i% of hi’nmiiiij,;

,, 2m

»t Sarrifirr

iH|

filling* Arnirrw, rrfrrrni lu ...

11,12

Language of Syrnlnil^i

*• L 5.1

Lafin Uiigin of

,., aofj

M Lv nf, it» Koinan riniirh

•' M 7

Law *»f Sarrifkr

... 301

M M 1*1 Hm»lmnm

... 303

*1 M in X.ifnrc of

... 304

M M in Xorna!niriiini’»m

i 03

** »» or ManifrMatirm

... 304

Law, WfIliiOn

117

la'fl haJi'i I’afh

*7

i*rnt

.. i 6 y

l^’vi Kfiplta^t

un


* ■ • s%^

iJgAf m (k^ iMfkn *|noiri|

330

** LifftrC*ttllfr‘ .


Birth of t fir.

305

M tttnJ Sarnfirr

304

it Life Ilf, in every form

. MM

«t .Meaning ul the Term

... 17a

», of Lfalo

,. iHj

H IVrfirliml Sarfifirr Ilf

... acxi

|,.cm tif Myittie Trarhing in (‘hrisimnity

37

LVt/V/i/, r|«f 4 ril 4K, *75, 176, afi4t

a%i J«a.i J*a

liiithrf rm the Attuirmrnt .

... igifi

... ...

. 160

M«grielk Ctirrn* Hrrrrt of .

. J 4 *

It C’hungr In Karfamrntal Sttb^tanrr

... .34a

If Knrrgir?i in Kthrr ..

34 *

MagnrliMitr»n Ilf .Snh^tanrrs.,< ..

... 341

h*0iigim^ The, relrrml in

. It

Man Mkfiicntin

... 371

,, and Woman C'»nt|ikmrnlary ...

...

1, tlfvclnfi^ Hrenml

37a

'' ftf* , ** 4 ~

•. ,/fc? I*'-


396


INDEX.


PAGE


Man’s Manifold Nature .

... 234

Mandakopanishat, quoted

33, 202

“ Mantras ” .

... 335

„ essential in Sacraments.

... 33S

,, in rite of Baptism .

... 350

,, in Sanskrit .

... 336

,, spoilt by translation

... 337

Mark, Gospel of, quoted .

vii., 45, 47

Martin, St.

... 117

Marriage, Beeper meaning of .

... 365

„ in Lesser Mysteries .

... 368

„ Mystery of.

... 366

,, Sacrament of .

... 364

„ type of union between God and Man ...

... 3^6

Mary, the World Mother .

... 206

Master, Jesus, the .

... 142

Matthew, Gospel of, quoted, viL, 45, 46, 49, 52, 53,

54 , 92, 134,

’176, 177, 186, 210, 216, 240, 271, 274, 281, 306, 319

Maurice, cited..* .

... 254

Mead, G. R.*S., quoted . 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 114

Mediator, Nature of...

... 274

Meditation—What it is .

... 293

„ Growth by.

... 299

Men at different levels .

3

Miguel de Molinos..

... 116

Ministry of Angels, The .

287, 289

Miracles .

... 145

Mithras, Birth of .

... 161

Modern Spirit antagonistic to Prayer .

... 276

More, Henry.

... 116

Mother Juliana of Norwich...

... 117

Mount Serbal.

... 130

Mount of Initiation.

91, 188

Muller, George, Case of ... .

284^/ seq.

. .

335 , 337

Myers (F.), St. Paul.

... 378

Mystery Gods..

... 25

„ of Christ .

- 57

Mysteries, Christian, Symbolism of.

... 247


INDEX.

397


PAGE

^yrfrrifs «nd

. 31

M C’*hri''l an Hirrnphjint of ...

.

,, DisAppr.UiUirc <4 fhr

. 184

M I'liphii*! Lfvi on ihc

... n8

refill 4 i' 4 }r«i by C’liriM .

... 142

,, Cirrafrf, ’I'lir

h., I, 2i| 27, 63

in Ihr f i.iHprln

. 45

., in l*4:ypt ... ..

. nt

,» in rriafiim to Mytfj .

. *57

♦ » Lr^«irr

G 22

M M a Iff! Trayrr.

... 2S0

II to bcHiiirH

. 237

.1 M 1>a«i}in|,» of

. 251

11 N*ainr% in ChriHlianify

47

,, of rn'0’*''iin%

21,27

M '4 t 'ls>jM,ra, l‘4,^y|>l, Klrni^i'ii Millna^,

OrplunniA

S#nnnihm<tT, Si yibia ,.

1

,« of (o >4

. 57

,* ofJr*iw«i

*• .. G 42, 94

,1 of thi* Early Outfc'h

... 69 a

,, of fjiioled ,,.

... 157

,1 by larninrri Grroki

21

,, l‘»rmlsi| ami Simdiml Story

... 167

,» wufrf of Myalio Lrarning

... to8

M

17J, 17 B

taughli ExintrOCi?

. 31

,1 Thr I'fnr.

... 179

M Thr Chri«jl of the ...

. 184

,, ’rtjr*ny of the

23

H wilbdmwri

... 108

4ysiir Cbii«>l| Thr ,,.

. m

M 1, l*wofiilfl

... tj$

n Vr*iyiri The ,.,

.. * 3 S

bf yibic Cbrtib The .

... 145

tefyilu Mratiing of ..

-- * 531 * *S 3

»» H«daf

... 155

«►! y 1 hokig y C 4 »m 11«wi i v«?

... 147

«isl Sniiiitial lliHlicit,,. .

... 333

I* llmly—cif Sb Paul ...

. ^37


398


INDEX.


PAGE


Natural Body, The .


... 235 et seq.

Need for Graded Religion .


.. 14

Neoplatonists.


29, 112

Newman, Cardinal, quoted.


103 et seq.

,, Recognises a Secret Tradition


. 104

New Testament Proofs of Esotericism


42 et seq.

Nicene Creed ...


. 181

Nicolas of Basel .


. 114

Noachian Deluge .


. 19

Nous Demiurgos of Plato .


. 255

Numbers^ Book of, quoted .


. 270

Object of all Religions .


. 3

Occult Experts .


. 127

,, Knowledge, Danger of


. 16

,, Records .


. 18

,, ,, and the Gospels


. 129

„ side of Nature.


. 279

,, use of Sounds.


. 334

Old Testament*Allegories


. 121

One Existence, The.


. 253

One, The, Three aspects of.


. 262

,, „ Manifest.


. 261

Origen Against Celsus .


88 et seq.

,j j, ,,


. 95

,, on the Need of Wisdom ■


. 99

,, ,, Mysteries .


. 89

,, ,, Scriptures .


. 372

,, ,, Tower of Babel


. 97

,, referred to


. 44

j, ,,


. 73

,, Shining Light of Learning ...
Orpheus, Mead’s, quoted .


. 87


28, 29, 30, 114

Owen on Atonement.


. 197

Pantaenus .


73 > 74

Paracelsus .


. 115

Paradise .


. 242

Path of Discipleship.


. 174

Fhilippians^ Epistle io^ quoted


. 62

Physical Ailments final expression of Karma

. 310


INDEX.


399


Phy^ritl <"hiin^»r% in .

,, M-ilrriJi! in Sftrrnmrnls

/V?/n f|li*i»lT 4 461 l^|q, jni r*/ wi^.^

»* M rrfrrrrii r<i

l*|j*.lr/*». (‘rtvr
PIftto initminl in

i*f C iiinhftiljuir
I >'yifi|^ \Vi>r<N f)f
frlrrirril l»>

Mr»*i'*», qin*lril
r«»lyi ar{i. uf Smyrnn

P«i|nikf rhrt*iUAriily, «♦!

o Driijitl i4 I'Aotriif'< hri»4ifttnly


TMm

. m

... 340

....

Jir| fi .f/^M , 14 *^

. KW

.. *SJ

.. ai

... iifi

.. it

n

. p

. 7 «

... Vtk
. I


Piifpliyry, »|i!»»frt|

ay, 54

Ptnyrr , . .

.., ayA

M Atwrf’4 If! . ,. ,

m '

,, 4^ Will ,.,

...

*, Claw II—-gf^nrffil pririnplr

. a^a

1* Esiitwr^ «l

aKy

», for Kpiriliml luitijslilmrnl

. , af)i

,, f«r thi? Sluileni nf Mystrrifs .,

.. a«ii>

i» ilij^hf'’*! foirm (4

... m

,* P«//Un^ I'Vctft ii» to ...

... ayy

Pfiiyrr«4

... ay8

Pri»i»4n«imtry Pitlh, Tbr

... *47

** i’tmiiinn uj^m Uir ho«Hr’^‘* Myiucat meaning ...

... 79

PrtH-lij!**'tVin'lniig ..,

a9, a9, S«

iVaim^, ♦fUulnl

5. m

Pwnilo-MyminrirHitntl Sun-tJiMl Drama

... 167

PufuD tif ihe A|»«w*llr?» ... .

... 70

Piirgiilory ... ..-

... 34a

Ihirifiralion

... 344

Pythitgofflji# frfrjEml Ui ... ... ... ...

.. inImlU f*.*^**'*^.

... a8-

3*

Pythagorean Seh*w4* Di?»*.*i|*Hne of

a9» 3«

Qwltlirutkini* of 1 >ii4eipte

... *75

fjiiicliil*, Thr ...

Ufi

Efgicitia of the Inviulble W‘cirt4»

... ajci


400


INDEX.


Re*incarnatkm.

Religion, Need graticti .

A'ehlifiim n/ Attcieni qnofcd

Religions, Conimnn origin of'
t ,, CuMtidiauh of SiU’icdlkmkH
n Ksscnfiftls of

,, fitted for Stages of Growth

,, OhjVei of all

,t Source tjf uH

Religious Fourniers ...

„ ScripturcH ...

„ Tcudier.H ..

, Resurrection and Solar Myth

»» Brxly .

n of the Qyrkt

ft of the Dead . ^

Revelation"


», Fragments of in Sacred Book
»t in Cypher...

tt of Deity in Kosnios

BiH)k a/, qunteti
Revolt against Dcjgma

Roman Empire dying.

jRomans, iipisfii* ,,,

Roicnkreutr. Christian
Ruling Ar)gd of Jews..,

Ruysbroeck .

, Sacram ent, a kind of crucible
tt a Pictorial Allegory

n Change in iulwtance it

II link between VUil»le and Invisible

If of llaptiim

II of Eucharist

I* of Marriage

of Penance


Sacramantf


Anpls connected with
defined In Church Cttechkm


e:./


1


aji


14

347

7

4

*3

3

7

fet

to

9

1 a so
J40

370

37 ^*

m


so, 6j, M, 24% ao.i, 29J, iJ4, III
. ‘ 3 ^

#3

**7

#1^

■- >*S

‘ • Jifi

-- .m

- 343

Jty
-■ 347

- 347
347 * 3 ^

.140
3*4
341
3 m


INDEX.


401


Sacraments, Gestures used in
3, in all Religions ...

,, Lost at Reformation

,, Man trams in

„ of Christian Church

,, Peculiar Characteristics of

33 Seven, of Christianity ...

,, Signs, Seals, or Sigils in

„ ‘‘Substance” and “Accidents

,, Twofold Nature of

,3 Two, in Protestant Communiti

Sacred Places and Objects
Sacred Quaternery, The


of


PAGE

- 33S

... 324
... 327

... 33S

... 327

... 324
327,346

••• 339
... 361

324

328, 346
... 380
261


Sacrifice as^|^y

. 210 et seq.

,, Law of

.201

3 3 33 Four Stages in

.212

„ Lessons in.

. 212 et seq.

„ of Jesus .

. 133

Saint Bonaventura .

. II2

,, Elizabeth .

.113

„ Francois de Sales

. "* ... I16

,, John of the Cross

.116

„ John's Gospel, quoted x., 46, 52, 53, 54, 56, 103, 132,

* 33 . 134, 137. 177,

180, 216, 240, 246, 250, 262,

270, 273, 292. 382


,5 Paul, quoted .

. 55 124, 184

„ Paul an Initiate

. 61

„ „ and Mysteries

. 57

„ „ and Timothy

. 59 » 69

„ „ on Allegory

. 66

„ Peter, quoted.

. 194

„ Teresa.

. 116

,, Timothy, referred to ...

. - 59

Samueli Book of, quoted

. 33

Savage Deities .

.. ... II

Savages as Descendants of Civilisation . ... 12

Saviour, The True ”...

.. 219 ei seq.

Sayings of Jesus .

. 53 > 54 , 301

Scientific Analysis of Vehicles

.237


402 INDEX.


Search for God, The.


PAGE

5

Secret Teachings of Jesus .


... 90

,, Tradition recognised by Newman ...


... 104

Second Birth.


185, 247

Sepher Yetzirah, quoted .

...

... 34

Sharpens Egyptian Mythology^ quoted


259

Skvetdskvataropaniskat, quoted


... 32

“ Sign of Power ” .


... 339

Society of Friends .


... 117

Solar Gods .


... 160

) „ Myth, Root of.


... 17S

Sopater, quoted ... .


21

Sophia—The Wisdom .

Soul—Dual

^ V ^ ^ Ir 1 Sound and Fonn in the. Invisible World^ • - -

»^ ^ Sound, Occult use of.

Source of Religions..


... 13^

... 233
333 -^
... 334


7

• Spirit and Matter .


... 367

Spirit threefold .


... 233

,, manifested as triple Self


... 330

Spiritual Body, Divisions of.


240 et seq.

“ Star of Initiation ”.


... 186

Strait Gate” term of Initiation .

49 » 50 > 174, 177

Stromata or Miscellanies of S. Clement, quoted, 58, 74 et seq..

78, 83, 84, 85, 87


Sufferings of the Christ


... 223

Superintending Spirits .


... 98

/ Sun God Lee:end . . .


... 158

^ 5 ^* »> j> Symbol of Lc^os.

» Heroes .

1 ^’ „ Myths, recurring .


... 171


... 165


... 169

„ of Righteousness .


... 249

,, Symbol of the Logos .


... 154

„ Symbols .


... 155

Survival of Christianity ? .


... 40

Symbol of Jesus .


... 165

„ of Trinity .


... 267

Symbols — animal, in Zodiac.


... 165

„ Language of .


... 153


INDEX.


403,


PAGtf


Symbols of Logoi .


266 et

seq.

Tatian and Theodotus, referred to.

...


73

Tauler, John.


114

Taylor, Robert, quoted .


350

Teachings common to all Religions ... ... ,


146

,, in the hands of Spiritual Brotherhood


374

Tertullian on Baptism


151

The Christ .


132,

134

The Hidden Side of Religions .


I

,, of Christianity .


36

The Disciples.


136

The Simple Gospel ” .

...

...

39

The title of Lord .

...


96

The Testimony of the Scriptures


36

The Tower of Babel ...


97

The Thyrsus.


75

The True Exstasis .


108

The Trinity .


253

,, among the Hebrews .


...

254

„ Hindu .


257

,, in Buddhism .

...


258

,, in Chaldsea .


259

,, in China.


259

,* in Extinct Religions .

...


258

„ in Egypt.


„ in Man .

„ in Manifestation.


^33

254

,, in Zoroastrianism.


257

The Word of Wisdom, of Knowledge


102

Theological Hell .


308

Theosophical J^eview, quoted .


228

Thessaionians, Epistle to, qaottdi

...


233

Three Worlds, The.


241

Timothy, Epistle to, quoted ... ... 59 j

61,

6 s. 134.

, 227

Tradition of Post-mortevi Teaching of Jesus


46

Transubstantiation—Truth Underlying


360

Triangle as a S3rmbol of Trinity


267

Trinity, A Second .


263

„ of Spirit .


233


404


INDEX.


Trinity in Christian agrees with other Faiths . 266

Triple Aspect of Matter .264

Triplicity in Nature.261

True Theosophy defined . x.

Two Schools of Christian Interpretation . 122

Two-fold Division of Man Insufficient . 232

Vaiivasvata Manu . I 9

Valentinus ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ^37

Vaughan, Thomas . 116

Vehicles of Consciousness, Need for Different ... ... 238

Vibrations -. 334

Vibratory Effects of Mass . ... 338

Virgin Matter.264

,, „ and Third Person of Trinity. 265

„ „ and Second „ „ . 265

„ Mother.264

Vkgin’s Womb, Meaning of. • . ... 180

Vifgo, Zodiacal Sign of ... ... ... ... 158, 160

Virtues in the Mysteries . 27

Vmci pf tke SUmcCf ciuotod. ... ... ... . 249

Vmcs Figures —Mrs. Watts Hughes, referred to. 333

Willlainson’s Great Law^ quoted—l6l, 163 etseq.y 166, 167, 203,

255. 2 S 9 . 348. 358.


Will as Prayer.

. 285

Words of Power .

. 335

of the Holy Spirit ... .

179, 268

,, Second Person ...

179, 269

,, First Person .

. 270

Working of Legos in Matter...

. 182

IVorkers in Kosmos.

. 283

,, the Invisible Worlds .

152, 280

World Bibles, fragments of Revelation

. 374

W wld Soul, The

. 2*^

World Symbols .

. 266

Writing of the Disciples .

... 140

Zmkmrmkf quoted

. 268

The .

. 160


WUXIAM BTLBS & SONS, PIUNTEKS, BRADFORD.
